Three Decads OF SERMONS Lately Preached to the UNIVERSITY at St MARY'S Church
in OXFORD:

BY HENRY WILKINSON D. D. Principal of Magdalen Hall.

Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might: for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither
thou go. 2 Cor. 5. 14. For the Love of Christ constrains us. ACADEMIA OXON
IF. SIS.



OXFORD, Printed by H. H. for Thomas Robinson. 1660.

Almae and Venerabili Matri ACADEMIAE OXONIENSI TRES CONCIONVM DECADES in
Templo S. MARIae haud ita pridem habitarum, In perennis Obsequii and
Gratitudinis Testimonium, D. D. D. Q. L. M. Q.
HENRICUS WILKINSONUS.

The AUTHOR'S Preface to the unprejudiced Reader.
BE pleased (Reader) with patience to take notice of, and give Credence to this
true (though brief) ensuing Information. As for my part, being conscious to my
self of manifold Failings, (perhaps more then others can, or will acquaint me
withal) I should have stood in more awe of a Press, then (in such a Critical
Age to have exposed even the best of my Labors to public view: Had not some
both eminently Godly and Judicious encouraged me much by their Approbation:
Amongst whom the Dr. J. Conant.
Vice Chancellor, and Dr. Edw: Reynolds.
Dean of Christ-Church, (whose Judgments I highly value) approved what now
comes forth. Likewise those several Sermons which I formerly Printed in another
Language, for the most part were communicated to a * Reverend and Dr. Harris,
President of Trinity Coll: Oxon.
Judicious Divine, lately gone to Heaven (with whom I had intimate
acquaintance, and always found a faithful Friend) by whose Advice they were
committed to the Press. For Apologies, and such like preliminary Discourses, I
purposely wave as superfluous altogether.

I have often thought (not without great detestation) of a proud vainglorious
speech of one (not worth the naming) Trajectum plantavit, Lovanium rigavit,
Caesar dedit Incrementum: Whereupon another made Answer, Hic Deus nihil fecit.
I shall acknowledge Adwickium in Agro Eboracensi plantavit, There I was born:
Oxonium rigavit, There I had the greatest part of my Education: Christus autem
dedit Incrementum, The increase and blessing of all I ascribe unto Christ
alone: Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but God alone 1 Cor. 3. 6.
gives the increase. I have read, that a Philosopher accounted it as his
honor, That he was a Man, a Citizen, and lived in the time of Socrates: Much
more do I account it my honor to be a Christian, and born in a Land where
Christ is known: And (through riches of Grace and Mercy) to be born again: And
to be accounted worthy (even such a worthless Instrument as I am) to be a
Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, for whose sake to spend and be spent, I
account it a far greater honor then to be the Emperor of the World: And if the
Lord be pleased to make me more Instrumental to gain souls to Christ (through
Mercy I have already heard of some brought in, to my comfort) This Mercy I
shall value at a higher rate then all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory
of them. Neither may I pass by in silence (for which I cannot be thankful
enough) Gods gracious dealings with me in my younger years at Gloc^ster, where
Mr. John Workman. Mr. John Langly.
the Lord blessed to my soul the Ministry of a * Holy man of God, and likewise
the Labors of a * Worthy Schoolmaster. Further, The Lord in mercy afforded
unto me great advantages, after I was placed in Magdalen-Hall, under the
Government of Dr. John wil^inson, Principal of Magdalen Hall 43 years.
my Honored Uncle, the vigilant Principal; one (as I conceive) endowed with the
spirit of Government, where likewise I was well accommodated with a Dr. Henry
wilkinson, now Cannon of Ch: Ch:
Religious, Learned, and Diligent Tutor, now an eminent Professor of Divinity
in this University. These I mention with thankfulness unto God: And with Pliny
I conceive it, Ingenuum confiteri per quos profec^rim.

As for many of my Brethren who have more Talents entrusted to them, then my
self, I envy not any of them, but heartily wish a diligent improvement of them,
as remembering where much is given, much is required: For what (through Grace is
given me) I am obliged to be thankful, and not hide in a napkin. Those
Scriptures are as Frontlets before mine eyes, and frequent Monitors unto me,
viz. Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might,
for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
whither thou go. Joh. 9. 4. I must work the works of him that sent me, while
it is day: The night comes when no man can work. And 2 Cor. 5. 14. The love of
Christ constrains us. Upon these Principles I desire to manage all my
undertakings, and act accordingly.

Now in an especial manner I present these Sermons (as Duty and Gratitude
binds me) to the University, before whom I Preached them. I cannot conceal
(what my heart is so much affected with) but must acknowledge with all
thankfulness those signal Mercies from Heaven of late extended even to a
Miracle, that the Ministry, and maintenance due thereunto, the Universities and
their Privileges are yet secured and rescued from the malicious projects and
attempts of unreasonable men, who cry with a Stentorean voice against an
Universitie, as the children of Edom did in the day of Jerusalem, Psalm. 137. 7.
Raze, raze it even to the Foundation thereof: These are of John of Leydens and
Wigelius his Faction, lately consuted by a * Learned Dr. Arrowsmith in Orat.
Aqtiweig^l.
Professor. It Is sufficiently known that men of this Leaven have an evil eye
against all Schools of Learning, and therefore bespatter and calumniate them,
that they may more easily make a prey of their Revenues. This was the Divelish
design of Julian the Apostate to overthrow Schools of Learning, and rob them of
their maintenance; and this was a subtle Stratagem used by him to hinder the
succession of Ministers: But all sober minded persons (who have their eyes in
their heads) see, and cannot but acknowledge the singular and daily use of
Public Nurseries of Learning, Maugre all the Aspersions and out-crys of those
false tongues set on Fire of Hell. From these places of Learning have come
forth a Noble Army of Martyrs, viz. Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Bradford,
Tindall, Philpot, etc. who have resisted Popery unto Blood, and sealed unto the
truth of the Protestant Religion with their own Blood.

Our University of Oxford can produce a large Catalogue of eminent Champions
for the Truth, some whereof were Bradwardin, Wickliffe, Jewel, Fox, Jo:
Reynolds, Hooker, Ayry, Crackenthorp, Field, Lake, Hackwell, Benefield, Bolton,
Pemble, etc. Our public Professors have been an Ornament unto that Chair, and
have opposed Rome, Racovia, Munster, etc. Their Names are like precious
Ointment poured forth, leaving a sweet savor behind them, viz. Peter Martyr,
Humfred, Abbot, Holland, Prideaux, Sanderson, Hoyle: And the present Professor,
(though I conceal his name) deserves an Honorable mention, whose Parts and
Graces adorned with so great Humility, render him an useful Instrument for
Public Good.

It Is worth our Observation, That in former times still God raised up Men of
Heroic Courage and Invincible Resolution, to lop off and fear the Hydra of
Heresies, and defend the truth against all Gainsayers. I shall only make
mention of some remarkable passages within my own remembrance: When that novel
upstart Doctrine of Arminius, (novel I call it) (unless Arminius be Pelagius
redivivus, and upon that account may plead more Antiquity) was broached when
some (not all) Prelates countenanced those Tenets, and preferred those of that
Persuasion to places of Preferment: How many then of the younger Students bent
their Studies that way? Insomuch as I have seen a Remonstrance of Parliament
above thirty years ago, declaring, That the study of Arminianism was the ready
way to preferment, and the Arminians were compared to the Jesuits. For my own
observation, I have for the most part apprehended an Arminian to be compounded
of a Jesuit and a formal Protestant, That so by the one he may ingratiate
himself thus, by broaching pleasing Doctrines of General Redemption, Free Will,
etc. And by the help of the other, he may carry on his Designs with more
subtlety: It cannot be denied, but twenty years ago Arminians had a great
Harvest in both Universities, yet in both God raised up worthy Champions, to
oppose and confute all those rotten Opinions: To instance only according to my
own Personal knowledge. In this University the * Learned Professor of the
Chair, stood up with Dr. Prideaux.
Courage in his Lectures and Disputations against Arminianism: Dr. Twisse put
forth that Learned accurate Book, called Vindiciae Gratiae, etc. Since him Dr.
Kendall wrote after the same Copy: Maugre Inhibitions, Affrightments, and other
dangers of those times; yet some there were, who not afraid of the face of men,
cried aloud against the Errors of the Time: Two or three more I shall mention.
* One Preached upon this Text, Numb. 14. 4. And they said one unto Mr. Hodges
of Excter Coll.
another, Let us make a Captain and return into Egypt: In which Sermon
Gravenchovius was quite beat out of the Field.

Another Preached on this Text, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Because they received Mr. Ford
of Magdalen Hall.
not the love of the truth, that they might be sav^d: He gave Arminius a deadly
blow, and cried down Superstitious Innovations in these words, Altar, High
Altars, the uncouth Language of a strange Land. These suffered Banishment, and
their suffering was their Crown.

A third (whom I heard Preach in Latin about 27 years ago) Mr. Croke of
Br^sen-nose College.
charged Arminius through and through; and in conclusion, was not afraid to
call a Spade a Spade. These were (as I well remember) his ipsissima
verba-Postremo agendum est mihi cum Jacobo Arminio qui etiamsi non ess^t
Orthodoxus, utinam non esset perjurus. And in the Public Act the same year, a
worthy Doctor answered: And at another Dr. Staunton now President of C. C. C.
time a Batchelour of Divinity, who both courageously and faithfully defended
this Truth against their Antagonists- Deus non est Author mali secundum
Reformatorum Placita.

A fourth I shall mention is (about 22 years ago) an ancient Bachelour Mr.
(...) of (...) ^^ll.
of Divinity, who defended the Orthodox Doc^^^ne against the Arminian Faction:
His Text was, P^il. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling:
Being called in question for that Sermon, he ingeniously confessed, That the
self-same Sermon he had Preached in St. Mary's Pulpit sixteen years before, and
then it wa^ well approved of, and accounted true Doctrine.

Neither can I bury in silence (to Gods glory be it mentioned) that Oxford has
afforded many faithful and constant Preachers this la^^ Century: What excellent
Preaching was there (as I have received from good hands) at Alhollows, by the
Tuesday Lecturers (for which Dr. White, a worthy Benefactor to the University,
and ^ounder of the 5 Exhibitions in Magdalen Hall, left an allowance) Then Dr.
J^h: Reynolds, Dr. Ayry, and others, supplied that course: And Dr. Ayry for
many years together Preached at St. Peter's in the East each Lords Day; and his
excellent Pains are made public in those Lectures on the Philippians. Within
the compass of my own remembrance (for thirty years at least I can speak) there
were many able and Judicious Preachers in particular Parishes, who constantly
labored in the Word and Doctrine: Of such were choice Ministers of the Gospel
at * Alhollows, at St. * Micha^ls, * St. Peter's in the East, by Mr. Pope. Mr.
Black burn. Mr. ^ight. Mr. E^sto^.
whose Ministry (blessed be God) I received much edification. Other able and
faithful Preachers are yet alive, who have, and do at present take abundance of
pains in the Work of the Gospel amongst us, whose Names, though I pass by, yet
are no whit the less to be esteemed of. I would not willingly give offense
neither to J^w n^r Gentile, nor Church of God: Yet I must speak my conscience,
without respect of persons, that for these thirteen years last past there has
been more constant and more practical edifying Preaching amongst us, then the
eldest alive can remember was ever before in this University.

Every Lords Day, at several hours, three or four Sermons are Preached:
Likewise every Tuesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, constant Lectures are
Preached; besides many other Lectures in private Chapels. Upon these
considerations it plainly appears, what care and industry is taken to propagate
Religion in the University and City. And many there are amongst us of that
excellent temper of Amaziah the Son of Zichri, who willingly offer up
themselves unto 2 Chro. 17. 16.
the service of the Lord: Who give their Labors as a free-willoffering gratis,
(I may truly say) I wish not Ingratis.

It Is not in my intention to make up a Nom^nclature and complete Catalogue of
the Worthies of our Universities: Many* not named perhaps may be no whit
inferior to those that are already named. My design is to stop the mouths of
Clamorous, Envious, and Malicious Persons, who asperse and traduce Universities
as useless, and little better then Hives of Wasps and Drones (although I know
no reason why because of some Wasps and Drones the whole Hive should be
destroyed:) But those Machiavilian Counsels take place (too too much) now
adays- Audacter criminare aliquid haerebit.

Neither do I in the least question but that the Venerable University of
Cambridge can produce a parallel number of choice Divines and Scholars, such as
were Whitaker, Cartwright, Ward, Davenant, Greenham, Perkins, Baynes, Sibbs,
Preston, Dod, Hildersham, Hill, Arrowsmith, etc.

But I proceed no further in this Argument: By what I have observed from others
(to whom I subscribe) that since Christian Religion was professed, there was
never a Collection of more Godly, Orthodox, and Learned Divines, then in this
present Century. Yet I am far from excusing or extenuating the Animosities,
Heart-divisions, uncouth, unseemly Habits, self interests, carnal Policies,
unwarrantable separations, and that Latitude which many take unto themselves
now adays: The good old Puritan would not take an Inch formerly, where many now
venture to take an Ell. I heartily wish a Reformation through and impartial,
that what we condemn in others, we may avoid each one in himself. O that it
might be the main design we drive at to advance the power of godliness, and to
go before each other in a real example of Reformation. Let Us all labor as one
man to be found in the Faith, and holy in life, so that Heresies, Blasphemies,
and all forts of profaneness, may be abominated and extirpated. And let it be
our endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: So Ephesians. 4. 3.
that according to those Prophesies (the accomplishment whereof we daily
expect) We may all worship the Lord with one consent, that the Zeph. 3. 9.
Zech. 13. 9.
Lord may be one, and his name one: And let us never forget that the vows God
are upon us, (which we ought to our power to endeavor to keep inviolably) in
that Solemn National Covenant (which was made in a day of distress) with our
hands lifted up to the most high God. Let not that Solemn Oath be accounted as
an Almanac out of date, lest the Lord send a Sword to avenge the quarrel of a
broken Covenant: Let Us expostulate with Ezra, Should we again break the
Commandment, Ezra. 9. 14.
and join in affinity with the people of these abominations? After Oaths,
Covenants, Days of Humiliation; and after so many signal Deliverances, shall we
again hancker after superstitious Ceremonies, a formal Service Book, a Lordly
Prelacy, unwarrantable Separations, Schisms, Machiavilian Policies,
self-seeking Interests? The Lord forbid that we should be so unthankful for the
mercies received, and so unmindeful of those particular Duties which God
expects from us in our several Places and Callings.

But I shall not exceed the bounds of a Preface: Although this may be accounted
a Digression, yet (I hope) may be of some use to the Reader.

Thus much I was willing to premise (as far as I apprehend) having a single eye
at Gods Glory and the Public Benefit, Wherefore be pleased (Reader) to peruse
deliberately and heartily these three Decads of Sermons Preached with much
plainness to the Auditors, accompanied with a vehement desire to do good, and
afford the Author thy Prayers, who desires a share in the Prayers of all the
Israel of God, and remains,

Magdalen-Hall Oxon, April 9. 1660. Thy souls servant, HENRY WILKINSON.

To the Reader.
WHen it was told David after the defeat of Absalom, that Ahimaaz the son of
Zadok came running, the King said, He is a good man, and comes with good
tideings. I may truly say so of these Sermons, and the reverend Author of them,
He is a good man, and therefore we may be sure that he brings good tidings
with him. He is a right Nathanael, a true Israelite, without guile, an able
Preacher, a vigilant Governor, a faithful friend, a bountiful distributer,
to whom much of the Character of Aristotle's magnanimous man does exactly agree,
(...), who dares openly to love a friend, when others reject him, and openly to
disprove the faults of those whom others fear and flatter. As is the man and
his Communication, such is his doctrine, sound, wholesome, savory, edifying, not
merely notionall and suited only to the fancy, but properly calculated for the
Conscience and conversation, unto which the more any doctrine is fitted, the
more it is according to the mind of the spirit of Christ speaking in the Word,
and to the direction of his Apostles, who used great plainness of speech, and
such demonstration of the Spirit and power, as might manifest the truth to
every man's conscience in the sight of God, who gave instruction unto others
whom they had separated to the work of the Gospel, to hold fast the wholesome
form of sound words, by sound doctrine to Exhort and Convince gainsaiers, to
show in doctrine incorruptnesse, gravity, sincerity, sound speech which cannot
be condemned, to speak, to rebuke, to exhort with all Authority, to teach men
to maintain good works for necessary uses, to preach such things as are good
and profitable unto men. Though I have not had opportunity to peruse all these
Sermons, yet having been an hearer of many of these, and finding in those which
I have read the same even and serious spirit, and withal great variety of
profitable matter, I may safely commend them to the Christian Reader as Sermons
drawn according to these prescripts of the Apostle, and consequently very
useful unto public edification, unto which all our studies, labors, and
writings should be subservient.

Apr. 4. 1660. Thine in our Common Lord EDWARD REYNOLDS.

The contents of the first Decad.
SERMON. 1.
1. COr. c. 2. verse. 2. For I determined not to know any thing among you save
Jesus Christ and him crucified. p. 1. The Text divided, p. 3: and handled. 1
Concerning knowledge in General, p. 4. 5, 6. 2 Concerning the knowledge of
Christ, page 7. 8. And this knowledge has 3 characters; Fundamental
excellent, and soule-saveing, page 9. 3 Cautions concerning the use of humane
learning, page 11. 12. 3 Concerning the knowledge of Christ crucified, page 13.
14. Applic: what Ministers must teach, page 14. 15, 16. 2 What all must learn,
p. 16. 17, 18.
SERMON. II.
IEr: 45. v. 5. And seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not?
Text divided, page 22. Several sorts of seekers, page 25. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
The Person seeking, p. 31. 32, 33. Applic: Use 1. For exposition, page 34. 35,
36, 37. Use 2 For direction in 4 Particulars, page 38. 39, 40, 41. Use 3 For
exhortation in 4 Considerations, page 42. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
SERMON. III.
Prove. 11. 30. He that wins souls is wise. The Text divided, page 50. 51.
The Doctrine propounded. That it is a choice fruit of wisdom to win souls
unto God, page 51. Method propounded. 1 the proof of the Point, page 52. 53.
2. 4 Arguments for confirmation, p. 53. 54, 55. 3. Two Characters of him that
is likeliest to win souls, page 56. 57, 58, 59, 60, 61. 4. Applic. 1. For
Humiliation. page 63. 3. For Direction in 7 particulars, page 66. 67.
SERMON. IV.
Matthew: 13. 45, 46. page 68. Again the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a
Merchant man, seeking godly Pearls, who when he had found one Pearl of great
price, he went and sold all that he had and bought it. The Context opened,
page 69. 70. The Text divided, page 71. 72. Two Doctrines raised, page 73,
Doct: 1. That every true Believer is a Merchant of goodly Pearls. Method
propounded. 1. By illustrating the similitude in seven particulars. page 73.
74. 2. By applying the properties of a Merchant in 6 particulars, p. 78. 79.
80. 81. 82. Doct. 2. That every spiritual Merchant-venturer must sell all for
the purchase of the pearl of price. p. 83. Method propounded. 1 The Doctrine
illustrated by examples, p. 83, 84. 2 Proved by Praecepts p. 84. Confirmed by
5. Reasons, p 85, 86, 87, 88. 4 Applied 1 for reproof of ignorant, idle,
covetous, profane persons, page 88, 89, 90. Use 2. For examination in 3
Queries, p. 90, 91. Use 3. For exhortation in 6 Particular duties, page 91, 92,
93. Use 4. For Direction in 5 Particulars, page 93, 94.
SERMON. V.
PHil. 1. 29. For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. Text divided, page 96.
Doctrine raised. That it is the Duty of true Believers not only to believe on
Christ, but likewise cheerfully and readily to suffer for him, when he calls
them thereunto. Method propounded. 1. By way of illustration, page 67, 98, 99.
2 The Doctrine confirmed by 4 Reasons, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104. 3 The Doctrine
applied. 1 For reproof and Discovery of 6 sorts of Persons which will not
suffer, page 104, 105. page 106, 107. Use 2 For Examination in 6 Particular
Notes of Trial, page 107, 108. Use 3 For Exh^rtation in 4 Preparatives, page
109, 110. Use 4 For Direction in two cases. 1 When have we a call to suffer.
A. In three cases, p. 110, 111. 2 How must we suffer? A. 6 Several ways,
page 111, 112. Use 5. For Consolation in 4 Considerations, page 112.
SERMON. VI.
HAb. 2. 3. For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end, it
shall speak and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely
come: it will not tarry, page 113. The Context opened, page 113, 114, 115. The
Text divided and expounded, page 116, 117, 118. Doct. That in troublesome times
when the vision is dark, and seems to tarry, then in a peculiar manner, we
should wait upon God for the accomplishment thereof, page 118. Method of
handling the Doctrine. 1. What it is to wait? Ans: In 5 Particulars, page 119,
120, 121, 122, 123, 124. 2 The doctrine is illustrated by examples, page 121,
122, 3. The doctrine demonstrated by 3 Arguments, page 125, 126, 127, 128, 129.
4 The Doctrine applied. 1. For Reproof, page 130, 131. Use 2. For exhortation,
wherein 8 Propositions are commended, page 132, 133, 134, 135. Use 3. for
Direction in 6 Particulars, page 135, 136, 137, 138. Use 4. For Consolation,
page 138.
SERMON. VII.
AMos. 5. 15. Hate the evil and love the good, and establish Judgment in the
gate: It may be that the Lord God of hosts will be gracious to The remnant of
Joseph, page 139. The context opened, page 140, 141, 142. The Text divided and
expounded, page 142, 143, 144. 6 Doctrines raised, page 145, One handled only,
viz: That the faithful execution of Justice in a Land is a probable means to
move God to extend mercy and compassion toward them, page 146. Method of
handling the Doctrine. 1 From scripure proof, page 146, 147, 148. 2 From 3
Reasons, page 149, 150, 151, 152. 3. How must justice be executed, page 153. 1
How must a Judge be qualified: Ans: In 4 Qualifications, page 153, 154, 155,
156. 2 What Rules must be observed in execution of Justice? Ans: In 6 Rules,
page 156, 157, 158, 159. An Use of exhortation to the Judge in 4 Particulars,
page 159, 160. To the Bench, page 161. To the Lawyers and Grand-Inquest, page
162.
SERMON. VIII.
ZEch: 13. 1. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the House of
David, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness, page 163.
The Text divided, page 164. Doct. 1. When the children of God are soakt in
their tears of godly sorrow for sin, then in that season divine refreshing
consolations come from the presence of God, page 165. Method of handling. 1 By
Scripture Examples, page 165. 2 By Scripture Reasons, page 166, 167. 3 In an
use of exhortation in 6 Particular duties, page 165. Doct. 2. That there is a
Fountain of free grace and mercy in Jesus Christ opened to purge and cleanse
his people from all their sins and impurities, page 168. Method propounded.
1. An Analogy between Christ and a Fountain in 5 Resemblances, page 170, 171,
172. 2 How Christ may be said to be a Fountain? page 172, 173, 174. 4 Hammers
wherewith God usually knocks, page 174. 3 False keys discovered, page 175. 4
True keys, page 176. 5 For whom is the Fountain opened, page 177. 6
Considerations, page 177. 178. 3 Inferences, p. 179. 4 What are the virtues of
this Fountain. Ans: 5. page 179. 180. 5. The Doctrine applyedin 5 Uses. 1 For
Consolation, page 180. 181. Use 2 For Examination. 7 Qualifications propounded,
page 182. 183. Use 3 For Exhortation, page 184. 185. Use 4 For Direction in 6
Particulars, page 186. 187.
SERMON IX.
Prove. 3. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness. All her Paths are peace, page
188. Text divided, 189. Doct. 1. All the ways of godliness are ways of
pleasantness, and full of delight unto the Children of God, page 189. Method of
handling. 1 Objections answered, page, 190, 191, 192, 193. 194. 2 The Doctrine
prooved by particular Instances, page 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199. 3 The
Doctrine confirmed by 5 Demonstrations, page 200, 201, 202, 203, 204. 4 The
Doctrine applied in 5 Uses. 1 For conviction in 6 Particulars, page 205, 206,
207, 208. Use 2 For Exhortation, page 209. Use 3 For examination wherein are 6
Qualifications set down of spiritual joy, differing from natural joy, page
211, 212, Use 4 For Direction in 3 Particulars, page 212. 213. Use 5 For
Consolation, page 213. Doct. 2. That all the Paths of divine wisdom or
godliness are full of Peace to the Sons and daughters of Peace, page, 214.
Method propounded 1 Proved by Scripture, 214, 215. 2 Confirmed by 4 Reasons,
page 215. 216. 3 Applied. 1 In an use of information, page 217. 2 For
instruction in 4 Particulars, page 218. 3 For Comfort in an Objection
propounded and answered in 3 Particulars, page 218. 7 Particular Counsels
given, page 218. 219.
SERMON. X.
MArk. 8. 36. For what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul? The Text divided and explayned, page 220. 221. Doct.
That the gain of the world can in no wise counter veil the less of one
soul; page 222. Method of handling. 1 By comparing the soul and the world,
wherein. 1. Consider the excellency of the soul in 7 Singularities, p. 222,
223, 224. 2 Consider the vileness of the world in 7 Aggravations, page 225.
226. Use 1 For terror unto 4 sorts of Persons, 227, 228, 229. Use 3 For
exh^rtation in 9. Considerations, page 233, 234, 336, 237, 238. Use 4 For
examination in 6 Quaeries, p. 239. 240. Use 5. For Direction. 5 Impediments
must be removed, page 240. 5 Duties to be practiced, 241. Use 6 For comfort,
242.
ERRATA.
Page 2. Marg. r. celare. p. 5. r. Marg. Jun. in Loc. p. 21. l. 4. r. rest, p.
105. l. 30. r. which while some, p. 182. l. 33. r. sic, p. 218. l. 3. r.
surely. p. 221. l. 6. del. of p. 227. l. 19. r. you.

DECAD. I. VNVM NECESSARIVM, OR The Knowledge of Christ crucified.
1 Cor. chap. 2. verse. 2. SERMON. I: At St Maryes Oxford Aug. 8. 1642
For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him
Crucified.


It Is storyed of Heraclitus the weeping Philosopher, that when a Question was
proposed to him, what was the subject of his serious meditations? He returned
this answer, that he was studying to know himself: O profitable knowledge to
be thus well acquainted at home! Now the most compendious method of attaining
this knowledge is then procured, when we know our own ignorance: So that
without Question he is the best knowing Christian, who knows this, that, he
knows nothing, as he ought to know. And as in point of knowledge, so also the
rule hold^ good, in point of practice: He Is the best proficient in the School
of Christ, who daily practices the Divine art of self-denial. For then are
we something in Gods account, when we are nothing in our own. For a provocation
to this duty, look upon the Archetypum: a singular pattern of humility is
Christ our Savior, the head of his Church, and there ought to be a conformity
between the head and the members. He that was God from all eternity Phil. 2. 7.
Gloriam suam non minuendo sed supprimendo in conspectu hominum deposuit Calv.
(...), emptied himself, became incarnate, and wore the rags of mortality:
here is a condescension indeed, even the lowest step of humility. The first
lesson then which the disciple of Christ must learn, is, to deny himself: And
certainly there is nothing lost in a selfe-denying way for Christ. But this is a
difficult lesson, and who can learn it? Counsel a strong man, not to glory in
his strength, a rich man, not to glory in his riches, a wise man not to glory
in his wisdom, and they will tell you as the disciples answered Christ, This
is a hard saying, and who can hear it. This grace of self-denial is a rare
her be, John 6. 60.
and grows no where, but in the garden which the Lord has planted. O what an
excellent thing it is for a man to be out of love with himself! that plant had
need of much watring from Heaven, before it can be brought to such a maturity.
My Apostle is an example, instar omnium, When those (...) of Greece expected
quaint composures, and flashes of Rhetoric, he treads quite Antipodes to them,
drawing his lines after another and exacter copy. The simplicity of preaching
the Cross of Christ, is his Apology. And to strain for sublime raptures upon
such an argument, were a mere solaecisme. Here Is one that is every way an
accomplished scholar, (...), Homer. Il. 1.
and yet knows it not, it may be verified of him, what Homer speaks of Nestor:
His words were sweeter then honey. At Lystra he was styled Mer^urius, the God
of eloquence; yet he shakt off all these tickling inticements. He makes of all
these an act of oblivion* Dele dehinc ex animo, (...). If Christ may be formed
in him, he is fully satisfied, and will say with Jacob in another case, I have
enough: now let me die, I have all, for I have the knowledge of Christ
Crucified. Weigh all other kinds of knowledge in the balance of the sanctuary,
and they will prove too light. This I say, even the knowledge of Christ will
allwaies preponderate. A long time modesty kept in his own commendation, but at
last it could hold no longer, least it should conceal a truth. He professed with
a thankful heart, 1 Cor. 14. 18. that he spoke with tongues, more then all the
Apostles, Artis est Caelare Artem.
and yet here he takes no notice of them: It Is the property of art to conceal
it self. St Paul was an acurate linguist, and yet so lowly as he would not be
reputed so. Nay, besides all these he had the best helps of education: He was
trayn'd up at the feet of Gamaliel, a learned Rabbi. He hung upon this Doctors
lips, ready to take every word that dropped from his mouth, and improve it to his
best advantage: Yet notwithstanding, all the polite learning, which he took up
at the feet of Gamaliel, in all humility he lays down at the feet of Christ.
Peruse his Protestation, in the verse immediately preceding my Text. Concedit
sibi non adfuisse humanae vel ficun, diae vel sapientiae praesidia quibus
instructus aliquid efficeret sed ex quo se destitutum opibus faisse fatetur
inde magis elu^ere in suo Ministerio Dei potentiam subinfert, quae hu^usmo li
subsidius non indaguerit, Calvin, in Loc. Corinthus erat totius Graciae lamen.
Cicer. pro lege Man. Calv. in Loc. Tertull. in lib. de carre. Christi. Erasmus
in Loc. Divis. 1 The Apostles profession. 2. The Object. 1 Positive. 2
Privative. 3 The Condition.
And I brethren, when I came unto you, came not with excellency of speech or of
wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God. However others make
ostentation of learning, and through an ambitious affectation of eloquence,
preach themselves and not Christ: yet I that am a minister of Christ, and
called to be his Ambassador, make conscience to go beyond my commission to
add the compositions and varnishings of humane eloquence, lest I detract from
the simplicity that is in Christ. You Corinthians may expect eloquence, your
City (as it is attested by Cicero) was the Eye of all Graece: However, I am
resolved to deceive your expectation. Here I am (says he) Agens consilio, I
do it upon most serious advice, and mature deliberation: this is the upshot of
my praemeditated resolution: My conclusion I retain inviolable, (...) etc. Non
eximium duxi so Calvin. Non statui, so Tertullian, Non judicavi, so Erasmus.
These versions give light one to another. My text is the determination of Paul
the great Doctor of the Gentiles. In the unfolding whereof I shall not crumble
the bread of life into an overcurious division, least I divide the sense. --
Out of the words I commend to your observation, three remarkable particulars.

1. The Apostles profession or resolution (...), I determined to know. 2. The
object of his profession expressed, 1. Positively, (...), Jesus Christ, 2.
Privatively and by way of Antithesis, (...) this and nothing else. 3. The
Condition or Qualification of the object, (...), and him crucified. Homo
naturaliter appetit scire. Every man by nature is desirous of knowledge. In
point of knowledge, the cry in general, is, with the horseleeches daughter,
Give, Give. There Is no satiety in it. Of all other goods, knowledge is to be
set at the highest estimate. And of all sorts of knowledge the knowledge of
Christ is superexcellent: and if we raise the Climax higher, that knowledge
which concerns the Cross of Christ, is most excellent, sweet and comfortable.
You see then that I am warranted by my Apostle, to outbid all the knowledge in
the world. The knowledge of Christ transcends all the knowledge in the
Universe. This is the wisdom of God in a mystery, 1 Cor 2. 7. It Is that which
the blessed Angels desire to peep into, and they use more than ordinary
diligence. Its beyond the sphere of their apprehension. Let 1 Pet. 1. 12.
(...) est intent ^t cum animi observatione prospicere and intucri, Gethar. in
Harm. Evang.
all humane learning unveyle to this. Let all secular knowledge rise up, and
give up the bucklers. Let the profoundest Philosophers, those Glimmerers, and
(as I may say) Night-wormes in Divinity, learn so much knowledge as to know
their ignorance. All their Lamps twinckle, and cannot illuminate the soul of
man. What clouds and mists are there in the most exquisite Arts and Sciences,
until they be dissipated, by the sun of righteousness. Extract the
quintessence of the most elaborate volumes of Philosophers, (though things in
themselves of precious value,) yet compared with the knowledge of Christ, they
are but brutish ignorance, no better then those husks which the Prodigal son
fed on, devoid of all real solid nutriment.

In the discussion of this excellent knowledge, for my more methodicall
progress, I Will resume the parts of my Text in their proposed order, taking my
rise at my Apostles profession (...), I determined to know.

You hear my Apostles determination is unalterably fixed upon 1 part Concerning
knowledge in general.
this principle, to be a knowing man, He has discovered a gemme in the field,
of superlative value, and therefore he dug hard in the mines of wisdom, to
get possession of it.

Non nisi sublato reperitur gemmula saxo.

It Is no mervaile that the Apostle should be so eager in the pursuit of
knowledge. The Minister of the Gospel as well as the Priest under the Law,
ought to be a man of knowledge. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and
they should seek the Law at his mouth for he is the messenger of the Lord of
hosts, Mal: 2. 7. Hence Calvin concludes that be ought to be a Teacher. An
ignorant minister Hine sequitur a Jure Sacerdotii non posse divelli docendi
munus prodigiosum est si sacerdotemse esse jactet interea non sit Doctor Calvin.
is none of Gods making, for God gives gifts, where he gives a calling.

How then can a man attain unto the riches of wisdom; unless he has the key
of tongues to open them unto him? Hence it comes to pass, that diversity of
tongues are reckoned with the choycest persons, and things as Apostles,
Prophets, Teachers, Miracles, Gifts of healing; Helps, Governments, 1 Cor: 12.
28. How much is a Divine accommodated, by the knowledge of tongues? For how can
he beat out the meaning of the holy Ghost, unless he understand his language?
Me thinks then, our desires should be raised, to as high a pitch as Solomon
intimates, Prove: 18. 1. Through desire a man having separated himself
intermedleth with all wisdom. This separation is lawful, Qui se ab hominibus
sejungit quaerit sapientiam prae desiderio and sludio ejus consequendae itaque
cum omni doctrine a sese immiscet, omni hominum con. sortio relicto ut liberius
studiis incumbat Merc. in Loc.
to leave company to study the harder, as Mercer observes. A scholar will find
special use of Arts, and Sciences: they enrich the mind with knowledge, and
help to unty many knotty Controversies: Let me then persuade you to compass
these spoils of the Egyptians, to leave no pains unattempted, in the pursuit
of learning. Arts and Sciences caught a fall in Adam: How prudent a course
would it be for us, to raise a building out of those ruins, and to have that
part of Gods image restored? Solomen excelled the learned and put down the
skillfullest in their own Art. 1 Kings. 4: 30. There Is made up a catalogue of
his knowledge in natural things, And they pass under the seal and signature of
the holy Ghost, as being subservient unto Religion, and therefore of great
price, dignity and value. Moses who (as they say) lived in Hermes Trismegistus
time, was learned in the Mathematics, and all things that appertayn'd unto
humane learning: The Text is clear: And Moses was learned in all the wisdom
of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds, Acts: 7. 22. If any be
enemies to University learning, I conceive with St. Jude. v. 10. They speak
evil of those things which they know not. Their ignorance (as Incivile and
iniquum est sin vero quia respuunt malitia and impietate vacare non potest Ium.
in Loc.
Junius observes) is uncivil, unjust malicious and impious: They may fitly be
compared to the fox in the fable, who said, the grapes were over bitter,
because they were above his reach. None but an Ignoramus is an enemy to
knowledge. Thus you see how we ought to prize knowledge where ever we find it.
But let us confer our principal pains for the attaining of that knowledge
which only, will make us wise unto salvation. Throughout the whole book of
Proverbes a wise man and a godly man, are convertible terms. Religion is
therefore called the way of understanding, Prove: 9. 6. And it is the high
commendation of a wise man, Prove: 1. 5. That he will hear, and increase
learning: and a man of understanding shall attain unto wise counsels.

This is the end of Christ's coming into the world, to be a light unto it. Ioh:
1. 9. (...). The Clem. Alexan. strom. 6.
Lord is our illumination, and that true knowledge into which we are translated,
so Clemens Alexandrinus, By his knowledge, shall my righteous Clem. Alex:
strom. 6 to.
servant justify many, I say: 53. 11. And it is David's prayer, O continue thy
loving kindness, unto them, that know thee, Psalm: 36. 10. Knowledge is the
foundation of all other graces: Faith, Hope, and Love, are grounded on
knowledge. It Is Gods first work to illuminate the understanding: The seals
fell off Paul's eyes before he became a preacher of the Gospel. The promise is
to those whom the father draws, Ioh: 6. 45. that they should be (...), all
taught of God But this Promise excludes not the preaching of the Gospel, as
learned Hoc verbo abutuntur hi, quiv^calem praedication^m and externum verbum
vel scripturas contemnunt etc. Rollocus in Joh. 6. 45. 1. Divine knowledge is
humble.
Rolloc observes on the place: And that you may know, where this knowledge
resides, let me assure you,

That, it ever lodges in an humble breast. The knowledge taught of God is an
humble knowledge. But when God opens a man's eyes and gives him the spirit of
understanding, he then discernes in himself, more ignorance and folly then
knowledge. After that he has studied this domum interiorem, his own conscience
(as Bernard sti^es it) he knows more ill by himself, then all the world can
acquaint him withal. As the consideration of his primitive integrity may be
scientia inflaens, so the review of his original praevarication, may be
scientia humilians: As that may pusse up, so this may humble. It Is the greatest
honor of the learned Rabbis, to be men of the humblest spirits. And the
more humble they are, the greater proficiency they make in knowledge. Let them
consider; what they have is derivative: Quid habes, quod non accepisti? Their
abilities are not their own, but so many talents concredited unto them, of
Quinto quis decrescit in despectione sui, tanto amplius proficit in cogni tione
Dei, Bern. 2. Its a reforming knowledge.
which they must stand accomptable unto him, who is their Lord and Master. It Is
undoubtedly true, that, the most ignorant are apt to think best of themselves.
The Laodiceans were well conceited of themselves, and the reason was, because
their eyes were not opened.

Neither does divine knowledge float in thy brain, but secondly it works a
reformation, upon thy heart, and life: To depart from evil is understanding,
Job. 28. 28. Hereby we are sure that we know him, if we keep his
commandments, 1 John 2. 3. this is a (...) indeed, of a man of knowledge: Has
thy knowledge an effectual influence upon thy life and conversation? Does it
quicken thy love to Christ and inkindle thy zeal for his glory? When the
spirit of wisdom breaks in upon thy soul (just as when the spirit of God came
upon Saul) it makes thee another manner of man, this spirit is a fire, to purge
thy corruptions: It Is water, to allay thy passion: It Is a wind to blow and
scatter thy swelling thoughts of vanity. May that popular rumor never be
verified of our age, that, never was more knowledge, and never less practice.
Now, when knowledge abounds, as the waters cover the seas, where is the return
of a sanctified conversation? He Is truly the knowing man, who reduces his
knowledge into practice. Knowledge and practice should go together in a mutual
equipage, being conjoined in an indissoluble union by the Holy Ghost. If then
God has advanced you to places of higher dignity, God expects from you more
duty and obedience. If God has bestowed greater gifts on you, he expects
better fruits of holiness to be manifested throughout your whole life and
conversation. For where much is given, much is required. He Is a man of
learning, that is a man of a sanctified conversation. I remember Berr: Suber
(...). 37.
that Bernard gives a direction or two for knowledge, ut scias, quo ordine, quo
studio, quo sine. For order, that must be known in the first place, which most
nearly conduces unto thy salvation. For study, that must be studied, which is
most worthy of thy love: and as for the end, that must not be curiosity, but
the edification of thy own, and thy brothers soul. These directions in my
Text, meet as lines in the same center. Christ Jesus is first to be known,
worthiest of our love, and the end of all our knowledge. This puts me in mind of
my second particular, the object of my Apostles resolution (...) to know Jesus
Christ. 2. Part Concerning the Knowledge of Jesus Christ.


In these Epistles, St Paul uses the name of Jesus, above 500 times, and no
wonder, for in this name there are above 5000 treasures: Yea, in it, all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge are reposited. If you would Anatomize all
Paul's Epistles, you should find the sacred name of Jesus written in the heart
of them in golden characters, as truly, as they falsely report, it was seen in
the heart of Ignatius Loyola; that grand Impostor. I have read, that Phidias
made a buckler for Minerva, wherein his own name was so curiously engraven,
that it could not be took out, without the dissolution of the whole frame. So
Christ has divinely wrought his name in the Scriptures, and that so
accurately, in so much, that you cannot take it out, but the truth will fall to
the ground. Christ is the complement and perfection of all science, the ground
of all consolation. Hereupon the Prophet concludes triumphantly: I will rejoice
in the God of my salvation, Hab. 3. 18. (...). Clem. Alex. strom. 6.
Our knowledge and spiritual paradise is our Savior: So * Clemens
Alexandrinus. O then above all thy gettings, labor to get this understanding,
to know Christ and him crucisi'd. Have this, and thou need no more: It Is
that unum necessarium the only requisite. A man may read 20 Lectures in
Aristle, and yet be never the more moralliz'd man. All Platoes and Aristotle's
Precepts meddle not with heart pollutions, nor tend to the Reformation of the
inward man. A man only acted by principles of nature, cannot correct the least
vice. It Is beyond the sphaere of it is activity to discover sin in it is proper
colors, I mean the siafulnesse, and pollution that is in sin. It Is true a
temperate Socrates, a just Aristides, a covenant-keeping Regulus, shame many of
us Christians, and will rise up in judgment against us, and condemn us, but
their morality could not advance them, to the third Heaven. The eye of natural
reason was too dim, to discern Christ erected upon a pole. Their charity
then justly deserves the check, who enlarge the way where Christ has
streightn'd it: The text is express, there is no other name given under Heaven,
whereby we must be saved: Till this truth be expunged out of Canonical Acts 4,
12.
Scripture, I shall never admit any scientiam mediam, or posterne door, to let
in those, who are without the pale of the Christian world. As for those
Jesuited persons, who advance nature and deprave grace, the time may come when
upon conviction of conscience, they may be forced to conclude with Bellarmines
Tutissimum est etc. It Is Bellarm. 1. 5. de Iustif.
the safest way to rely upon the grace of God: when as that idolized (...) will
prove an Egyptian reed, to give them the slip in their greatest necessity.

Now it is requisite, that I should put a difference between the 3 Characters of
Knowledge.
precious and the vile, and distinguish that knowledge which is so in reality
and truth, from that which is counterfeit, and only personates a Christian.
View it in these distinguishing characters: This is a fundamental, an
excellent, and a soule-saving knowledge.

1. I say, this is a fundamental knowledge. The knowledge of 1. Fundamental.
Christ is the sum and substance of all Divinity, the scope of all the
Scriptures, the very pith and quintessence of all religion, even that, which is
(without controversy) the great mystery of Godliness. The Scripture is the
field, and Christ the pearl of price; The Scripture the Box, and Christ the
precious ointment. Pretiosum opp^balsamum in gemmeo myrhothecio. Christ is
called in Scripture (...), The word (...), as though every word in Scripture
didre-echo this precious word. The Apostle sets it down unto the life, Ephesians. 2.
20, 21. And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all the building fitly
framed together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord. 2. Excellent.


2. Add hereunto, this is an excellent knowledge. The Apostle, though a man of
incomparable gifts, yet accounted all things but loss, and dung, in comparison
of this, Phil. 2. 8. (...), Be they what they will, honors, riches in their
greatest estate and confluence, arts and sciences, in their resplendent
lustres, let them be virtues which beautify the mind, yet when they come, in
competition with Christ, they pass under such a censure, (...), loss, and
garbidge, the most vile and contemptible things in the world. This knowledge
must needs be amiable, because it proceeds from Christ the fairest of ten
thousands.

And lastly, for the complement of all, this is a soule-saving-knowledge. 3.
Soul saving. 1 (...) 2. 14.
When all Philosophical speculations puzzle and non plus thy understanding,
and cannot administer the least auxiliaries unto thee (For the natural man
perceives not the things that are of the spirit of God) then when thou have
the spirit of discerning to see their emptiness, and impotency, Christ darts a
ray of supernatural knowledge into thy soul, infuseth into thee new
principles, a renewed nature; And now thou discernest with another manner of
eye, for the spiritual man knows all things. Thou must then have a better
master then Aristotle to teach thee. This knowledge can no where be learnt but
in the school of Christ. A man may be admired for a great Gnostick, as
accurate a Text-man (as Buxtorfe records of the Jews) as to know every letter
in the Bible, and observe every point (as the Masor^t^es do) yet all this
while he may be a mere stranger to this soule-saving knowledge. For if the
Doctrinall truth of Scripture, be not made an experimental truth unto thy
soul, and conscience, though thou may be reputed a great scholar, yet thou
art far from being a good Christian. When Christ comes into thy soul, by his
grace, he renewes thee in the spirit of thy mind, he purifies thy nature,
reformes thy life, redeemes thee from thy vain conversation. When his gracious
face shines upon thee, he makes his ways and saving health known unto thee, as
it is Psalm. 67. 2.

Thus I have endeavored to describe the object of this knowledge positively
considered, lett's now view it as privatively, and by way of Antithesis set
down in the text, (...), only, or nothing else besides Jesus Christ.

Q. But does no other knowledge pass current? Does my Apostle use a kind of
Ostracisme, to banish all secular learning out of the school of Christ?

A. Doubtless such an interpretation stands not with the sense Calvinus in
locum. Aquin: in locum.
of my Apostle. Nulla mihi scientia tanti fuit; ut aliud cognoscere appeterem,
quam Christum, licet crucifixum, So Calvin. He esteemed no knowledge equal to
the knowledge of Christ. Per sapientiam verbi ^vacuatur crux Christi. By
eloquence of words the Cross of Christ is made of none effect: so Aquinas upon
the place. But these two agree with Estius and Paraeus, who are no enemies unto
humane learning, but they much disrellished the affected eloquence of
newfangled preachers, who rent the people a sunder, from unity to mutiny, from
faith, to faction, and so tear the seamlesse coat of Christ. They bragd of
Cardans vain glorious humor (otherwise a man of wisdom) who making a
catalogue of renowned worthies, inserted himself Hi^ronymus Cardanus in the
number. So these instead of preaching Christ in all humility, are not ashamed
to vent the frothy issues of their abortive brains, rather to tickle their
auditors ears, then to affect their consciences. Therefore to this poison, my
Apostle prescribes a sovereign antidote, and that Paraeus inlocum.
is to preach Christ and him crucified, Sola Christi cognitio sufficit ad
salutem, says Paraeus. The knowledge of Christ, is alone sufficient unto
salvation: but he adds further, sed cum aliis conjuncta, tanto erit jucundi^r:
but mixed with other sciences, will relish some palates the better. Having a
spice of humane learning, it may win upon men's affections, and so take the
learned in their own Art. Augustine going to have his ears tickled, had his
heart touched, and got Christ to boot, with the eloquence of Ambrose. A
Minister ought to preach in the most winning way, and ought to endeavor by a
pious kind of fraud (not in a Popish nor Machiavilian sense) to insinuate
himself, into the affections of his Auditors. I ground my assertion upon the
Apostle 2 Cor. 12. 16. being crafty I caught you with guile. The preacher
studied acceptable words, Elegant composures, and apposite expressions are
commendable. I know not any thing to the contrary, but an Egyptian jewel may
be dedicated to the service of the sanctuary. The Apostle quotes Menander,
Videmus non satis esse si sidem nostrae integritatis faciamus nisi ^ales
deprehendantur quorii us^ fucrimus opera. Quare delectus habendus est non
levis, neque perfunct^rtus sed exquisita diligentia Calv. (...) Chrysostom. Dan. 2.
34.
Aratus, Epimenides, Heathen Poets, that so he might foil the Gentiles with
their own weapons: Chrysostom upon my Text says The Apostle, who knew greater
things of art, could not be ignorant of these lesser things: yet, he would
relinquish his learning, deny his parts, seem to be ignorant of his gifts,
that by this means, he might gain the people to the knowledge of Christ. The
Apostles Acts 4. 13. were accounted by the Counsel (...) illiterate men, even
Idiots, (as the word is commonly Englished) yet these God used as instruments
to confound the wisdom of the wise, and to put to silence the most knowing
men. We read in Daniel of a stone without hands cut out of the mountains,
which battered all the rest in pieces: so the Gospel of Christ in its purity
and simplicity, without the help of humane policy or contrivances, throws down
all the towering thoughts of men, it levels mountains as low as the valleys,
and casts down the high and mighty from their seat. Its the arm of the Lord,
Is. 53. 1. Its the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1. 16. Yet all this while,
though I admire divine learning, and prefer it to the highest place,
accounting all knowledge none at all to the knowledge of Christ: Nevertheless
I discard not humane learning from its office and convenience, and usefulness
in a learned Republic. My hearts desire and prayer is, that the Sun may never
set upon our Israel, but that the Schools may flourish in learning and
religion, and that the Sons of the Prophets may grow up as young plants, and be
as the pollished corners of the temple, never wanting honorable
encouragements. But for the prevention of abuses which are apt to creep in, I
hope a caution or two will not be unseasonable.

1. Before you make use of humane learning, labor to cleanse 1. Caution. Purge
and cleanse humane learlearning. Isay 8. 20.
and purge it. There Is much dross in it and therefore it must be refined. It
requires an understanding head, to cull out, what is Legitimate and to reject
what is spurious. Things must not be took on trust at adventure by an implicit
faith relying upon the judgment of Learned Doctors. There Is a Lydius Lapis, to
discern true from counterfeit. Ad Legem and Testimonia: Examine all Doctrines
by the Touchstone, which is the Word of God. Take heed that thou bring not in
those things, which contradict the principles of thy faith. Better to
relinquish thy author, and sacrifice him to the flames, then flinch one tittle
from the rule, which is the word of God, and so make shipwreck of faith, and a
good conscience.

In the next place, be advised to make all humane learning subservient, Cant.
2. Make humane learning subordinate unto divine.
and subordinate to divine. Hagar was courteously entertained whilst she was a
servant, but when once she domineered and despised her Mistress, she was turned
out of doors. The comparison is obvious, between humanity, and divinity. If
that, being but a handmaid, flaunt it and outbrave her Mistress, let her be
casheired in Deuteronomy. 21. 12.
the same manner. The captive woman must have her nails pared, and her head
shaven, before she might be entertained for a wife. In like mannner, we must
pare off all the superfluities, protuberancies and excrescencies of humane
learning, before it can be dedicated to the service of the Lord. As Moses in
his glorious luster, put a veil before his face; so were it an act of prudence
some times to conceal a man's self. The veil of silence is, often times, the
best attire of sobriety. A fool, says Solomon, speaks all, but a wise man
Prove. 29. 11.
holds it in, till afterward.

3. Use humane learning with moderation, and modesty; The Cant. 3. Use humane
learning with moderation.
gold sanctifies not the altar, but the altar the gold. Humane learning
improveth not divine, but is it-selfe improved by it. Arts are holy in their
use only, which is, to attend upon sacred knowledge; And whilst they do so,
the law entitles them to some kind of holiness: Nam quae sacris serviunt,
profana non sunt. Surely then, that Painter discovered abundance of folly, who
when he could not make the Picture handsome, then fell a daubing of it: A
remedy worse than the disease. Onesilus his head (as I find it in Herodotus)
Herodet. Terpsic.
when it was empty of brains; was filled with honeycombes: such are those (and
may they never come near our Athens) whom I may term capita sine cerebro,
brainlesse, or brainsick heads, who gleane tares from a stage, and scatter them
in the pulpit: Whilst Jesuits and Postilers are mustered up by scores, scarce
one quotation of Scripture.

This is just as if a man should forbear wholesome food, and gnaw hungerly
upon flint stones, according to the Similiti^^ of Robertus Guleus: The Lord
complains of this Epidemicall disease, Jer. 2. 13. My people have committed
two evils, they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed
them out cisternes, even broken cist^rnes. Would Jeromes dream, might instruct
our morning thoughts. ^e dreamed that Christ said unto him: Inveni te magis
Ciceronianum, quam Christianum. Away with such lines of luxuriant fancies,
strong you may call them, but by an Antiphrasis, they are as weak as water,
and cannot quench the drought of a thirsty soul: What Is the shell to the
kernel? What are all these outsides to Christ Crucified? We cannot preach
Christ in any other method, but we shall bewray our own vainglory, betray the
honor of God, and the souls of his people. When poor souls lie a bleeding,
and they cry out, None but Christ, what advantage will all the froth of wit
afford them? When all the flourishes of wit are empty, and can do no good,
there must be a real solid thing (as I may say) Corpus solidum succi plenum,
that must add a word of comfort to a troubled spirit. Let me beseech you in
the bowels of Christ, that you would preach Christ, and that in all humility.
God advances the low in spirit: he is the best Preacher, and he will reap the
best fruit of his pains, who endeavors to condescend to the capacity of his
Auditors. Perspicuity is the ornament of an Orator, and the humble preaching
of Christ crucified, is the grace of a Sermon. And so I am fallen upon my last
particular, (...), and him crucified.

Here Is a man of the right stamp indeed: What the Jews accounted a stumbling
block, and the Greeks foolishness, he accounted his 3. Particular. The
knowledge of Christ ctucified.
only glory. God forbid says he, that I should glory, save in the cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world, Gal. 6. 14.

Q. But why does the Apostle so often inculcate this expression, Christ
crucified? why not Christ incarnate, or Christ risen, ascended, and glorified?
why not Christ rather in his Robes, than now in his rags?

A. I answer, without the knowledge of the cross, the knowledge of Christ will
profit us nothing. Upon that he was made (...) a curse for us to redeem us
from the curse of the law. Christ made our atonement upon the cross, where he
felt the Phials of God's wrath powered down upon his righteous soul, having
assumed the Person of an offender.

Where then is the wise, where is the scribe, where is the disputer of this
world? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? 1 Cor. ^. 20.
Are swelling words suiteable to this exinanition of the Son of God? Is a losty
style correspondent with this abasement, Is it fit to discourse sweetly and
delightfully upon gall and vinegar, and to beset nails and thorns with
flowers of Rhetoric, and to bring our Savior in pomp of words, and
vainglorious pageants of Art unto his cross? This is not to preach Christ,
but to preach a man's self in a vain glorious affectation of eloquence:
Herein consists the duty of a Minister, for matter to preach Christ only, for
manner with all humility and him crucified: This is the preaching when all is
done; this I may term the very Art of preaching, which directly tendes to the
Glory of God, and the salvation of souls. Admit a man be of never so mean a
presence, and men come to hear him possessed with a prejudicate opinion, yet
if he labor to divide the word aright, and to speak to the conscience, rather
than the fancy of his Auditors, O! what wonders does the Lord work, by weak
means? As by rams horns, the walls of Jericho, were battered in pieces: and
by earthen pitchers the huge host of the Midianites was discomfited: so by that
preaching which the wits of the times, and men that applaud their own fancies
accoumpt empty and foolish, the Lord works miraculously in the conversion of
souls. It Is the Apostles assertion; For after that in the wisdom of God, the
world through wisdom knew not God, it pleased God, by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe.

Thus having endeavored to beat the corn out of the ear, suffer me now to
grind it at the mill. Application is the life of every sermon, Let me then
entreat your patience, in a few words, to press what has been said, unto your
practice, and then I shall put a period to my discourse.

Marlorate, out of Calvin, draws two inferences of practice: Quid docendum
first, and then Quid discendum afterward: Christ crucified, is the substance
of all, that we can preach or hear. It Is a lesson can be never enough taught,
and never enough learned.

In the first place, seeing this is that lesson, which we all ought to teach
(Fathers and Brethren) suffer I beseech you, the word of exhortation, to
confer your best endeavors to put in practice this excellent method, and
exquisite art of preaching Wast not this precious lamp of the sanctuary, in
making (...), circumstantials, the maine employment: What Is this but to tithe,
mint and cummin, and to neglect the weightier matters of the law. (...). There Is
one most needful Doctrine, which you ought frequently to inculcate, and make
deep impressions upon the conscience, and that is the knowledge of Jesus Christ
and him crucified. I cannot sufficiently admire how sacred is the ministerial
function What a great honor is it to be employed in Embasy for the King of
heaven! O! what fidelity is requisite in the discharge of so concerning a
message? You are God's sword hearers, bear up that sword which he has put
into your hands: The Lord has promised to be your portion. And if I invert the
order of the words, that they which live upon the Altar ought to serve it; it is
a piece of the same truth, as well as that; The Lord has so ordained, that
those which serve the Altar should live upon the Altar. The readiest way (I
conceive) to suppress, schisms and divisions, is by preaching the power of
godliness. This is the way to stop the mouths of Gainsayers; when they see
that self is not the maine Engineer, nor the promoting of a man's own
particular ends, and interests, but the glory of God, and the love of Christ
constraines a man, then they are put to silence, and have nothing to gainsay.
We read how Moses, in his own cause, was the meekest man upon the face of the
earth: yet transported with zeal in the cause of God. A spirit of discretion
is required in a Christian, least he may quickly pluck down with the one hand,
what he endeavors to build up with the other Moderation is much talked of;
it is a goo^ to be desired: For often times it serves as a golden bridle, to curb
a passion. Calvin. in Epist. ad Melanct.
But Calvin's caution to Melanchth^n, is worthy of your observation: Take heed
(says he) that moderation do not quench thy zeal. Meekness and silence,
does good, and is commendable in a man's own cause. It Is a man's glory to pass
by a personal injury: but when religion suffers and the cause of God lies a
bleeding then to be silent, argues a spiritual stupefaction, as if a man were
possessed with a dumb Devil. When men preach their own inventions, teaching
for Doctrines, the traditions of men: When men deride the way of holiness,
casting nicknames and aspersions of Puritans Precisians and I know not what
upon them, that so they may render their persons, and profession odious, just
as thy dealt with the Saints in the Primitive Church, who were put into
beares-skins, and then worryed: When men are not affrayd to exercise their
wits, to be witty even unto blasphemy, to cast a slur or a jest upon that
sacred word, by which one day they shall be judged; This is not to preach
Christ crucified, but it is to crucify him afresh, and to put the Lord of glory
to an open shame: When men like Jehu drive furiously, mistaking a passion for
zeal, and so often times spoil a good cause in the carriage, this is not
suitable to that meekness, that was in Christ. Let not then any humor or
opinion sway thee; there is nothing so dangerous in religion, as this compliance
with humors, and fancies, and siding for selfe-interests and advantages. The
Spirit of God must be thy Pilot to s^eare thee, and the word of God must be thy
compass, and the glory of God ought to be in thy eye as the scope and end of
all. Take nothing upon trust, but imitate those noble Act. 17. 11.
Bereans, who let nothing pass, without due examination: For we read that they
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so.

2. As you have heard what we must all teach, so you shall 2 Quid discen dum.
hear what we must all learn, viz: Christ crucified, Let me then persuade you
(as Jerome does in an Epistle to Paulinus.) Let Us learn that knowledge on
earth, which will carry us unto heaven. May Discamus eam te^ris quorum scientia
perseverabit in coelis. Hieronymu^ in Epist. ad Paulinum.
it never be verified of any of us, that, we seek our own things, and not the
things of Jesus Christ, and that we resemble Mercuries statue, that point the
way to others, but move not one step our selves. A good life is the best
commentary of a good sermon, and the best con^^tation of a slander. The
shepherd has discharged his duty, when by his own example, he leads his flock
to the waters of comfort. We should all labor to be spiritual builders: As no
noise was heard in Solomon's Temple; so my heart desires that there may be no
differences nor jarrings, to be heard among us. Quirites, was a forcible word
with Caesar, to suppress all his soldiers mutinies: and shall not the word
Christiani be as prevalent with us. What said Abraham to Lot, Genesis 13. 18. Let
there be no strife between my herdsmen, and thy herdsmen, for we be brethren.
So say I, we that are sons of the same mother the Church, servants of the same
God, heirs of the same hope, how should we consult the good, one of another,
laboring to build up one another in the holy faith, considering to provoke one
another to love and to good works. We are (...), members one of another.

Is there a controversy between thee and thy brother? be not wanting in thy
duty to pray for him: this, if any thing, will be the reconciler. Imitate thy
Savior on the cross: who prayed for his enemies. None are so bad, but they
deserve thy prayers, and commiseration; Is thy brother ignorant? do not
despise him: Consider who made thee to differ from thy brother, and a greater
mercy, requires a greater measure of thankfulness. Copy out that excellent
advice of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4. 8. And above all things have f^rvent oharity
among your selves: for charity shall cover the multitude of sins. This is to
learn Christ crucified, when we labor to puri^y our selves even as he is
pure, when we labor to be holy as he was, in 1 Jon. 3. 3.
all manner of conversation, when we imitate him, in putting on bowels of
mercy and tender compassion. My brethren, God has given you greater measure of
knowledge, and therefore he expects from you greater improvements. It was a
grievous complaint of Austine in his time: Surgu^indocti and rapiunt coelum,
and nos cum doctrinis nostris detrudimur in gehennam. God grant that our holy
life, August.
may be the confutation. Let it never be told in Gath, and published in the
streets of Askelon (I wish there were no cause) that any son of Levi should
prove a son of Belial, and make the sacrifice of the Lord to be abhorred. God
forbid, that in so sacred an order, (as the Ministerial Function is) That
there should be any profane Esaus, any taunting Ishmaels, and blasphemous
swearers.

We cannot in any wise brook Intruders into the Church: we abhor, and that
deservedly, their irregular motions who run before they are sent: wherefore
we should all unite our prayers and endeavors in our capacities, and callings
to God as one man, to hinder such from ever setting footing in our Israel. If
any such be, (as I fear there are) methinks the fearful judgments of God
executed upon Vzzah, and Vzziah, for their over-officious services, and
intermedling without a calling, should make them fear and tremble, (...), so
unpreparedly to adventure, upon sacred mysteries. In the interim, let us walk
inoffensively and more circumspectly in our life and conversation, and give no
just offense, neither to Jew, nor Gen^ile, nor Church of G^d. This counsel is
not unseasonable; for we know not what advantage a scandalous life gives unto a
common Adversary. If those that should be Seers, yet will be blind; if the
Watchmen sleep, and the Sh^pheards leave their flocks to hierlings, then will
some of Jeroboams Priests, of the basest of the people, presumptuously usurp
the Ministerial function. Take which you will, a negligent Minister who
performs not his duty, or one that runs without a calling, of his own mission,
and the flatteries of such like himself, they are both abominable, superfluous
branches, which God will pluck up and sweep away, as dung out of the Church.
Would we then have our callings more honored, and our persons more reverenced,
and our Doctrine with more cheerfulness embraced? lets all endeavor to be
more conscientious in the discharge of our duties; let us not post off
reformation, from one, to another, accusing, and excusing one another, but
let us commune with our own hearts, make diligent enquiry into our own bosoms,
every one saying with himself in Jer. 8. 6.
particular, what have I done? The way to contract greater reverence abroad is
to be more circumspect at home, that as we go beyond others in knowledge, so
likewise, we should outstrip them in the practice of holiness. Christ in a
more special manner has communicated unto us, the knowledge of his ways: how
should we strive with a pious contention, which of us should bring most glory
to God, and advance the cause of Christ! It shall be my close and prayer with
Moses, that God would put his Vrim and Thummim, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
upon his holy ones, even write upon all our hearts; Holiness unto the Heb.
13. 20. 21.
Lord, that so we may be a Royal Generation, a Holy Priesthood, a peculiar
people, to set forth the praises of him, who has called us out of darkness
into this marvelous light. I shall conclude with the Apostle, Now the God of
peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd
of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect
in every good work, to do his will: working in you, that which is well
pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Baruchs Hurt and Cure:
Set-forth from JEREM: Chap: 45. Verse: 5. And seek thou great things for thy
self? seek them not. SERMON. II.



IF ever a word spoken in due season might be At St Mary's Oxon. October. 18.
1642.
compared to Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver, such a one is here
represented to your view, being a word of comfort opportunely administered unto
a man of a sorrowful spirit. (And) in the front of my Text is a connexive
particle, and draws down the Context unto the Text. Take a review of the
precedent History in this brief relation. The iniquities of Israel and Judah
are full ripe, and now it is high time for the destroying Angel to thrust in
his sickle and cut them down: But such are the tender bowels of our Father of
mercies, and God of all consolations, that he gives warning before he smites:
It Is his accustomed method, to leave no means unattempted for his peoples
recovery, and for the healing of their backslidings. How often does he draw
them with the bands of a man, even with cords of love? What presuasive
arguments, what alluring Rhetoric does he use, enough to break the Rock
within thee, even an heart harder then Adamant, and to melt it into the love of
God, here behold bowels opened, like the sounding of an Harp, and once more
rol'd together. The Lord denounces most heavy Judgments, and yet in the midst
of Judgment entertaines some thoughts of free love and mercy. The Lord reveals
his secret intentions to his servants the Prophets. He makes the prophet Jeremy
of his privy counsel. The Lord himself becomes the inditer of a doleful
writing fraught with lam^ntation, mourning, and woe: Jeremy dictates from the
mouth of God unto Baruch, and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the
words of the Lord, Jer. 36. 4. Forthwith they are communicated unto the King,
and Princes of Judah. The King being no whit affected Jer. 36. 4.
with these dismal tidings, but rather hearing them as it were in a dream, he
cuts the role in pieces, and casts it into the fire; O the Sottish Lethargy of
a rebellious sinner! He Is settled upon his lees, at ease in Zion, come what
will come, he thinks himself secure, that no evil shall happen unto him.
Security is the harbinger of ruin. But wickedness stands not still, it is a
teeming mother, though of a spurious issue. To make his sin completely
sinful, he sends hue and cry to apprehend the prophet, and the scribe: Heel'e
be revenged on the instruments, though for the performance of their obliged
duty. O ungrateful patient, who when he has trampled sovereign physic under
his feet, straightway plots the destruction of his physician! but humane power
is circumscribed with certain limits, and compasses, and cannot go one jot
further then the supreme overruling hand permits the motion. Man purposes, but
the Lord disposes of that purpose as it pleases him: God himself becomes an
hiding place unto his servants: But the Lord hid them, Jer. 36. 26. the kings
express commands must be frustrated, his messengers must return without their
errand, for God has more work for the prophet, and the scribe: A new role
must be writ: The national rebellions must stand upon record, legible to
posterity: This God gives in precept, and they immediately put in execution. And
over and above the text is express in the close of the forecited chapter, that
there were added besides unto them many like words. New rebellions renew their
sorrows; and continuance in sin, abundantly aggravates the punishment. By this
time Baruch is perplexed with multitudes of sorrows, the apprehension of the
Kings wrath makes him fear, and tremble, he is sensible of a burden too heavy
for him to bear, the weight whereof mak's him fall grovelling unto the ground.
The Lord becomes the remembrancer of his passionate expressions: Thou did
say, woe is me now, for the Lord has added grief to my sorrow, I fainted in
my sighing, and find no rect v. 3. Addidit dominus scriptionem Scripti vi, one
writing after another; I hardly escaped for my former writing, and now I put my
self into the very mouth of the lion, adding a second danger to the former,
and so expose my self unto a continual succession of miseries. In the mount,
in the greatest straits, and extremities the Lord will be seen. Now comes the
Lord and brings out a precious cordial, which he reserved for a languishing
condition: Now he shows himself indeed a very present help in this needful
condition, and time of trouble. He Is the good Samaritan, he powrs oil into
the wounds, and binds them up* he will in no wise quench this smoking flax, nor
break this Matthew. 12. 20.
bruised reed: O taste, and see, O Baruch, how good, and gracious the Lord is to
thee, in particular! There Is an universal conflagration, and yet thou art as a
brand plucked out of the burning. There Is a general massacre, and yet thy life
is given thee for a prey, whithersoever thou go. The Prophet brings this
tidings from the mouth of God, v. 4. behold that which I have built I will
break down. Goodly edifices must be leveld with the ground, and not one stone
left upon another: It follows and that which I have planted, I will pluck up,
even this whole land. The vineyard of Gods own plantation must be laid wast,
and plucked up root and branch. The Lord, when he begins, will make an end,
Laesa patientia, fit furor, Patience abused breaks forth into extremity of
fury: his wrath is incensed, and his jealousy burns hot like fire. If any
thing, (questionless) a shower of tears might quench this burning, but their
hearts are unbroken, their fallow-ground is not plowed up; they are past
relenting, and so shut against themselves a door of mercy. And now, O Baruch,
thou son of Neriah, where is thy sympathy? why do not thou call thy comforts
Ichabods? Do thou think to fare well at home, whilst the Church of God is
under hatches abroad? would thou be in the floate of prosperity, whilst the
Church is in the ebb of adversity: As the mariners in a tempest roused Jonah
and cried, what meanest thou, O sleeper, arise, call upon thy God, Jonah 1. 6.
so say I, arise, and lay to heart the afflictions of thy brethren. When private
calamities come in competition with, public, let the latter preponderate: Thou
must not stick to foregoe thy own rest, ease, tranquillity, nay thy life it
self, when thou have a lawful calling to lay it down in these times of
horror, and confusion. Let this advice from heaven in my text have an
effectual influence upon thy spirit, and tu quaer^res tibi res magnas? ne
quaerito: and seek thou great things for thy self seek them not.

My text may be styled Baruch's hurt, and cure. If he or any other Baruchs Hurt
and Cure.
would with the sorcerer bost himself to be some great one in the world, if he
set upon the pursuit of great things in this world, an arrow from God will be
sent, and pierce his soul through with many sorrows: there is his hurt. But if
so be he become endowed with a self denying spirit, so that sublunary things
are below his notice, he can bid adieu unto them, as unsuitable to his elevated
affections, he is a man of a singular temper, he will discern a sun of
righteousness with healing wings, there is his cure.

So then in the words formally considered, there is a Question and an answer.
In the Question I recommend three particulars unto 1. An Act. 2. An Object. 3.
The person.
your observation. 1. An act, and seek thou. 2. The Object, great things. 3.
The persons, one and the same, thou for thy self.

The Prophet anticipates Baruchs answer, and gives it himself, seek them
not. This dehortation is diametrically opposite. It stands like the Cherubims
with a flaming sword to keep the way of the tree of life. A sinner rides full
speed in a swift career of ungodliness: Here Is a Remora which purposely meets
him, and stops his passage. He Is bid to stand, by the watchman of the Lord of
Hosts. You see then (my Brethren) what I am to press upon your affections,
that ye would get raised spirits, and sue out a divorce between your selves,
and the world. The Argument of my discourse is Heavenly mindedness. The
enlargement of this Theme is most suitable to these present distractions, where
there are such sad thoughts of heart for the afflictions of Joseph, and for the
divisions of Reuben. Is it now a time for purchasing of Lands, and revenues,
eating the fat, and drinking the sweet, to solace our selves in all variety of
voluptuousness, and epicurisme, to stretch out our selves in beds of Ivory, to
drink wine in bowls, and yet remain insensible of the afflictions of Joseph?
If by such projects as these we seek to get a name upon earth, we may build a
Babel of our own confusion. But let us learn to deny our lawful pleasures,
and make our tears our meat and drink, imitating St James, whose knees (as
Eusebius records) became like camels hooss by the assiduity of his devotion.
Where Is the man that spares the more either from his Eusebius Eccle. Hist.
belly, or his back, that prostrates himself in the dust before the throne of
Grace, whose soul is alike affected with J^remies to weep in secret for the
sins of the times? I fear our times are just like those before the deluge,
eating, and drinking, and making merry. God grant that we imitate not the
Swans, who (as they say) sing sweetly before their Funeral. Cast your eyes
upon the bleeding condition of Ireland, and that which comes nearer home the
miserable distractions of the land of our Nativity: Is mirth, jollity,
seasonable at a Fast, or Funeral? Is it a discourse suitable for a dying man to
talk of honors, high places, and promotions? shall a man drencht in tears,
pursue pastimes, and pleasures? shall humility and lowliness change the scene
into pride, and ambition? shall poverty invest it self with stately robes?
shall thou O Baruch, when all the world is in combustion, be so spiritually
benumbed, as to have thy heart doting upon the momentany pleasures of this
wicked world? does thy heart hanker after thy pleasures? and with Lots wife,
do thou look back upon the delights of Sodom? Let her (...) be thy warning
piece not to seek great things for thy self.

Thus having paraphrased the words, I shall prosecute them according to my
proposed method, intending the question for the doctrinall part of my text: and
seek thou great things for thy self? And the dehortatory answer shall be
my use, and application: seek them not. In the unfolding whereof, I shall
purposely endeavor to enlarge my self in a plain and familiar discourse,
making my text my Apology, not to seek great things for my self, not any
sublime composures to gratify any wanton ears of Athens, but to condescend
unto the capacity of the meanest Auditor that hears me this day.

In the prosecution of the words I shall not separate the act from the object:
they are joined in the sense, and therefore I Will not divide them in my
discourse: And so I Will resume them jointly: Et quaeris tibi grandia? and
seek thou great things? And now, O Baruch thou son of Neriah, let me once
more on this wise expostulate the matter with thee! Is there any such a
miablenesse in that thing, whereon thy heart is so wholly enamoured? does the
object so necessarily conduce to the completing of thy felicity, that with
Rachel thou must have it, or else die? Is thy life bound up in it is life, as
Jacobs was in Benjamins, so that for a moment thou can not foregoe the
fruition of it? what is the reason that thou art so possessed with so much
anxiety of spirit? when I see a man bid adieu to all other things, and wholly
fix himself upon one thing alone, I presently conjecture that there is some
rarity, and excellency in that thing which wholly takes up his affections, and
terminates his acquiescencie, as lines in their proper center. Let Us then, as
Moses did, turn aside, and see what these great things are, whether answerable
to the report, and expectation. yea, or no. But alas our pains will be to
small purpose, and the issue parallel to the pains, both alike unfruitful. The
text calls them great things: by which Vatablus, and some others understand the
gift of prophe^y, but this interpretation has no correspondence with the
History, and seems Vatablus. Theodoretus C. A. Lapide Calv. in Loc.
to offer violence to the words: But I rather adhere to Theodoret, a Lapide,
Calv. and indeed the general current of interpreters, who by great things
understand rest and tranquillity, an immunity from imminent, and apparent
dangers, a confluence of outward delights and comforts, as riches, honors, and
the like: Out of an apprehension of the loss of these, there arose such
grievous complaints, and bitter expressions of sorrows: a great infirmity, a
practice how unsuitable unto a servant of God! what was not Baruch promoted to
so high an honor as to be the Scribe, and Amanuensis of the Lord of Hosts, and
shall he be so nice and delicate, as to account his life more precious then
many thousands, to prefer his private welfare; before the weale-publick? O
faint hearted soldier! Vriah was of a more Heroical spirit, when David bad
him go home to his house, and refresh himself after his journey: The Arc,
says he, and Israel, and Judah abid in tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the
servants of my Lord are encamped in open field, shall I then go into my house
to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou live, and as 2 Samuel 11.
11. Salu. Bell. Jugur^h.
thy soul lives, I will not do this thing: Marius in Salust discoverd a
magnanimous resolution unto his soldiers: Doctus sum hiemem, and aestatem
juxta pati, humi requiescere e^dem tempore, inopiam and laborem tolerare. A
child of God must prefer the welfare of Zion before his private respects, and
interests: he must not dream of his own personal peace in their public
calamities, in times of captivity and Jacobs troubles, we must bear a share
with them in their sufferings: O brave profession of the Kingly prophet, Psalm.
137. 6. If I forget thee O Jerusal^m, let my right hand forget her cunning.
That of Moses must be the good Christians choice, Heb. 11. 25. Rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin, which
last but for a season. But lets take a narrower survey of these great things,
and lets consider whether they be worth the seeking after, yea, or no. One man
seek's rest, and quietness, these are his great things. Naomi sought out a
rest for Ruth: This man would Induction. One man seeks rest, and quietness.
feign sit under his own vine, and under his own figtree, he is secure with the
men of Laish, he resembles the whore, who sits as a queen, and says no evil
shall happen unto her: But ye know the woeful end of the men of Laish: Their
security exposed them to their enemies rage and fury: And that Babylonish
strumpet shall have death, and mourning, and famine, even all these plagues
come upon her in one day, Rev. 18. 8. So the fool in the Gospel, and
Nebuchadnezzar amidst their vain glorious boastings were cashiered of all.
When Amnons heart was merry with wine, then was he slain: The handwriting
came out against Belshazzar, and numbered his days amid'st his carousing, and
jollities. Agag came delicately, but was presently hewed in pieces before the
Lord in Gilgal. Sis^ra took his sleep, but never awak't, but unto eternity.
When men seek rest, it will fly from them. When Job promised rest unto
himself, he could not find it: my bones, says he, are p^irced in me in the
night season, and my sinew's take no rest, Job 30. 17. Ponder seriously with
thy self, how David was a man of wars, and the sword never departed from his
house: so perhaps God has not yet intended for thee a blessing of peace. He Will
make a soldier of thee to fight his battles, he will put thee upon hard services
in hard times to try what metal thou art made of: he intends thee for a
valiant champion, and combatant. Take heed then of incurring that fearful
curse of M^roz, Jud. 3. 23. who came not to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the Lord against the mighty. Would thou feign sleep in a whole skin, when
thousands fall besides thee, and ten thousands at thy right hand? Think thou
to be at rest, free from all enemies within, and without? May be God sees it
fit in wisdom to exercise thee with some smarting cross, lest otherwise with
Jeshurun thou should wax fat, and kick against the Rock of thy salvation.
God know's what is better for thee, then thou do for thy self. May be its a
special providence, that thou shall not receive good things in this life, nor
take thy rest in this world. Non ad hoc noc de paradiso voluptatis Bern.
ejecit (says Bernard) God has not cast a man out of paradise, for him to
find another paradise in this world. All our rest, and quietness is in God.
It Is an observation of the Rabbines, that all the letters in the name Jehovah
are quiescent: And they say there is a mystery in it, to show that all our rest
is in God alone. Domine August.
fecisti nos pro te, and in quietum est cor nostrum, donec veniat ad te. Lord
thou have made us for thee, and our heart^ is never at rest, until it come
unto thee, so Augustine. We cannot choose but expect crosses in this world,
since we live in the valley of tears. The Canaanites were thorns in the
Israelites sides, which the Lord left for their trial: such a man is of a
proud, and haughty spirit, God sends an affliction, and bids it take down his
pride: Another loves his ease, and lives carelessly, God sends some sharp cross
to scour away his rust contracted by want of usage. The emulation between Rome
and Carthage was a foil to set out each others renoune and valor. The
skilfullnesse of a Pilot is unknown but in a tempest: a Captains valor
appears in the day of battle, and a Christians Magnanimity in a fiery trial:
so then, to sum up this particular: Let me ask thee, are peace, and
quietness, an exemption from cares, and troubles the great things which thou
seek after? O how will thou be deceived of thy expectation? quaeris magna,
scilicet quietem, and tranquilitatem, thou seek great things ( i. e.) rest,
ease, and tranquillity and invenies misera, scilicet motus, and proc^llas: thou
shall find quite contrary, hurley-burleyes, storms, and tempests.

Another man seek's for promotion, and high places, these are A Second man
seeks promotions.
the grandia, his great things for the attainment whereof, he becomes as very a
Parasite as were those sordid flatterers of Dionysius, who lick't up his
spittle, and preferred it before N^ctor: this is indeed (...) an unstable man,
as St James phraseth him, who Jam. 1. 8.
runs with the tide, and varies with the practice of the times: so that often
times the humor of his honorable Mecoenas becomes the compass whereby he will
steer the course of his life, and conversation: But pause a while thou who
runst in an eager pursuit after promotion, let me ask thee art thou fit for
it? or if so, art thou sure thou shall not miss of it? honor fugientem
s^quitur, sequentem fugit. Honor like the shadow when a man looks toward it,
it avoids him, but if a man turn his back from it, it follows him. And whence
comes promotion? It comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from
the South: But God is the Judge, he^utt^th down one, and sett^th up another,
Psalm. 75. 6, 7. How many verify the proverb of the Ambitious, who have a Pope
in their belly? How many are their aspiring projects, and how unsatiable are
their desires? Me thinks the practice of David, should curb them: who went
into the Sanctuary of God, and understood their end: and that is specified,
Psalm. 73. 18. surely thou did set them in slippery places, then castest them
down into destruction. Agrippina tempered her poisons in that meat which
Claudius most delighted: And so thy greatest honors may prove thy greatest
torments. It Is the observation Abulensis.
of Abulensis, that those men of renoune who have been most glorious in the
worlds account have come to most inglorious ends, as Absaloms beauty, Sampsons
strength, Achitophels policy, Asahels swiftness proved their overthrowes: and
Alexand^r notwithstanding his great conquests, was at the last poisoned. Those
quatuor summa imperia the Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman Empires
presently came to ruin: You know the fatal end of Haman the greatest
favorite in King Ahashuerosh Court, who erst while was advanced above all the
princes, and presently after was elevated higher upon a gallows. O then take
heed, lest any preferment choke the grace of God in thy soul. C. A Lapide
has a story of C. A Lapide.
Pius quintus, Cum essem religiosus been sperabam de salute animae meae,
Cardinalis factus extimui, Pontifex creatus pene desper^. Every degree of
preferment made his condition more disconsolate. But my charity hopes better
things of you my brethren, and such as accompany salvation: When I see the
failings of my elder Brethren, as on ^^e side, I abhor daubing, and flattery,
so on the other side I can in no wise brook the practice of an undutifull
Cham, to discover their nakedness, where is probable hopes of amendment.

If it were possible we should have peace with all men, and cover one another
errors with the mantle of love: A bad sense must not be entertained, when words
can admit of a better construction. May it never be verifyed of any of us, that
our young years condemn our old, and that we grow worse by those dignities,
which should make us more dutiful. Let not, O let not your talents be as so
many prices put into the hands of fools, for want of hearts to make the best
improvement of them. What pity it is to see, and I cannot see it without a
bleeding heart) that excellent gifts, (and abilities are so often buried in a
napkin, or else employed the contrary way, by such who are ingeniose nequam,
witty enough to their shame, and infamy: To dismiss this particular instance;
thou that art so ambitious of honors; It Is a great hazard, whether thou can
get honors, or if got, it is a greater hazard, whether thou can keep them:
and miserrimum est fuisse faelicem. Quaeris magna? Honors, promotions:
Invenies parva, little, small things, or else the quite contrary. Thus you see
honors, and high places are not the great things worthy of our search, and
labor.

3. Another man seeks after riches, and worldly wealth, they A third man seeks
riches, they are his great things.
are those great things, which set his endeavors a working. This man is still
a compassing of corn, and oil, he rises early, goes to bed late, eats the
bread of carfulness, and loses his beloved sleep. Is there a good
pennyworth, a good bargain stirring, how does he labor to compass it? He
racks his rents, grinds the faces of the poor, he makes have to be rich, and
this he thinks is the right course, but he is not aware all this while, that he
has put his moneys into a broken bag, and that the timber, and stones in the
wallwill prove vocal, and cry out against him: the prophet acquaints him with
his fatal doom, Jer. 17. 11. As the partridge sits on eggs, and hatcheth
them not, so he that^eteth riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the
midst ^^ his days, and at his end shall be a fool; That wedg of gold which he
so idolized, will in conclusion prove his greatest curse: his table will prove
his snare, his meat his gravel, his cup his poison, his bed a bed of thorns,
because these creatures are not sent in mercy, and so not sanctified by God.
And besides we may discern by experience, how these covetous earth-wormes are
crossed in their intentions. They scrape up riches, and know not who shall enjoy
them. Often times God punishes sin by it is contrary, the sin of covetousness in
the parents, with the sin of prodigality in the children, so that they scatter
as fast as the other gathered, and wast as profusely, as the other got
greedily. God crosses men in their darling sins, as David was crossed in his
beloved Absalon, Absalon in his Kingdom, Amnon in his Tamar. So the covetous
are crossed in their greatest confluence of riches; Those very things which they
have pursued with the strongest affections, prove unto them the most bitter
afflictions. Hereupon Reverend Latimer inculcates Latimer in his Sermons.
this lesson again, and again, beware of Covetousness, beware of
Covetousness. Of all other sins, Luther confessed that he found his heart least
inclined to covetousness: when some bad stop his mouth with preferment,
another answered, hem Germana ista bestia non curat aurum: So Melchior Adamus
in his life. Hence Seneca very divinely: Melchior Adamu^^n vita Lutheri. Seneca
de Brevitate ^^tae. A fourth man propose^h mirth etc.
Brevissima ad divitias per contemptum divitiarum via, the contempt of riches
is a price paid to purchase them.

4thly and Lastly, not to multiply any more instances: Others propose unto
themselves mirth, and jollity, these are their great things: Many have thoughts
of Heaven, they promise to redeem their time, as Elimelech promised to redeem
the inheritance, but when there came a condition, thou must take Ruth with it,
then he fly'd off: I cannot redeem it, lest I mar mine own inheritance,
Ruth: 4. 6. So men are apt to say, O if I should take a precise course of life,
I should mar my hopes, then farewell all pleasures, and comforts: whereas
indeed if we had the spirit of discerning, we should see, that there is no real
pleasure but in the ways of godliness: The ways of wisdom are ways of
pleasantness, and her paths are peace, Prove. 3. 17. of all other pleasures, I
may say, inter amplexus strangulant. What Is all the mirth, and jollity of the
world but madness, as S^lomon concluded by woeful experience: I said of
laughter it is mad, and of mirth what does it? Eccles. 2. 2. All the mirth of
the wicked is like the crackling of thorns, but a blaze, and extinguished.
Their hearts are full of gravel, there is a dampe upon their consciences. The
terrors of God afright them amidst all their mirth, an jollity. The Epicure
makes his belly his God. Clem^ns calls his vice by two words which express
them to the life (...), belly phrensy: the brutish drunkard makes his cups
Clemens Alex:
his Idols: He Is mighty to power in strong drink, but he considers not, that
cups of trembling will follow cups of healthing, and carousing, and that the
time will come, when he shall be called to a fevere account for those cups, which
he has powered down his own throat, and for those (which he least thinks of)
that he has forced upon his brother. O think upon this in your most sad, and
composed thoughts, you who ever you are, that are addicted to your pleasures,
that make your recreation your profession, and employment, who eat and drink,
and rise up to play: when cards and dice (to say no worse) shall be more
exercised then the book of God: when men can have time enough for vain, and
unprofitable pastimes, and can have money enough to spend upon a base lust, yet
if they be required to set upon a business of weight and consequence, then
they complain of want of time, and if they be entreated to extend their bowels
of compassion to any of Christ's afflicted members, then they plead poverty;
where there are such symptoms as these, you may guess what is the disease of
the illaffected parts, and the issue will be lamentable. I have read of a young
man, who stood by St Ambrose, and saw his excellent death, he presently said to
some of his boon companions, O that I might live with you, and die with him.
So many we have who with Balaam would feign die the death of the righteous, but
take no care to live the life of the righteous. What wilt not thou foregoe a
pleasure, a beloved sin for Christ? Christ will one day say to thee: could I
be content to part with my blood, and could not thou be content to part
witha lust? Augustine in his confessions has August. Confession.
this notable expression: Quam suave mihi subito factum est carere suavitatibus
nugarum? How sweet is it to me of a sudden to want those sweet vanities! One
drop of a racking conscience swallows up an ocean of ungodly joy. Only soul
delights leave a sweet relish in the spirit, but carnal pleasures leave a
sting in the conscience. By these instances ye may guess at the rest: suffer
me to make a brief recapitulation of the premises. Suppose rest, and
quietness, be the great things sought after, whilst we pursue them greedily,
vexations, troubles, disquietnesse of spirit come in thick, and threefold, and
dash all. Promotions, and preferments if they be the great things we seek
after, they resemble Jonah's gourd, which in one night had it is original, and
it is period. Riches and wealth, if they be the great things sought after, these
fly away, they prove Egyptian reeds, wells without water, and they start aside
like broken bows. Admit pleasures, and carnal jollity be the great things
sought after, however the prologue may promise a comedy; yet the Epilogue will
discover a fatal tragedy; whatever laughter was extorted, was but risus
Sardonicus. All the pleasures are but (...) bitter-sweets; will there not in
all these be bitterness in the end? Thus drawing an induction from these and
the rest, I may hence collect an universal conclusion: That nothing under the
sun is worthy of the labor, and pursuit of the sons of men. Thou then ex
meliore luto sictus, who art framed of a better mold, who art employed in a
more peculiar service for the God of Heaven, O tread not Antipodes, be not
unsuitable to thy Lord and master: A shame for a child to be so unlike his
Father: Tu tibi ipsi quaeris grandia? do thou, O Baruch, Baruch the person
seeking.
seek great things, thou for thy self, which is the person seeking, and now
bespeaks the continuance of your patience.

This string sounds harsh; It Is strange that a man so highly advanced in the
service of God should so much forget himself. C. A La^ide checks him thus:
solus vis otiari, nil vis pati pro conversione and salute C. A Lapide, in Loc.
populi? would thou enjoy thy rest alone, and venture nothing for the
conversion and safety of the people of God? There Is an Emphasis in the word,
will thou seek for thy self? As supposing the Church, and State should be put
into one balance, and thy life in another, would thou desire to outweigh
them both? Is thy life more precious then so many millions? Would thou be
advanced when the Church is brought low? Would* thou warm thy self at home
by thine own fire, when the temple of the Lord is a burning? Questionless (my
brethren) it is the duty of a child of God to have a fellow-feeling of his
brethrens calamities, to lay to heart their miseries, as if they were his own:
Private interests must give place to public miseries. Particular relations
must be swallowed up in the weal public. Private affairs must cease and be
suspended, when mighty, and urgent business of Church and state require our
helping hand. Good old Elyes heart trembled for the Ark of God, he could hear
with patience the flight of Israel, and the slaughter of his sons, but as
soon as the messenger made mention that the Ark of God was taken, he fell
from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his neck brake, and he
died, 1 Samuel 4. 18. And his daughter in law Phineas wife bowed her self, and
travailed, and called her child I^habod, saying the glory is departed from
Israel, because the Ark of God was taken, verse. 22. You hear how deeply these
two were affected with the Churches misery. It were a prudent and profitable
course in such times as these wherein we live to read leasurely over the book
of Lamentations, that so our hearts might be framed into a broken temper. And
in the failing of this man of God, it should be our wisdom profitably to
reflect upon our selves, and see where is our sympathy in these times of
national calamities. I fear most of our Consciences, if they be not
cauteris'd, will give in evidence to the contrary: How many are there who grow
worse and worse in these perilous times, adding d^unkennesse to thirst, living
in all manner of Epicurisme, and sensuality? Now Gods judgments are abroad, how
few are there that learn righteousness at home? Where Is the man that makes
such an excellent use of these distractions as to labor to walk more closely
with God, and to make his peace with him? Where Is the man of Jer^mies temper,
who makes his head waters, and his eyes a fountain of tears? Jer. 9. 1. Who
eats no pleasant bread with Daniel? who with Job abhorres himself, and repents
in dust and ashes? we have many water-breaches, and we may fear an
innundation. It nearly concerns us to put in practice the prophet Jo^ls
counsel: To turn unto the Lord with all our hearts, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning, Joel 2. 12. would we were better acquainted
that our Benonies will prove our Benjamins, our sons of sorrow, the sons of our
right hand: we should mourn with those that mourn, and share with our brethren
in their sufferings. There Is more comfort to be extracted out of one days
communion with the Saints of God, though in a suffering condition, then in all
the joviall society in the universe. It Is storyed of Godfrey of Bullen, that he
refused to be crowned at Jerusalem with a crown of Gold, where Hist of God frey
of Bullen in Fullers Holy War.
Christ was crowned with a crown of thorns: A modest act that would not admit
such a vast disproportion between him and Christ: and shall we crown our selves
with rose buds, abate nothing of our former delights amidst all these dangers,
and perplexities? When one ask't Plato how he came to such a perfection of
wisdom, he returns this answer: plus olei consumpsi in lampade, quam vini in
calice, that he spent more oil in the lamp, then wine in the cup. May the
same be verified of us all: And may not the complaint of the Prophet Isaiah,
Is. 22. 12. find us guilty: and in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to
weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth; and
behold, joy and gladness, slaying Oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh, and
drinking wine: Let us eat, and drink, Magnifice tibi prospectum vis and in
omnibus procellis etc. Junius in locum.
for to morrow we shall die: (Blessed be God) we have fasting days enjoined by
public authority, but have not we just cause to fast for our fasting, and
mourn, and be heartily sorrowful that we have mourned, and sorrow'd no more?
what a fearful woe is there pronounced against those that are at ease in Zion:
Magnifice tibi prospectum vis, and in omnibus procellis, ac tempestatibus,
tanquam e portu naufragium publicum prospectare? So Junius upon my text tells
us, will thou sit at the haven, and see others in a shipwreck, and not bear a
share in their sufferings? My brethren, we sit here in peace: our profession is
a profession of peace: We are Ministers of the Gospel, and the Gospel is a
Gospel of peace: How should we with united hearts pray for the peace of
Jerusalem! our weapons should be preces and lachrymae, prayers and tears are
the best armor of proof, most suitable to men of our coats. The Apostles
advise must be put in practice: study to be quiet, and to do your own
business, 1 These 4. 11. Our eyes must be bedewed with tears: Our souls must
be afflicted with sorrow, and with our indefatigable supplications never give
the Lord any rest, until he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isay 62. 6,
7. O then give not liberty to thy nor satisfy thy self to the utmost though
in a lawful pleasure: Labor for the practice of mortification, and learn the
divine lesson taught in the school of Christ, to deny thy self. Labor to
bring thy self over to a sweet frame of resignation, that thou can willingly
part with thy choicest pleasures, and comforts for Jesus Christ: As those in
the Revelations cast down their crowns, so cast down thy chiefest comforts at
the feet of Christ. It was an excellent speech of David, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. If
I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me back again, and
show me both it, and its habitation, But if he say thus, I have no delight in
thee, behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good to him: so if it
seem good in the eyes of God, he can wholly take thy heart off thy comforts, or
else give thee them in greater mercy, in a more sanctified manner, and so make
thy comforts exceeding comfortable. What can not thou foregoe any outward
pleasure, any worldly delight now? how would thou resist unto blood, undergo
the fiery trial, if Christ should call thee thereunto? If thou have run with
the footmen, and they have wearied thee then how can thou contend with
horses: And if in the land of peace, wherein thou trusted'st they weari^d thee,
then how will thou do in the swelling of Jordan: Tertullian in his tract de
cultu faeminarum has this observation: Timeo c^rvicem, ne margaritarum, and
smaragdorum laqueis occupata, Jer. 12. 5. Tertul. in Lib. de cultu Faeminarum.
lorum Spathae non det. I fear (says he) that neck, that is used to pearls,
and chains, will not give it self to the sword: Men of delicate appetites,
who pamper their flesh, will find it a difficult task to endure any hard-ship
for Christ's name. It was an inhumane practice of that Monster Nero, who
rejoiced when Rome was on fire. None but beasts will enjoy their pleasures,
when the commonwealth is in jeopardy. and religion, and liberty lies at stake.
O then put on bowels of compassion, and be alike affected one to another, bear
one another burdens: Let your resolution run parallel with St Paul's: who is
af^licted and I burn not? O that instead of burning in lusts, you would burn
in love one to another. A blessed alteration. Tudippus, and Phocion being both
condemned to die, one of them was afraid, the other recollected his spirits,
and in this wise comforted him: Non satis est tibi, Tudippe, cum Phocione Mori?
Is it not sufficient for thee O Tudippus, that thou die with Phocion. A
comm^nion with Christ's afflicted members in a suffering condition is accounted
their crown and glory. Consider God has called us unto virtue, and unto glory:
It Is the Gospels glory to set out unto us high, and glorious things: these we
want, and these are worthy of our search: Let Us then no more seek after lying
vanities, and forsake our own mercy: The dehortation reaches us home in my
text: Ne quaesuris: seek them not, which is the Use, and Application, which I
promised you, the close of my pains, and your patience. Application. Is. 55.
2. Use. 1. for Expostulation.


Let me expostulate the case with you as the prophet Isaiah does, wherefore do
ye spend money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which
satisfies not? There Is no created power which can be commensurate to the
boundless desires of an immortal soul: A glutton may fill his belly, but he
cannot fill his lusts. A rich man may fill his barnes, but he cannot fill his
heart: It Is triangular, still one angle will be empty: An ambitious man may
have titles of honor enough to overcharge his memory, but not to fill his
pride: The voluptuous may wallow in sensual delights, he may be a frequenter
of profane Theatricall interludes, and yet the hell of his desires remains
unsatisfied: why then should men be such fools to seek after other lovers
besides Jesus Christ, and to hunt after any other kingdom, besides the
Kingdom of God, and his righteousness? how many men's hearts are in
aequilibrio pendula, indifferent to which side the balance turns. When
M^rdecay was raised, many became Jews: and it was the saying of Pamachius an
heathen: Fac me Pontificem, and ero Christianus. Such u Platiram devi it is
Portificum.
follow religion, as the people did our Savior, for the loaves, and so make it
a stalking horse for the advancing of their ambitious designs: but sini^ter
respects never prove a sure bottom for the soul to be fixed upon. If the maine
question of a Minister be, what is the fleece of the sheep, I much scruple
whither he has the heart to feed them. For a man to be wedded to his revenues,
and incomes, and not to the discharge of his duty, what is this but to marry the
portion, and not the wife. What a great madness is there in men not to trust
their honors, dignities, and riches with God, in whose hands they are in the
safest custody? what folly is there in men to make their servants their
Masters, by Idolizing an arm of flesh, and subjugating themselves unto the
creatures, as if they preferred a slavery before a freedom: The Apostle tells
us Col. 3. 3. that we are dead men, and is it congruous for dead men to hunt
after honors, and the worlds goods? we are crucified to the world: And we are
Crucified with Christ: O labor then to answer thy Original: As he minded not
high things on earth, as he was wrapped up in heavenly meditations, so should we
have raised spirits, and sore aloft, being carried with the wings of divine
contemplation. It Is reported of Lysimachus, that for his staying to drink one
draught of water he lost his kingdom. So if we stay for these waters drawn out
of the broken cisternes of the creatures we may hazard our precious souls: had
we eye salve from Christ to iliuminate us; we should discern such transcendent
beauty in the ways of holiness, so that we should enter an action, and
zealously commence a suite against the world, and never let fall the suite,
till we have obtained a sequestration between our souls, and these things here
below. You may remember that my errand is to you, not to seek after great
things, I mean such as are reputed so by the great ones of the world. Who ever
sought them and prospered? Nimrod, Haman, Nebuchadnezzar, Herod sought them out
to the utter ruin of the seekers. Let the stream be turned, seek the Matthew.
6. 33.
Kingdom of God and his righteousn^sse, and all other things shall be added as
supernumerar accruments; O that I could prevail with you to seek those things
that are above. It Is the glory of the Gospel to set out glorious things: We
have a glorious God, glorious graces, glorious company, glorious privileges,
and a glorious reward: Had thou but a glimpse of those superlative
excellencies which are treasured up in Christ, of those glorious things which
are spoken of the City of God, which St Peter calls (...), 1 Pet. 5. 4.
an immarcessible crown of glory, then thou would be transformed into
another manner of man, thy tongue will be touched with a coal from the altar:
Thy language wou^d bewray thee to be a denizon of Canaan, thy love, joy, and
hope, would be alienated from the world, and wholly center upon God, who is the
love, joy, and hope of thy soul. Were there no future reward of godliness,
the beauty that is in it self is more amiable, and desiderable then all the
Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them. What Cleopatra.
said Cleopatra to Marcus Antonius? It Is not for you to be a fishing for small
fish, but for towns, forts, and castles: And so for those who have the beams
of Gods reconciled countenance darted into their souls, who have a spiritual
acquaintance, and a sacred communion with the great ^^ God of Heaven, and
Earth, It Is not for them to be trading for mean things, for the trash, and
pelf of this miserable world, but their spirits must aspire unto great things,
eternal life v. Fox Martyr. de Edvardo primo.
glory, and immortality, even the price of the high calling, that is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. It Is story'd of Edward the first, that he had a vehement desire
to go to Jerusalem, but being prevented by death, he gave in charge on his
deathbed, that his son should convey his heart thither, and for that purpose
he left a great Mass of money: so the Saints though their bodies are not in
Heaven, yet their hearts are there, and their conversation is above, though
their bodies are here below: O that my words might make a firm impression upon
your consciences, that you would put the highest price upon godliness, and
account it your honor and preferment, whilst others labor for corn, and
oil, and join house to house for the perpetuating of their memories, let me
persuade you to labor for the riches of faith, and the riches of Christ, that
you may be rich in holiness, and may be truly noble by the divine image
stamp't upon your souls; you that are called to be Gods Ambassadors, his mouth
to his people, how dare ye choose rather to be scholars to Pythagoras then to
Christ by affecting a stupendous silence; you that have took upon you the
charge of souls, do not, O do not maintain your bravery by the price of
blood. The time will come when it will be said, sheapheard give account of the
flock committed to thy charge: When Andrew shall come in with Achaia, by him
converted to the saving knowledge of the faith, John with Asia, Thomas with
India, Peter with the Jews, and Paul with the Gentiles, where then shall the
idol shepherd appear, will such an Apology hold, I could not brook the
rusticity of the people, it would be a crushing of my hopes of preferment if I
should spend my spirits upon such illiterate men. But how dare thou deny thy
breath to those poor souls, for whom Christ powered out his precious blood out
of his veins? My hearts desire is that all men in place of quality would
herein anticipate authority, and feed their flocks themselves, and labor to
approve themselves workmen, not to be ashamed, not handling the word of God
deceitfully. Happy were it for us, if we could keep a Parliament within our
selves, and save them a labor by setting upon the work of reformation, every
man in his own soul, and conscience. He Is the best Critic, who makes a
Critica Sacra upon his own heart, who labors to understand the Errata of his
own life, and to wipe them out with the sponge of Godly sorrow. Whilst we have
an heart, and a heart, a heart for God, and a heart for Mammon, whilst worldly
pomp, and high place come in competition with the glory of God, so that we
would gladly carry a fair correspondence on both sides: if these be our
humors, we can never (...) walk with a right foot in the ways of
godliness. When thou flatterest thy heart on this wise: O if I shone in an
higher sphere, if I had such, and such a place of dignity, I should then
labor, to bring more glory to God, thou colludest with thy conscience, and art
not acquainted with thy selfe-deceiving-spirit, how higher places might cause
greater precipices. If thou art not qualified for the present condition, I
fear thou will be more unfit to manage another. This is an hard lesson which I
inculcate: what shall the wise man deny his wisdom, the honorable man his
honors, the rich man his riches? we say it is a strong stomach that can digest
much honey, so it is a strong spirit that is not overcome with the sweetness of
much prosperity. It Is a true sign that the Eunuchs were on Jehues side, when
they cast down Jezebell, who had painted her face in pomp, and glory: so when
the world comes in its harlots dress, and inticeth us to all manner of
impurity, if we can lend a deaf ear unto its syrenicall enchantments, if we
can bid defiance unto its bewitching allurements, this is an argument that we
set our faces toward Heaven, that we seek a city which is above, whose maker
is the Lord of Hosts.

In the second place, i will add a few directions how we should 1. For Direction.
do to slacken our pursuit after great things, and get our hearts estranged
from them. 1. For direction, amongst many I shall only advise you to these
four things.

1. Labor for a contented mind.

2. Learn to deny your selves.

3. Study the vanity of the creature.

4. Be acquainted with the fullness that is in Christ.

1. You must labor for contentation of spirit, It Is a lesson worth D^rect. 1.
Labor for acontented mind.
the learning, Phil. 4. 11. I have learned in what state soever I am therewith
to be content: what is the reason that the ambitious never cease climbing, the
covetous never cease scraping, the Epicure never cease swallowing, but
because he is not contented with his present condition? No life to a contented
mind, it accounts its poor cottage a kingdom, it accounts its gleanings a
granary, its russet beyond all the rufflings in silk, and satin: satis est
divitiarum nihil amplius velle: So Quintilian: This is reckned by Seneca
Quintil. Orat. 13. Seneca de vita beata.! Solum certe Beatum, Cortina Aglium
judicavit qui in angustissmo Arcadiae pauperis soli Dominus nunquam eg^essus
paterni Cespitis Te^minos invenitur, Jul Sol. Polyhist.
amongst his beatitudes: beatus est, praesentibus, qualiacunque sunt,
contentus, amicusque rebus suis: He indeed is a happy man who is contented with
his present condition, whatsoever it be.

Imagine thy present condition to be that which is allotted unto thee by God,
and that best which he in wisdom sees most convenient for thee: this was Agars
prayer, Prove. 30. 8. Give me neither poverty, nor riches, feed me with food
convenient for me. Its a great weakness that makes us weary of our present
condition, that we make it our task Sysyphi sax^m volvere, to be in a
restless motion, never satisfied: whereas a man of an excellent spirit, if the
present condition be not suitable to his mind, he labors to make his mind
suitable to his condition: Godlin^sse with contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy
6. 6. No real contentment but in godliness: for where its principled in a
man, it casts a man into such a sweet frame, and temper of spirit, that let the
condition be what it will, he apprehends it to be sent from God to him, and
therefore in all humility submits unto it, making a virtue of necestity; It was
an excellent vow of Jacob, Genesis 28. 26. If God will be with me and keep me in
this way that I go, and give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I
come again to my fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God. Thus
you see how this good man stood affected: Though the Lord had promised him a
goodly inheritance, and a numerous posterity, yet he seems not to take notice
of it, so he may have Gods protection, bread, and raiment be they never so
course, he has set his heart at rest in a sweet contented posture: Ofttimes
there is more tranquillity, and setlednesse of spirit in a condition ebbing, then
flowing, in rags rather then robes: O then labor for a contented mind, and
then thou will be rich even in thy poverty.

Secondly, Learn to deny thy self: Thus Abraham denied Direct. ^. Learn
selfedeniall.
himself, Genesis 12. 4. who left his native country, his kindred, and his
fathers house: This practice proceeded from a principle of faith, as St Paul
records it amongst the catalogue of the faithful, Heb. 11. 8. It was the
strength of faith indeed which made him go he knew not whither staying
himself upon the divine promises, which was better to him then all lands, and
revenues: God was (he knew) All sufficient, and his exceeding great reward.
Likewise in a personal difference between him and Lot, there he denied
himself by giving precedence to him who was his inferior: He gives him his
choice, and first refusal of his habitation, Genesis 13. 9. A man cannot be
Christ's crosse-bearer except he deny himself: A man cannot preach Christ
unless he deny himself: A man cannot pray in faith unless he deny himself.
A man cannot suffer for the name of Christ, nor perform any service acceptable
unto him, unless it arise from a principle of self denial: Let the actions
carry never so glorious an outside, enough to dazzle the very eyes of the
beholders, yet if self be the Engineer, if self love, and self seeking be
that primum mobile which sets all the other orbs in their motion, they are
like those wild gourds which spoild the whole mess of pottage, and we may cry
out as they did to the prophet, est m^rs in olla, there is death in the pot:
there is death in these gaudy services. That student then has studied to the
best purpose, who has learned to deny himself, The wise man must deny his
wisdom, the strong man his strength, the rich man his riches, the scholar his
learning. The good Christian must come out of himself in all his duties, he
must cast down his best performances, at the feet of Christ, beseeching the
Lord Jesus Christ to bear the iniquity of his holiest things: here is the
labor, and this is the work: we must leave sin before it leave us. When in
the greatest confluence of profits, honors, and pleasures, then a man can lay
aside his dignities, and deny himself in his pleasures: when a man is raised
unto St. Paul's excellent temper of spirit that befits him for any condition,
Phil. 4. 12. I know how to be abased, and I know how to abound Hence observe a
lesson very fit for us and for all Christians to learn, even to be content
with our estate what soever it is. Air. in Phil.
^very where, and in all things, I am instructed both to be full, and to be
hungry, both to abound, and suffer need: When a man can use this world as if he
u^'d it not: When corruption has matter to breed on then to keep it down in
the prime of a man's youth, when his bones are full of marrow, and his body is
vigorous, amidst the fruition of delights he can then deny himself, these are
the rare qualifications of a self denying spirit: Hence David confesses, so
foolish was I, and ignorant, even as a beast before thee. The nearer a man
approaches to a sacred communion with the invisible God, the more he is abased
at the apprehension of his own vileness, and with Abraham, he confesses that
he is but dust and ashes. If then we have been the disciples of Jesus Christ,
and have took out of his school this excellent lesson of self denial, then
we are better taught then to seek after great things here below.

3. Study the vanity of the creature: It was the upshot of Solomon's Direct. 3.
Study the vanity of the creature. Somnus, bull^, Vitrum glacies, Flot, Fabul^,
Foenum Umbra, cinis, Punctum vox sonus, Aura ^thil.
verdict: vanity of vanities, all is vanity. What are all things under the sun
but bubbles, smoke, fables, wels without water, trees without fruit, broken
cisternes, Egyptian reeds, deceitful bows, bags full of holes. Weigh all
earthly things in the balance of the sanctuary, and they will prove too light,
even lighter then vanity it self. A man trusts to a friend, he deceives that
trust reposed in him. Ziba took an opportunity to slander his master: When we
trust to our idols of gold, and silver, either by fire, or water, thieves, or
robbers, perfidious servants, or sundry other ways we are brought low, and
bereaved of our confidence. Our choycest earthly delights pretend a goodly
fair outside, like the Apples of Sodom, but being touched they fa^^ into
ashes, and cinders. The consideration of the vanity of the creature should
cause us to cast off its yoke, and suffer our selves no more to be under its
vassalage. Shall we be so sollicitous to seek after our tormentor? how much
vexation, and anxiety of spirit accompanies all the worlds darlings? their
desires are insatiable crying with the horse-leeches daughter give, give, and
the creature cannot satisfy them, the comforts of this present world urge their
arguments, just as the Devil urged Scripture to Christ to^ halves, taking what
serves for their turn, and leaving out what might make against them. They tell
you of goodly buildings, preferments, revenues, and profits, but mention not a
syllable of the days of mourning, and of that severe account which must be
rendered at the impartial tribunal of the great Judge of Heaven and earth. Who
then of any understanding will thus seek after lying vanities, and forsake his
own mercies? who would join himself associate with this perfidious world a
president of all vitiousnesse? it brings us like fools to the stocks, and then
laughs at our misery: It brings us upon the rack, and then becomes our
executioner. The time will come when the Lord will summon up his creatures; and
they all will bring in their Bills of indictment against their dearest minions:
and then thou wist find by woeful experience that those darling sins which
yielded, the sweetest relish unto thy sinful soul in the acting, will now
present nothing unto thee but gall, and wormwood, they will make the deepest
wounds, and gashes in thy conscience. If then thou art well acquainted with the
vanity of the creature, thou will slacken thy pursuit, and forbear such a
furious prosecution of those things which are so destructive both to thy body,
and soul: if thou knew how vain all things are in this world, how empty,
how deceitful, thou would not hazard thy soul upon such an unprofitable
purchase.

4ly, And lastly, Labor to be acquainted with the fullness that Direct. 4.
Labor to be acquainted with the fullness that is in JesusChrist
is in Jesus Christ. He has fullness of wisdom to teach thee, of holiness to
sanctify, of mercy to pardon, fullness of riches, fullness of merits, and
fullness of glory. It pleased the Father that in him should all fulness
dwell, Col. 1. 19. Be thy wants many? from Christ thou may fetch a supply:
be thy miseries pressing? Christ is a father of mercies, and a God of all
consolations: for we have not an high priest which cannot be to^^^t with the
feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. The self same bowels of compassion
Christ has in Heaven, which he had on earth, when he wept over Jerusalem.
(...) 2 Cor. 12. 7. v. 9.
Are thy desertions impetuous, and thy spiritual conflicts violent, does the
Angel Satan buffet thee, and sometimes leave thee as he did the possessed
dead in outward appearance? O make have to Christ, look for him in the word,
in the sacraments, in prayer; if thou find'st him not in one ordinance, never
leave off seeking till thou have found him in another: and then ^ee'l manifest
to thy soul that his grace is sufficient for thee. Art thou poor? Christ is
riches; art thou blind? he is eye salve. Art thou weak? he is strength. Art
thou dead? he is life. Now then remember thy self how all this while thou have
run on hoodwink't into errors, and precipices expecting a fullness in the
creature wherein is naught but emptiness. O Christians labor to make a better
choice, to get hearts emptyed of all self-love, and abhor all
selfe-sufficiency in, and Idolatry with the creatures: when once you are
partakers of those glorious privileges which are above, of the fullness of
Christ's excellency, beauty, wisdom, purity, these will a thousand times
recompense the emptying of your selves of any fullness of outward contentment
in the creature. How then should we power out our petitions to have this
fullness of Christ communicated unto us, according Joh. 1. 16.
to our measure, that of his fullness we may all receive grace for grace! Be
thy condition never so poor in the world, yet if thou have Christ, thou art
the richest man in the world: Though all things go against thee: friends leave
thee, riches fail thee, promotion flies from thee, thy custom, and livelihood
much decays, yet all this while if thou have made Christ thy portion, none can
take away thy Christ: Christ is better then thy friends, then thy riches, then
thy promotion, then thy custom. He Is above all, and better then all comforts:
nay the choicest comforts are none at all in comparison of his soule-ravishing
comforts: Christ has For Exhortation.
the pre-eminence, and is all in all.

In the last place here is an use of Exhort to persuade you to get your hearts
weaned from the world. And now that I might better prevail with your spirits,
that you might be took off of these things here below, and no more seek great
things in this world for your selves, suffer me to press home unto your
consciences these ensueing considerations.

1. Earthly things are accompanied with much vexation, and disquietnesse of
spirit.

2. They cannot afford any satisfaction unto the soul of man.

3. All things on earth put together in one cannot help a man in the evil day.

4. They cannot lead a man beyond this present life, they cannot accompany him
unto eternity. Weigh seriously these considerations, and they will be as so
many plummets of lead to weigh down your affections, and keep them from an
eager pursuit after the greatest things the Universe can afford.

1. I say, the greatest things in this world are accompanied with much
vexation, and disquietnesse of spirit. As it is a great blessing 1 Consider. The
vexation that accompanies earthly things.
to enjoy the creature with a cheerful heart: so it is a great curse to have
them as so many thorns in their sides pricking^^m, and as so many gins, and
snares in the way to entrap the followers to their ruin. Let a man have a
Cornucopiam a store house of riches, yet if he cannot quietly enjoy himself in
the use of them, he had far better be without them. Let a man be upon the rack,
let the wheel pass over him, and dislocate his bones: Let him be put in
Pe^^^lus Bull, or exposed to the most exquisitely devised torments in the ten
persecutions in the primitive Church, yet this man's pain is easy in comparison
of his who has riches, and honors in abundance, even goods laid up for many
years, and yet has all this while a discontented spirit. Thou then who ever
thou art, that art an Ingrosser of worldly wealth, who make gold and silver
thy Idols, and honour'st them more ^en thy God, thou art not aware how thy
earthly mindedness will sharpen, and give teeth to an affliction to eat out
thy choicest delights, and comfort^. Thou art sollieitous to plow, and low thy
grounds: and another may reap the fruits thereof: Likewise thou have no power
of the clouds, and can not command the influence of heaven: for the iniquity
of a people God makes the heavens iron, and the earth brass: and now how art
thou vexed, and disquieted, and know not how to help thy self: thou
hoardest up moneys in abundance, the thought whereof cheares up thy heart, in
the interim God denies thee, thy health, sends thee the gout, chollick, stone,
strangury, and the like, so that its a burden and a torment to live. Thou
hug'st thy self in thy ample possession, and favors of great ones: Now thou
have somewhat to loose thou art made a fairer mark of opposition: Suits in
law, and vexatious controversies may wast thy estate: Thieves, shipwrack's,
perfidious servants, miscarriages, and ill success in business may bring thee
to a morsel of bread: or otherwise God has given riches, and not an heart to
use them, and this I reckon amongst the greatest outward curses, which can
befall the sons of men. Sometimes God takes away a man's taste, so that he can
relish no more sweetness in these things, then in the white of an egg:
Otherwhile God takes away a man's rest, so that he lies all night tossing to and
fro, and can take no rest, his sleep falls from him, and his eyelids can take
no slumber: divitias invenisti, requi^m perdidisti, thou have got riches, and
lost thy rest. Stobaeus has a story of one Anacreon who when Polycrates had
give ^im five talents, he could not sleep two nights together, he immediately
restored them, saying, Reddidit ea inquiens non tanta esse quauta ipsorum
nomine cura laboraret Stob. cap. 39.
they were not so much worth as to countervaile that care which was undertook
to keep them. But admit thou art not yet blasted in thy estate, (though
usually the great ones of the world feel this by woeful experience) yet there is
a fierce lion which a long time slept at thy door, which now being awakened
flies upon thee: this is thy conscience w^^h presents unto thee the history of
thy life in all its ugly deformities, it paints thee out in thy proper colors,
and this map discovers a mare mortuum, a dead sea, even a sea of blood,
destruction, and misery, thy fatal period. Quis tanti emet paenitentiam? So
Diogenes said concerning Lais the strumpet, who then of any understanding would
purchase th^s^ worlds goods at so dear a rate, to be thus in a restless
condition, never at quiet, distracted with thoughts; perplexed with cares, and
wounded in conscience? Honor proves a torment: To be degraded is the height of
infelicity: No disgrace parallel to that as to be advanced high, and immediately
pulled down in the dust. It was Wolseyes complaint: Had I been as careful to
serve the God of Heaven, as I have been to serve my Lord, and master on earth,
he would never have* left me in my gray hairs. Riches prove the greatest
cross when God blows upon them. To be as Job one while, the richest of all
the sons of the East, and then ere long become a proverb of poverty, this is an
exceeding misery. Pleasures are vexations, laughter is madness, Eccl. 2. 2.
Would thou then have that which might quiet thy spirit? thou must seek it
else where: if thou seek'st it amongst the great things of this world, thou
seek'st all this while for the living among the dead. No earthly thing can
quiet the soul. There Is much vexation in the greatest things of this world
here below, and therefore seek them not. But admit they have wearied us in
vexatious suites, tossing us from court to court, and so by many delays, and
troubles has impoverished us, yet if at the last they afforded any
satisfaction, this would make amends for all: but no earthly thing can satisfy
the soul.

This is my second consideration: They bring us into suites, 2 Consid. Earthly
things cannot satisfy the Soul.
weary us in them and at last cast us: The world brings us into a lottery,
where we come with heads full of hopes, but at the last return away with hearts
full of blankes: the Teraphim is a lie: All the creatures may be compared to
bags full of holes, and deceitful weights: The Lord denounces this as a
fearful judgment: thou shall eat, but not be satisfied. The world is an errand
hypocrite like the painted Mich. 6. v. 11. 14.
sepulchers, gaudy without, full of dead men's bones within, or like the
Egyptian temples, where there were a stately Frontispice, and a magnificent
structure, but naught within but an ugly Ape, the ridiculous Idol of the
people: They are emptiness it self, and can emptiness fill the soul? The
things of this world are wells without water, and can these quench our thirst?
they are broken reeds, and can they stay us from falling? when you can hoard up
grace in your coffers, when you can replenish your bags with divine wisdom,
then and not till then can an immortal soul rest satisfied in the fruition of
the transitory things of this present life. As Homer fancyed that the Gods sed
upon Nectar and Ambrosia, and not Hom. Iliad. 1.
upon such food as men do: so the soul of man, being divinae particul^aurae,
having an heavenly borne being, cannot be satisfied with any terrene things:
spirits and bodies, heaven and earth admit no correspondence. Had thou a
Monopoly of the choicest delights under the sun, these could not satisfy thee,
because they are but finite, and thy desires are infinite, and you know between
finite, and infinite there is no proportion. Solomon tells us, Prove. 14. 14. A
good man shall be satisfied from himself: Inward peace, and tranquillity of
conscience affords us true contentment, and satisfaction unto the soul: The
light of Gods reconciled countenance revived David's spirit, this was his only
desiderable good: Lord list thou up the light of thy countenance upon us: Thou
have put gladness in my heart more then in the time, that their corn and wine
increased, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. Moses the man of God cries for mercy to satisfy him:
O satisfy us with thy mercy, that we may rejoice, and be glad all the days of
our life, Psalm. 90. 14. Only Christ, and his comforts can fill up the soul:
The waters which he gives will never make us thirst again, whereas the
well-springs of the world will the more inrage our thirst.

3. Great things here below cannot help thee in the evil day. 3 Consider.
Earthly things cannot help in the evil day.
An evil day will come, a day of darkness, and gloominesse, a day of clouds,
and thick darkness, and for this day Solomon requires a memento, Ecol. 11. 8.
But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember
the days of darkness, for they shall be many: When sicknesses, and diseases
render thy life disconsolate, and when death the King of terrors is
approaching thy house, and ready to lay his mace upon thee to arrest thee to
appear before the great Judge of Heaven, and Earth. Now can thy riches, and
friends bribe this sergeant, and add one moment unto thy life? Ask thy
joviall Comrades, and boon Companions, whether they can help thee, the very
sight of them brings thy sins to remembrance, and makes thee sensible of the
very flashings of hell-fier. Ask thy bags whether they can help thee, alas!
they are full of holes* and let out all comfort: Ask thy dignities, and high
places whether they can do thee any good, these all come and give evidence
against thee on this manner: Thou have been a corrupt and careless Magistrate,
fear of men has justled out the fear of God: Thou have bin a lazy, and
debaucht Minister, thou have sought thine ow^ things, and not Christ: Thus one
day high places, and promotions if abused, will come in, and witness against
thee. O how nearly does this concern all those whom God has made Rulers i^
Israel to be conscientious in the discharge of their duties, that so they may
hold up their heads with comfort before their judge. When a man is cast upon
the bed of sickness, and all his sins are set in order before him, then a man
would part with all his wealth for the purchase of a good conscience, and he
would prize one glimpse of Christ's reconciled countenance before the Empire of
the world. Now whither should a man go for succor? The world's his enemy, and
it is madness to go to my enemy for comfort. Only the riche^^ of Christ, those
glorious things above must comfort thee, or else thou can never be comforted.
Those whom thou hated'st in thy health must be thy comforters in thy sickness.
Now thou art sensible what need thou have of their prayers whom thou
accounted'st the very abjects of men, and refuse of the wotld. Surely men
speak not as they think, when they revile many sincere Christians under the
notions of hypocrites and dissemblers, these they will be readiest to send for,
and apply themselves most unto them when a fit of sickness seiseth upon them.
You see then how great things in this world cannot help a man in the evil
day, in a languishing condition, they fail a man in his greatest necessity,
and therefore unworthy of our search and labor. I infer with my Prophet. Ne
quaerito, seek them not.

4ly, and lastly, the greatest things on earth cannot lead 4. Consider. The
greatthings of the world cannot carry a man beyond this life.
a man beyond this life, they cannot carry him unto eternity: A man cannot
carry his honors, and riches into another world. Can a man carry the things of
this world into the place of torments to bribe the flames, or corrupt his
tormentour? (...) in Aristotle is an Epithet attributed to something of
excellency. Now the greatest things on earth are uncertain, transitory, sading
things; when death shall strip us of lands, and revenues, of all our gorgeous
attires, and leave us naked, if then we are not clothed with the robes of
Christ's righteousness, we are of all men the most miserable: This garment
alone of our elder brother must cover all our nakedness. Behold then, we all
stand at the door of eternity: several ways God has to call us, and then we
are utterly deprived of all. Now a good conscience alone must stand us instead
when all other comforts are defective: Hic Murus aheneus esto etc. this is the
best bulwark of defense; Let Us no more trust to uncertainties, to such things
that will fail us. Lets lay up treasure for our selves in another world, and
now make provision for eternity, whence all our comfort is derived. When once
we are involved in eternity, then we are in an unalterable estate, no
postibility of returning back to the land of the living. Me thinks that the
serious and frequent meditation of aeternity should raise up our spirits, and
put us upon a daily provision for our immortal souls.

The great things of the world are below our cognizance. We call them great but
by an Antiphrasis. For they are little, and lighter then vanity: so multitudes
find them by sad experience. My conclusion shall be the Apostles patheticall
exhortation, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. If ye then be risen with Christ seek those
things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Set your
affections on things above, not on things on the earth. For ye are dead and
your life is hid with Christ in God.

The wisest Preacher: Set forth in a SERMON
Upon Prove. 11. latter part of verse. 30. He that wins souls is wise.
THe Areopagites had a custom that such SERMON. 3. at St Mary's OXON. April 16.
1648
as pleaded before them should plead (...), without prefacing and without
passion. For passion of my own let it be discarded altogether: All my design
is this, to be inflamed with zeal to the glory of God, and so to be
transported with a passion of love toward your souls, as to win them to
Jesus Christ. And for prefacing I look upon all slattering Apologies as
superfluous, and beneath the dignity of that work I have in hand. The words
read are a sacred Proverb, or a divine select Aphorism deciphering forth in a
Character the truly wise man. Not the (...) of Greece, nor the Philosophers of
old, not the accurate Linguists, not the eloquent Orators, nor the learned
Rabbis, nor Machiavilian Politicians, not an elixar and quintessence drawn
forth out of all the elaborate volumes of Philosophers and Orators can
denominate the author truly wise, in a spiritual and Theological acception;
My ground 1 Cor. 2. 14.
is from the Apostle 1 Cor. 2. 14. (...) etc. compared with 1 Cor. 3. 19. But
here the spirit of God (...) celebrates the praises, and stampes a character of
wisdom upon him that wins souls, He that wins seues is wise.

You know that Proverbs for the most part are entire sentences, without
connection or dependence on the precedent words: yet Context.
here (And) in the front of the text denotes a relation to what went before: so
that the precedent and subsequent parts of this verse refer each to other.
You have a rare description of the righteous man: such a one whose heart is
upright with God, is resembled to a tree of life; Alluding to the tree of life
in Paradise. As that was of Gods own plantation, and had the pre-eminence of
other trees, so the graces of a godly man are of Gods own plantation: None are
borne holy, but created so. Grace is no plant that naturally grows in our
Gardens, but is a plant of our heavenly fathers plantation. And as the tree of
life had the pre-eminence of John 15. 5.
other trees; so the godly over all other men. And its observed by a judicious
commentator on the place: That the scope of this Proverb Proverbil summa
recidit ut discant homines quo pretio virum justu^ aestimare convenit, Carthw^.
Ehp. 5. 4.
is to inhance the esteem of the righteous man. Though Godly men be held at a
cheap esteem, and are accounted the scumme of the world; yet the Allegory in
the text gives in Gods Probatum est of them, that they are as a tree of life.
And further its said the fruit of the righteous (i. e.) the words and actions,
the counsel, example, life and conversation of a righteous man are the
precious fruits which the tree of life does bear: His words are savory,
ministering grace to the hearer: He Is grave and edifying in his discourse: His
conversation is exemplary, such as adornes his profession: In a word, the
fruit of a righteous man is precious fruit. And if you would have a taste of
it, here you may gather one of the choicest that grows on this tree, and that
is to win souls, The fruit of the righteous, etc.

Now the text presents you with the most choice and excellent fruit of a
righteous man, the winning of souls. The text is an entire categoricall
proposition consisting of a subject, praedicat, and copula. Division. 1. The
Person.


Or rather. 1. Here Is a person set down definitely. It may be applied to the
Ministers of God eminenter, for it is their peculiar office and maine design to
gain souls to God, yet not exclusive: It Is every ones duty to do all the
offices of love they can, and especially to consult and endeavor the mutual
good of each other souls.

2. Here Is the work set down, to win, or take in, or gain souls. 2. The
Work.
The Metaphor may be drawn from a soldier, who has fought valiantly and won
the field: so must he that wins souls take up arms against the flesh, the
Devil, and the world, against principalities, and powers, and spiritual
wickedn^sse in high places. And this spiritual soldier must never give over,
'till he return away with the trophies of victory.

Or else the Metaphor may be took from a fowler, who takes fowls in a net: So
he that will win souls must spread the net of the Gospel: And if the
government of souls (as Gregory says) Artium Ars est Regimen Animarum. Greg.
de Pastor cura. 3. The Object souls.
be of all other arts the excellent'st certainly the winning of souls must be
a superexcellent Art, all other arts the excellent'st.

3. Here Is the object, souls, immortal, heavenly-borne-being-soules, the
image of God, the very breath of God inspired in our creation, of more value
then all the world, the purchase and ransom of Jesus Christ: The excellency of
this noble object, makes the victory more glorious, and the conqueror more
renowned. To win a strong castle, a town, a kingdom is the glory of the
conqueror: but to win a soul to God is a far greater glory: It Is the
gallantest piece of service in all the world to win souls to Jesus Christ.

4. And lastly, Here Is the commendation, high Elogium, or a sacred 4. The
Commendation.
Panegyric, which is given to him that does this great work: He is wise: It Is
a great question where wisdom is to be found, Job 28. 12, 13. the
determination of all is verse. 28: The fear of the Job 28. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 1. 20.
Lord is wisdom, etc. and its a great question with Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 20. where
is the wise, where is the scribe? Now both these questions may be resolved from
the text, its a point of wisdom to gain souls, and he is a wise man that is a
practitioner in this soul saving art: This is the wise man; a man of a
precious anointing, an interpreter one of a thousand, whose eyes are in his
head, whose wisdom is taught of God. And the declaration of this wisdom is
that Argument whereon I fix as a word spok^nin due season, which can never be
enough taught, never enough learned: The Lord make it as profitable as it is
seasonable. The words of the text in terminis are a doctrine: But in relation
to what went before, thus I shall propound it to you.

That it is a choice fruit of wisdom, to win souls unto God. For my more
methodicall progres in unfolding this point, I shall propose these familiar
heads of discouse. Method.


1. To assert this positive truth, and give in the proof thereof.

2. Describe the Character of him who is likeliest to win souls:

And 3ly, Draw forth some inferences of practice as may best conduce to the
better ordering of your lives and conversations. Those shall constitute the
doctrinall part of my text, this last, the use and application: and these shall
be the bounds and limits of my ensuing meditations.

I resume the enlargement of the first head propounded. And for proof of the
point, I shall consider it under a double demonstration (...) and (...): for
the (...), that it is so: The Apostle James distinguishes 1. Head. (...), That
it is so Jam. 1. 15, 17.
of a twofold wisdom, Earthly, and Heavenly, and by their fruits you may know
them, James 1. 15, 17. Now humane earthly wisdom has no part nor portion in
this work: It Is above the sphere and cognizance of secular learning to reveal
the knowledge of Jesus Christ. A man may attain unto as great knowledge as
ever Aristotle or Plato had, and yet be an Ignoramus in the mystery of Christ's
reconciliation: such a man's natural parts are too good to go to hell with
him, he shall be degraded of them before, and so shall miscarry to all
eternity. The wisdom that we speak of is divine wisdom, such alone as can
make us wise unto salvation. This is not taught in Aristotle's Lycaeum, nor
Zenoe's Stoa, or Plato's Academy, but only in the school of Jesus Christ: He
then must be (...), a man taught of God who is a good proficient in this soul
winning art. To drive this spiritual trade, to negotiate for souls, to be
isntrumental in the conversion of souls, It Is the greatest work in all the
world. Now that this is such an excellent piece of wisdom, I shall prove it by
an induction of particulars: such as have put it in practice themselves, are
fittest to give testimony to this truth.

First, and above all, I shall instance in him who is the wisdom of his
Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, styled a Counselor for his wisdom. He was
employed about his Fathers business, Luke 2* 40. And what was his business,
but to save that which was lost? Matthew. 18. 11. He professes that he was sent
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Matthew. 10. 6. He came to call sinners
to repentance, Luke 5. 32. You may read the great employment of Christ in his
Ministry, Luke 4. 18. Christ went about doing good, speaking of the things of
the Kingdom: Christ is our peace, Ephesians. 2. 4. And the great mystery of the
Gospel is declared in this work of reconciliation. Next to instance in the
Apostles, however in the Judgment of the Council, Acts 4. 13. (...), yet these
the Lord made isntrumental to confound the wisdom of the wife. By their
Ministry the Lord converted multitudes of souls, 3000 at one Sermon, Act. 2.
41. Further, I Will instance in Paul whose desire was transcendent for their
salvation, Romans 10. 1. See his protestation, 1 Cor. 2. 2. See his judgment, 1
Cor. 1. 20, 21, 23. Compare this with the first of Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8. Paul that
great Doctor of the Gentiles, bred up at the feet of Gamaliel, a man of great
learning, gives Christ the pre-eminence, and undervalues every thing for Jesus
Christ. (...), Phil. 3. 8. Be they the most exquisite Arts and Sciences,
riches, honors, pleasures in their greatest estate and confluences, yet in
comparison of Christ he sets upon them this brand of infamy (...). Luther had
such high esteem of Christ and such a regard unto precious souls as he
professes -- satius est conturbari Lutheri loc. com. Adveniat verbum Dei,
adveniat, et si sexcentum habuissemus ora, cisummitteremus omnia, Baldassar
Minist. Germ. Acts 17. 34.
and collidi totum terrarum orbem, quam Christum non praedicari, etc. Baldassar
(Minister of Germany) professed, Let the Word of God come, let it come, if I had
600 necks I would submit unto it. It Is verified by experience what Luther was
wont to say: Praedicare verbum Dei, nihil aliud est, quam derivare in se
furorem totius inferni and satanae. Yet God in his wisdom has ordained this
for a medium to convert souls. And where the word of God is preached in
sincerity, the messengers meet with the same entertainment as Paul at Athens,
though some mocked and accounted him a babbler, yet others cleaved unto him.
Here then my Brethren is a point of wisdom to follow the example of Christ,
his Apostles and servants. It was their wisdom to beget souls unto God; It
was their principal business, according to their commission, to open their
eyes, to turn them from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, Acts 28. 18. Go you and do likewise. It Is a sound gloss upon the text,
Ex his colligitur etc. Hence we gather wherein consists the Cartwright in locum.
true praise of Ministers, not in others applauding of them, and setting forth
their parts, but here is their wisdom and knowledge indeed, in converting souls
unto God: So judicious Carthwright.

2. I proceed to the other demonstration (...) Here my task (...) Why it is
so. Arguments.
will be in laying down some Arguments for confirmation of the truth: The
Arguments i will cast into 4 heads.

1. In respect of God.

2. In respect of the Object.

3. In respect of the work.

And 4ly, In respect of the reward. Arg. 1. In respect of God.


1. In respect of God. God has a tender care of his own glory: and this must
be the end of the whole creation. And above all, the reasonable creature must
act in every thing for the attainment of the last end, the glory of God. Now
wherein is God more glorified, then in the conversion of souls. Its said, John
15. 8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. And amidst
variety of good fruit, this is one of the most sweet and acceptable to God, to
pluck a sinner out of the Devils snare, and convert him to Jesus Christ. And
this should be the sole end and design of every one that enters into the
Ministerial function to promote the glory of God in saving of their own
souls, and those that hear them: when this end is first in thine eye, and
accompanied with a conscientious sedulity in the exercise of the means, thou
may expect the blessing of God crowning thy endeavors with good success.
And such a person is a man of wisdom, who is so highly honored by God as to
be an instrument to convert but one soul unto God. Arg. 2. In respect of
souls.


The second Argument is in respect of the object, souls, and that rational
souls endowed with noble faculties, the understanding and the will the very
breath of God, Genesis 2. 7. The peculiar creation of God, not ex traduce, not by
propagation, it is God that forms the spirit of man within him, Zech. 12. 1.
And God is terminus a quo and ad quem both, Eccl. 12. 7. The spirit shall
return unto God that gave it. The soul is immateriall and spiritual, a
Heavenly borne being, not made of the earth as the body was, but infused by
creation, and created by infusion: and though the body moulder into A nima
creando infunditur, and insundendo creatur. Aug.
dust and see corruption, yet the soul runs parallel with the longest line of
eternity. Men and Devils banding together cannot kill the soul. And hereupon
against perplexing fears and cares, Christ gives a seasonable caution, Matthew.
10. 28. Fear not them, which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul, but rather fear him, which is able to destroy both body and soul in
Hell.

Now then in the third place in respect of the excellent work, Arg. 3. In
respect of the w^r^e.
employed upon so noble an object as an immortal soul, the wisdom of the
worker will be more enhaunc't. We must know that God is the sole efficient
cause of the salvation of a sinner, man onlyan instrument subservient to Gods
commands. To preach, pray, conserre, and meditate is the Ministers duty, but
the success is the work of God. We are earthen vessels encompassed with
infirmities, men of like passions, but in the weakness of the instrument, the
strength of God more eminently appears; and God works by weak means, men of
mean presence and low esteem amongst men, that no flesh may glory ^n his
presence, and all the honor may redound to God. But the Lord had never any
special service but he raised up persons of suitable spirits for the
performance of it. Bezaleel and Aholiab were filled with wisdom for building
of the tabernacle: God raised up the spirits of Ezra, Nehemiah, Haggai,
Zachary, Zerubbabel for the reedifying of the temple. And now adays God
raises up men of heroical spirits both of the Magistracy and Ministry, to
carry on the work of reformation both in Church and State, maugre all the
hostile oppositions, plots and projects of Sanballats and Tobiahs, even all
Jesuiticall Malignantfactions, which are the Pests and Gangrenes of the
kingdom, Remora's and obstructions of reformation. That prophesy does afford
many hopes against in any fears, Dan. 9. 25. The street shall be built again,
and the walls in troublous times. Thus then I argue. To conquer potent enemies,
to subdue places of great strength, and reduce them to outward obedience, is an
argument of wisdom in the conquerours: but to subdue unruly affections, to
conquer men's spirits, to win souls unto Christ, this must be a higher piece
of wisdom indeed.

4. And lastly, In respect of the reward, the excellency of this wisdom shines
forth more clearly. He that gains a soul does Arg. 4. In respect of the
reward.
an excellent work so James sets it forth, James 5. 19, 20. Brethren, if any
one of you do err from the truth, and one convert him: let him know that he
which converteth a sinner, from the error of his way, shall save a soul from
death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. The very work it self is sometime
counted a reward, the work and the reward are used assynonymous terms, Isay 49
4. Yet surely my judgm^nt is with the Lord, and my work with my God. And
besides no man ever did, nor shall ever go away a looser by Gods service: God
keeps the wages 'till afterward: Here we may have an earnest, part of payment,
but the great sum is reserved for another world. And they that honor God in
bringing converts to the Gospel, and making Proselytes to Jesus Christ, they
are highly honored of God. Them that honor me (says God) I will honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30. And what honor God will one day put upon them, you may read, Dan.
12. 3. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament,
and they that turn many to righteousness, is the stars for ever and ever:
such honor has all his Saints. When Andrew shall come in with Achaia, by him
converted to the truth, John with Asia, Thomas with India, Peter with the
Jews, and Paul with the Gentiles, and all the Ministers of the Gospel, and
others whom God has made isntrumental in this great service: when these shall
be able to say, Behold Lord, here we are, and the children which thou have
given us, then will the Lord say to them, well done good and faithful
servants, enter into your masters joy.

And thus I have dispatched the first head propounded, in the second 2. Head.
The Characters of him that win neth souls. Charact. 1. He must abound in love.
place I am to give in the character of him who of all others is likeliest to
win souls, how such a one should be qualified, I shall represent unto you in
these ensuing Characters.

1. He must abound in the grace of love, his heart must be enflamed with
seraphicall love unto Jesus Christ. It Is a passage frequently used in Ignatius
Epistles, (...), my love is crucified. It Is an excellent saying in Paul, 2 Cor.
5. 14. (...), the love of Christ constrains us. A faithful Minister acts
altogether from a principle of love to Jesus Christ. He prays, preaches,
gives alms, fasteth, watches, and he is indefatigable in his labors, and
what is the reason or ground of all, Because the love of Christ constrains him.
Then only are we upon sure grounds, when the love of Christ is that primum
mobile that sets all the other orbs in their motion, and where there is a
principle of love to Jesus Christ, there will be shed abroad mutual love
toward our brethren: such love was unparalleld in Moses, who wished himself
blotted out of the bo^ke of life, Exodus 32. 3. And in Paul, who wished himself
an Anathema for the Jews, Romans 9. 3. Here Is soul love indeed beyond compare.
O what an ardent affection and tender compassion ought Ministers to have to the
souls of their people! Love to their souls will make them run through fire
and water, grapple with beasts of Ephesus, sons of Anak, even Herculean
labors. But where is love to the fleece only, Mercenary hopes of promotions,
dignities, carnal interest, all such self ends and sinister respects, will be
but as so many Ignes fatui, to lead men away into dangerous and destructive
ways: It Is only love to the soul that will set thee a working to good purpose.
And further, he that is thus set on fire with love to Christ, and to his
Brethrens souls; must be a man of such wisdom, as to temper all his counsels in
love: In all his Meditations and Exhortations, Love is one main Ingredient in
the composition: He abhors sin in any, and reproves it; but whilst he hates
the sin, he loves the person; and whilst he endeavors to slay and utterly to
destroy the sin, he would gladly be instrumental to save the soul of the
sinner: This is the rule which the Apostle gives, Ephesians. 4. 15. (...), some
render it speaking, some following, some, doing the truth: But if the English
word may be admitted, it is rendered most suitable to the Original, truthing of
it in love.

2. He must be a man of a willing mind: God expects his offering Charact. 2. A
man of a willing mind.
of the willing hearted, Exodus 35. 5. And the people are commended for
willingly offering themselves, Judge. 5. 2. The question was asked, 1 Chronicles. 29.
5. Who then is willing to consecrate his service to the Lord, and it is said, v.
6. Then the chief of the Fathers, and the Princes of the tribes of Israel, etc.
offered willingly: And Gods people are a willing people, people of
willingn^sse, Psalm 110. 3. Every one set apart for the Ministry must have such
a Spirit as Amasiah the Son of Zichri had, who willingly offered himself unto
the Lord: And this was as eminent in Paul, And I will very gladly spend 2 Chro.
17. 16. 2 Chro. 12. 15.
and be spent for you: Necessity and constraint may not put any upon a
Ministerial Function, Quasi ultimum refugium, not an Advowson purchased by the
Father, and intended for the Son; nor an Impropriator, who intends his Son for
his Substitute at a venture. A strange Soloecism (says Mr. Bolt^n, that holy
man of God) a Lay-Rector and not Preach, nor a Collegiate Education, by
Statute, enjoining at such a standing to enter into Orders, whereas, alas,
many venture thus upon this calling, who have neither heart nor hand to put
forth to the work, but only that they might keep their places: I say, none of
those can be a sufficient warrant in point of conscience to take upon them so
high a Calling: This Calling must be took upon choice and serious deliberation:
It must be willingly entered upon, and willingly performed: No thinking of
putting thy hand to the Plough, and looking back, such are not fit for the
service of the Lord: This must be thy resolution, come good report, come evil
report, honor, dis honor, prosperity or adversity, I will give my self up to
God (as Hannah gave Samuel) for a loan all the days of my life.

3. He must be a man of a meek spirit, such a singular spirit was Charact. 3. A
man of a meek spirit.
in Moses, Numb. 12. 3. And beyond all parallel in Christ: He propounds himself
the pattern of our imitation, Matthew. 11. 29. How must the servant of the Lord
be qualified, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. And the servant of the Lord must not strive,
but be gentle unto all m^n, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing
those that oppose themselves: And how must an erring brother be dealt withal,
you may observe the rule Gal. 6. 1. (...), etc.

4. He must be a man of zeal and courage in the cause of God: Every Charact. 4.
He must be a man of zeal and courage.
thing is beautiful in its season: There Is a season for meekness, and a season
for zeal. Moses, who was meek in his own cause, yet was highly transported with
zeal in the cause of God: Some are Boanergesses, Sons of Thunder, and others
are Barnabasses, sons of consolation: It Is observed, that notwithstanding many
failings, there is some good spoken of all the Churches of Asia, only Laodicea
Rev. 3. 16, 19.
excepted, because they wanted zeal, they were lukewarm, neither cold nor hot,
and therefore God will spew them out of his mouth: Wherefore God commands the
Angel or Minister of the Church, v. 19. Be zealous, and repent: He that will
gain souls, must have his heart boiling in zeal to Gods glory. Paul, when he
came to Athens, and observing their Superstition, was not afraid of the
Philosophers encounter; neither was he mealy-mouthed for all their reproaches,
but tells them plainly to their faces, Ye men of Athens, I Acts 17. 22.
perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious: Sin must not be connived
at, though in Athens, nay rather the more to be reproved, because in such a
place, eminent for Learning, more is given, and more is to be required; and he
that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beat^n with more
stripes. Who can refrain speaking in the cause of God, unless he be spiritually
stupefied, and have a dumb Devil within him? It was Luthers brave resolution,
to go to Melch. Ad. in vira Lutheri.
Worms, and preach the Gospel, though every tile was a Devil to oppose him:
However zeal may be censured for phrenzy, its but the same Livery that Festus
bestowed on Paul: And thou may urge Paul's Apology, I am not mad, but speak
forth the words of truth and soberness: Act. 27. 24, 25.
And resolve with David, if to be zealous for God, be accounted vileness,
resolve to be more vile.

5. He that would win souls, must be a man of knowledge: Charact. 5. He must be
a man of kn^wledge.
Where God gives a calling, he furnishes men with a competent measure of gifts
for the discharge thereof: Blind guides, Ignoramusses, are none of Gods
sending: They run before they are sent: Prophets were called Seers, and the
Priestslips should preserve knowledge. As the Mal. 2. 7.
Priest under the Law, so the Minister under the Gospel, must be a man of
knowledge: How should the Minister be able to grapple with the Hydra of
Heresies, to contend for the Faith, to convince gainsayers, unless he be a man
of knowledge? There Is much use of secular Learning: Arts and Sciences are
Handmaids to Divinity: As long as they keep their distance, they contract a
good esteem; but if the Handmaid will have the pre-eminence of her Mistress,
it is high time she should be casheered: And there is exceeding great use of
Nurseries of Learning, and Schools of the Prophets: But here is the knowledge,
which above all others you must get, even the knowledge of Jesus Christ. All
the Fathers, and Schoolmen, and philosophers, though in their due place they
must be reverenced, yet all their Learning put together, cannot make you
gainers of Souls: Its Christ alone that can do it: He can infuse Divine
knowledge, and give you Eye Salve, as he promises Rev. 3. 18. He can give you
that Unction whereby you shall know all things. This is a rare 1 John 2. 20.
knowledge, to know how to gain a soul: This only is to be learnt in the
School of Jesus Christ.

6. He must be a man Orthodox in judgment, one that has the Charact. 6. He
must be a man Orthodox in judgment.
Spirit of discerning, to understand the ways of God, able to distinguish truth
from falsehood; otherwise, being blind and ignorant, the blind leading the
blind, both must fall into the ditch. God goes not forth with the Ministry of
false Teachers: They may deceive souls, but cannot gain them, unless in that
sense which is said that the Scribes and Pharisees did, which compassed sea and
land to gain a Proselyte, and when he is made, he becomes seven Matthew. 23. 15.
times worse the child of the devil then before. Such a gain is a dreadful
loss, not a winning, but a destroying of souls: It should therefore be our
principal business to study the Scriptures, and to be well grounded in the
truth, to be steadfast, and settled in the faith, not being carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, by the slight, of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4. 14. There are three emphatical words in
the Text, (...) from (...) a Dye; counterfeit Teachers, imitate counterfeit
Gamesters, they can cog a Dye, (...) every work, any trick, any shift, (...) a
wiley art of legerdemane: To be fenced against these, what need have we to pray
for a spirit of discerning to know the truth, and to have our hearts stablisht
with grace, as the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 13. 9.

7. He must be a man of an holy life, and exemplary conversation: 7. He must be
a man of a boly life.
Concionatoris vita, Concionis anima: Gregory de Pastorali cura, tells us,
Necesse est ut esse munda studeat manus, quae diluere aliorum sordes curat,
That hand must be clean that is employed in wiping of others filthiness. The
Exhortation is urgent, Isa. 52. 11. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the
Lord. A good life is a good Commentary upon a good Sermon. The Apostle is
earnest in his Exhortations, Romans 2. 21. Thou that teach others, teach
thou not thy self, etc. Ministers lives should be standing Sermons, their whole
conversation a pattern of Piety: They are Beacons set upon an Hill, the eye of
the whole Country is upon them; As the godly observe: So the eye of the wicked
watch* for their halting, ready to make them an offender for a word. It Is a
common observation, that the contention of Abraham's and Lots Herdsmen, has a
greater aggravation because the Canaanite was then in the Land: The observation
of the wicked, Genesis 13. 7.
is not a small motive to engage us unto circumspect walking: The very
breathings of a Minister should be spiritual, full of grace in his lips,
ministering grace to the hearers; his words savory, tending to edification; his
carriage serious, grave, exemplary, adorning his Profestion, as becomes the
Gospel: What an efficacy has a good Phil. 1. 27. (...).
Sermon, when its backed with an holy life and conversation? We should therefore
pray for a serious, heavenly frame of spirit.

8. He that would win souls, must be a man of industry: This is Charact. 8. He
must be a man of industry.
that Apostolical Character, To be a workman that needs not to be ashamed, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Christ admits no Truants in his School, no Droans in his Hive, no
Loyterers in his Vineyard: It Is said, The lab^r^r, not the loyterer, is worthy
of his hire. Ministers are in Scripture called Pastors, Seers, Watchmen,
Workmen: Its a palpable contradiction, for to be a Pastor and not to feed, a
Seer, and to be blind; a Watchman, and to sleep, and a Workman to be idle.
Pharaoh bids Joseph set any of his Brethren, that were men of activity, over
his cattle; and much more ought they to be men of activity who are to be set
over souls: No industry, no labor like that of the brain; I should rather say,
that of the heart, for the heart labor is the best labor of a Preacher of the
Gospel: There Is no resting from our labors, till we come to Heaven; we read of
Paul's labors in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, etc. you read 2
Cor. 11. 27.
often of (...) and (...) in Chrys^st^m^s Homilies: Some of Calv^ns excellent
Commentaries were read every day: Let not such as hope to gain souls to indulge
their ease: It Is a dangerous thing to be a lover of ease: Leave off dallying
and procrastinating, and sall a working; wrap not thy Talent in a napkin, but
improve it industriously, to the glory of God and advantage of souls.

9. He that would win souls, must be a man of discretion, that Charact. 9. He
must be a man of discretion.
knows how to speak a word in due season: He must have skill in this
soul-trade, when to give a Corrasive, and when a Cordial, when stronger, when
gentler Physic must be prescribed: There are Lambs as well as Sheep; Babes as
well as strong men; broken hearted as well as hard hearted, and a suitable
remedy must be applied: He must speak war where God would have him, and speak
peace where God would have him: O how faithful ought he to be in the discharge
of his Function, he must divide to every one their portion, mercy to whom
mercy, and judgment to whom judgment belongs: Thus was the Prophet Isaiah
qualified, for, says he, The Lord God has Isa. 50. 4.
given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in
season to him that is weary: Gregory de pastorali cura, a Book Gre^: de
Pastorali cura.
worthy of our reading, insists largely upon this particular; how proud and how
humble persons, how merry, how sad persons, how angry, how meek persons, etc.
are to be admonished, that so remedies may be applied suitable to the sore:
This wisdom we must pray for, and put it in practice throughout the whole
course of our Ministry.

10. and lastly, He that would win souls, must be a man of an Charact. 10. He
must be a man of an humble spirit.
humble spirit: Love was the first I mentioned, Humility the last, but not the
least: Love must lead the van, and Humility brings up the rear, and then
there is great hope of a souls conquest: The Apostle exhorts, (...) Be ye
clothed with 1 Pet. 5. 7.
humility: The word (...) (as Hensius and Pollux observes) signifies
vestimentum humile, a mean Garment which servants wore, and it was a badge of
humility: Let Us put on Humility as a garment, this let us always wear, never
put it off. Next to the R^be of Christ's righteousness, it is the best garment in
all the world. When God gives thee parts, and thou art proud of them, this
spiritual pride will be thy ruin: But when thou have good parts, and an humble
spirit, thou art put in a capacity of saving thine own soul, and those that
hear thee: For God gives grace to the humble, and pours most precious liquor
into empty vessels. I have read a Story of one that saw in a vision many snares
of the Devil spread upon earth, he sat down and mourned, and said within
himself, Who shall pass through these? whereupon he heard a voice answering,
Humility shall pass through them. Humility will pass through Caut-ropes, Gins
and Pit-solds, which the Devil lays in the way. O beware of Pride, and above
all pride, of spiritual pride! It Is that dead fly that mars many, a Box of
precious ^yntment: It Is like that wild gourd that spoild the pottage, and
caused them to cry out, Est mors in olla. Take notice how God blesses the
labors of many of meaner parts, who are humble and watchful, when as many of
greater parts, possessed with Luciferian pride of spirit, are cursed in all their
undertakings.

Thus you have heard him set forth in his proper colors, and decyphered in
legible Characters, who of all others is likeliest to win souls.

Q. But what, if notwithstanding a man in some good measure thus Q.
qualified cannot reap the fruits of his pains, nor obtain the seal of his
Apostleship?

I Answer, That must be our stay and supportation, Isa. 40. 4. A.
Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and
in vain, yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God:
It Is said, Rev. 22. 12. And behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me,
to give to every one according as his work shall be: It Is not said, according
to the fruit, but according to the work: It may be our sad affliction, for
which our hearts must bleed, that we labor all night, and catch nothing, yet at
the word of Christ we must let down our net. Though we plough amongst rocks and
sow amongs thorns, yet if there be a willing mind it will be accepted: God
will accept the will for the deed: Let us then be conscientious and constant
our duty, and leave the success to God.

And thus far for the Doctrinal part of the Text.

The third and last head propounded, is, To draw from the premises 3. Head.
Application.
some inferences of practice, which is the particular Application I promised
you, of which in a few words, and I shall put a period to my discourse.

Three Inferences I shall only draw from this Doctrine, for Humiliation,
Exhortation, and Direction.

1. For Humiliation: Here Is just cause of deep Humiliation, that Use 1. For
Humiliation.
we are so little acquainted with this precious fruit specified in the Text, of
winning souls. It was a saying, Few Confessors of great men are saved, which a
Learned Divine renders in equivalent terms, Few great Mr. Calamyes Sermon on
Josh. 24. 15.
men's Chaplains come to Heaven: Few Ministers are skilled in this soulsaving
art, and they that are best skilled, yet have cause enough of Humiliation: I
well know, and shall ever acknowledge, that to save a soul is the peculiar work
of the great God, yet Gods Messengers are accounted his mouth unto his people:
And the word of God, is the power of God unto salvation. We have a weighty duty
lying upon us, Ier. 15. 19. Romans 1. 16.
and we have great cause every one to be humbled to the dust, that we come
short of our duty: And if they that labor all the day in Gods vineyard, and are
faithful in the work, have cause to be humbled for their unprofitableness, O
how should they lay it to heart, and sigh even to the breaking of their loins,
who leave the Sheep with Mercenaries in the Wilderness, whilst themselves fare
luxuriously, and live with Dives deliciously every day. Peradventure they give
their flock a visit at Sheep-shearing time, once a year, as the High Priest
entered into the Temple, and then with blood: and indeed a Non-Resident is a
soul-murderer, who maintains his bravery with the price of blood. Fathers and
Brethren, I love not to lay out my Mothers nakedness, but my heart burns in
love to your souls; and I hope and pray, that a through Reformation may go on
and prosper, and that under no pretense whatsoever, Non-residency may be
dispensed withal for the future, it being Materia pr^rsus indisp^nsabilis. For
this sin the Scarlet Gowns ought to come down in the dust, and wear Sackcloth:
Statute Tolerations, Dispensations, for such and such Dignities, local Statutes
in Colleges, dispensing for such a Lecture, and for a Living under such a
value, all these will prove but sorry fig leaves to cover thy nakedness: Will
any of these ^leas serve thy turn at the Audit of the great Judge of Heaven and
Earth? Will they stop the cry of blood? It was said in Suetonius, Quintili
Vareredde l^giones, so will it be said, Steward, give an account of thy
Stewardship, Sheep-herd, give an account of thy flock, Isa. 56. 10.
where then will dumb dogs, (as the Holy Ghost styles them) and Idol Shepherds
appear? They will wish, that the hills might fall upon them, and the mountains
cover them from the face of the Lamb.

In the second place, suffer I beseech you, (my Brethren) the Use 2. For
Exhortation
word of Exhortation: I beseech you, by the mercies of God, in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, above all your gettings, get this wisdom to gain souls. In
general, it concerns every one to do all the offices of Heb. 10. 24.
love they can, and to consider one another, to prov^ke to love and to good
works: Let Parents do this for their Children, Tutors for the in Scholars,
(they are Pro-parents for the time) Masters for their Servants, one Friend, one
Neighbor for another: Let any one indifferently learn this Art, and put it into
practice: These Scriptures I commend to your serious considerations, and
continual practice: one is, Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thine heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin
upon him: Another is, Mal. 3. 16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often
one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of remembrance
was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his
name: A third, is Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to
day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

And in a peculiar and special manner I address my Exhortation unto my Brethren
of the Ministry, in the Language of the Apostle, (...): I put you in
remembrance 2 Timothy 1. 16.
to stir up your gifts: Let not good parts be blasted, or lie rusty for want of
using: If such yet remain here unpurged (would there were none) who keep their
Pastoral Livings, and their Founders maintenance, living here at ease, let the
Flock sink or swim: I recommend those dreadful Imprecations unto their saddest
thoughts, Zech. 11. 17. Woe to the Idol Shepherd that leaves the flock, the
sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean
dried up, and his right eye utterly darkened: And 1 Cor. 9. 16. Woe is unto me if
I Preach not the Gospel. And for such as are set apart for this Calling, and as
yet have not a Pastoral cure, a particular determination, ad hic and nunc, know
that you are Ministers of Christ, ordained into the universal Church, (that is
my Judgment) for the benefit of the Church of God in general; be not idle, and
lazy, saying, No man has hired us: Begin betimes, and consecrate your strength
and marrow to God: And if the first-fruit be holy, the whole lump will be
sancti^ied. Neighbor Villages stand in need of your charity: many poor souls
ready to starve, cry as earnestly for spiritual bread, as poor Prisoners for
corporal bread: And the want of a settled Ministry, in several places, is
occasioned by a scandalous maintenance. Give me leave to be importunate in my
suit, and press your duty farther, from th^se moving considerations.

1. Consider your high and weighty Calling, what a great honor it is to be a
Minister of Jesus Christ: You are called Ambassadors, Consid. 1. The Ministers
weighty calling. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Matthew. 5. 13.
now Ambassadors must pursue the Instructions of their Commissions, and your
principal instruction is, to beseech people to be reconciled to God: You are
the salt of the earth, and if the salt loose its savor, wherewith shall it be
salted: You are lights, and lights must not be put under a bushel; you are
Stewards, and Stewards must be faithful; you are Laborers, and Laborers may not
eat the bread of idleness.

2. There Is a price put into your hands, you have abilities and opportunities,
Consid. 2. A price put into the hands of Ministers.
health, and strength, and if God be pleased to give you hearts, the business
would be soon done, and well done: you have helps of Learning, helps of an
ingenuous Education, helps of frequent Preachers, dividing the Word faithfully
amongst you: these are as so many prizes put into your hands to get wisdom, the
Lord give you an heart to make a spiritual improvement of them.

Two places of Scripture (drawing to a close) I would gladly fasten upon your
thoughts: The one is, Eccl. 9. 10. What soever thy hand find th to do, do it
with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor kn^wledge in the grave
whither thou go: The other is, John 9 4. I must work the works of him that
sent me, whilst it is day, the night comes, when no man can work.

Thirdly and lastly, Consider the strictness of your account at the Consid. 3.
From the day of account.
day of Judgment: Then the Lord will say, Give account of thy Stewardship:
Shepherd, give account of thy Flock: Watchman, have thou looked to thy Watch?
Laborer, have thou wrought in my Vineyard? The consideration of the day of
Judgment, the day of visitation should awaken your spirits, and put you upon a
careful provision against that day.

Use 3. In the last place, let me close up all with a word of direction, Use 3.
^or direction.
and I have done, according to that little experience I have (and the Lord
forgive me that I have no more) I Will commend a few rules of direction to you.

1. Give your selves to Divine Meditation: This was Mose's practice Direct. 1.
To meditate. 1 Timothy 4. 13.
in the Mount, Isaac's in the Field, and a duty prescribed by Paul to Timothy:
Meditate upon these things: Meditation is, as it were, the wing of the soul to
carry it unto Heaven, and herein a Ministers Profession has advantage of all
others: By doing, he receives good: by meditating to instruct others, he gains
knowledge for himself: by holding forth light to others, he enlightens himself.
This life of Meditation, is an Heaven upon Earth, by it we have communion with
God, and are admitted into the Prelence Chamber, so that such as are well
skilled in this Divine Art, can say experimentally, as John did, And truly our
fellowship is with the Father, and with the Son Jesus 1 John 1. 3.
Christ.

2. Be much in Prayer, Been orasse, est b^ne studuisse: So Bernard, Rule 2. To
be much in Prayer.
He studieth best, that prays best. Pray for thy self, and pray for thy
Brethren: pray that God would warm thy heart, that thou may warm theirs.
Many run from Commentator to Commentator, when as they should be upon their
knees: I dis-allow no good helps, but commend the use of them, yet principally
thou must study the Scriptures, and so Preach a Sermon, as thou may apprehend
it to be the fruit of thy Prayers: then Minister and people are likeliest to do
most good upon one another, when they mutually join in fervent Prayer one for
another.

3. Beware of Preaching thy self, froth of Wit, fragments of Rule 3. Preach not
froth of wit.
Poets, affected Phrases, forced interpretations of Scripture. I have read,
that when Bernard one day Preached a learned eloquent Sermon, and the next day
a plain and profitable Sermon, he said, Heri Bernardum, h^die Jesum Christum:
Yesterday I preached my self, to day Jesus Christ.

4. Labor to Preach Jesus Christ: Preach that which may most Rule 4. Preach
Jesus Christ.
conduce to the knowledge of Christ crucified, which may most advance the
Kingdom of Christ. Busy thy self in showing the people the way to Heaven, the
necessity of the knowledge of Christ, the necessity of holiness, faith and
repentance. Christ crucified, is that Vnum Necessarium, which above all others
we must desire to know, and instruct others in the knowledge of it.

5. Let thy Preaching be from the heart, from an experimental knowledge Rule 5.
Preach from the heart.
of the love of God in thine own soul, that so thou may comfort others, with
those comforts wherewith thy self has been comforted in particular. A
speculative Divine, that Preaches merely from the strength of parts, from a
brain knowledge, does little good: and why? Because (as Reverend Latimer used
to say) d^^st ignis, de^st ignis, There wants fire, there wants heat. What
comes only from the head, commonly reaches no farther then the head, but
what comes from the heart, will go to the heart. A Minister should Preach
every Sermon to himself first, before he preaches it to his people, that so he
may comfort others, with those comforts wherewith he himself has been
comforted.

6. Know thy people well, and converse with thy flock: There Is Rule 6. A Pastor
should know his Flock.
more work to be done besides Preaching: Thou must not be a stranger to any
that will bid thee Ged-speed, visit them, confer with them, and see how they
profit. The rule I go by, is, Prove. 23. 22. Be thou diligent to know the state
of thy flock, and lock well to thy h^rd.

Seventhly and lastly, and with this I shall conclude, Be diligent Rule 7. Be
diligent and watchful.
and watchful, still with Habakkuk be upon thy Watchtower: Be not wearied in
thy work: In due season thou shall reap, if thou faint not: shake off all
drousiness and spiritual slumber: Watch over thine own soul, and over those
whereof thou art an over-seer. It pleased God to reveal the glad tidings of a
Savior, unto Shepherds who were watching their flocks by night: And whilst
thou art watching over thy flock, Christ may call thee to eternal Glory. And
blessed are they, whom when Christ comes he finds so doing.

The Pearl of price. Discovered on the Monthly Fast Day,
upon Matthew. 13. 45, 46. Again, the kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant
man, seeking goodly Pearls, who when he had found one Pearl of great price, he
went and sold all that he had, and bought it.


THis Text is Homogenous with the last SERMON. 4. at St Mary's OXON. June 20.
1648.
which I unfolded from this place: It Is a driving of a former nail to the full
head: I look upon it as a link of the same golden Chain of matchless dignity,
price, and value. It may be expected (and so were my first thoughts inclined)
that upon such a day as this, peculiarly set apart for the afflicting of the
soul, I should represent to you the nature and duties of a day of Humiliation;
But that I am persuaded, that this Argument has been srequently and
conscientiously prosecuted in your hearing: Wherefore, upon second thoughts,
waving that common place, and pursuing my intended method, I hope I shall speak
a word in season, and not digress from the work of the day. I discovered then,
the excellency of wisdom, and pronounced him the truly wise man, who winned
souls, out of Prove. 11. 30. Go you and do likewise. My task now lies before me,
to make a serious review and discovery of more of the same genuine Issue and
Divine Extraction, wholly made up of the right stamp. And such a one, instar
omnium, has a sacred Panegyric, even the singular Testimony of Christ himself
in his behalf, set forth in the words now read unto you: Again the kingd^m, etc.

Not to stay long in the Portall, I shall briefly draw down the Context Context.
unto the Text.

Its worth our observation, that our Savior Christ, in the dispensation of his
Ministry, propounded many choice and excellent Parables, ver. 4. This was
Christ's familiar and accustomed method of Preaching.

One reason whereof is given for fulfilling of a Prophecy took out R. 1. Ver.
35.
of Psalm. 78. 2. I will open my mouth in a Parable: I will utter dark sayings
of old; which we have heard, and known and our fathers have told us. Every
Prophecy of Christ must be fulfilled in its season; not an (...) of the word
of God shall fail.

Another Reason why Christ spoke in Parables, was for the obduration R. 2.
of the hearts of the wicked: God in judgment fast closes up, and hardneth
the hearts of many ungodly persons, who persist in their impenitency, ver. 13.
And Isaiahs Prophecy is cited by this Evangelist for a pregnant testimony,
Isa. 69. 10. which words you shall find syllabically repeated in the
substantials thereof, Mark 4. 12. Luke 8. 10. John 12. 40. Even all the four
Evangelists likewise, Acts 28. 26. Romans 11. 8. Such a Crambe of repetitions,
points out something to be specially regarded, as of more then ordinary
concernment.

A third Reason why Christ spoke by Parables, might be to gain R. 3.
an attentive audience. Christ speaking Mysteries and Oracles, inflamed the
hearts of the Auditors, and made them inquisitive after the Interpretation.
Under hidden similitudes there lay a mysterious meaning. Christ spoke with
authority, not as the Scrib^s, each word had weight: Whereupon, people hearing
things which they never heard before, were eager and restless in their desires,
until they understood the Parable, and the interpretation thereof.

The fourth and last Reason I shall mention, why Christ preached R. 4.
in Parables was, because this was a more prevalent convincing way of
Preaching; when Reproofs or Exhortations are delivered in Parables under the
name of a third person, they gain more well-come and acceptable entertainment.
Thus Nathan reproved David by a Parable of the Ewe-Lamb, and set his reproof
home by a Prosopopeia; David hearing of the rich man's cruelty, in taking the
poor man's Lamb, passes sentence of death upon him, and a fourfold restitution,
because he had no pity. Now David was (...) condemned 2 Samuel 12. 5. 6.
out of his own mouth: Whereupon Nathan strikes whilst the Iron is hot, by
making particular Application of the Parable unto David, Thou art the man: This
was a convincing way of Preaching. And thus ought the Ministers of Christ to
put in practice the most convincing way of Preaching, whether in a way of Mercy
or Judgment; whether to come with a rod, or the spirit of meekness; whether to
be Boanergesses, or Barnabasses. The most taking, winning way we must use
(Provided always, that we make the word of God our just Standard and rule to go
by) so that we may win souls unto Jesus Christ.

Now to draw nearer to the words: In this Chapter there are delivered sundry,
choice, and excellent Parables, as of the sower, and the seed, a grain of
mustard seed, leaven hid in three measures of meal, a casting-net. I pass from
these, unto that which has immediate reference unto my Text, v. 44. The Gospel
of Christ is a Treasure, and the Scripture is that precious seed where that
Treasure is to be found: Neither can every one find it, or know the worth of
it; It Is a hidden Treasure: The worth of the Gospel is unknown by, and hidden
from unbelievers: But the true Believer who sindes it, 2 Cor. 4. 3. Luk: 2. 19.
and knows the worth of it, hides it, (i. e.) he keeps it safe in the
secretest recesses of his heart; he hides it, as Mary did, (...). He that has
discovered the incomparable Treasure of the Gospel, does not conceal or
suppress the knowledge thereof from others. But first, he will enrich himself
therewith; upon the finding of the Treasure he is so ravished with joy, and so
transported with a desire after the purchase, as without delay, demurs,
dodgings, or abatements, he sells all he has to purchase the field, and get
possestion of it.

Now my Text is a further prosecution and confirmation of this Parable: The
first word, (...) again, specifies a dependence upon what went before. Expect
no curiosity in dividing the words: You have here propounded a Parable, and its
Interpretation.

1. For the Parable, and therein are to be considered these six Divis. A
Parable and its interpretation.
particulars.

1. The Subject compared, or groundwork of the comparison: The kingdom of
Heaven.

2. The subject of this comparison, or Person spoken of, and he is A Merchant
man.

3. You have set down what he trafficks for, his particular Merchandise:
Pearls: And because there is a difference in Pearls, Aliae nobiles, aliae minus
generosae, some are of a greater, some of a cheaper estimation: he trades for
the best, not ordinary, common, but goodly Pearls.

4. The success he finds: His labor is not lost, but answered with goodly
Pearls.

5. What does he find of greatest value? He finds a Pearl of superlative, The
Pearl of price.

6. and lastly, Here Is set down what the purchase cost him, and

Thus far of the bare letter of the Parable, according to the dark part of it:
But there is a mystical meaning to be considered; let us take off the veil, and
give in the interpretation. I shall open the terms in that order they lie in
the Text, (...). By Kingdom of Heaven, in this place, is plainly set forth, the
administration of the Gospel: It Is called the Kingdom of Heavens in the plural,
alluding to the other Heaven, the habitation of glorified Scopus est commendare
Evangel^u^ piis a singulari praestanua eademque opera dicere qu^nti Evangelium
a piis fiat, Pis^at.
Saints and Angels. The Gospel of Christ is that Heaven on Earth, which will
bring us to that Heaven above. Piscator observes on the place, The scope of all
is this, to inhance the incomparable worth and estimation of the Gospel in the
hearts of the godly: It follows, (...) a Merchant man: This Merchant is every
true believer, who drives a continual trade for Heaven, who is industrious and
indefatigable in his labors: He seeks after faith, repentance, holiness of
life, the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, the reconciled countenance of
God in the face of Jesus Christ. These are the Jewels for which he searches:
This is his sole employment to negotiate Instar negociatorum debent conquirere
pretiosas Margaritas fidel and pietatis. Pareus in loc.
for Heaven: He trades not for trifles, but weighty, precious Commodities: His
merchandise is particularized, (...) goodly Pearls, the Pearls of faith and
holiness, as Pareus on the place. The Gospel holds forth goodly Pearls, goodly
Promises, goodly Ordinances, goodly Graces, a goodly recompense of reward: the
beauty thereof will enamor the soul, and the Treasure therein contained will
more enrich it, then all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them. And
what success he had, you may see, (...). This Pearl of great price is Jesus
Christ: The Gospel is the Cabinet. Margarites (as Pliny and other Historians
observe) are produced out of the dew of Heaven, and Shell-fishes draw in that
dew: They are called Unions, because usually they are found two by two,
unsevered, in the same shell. And that which is last to be opened, is the price
paid to purchase this invaluable Pearl, Quis magno emit Margaritam, nisi cui
notum est pretium. Mucul. (...) Chrysostom.
(...). None will buy this Pearl, who knows not the price, says Musculus: It Is
evident that this Spiritual Merchant was a man of knowledge: The knowledge of
the worth of Christ made him so willing to sell all for him: He stands not
dodging, and cheapning, hoping to bring down the price, he knows Christ to be
infinitely more worth then all, and therefore willingly foregoes all things for
him. It Is Chrysostom's observation, Christ is the Pearl of infinite value, if
you sell not all, you cannot purchase him.

But an Objection lies in the way, and must be removed, lest it Q.
prove a dangerous stumbling block: Can Christ, Heaven, Salvation, be bought
and sold? Questionless, Heaven is the Saints inheritance; not their purchase,
but Christ's for them.

For Answer hereunto, we may not too hard strain a Parable, lest A.
we draw blood out of it. And it is a received rule in Divinity, Theologia
Parabolica non est argumentativa: And Pareus observes on the place, Hoc servit
Parabolae, non sensui: Non enim pretio emitur, sed gratis fide acquiritur: No
merit, no purchase of Heaven; all is from Grace. But then, says Calvin, are we
said to buy Christ, Quum volentes, nos privamus carnis desideriis, i. e. When
we willingly renounce carnal desires: When knowing the worth of Christ we deny
our selves, foregoe what is dearest and nearest, so far forth as it stands in
competition with, or opposition unto Jesus Christ. When we forsake all for
Christ, foregoe lusts, pleasures, profits, honors, in their greatest estate and
confluence, then are we said to buy this Pearl of price.

Now the Parable thus unfolded, holds forth these evident truths of Doctrine.

First, That every true Believer is a Merchant of goodly pearls.

Secondly, Every spiritual Merchant-venturer, must sell all for the purchase of
the Pearl of price.

And these shall be the groundwork of my ensuing Meditations: Both I purpose
to enlarge this time ((...)) the solemnity of the day requiring enlargement of
Duties. I resume the first That ev^ry true, etc. In handling whereof, I shall
observe this method. Meth.


1. To illustrate the similitude between material and immaterial Pearls: And
show how the comparison holds between them, that shall constitute the Doctrinal
part.

Then secondly, I Will review the comparison betwixt a Merchant, and a true
Believer, and from the practice and negotiation of the one, infer the duty of
the other: This shall constitute the Use and Application.

1. Then my task lies in illustration of the similitude, and making 1. A
similitude between material, and immaterial Pearls. 1. Pearl^ have luster and
beauty.
a comparison between material and immaterial Pearls: The comparison holds good
in these resemblances.

1. Pearls have a resplendent luster and beauty: Pearls and precious Stones are
beautiful, even to admiration. The sparkling of a Diamond, the beauty of a
Ruby, will even dazzle the eyes of the beholders: So the Word and Sacraments
are beautiful Ordinances; there is a great deal of beauty and splendour put upon
the Word of God sincerely preached, and the Sacraments purely administered.

There Is a vast difference betwixt Pearl and Pearl. A Bristol stone or a
bastard Pearl, may cheat ignorant people: But a skillful Jeweller will bring
them to the touchstone, and discover the difference. There Is a great
difference between Preacher and Preacher: One man bands Jesuit against
Jesuit, Counc^l against Council, or stuffs up his Sermon with Poetical
fragments, high-flown Stage Play expressions; this man is cried up for an
excellent Preacher, even in Athens, amongst some raw, wanton Auditors: And I
wonder not that such preaching frequently of late years used in this place
(thanks be to God there is better now) has been useless, unfruitful, such as
God would not honor with a blessing, because it came only from the head, and
so went no further then the head; it tickled the ear, and pleased the fancy
only, it never descended into the heart, and affected the Conscience: Whereas
on the contrary, another man preaches Christ in simplicity of heart, in the
demonstration of the spirit, having experience of Gods love in his own soul, he
comforts others with those comforts wherewith he himself in particular has
been comforted withal: This is the Preacher likeliest to do good: And the seet
of such are beautiful. The Gospel is most Isa. 52. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 21.
beautiful in its own dress: And the foolishness of Preaching is effectual to
salvation. There Is no necessity of guilding a Pearl; the Pearl of it self is
more precious then all the guilding that is put upon it: To guild over Sermons
with humane inventions, and froth of wit, is like to those, who when they could
not make the Picture handsome, fell a daubing of it. I discard not humane
Learning, but highly commend it, if it be used with wisdom and moderation; as a
servant, keeping its due distance: But love to your souls constrains me to
speak, and be your remembrancer; how thankful ought you to be (and O that you
would improve the price put into your hands!) that instead of such, whose study
was to preach affected phrases, strong lines, more Philosophy then Divinity,
now at last God has sent amongst you, faithful, painful Preachers, dividing
the Word aright, even between the Joints and Marrow, applying it home to your
consciences, such you ought to esteem highly for their works sak^, as the
Apostle exhorts: It has been an exceeding 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13.
grief of heart unto me, to hear so little use made of Scripture in this place
formerly, when Postillers and Jesuits have been mustered, as frequently as
uselesly. I would therefore inhance the price of this inestmable Pearl of the
word of God: There Is more beauty, more strength of judgment, more conviction
of the conscience in one line of Gods word, then in all the elaborate Volumes
of Philosophers. Compare Livy and Moses, Pindarus's Odes and David's Psalms;
compare Demosthenes and Cicero with Isaiah and Paul (as some of the Learned
have done) and you will find how the Learned Clem. Alex. St^om.
Philosophers and Orators are put down, and vanquished in their own Art, quite
foiled with their own Weapons, so that the Quintessence, and Elixar drawn out
of the exquisite Writings of Philosophers, are but bastard Pearls, in
comparison of the Holy Scriptures. Let me impart an experience (I speak it
only to the glory of God) that I have gone from Commentator to Commentator
(though ^ approve of their help) and have been unsatisfi'd; at last I have
compared Scripture with Scripture, and there have I received satisfaction upon
my knees, which otherwise I could not obtain. Let Us all study the Scripture
more, for Gods Word is more beautiful then all the Writings of the wisest Men.

2. Pearls are very rare and scarce: A man may find millions of 2. Pearls are
very rare.
Pebble-stones for one Pearl: The Margarites come out of a she^l, and that very
rare to be found but in the Indian Ocean: The Merchant that gets them, must
sound the depth of the sea: And many precious stones are found only in craggy
steep rocks: A man must scramble up to the top of high Rocks, and incur the
hazard of a dangerous Precipice: And it is doubtful, whether for all his labors
he shall be recompensed accordingly, there being such an exceeding rarity and
scarcity of such precious Commodities. So immaterial Pearls, Gospel Ordinances,
purely dispensed, are rare to be found. Pure Officers, and pure Administrators,
without humane mixture or composition are very rare. Divide the World (as some
have done) into thirty parts, but (...) are in Christendom, and even in See a
Map called Ch^istianographia.
Christendom are Papists, Socinians, Arians, Pelagians, Sons of Heresy, who
differ from the Orthodox even in Fundamentals. And now adays (though for what is
already done, we have cause to bless God with meltings of heart) yet through
the manifold obstructions of a formal and superstitious People, it is very rare
to find a faithful soul-saving Ministry: Omne tempus Clodios, non cmne Catones
foret: He Is but a mere stranger in Isra^l, who knows not that Priests of Baal
and Bacchus, such as made the Sacrifice of God to be abhorred, have been like
Sycamores in the valley for abundance. And I wish there be not a remnant left
of that wicked generation, who within these Walls are enemies to Reformation,
who brayd of the murmuring Israelites, saying, Come, let us make us a captain,
and go again unto Egypt: The Language of their heart is, Let Us have our
Altars, our Images, Copes, Genuflexions, Cringings, the Liturgy, with all its
bundle of Ceremonies: And no wonder, -- Missa non morder, These never touch the
quick: But all this while the faithful, sedulous I aborers in Gods Vineyard are
very few: old Mnasons, the good old Puritans are very few: The harvest is
great, and the laborers few: We must therefore pray, that God would send forth
faithful laborers into his harvest.

Thirdly, As Pearls are rare and scarce, so they are hard to be got, 3. Pearls
are hard to be got.
there is much difficulty in getting of them, even in those places where they
are to be found. For getting precious Stones, I told you before, many venture
far, and scramble upon Rocks to get Pearls (as some Travelers report) the
Merchant must wait the ebbing and the flowing of the Sea, and tarry till such a
certain season, waiting many days and nights till that come, then sound the
depth of the Sea: Some dive and hazard their lives for them. So sor to get
immaterial Pearls is a great difficulty: All the graces of the Spirit are
invaluable Pearls, the richest Bracelet or Neck-lace of Pearls that ever I read
of, you have mentioned by the Apostle, Add to your faith virtue, etc. To get a
common, temporary faith, a verbal 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
love, a groundless hope is easy, and ordinary; but to get a justifying faith,
an unfeigned love, a steadfast faith, here lies the difficulty, here is the
labor, here is the work indeed. To get saving Graces, thou must be in labors
often, in watchings often, in fastings often, and thou must pass through good
report and evil report, fiery Serpents, and sons of Anak: You read of a work of
faith, a labor of love, a patience of hope. Salvation is a Pearl of glory, and
we are commanded, 1 Th^ss. 1. 3. Phil. 2. 12.
(...) Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling: It Is the
difficultest task in all the World to save our souls: The way to Heaven is a
straight way, a narrow Gate, there are many obstacles, brakes and briars in the
way, Beasts of Ephesus to be encountered withal: This conflict cannot be
managed, (...) without raising a dust, without shedding of Blood: Thou must set
thy self in battle array against thy self, the spirit against the flesh: Cum hac
controversia^nati sumus (says a Father) Thou must wrestle Matthew. 11. 12.
against Principalities and Powers; thou must run a race, thou must even storm
Heaven, and take it by violence. Peradventure thou may be stripped of all, and
it is no matter, if in the interim thou be clothed with the righteousness of
Christ. It may be God intends thee for a Martyr, to seal the Truth with thy
blood: Happy will thou be, notwithstanding all the hardships and difficulties
thou have grapled withal, if thou come to Heaven at the last: one moment of
Heavens joys, one beam of Gods reconciled countenance, will make amends for
all: The Apostle determines, That the afflictions of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall b^revealed Romans 8. 18.
in us.

Fourthly, Pearls are of invaluable price and estimation: Cl^opatra's 4. Pearls
are of unvaluable price.
Pearl was worth many thousands: One Pearl no bigger then a man's thumb, may be
worth many thousands. So the Pearls of the Gospel are of invaluable price: This
Cabinet contains the most precious Gems in the whole Universe. Every
Gospel-promise is a pearl: That excellent promise, which has five Negatives
(and five Negatives in Greek more vehemently deny) (...) Heb. 13. 5.
is of it self more worth then an inheritance of ten thoufand pounds per annum:
Those promises, John 3 36. and c. 10. 28. are the Jewels which Believers lay up
as their chiefest Treasure.

Fisthly, Pearls are full of virtue, and medicinable: There Is much 5. Pearls
are full of virtue.
virtue in diverse precious Stones: Jewels commonly worn have much virtue in
them; and Pearls questionless much more. That which is called the Magistery of
Pearls, is of special use. It Is commonly observed, that the Ruby cures the
dimness of the eyes; and the Topaz keeps a man's hand from scalding: The
Carbuncle gives light in the dark, and the Sapphire cures the stingings of
Scorpions: So the word of God is that Ruby, that (...) mentioned Rev. 3. 18.
that enlightneth thy eyes; that makes thy darkened* an enlightened mind: Christ
is that Topaz, that good Physician that hea^s thy distempers, both of body and
soul: Look upon Christ with the eye of Faith, and thou shall be cured of the
stingings of Scorpions, of Sin and Satan, as they were who eyed the brazen
Serpent, and were cured of Numb. 21. 9.
the stingings of the fiery Serpents.

Sixthly, Pearls are sterling Commodities in every place: In many 6. Pearls are
lterling comm^dity.
Nations our Coin is not current with them, neither theirs with us: But Pearls
are current every where. Certainly therefore there is much worth in Pearls, for
God-would not so befool the whole world, neither would the Scripture shadow
forth the glory of Heaven by Pearls, Rev. 21. 21. were there not an
extraordinary worth in them. So the Gospel of Jesus Christ is a sterling
Commodity, where ever it comes, It has the stamp of the King of Heaven upon
it; where the light of the Gospel breaks in, it finds, or makes a way for its
entertainment: It Is so lovely, that it will ravish us with its love: the
Proclamation runs, Ho every one that thirsts, come unto the waters: The
Gospel is right metal, and passable wherever God will have it: It passes
currantly through all Believers for their eternal salvation; and to unbelievers
to leave them (...) for their conviction and condemnation.

Seventhly and lastly, Pearls are lasting and durable, they are solid, 7.
Pearls are lasting and dura^le.
substantial, and the solidity and duration of them inhanceth their estimation:
So the Gospel of Christ is a durable Pearl: It Is Christ's Legacy, bequeathed
from generation to generation: Gods Word shall never fail: Salvation is a Pearl
that will never moulder away: The pl^asures of heaven are for evermore. Christ
the Pearl of Psalm. 16. 11. Heb. 13. 8.
price is an unchangeable Savior.

Thus far of the Doctrinal part: It now remains, that I should draw down the
similitude of a Merchant, and from his properties infer the particular
Application unto your practice.

1. A Merchant must be a man of knowledge and good understanding: Prop. 1. 1 A
Merchant must be a man of knowledge.
He must be able to know the worth of his Commodities, how to distinguish true
from counterfeit Pearls. The Merchant in the Text, knew well the incomparable
worth of the Pearl of price; otherwise, he would not straightway have for gone
all for the purchase of it. We say commonly, and as truly, Ignoti nulla cupido:
So every spiritual Merchant must know the excellent worth of the Gospel, the
riches of Christ, the riches of says: The knowledge of them will set his
affections awork. Hear, O Christian! know thy main duty, that Vnum Necessarium,
to learn the knowledge of Jesus Christ: This is that fundamental knowledge,
without which you can never come to Heaven. Eternal life consists in this
knowledge, John 17. 3. Above all thy gettings, get this understanding: What if
thou art skilled in all Arts and Sci^nces, in all the humane Learning in the
World, and in the mean time art ignorant of Jesus Christ? Thou art (as the
ordinary Proverb says) penny wise; and pound foolish: For all thy secular
Learning, thou may go to Hell. O then, let thy vote run parallel with
Solomon's for Wisdom: Beseech 1 King. 3. 9. Rev. 3. 18.
Christ to anoint thee with eye salve, and to enlighten the eyes of thy mind,
that thou may comprehend all the dimensions of the love of God. As the light
of the body is the eye, so the light of the soul is the understanding. As the
Pilot to the Ship, the Sun to the World, the Commander to his Soldiers, so is
knowledge to the Soul, to steer, guide and direct its motions: Say not, though
thou art ignorant, yet thou have a good heart: Solomon tells us, Without
knowledge the heart is not good: Say not thou art a Believer, Prove. 19. 2.
though thou art ignorant, for knowledge precedes faith, Psalm. 9. 10. They that
know thy name, will put their trust in thee: Boast not, that thou esteemest
highly of Christ, and yet can not tell what worth is in him, what
Justification means, what saving faith is: For an ignorant person cannot set an
high price upon Christ. He Will ask What Is this beloved more then another beloved?
And you my Brethren, that are men of Learning, bred up in this Famous Nurs^ry,
do not glory in your skill in Tongues, nor in your skill in the Liberal
Sciences; you that are the greatest Scholars, must come the same way to Heaven
as the meanest Christian, that cannot read one letter in the Book: What will
all your knowledge avail you without the knowledge of Jesus Christ? There Is no
Postern-door for Heathens; no name but that of Christ; no way besides, v. Acts
4. 12. John 14. 6. O then set your hearts and heads on work to know Jesus
Christ: If you knew the worth of this Pearl, you would prize it the fairest of
Ten thousands, and you would willingly venture all for the purchase of it.

2. A Merchant is a man of indefatigable labors and industry; he Prop. 2. A
Merchant is a man of paint.
compasses Sea and Land, and negotiates in foreign places for his advantage:
Hereupon the good Huswife, Prove. 31. 14. is compared to Merchants Ships; she
bring^th her food from afar; she ris^th also whilst it is yet night, and gives
meat to her household, and a p^rtion to her maidens. A Merchant is a man of much
employment, and therefore must be very diligent and industrious: He well
knows Prove. 10 14.
that of Solomon, that the hand of the diligent makes rich: And thus must
every true Believer, every Merchant for the soul, be a man of diligence and
unwearied labors: He knows it is a long and difficult journey to go to Heaven,
and therefore his wisdom is to set out early, and consecrate to God the morning
of the day: The World sometimes throws Caut-ropes in the way, to gaul him;
sometimes golden Apples of pleasures, profits, preferments to bewitch him;
other times he meets with scoffing Ishmaels, railing Rabshakehs, Beasts of
prey, which open their mouths ready to devour him: And therefore it concerns
him to fortify himself with says, hope, and patience, and steel himself with
invincible courage. He that Trafficks for Heaven, must look for Paul's portion,
To be in weariness 2 Cor. 11. 27
and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often,
in cold and nakedness: My exhortation therefore runs parallel with the
Apostles, Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good Solaier of 2 Timothy 12. 3, 4
Jesus Christ: No man that warreth, etc. He that aims at proficiency, must not
shrink at difficulty: You are seeking for Pearls, for precious Stones, for
precious promises, precious graces, even the Pearl of price, The Lord Jesus: Do
not leave of seeking, till you find, slack not your endeavors: Be not weary of
well doing, but persevere in the work, and you shall reap if you faint not: The
precious Pearls of the Gospel are in jeopardy. A Jesuitical party would take
away our Gospel, which if once gone, we may call all our comforts Ichabods.
Adde' therefore to your pains, and as you are exhorted, Jude 3.
Contend for the faith delivered to the Saints, stand up for Christ, and own
his cause before men, otherwise he will not own you in his kingdom.

Thirdly, It Is the property of a Merchant to venture largely in the 3. A
Merchant ventures largely in the stock.
stock, in hope of a plentiful return. A Merchant-Venturer commits his
Merchandise to the mercies of Winds, Waves, Pirates: It Is their common Proverb,
Nothing venture, nothing have: And thus must every spiritual Merchant venture
liberally in the stock; he must venture his Prayers, one day they may return
with good measure, full pressed, and running over: He ventures his Alms, and he
Eccles. 11. 1, 2.
has a ground of encouragement, to find bread cast upon the waters after many
days: He ventures his life, livelihood, hopes, fears, all upon Jesus Christ: If
Christ be in the Ship, no fear of sinking, here is safe venturing. And so let
not us of the Ministry be afraid of evil entreaties, and unfruitfulness of our
labors: Lets not bauk our duty, because we fear we shall do no good; let us put
that to the venture, and fall a working: In the morning sow thy seed, and in
the evening withold not Eccles. 11. 6.
thy hands, for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or
^ King. 22. 24.
whether they both be alike good. We read, That a certain man drew a bow at a
venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the harness. So
though Ministers shoot at a venture, personating no man, yet it may please God
so to direct the word, that it may hit the right mark. Now let us all become
Merchant-Venturers: The Church is the Ship, tossed up and down with Tempests and
Storms: It Is exceeding great folly, to trim up our Cabin, if the Ship be a
sinking. Fear not, this Ship will at last come to a safe Harbor; here then let
us venture Counsels, Pains, Prayers, Estates, Liberties, Lives and all:
Deliverance will come to the Church of God, we have received earnest already;
let us tug harder at the Oar, and wrestle with Prayers and Supplications, as we
read, Isa. 62. 1. and v. 6, 7. When deliverance comes as a Samuel of our
Prayers, when we apprehend it the return of prayers, O how welcome will be
that deliverance: To see the ship so well fraught in the return, will be our
rejoicing, that we have ventured so liberally in the stock.

Fourthly, A Merchant must be a man of singular Patience, his Prop: 4. A
Merchant must be a man of Patience.
stock is in a ship, whose voyage is to the Indies, he therefore must wait
patiently for the return. So must every spiritual Merchant venturer wait
patiently upon God. Learn hence (O Christian) to wait upon the God of thy
salvation, the Chariot wheels of deliverance are long a coming, sense fails;
reason is non-plus't, but faith bids thee wait longer; It bids thee leave off
disputing and reasoning and learn to believe. But when faith a little flags,
then hope encourages as it did Ezrah, amid'st multitudes of tears. But Ezrah
10. 2
hope says, I have hoped long, and hope d^forr'd makes the heart sick, then
comes patience, and bids thee wait and stay Gods time, his time is the best
time. Do not Limit the holy one of Israel to times or means, this or that
instrument. Eligat Opp^rtunitatem qui libere August.
dat misericordiam. O be persuaded to possess thy soul with patience, There Is
need of patience, Heb: 10 36. There Is a certain Period or Limit of time set
down by God (though unknown to us) when Deliverance shall come. Thirty years
was appointed to the impotent Cripple, which time expired Christ healed him;
Eighteen years to the daughter of Abraham, and then was she healed; 70.
years to the Jewish captivity and then deliverance came. We are to observe,
that there is a great talk amongst the household of Christ's coming, the feilds
look white to harvest, the Gods of Babylon are in disgrace, there is great
pouring out of the spirit, and a gracious answer of prayers, there is earnest
thirsting and longing after deliverance, And these are usual Harbingers of
Deliverance: But to determine the punctual time it is above all our knowledge;
we can say no more then with the Psalmist: We see not our signs, there is no
more Ps. 4. 9.
any Prophet, neither is there amongst us that knows h^w long. Lets imitate
those who through faith and patience have inherited the promises. Lets resolve
come what will come to wait on God, as the Church professes, Is: 8. 17: and
Mich: 7. 7. God waits to do us good, let us wait for the reception of his
mercy, Is: 30. 8, 5.

5 A Merchant frequents the places of Merchandise, where he may Prop. 5. A
Merchant must frequents the places of merchandise.
hear of his factors, and receive intelligence of his Merchandise. He Is
frequently at the Exchange, or such like meeting places. So does every
spiritual Merchant frequent the public Assemblies, which are as it were
spiritual Exchanges, Places of concourse, where he may hear news from heaven,
and receive Intelligence for the best Emolument of his soul. Wait then, O
Christian, at these Bethesdaes, wait at the Posts of wisdoms gate, Lie in
this way where Christ frequently comes by, Omit not through Negligence any
Sermon, that peradventure may be a convincing, a converting and a confirming
word unto thee. It Is a mercy promised to an afflicted people, Isay 30. 20. And
though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction,
yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes
shall see thy teachers. That you have public Assemblies, frequent
opportunities, enlarged means, and that your eyes behold your faithful
teachers, these are singular mercies vouchsafed to you, your duty is to improve
them to the glory of God, and the best advantage of your precious souls.

6ly, and lastly, A Merchant must improve his estate to his best Prop: 6. A
Merchant must improve his estate to his best advantage, Mat: 25. 27.
advantage. He has been at great pains, cost, and charges, therefore he will
put off his commodities to his best emolument. The Lord in the Parable expects
his own (...) with increase. An honest gain is commendable in the trade. So a
spiritual Merchant must improve all he has, his time, Talents, Graces,
Ordinances, to the advantage of his precious soul. He must endeavor to gain
by various dispensations, adversity as well as prosperity; he must endeavor to
prosit by every Sermon he hears, by every man's company, with whom he
converseth. He Is skilled in the soul thriving trade. He stores up a stock of
Divine graces, faith, love, humility, meekness etc. And there with he would be
adorned. He stores up a stock of attributes, he knows there is wisdom in God
to counsel him, mercy in God to pardon him, power in God to defend him, and
with these he supports and stays his spirit. He stores up a stock of promises,
He reads, and believes, that they are precious promises, and that they are 2
Cor 11. 20.
all in Christ, Yea and Amen. These he gathers up, and applies to his
particular condition.

This spiritual Merchant, this true believer is the best Husband in all the
world: He not only has grace, but is still a growing in more* grace: He Is a
plant planted in Gods garden, and therefore brings forth more fruit in his
elder age. He Is not contented with what grace he has already, but with Paul
he forgets those things which are behind, and reaches forth unto those things
which are before, pressing forward toward the mark, for the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. He Is still on the getting hand, getting more
Phil: 3. 13. 14.
accession unto his faith, love, and humility, adding one degree of grace unto
another, till at length he attaines unto the end of his faith, the salvation of
his immortal soul.

And thus you have heard a comparison betwixt material and immateria^l
pearls, between an earthly and a heavenly Merchant. In the close of this
point, suffer, I beseech you, (Brethren) one word of exhortation; and that is
to persuade you to be Merchants of pearls. Let me expostulate the case (as the
Prophet did) Wherefore Is: 55. 2.
do ye spend money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which
satissieth not? Be no more Merchants for Gugawes, and triffles, and the
vanities of the world; which if you should get, you could find no solidity nor
satisfaction in them. But let your labor be bestowed in seeking out the goodly
pearls of the Gospel; Negotiate for heavenly treasures, which alone are solid,
which only are satisfactory, able to enrich your souls. Seek after the
Cabinet (which is the Gospel) and set an high estimate upon it; but above all
seek after Christ, who is the pearl of price in the Cabinet, and having found
Christ, imitate the wife Merchant in the text, Sell all you have to purchase
this pearl of price: which brings me to my second That every spiritual
Merchant venturer must sell all for the purchase of the pearl of price.

For unfolding of this precious point, I shall observe this Method. Method.
1. To illustrate the truth by Parallel examples. 2. To prove it by scripture
Precepts. 3. To confirm it by Evidence of reason. 4. And lastly, To set it
home upon the conscience, by particular Application.

First, To illustrate this by Examples, time would fail me to enlarge 1
Illustration by Examples.
my self in so great a cloud of witnesses. Review v: 44. of this chapter, set
Abraham's example for your imitation; God bids Abraham leave his country Gen:
12. 1. and makes him a promise to bless him v. 3. Abraham disputes not the
command, but obeyes it, v. 4. And this arose from a principle of faith, so the
Apostle Heb: 11. 8.
mentions.

And what was the moving cause? v: 10. For he looked for a City which has
foundations, whose builder, and maker is God. God was better to Abraham, then
kindred, possessions, and houses; He loved his relations well, but loved God
better. That one promise Gen: 17. 7. I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed, was of more value to him, then all the world besides. Wherefore at the
command of God with all readiness, he foregoes all. Thus Moses left a kingdom
for Christ. Josephus reports that Thermuthis Pharaohs daughter Joseph. A^tiq:
had no child, and therefore having found him, she set her heart upon him, and
fained her self to be with child, and kept Moses hid, until such time, as it
might be thought to be her own Child, to that end, that he might inherit her
fathers crown. This is doubtful; but what the Apostle delivers is an
undoubted truth Heb: 11. 24, 25, 26. (...) When he became great he refused to
be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, Moses who was skilled in all the
learning of the Egyptians, the adopted son of Pharaohs daughter, educated in a
palace, a man mighty in words and deeds forsook all for Jesus Christ, so the
Apostles forsook all for Christ, The primitive converts, sold all their
possessions for the Gospels sake. Math: 19. 37.
When the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified at Ephesus, those Act: 4: 3.
that used curious arts, burnt th ir books, the price amounting to 50.
Thousand pieces of silver. Elisha left his Oxen, and followed Eliah. Acts. 19.
19.
Matthew left the receipt of custom, and followed Christ. Marcus Galeacius
Caracciolus (of whom Calvin makes honorable mention) left his Marquesdome, his
great Relations, and all his proffers of honor, for Jesus Christ, It was a
truly noble protestation which he used, Cursed be he that preferres all the
gold and silver in the world before one days communi^n with Jesus Christ. I
have read of one Hormisdays a noble Persian, who would rather leave his noble
Robes, and wear beggars rags then deny Jesus Christ, He was degraded of all
his honors, and put to serve Camels, and was clothed with rags: Once to tempt
him to deny Christ, they put on him silken garments: He presently in scorn
tore them in pieces, refusing silken garments upon such base terms and
proposalls. The Lord Cobham (as the Acts and monuments record) notwithstanding
many v. Fox Acts and Monum.
flattering entreaties denied the Popes spiritualty, and said he was the
Antichrist, he rather would dye, then acknowledge him Christ's Vicar: He lost his
life in that cause. All those are (...) examples to us that we should fore-go
our Relations, interests, liberties, estates, even all for Jesus Christ. To
purchase the pearl of price, we must foregoe all.

Now in the second place for precepts commanding, read Prove: 23. 2 Proof by
Precept
23. Buy the truth, and sell it not. Now if we would buy the truth, we must
come up to its price.

If it be to loose our Ease, Promotions, Riches, Pleasures, Profits, we must
sell them all for the purchase of truth. We are commanded by the wise man,
Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom, and withal thy
getting get understanding: And Christ's counsel Prove: 4. 7.
is above all, most excellent. I counsel thee to buy of me gold, and a^oynt
thy eyes with eye salve etc. By eye salve we understand illumination Rom: 3. 18
of the spirit, by gold a pure and precious faith, by white Raiment the
innocence of Christ, his immaculate robes to cloth us: These are not to be had
for nothing, they must (sano sensu) be bought, after a manner, and a price
paid to purchase them, and to the same effect tends the counsel to the rich
man By our Savior; Mark. 10: 21.
go thy way, and sell what soever thou have, and give to the Poor, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven, come take up the cross and follow me.

I proceed to the 3. Head propounded, the confirmation of the 3 Proof by
Evidence of Reason.
point by evidence of Reason, the Pearl of Price the Lord Jesus is of that
infinite price, dignity, and value, as all must be sold to purchase him: And
this I Will make good by these ensuing Demonstrations.

First, The pearl of price is not to be had for nothing: we must Reason. 1.
The pearl of price is not to be had sor nothing
buy it, even give all that we have to purchase it. Ephron would give Abraham
the cave of Machpelah. Gen: 22. 11. But Abraham would buy it, neither does he
dodge, and abate any thing, but gives the full price, which was 400. shekells
of silver, current money with the Merchant. v. 16. It Is said Araunah gave all
the sacrifices to David as a King. 2 Samuel: 24. 23. But David would not offer
sacrifice of free-cost, but gave fifty shekells of silver, the full price.
Neither is Christ the pearl of price to be had for nothing. We have sacrifices
to offer, Our sins must be slaughtered, Our corruptions crucisi'd, and we are
to offer our selves as an Holocaust, a whole burnt offering unto the Lord.

Q. But some will say? Is not here a gap opened for merit? Can heaven, and
Christ be bought and purchased? Hereupon the Papists lay the rotten foundation
of their own merits.

answer, we may not lay too much weight upon a Parable, or similitude, Few
similitudes run as they say quatuor pedibus. Compare this Parable with Is:
55. 1. Come buy wine, and milk, without money and without price. We must come
and buy, we must be industrious in the use of the means which God has
appointed, and yet without any meritorious price: In commutative justice, inter
vendenda and emenda, One gives one thing and receives another worth it, so that
in equity the price must be worth the commodity, and the commodity worth the
price. But the greatest price we can give for Christ, comes more then
ten-thousand times below his worth: Yet then in a true sense are we said to
buy this Pearl, when we industriously pursue all good means to get it, when
we deny our selves, pray, hear the word, entertain Christ in our hearts, and
lives. And notwithstanding the grace of Christ is free, without money or price,
It Is our duty to come unto the waters, to frequent the means of grace: Though
what ever we give is but as a drop to the Ocean, a sand to the Balance, an
Atome to the sun, and when we have done all we can, we must acknowledge our
selves unprofitable servants.

Sec^ndly, The pearl of price is the most necessary purchase in all Reason. 2.
The pearl of price is the most necessary purchase in all the world.
the world. It Is no good husbandry to lay out our moneys upon trisles, and
superfluityes; but this is Mary's choice, that one thing needful. Thou can
not live without necessaries for thy body, as bread to eat, drink to drink,
and Raiment to put on: Take away these and you starve the body. Now Christ is
the bread of life, a fountain inexhausted to quench the thirst of his people,
and the robes of his righteousnesle are a precious garment to cover all our
nakedness: Take away these and you starve the soul: We cannot live one moment
without Jesus Christ. Enemies may take away thy meat, drink, raiment, and such
like outward comforts; but they cannot take away Christ. In the absence of all
these, if thou have the presence of Christ, thou may say with Jacob, I have
enough. As it was said to the Boat-man, Be not afraid, (...); Ipse unus
Christus erit tibi omnia, quia in ipso uno bono, bona sunt omnia. August.
so say amidst tempestuous Euroclydons; be not afraid, if thou have interest
in Jesus Christ. Christ is of absolute necessity, insomuch as thou can not
subsist without him. For riches they are contingent, to be or not to be. For
honors, pleasures, and promotions, unless they be sanctified, it is far better
to be without them, then with them. They are but the blessings of the left
hand. But in the want of all these, thou art made up abundantly with Christ;
and in Domine Jesus, te plus diligo, quam mea, meos meipsum. Bernard.
the fruition of them all in their greatest estate and confluence, thou art
utterly undone without him, The Martyr in the flames cried out, none but
Christ, and so does every true believer cry out, importunately with Rachel,
give me Christ or else I die. Christ is more to be loved then all.

Thirdly, This pearl of price is a commodity infinitely more precious Reason
3. This pearl of price is a Commodity infinitely more precious then all other
pearls.
then all other pearls or gemmes in the universe. No man of discretion will
buy refuse stuff, and worthless wares: but the excellent precious worth of a
commodity allures the Merchant to bid a price for it. Now Christ is of such
value and superlative excellency, as that all we can compare with him comes far
short, and no ways able to reach him. v: Prove. 3. 13, 14, 15. and Job: 28.
beginning at v. 15. We read, 1 Peter. 2. 7. Unto you therefore which believe he
is precious; we render it in the concrete, but the Original is an abstract.
(...) an honor: Christ is honor it self. A plant of renown, Ezekiel: 34. 29.
We cannot set a price high enough answerable to the worth of Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, The pearl of price is the most gainefull, profitable, Reason 4. The
pearl os price is the most gainefull Commodity. 1 Timothy 6. 6 Genesis 26. 12. Mat.
19. 29.
and enriching commodity. Godliness is great gain: Christ is an enriching
pearl, and his Graces, faith, hope, love, even all the graces of the spirit
are enriching graces. It was great gain for Isaak to receive in one year, a
100 fold increase. There is a rich and precious Promise, Every one that has
forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or lands, for my names sake, shall receive an 100 fold, and shall
inherit eternal life. Godliness is profitable to all things: It has the
Promise of this life, and that which is to come: 1 Timothy: 4. 8.
so far are we from being loosers, or only bare savers, as that we shall be
exceeding great gainers by this commodity. Religion is the Rom: 6. 21.
gainfullest profession. No profit comes by the service of sin. What profit had
you in those things wherein ye are ashamed? Get Christ, and thou art made for
ever. Have thou this pearl? thou art richer then the greatest Emperor without
it.

Fifthly, There Is no possibility of being cheated or any way overreached
There Is no possibility os being cheated.
in the purchase of this commodity: For worldly things are not Bread, and a
great deal even too much of time, cost, and charge are thrown away upon them:
but Christ is the best pennyworth, the best bargain that ever thou made all
the days of thy life. If thou sell'st all thy pleasures, riches, prosits,
honors, for Christ, thou have got that which is of more incomparable value,
then them all. There Is no fear of fraud or couzenage in traffiquing for this
commodity. Stand not therefore dodging, and cheapning at the market, saying, I
must keep this sin, or delight, custom, or profit, for these I hope to
obtain a dispensation; I assure thee in the next (which is the last
Demonstration I shall lay down for confirmation of the point.) That there is no
possibility of purchasing Christ for less than all. If thou will sit upon a
sin, (as Rachel upon the images,) and interpose an exceptive with Naaman,
foster a Delilah, an Herodias, entertain a Gibeonite, a pretending sin, spare
an Agag a ruling sin thou can not purchase the pearl: For if the commodity
be worth an hundred pounds, he goes without it that bids but fifty pounds, as
well as he that bids but twenty pounds. There must be no hypocritical
defaulking from the price with Ananias and Saphira, no halving of it with the
strumpet, or partial almost Christianity Act. 5. 2.
with Agrippa: A divided heart is afaulty heart. We must Hos. 10. 2.
willingly part with all whatsoever is dearest, or nearest, though it be to the
dismembring of our selves, the parting with a right hand, or a right eye, our
constitution, our accustomed sins. We may not be faint chapmen, cheapning, and
hoping to bring the price down: The Drunkard cannot have Christ and his cups;
The swearer cannot have Christ and his oaths; The unclean person cannot have
Christ, and his strumpet; The Hypocrite cannot have Christ, and his painted
glosses; The cheating cradesman cannot have Christ, and his false weights, or
sophisticated wares; Christ will not be thus coupled, thus unequally yoaked.
Between light and darkness, Christ, and Belial there can be no communion.

And thus far having gone by way of Explication and Confirmation of the
point, give me leave to press all home unto your consciences by particular
Application. uses 4.


4 Uses I would make of this doctrine, for reproof, Examination exhortation,
and direction. Uses 4. For reproof.


For reproof, of all such who will not sell all for the purchase of the pearl
of price. There are 4 sorts especially who will not go to the price of this
pearl. Ignorant persons that know not the worth of it. Covetous persons who
preserre the world before it; and open profane persons, who scorn, and do
what in them lies to trample this Pearl underfoot. These 4 come within the
verge of this Reprehension.

1. Ignorant persons through blindness of mind undervalue the Ignorant persons.
glorious excellencies of Jesus Christ. Their gross ignorance causes them to
undervalue Jesus Christ. So that profane Duke of Burbon preferred his Part in
Paris before his part in Paradise: 1. We say, Ignorantia excusat a tanto non a
non a toto; And we usually distinguish between an affected ignorance which is
pravae disposit ionis, from that which is crasse, invincible, purae negationis;
And so their punishments may be inflicted secundum mag^s and minus, yet neither
being excusable, These through ignorance resemble Aisop's Cock, preferring a
barley corn before a gemme. And these are liable to a dreadful curse mentioned
by the Prophet; Pour cut thy Jer. 10. 25.
fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that call not
upon thy name.

2. Idle lazy persons are to be reproved, who are so supine, and careless, as
will not stir a foot to purchase Christ. The wisemen came from the East to
worship Christ, and the Queen of Sh^ba from the uttermost parts of the earth to
hear the wisdom of Solomon: these shall rise in judgment against this lazy
generation; who will be at no pains, and at no cost for the purchase of a
Savior. Mannah falls round about your tents, You have bread in the morning,
and bread in the evening, will not you take pains to gather it? You have a
Mart, and a market for your souls; These places of concourse are open (which
is no small mercy) and will you not come at them? Men go many miles for a
gainful bargain, and are ye so sick of the lazies as you will not step over the
threshold to hear a Sermon? -- Non nisi subla to reperitur gemmula saxo. This
pearl is not to be had by such as fold their hands in their bosoms, nor such
as lie at Tavernes, and Alehouses; nor such as in contempt of the Gospel
wilfully absent themselves from the public ordinances, for fear lest the
plain dealing of the Minister should touch them to the quick.

3. Covetous persons are to be reprooved, who will not foregoe an Ox, a farm,
not a penny profit in the trade for Jesus Christ. Mammon is their god, and
therefore they will give no entertainment unto Jesus Christ. Gold and silver,
corn, and wine, lands and sumptuous buildings are their God. Take away these,
and they will reply with Mica, ye have taken away my Gods, and what have I
more? You may read the absurd Contents of the foolish Gadarens petition, that
Jesus Christ would depart out of their coasts: They preferred their swine before
a Jesus. Judas betrayed Christ for 30 pieces of silver: And the young man in
the Gospel preferred treasures on earth before treasures in heaven. Demas for
the love of the world turned Apostate. If a man will allow himself in
covetousness, hel'e be any thing as opportunity offers: Hel'e sell his
conscience for Mammon: Hel'e tack about for his best advantage. A man that was
never drunk with wine nor bear, yet may be drunk with the cares of the world
(as our Savior expresses) Luke 21. 34. A Christian's conversation must be
without covetousness.

4. Profane persons are to be reproved, such as are of Esau's humor, Heb. 13. 5.
Heb. 12. 16. who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. A profane
person will not foregoe a lust for Christ: The drunkard will not leave his
cups: The unclean person will not leave his strumpet nor the swearer his oaths
for Christ. And why I because they are enemies to Christ: Christ and Belial,
Christ and profaneness of spirit, Christ and lusts cannot be reconciled. Use
2. For Examination.


The second Use is for Examination, whether we are willing to sell all for the
purchase of Jesus Christ: By way of character I Will propound three queries. 1.
Do we exalt and prefer Christ above all besides? If so it will appear by
our judgments, affections, and conversation.

1. Do you exalt Christ in your judgments; Have you a spirit 1 Query. Do you
Exalt Christ? 1. In your judgments. 2. In your affections.
of discerning, to discern more beauty, wisdom, riches, purity and virtue in
Christ, then in all the world besides? observe what a high commendation the
spouse gives of Christ upon experimental knowledge Cant. 5. 10. My beloved is
white and ruddy, the chiefest amongst ten thousand: Christ was white for his
innocence, and ruddy for his sufferings. 2. Do you exalt Christ in your
affections, do you love Christ with an entire love, does his love constrain
you, 2 Cor. 5. 14. Do you set your joy upon Christ? when Christ came in the
power of his Ministry, it is said there was a great joy in that City, Acts 8.
9. That Christian who has a white stone and a new name! O how is his heart
ravished with an exuberant joy? And do you place your desire upon Christ? Psalm.
73. 25. whom have I in Heaven but thee? there is none whom I desire besides thee.

3. Do you exalt Christ in your life and conversation? Then 3 Your life and
Conversation.
do we price Christ highest, when we live to him, and the life of Christ is
fashioned in us, when Christ's image is stamp't upon our spirits, when we square
our lives according to the will of God, when we set up Christ commander in
chief in our souls, its evident that we exalt Christ, and set the highest
price of him.

The second Query is, Whether we are willing to deny our selves 2 Query. Are we
willing to deny our selves.
for Christ? Who ever will come after Christ must deny himself, Matthew. 16. 24.
What ever is self must be denied for Jesus Christ. Self opinions, self
applaudings, self reasonings, self righteousness, self interest, Ends, and
Aims, must all be renounced for Jesus Christ. A proud man must deny his proud
self. A passionate man must deny his passionate self: A scholar must deny
his learning, a wise man his own wisdom, a strong man his strength; All must
be denied when they stand in competition with, or opposition unto Jesus Christ.

One querie more I Will propound, and it is very seasonable. Are you willing to
undergo any affliction, to suffer any hardship for Jesus 3 Query. Are we
willing to suffer for Christ?
Christ? As a man must deny himself, so he must take up hiscrosse. The Apostle
tells the Philippians, Phil. 1 29. To you it is given in the behalf of Christ
not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. A suffering faith
is the gift of God. Are you resolved to take Christ upon his own conditions.
Will you follow the lamb where ever he goes, through thick and thin, even
through a shower of blood, when you are called thereunto. Elihu makes it the
mark of an Hypocrite Job. 36. 21. to choose iniquity rath^r then affliction.
Whereas when it comes to this Dilemma, either I must choose affliction, or
sin, then must my resolution be to choose the greatest affliction in the
world, rather then to wound my conscience with the least sin. He Is a believer
of the right stamp indeed who is of Paul's resolution, Acts 21. 13. willing not
only to be bound, but to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus. Put
your selves upon trial by these three forementioned queries.

The third Use is for Exhortation: I beseech you in the Bowels of Use 3. For
Exhortation.
Jesus Christ (as you regard the eternal good of your precious souls) to be
Merchant Venturers for the pearl of price: Oh that I could prevail with you
to foregoe and sell all you have for the purchase of Jesus Christ. But you will
demand what must we sell and foregoe? I answer

1. Thou must foregoe thy lusts, bid adieu to thy beloved sins, 1 Foregoe thy
(...).
put to death those brats of Babylon, slaughter thy corruptions: Thou must
deal with thy sins, as Samuel dealt with Agag, hew them in pieces before the
Lord in Gilgal; Make no Apologies for sin, plead not Antiquity, pleasure,
profit, custom, interest, etc. All these are but sorry fig leaves to cover thy
nakedness. If thy nearest Relations stand in opposition to Christ, thou must
foregoe them too. For so Christ determines. He that loves Father or Mother
more then me, is not worthy of me, and he that loves Son or Daughter more
then me, is not worthy of me, Matthew. 10. 37.

2 Thou must foregoe thy pleasures for Christ, so did Moses and 2 Foregoe your
pleasures.
Nehemiah bid adieu to Court pleasures: Many promise to redeem their time and
take Christ: But as Elimelech would not take the condition to redeem it at the
hands of Ruth, lest he marred his own inheritance: Ruth. 4. 6. so when the
condition comes thou must foregoe these and these pleasures and be serious, and
grave in all thy carriages, then many fly off, and will not take Christ upon
such terms. But without question Christ is the only pleasure; And the ways
of wisdom are the only ways of pleasantness; Prove. 3. 17. no joy, no
pleasure to be compared to the joy in a believers soul, arising from the
beams of Gods reconciled countenance darted upon it.

3. Thou must foregoe thy profits for Jesus Christ. When Christ invited they
all with one consent began to make excuse. But none of 3. Foregoe thy Profits.
these were fit guests for Christ. Be it a great Farm, a goodly Rev^nue, and
it stand in competition with Christ, thou must let all go. You cannot properly
be said to buy Christ, (for himself and his graces are free rich gifts) yet
much good you may do with your monyes. You may buy Bibles, good books,
maintain faithful Ministers, feed the hungry bellies, and cloth the naked
backs of many poor afflicted members of Jesus Christ.

4. Foregoe thy Liberty, ease, and quietness for Christ. With 4. Foregoe thy
Liberties.
Jerome deny wife, Mother, children and all for Christ. Put it to the Question
whether would you rather be with the Apostles in prison singing sweetly, and
enjoying communion with God; then with Apostate Demas ranging in the wide
world. Thou may have liberty of body and an imprisoned spirit, and thou may
have an imprisoned body, and enlargement of spirit. There Is a black cloud
hanging over the whole kingdom, and we know not what the womb of one day may
bring forth. Do not seek thy own ease, and quietness amidst public
calamities, let Baruchs failing be thy warning piece, Jer. 45. 5. And seek
thou great things for thy self? seek them not.

5. Foregoe honors and preferments for Christ. It was Ignatius 5. Foregoe thy
Pleasures.
his saying, Antiquitas mea, and nobilitas mea Jesus Christus; would you know,
who have the best noble blood running in their veins, you may find Acts 17.
11. These were more noble then those of The salonica, in that they received the
word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scripture daily, whether
those things were so. No honor to holiness, no Arms so excellent, no Coat so
noble as those which the Christian nobility gives; so then what ever things
thou highly esteemest, whether preferment, friends, reputation or the like, if
they stand in opposition to Christ, deny them all.

6. And lastly, thou must foregoe thy life (when thou have a calling) for Jesus
Christ. Think not thy blood too dear for him who 6. Foregoe thy life when
Christ calls for it.
ventured his blood for thee; In this cause by loosing thy life, thou shall
save it. All are gayners, none loosers that die in Christ and for Christ. But
examine thy self, if thou can not foregoe a lust, a pleasure, a dignity, a
liberty for him; If thou can not bear a scoff, and a reproach for Christ,
how will thou be able to resist unto blood, to endure the fiery trial? I may
expostulate with the Prophet, Jer. 12. 5. If thou have run with the footmen,
and they have wearied thee, then how can thou contend with horses? And if in
the land of peace, wherein thou trustedst they wearied thee, then how will thou
do in the swelling of Jordan? If lesser afflictions cast thee down low, will
not greater quite overwhelme thee? consider of those things in thy most serious
composed thoughts.

The 4th Use, and last is for direction. The Question will be asked Use 4. For
Direction. 1. Direction. Come to the mankets.
what means must be used for the purchase of this pearl? In the winding up
of all, I Will prescribe a few principal means, and forthwith conclude.

1. You must come to the markets whilst they last, and whilst the shops are
open. To day is the market, and the Ministry of the Gospel shows forth the
most precious wares. Now then come here and buy. Mary found Christ in the midst
of the Doctors, and the blind man lay in the way where Christ came by. Jacobs
sons must go to Egypt to fetch corn. The five Virgins are bid to go to them
that sell, Matthew. 25. 9. The Minister tenders these commodities. Sabboths are
market days, and the public assemblies market places: sit then at the feet of
your teachers, come frequently to the means of grace. This coming is accepted
as a kind of price (though not meritorious) paid to purchase Christ; Though
grace be free, and we cannot bring money in our hands, yet come, come, come it is
thrice ingeminated, Isay 55. 1.

2. When you are gone from hence give your selves to reading, 2. Direction.
Give your sel^es to Reading and Meditation.
meditation and conference. Read and search the Scripture, bring all with the
Beraeans to the touchstone of the word. John Husse was converted by reading the
Scripture, then there was no open vision. But the word preached is like the
breast milk most nourishing. To reading add meditation, meditate of the worth
of this Pearl. What you read or hear labor to digest by meditation, and to
meditation add conference, Mal. 3. 16. so those old Disciples spoke often one
to anoth^r etc.

3ly. Seek the face of God by prayer. They that seek have a promise of finding.
To ask for Christ, and his grace is a Petition suitable to the will of God.
And as king according to God's will we have a promise of being heard.

Let us cry after Christ, as hid treasures; Lord give me this pearl or else I
am undone. Lets resolve with Bernard. Nunquam 1 John 5. 14.
discedam a te, Domine sine te. Lets herein be importunate beggars, take no
nay, no repulse, resolving never to be driven away from our Fathers door.

4ly. Buy the truth, Prove: 23. 23. Be at any cost, pains, or charges for the
Purchase of truth, and what is the truth, (...) Joh. 14: 6. I am the way, the
truth, and the life. Give all diligence to know the truths recorded in the word
of God. Be unwilling to part with the smallest truth. Take such a delight, and
love to the truth, as thou will leave no means unattempted for the purchase of
it. Every truth is gold, and the least shaving of gold is precious. One truth
is more worth than a world. Not an (...) of truth shall fall to the ground.
Therefore thou must study the truth, read, pray, meditate, confer, and hear
to attain unto the knowledge of the truth.

5ly. Lastly, buy this pearl of price, in the season and opportunity, when
it is tendered. Take the benefit of the present time. To every thing there is a
season, and a time to every purpose under heaven, Eccles. 3. 1. Let that
excellent council make deep impression upon your spirits, Is. 55. 6. Seek ye
the Lord while he may be found, etc. And let Jerusalems misery be our warning
piece, Luke 19. 42. If thou had known, even thou at least in this thy day,
the things which belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thy eyes.

Now is the market, it yet lasts (blessed be God) other the opportunity.
Neglect not these golden seasons now tendr'd to you. It Is now day, fall a
working, whilst its day, the night comes, when no man can work, Joh. 9. 4. You
have here a tender of the pearl of price this day; you know not whether you
shall live to have a second tender. The Lord of heaven set home this word upon
your consciences, and persuade you speedily, readily, and cheerfully to sell
all you have to purchase this Pearl of price, the Lord Jesus, who is of
superlative value, more worth then millions of worlds.

A Suffering Faith
Discovered from Philip. 1. 29. For unto you it is given in the behalf of
Christ, not only SERMON. 5. At St. Mary's Oxon. December. 24. 1648.
to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.


THe Apostle having encouraged the Philippians to contend for the faith (...)
verse. 27. prepares them for encounters with adversaries verse. 28. And in
nothing terrified by your adversaries, which is to them an evident token of
perdition; but to you of salvation, and that of God: he tells them plainly what
they must meet withal in the reason of the Text. The words contain three
generals. A Duty, An Object, An Ability to perform the same.

1. For the duty, and that is double, to believe, and to suffer, or Thetext
divided.
it is but one, even a suffering faith; 2. For the Object, its twice repeated,
but one and the same, on Christ, and for Christ: Christ is the object of faith,
and for his sake we must be willing to suffer.

3. Here Is the ability to perform both duties of believing, and suffering: To
you it is given: None can believe in Christ, nor suffer for Christ, except it
be given from above: Before I draw forth the Doctrine, I will insist a while in
the explanation of the words: It Is said (...) its gratia gratis data, and
gratia gratum faci^ns. Faith is no herb, that grows in our gardens: but its
a plant of our heavenly Father's plantation; Its an habit infused by the
spirit, the supernatural work of God: No moral persuasion, no principle of
nature, no volumes of glimmering Philosophers can make discovery of this
pearl; Nature is as dimme-sighted, as a mole, in divine mysteries: Its beyond
the kenne of a natural man to discern spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But
the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. As John gave Testimony of Christ, John 3. 27. That a man can
receive nothing, except it be given him from above; so it may be said of Faith,
except it be given thee from above; thou can not receive it. It follows
(...) hence its evident that every faith is not a suffering faith: when the
son of man comes shall he find faith on the earth? A temporary, verbal,
dogmaticall, or historical faith are every where to be found like the
Sycamores in the valleys for abundance: But a true, saving, justifying faith
that will follow the Lamb where ever he goes, be it to mount Calvary, as well
as to mount Tabor, this is rare to be found. Here then is Shibboleth and
Sibb^leth, a note of distinction between a common and a special faith, the
faith of the world, and the faith of the saints to be found in the text, not
only to believe but to suffer. Then here is the object specified (...) Its a
true observation, but not more common then true: N^n poena sed causa facit
Martyrem; there are sufferings for our faults mentioned, 1 Pet. 2. 20. For what
glory is it, if when ye be buffetted for your faults, ye shall take it
patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, and take it patiently,
this is acceptable with God: If so we may thank our selves. But to die in
Christ, and for Christ makes the suffering glorious. Now how we may know,
whether we suffer for Christ, you shall hear anon in the particular
Application.

From the words thus divided and expounded, I shall collect this entire point
of Doctrine, which I lay for the ground work of my ensuing meditation.

That its the duty of true believers, not only to b^lieve on Christ, but
Dectrine.
likewise cheerfully and readily to suffer for him, when he calls them
thereunto. I interpose on purpose this limitation, when Christ calls; Because
we may not create evil to our selves nor run without a calling; so far as we
have a lawful calling in doing or suffering we may expect Method propound^d.
a blessing and no farther. Now that I may handle this Doctrine (as I desire)
in a profitable method, I shall use all plainness, and perspicuity of speech.
I shall only propound three Heads of discourse, something by way of
Illustration, something by way of Confirmation, and something by way of
Application.

1. First for Illustration, time would fail me to enlarge my self 1 For
Illu^^ation.
in so great a cloud of witnesses. The 11 of the Hebrews is an Epitome of a
larger Book of Martyrs. Abraham did not only believe but suffer for Christ,
Heb. 11. 8, 9, 10. By Faith Abraham when he was called to go out into a place,
which he should afterward receive for an in heritance, obeyed, and he went
out, not knowing whither he went: by Faith he sojourned in the land of promise,
as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the
heirs with him of the same promise. For he looked for a City which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God: Moses did not only believe but
suffer, Heb. 11. 24, 25. By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to
be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season,
verse. 37. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain
with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins, and goat skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented: Paul makes a catalogue of his sufferings; 2
Cor. 1. 23, 24. Are they the Ministers of Jesus Christ? I speak as a fool, I
am in labors more abundant: in stripes above measure: in prisons more
frequent: in deaths often: Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save
one. Paul's sufferings were abounding sufferings, 2 Cor. 1. 5. for as the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ.
Review his protestations, Acts 21. 13. Then Paul answered; what mean ye to
weep, and to break mine heart, for I am ready, not to be bound only, but also
to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus: and see what Doctrine he
teaches, Acts 14. 22. Confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting
them to continue in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter
into the Kingdom of God^ and see the confirmation of his doctrine, Acts 20.
22, 23. And now behold I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing the
things that shall befall me there: save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every
City, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me. Through all Centuries we
read of the sufferings of the Saints, Abel was the Protomartyr in the old
Testament. Stephen in the new: Noah's arc tossed up and down upon the surface
of the waters was a Type of the militant Church; David was hunted as a
Partridge in the wilderness; see the inscription of Psalm. 22. The passage of
the Israelites through A^^cloth shahar or the hind of the morning.
the red sea to Canaan was a type of the afflicted condition of the Church of
God; Elias was persecuted by Jezabel. The Prophet Esaiah was sawn asunder:
Jeremy was put into a dungeon, and afterward stoned to death in Egypt: Ezekiel
was slain in Babylon: Micah thrown down a steep place, and his neck broke. All
the Apostles (as Ecclesiastical writers mention) were put to death, excepting
John, that was banished into the Isle of Patmos. Peter, Andrew, and Philip were
Crucified: James was slain by the sword of Herod. Bartholomew preaching in
Armenia, was beaten down with slaves, had his skin flead off, and afterward
beheaded; Thomas was slain with a dart at Calamina in India: Matthew was run
through with a spear: James (surnamed the just) was killed with a ^ullers
club. Lebbeus was slain by Agbarus King of Ed^ssa. Simon and Jude (as some
say) were killed in a tumult; Matthias was stoned, and Paul beheaded at Rome.
These primitive persecutions were so bitter, (as Jerome says) that there was
not one day in a whole year, unto which the number of 5000 martyrs could not
be ascribed, excepting only the first day of January. Some took Nero (as
Austine de Civitate D^i relates) to be the Antichrist -- Quaesissimis
suppliciis aff^cit Aug. de Civ. Dei Dei Tacitus.
Christianos, so Tacitus writes of him. All the four Elements were witnesses
of that Monsters cruelty, some were drowned, others hanged, some were burnt to
death, others were buried alive. Ignatius was torn in pieces with wild beasts,
and when he felt himself grinding in their teeth, now (says he) I am become
meal for Christ's tooth: Lawrence was fried on a Gridiron: Vin entius had his
body indented with wounds, then thrown into a dungeon, where the floare was
spread with sharp shells, and his naked body was laid upon them: Romanus a
Noble man, sealed the profession of the truth, with his blood, he accounted his
Christian profession his chiefest nobility: Policarpus venerable for his
years, and more venerable for his heroical spirit in the cause of Christ,
being pressed to recant, answered, fourscore years I have served Christ, and he
never did me any hurt, and shall I now turn Apostate? Eusebius, Zozomen,
Socrates, Theodoritus and our Martyrologers exaggerate the sufferings of the
Saints: and however Romish Rabsheka's brand our book of Martyrs, wrote by an
eminently Mr John Fox:
learned and Godly man Mr John Fox, for a Legend of lies, yet it shall be had
in honor when their lying legends shall rot. There Is a famous History of the
Waldenses, of the people of Merindall, and Cabryers, and of the Parisian
Massacre, even this last century, when the blood of the slain ran warm
reeking down the streets. Peruse the History of the late Marian quinquennium.
Look upon the mach^lesse cruelty of the blood-sucking Papists in Ireland: And
all these are ensamples to us; we should not (as the Apostle says) 1 Pet. 4.
12. Think it strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you, as
though some strange thing happened unto you. Thus we may argue; Did such
worthies suffer? must we look to be scot-free? are we better then they? can we
plead privilege to escape? others have began to us in Germany and Ireland, how
soon we may drink of the same Cup, who can tell? I would not be a Foecialis,
yet I dare not flatter; A blackcloud hangs over our head, how soon it may break
and shower down blood, and involve us in a new War we cannot tell. All that I
aim at, is to prepare you for what ever comes, for the worst of times, seeing
a storm to make your garments fast about you, and retire to a shelter, to get
your Arc built before the deluge come; Praem^niti praemuniti; its the prudent
man's practice to foresee evil and hide himself, so says Solomon.

In the second place; I shall give in the confirmation of the point: 2. The
Doctrine confirmed by Reason.
Amongst others these four Reasons may confirm the truth delivered. 1.
Because persecution and suffering is the ordinary lot and portion of true
believers: The way to Canaan is through the wilderness, and the way to Zion
through the valley of Bachah: In Reason 1. Pers^cution and and suffering is the
Lot and Portion of Believers.
the world (says Christ) you shall have tribulations, Joh. 16. 33. Many are
the troubles of the Righteous, Psalm. 34. 19. We must through many tribulations
enter into the Kingd^me of God, Act. 14. 22. Every Disciple of Christ, must
take up his cross, Matthew. 16. 24. Non est Christianus qui non est Crucianus
(says Luther.) The Saints are killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep
for the slaughter, Romans 8. 36. As soon as Paul was manifested to be (...) a
vess^ll of choice, he was showed how great things he must suffer for Christ,
Acts 9. 16. and upon experimental knowledge he lays down this positive truth,
That all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy
3. 12. Now this comes to pass.

1. By the wisdom of God: The Divine hand is in it. Persecutors (says
Bernard) are Gods Goldsmiths, to put the righteous into the furnace of
affliction, and take away their dross: so God permits persecutors to try the
faith, love, and patience of his servants, and often times they do a great deal
of good even against their will, Jer. 9. 7. Therefore thus says the Lord of
Hosts, behold I will melt them, and try them: for how shall I do for the
daughter of my people. The Sabaeans, Chald ans, and Satan were instruments of
afflictions to Job, but God wrought good out of all, Jam. 5. 11. Behold, we
account them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have
seen the end of the Lord: that he is very pitiful and of tender mercy. Had it
not been for afflictions, we had never read of the patience of Job: we should
not have left us upon record that excellent book of Job.

2ly. This comes to pass by reason of Satan's rage and malice; The great Dragon
stands by ready to devour the man-child of reformation: He is the envious
man, the accuser of the Brethren, the adversary, the roaring Lion. Pliny
speaks of the scorpion, that every moment it puts forth his sting; the Devil
is that Scorpion that every moment assayes to do mischiese; he will cast some
of you into prison, Rev. 2. 10.

3ly. This comes to pass by reason of the malice of wicked-men, they are the
Devils agents, they have sucked the poison of this old Serpent and swell with
it, and are greatly enraged against the power of godliness. There Is a deadly
Fewd and Antipathy in wickedmen against the powerful workings and breathings
of God's spirit in the Saints. The great ones and Potentates of the world rages
athe godly, Psalm. 2. 1. Why d^e the heathen rage? They hate them without cause:
Tigers (as some report) rage at the sent of fragrant spices, so the wicked at
the savor of Godliness. As long as there is any left of the serpents brood,
there will not be wanting opposition and persecution against the godly. This
is the first head of reasons.

The 2d reason is because Christ does expect that the faith of his Reas. 2.
Christ expects that the faith of his servants should act extraordinarily:
servants should act so extraordinarily, as the faith of hypocrites and
Reprobates, cannot come near it. Temporizers will profess that they have faith,
but these follow Christ only for the loaves, while the Sun shines warm upon
them, in Halcy^n days of peace and tranquillity, but when it come to fire and
faggot, or degradation and suspension, (...), they take offense. Now he that
has not learned Christ's Cross, has not learnt his Alphabet. The Question was
in another case ask't, Matthew. 5. 47: what do you m^re than others? and so in
this case Christ will ask the question, are you willing to glorisy me both by
doing and suffering? are you willing not only to believe on me, but also to
suffer for my sake? Such Questions as there will touch the quick: Believers
must study all advantages, and take all opportunities to promote the honor of
Jesus Christ, they have a battle to fight, they are to encounter with b^asts of
Ephesus, and sons of Anak, they have a race to run and many stumbling
blocks are laid in the way: They have a fiery trial to endure, a Cross to
bear, they must pass through h^nor and dishonor, good report and evil report:
They must follow the Lamb where ever he goes, through thick and thin,
through a shower of blood. Thy life must not be dear to thee when Christ calls
for it: Be not afraid of venturing limbs, liberty, life it self for him that
laid down his life for thee. It was an heroical speech of Luther, that he
would go to Worms and preach the Gospel there, though ev^ry Tile was a Devil
to oppose him: and it was a gallant resolution John Fox Act: Mon^: ^^: Maryes
days:
of John A^dly that holy Martyr, that if he had as many lives, as he had
hairs on his head, he would loose them all for Christ: Thus you see how the
says of Believers acts extraordinarily.

A 3d Reason is drawn from the conformity of Believers unto Reas. 3. Believers
in a way of suffering are made conformable unto Christ:
Christ, for Believers are made conformable unto Christ the head and Captain
of their salvation in a way of suffering, Heb. 2. 10. And says the Apostle
Peter: For hereunto were ye called because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example that ye should follow his steps, I Pet. 2. 21: and this
is that which the Apostle did so earnestly desire to know, even the sellowship
of Christ's sufferings, Phil 3 10. Now between the head and the members, there
ought to be a conformity. Christ went into his glory by the way of sufferings.
Christ suffered in his name, he was called a Wine-Bibb^r, a Deceiver, a
Samaritan, an Heretic, a Devil: he was scoft at, scorned, crucified; And his
singular patience is upon record, 1 Pet. 2. 23: who when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself
to him that judges righteously. Yea he suffered in every place, hunger in the
desert, resistance and reproaches in the temple, an Agony in the garden,
contumelies in the judgment hall, crucifying without the city, likewise he
suffered in every part, his eyes ran down with tears, his temples with blood,
his ears tingled with buffetings, and the hearing of their blasphemies, and
glowed with their reproaches, they afflicted his taste with gall and vinegar,
pierced his hands with nails, his sides with a spear, his heart was full of
sorrow, his soul of anguish: he gave his back to the smiters, and his cheeks
to those that plucked off the hair, Isai: 50. 6. Never was any sorrow like unto
his sorrow, the wrath of God was powered upon him in a full bitter cup, and all
was to this end, that he might leave us an ensample to follow his steps. Heb.
12. 3. For consider him that endured such contradictions of sinners against
himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. Now then let us
expostulate the case, did our master suffer, and shall not we his servants?
did the head suffer, and shall not the members sympathise? Learn therefore to
follow Christ to Golgotha, and be conformed to Christ in the veil of his
misery, in his temptations, if ever you look to abide with him in his kingdom;
Look for it, make account of it, whoever thou be that art a Disciple of
Jesus Christ; Thou shall one time or other, drink of the Fathers cup of
affliction in via, before thou shall drink a cup of new wine in Patria; Do you
look for better usage and entertainment; than Christ and all his witnesses have
met withal before you. Herein, Man has a privilege above Angels, he has a
body and can suffer, and so has not Angels.

The 4th and last reason shall be drawn from those singular benefits Reas: 4.
Drawn from the benefit of suff^ring for Christ: 1.
that accrue unto God's people from their sufferings. 1. Their suffering places
are furnaces not to consume, but to purify and refine them, Dan. 11. 35. And
some of understanding shall fall to try them, and purge them, and to make them
white, even to the time of the end, because it is yet for a time appointed: and
likewise the same Prophet tells us, Dand. 12. 10: many shall be purified and
made white, and tried: but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the
wicked shall understand, but the wise shall underst and. To the same effect the
Prophet speaks, Zech. 13. 9: and I will bring the third part through the fire,
and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried;
and to purge them and to take away their dress and Tin, Is. 1. 25.

Suffering places are Gods framing houses, wherein he fashions and casts his
people into a new mold, he makes their graces shine the Job, and courage of
Paul, Jeremy and Daniel, were it not for their sufferings.

Their suffering places are as so many consecrated Oratories, Act. 16. 25: and
at midnight Paul and Silas prayed and sang praises unto God: and the prisoners
heard them. In prison, Manasseh fell a praying. He got more good by a Prison,
then by a Throne: how sweetly did the Martyrs pray in prison? what ravishing
letters did Bradford, Philpot, Carel^sse and others write out of prison? Men
may imprison the body, but cannot imprison the spirit. The hearts of God's
children are enlarged, though their bodies are imprisoned.

The Lord Jesus Christ is the supporter of the Saints in their sufferings, and
applies his cordial comforts to them in their languishing Angel comforted
Jacob when he was afraid of his brother Esau, and he saw a vision at Bethell.
An Angel comforted Elias, when Jezabel had designed him to destruction: an
Angel delivered Peter out of Prison; and supporting grace strengthened Paul, 2
Cor. 12. 9: and he said unto me, my grace is suffici^nt for thee; for my
strength is made perfect in weakness; most gladly therefore will I rather glory
in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.

Suffering is the way to prevent sufferings: suffering loss of goods, liberty,

For 6ly, and lastly, suffering for and with Christ has an ample Romans 8. 17:
if so be that we suffer with him, that we also may be glorified together.
Compare our sufferings and glory together, verse 18. For I reckon that the
sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be rev^aled in us, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17: For which cause we faint not,
but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renew^d day by day.
For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

And thus much for explication and confirmation of the doctrine, Applic.
I now descend to particular application.

In the first place this reproves the paucity of those that will suffer Jesus
Christ, you know how Peter boasted of his courage, and how lamentably he was
foyld: Many pretend valor and resolution For reproof.
for the truth, and are voces and praeterea nihil: Ther^s a notable story in
the book of Martyrs concerning Dr. Pendl^ton, and M. Saund^rs; Mr Saunders was
timorous and afraid lest, he should deny Christ; The Dr was confident and said
(being a corpulent man) that each gobbet of fat in his body, should fry at the
stake, but this Braggadocian turned Apostate, and the other timorous Christian
suffered Martyrdom. I may not shoot at Random, but level at some particular
persons, these 'Ile single out that are of all others unlikely to suffer when
persecution comes.

1. They that will not endure a lesser evil for Christ, will never endure 1.
They that will not endure a l^sser suffering are unlikely to to suffer greater.
a greater; If thou have runn^; with footmen and they have weari^d thee, then
how can thou contend with horses? Jer. 12. 5. If thou can not brook a
byword, a nickname, a scoff, or a reproach for Christ, how will thou resist
unto blood? Art thou loath to venture thy breath to plead the cause of God, how
will thou venture thy life? when the water is but to the ancles, and then you
will not wet your feet, how will you pass over when it becomes a river? Bilney
the Martyr tried the fire with his finger: If thou can not endure the burning
of thy finger, how will thou endure the burning of thy body? If a lesser cross
foyl thee, how will thou grapple with a greater? If a reproach, a jear, the
fear of displeasing a Relation, carnal interests and selfishness, make thee
fly of and apostatise, surely thou will never kiss the stake, and welcome fire
and faggot when Persecution comes.

The glozing Hypocrite, and Machivilian Politician, will never 2. The Hypocrite
and Politician will not suffer.
suffer for Christ; his Policy is not to follow Religion too close in the
heels, lest it dash out his brains; not to launch further in the deep, then he
can come safe unto the Haven; his design is, not to discover his conscience
farther, then he can save his skin. This is the man that chooses sin rather
then affliction, Job 36. 21. The Hypocrite has no sure rooting, nor firm
foundation, for he builds on the Sands: Superficial outsides, Popularity,
Relations, Revolution of times, bias his motions, and stears all his
practices, and not the glory of God, nor the love of Jesus Christ.

The carnal Mamonist will not suffer for Christ. The world is his master, and
he serves it, and makes it his Idol; and no man can serve two masters: 3. The
carnal Mamonist will not suffer.
His Gold, Corn, Buildings, Dignities, Revenues, are his Gods; he sets up these
as the Idols and stumbling blocks of his own heart. Demas loved the world, and
therefore deserted the society of the Apostles; Judas loved money, and
therefore betrayed Jesus Christ; The foolish Gadarenes preferred their Swine
before a Jesus; The young man preferred Treasures on Earth, before Treasures in
Heaven, Mark 10. 22. And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved, for
he had great possessions: The root of this lamentable choice was covetousness,
(...), which (in the Apostles Character) is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
For the love of money is the root of all evil, which will become coveted after;
they have errid from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows: The covetous man dreams of an Eternity upon Earth, he is earthed before
his time; he will not forgo his Oxen, his Farm, his Gold or Silver for Jesus
Christ; he will follow Christ no farther then he may gain by, and make a good
Market of him (as the people followed Christ for the loaves:) But if it come to
the parting with some of his Idols of gold and silver, he will not let them go,
he will sit on them, as Rachel did on the stuff. They are his Gods, and what has
he more? whoever you are, that are in love with the world, whose breath smells
of earth, whose discourse is earthly, and whose hearts are glued fast to the
Pelf of the world, and swallowed up with worldly intanglements, of all men, you
are unlikely to suffer for Jesus Christ: And as for you (the younger sort are
herein most faulty) that follow the fashions of the world, the Antic, Exotic
garbs, and wear ridiculous, monstrous fowl heads of Hair, borrowing other
folks Hair: I may thus argue with you, if you will not part with a fashion of
ill report, how will you part with your lives for Christ? Tertullian has a
saying, Timeo Tertul. lib. 3. de cultu Faeminarum.
cervicem, etc. I fear that Neck, that has on it a Neck-lace of Pearls, that
it will not lay it self down upon the block for Jesus Christ.

4. The formal Professor will not suffer for Jesus Christ; these are 4. The
formal professor will not suffer for Jesus Christ.
the highway hearers, mentioned, Matthew. 13. 19. When any one hears the word
of the kingdom, and understands it not, then comes the wicked one, and
catches away that which was sown in his heart: this is he which received seed
by the way side. A formal Gospeller, that does all for form, will fly off and
flinch when suffering comes: Many reduce Religion to a mere form, and come to
the Ordinances as a fashion and a custom; and many Scholars come to Prayers and
Sermons, because they are engaged to it by local Statutes: But what do they in
their Studies? Do they pray there in secret? I beseech you chatechife every
one his own heart, ask thy felf, Do I keep time and touch with God in private?
Do I pray, when no eye of man sees me? Do I walk closely with God? how do I
carry my self in my private addresses to God? Fly from Formality, beware of
resting on a formal outside Profession. Formalists are so odious, as that we
may not associate our selves with them, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn away.

5. Your lukewarm La^diceans will not suffer for Christ: These 5. Lukewarm
Laodiceans will not suffer for Christ.
halt between two Opinions, and have two Faces; they are of the worst temper,
neither hot nor cold; some calls them Ambidexters, other Neuters; some
Vterques, some omnia: These will not suffer for Christ, these will not stand
for Religion when it is under Hatches: Many that pretend to this moderation, are
much of this Laodicean temper, (Erasmus like, hanging between Heaven and Hell;
you cannot tell what to make of them, like cunning Gaimsters, who will stand by
a great while, and then bet on the winning side: I would (says the Spirit)
that thou were either hot or cold, Rev. 3. 15, 16. I know thy works, that thou
art neither cold nor hot, I would thou were cold or hot: So then, because thou
art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth:
Those are either of Gallio's temper, that will not take pains in the work of
God; or else with Agrippa, (...) in some small things they will appear for
Christ, so far forth, as it will not cross shins with their own Politic
Designs: Of all others, these are the greatest enemies to reformation, and
because they would comply with both sides, God in Judgment will make them
odious unto both.

Lastly, Profane Libertines will not suffer for Jesus Christ, these 6. Profane
Libertines will not suffer for Christ
are enemies unto the Cross of Christ, running headlong into all excess of
riot; these are drunk with the Drunkards, and swear with the Swearers, how can
these be put into any possibility of suffering?

For first, They will not bate a Lust, forgo a Corruption for Christ, how then
can they suffer for him?

Secondly, They hate Christ and his Servants, now its love to Christ that only
constrains us to suffer for him.

Thirdly, They cannot sympathize with the sufferings of Gods people; they are
so far from being afflicted with them, that they rejoice in their afflictions,
and add affliction unto affliction: They that are of this temper, will never
suffer for Jesus Christ.

The second use shall be for Trial and Examination, whether you Use 2. For
Trial and examination.
have a suffering Faith, yea or no: Many springs move many to suffer, as a
natural Conscience, and a natural Pride, and stoutness of Spirit. A man may
give his Body to be burnt, and yet want love to Jesus Christ.

Here Is the grand Question: What Is that Faith which will be a true Q. What Is
that faith which will be a suffering faith? A Faith is a Christians life.
effectual suffering Faith?

For Answ. 1. That Faith which is thy life amidst all deaths, thy supply amidst
all wants, thy supportation and consolation amidst all troubles, thy meat and
drink, and household stuff, thy Riches and Revenues, this will carry thee
through sufferings, that Faith which makes thee live upon Christ in all
straights, srovvns, crosses, losses, and hardships, this will make thee
undergo the worst of evils for him, who is the chiefest good: It Is not said
that a man shall live by his Wits, Lands, or Labors, but by his Faith, Hab. 2.
4. The Just shall live by Faith.

2. That Faith which is rooted and grounded upon the love of Christ, will
constrain thee to suffer for him: Love made Jacob endure 2. Faith is grounded
upon the love of Christ.
his hard service cheerfully, for his beloved Rachel: Love made Moses wish
himself to be blotted out of the Book of Life: And Paul wished himself Anathema
for the Jews; none so ready to die for Christ, as the lovesick Spouse: Many
waters cannot quench her love, Cant. 8. 7. Its love to Christ that will make
thee willing to do and suffer any thing for him.

3. If thy Faith can carry thee well through the temptations of 3. Faith
carries through temptations of Prosperity and Adversity. Foelix ille, quem nec
fortuita attollunt, nec adversa deprimu^t. Senec. 4. Faith keeps up the heart
in the use of means.
prosperity, it is probable that it will carry thee through the trial of
Adversity: If Faith will keep thee from swelling in prosperity, it will keep
thee from breaking in adversity. It Is a strong Stomach that will digest much
Honey: It Is a strong Faith that will not be allured by the sweetness, pleasures
and profits of the world: He Is happy whom prosperity lifts not up, nor
adversity breaks.

4. That Faith will make thee suffer, that keeps thy heart up in the use of
good means, even then when all things go against thee: David then most repairs
to the Sanctuary, Psalm. 73 17. Until I went into the Sanctuary of God, I knew
it not, but hereby I understood their end: And see his behavior at Ziglag, 1 Samuel 30. 6. And David was greatly distressed: for the People spoke of stoning of
him, because the soul of all the People was grieved, every man for his sons,
and for his daughters; but David encouraged himself in the Lord his God:
Rabshekah falls a railing, and Hezekiah falls a Praying. Observe well; if Faith
keep you in love to, and frequent Exercise of holy Duties (though as yet you
feel nothing coming in) yet still continue in the practice of them, and dare in
no case sit loose from them, but follow Christ from Ordinance to Ordinance, and
enquire every where after your Beloved, this is that Faith questionless, that
will carry you through sufferings.

5. That Faith which purifies thy Conscience, reforms thy Life, 5. Faith
purifieth the heart.
and resigns thy Will wholly to the will of God, this will make thee suffer for
Christ: Only an holy unfeigned Faith will make thee to suffer: Such a Faith the
Apostle had, which made him not be afraid of the King of Terrors, Phil. 1. 21.
For to me to live is Christ, to die is gain.

That Faith will prove a sound suffering Faith, that will engage thee to
venture soul, estate and body, upon the free grace of God in Jesus Christ: This
will make thee to cast thy burden upon the Lord, and fly to him, as a
Sanctuary, as a refuge from the Storm, and as a shadow from the heat: Examine
whether thou can produce these Symptoms of thy Faith.

The third Use shall be for Exhortation: Be willing to undergo Use 3. For
Exhortation.
any hardship, loss or cross for Jesus Christ. Consider what times you live in,
what contempt is powered out upon those great Ordinances of Divine Institution,
viz. Magistracy and Ministry: Perhaps God intends thee for a Martyr. A few
preparations I conceive seasonable.

1. Make account of suffering: We may fear God is bringing confusion Prepar. 1.
Make account of sufferings.
and desolation upon the Kingdom: If we consider the Ataxies and Anarchy's
thereof, we may take up that complaint, Ezekiel. 19. 14. A fire is gone out of a
rod of her branches, which has devoured her fruit, so that she has no strong
rod to be a Scepter to rule: this is a lamentation, and shall be for a
lamentation. I neither profess my self Statesman, nor Politician; neither do I
intermeddle, out of my own Sphere and Calling, only as a Minister of God; I
counsel you in the Language of the Holy Ghost, Jer. 6. 8. Be thou instructed, O
Jerusalem, l^st my soul depart from thee, lest I make thee desolate, a land not
inhabited. Prepare for troubles and afflictions; for the end of one trouble may
be the beginning of another, as when a man has escaped a Bear, a Lion meets
him; and after he has escaped the Lion, and leans his hand upon the wall, a
Serpent out of the Wall comes and bites him; know then, that you are
fore-appointed unto sufferings; so says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 3. That no
man may be moved by these afflictions; for your selves know that we are
appointed thereunto: Praecogitati mali, mollior ictus: Xeno suffering
Shipwreck, said, Jam didici Philosophari, By our sufferings let us learn to be
better Christians.

The second preparative, is to get a self-denying spirit, it is self Prepar. 2.
Get a self-denying spirit.
that makes us shye of the Cross, self must be first denied; Several selfs
must be denied; selfe-opinion, selfe-counsels, selferighteousness,
self-excellencies, self-will, self-comforts, self^ends: All these selves must
be denied for Jesus Christ; let it suffice only to mention these at present. I
proceed to another Preparative: And that,

3. Is to set upon the practice of Mortification: The Apostle protests
Prepar. 3. Set upon the practice of Mortification.
that he dies daily, 1 Cor. 15. 31. I protest, by your rejoicing, which I have
in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. Strive to get thy corruptions mortified,
thy ill humors purged, thy affections crucified, thy filthy garments took away,
and so thou will be better prepared to suffer: A great power must be given thee
from above, over thy corruptions, before thou can grapple with a suffering.
Violent Storms and Thunder clear the air, so strong afflictions clear the heart
by them; we are, as it were, by them powered from vessel to vessel: Read Jer.
48. 11. Moab has been at ease from his youth, and he has settled on his lees,
and has been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither has he gone into
captivity; therefore his taste remained in him, and his sent is not changed:
Hereby the ill savor and distemper of our heart comes to be took away: Every
affliction does, as it were, preach to us a Sermon of Mortification: An
unmortified man, and an unsanctified heart, will never suffer.

4. The last preparative, is still to bear in mind the sufferings of Prepar.
4. Bear in mind the suffering of the Lord Jesus.
our Lord Jesus. Consider his innocence, meekness and humility, often keep in
mind the dying of Christ, an exact pattern for our imitation: Let not the
Disciple expect to be above the Master: The ornament of Christ's Livery is
persecution. But I proceed to another Use, which

Is for direction: I shall only direct in two particular cases. Use 4. For
direction. Q. 1. When have we a call for suffering?


1. When have we call to suffer? 2. When we have a call, how must we behave our
selves in suffering?

For the first of these: In this case I conceive we have a clear call.

1. When we have no warrant for active obedience: So the three A. 1. When we
have no warrant for our active obedience.
Children made choice of a hot Furnace, rather then they would worship
Nebuchadnezzars Image, Dan. 3. 21. Then these men were bound in their coats,
their hosen, and their hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the
midst of the fiery furnace. So Daniel made choice of the Lions Den, rather then
he would obey an ungodly command, Dan. 6. 16. Then the King commanded, and they
brought Daniel, and cast him into the den of ly^ns: The rule is infallible,
Acts 5. 29. We must obey God, rather then man. The Martyrs chose rather to
embrace the flames, then to worship a breaden God of the Papists devising; we
must rather suffer the greatest punishments, then wound our consciences with
the least sin.

2, When it comes to this Dilemma, that either thou must suffer, 2. When either
we must suffer, or Gods glory must suffer.
or else Gods glory must suffer, then thou must determine to suffer any thing,
rather then Gods glory should suffer, rather then Religion should lie at stake,
or the Gospel lie a bleeding: We must have a tender care of Gods glory, we must
not be afraid to be good, we must not be ashamed of Christ; dispossess then
this dumb devil, that makes thee silent, when Gods glory suffers.

If God have given thee suffering graces, as faith, love, zeal, and 3. When God
has given thee suffering Graces.
patience, and a brave heroical spirit, assure thy self they are not given in
vain, to be buried in a napkin, but for duty and employment. If God have given
thee a Martyrs courage, thou must endure a Martyrs trial: When God calls thee,
he intends thee for a Soldier, but its to fight his battles.

The second Case is, how we must suffer? least we spoil a good duty in the
miscarriage, I will leave with you a few rules. Q. 2. How must we suffer? A. 1.
We must suffer as Saints.


1. In suffering, be sure that you suffer as Saints, and not as evil doers,
Matthew. 5. 10, 11, 12. Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness
sake, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven: Blessed are ye, when men shall
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you
falsely, for my names sake: Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your
reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you:
And says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for
conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully; for what glory is it,
if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when
ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with
God.

2. Suffer prudently, Matthew. 10. 16. Behold, I send you forth as 2. Suffer
prudently.
sheep in the midst of wolves; be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless
as doves: Wisdom and innocence are joined together: Wisdom is a necessary
ingredient in suffering: When men rashly bring evils upon themselves, they
loose the glory of their sufferings: And when men suffer, and are boisterous,
clamoring, and reviling, and reproaching such and such instruments, these do
much discredit their suffering.

3. Christians must suffer believingly: Faith acts, though the vision 3. Suffer
believingly.
be dark, Faith approximates a promise, and amidst Euroclydons storms and
tempests, can say, Nubecula est cito transitura.

4. Suffer patiently: By patience possess thy soul, Heb. 10. 36. 4. Suffer
patiently.
For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye
might receive the promise. Moral men have had great patienco: Do thou discover
more patience that art a true Believer, say with good old Ely, It is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good; and with David, Psalm 39. 9. I was dumb, I
opened not my mouth, because thou did it; and with Hezekiah, Isa. 39. 8. Good
is the word of the Lord, which thou have spoken; he said moreover, for there
shall be peace and truth in my days.

5. Suffer joyfully, (...), Romans 5. 3. and James 1. 2. My 5. Suffer joyfully.
Brethren, count it all joy, when you fall into diverse temptations: The Apostle
mentions this to their joy, Heb. 10. 34. For ye had compassion of me in my
bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves
that you have in heaven a better and an enduring substance: So did the
Apostles, Acts 5. 41. and they departed from the presence of the council,
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name.

6. Suffer profitably; labor to profit by the rod, to get corruption 6. Suffer
profitably.
purged out, and grace wrought in: Labor to suck sweetness (as the Be does)
out of bitter herbs, and to eat honey out of the carcass af a Lion: A wise man
will gain by every dispensation of providence.

The fifth and last Use, in one word, is for Consolation: Many promises Use 5.
For Consolation.
are made to them, and they shall get the performance of them, Romans 8. 17. And
if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ; if so be
that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together, Matthew. 19. 29.
And every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names sake, shall receive an
hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. Luke 22. 28, 29. Ye are they
which have continued with me in my temptations, and I appoint unto you a
kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me: Let them comfort themselves with
these four Considerations.

1. Their sufferings are for a moment only, but their reward is Consid. 1.
Sufferings are for a moment.
eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17. For which cause we faint not, but though our
outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day: For our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding. and
eternal weight of glory.

2. Their sufferings are few, but there are many Mansions in Heaven. Consid. 2.
Their sufferings are few. Consid. 3. Their sufferings are sanctified.


3. Their sufferings are sanctified, and sweetened by God, their Prison is their
Palace, their Chain their Glory, their Dungeon their Paradise.

4. In Heaven there is no more suffering, all tears shall be wiped away from
their eyes, and when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of God,
they shall rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

The dark Vision. Unfolded on the Monthly Fast Day,
upon Hab. 2. v. 3. For the vision is yet for an appointed time; but at the
end, it shall speak and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will
surely come, it will not tarry.


THe Prophet Habakkuk was one of the last Prophets Sermon 6. At St. Mary's
Oxon. Jan. 31. 1648
that Prophesied before the Captivity: He lived in sad troublesome times, even
days of darkness and gloominess, and full of darkness: And no wonder, because
they were exceeding evil, by reason of varieties of sins and abominations. The
Prophecy is Dialogue-wise, consisting of Expostulations and Answers.

1. You have an Expostulation to the Lord against the extreme 1. An
Expostulation.
wickedness of the Jews, chapter 1, 2, 3. O Lord, How long shall I cry, and thou will not hear? even cry out unto th^e ^f violence, and thou will not hear? Why
do thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance? for spoiling and
violence are before me, and there are that raise up strife and contention.

2ly. You have the Lords answer, threatening great calamities to 2. The Lords
Answer.
the Jews, by the cruel oppressive Caldeans, ver. 5, 6, to the 11th inclusive:
Behold ye among the heathen, and regard and wonder marvellously: for I will
work a work in your days which ye shall not believe, though it be told you. For
lo, I raise up the Caldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, which shall march
through the breadth of the land, to possess the dwelling places that are not
theirs. They are terrible and dreadful: their judgment and their dignity shall
proceed of themselves. Their horses also are swifter than the Leopards, and are
more fierce then the evening wolves, and their horsemen shall spread
themselves, and come from far, they shall fly as the eagle that hastes to
eat: They shall come all for violence, their faces shall sup up the cast wind,
and they shall gather the captivity as the sand, And they shall scoff at the
Kings, and the Princes shall be a scorn unto them; they shall divide every
strong hold: for they shall heap dust and take it.

Then thirdly, you have another expostulation to the Lord against the Caldeans
cruelty, ver. 12. to the close of the Chapter. O Lord! thou have ordained them
for judgment: O mighty God! thou have established them for correction. Thou
art of purer eyes then to behold evil, wherefore look thou upon them that
deal treacherously, and hold thy tongu^, when the wicked devoureth the man
that is more righteous then he? And make men as the fishes of the sea. as the
creeping things that have no ruler over them? They take up all of them with the
angle; they catch them in their net, and gather them in their drag: therefore
they rejoice and are glad. Therefore they sacrifice to their net, and burn
incense unto their drag, because by them their portion is fat, and their meat
plenteous: Shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare continually to
slay the nations?

Fourthly, You have Gods second Answer, which consists partly of Direction and
Commination.

1. For direction, to wait and live by Faith, and patiently to expect
deliverance.

2. For Commination, threatening revenge and ruin to the Churches enemies, from
ver. 5. to the end of the Chapter.

Lastly, You have an excellent Prayer, penned in the Prophets name, and in the
name of the Church, intimating our duty in dark times, to be more frequently
upon our knees, and more vehement in Prayer for the Churches deliverance. Thus
in brief you have the scope of this Prophesy set forth unto you.

Now to make way to my Text: From the precedent words in this Chapter, you
find the Prophet upon his warch. Notwithstanding the enemies of the Church are
in the float of Prosperity, and the Church in the ebb of Adversity, yet he
questions not Gods vigilant eye of Providence over his People: He therefore
gets out of the crowd, and separates himself from the multitude, and retires
himself from the hurry of earthly intanglements. As Watchmen get themselves
into some high Turret, or fenced Castle, to espy Passengers at a distance; so
does the Prophet get his thoughts highly raised, and gets himself up into a
high place, remote from all intercourse with, and interruptions from the world.
If with Judicious Calvin, we weigh the reason of the Metaphor, we shall know
that this Tower Speculam intellig^mus esse recessum m^ntis, ubi nos subdu^imus
a mundo. Calv. in Loc. (...). Ver. 70.
is a recess of the mind; wherein we withdraw our selves from the world: I
will get me upon my rock, so the Septuagint: There Is safety alone to be found
in God: He Is the Rock of Ages, an impregnable Tower: And what^s his intention?

1. He waited to see what God would say to him: As if he should say, It Is only
the word from God that can comfort me, that alone will abundantly make amends
for all my watching, therefore I Will still remain Sentinel: Though I be not
suddenly relieved, yet I Will not desert my station: Though as yet there be no
appearance of comfort, yet I know that it is my duty to tarry til it come: I am
resolved to wait Gods leisure: I will wait for a word of comfort: It Is worth
waiting for it: I Will wait quietly for it, and when it comes, I will yield ready
obedience thereunto.

2. He waited to see what he should say unto God: What shall I answer, when I
am reproved? When men and devils reprove me, and belch out calumnies against
me, then I shall bear up against all: I have armor of proof to bear off all
their reproofs: Though they rebuke me never so much, and insult over me, yet
now having heard what God says unto me, I am armed Cap-a-pee against them all.

Hence, 1. Learn our duty, to wait upon God with a quiet spirit, whatever
reproofs or oppositions we may meet withal from men or Devils.

And secondly, To set an high estimate upon the word of God, and stick close to
it as the rule: No matter what men say against thee, if God be for thee.

And thirdly, Not to follow any devised way of man, but to make the Word of God
the Umpire, guide, rule of thy life.

And lastly, Though God speak not presently, we must not be hasty, but wait his
time: For when we wait for an answer, then are we put in a capacity to receive
it. The Prophet waited for an Answer; and an Answer he obtains, ver. 2. And the
Lord answered and said, Write the vision, and make it plain upon Tables, that
he may run that reads it. Note how opportunely God answers the Prophet upon
his watch. An Angel revealed the welcome news of a Savior to the Shepherds,
keeping their flocks by night. And a Vision is revealed to the watching
Prophet: And because the Vision was principally for public use and
edification, it was to be writ in legible Characters, even Capital Letters,
that any one might read it in transitu, and not stop.

Q. But when shall the Vision come to pass, might some say, When will it come?
Oh! it is a long time a coming, and hope deferred makes the heart sick. The
Caldeans may quite ruin our nation: We may fall every one of us by the hand of
the enemy, before this Vision may be accomplished: Every minute is long, When?
Oh when will the Vision be performed?

A. To such impatient querulous Speeches, I oppose the reason or strong ground
of encouragement from my Text, For the Vision is yet for an appointed time, etc.

Which words contains a Prophetical Promise, encouraging, and a Text divided.
special duty prescribed.

As first, For the Prophetical Promise.

1. You have set forth the matter of it, A vision.

2. The limitation thereof, for an appointed time.

3. The truth of it, it shall not lie.

4. The ingemination for the certainty, it shall speak, it will surely come, it
will not tarry.

2. For the duty: It Is set in opposition to hastiness of Spirit, Wait for it.

The words need a Paraphrase: Let Us review them apart.

Q. 1. It shall be asked, What Is meant by Vision?

A. You know, God spoke at sundry times, and in diverse manners (...), Heb. 1. 1.
in times past to the Fathers by the Prophets: Sometimes by dreams, other times
by Urim and Visions; sometimes viva voce, to the Fathers of old; to us by his
Son, voce scripta, in his written Word; so that Dreams, Visions, and
Revelations cease, which were extraordinary, and only pro tempore: We are to
keep close to the written Word, and take heed of being wise above what is
written.

By the Vision, some understand the Administration of the Gospel of Christ, and
his glorious Appearances: But Calvin, whom I follow (...).
(as much as any Interpreter since the Apostles times) by Vision understands
Admonition and Instruction to the People of God: And though this may be dark,
it shall speak and not lie, not in vain, (...). Numb. 23. 19.
so the 70. Not an (...) of the Word of God shall fail. God is the God of
eternal Truth. Mercenary Balaam gives this true attestation: God is not a man,
that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent: Has he
said, and shall he not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good?
God does not delay his people, on purpose to deceive them, and frustrate their
expectations, but to exercise their faith and patience, and to prepare them for
the better reception and entertainment of a mercy when it comes.

Q. 2. But secondly, Why is it said, it is yet for an appointed time?

A. 1. To show that it is in the power of God alone to prefix a time: He
created time, and limits time and seasons according to his pleasure: He sets
bounds and periods to all Kingdoms, Nations, Languages.

2. And secondly, For a Caveat to us to beware of limiting God to our times and
seasons.

3. To stop our running, not to make more haste then good speed, but to wait
upon God in his own way, who will accomplish his Vision in his own time, for
his own glory.

Q. 3. What Is meant by waiting here?

A. Be silent, and murmur not, because the Vision seems to linger: Though sense
fails, yet let not Faith fail: It Is the nature of Faith to wait for the
execution of a promise, though it be long a coming: Faith has a Prophetical
virtue to see a Promise a great way off, and a Magnetical virtue to draw it
near to it. So that if the Question be moved to a Believer, What will thou do
in these cloudy days? How will thou behave thy self amidst these dark passages
of Providence? His answer is, I Will hope against hope, wait with Faith and
Patience, and adhere unto the Word of God, and am resolved not to let go my
confidence.

However works of Providence may seem cross, yet I Will depend upon the truth and
faithfulness of God, I will wait and believe; though sense be non-pluss'd, and
I can see no reason why I should wait on the Lord any longer. And here is the
acting of Faith indeed in a true Believer, who resolves, I will trust my God,
depend upon his Word, stay upon his Promises, rely upon his Attributes: Though
he kill me, yet I will trust in him, as Job resolved.

Q. 4. Lastly, Here seems to be a contradiction, though it tarry, it Job 13.
15. Argumentum ad hominem and creaturas, non ad Deum and creatorem.
will not tarry: How can these be reconciled?

A. This is an Argument to Men and Creatures, and not to God and Creator:
There Is no tarrying in God: Time past, present, and to come, are all one in
him: A thousand years in his sight, are but as yesterday. We are then to
distinguish between the Decree and the Mora resertur ad sestinationem nostram.
Caeterum si respicimus ad Dei co^silium nunquam moram facit. Calv. in Loc.
Execution thereof.

The Decree tarries not, nor seems to tarry: But according to the execution of
the Decree, as it falls under our apprehensions and manifestations, it may seem
to stay and linger: There is then no tarrying in God, but there is in the
Creature. And though flesh and blood cannot apprehend it, yet in tarrying God
makes haste.

You have here represented what Faith can do: David told Achish, when he was
going to Battle, Thou shall see what thy servant can do: Behold here what
Faith through the strength of God can do. Faith meets with many Obstructions,
and many Repulses, yet it will fall on again: Faith meets with many delays, yet
it is not querulous, it waits, it stays at the Fathers door, it will not be
driven away. A faithful soul believes God upon his word. God says, The Vision
shall come; the Believer says, I have enough, I Will here cast anchor, it is good
being here. The Promise is my strong hold, like Sampsons Locks, here my great
strength lies, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. The Decree and
Counsel of God never delays. God knows every minute of time, and gives a quick
dispatch unto his work. Faith believes it, though sense cannot apprehend it,
though (as I intimated before) the execution of the Decree, according to
particular effects and operations, may seem to delay. Here then is the trial of
our Faith and patience, and here is a word most seasonable to Preach and
practice in these days of Jacob's troubles, when the Vision or the word seems
to be dark and to tarry. I shall wind up all into one bottom, and from the
scope and substance of them lay this one entire Doctrine for the foundation of
my Discourse.

That in troublesome times, when the vision is dark, and seems to tarry, then
in a peculiar manner we should wait upon God for the accomplishment thereof.

For proof hereof, we have copious testimonies of Scripture: I Isa. 8. 17. Isa.
26. 8. 18.
will wait upon the Lord, that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and
will look for him. In the way of thy Judgments, O Lord, have we waited on
thee: the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. We
have been with child, we have been in pain, we have, as it were, brought forth
wind* we have not wrought any deliverance in the M^cah. 7. 7.
earth. Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my
salvation, my God will hear me.

For the Methodical enlargement of this precious truth, I shall Method
propounded.
propound these Heads of Discourse, which shall constitute my ensuing
Meditations.

1. To explicate the nature of waiting, what it is to wait upon God.

2. To illustrate the duty from the practices of the Saints in the like case.

3. To demonstrate the truth of the Point from convincing rational arguments.

And fourthly, To reduce all to point of practice by way of useful application.

I resume the first Head propounded, to open the nature of Faith, 1. What it is
to wait upon God.
and waiting on God.

The inquiry is, What it is to wait upon God?

The Answer which I shall give to this particular Inquiry, shall be comprised
in this description: Waiting is a cheerful submission of our wills to the will
of God, whereby the soul rests in hope, exercises faith, expects with
patience, and improves a diligent use of means for the obtaining of a good end:
This description is made of these five following Ingredients.

1. It Is the Christians duty to wait cheerfully: Swine roar when they 1. We
must wait cheerfully.
have rings put into their noses; Bulls and Bears cry out and roar when they
are baited; and Slaves howl when they are beaten with rods: But Christians are
of another temper. Good children kiss the rod that beats them: Not only so
(says Paul) but we glory in tribulations, knowing that tribulation works
patience: And (says Romans 5. 3. (...).
James) the trying of your faith works patience. Likewise the Apostle
mentions, For ye had compassion of me in my b^nds, and took joyfully James 1.
2. (...), Heb. 10. 34.
the^ spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves that ye have in heaven a
better and an enduring substance: Murmuring, repining, and reviling Language
must not be heard amongst Christians. God loves a cheerful giver, and a
cheerful waiter too. Hannah felt some spiritual illapse, something coming in as
an answer to her Prayers, and her countenance was cheared up, she was no more
sad: And she said, Let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight; so the woman
went her way, 1 Samuel 1. 18.
and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad. You read of the singular
cheerfulness of the Martyrs, how they kissed the stake, wellcom'd Fire and
Faggot, embraced the Flames: What a sweet cheerful frame of spirit did they
discover amidst their greatest sufferings, and were no whit daunted by the
utmost cruelty of their Adversaries? It would ravish a Christians heart to
peruse the Letters of Mr. Bradford that holy Martyr, then whom (as I apprehend)
never man wrote more sweetly, and manifested more cheerfulness under the Rod.
To rush upon trouble, to be forced to sufferings, and to say, I will bear it,
because I cannot otherwise choose; and to murmur and rail against such and such
Instruments, this is not thank-worthy: But to make a virtue of necessity, and
to bear thy Cross cheerfully, to abound in inward consolations amidst outward
troubles; to have thine heart enlarged, though thy body be Imprisoned; to smile
in affliction, because God smiles upon thee, even when he beats thee, this is
the glory of thy suffering: And whenever God hides his face from us, and
clouds his gracious countenance, let us with all alacrity wait upon him, and
learn to bear cheerfully his dealings with us.

A second ingredient is, That it is the duty of Believers to wait submissively
2. We must wait submissively.
upon God: It Is not enough to say, I must submit, I must be content; but to
say, I will submit, I will be content, that argues a submissive spirit, and
not the other: Shall a Zeno say, after he Jam didici philosophari. Zeno.
had suffered Shipwreck, Now I have learned to be a Philosopher? Shall an
Anaxagoras say, after the news of the death of his Son, Now I Scio me genuisse
mortalem. Anaxag. 1 Samuel 3. 18. 2 Kings 20. 19.
know I begat a mortal Son? And shall Christians presume to contest with God,
and grudge against their Maker? We should say with Eli, It is the Lord, let him
do what seems him good: with Hezekiah, Then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah, Good
is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken; and with Job, The Lord gives,
and the Lord takes away, Blessed Job 1. 21. Levit. 10. 3.
be the name of the Lord. Imitate Aaron; Moses said unto Aaron, this is it that
the Lord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and
before all the people I will be glorified; and Aaron held his peace. David
professed, I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because Psalm. 39. 9. Amos 5. 13.
thou did it. And remember the counsel of the Prophet, Therefore the prudent
shall keep silence in that time; for it is an evil time: It Is not meant that we
should be tongue-tyed in the cause of God; for if we speak not when Gods glory
suffers, it is a sign that we have a dumb Devil within us: But true Believers,
which judge truly of calamities, and of their causes, shall in silence, and
with patience worship Gods Justice without any murmuring or scandal. David
falls not a railing at Shimei, he was better instructed, then to render railing
for railing, but he looks at a higher hand, and submits. So when Iliads of
troubles surround thee, and one cross follows upon the neck of another, as one
Wave of the Sea upon another: Oh! do not break forth into cursing and reviling,
but look at the hand of God, and say, Lord, I see thy hand, I desire to know
thy meaning, to be instructed with Ephraim, to smite upon my thigh. and submit
unto thy hand in every thing; and I beseech thee, what I understand not teach
thou me, and wherein I have done amiss, I will do so no more. Job 34. 32. 3. We
must wait patiently.


3. It Is the nature of Faith to wait patiently. This is waiting indeed, when
with a quiet frame of spirit I expect the fulfilling of the Vision, whether it
speak good, or whether it speak evil, I am content, my heart is of David's
temper; My heart is fixed, (O God) my Psalm. 57. 7.
heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise: The Husbandman waits for the
Harvest; so must we wait patiently for the Harvest; of deliverance. Delay is
the sickness of the soul; Patience is the cure of it: Patience is the very soul
and life of waiting: Waiting without patience, is enraged sury. We must bear
Gods anger patiently, I will Micah 7. 9.
bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he
plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: He will bring me forth to the
light, and I shall behold his righteousness: We must wait for that we see not.
If we (says the Apostle) hope for that we see not, then Romans 8. 25.
do we with patience wait for it: Hence are we commanded, In your patience Luke
21. 19.
p^ssess ye your souls. There Is a Philosopher that has this expression; if the
Gods would grant me my desire, and bid me ask what I would have, I would ask of
them this thing, That I might have the spirit of Socrates, such a composed
spirit as he had: It Is observed of him, and of Cato likewise, that they were in
such a quiet composed sedate frame, that they never changed their countenances
upon any thing that. befell them. This should stir up Christians to beg of God,
the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit (whereof the Apostle 1. Pet. 3. 4.
speaks) which is in the sight of God of great price: Pray hard for the
excellency of a quiet composed spirit: Come what will, if thou be armed with
patience, it will ward off the blow.

4 It Is the duty and property of waiting Christians, to exercise Faith 4. We
must exercise faith upon the Divine Promises.
on the Divine Promises. A Heathen, out of a Cynical stupidity, and by Moral
Documents, may have patience and pass by injuries; but he knows not how to
believe against sense; he is a stranger to Faith, he discerns no excellency in a
Promise, he cannot live upon a word, he knows not how to rely upon a Crucified
Savior, and live by Faith on the Son of God. But a true Christian waits
believingly, he lays hold upon Jesus Christ by Faith, and lives upon the Divine
Promises, and applys them by Faith unto his particular condition. Faith gives
the soul a firm bottom to stand on, a strong foundation to build on, which is
the Word of God: Faith (says the Apostle) is Heb. 11. 1. Psalm. 27. 13.
the substance of things hoped for, and the evid^nce of things not seen. There
are two great words, (...). I had fainted (says David) unless I had beli^ved
to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of Romans 8. 28.
the living. A Believer knows, that all things shall work together for good, to
them that love God, to them who are called according to his purpose: Mal. 4. 2.
Such Scriptures are his strong Rock: But unto you that fear my nam^, shall the
Son of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth,
and grow up as calves of the s^all: For a small moment Isa. 54. 7.
have I forsak^n thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. A Believer
Matthew. 28. 20.
stays himself upon a promise, Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of
the world. He fears not the opposition of men and devils against the Ministry;
for he knows Christ will uphold them, and vindicate their quarrel. A Believer
knows, that the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the back of the
righteous; therefore he waits till God take it off. He knows that deliverance
shall come to the Church, that the Lord will build up Zion, and appear in his
glory, that all the enemies shall come and worship before the Churches feet,
and the shaking of Nations is a harbinger to deliverance: Peruse Hag. 2. 7.
that great Promise, I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations
shall come, and I will fill with glory this house, says the Lord of hosts. A
Believer knows that God can bring light out of darkness, order out of a Chaos,
strike a straight line with a crooked stick, make the wrath of man turn to his
praise, and restrain the remainder thereof. By Faith Stephen saw Christ, when
the stones were about his ears: And by Faith Job saw a Redeemer upon the
Dunghill: And by Faith Moses saw him that was invisible, amidst Reproaches
and Sufferings: Faith discerns a Sunshine approaching, amidst cloudyness and
dismal darkness: Whatever makes against a Believer in a carnal apprehension,
the spiritual eye of Faith sees something to make for him: So that a Believer
has double, nay trebble even multiplied hopes for single fears.

It Is the nature of waiting to have Hope for its companion: Waiting ^. We must
wait and hope. Lam. 3. 26. Heb. 6. 19.
and Hope are conjoined: It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly
wait for the salvation of the Lord. Hope is the Anchor of the soul, both sure
and steadfast, and which enters into that within the vail: When thou art
tossed in the troublesome waves of the World, cast anchor, and let hope support
and stay thy spirit: Were it not for hope, the heart would break, in those days
of confusion and misery, where there are so many sad thoughts and searchings of
heart for the afflictions of Joseph, and divisions of Reuben; yet we are not
without hope: Let Us apply that of Ezrah amidst all their sorrows and
perplexity, Shecaniah the son of J^hiel, one of the sons of Elam, answered and
said unto Ezra, We have trespassed against our God, Ezra 10. 2.
and have taken strange wives, of the people of the Land; yet now there is h^pe
in Israel concerning this thing. They fall a making a Covenant, and O that we
would bewail the breach of Covenant! and resolve to keep that inviolable which
we made in a day of distress, and for which there will be a day of account! we
are a sinking kingdom, and cry out, Lord save us, or else we perish: Hope even
holds us up by the chin. We are just as the Israelites coming out of Egypt, in
straights and intanglements, amidst Rocks: When they were in Egypt, O what
servitude did they meet withal, and cruel bondage! Now they come out of Egypt,
they meet with difficulties, the Enemy overtakes them at Pihahiroth, between
Migdol and the Sea over against Baal-zephon: Pihahiroth, was a Cave hemmed in
with Rocks: Migdol signifies a Cavernac rumbus inclusae.
Tower: Baal was their God; and Zephon signifies ruri speculatus est: And see
what counsel is given, Moses said unto the people, Exodus 14. 13.
fear ye not, stand still and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will show
to you to day: For the Egyptians, whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them
again no more for ever. We are just as Jehoshaphat was, in great straits and
know not what to do; but his practice must be ours, to fall a praying, O Lord
our God, will thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great
company that comes against us, neither 2 Chronicles. 20. 12.
know we what to do, but our eyes are unto thee: Hold out hope, and thus it
will argue and plead, The Lord has delivered us from our enemies, we hope he
will not suffer us to destroy one another; The Lord has done us much good, and
wrought miraculous salvations for us; we trust he will not now destroy us,
after he has done us so much good. Join Faith, Hope, and Patience, and thou will then wait to good purpose: Sense fails, contrivances are disappointed,
Faith bids dispute not, but believe: But Faith grows weak, then Hope
interposeth; its good to hope in God: Happy is that man whose hope the Lord is:
Art thou a tottering, ready to fall? hope underprops thee: Art thou ready to
sink? hope finds out a twig to lay hold on: but hope deferred, makes the heart
sick. Then patience steps in and argues thus, Art thou a Believer? consider, A
Believer makes not haste: Have thou hope? thou must wait for that thou see
not, quiet thy spirit and vvait upon God, cast thy self upon his providence,
stay upon his wisdom, roll thy self upon his love, and vvait quietly for his
salvation: He that vvaits cheerfully, submissively, and patiently with Faith
and Hope, is put into a ready capacity of receiving a gracious answer from
God. Thus did the people of God, they waited upon a word of Promise, and relied
upon God for the fulfilling of the vision, and they enjoyed the accomplishment
thereof, which is the second Head propounded, viz. the illustration of the
Point, from the practice and example of the Saints in former times. 2. The
Doctrine illustrated by examples.


2. I Will first instance in the promises made to Abraham long before they were
fulfilled. There were two Promises made to Abraham.

1. That the Country which God would give him, should flow with Milk and
Honey.

2. That his Seed should be as the Stars of Heaven: Here Is Gods Word; but his
works seem strange, to run quite cross unto it. This would appear to a carnal
eye to be a very dark vision: Abraham was commanded out of his own Country:
Now the Lord said unto Genesis 12. 1.
Abraham, Get thee from out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy
fathers house, unto a land that I will show thee. As soon as he came into
Canaan there was a Famine, he was ready to starve: There was a famine in the
land, and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn Genesis 12. 10.
there, for the famine was grievous in the land. This Promise was not made good
till the Israelites were seated in Canaan many hundred years after: and that
his Seed should be as the stars of Heaven; this was strangely brought about,
against all humane apprehension, as by the sequel may appear: for Abraham
stayed many years before he had Isaac, the child of the promise, and Isaac
stayed 20 years before he had a child; and God bad Abraham kill Isaac. These
works seem directly opposite to the Word of God. But we must not lay too much
weight upon the works and thwarting passages of Gods providence, but depend
wholly upon the word: What God promised unto Abraham, was fulfilled every
tittle in its season. So the vision was dark to the Children of Israel. Joseph
told them that God would surely visit them, and bring them out of that Land;
yet they must wait the limited time: And it came to pass, at the end of the
Exodus 12. 41.
four hundred and thirty years, even the self-same day it came to pass that all
the hosts of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt. Hannah, Rachel,
Rebeckah, waited Gods time; and Sarah waited for a child, though against the
ordinary course of nature: God had promised, and they must vvait upon his Word.
Seventy years were appointed for the Babyl^nish Captivity: The Jews must vvait
till the expiration, then, and not till then, came deliverance. The impotent
Cripple waited 38 years, at the Pool of Bethesdah, then Christ came and put him
into the water and healed him. The daughter of Abraham waited 18 years, then
Christ loosned her from her infirmity. The Woman waited 12 years on Physicians,
who had the bloody Issue, and they left her uncured, and poverty to boot; when
that time was expired, Christ came and healed her. Ten days tribulation were
appointed to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna. Three days Plague to David. God
in wisdom has set certain periods of time, known only to himself, all which
while he will exercise the Faith and Patience of his children; at the end
whereof, and not before, he will relieve and comfort them. What time God has
set for Englands deliverance, is a grand secret, locked up in his Cabinet: And
whether our eyes may see a right settlement, a Peace established upon the basis
of Truth, no man can determine: We can say no more, then Psalm. 74. 9.
with the Psalmist, We see not our signs, there is no more any Prophet, neither
is there among us that knows how long: Yet let us fall upon our knees, and be
earnest in Prayer for Zion: O that the salvation of Israel were come out of
Zion! When the Lord brings back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall
rejoice, and Israel shall be glad. Let us leave off murmuring and fall a
praying, let us take off from anxious cares, and add more fervency to our
Prayers; let us not be so saucy, as to prescribe times and seasons unto God, not
to limit the holy one of Israel to times or means. It Is a received rule of
Augustine, Let him, Eligal opportunitation, qui dat miscricordiam. Aug.
who shows mercy, choose his season.

We have seen this duty tracked by the footsteps of Gods people, let us go
and do likewise.

In the third place, to give in the demonstration of the Point, I shall 3. The
Doctrine demonstrated.
draw a threefold Argument, from the necessity, equity, and utility of the duty.

1. From the necessity of the duty: Ye have need of patience, that Arg. 1.
Drawn from the necessity of this duty.
after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise: And that is
necessary, Necessitate praecepti and medii. For Precepts, the Psalmist exhorts,
R^st in the Lord, and wait patiently for him, fre^ not thy self because of him,
who prospers in his way, because of the man, who brings wicked d^vices to
pass. For evil deers shall be cut off: but th^se that wait upon the Lord, they
shall inherit the earth. And the Prophet Zephaniah exhorts, Therefore wait ye
upon me (says the Lord) until Zeph. 3. 8.
the day that I rise up unto the prey: for my determination is to gather the
nations, that I may assemble the Kingdoms, to p^ur upon them mine indignati^n,
even all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of
my jealousy. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and Psalm. 27. 14.
he shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord. Solomon counsels,
Say not thou, I will recompense evil, but wait on the Lord, and he Prove. 20. 22.
shall save thee. David lays a strict charge upon himself, My soul, Psalm. 62.
5.
wait thou only upon God: for my expectation is from him. David could have
taken opportunity to have revenged himself on Saul, he had him (as we say) at
his mercy, but he waited Gods time: The Lord 1 Samuel 24. 23. 1 Samuel 26. 23.
(says he) render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulness: for
the Lord delivered thee into my hand to day: but I would not stretch forth mine
hand against the Lords anointed. David, though he had an opportunity, yet
considered Saul was Gods anointed, therefore he would not embrue his hands in
his blood.

2. Necessitate m^dii: For waiting is an instrumental means, Gods way of
obtaining a grant of the thing desired: Simeon waited for the consolation of
Israel, And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, Luke 2. 25.
whose name was Simeon, and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the
consolation of Israel, and the holy Gh^st was upon him: The sons of God waited
for their adoption: And not only they, but our selves Romans 8. 23.
also, which have the first fruits of the spirit: even we our selves groan
within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our
body. And they wait for the coming of Christ, So that ye come behind I Cor. 1.
7.
in no gift, waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Waiting prepares
us for the receiving of a mercy, whereas murmuring, querulous speeches do
indispose us for a mercy. Whineing, struggling, and quarrelling, provoke God to
lash us more; but a quiet composed behavior, an humble submission to the will
of God, is a ready way to obtain the thing desired, even a comfortable fruition
of our expectation. God is most ready to help his people, when their hearts
most long after him; for so runs the Promise, I will pour Isa. 44. 3.
water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my
spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine off-sppring. After the Church
was in pain and travel, and endured many throws and hard labor, in expectation
of deliverance, read the gracious answer, Thy dead men shall live, together
with my dead body shall they arise: awake and sing, ye that awell in dust: for
thy dew is as the dew of herbs, Isa. 26. 19.
and the earth shall cast out the dead.

So that waiting works two things.

1. It prepares us for a mercy, it seasoneth our hearts, and disposes them for
the entertainment thereof, so that we are as Vessels thoroughly seasoned.

2. It sets a higher price and estimate on the mercy when it comes: A mercy
begged by Prayer, waited for with Patience, will, of all others, be the sweetest
to us in the fruition. Hannah had more children after Samuel, but none so
valued as Samuel, the child of her Prayers. Now if deliverance and settlement
to the Kingdom come as an answer of our Prayers, O how welcome will the
deliverance be! It Is a comfortable experience recorded of the Church: And it
shall Isa. 25. 9.
be said in that day, lo, this is our God, we have waited for him and he shall
save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice
in his salvation.

2. The second Argument shall be drawn from the equity of the Argu. 2: Drawn
from the equity of the duty.
duty: It Is all the equity and reason of the World, that we should wait upon
God; we are Creatures, and is it not equal that the Creature should wait upon
the Creator? we are Servants, and should not Servants wait upon their Masters?
Behold, as the eyes of servants Psalm 123. 2:
look unto the hands of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the
hand of her mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he
have mercy upon us. We are children, and should not children wait upon their
Father? These relations intimate the equity of the duty: we say, that
Relations, though they be of least entity, yet they are of greatest efficacy.
Does not the Husbandman wait for the Harvest? Does not the Mother wait for the
time of her deliverance? Does not the Patient wait upon the working of the
Physic? Now God is giving the Kingdom strong Physic; a Purge to some, a Vomit
to others; nay, have we not just cause to fear, that by reason of our Laodicean
luke-warmness, God will vomit us out of his mouth? Let Us wait and see what God
will do; though we know not, yet he knows the reason of his own proceedings.
God made Nebuchadnezzar a scourage to the Jews, and God calls him his servant;
but because Nebuchadnezzar acted his own malice and revenge, God will turn the
wheel upon him. Jehu was made an Instrument to root out Ahabs Family, but
because his heart was naught, he aimed at the Kingdom for himself. God
threatens to avenge the blood of Jezre^l upon the house Hos. 1. 4.
of Jehu. God may raise up one to punish another, and when they have done, God
may find out a scourge to punish the punishers themselves: These are Gods Acts,
his strange Acts, (for so are his judgments:) Isaiah 7. 20.
God will have a razor for that purpose: In the same day shall the Lord shave
with a razour that is hired, namely by them beyond the river, by the king of
Assyria, the head, and the hair of the feet, and it shall also consume the
beard: And notwithstanding greatness of strength and power in the hands of men,
if they mis-imploy it, God can give strength to wounded men, to do great
exploits: For though ye had smitten the Jer. 37. 10.
whole army of the Caldeans that fight against you, and there remained but
wounded men among them; yet should they rise up every man in his tent, and burn
this city with fire: And God can cause the lame to take the prey: Thy tacklings
are loosed, they could not well strengthen their Isa. 33. 23.
mast, they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil
divided, the lame take the prey: Let us leave off murmuring and repining, and
wait to see what God will do with us, and for us: His time is next: He will
bring to pass his own work, his own way, to his own glory.

The third and last Argument I shall name, shall be drawn from Arg. 3. Drawn
from the benefit of waiting. Isa. 40. 31.
the singular benefit and utility of the duty: Art thou weak? wait, and thou
shall receive strength: They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their
strength, they shall mount up on wings, as eagles; they shall run and not be
weary, they shall walk and not faint: Art thou afraid of shame and disgrace,
lest contempt and ignominy be cast upon the Church of God? see what the Prophet
Isaiah says, It is he that sits upon the circle of the earth, and the
inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; Isa. 40. 22, 23.
that stretches out the heaven as a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent
to dwell in, that brings the Princes to nothing, he makes the Judges of the
earth as vanity: Do thou desire Gods blessing? wait and thou shall have it:
And therefore does the Lord wait, that he Isa. 30. 18.
may be gracious unto you; and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have
mercy upon you: For the Lord is a God of judgment; Blessed are all they that
wait for him: God knows when and how to help his Cum duplica^tur lateres venit
Deus. Isa. 3^. 9, 10,
people: In the mount God will be seen: When the Bricks were doubled, then came
God and delivered the Israelites from their Egyptian bondage: The earth
mourns and languisheth, Leban^n is ashamed and hewed down: Sharon is like a
wilderness; and Bashan and Carm^l shake off their fruits. Now will I rise,
says the Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self. When helps
from earth have been cut off, then help came from Heaven. When Abraham was
stretching forth his hand to kill Isaac, then the Angel said, Stay thy hand:
When David was hemmed in on every side, then a way was made for his escape by
the Philistines Invasion: When Paul was a killing, and they were beating of
him, to beat out his life: then came news of an Insurrection in Jerusalem, and
by that diversion Paul was repreived. God has a way of escape for his people
in Fire and Water: When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee,
and through the Isa. 43. 2, 3.
rivers, they shall not over-fl^w thee; when thou walk^st through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: Sometimes they
have their lives for a prey, other times they are made a prey, and suffer in a
common calamity: Yet though the Saints suffer, they have an hiding place: And a
man shall be as an hiding place from Isa 32. 2.
the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as
the shadow of a great rock in a weary land:. They have a Pella, a Zoar
sometimes, where they may securely escape with their lives: yet they have
always a refuge and shelter in the Divine Promises: They have a rock higher
then themselves, from the end of the earth (says the Psalmist) will I cry unto
thee, when my heart is overwhelmed: Psalm 61. 2.
lead me to the rock that is higher then I. It Is an obliged duty to wait upon
the Counsels of God: By waiting, we may look for good success, because we go
Gods way; by murmuring or reviling we cannot look for comfort, because we go
the way of flesh and blood: By patience, the pain and anguish of our fore is
mitigated; by impatience, it corrodes and is enraged.

Thus far of the Doctrinal part: I shall improve all unto four Use 1. For
Terror.
Uses, viz. For Reprehension, Exhortation, Direction, and Consolation.

It breathes forth terror and severe reproof unto the murmuring spirits of
these present times: Never more complaining in our Streets: Oh! we would have
peace upon any terms, when will the Sword be put into the sheath? when shall
the Kingdom be settled? That complaint is frequently taken up: Have thou utterly
rejected Judah? Has thy soul loathed Zion? Why have thou smitten us, and Jer.
14. 1^.
there is no healing for us? we looked for peace, and there is no good, and for
the time of healing, but behold trouble.

For Answer, I expostulate with Jehu, What? Peace? What? Peace with Rome? What?
Peace with Benhadad? What? Peace with falsehood? Peace upon such terms, will
prove but a Body massacring a Soul-murdering Peace: What? Peace with our lusts
and corruptions? Till they be slaughtered, what peace can we expect? Can we
expect a cessation of punishing, before there be a cessation of sinning? Can we
expect peace with men, as long as we continue at War with God? For all those
Monthly Fasts, and days of Humiliation, where is a serious Reformation of our
hearts and lives? You know how hasty Saul was, he forced himself to sacrifice,
and would not stay till Samuel came, it cost him his Kingdom. The Israelites
would not wait Gods time, but were hasty for an encounter with the Amalekites,
and you may see what they got by it, they fell before them, and were
discomfited unto Hormah: Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites that
dwelt in the hill, and smote Numb. 14. 45.
them, and discomfited them even unto Hormah: And what is the ground of this
hastiness of spirit? It Is infidelity, because we believe not God upon his Word;
we are such hot spurs, we outrun Providence, and antidate Deliverance: We go
devised ways, untract paths, according to secret impulses, quite contrary to
the rode of the Word; did we believe the faithfulness of God, That he is
faithful that has promised, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against
his Church; we should possess our selves with patience, and wait quietly for
deliverance: We usually say, that hasty men never want woe. Rash, preproperous,
and preposterous practices, are the ruin of practitioners. An impatient man,
is a gate without an hinge. Janua sine cardine.
What shame is it, for a Christian to be like Hercules furens, or like the
Demoniack (mentioned in the Gospel) rending and tearing himself? An impatient
male-contented person, is Felo de se, his own Executioner: What a weakness was
it in David, so to be overwhelmed in sorrovv for Absalom? and in Jonah, so to
lament the loss of his Gourd? The loss of Revenues, profits in the Trade,
Liberty, Oh how does it stick near a man? But where is the acting of Faith? Now
the just shall live by faith: and if any man draw back, my soul Heb. 10. 38.
shall have no pleasure in him. A true Believer lives by Faith, when Trading
decays, Livelihood and Profit decays. Now let us learn to live by Faith: Though
thou should loose all, there is enough in the Promises to make up all with
Interest, if thou can but make them thine own by particular Application.
Much time is thrown away in passing our censures one upon another, reviling
this or that instrument: I plead not in the least for any, but utterly abhor
any irregular practices or indirect ways; but I press patience and submission
unto Gods will, to look through all instruments and secondary causes unto the
first cause to hear the rod, and who has appointed it: The Lords voice cries
unto the city, and the man of Micah 6 ^.
wisdom shall see thy name: hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it. It Is a
doggish quality to snarle at a stone, and not look at the hand that throws it:
Pray then fervently, and watch against infidelity, and an impatient and
murmuring spirit: The Lord lay them not unto our charge. We might have been in
Canaan long ere this, had we not been murmurers in the Wilderness. I know well
that our condition is so lamentable, that we can neither bear diseases nor
remedies: And complaints find no better entertainment, then in those times
wherein the best of Historians lived, and said in his Presace, That complaints
Querclae ne tum quidem gratae cum sorsan necessariae. Live. Praef.
are not pleasing, no not then when they are necessary. There Is much bitterness
and implacableness upon men's spirits, devouring and calumniating one another:
Such expostulations are rise, where is the promise of his coming? Where Is the
reformation so much spoken of? Where Is the removing of the burdens? letting
the oppressed go free? breaking the bread to the hungry? clothing the naked?
such are peculiar duties for a Fast: Is there not rather fasting for strife and
debate, to smite with the first of wickedness? I aggravate these things no
further, but only let me tell you, as there were (...), so there are (...),
spots in your Fastingdays, Let Us bewail them with tears of blood; let us fast
for our former Fastings, and be humbled for our outside Humiliations, and lay
to heart our negligent services, and deprecate that curse that hangs over our
heads for performing the work of the Lord negligently: The Lord may call us to
an account as justly as he did the Jews, Zech. 7. 5. Did ye at all fast unto
me, even to me?

In the second place I proceed to an Use of Exhortation: Let me Use 2. For
Exhortation.
press home the duty of the Text, to wait for the fulfilling of the Vision in
these concussions and commotions, when men are at their wits end, and wonder
what will be the issue. Oh let us take heed of impatience and murmuring, let us
bevvare of tumultuous murmuring spirits, of tempestuous affections! Though
there be a storm abroad, we should endeavor after a serene quiet spirit at
home. A calmness upon our spirits, will be of singular use for us amidst the
fluctuating condition of the Kingdom. Every one will be ready to ask, What
shall we do? How shall we demean our selves in these dark times? Such
questions as these require an answer, and a word spoken in due season, is like
apples of gold in pictures of silver. I will advise nothing as a Statesman
(that is out of my Sphere) nor as a subtle Politician (for such Policy is the
bane of Religion) but from direct warrant out of the Word of God.

By way of advice, I commend unto your thoughts these ensuing Propositions,
which I take to be Propositions of Eternal Truth.

1. It Is unlawful to do any evil, that the least good may come Prop. 1. It Is
unlawful to do evil, that good may come thereof. Romans 3. 8.
thereof. And not rather (says the Apostle) as we slanderously reported, and
as some affirm that we say, let us do evil, that good may come, whose damnation
is just: God needs not our lies to maintain his cause. This was Rebockah's and
Jacob's fault, for the compassing of a good end, to betake themselves to
indirect means: This is a broken refuge, Isa. 28. 15, 17.
and will fail: Because ye have said, we have made a Covenant with death, and
with hell are we at agreement, when the over flowing scourge shall pass
through, it shall not come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge, and under
falsehood have hid our selves: Therefore, thus says the Lord, Judgment will I
lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall sweep
away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place.
Augustine is resolute, that if it was possible by an officious lie, to compass
the Redemption of the whole World: yet so weighty and universal a good, must be
rather let fall then brought about by the smallesst evil.

2. Another Proposition for confirmation, is, That no good intentions Prop. 2.
Good meanings cannot justify a bad action. 1 Chronicles. 13. 10
and meanings can ever justify the doing of any evil action. Vzzah's
intention was good, but because against the rule he was punished with death: He
invaded the Priests Office, and therefore the Lord smote him dead upon the
place.

3. It Is the duty of Christians to walk by rule, and keep close to Prop. 3. We
must walk by rule. Isa. 8. 20.
it, and that is the written Word of God: To the Law and to the Testimony, if
they speak not according to these, it is because they have no light in them.
Let Us not be a rule to our selves, nor follow extraordinary impulses upon our
spirits and revelations, but bring all to the touchstone: Let Us try all
things, and hold fast that which is good; and let the Scripture be the Umpire,
and let us acquiess altogether in its determinations: As many as walk according
to this rule, peace be on Gal. 6. 16.
them, and mercy, and on the Israel of God: It Is not any rule but this rule. If
an Angel from Heaven Preach any other Doctrine then what is contained in the
Scriptures, let him be accursed. Whatever Seekers, Familists, Enthusiasts, etc.
pretend to live above Ordinances (and so they are indeed, as much above
Ordinances, as a Swine is above a Pearl, which it tramples under feet) I say,
all their Lights, however new, are but Ignes fatui, false Lights, to lead us
into dangerous destructive ways: Let Us therefore, for every action, look unto
the rule, bring every thing to rule, and square all by the infallible rule of
the word of God.

4. It Is the duty of Christians to keep themselves in Gods ways, within Prop.
4. Christians must keep within the compass of their calling. Luke 4. 11.
the compass of their Calling: We can expect a Blessing no further then we have
a Calling for what we do: Vzzah and Vzziah paid dear for their irregular
attempts: Whereupon Satan, an old cunning Sophister, when he tempted Christ,
and urged Scripture: (And in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any
time thou dash thy foot against a stone: for he shall give his angels charge
over thee to keep thee, leaves out what made against him (in all thy ways) for
there was a pair of Stairs to go down:) To precipitate himself down from the
Pinnacle had been the quickest, but it was a destructive way.

5. We must obey God rather then man: When it comes to this Dilemma, either you
must displease God, and wound Conscience, or Prop. 5. We must obey God rather
then man.
displease a potent enemy; then thy resolution must be with the Apostle, rather
to obey God then man. When it comes to this pass, thou must either choose
affliction or sin; thy resolution must be to choose the greatest affliction in
the World, rather then to wound thy Conscience with the least sin. See the
practice of the three Children, they submitted themselves to the rage of the
King, and the Fiery Furnace, rather then they would worship his Image. And
Daniel Dan. 3. 21. Dan, 6. 16.
was cast into the Lions Den, for not obeying the Kings Decree. Some
State-Polititians might have insinuated themselves into Daniell, and persuaded
him to remit and abate a little of his Devotions, though for 30 days; but
sinful compliance is abominable, though but for a moment. Daniel prayed three
times, as he was wont, notwitstanding all bloody Edicts against him. Be then
well resolved: Is this thing I am commanded to do, a sin or no? Is it agreeable
to the rule of the Word? Can I do it with a good conscience? Thus Catechize thy
self before thou venturest upon any thing: And do nothing doubtfully, for what
is done doubtfully is not done believingly; and whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin.

6. We may not follow a multitude to do evil: For though hand Prop. 6. We may
not follow a multitude to do evil. Exodus 23. 2. (...). Pythag.
join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished: Multitudes, power, fear of
men, cannot be a sufficient Apology for me: Men's examples are no warrant for my
imitation, for I am to walk by the rule of the Word, not by the examples of
men. Pythagoras has a saying, Walk not in the rode. Beasts follow the heard,
Non qua cundum est: sed qua itur, (as Seneca observes) Those that are
Companions of Fools, shall be destroyed. Let us not bless our selves, because
we walk in beaten rodes, and follow multitudes, as if this was our
commendation. Eliah was better alone, then if he had joined with Baals Priests.
Luther was better alone, then if he had joined Unus homo solus totius orbis
impetum sustinuit.
with the Popish party. It Is said of Luther, That he was the man alone that
bore the violence of the whole world. Athanasius was better alone, then if he
had joined with a multitude of blasphemous Arrians. And Epaminondas was better
alone, then if he had joined Praestat solus sapere quam cum multis insanire.
Epamin. Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus.
with multitudes of drunken Thebans: The rule that he gives, was, It Is better
to be wise alone, then mad with a multitude. If thou be singular in right
ways, thou art not alone: Never less alone, then when alone; for thou have a
good God, a good Cause, and a good Conscience, and he that has these, has the
best Company.

7. Christians ought to believe God upon his word: All his Promises Prop. 7. We
must believe God upon his Word. 2 Cor. 1. 20.
in Christ are Yea, and Amen. Not the least tittle of the Word of God shall
fail: The Lord would suffer none of Samuels, much less will he suffer any of
his own words to fall to the ground: All the promises for the building of Zion
shall be accomplished, and all threatening Menaces against Babylon shall be
accomplished: Babylons ruin will make way for Zions raising: There shall be a
joyful word among the Nations: Babylon is fallen, Amen, Allelujah: Whatever
promises are made for the Church, shall come to pass in their appointed season.
The Prophet Isaiah complains, There is a crying for Isa. 24. 11, 12.
wine in the streets, all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone: In
the city is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with destruction: But Dan.
9. 25.
let us read the Prophecy of Daniel, Know therefore, that from the going forth
of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the
Prince, shall be seven weeks; and threescore and two weeks the street shall be
built again, and the wall even in troublous times: In streits of times, God
has promised to build his Church: Has not God said, That the gates of hell
shall not prevail against his Church? Has not he said to his Ministers, that
he is their portion, he will be Matthew. 28. 20.
with them to the end of the world? Now if God be for us, who can be against
us? If God speak peace, who can speak trouble.

Lets in the eighth and last place, in dark Visions and troublesome Prop. 8. We
must wait pariently upon God.
Times wait quietly upon God. Though passages of Providence are so intricate,
like a wheel in the middle of a wheel; and our miseries are revived, and the
end of our trouble we may fear is like to be the beginning of another: Yet let
us wait upon God, stand still and be silent: He that hurts us can heal us. And
a Reverend Divine said long ago of England, That God would break us to pieces,
and then set us together Mr. Davenport.
again. We are all a rebellious people, and our provocations are many in all
sorts and ranks of men, even Magistracy, Ministry, People. God is doing great
things, putting us into the Furnace; and if from thence we come forth as Gold,
we shall be gainers by all our troubles: Let us then, in a reverential way,
demean our selves and wait upon God in his various dispensations.

And if you demand, how must we wait? I shall show you in the third Use, which
now comes to be applied, and that is for Direction.

This only rule I shall lay down for a satisfactory Answer: That Use 3. For
Direction.
we ought to wait upoa God in the use of all good means.

But what are those means which are joined with waiting? They are these
following.

1. We must wait and pray: Never more need of praying, of Means 1. We must wait
and pray. Isa. 26. 16, 20.
wrestling, of tugging hard at the Ore: This God looks for, and his people have
practiced: Lord, in trouble have they visited thee: they poured out a Prayer,
when thy chastning was upon them. Come my people, enter thou into thy ^hambers,
and shut thy doors about thee: hide thy self, as it were, for a little moment,
until the indignation be over-past: We are in an afflicted condition, and the
counsel of the Apostle is, Is any among you afflicted, let him pray: We are
sick and wounded: The same James. 5. 13.
Apostle prescribes, Confess your faults one unto another, and pray one James
5. 16.
for another, that ye may be healed: the effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much. There Is a dreadful tempest, the ship is a sinking,
we had need be awakened and cry unto God; we had need pray, Lord save us, or
else we perish. This God expects: Thus says Ezekiel. 36. 37.
the Lord God, I will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do
it for them: I will increase them with men like a flock. This duty of Prayer
has a commanding virtue: The expression is very high, Thus Isa. 45. 11.
says the Lord, the holy One of Israel, and his Maker, ask me of things to
come concerning my sons; and concerning the works of my hands command ye me.
This is Solomon's Pharmachum Catholicum, even a Medicine for all diseases: O
pray! pray, roll your selves in the dust; you deal for a Kingdom, you deal for
the Church, the Gospel, and its Ordinances, for the lives of millions; pray
then in good earnest, and join fasting with waiting. Antichrist is a strong
Devil; this kind goes not out but by fasting and prayer.

2. Wait and study the Scriptures: Affliction (says Luther) makes us Means 2.
Wait, and study the Scriptures.
understand Scripture, we understand now what is meant by confusion and
desolation. Compare the times of Habakkuk with our times; and they come very
near; they answer one another, as face answers to face: Such a dark vision is
now, as was then. Let us study and search whether the Witnesses be slain or no:
If they be slain, then we may expect glorious times, if not, worse are to be
looked for. As far as I can apprehend, by comparing Scripture with Scripture
(though it is difficult to determine) by the Witnesses, are meant the Magistracy
and Ministry. Compare Rev. 11. 4. with Zech. 4. 3. and 14. These are the two
olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth: So
in the Revelations: And in Zechary we read, And two olive trees by it, one upon
the right side of the bowl, and the other upon the left side thereof: Then said
he, these are the two anointed ones that stand by the Lord of the whole earth:
I determine nothing in this doubtful case, but the great contempt cast upon
both Magistracy and Ministry, (and greater yet is to be feared) even throughout
all Kingdoms, makes it probable, that the time of their slaughter draws nigh.
We may not be overcurious in fixing particular times, lest we incur the same
check for our curiosity as they did: It is not for you to know the times or the
seasons, which the Father has put Acts 1. 7.
in his own power.

3. Wait upon God in his Ordinances: Yet you have them, and Means 3. Wait upon
God in his Ordinances. Isa. 30. 20.
blessed be God, we yet have a nail left us in the public Assembly: That
Prophecy is made good, That though the Lord give you the bread of adversity,
and the water of affliction; yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a
corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers: Yet we have a public
Vision: The voice of the Turtle is yet heard in our Land: Let Us wait at these
Bethesdah's, at the Posts of Wisdoms Gate: we should mourn for the great
contempt that is cast upon Ordinances, and because others slight them, we our
selves should learn to esteem them highly, frequent them diligently, and pray
that God would teach us to profit by them. The Word, Sacraments, Sabbaths,
Meditations, Conference, are advantageous Ordinances, even the food of our
souls: Take away meat and drink, and you starve the Body: Take away Ordinances,
and you slarve the Soul.

Wait, and treasure up your experiences: Review and call to Means 4. Wait and
treasure up your experiences.
mind the mercies of old, what God has done for you in former times: Thou
have known a Famine, God has provided for thee then: Thou have been in great
straits and dangers, and God has delivered thee at that time: Thou have been
at the Graves mouth, and a sentence of death seemed to pass against thee, God
has restored thee to tell his Praises, and to bless his Name: Thou have known
Troubles, Tumults, and Commotions in the Kingdom, and God has quieted and
composed them. Thus then argue, God is the same God, he is in Heaven still, and
does whatsoever he pleases; he is as willing, as able, as merciful as ever: He
sets bounds to the Seas, and stills the raging of the people: He is not changed
with the change of time: Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and the same for
ever: Though we are out of order, yet his Covenant Heb. 13. 8. 2 Samuel 2^. 5.
is ordered: Though we are transient, yet his Covenant is everlasting.

Wait in the right season: Now is the season perilous, and a time Means 5. Wait
in the right season.
of waiting: Times of afflictions are waiting times: When all seem against
thee, and thou can not tell how to conclude from such premises, as were
unheard of before: Now wait, and be silent: Be silent, O all flesh, before the
Lord: for he is raised out of his holy Zech. 2. 13.
habitation: Be far from murmurings and responsations against God. Thou must
wait upon God in the way of his Judgments; yea, in Isa. 26. 8.
the way of thy Judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee: The desire of our
soul is to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee.

Sixthly and lastly, Join reformation with waiting: I press not Means 6. Join
reformat^on with watching.
all this while a lazy, idle waiting, a folding thy hands in thy bosom, but a
working waiting: Wait and purge thy conscience: Trim up thy soul for the
entertainment of Jesus Christ. God will not come into a Cage of unclean Birds.
The soul must be purified. Mercy follows Reformation at the heels. Deliverance
follows Reformation. Many days of Humiliation we have had, and when one is
done, we had need have another to bewail the failings of the former: So that
many harvests are past, and many Summers ended, and we are not saved. But if
there was one day of through Reformation, the business would be done, God would
be entreated for the Land: We may justly fear, that the Commission given to the
Sword is not yet called back; but God will send it again to avenge the Jer. 6.
8.
quarrel of a broken Covenant: My advice from God to you is, Be thou
instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee, lest I make th^e Amos
4. 12.
desolate, and a land not inhabited: Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O
Israel! and because I will do thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O
Israel! Gather your selves together, yea, gather together, O nation not Zeph.
2. 1, 2. 3.
desired! before the Decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff,
before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lords
anger come upon you: Seek ye the Lord, all the meek of the earth, which have
wrought his judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be ye shall be
hid in the day of the Lords anger.

And for a close of all, The last Use is a Word of comfort to a waiting use 4.
For Consolation.
people: Mercy will be the portion of a waiting and believing people: And when
it comes, it will be good measure, full pressed, and running over: It will
abundantly make amends for all thy waiting for it: Oh then, confirm the weak
hands, and strengthen the feeble knees! Learn to live by Faith in dying times:
Whatever thou loosest, whether voluntarily or compulsorily, let not go thy
Faith: Wait patiently and silently under dark Visions, at the end the Vision
shall speak and not lie. God is a God of Infallibility and Eternal truth, and
will not falsify his promises. Though it tarry, and thou have waited long; yet
wait a little longer, it shall come and will not tarry. And it will be an
exceeding comfort to the Saints, when after long waiting for a mercy, they can
say by happy experience, Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, and he
will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and
rejoice in his salvation. Isa. 25. 9.


Establishment of Justice. Unfolded in an Assise Sermon Preached at St. Mary's,
OXON.
Upon Amos 5. 15. Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish Judgment in
the gate; It may be that the Lord God of hosts will be gracious to the remnant
of Joseph.


AS in Water face answers face: So the Text suits Sermon. 7. At St. Mary's
Oxon. March 1. 1649.
with the solemnity of the day. It is a word in due season, which I am resolved
((...)) without fear or flattery to apply particularly to your consciences, as
a word both seasonably to be Preached, and profitably to be learnt: The Lord
make it as profitable to you, as it is seasonable for you.

My Prophet Amos, was one of those Prophets, which we call the lesser Prophets;
not of less esteem for his person, or matter which he Prophesied, then the
others; but less in quantity and bulk, having reduced a great deal of choice
matter into a narrower compass: He Prophesied before Isreal's transportation
into Babyl^n: He was an Herdsman of Tekoah, chap. 1. ver. 1. furnished with a
Prophetical Spirit, and commissionated by God for so high an employment, v. 3.
He Prophesied in a time of monstrous Impieties and severe Judgments: He lived
in the days of Vzziah, and you may read of his horrid attempt in invading the
Priests Office, and the Judgment written in legible Characters in his Leprous
^orehead: And they withstood Vzziah the King, and said unto him, It p^rtaineth
not unto 2 Chro. 26. 18, 19.
thee, Vzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord: but unto the Priests, the sons of
Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: Go our of the sancluary, for thou
have trespassed, neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God. Then
Vzziah was wroth, and had a Conser in his hand to burn incense; and while he
was wrath with the Priests, the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before
the Priests, in the house of the Lord, from besides the incense altar.

Some particular impieties and reigning abominacions were, 1. Idolatry. 1.
Idolatry.


Idolatry was so continually practiced, as by way of Irony, the Lord seems to
invite them to heap up the full measure of their sins: Come to Bethel, and
transgress at Gilgal, multiply transgressions; Amos 4. 4. Hoc est cumulare
s^elera sceleribus. Calv. in Loc 2. Unmercifulness. Amos 1. 9.
and bring your sacrifices every morning, and your tithes after three years.

A second sin was unmercisulness, want of bowels of compassion: Thus says the
Lord, For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for f^ur, I will not turn away the
punishment thereof, because they delivered up the whole captivity to Edom, and
remembered not the broth^rly Covenant.

A third sin was Oppression: Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, that 3.
Oppression. Amos. 4. 1.
are in the mountain of Samaria, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy;
which say to their masters, Bring, and let us drink.

And violence is another sin of the same litter: Ye that put far the Amos 6. 3.
evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near.

A fourth sin is Injustice and Bribery, I couple them together, like 4.
Iujustice and Bribery. Amos 5. 7, 12.
to like: Ye that turn Judgment to wormwood, and leave off righteousness in
the earth: For I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins: They
afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the gate
from their right.

A fifth sin is Luxury and Jovialty: That chaunt to the sound of the Violl, and
invent to themselves Instruments of Music, like David: 5. Luxury. Amos 6. 5, 6.
That drink Wine in Bowlls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointments:
But they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.

A sixth is Pride: Now Judgments are the unhappy issue which 6. Pride.
sin brings forth. Each word is a Thunderbolt, Amos 9. 8, 9. Behold, the eyes
of the Lord God are upon the sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it from off
the face of the earth, saving that I will not utterly destroy the house of
Jacob, says the Lord: For lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of
Israel among the nations, like as corn is fifted in a sieve: yet shall not the
least grain fall upon the earth.

And particular Judgments are threatened suitable to their sins.

As, 1. Famine: I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your 1. Amos 4.
6.
cities, and want of bread in all your places: yet have you not returned unto
me, says the Lord. There Is the punishment of Luxury.

2. Mildew and Blasting: I have smitten you with blasting and mildew, 2. Amos
4. 9.
when your gardens, and your vineyards, and your fig trees, and your
olive trees increased, the palmer-worm devoured them: yet have ye not returned
unto me, says the Lord: There Is another punishment of Luxury and Intemperance.

A third punishment is Pestilence: I have sent among you the Pestilence, after
the manner of Egypt: your young men have I slain with the 3. Amos 4. 10.
sword* and have token away your horses, and I have made the stink of your
camps to come up unto your n^strils: yet have ye not returned unto me, says
the Lord: So that the Pestilence and the Sword accompany each other.

And wherefore are the Sword and Pestilence sent? See Levit. 26. I will bring a
sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant: and when ye are
gathered together in your cities, I will send the Pestilence among you, and ye
shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy.

And the Sword is a punishment of their Pride, Amos 6, 7. Now therefore they
shall go captive with the first that go captive, and the banquet of them that
stretched themselves shall be removed: Likewise the Sword is sent for a
punishment.

And for Fantastical Fashions, Isa. 3. 25. Thy men shall fall by the sword,
and thy mighty in the war.

A fifth Judgment is Famine, and this is for contempt of the Word: Behold, the
days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in 5. Amos 8. 11.
the Land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of the hearing
the word of the Lord.

A sixth Judgment is the enseebling of their strength, and weakening of their
forces: Behold, I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed 6. Amos 2. 13, 14.
15.
that is full of sheaves: therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and
the strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty deliver
himself: neither shall he stand that handles the b^w; and he that is swift of
foot shall not deliver himself: neither shall he that rides the horse
deliver himself. When any abuse their strength and power, God will enfeeble it.
This counsel is commended to our practice, Jer. 9. 23. Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not
the rich man glory in his riches. You have by what has been said a taste of
bitter fruits, some sins and judgments set forth in their proper colors. In
Isreal's glass England may see her face. The same evils of sin are rise among
us; and in part the same evils of punishment have already befallen us, and the
rest hang over our heads and will fall heavy upon us, unless mercy speedily
interpose.

Now amidst varieties of wounds, and sores, and heavy judgments the Prophet
prescribes a sovereign remedy: he addresseth himself to divine
exhortations, and counsels: One is Amos 4. 12. Therefore thus will I do unto
thee, O Israel: and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God,
O Israel. Another which begins Si vobis animus est ad Deum reverti, jam
abjicite omnes vestras superstitiones. Calv. in Loc.
Amos. 5. 4: is continued verse. 5. 6, 14. Thus says the Lord, seek ye me and
ye shall live. But seek not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal and pass not to
Beersheba: for Gilgal shall surely go into captivity, and Bethel shall come to
naught. Seek ye the Lord and ye shall live, etc.

Now if the question be asked, wherein does seeking of God consist?

A. In the former verses we read of injustice, verse. 7. They turn judgment to
wormwood, and leave off righteousness: and of bribery and cruelty, v. 12. They
afflict the just, they take a bribe. Insomuch that the prudent man is amazed
and stands admiring in a stupendous reverential silence. He dares not revile
instruments and murmur at the Providence of God, v. 3. Therefore the prudent
shall keep silence in that time: for it is an evil time.

Q. Now what is to be done? what particular remedy is to be prescribed suitable
to the disease?

A. My text makes discovery hereof, and informs you what is the most effectual
remedy to heal a wounded Kingdom, in the words of the Text. Hate the evil,
and love the good, etc.

The words represent unto you an excellent Medicine and the singular virtue
thereof.

The medicine is made up of three particular Ingredients. Text divided.


1. Hate the evil: There Is the affection of hatred.

2. Love the good: There Is the affection of love.

3. Establish judgment in the gate: There Is the exercise of distributive
Justice.

2. For the virtue, it is sovereign, effectual to appease the wrath of God, to
smooth his brow: So it follows: It may be the Lord God of hosts will be
gracious to the remnant of Joseph.

I shall briefly open the words and draw forth one doctrine, which, I shall lay
down for the groundwork of my ensuing meditations.

Here by evil, we are to understand the evil of sin, oppression, violence,
Idolatry, pride, mentioned in this prophecy, and in a large acceptance, under
this word all manner of sin is forbidden. Sin is the greatest evil; and this
ought to be the object of our indignation. What God hates, we ought to hate.
Now as God hates sin; so should we with a perfect hatred abhor and hate every
evil way.

By good is meant the right way, the way of holiness and virtue. Mr Calvin
takes notice of the order, first to hate sin, then to love that which is
good, and he conceives the scope of the Prophet to be this, that the
Israelites should become new men: and by a Syne^doch^, Repentance is described
in the whole work from these two parts, in hating evil and loving that which
is good.

And because there was abundance of corruption and injustice in their gates, in
an especial manner he inculcates the execution of justice, And establish
judgment in the gate: you have turned judgment into gall, and hemlock, and by
your neglect of justice have provoked God to high displeasure against you. Now
labor to pacify him by the impartial execution of Justice.

It was the custom of Judges to keep their courts of judicature near the gates
of the City: so v. 10. They hate him that rebukes in the gate, and they abhor
him that speaks uprightly, Isai: 29. 21: that make a man an offender for a
word, and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate, and turn aside the
just for a thing of naught.

Hereupon follows a strong ground of Encouragement. It may be the Lord, etc:
he could not determine absolutely, he knew not the decree, whether an
irreversible sentence had passed against them. See a notwithstanding mentioned
after a signal Reformation, 2 King. 23. 25, 26. And like unto him was no King
before him that turned unto the Lord with all his heart, with all his soul and
with all his might. Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of
his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all
the provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withal. But upon probable
conjecturall hopes he encourages them; God has been very gracious to a
penitent people formerly, God was gracious to Manasseh, Niniveh, Paul,
Mary-magdalen, and others repenting. Upon these experiences an afflicted
remnant may conclude that God will be gracious unto them. See Jo^l. 2. 12. 13,
14. Therefore now thus says the Lord, turn ye even to me with all your
heart, and with fasting, weeping and mourning: And rent your heart? and not
your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and
m^rcifull, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and r^p^nteth him of the
evil. Who knows if he will return and repent and leave a blessing behind
him, even a meat offering unto the Lord your God?

We read in Scripture of the afflictions of Joseph, as a proverbial spech,
alluding to Joseph the Patriarch, who met with evil entreaties from his
brethren, and from Potiphars wise, he was cast into a pit, bought and sold,
slandred, cast into prison: and the house of Joseph, his posterity, and not
only his proper natural posterity: but all the children of God must through
many tribulations enter into the Kingd^me of God, Act. 14. 22.

That the whole house of Joseph, that all the generation of men is not utterly
consumed is a great mercy, we have cause to acknowledge it with thankfulness
that there is a remnant yet left.

Now a through reformation, a turning from sin to God, a hating that which is
evil, a loving that which is good, an establishment of Justice may much
prevail with God to be gracious to an afflicted remnant. Though the number of
the Church be few, though Jacob be small, and Joseph be but a remnant, yet
many promises are made to a remnant, Isai. 10. 21. The remnant shall return,
even the remnant of Jacob unto the mighty God, Jeremiah 15. 11. The Lord said,
verily it shall be well with thy remnant, verily I will cause the enemy to
entreat thee well in the time of evil, and in the time of affliction, Ezekiel: 6.
8: Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may have some that shall escape the
sword among the Nations, when ye shall be scattered through the countries,
Ephesians 3. 12, 13. I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor
people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord. The remnant of Israel
shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies, neither shall a deceitful tongue be
found in their mouth: for they shall feed and lay down and none shall make
them afraid. Romans 9. 27. Though the number of the children of Israel be as the
sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved. And for the remnant we must pray,
Isay. 37. 4. It may be the Lord thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom
the King of Assyriah his master has sent to reproach the living God and will
r^prove the words which the Lord thy God has heard: wherefore lift up thy
prayer for the remnant that is left, Jer. 31. 7. For thus says the Lord, sing
with gladness for Jacob, and shout among the chief of the Nations: publish
ye, praise ye and say, O Lord, save thy people, the remnant of Israel. So then
you may plainly discern the sum and substance of these words. That which
they drive at is to engage people to a through reformation as the only means to
pacify an incensed God. Judgments fall round about us thick, and threefold:
many have been numbered out to the sword, many to famine and pestilence: Let the
remnant lay these things to heart: Let them humble themselves, turn from the
evil of their doings, cease to do evil, learn to do well, execute judgment
and Justice, and it may be God may turn again and repent, and be gracious to
the remnant of the house of Joseph.

The words thus divided and opened, commend these principal That sin alone
ought to be the Object of our hatred and indignation: So says the Psalmist: Ye
that love the Lord hate evil: Psalm. 97. 10. And the fear of God consists in
hating of evil. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil: Prove. 8. 13.
pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the froward mouth do I hate. You
have a short Catalogue of what things God hates in Prove. 6. 16. These six
things does the Lord hate: yea seven things are an abomination to him, a proud
look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, a heart that
devises wicked imaginations; feet that be swift in running to mischief: a
false witness that speaks lies, and him that sows discord among brethren.
Nay further whatsoever is sinful God hates: and where God hates we should hate.

2. That which is good ought only to be the object of our love. It Is a Amos 3.
2. to hate the good, and love the evil. Holiness has Gods Image stamped upon
it, and we must love God's Image where ever we find it.

God requires public establishment of Justice in a Kingdom. It Is said in the
gates where people went in and out: There ministers of Justice but judgm^nt
must run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream, Amos 5. 24.

4. In that there is such a connection between these words, hate Deuteronomy. 5. 17,
18, 19.
the evil and do good and establish judgment, hence observe, In religious
duties there is a sacred concatenation and harmony, It Is observed that all the
commands of the Decalogue are copulative. Thou shall not kill; neither shall
thou commit adultery: neither shall thou steal^: neither shall thou bear
false witness, etc. The same God that ingageth us to the obedience of one
Command, does not dispense with us or give any exception for any other.

5. The people of God, his Joseph's may be reduced to a very small remnant. So
they were in the Babilonish captivity; but 7000 that had Baal, and whether all
these were upright hearted is doubtful: The primitive Christians in times of
persecution were but a handful, a despised remnant in the eyes of the world.
And in the Arc which was a type of Christ there were but eight persons, and
Cham was one of them: In Christ's own family but twelve and one of them a
Judas.

6. Observe, That the reformation of a people, in hating evil and loving good
may prevail with God to extend mercy and compassion toward them.

It shall suffice only to have named these unto you. It concerns me to fix
upon the establishment of judgment, which the Text specially points at; and the
aspect of, a Venerable Judicature in presence puts me in mind of that point of
Doctrine which is genuine from the text and most seasonable to the Auditorie.
Thus I propound it to you.

That the faithful execution of Justice in a land is a probable means to move
God to extend mercy, compassion and deliverance to them. Method propounded.


In handling of this precious point I shall thus dispose of my Method.

1. To give in a full proof from Scripture asserting the truth.

2. Contribute some reasons, confirming the same.

3. Represent the manner how justice must be executed. This shall be by way of
Direction.

4. And fourthly conclude with a word of exhortation, and so press closely the
duty of the Text, the establishment of Justice, and 1. The Doctrine proved.
this shall be my particular application.

I resume what I first propounded, to assert the truth of the point. See Jer.
5. 1. Run ye to and fro in the streets of Jerusalem and see now and know and
seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that
executes judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. So Ier. 7. 5,
6, 7. for if you thoroughly amend your ways and your doings, if you thoroughly
execute judgment between a man and his n^ighbour; if ye oppress not the
stranger, the fatherless, and the widow. and shed not innocent blood in this
place: neither walk after other Gods to your hurt, then will I cause you to
dwell in this place, in the land which I gave unto your fathers for ever and
ever. So Isaiah 1. 17, 18. Learn to do well, seek Juagment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, pl^ad for the widow: come now and let us
reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be
as white as snow; though they be red as crimson, they shall be as wool, Prove.
29. 4. The King by judgment ^stablisheth the land: but he that receives gifts
overthrows it. In these and sundry other places God promises a blessing upon
the execution of justice.

I Will single out particular instances, that what is asserted may be cleared more
evidently.

When Israel committed both spiritual and corporal whoredom with the
daughters of Moab (for commonly they go both together, the greatest Idolaters,
the greatest whoremongers, witness the Babylonish strumpet at this day) Now
nothing will appease Gods incensed wrath besides the execution of justice upon
the Idolaters. The Lord said unto Moses, take all the heads of the people, and
hang them up before the Lord against the Sun, that the fierce anger of the Lord
may Number. 25. 4. 5
be turned away from Israel. And when Moses and the congregation were
consulting, Phineas stands up and falls a doing Justice: When Phineas the son
of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest saw it, he rose up from among the
congregation and took a javelin in his hand, and he went after the man of
Israel into the tent, and thrust both of them thorough, the man of Israel and
the woman thorough her belly. So the Plague was stayed from the Children of
Israel. Here Is a pattern of singular zeal, a man of heroical courage, all
steel to the back. Compare this with Psalm. 106. 30. Then stood up Phineas and
executed judgment and so the Plague was stayed. And you may read the ample
reward, Numb. 25. 10, 11, 12. The Lord spoke unto Moses saying, Phineas the
son of Eleazar has turned away my wrath from the Children of Israel, (while
he was zealous for my sake among them) that I consumed them not in my jelousie;
wherefore say, behold I give unto him my covenant of peace. Moses likewise was
a man of the same stamp; Though in his own cause the meekest: yet a man of
invincible courage in the cause of God. When he was in the mount, Aaron makes
them a golden calfe; the people commit Idolatry with it: the Lord is highly
incensed, Moses intercedes for them, Exodus 3. 11. Moses besought the Lord his
God, and said, why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou have
brought forth out of the Land of Aegipt, with great power and with a mighty
hand? He brake the tables verse. 19. as son as he came nigh unto the Camp that
he saw the calfe and the dancing, his anger waxed hot and he cast the Tables
out of his hands and brake them beneath the mount. He burns the calfe to
powd^r, strewes it upon the water and makes the Children of Israel to drink of
it, verse. 20. executes judgment. verse. 26, 27, 28. Who is on the Lords side?
let him come unto me. And all the Sons of Levi gathered themselves unto him,
and he said unto them, put every man his sword by his side and go in and out
from gate to gate thorowout the camp, and slay every man his brother and every
man his companion, and every man his neighbor. And the Children of Levi did
accordingly. Compare this with Psalm. 106. 23. Therefore he said that he would
destroy them had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the brach, etc.
Whilst the camp was pestered with an Achan, Israel could not stand before their
enemies. But as soon as Achan was executed, the valley of Achor became a door
of hope, Hos. 2. 14. As long as Jonah was in the ship the storm continued: but
as soon as he was cast over shipbord there was a great calm, Jonah. 1. 15.
Agag was hewed in pieces by Samuel. Baals prophets were slain by Elijah. Thus
David executed judgment upon the Gib^onites enemies retaliating their
mischiefs upon their own pates, 2 Samuel 21. 1, 6, 9. There was a famine in the
days of David for three years, and David enquired of the Lord. And the Lord
answered, it is for Saul; and for his bloody house, because he slew the
Gibeonites. verse. 6. Let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us and we will
hang them up unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, whom the Lord did choose. And the
King said, I will give them. verse. 9. And he delivered them into the hands of
the Gibeonites and they hanged them in the hill before the Lord. And see the
good success verse. 14. And the bones of Saul and Jonathan his sonn^ buried
they in the country of Benjamin in Zelah, in the Sepulcher of Kish his Father,
and they performed all that the King commanded, and after that God was
entreated for the Land. You see how just David was in executing justice upon
those that slew his enemies, 2 Samuel 1. 15. David called one of the young men and
said, go near and fall upon him. And he smote him, that he died. So 2 Samuel 4.
12. he commanded his young men, and they slew them and cut off their hands and
their feet, and hanged them up in the poole of Hebron. Amaziah slew those that
slow his Father Ioash, 2 Kings 14. 5, 6. The people of the Land slew those that
conspired against Amon, 2 Kings 21. 24.

I might produce for illustration many examples out of humane Authors, as that
of Zeleucus to his son in putting out his eye for Adultery, and such like:
But I will not light a candle to the sun. I keep close to Scripture proofs, I
need not range in any other f^elds.

In the second place, I Will give in some Scripture Reasons for confirmation of
the point. 2. Reas. 1. From the excellency of justice.


The sirst reason shall be drawn from the excellency of Justice. And this will
appear in these particular respects.

It derives its Original from God. Justice is a communicable Attribute flowing
from the fountain to the streams, and government which is that master-wheel to
set the motions of Justice in due order By me Kings reign, and princes decree
justice; by me Princes rule, and nobles, even all the Judges of the earth,
Prove. 1. 15. 16. There Is a jus divinum to warrant your honorable calling.

Justice is excellent in respect of that incomparable superexcellent Adam: But
he ran to meet the Prodigal: here is a walking in point of judgment: but a
running in point of mercy. Yet notwithstanding Justice will be no looser.
Mercy, Justice, power, goodness, obiquitie, etc. are diversely according to our
capacities apprehended by us: yet they are all one in God. As God is merciful:
so he is just: Justice must be satisfied per se aut per alium. Per se no man
can, it must be done per alium, by a surety. See Zech. 13. 7. Awake, O sword,
against my shephard, and against the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of
hosts, smite the sheph^ard, and the sheep shall be scattered, and I will turn
mine hand upon the little ones. No less price was paid to satisfy Divine
justice then the effusion of the precious blood of the son of God, one drop
whereof is of infinite dignity, price and value.

The excellency of Justice appears in respect of its excellent effects and
operations. Justice is the basis and supporter of the state. Le^est corporis
Politici nervus. The great body of states would be paralitick and in a
paroxisme, and there would be a dissolution of the continuum, if the sinews of
Justice should fail. To justice under God we owe our lives, liberties,
lively-hoods. We could not sleep quietly in our beds for fear of massacres and
robberies, if laws were not in force and the current of Justice should be
damnd up. Justice may be compared to the stakes of a strong hedge to keep it
from falling. And a Judge is a quick-set-hedg to keep off incursions into
another Peculiar. Justice is the preserver of meum and tuum. It Is the life of
our society, the bulwark and buttresse of our safety; the fort-royall and
strength of our Garrisons. Should justice cease, and there should be no
reprover in the gate, we should be resolved into an Anarchy, a Chaos, a
confusion, and destruction. We should be (...) homo homini lupus, nay, homo
homini Demon. By the execution of Justice, Government, Magistracy,
Iudicatures, those strong walls of a Kingdom remain impregnable. Religion,
learning, trades, traffiques, laws, arts and scien^ss thrive and shelter
themselves under the wings of government, executing Judgment and justice. Reas.
2. From the Necessity of establishing justice


The second reason shall be drawn from the apparent necessity of establishing
judgment and justice. The necessity is indispensible, whether there be
considered Necessitas Paecepti vel Medii.

For the first ^ how frequently does the Lord call for execution of Justice?
It Is that which must be sought after, Isay 1. 17. Learn to do well: seek
judgment: relieve the oppressed; judge the fatherless: plead for the widow. It
must be kept: Isay 56. 1. Thus says the Lord: Keep ye judgment and dot
justice: for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be
revealed. It must not be executed as a malefactor, that's a persecution, not
execution. Justice is executed upon delinquents, not upon it self, Zech. 7. 9.
Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying: execute true judgment, and show mercy
and compassion every man to his brother. So Zech. 8. 16. These are the things
that ye shall do; speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor; executo the
judgment of truth and peace in your gates. Its promised as a mercy, Isay 28. 6.
And for a spirit of Judgment to him that sits in judgment; and for strength
to them that turn the battle to (...)g^te. Its an argument of Gods love to a
people, I Kings 10. 9. Blessed be the Lord thy God which delights in thee to
set thee on the Throne of Israel; because the Lord loved Israel for ever:
therefore made he thee King to do judgment and justice. It Is that which has
God's approbation, Micah. 6. 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and
what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly and love mercy and to
walk humbly with thy God? Its that which God loves, Psalm. 33. 5. He loves
righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.
It Is that which in an especial manner God commands, Deuteronomy. 16. 18. Judges and
Officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates which the Lord thy God gives
thee thorowout thy tribes; and they shall judge the people with just Judgment.
There Is another jus divirum for your authority. And Justice is that which God
rewards, Isai. 33. 15. 16. He that walks righteously and speaks uprightly,
he that despises the gain of oppressions, and shakes his hands from holding
of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes
from seeing of evil; he shall dwell on high; his place of defense shall be the
munitions of rocks; bread shall be given him; his water shall be sure. So Jer.
22. 15. shall thou reign because thou cloathest thy self in C^dar? did not
thy Father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well
with him?

Justice is necessary, necessitate medii. A godly Magistrate dispensing justice
and judgment reconciles meum and tuum, those two wrangling pronounes, which are
those Phaetons and grand incendiaries that set the whole world in a combustion.
Terminus was so much set by among the Romans that they paid homage to it
tanquam Numini tutolari: Without any tang of or compliance with their Idolatry,
we may safely say, that the law is the Boundary of a commonwealth. Its a good
sense or mound to keep off beasts of pr^y from making inrodes into my Several.
It Is a good screne to keep off the scorchings of fiery spirits, who Salamander
like live in the fire of contention. It Is a strong bulwark to desend a man's
right from surprizall by violent enemies, who lay seige and make batteries
against it. The law is Terminus distingens, conservans, pacificans.

The Law is Terminus distinguens. It distinguishes one man's propriety from
another: all would become common (as some Anabaptisticall spirits would have
it) and no Propriety in goods; no man could say that any thing he possesses
were his own, were it not for the Law. Now the Law appropriates to every one
his right. Its a good mark-stone, to set bounds, so far reaches, such and such
a man's right and no further. It prevents all incro^chments, and injuries;
otherwise the strongest (though without right) would take all.

The Law is Terminus Conservans. It preserves men in their right, that so one
man may not incroach upon another. Were it not for 2. The Law is T^rminus
Conservans.
the Law the Poor man's Acres would be soon impaled in his Lords Park,
because of it is vicinity. -- Inde datae leges, ne fortior omnia posset. And
hereupon a Philosopher was wont to say, Cives non minus oportet pugnare pro
legibus quam pro maeniis. We must fight for our Laws rather then for our
walls: for it is possible for a city to be safe without walls: but not without
Laws. 3. The Law is Terminus Pacificans.


The Law is Terminus pacificans, that which prevents controversies and
preserves peace. Next to our religion we should stand for the fundamental
laws of our Nation. War is occasioned for the breach of Laws. The
Parliament of England, I am persuaded, (as may appear from their writings) had
never drawn the sword at first, were it not for the defense of Religion and the
Laws of the Kingdom, (which they solemnly covenanted to maintain) which were
trampled under foot by a Malignant party. Now peace should be in the eye of
them that go to law, whom the weightinesse of the matter constraines to such a
remedy; though it sadly and frequently fall out, Quod primum in intention est
ultimum in executione. Reas. 3. From the Mischief of Injustice.


The third and last reason shall be Causa a contrario, drawn from the mischief
of injustice and the sad consequences thereof. Contraries (we say) illustrate
one another: And of contraries there are contrary consequences. As where
Government flourishes, and good laws are put in execution, there is Terminus
distingu^ns, conservans, pacificans, men's proprieties are distinguished,
preserved, and peaceably enjoyed: So on the contrary, where is Anarchy and
licentiousness, every man's humor is his Law; Quod libet, licet, There Is no
bound set to distinguish and segregate between mine and thine, no safety, no
peaceable enjoying of any thing As soon as the Hedge of the Law is broken down
and the bounds removed, the commonwealth proves like a Forest, wherein wild
beasts of prey devour one another; the stronger the weaker, or like a great
Fish pond, where the great fishes devour the lesser. If the Law help not,
might will prevail above right: and people will be trampled under feet by
Tyrants who like those blustering ancient Giants made people to fall before
them. For want of Magistracy you read the lamentable Catastrophe of the people
of Laish, Judge. 18. 7, 27. Then the five men departed and came to Laish, and
saw the people that were therein how they dwelt careless, after the manner of
the Zidonians, quiet, and secure, and there was no Magistrate in the Land that
might put them to shame in any thing, ver. 27. And they came unto Laish, unto a
people that were secure, and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and
burnt the City with fire. You read of the Children of Dan's robbing Micha, and
he durst not speak for fear that angry fellows should fall upon him. You read
of the men of Gibeah's horrible abuse toward the Levites Concubine: And the
Spirit of God remindes us of one and the self-same reason, in Judge. 19. 1. It
came to pass in those days when there was no King in Israel, that there was a
certain Levite sojourning on the side of mount Ephraim, who took unto him a
concubine, one of Beth-lehem Judah, Judge. 21. 25. In those days there was no
King in Israel, every man did that which was right in his own eyes: The want of
Magistracy occasioned all those Outrages.

But I proceed to the third Head propounded; How must Justice 3 Head. How must
Justice be executed.
be executed?

Two things I intend to open to you.

1. What manner of person he must be, and how qualified, that executes
Judgments:

2. What manner and what rules a Judge ought to observe in execution of Justice.

If you inquire, How must a Judge be qualified? The Scripture 1. How must a
Judge be qualified.
leaves many Examples upon Record; some to avoid, others to follow: Samuel's
Sons took bribes, and perverted Judgment, 1 Samuel 8. 3. Corrupt Judges swim
through Pactolus, and land at the back stairs, as if they had the yellow
Jaundice in their eyes, Gold being so much in their sight: Justice may neither
be bought nor sold. Gallio was a careless Judge, let all sink or swim he is
indifferent. The unjust Judge would do nothing without importunity, something
at last he did through multitudes of importunate solicitations, not out of
respect to Justice, but his own ease: He would not be wearied with too many
supplications for Justice. Pilate condemned Christ against his conscience, to
please the People, and to be accounted Caesar's friend: Such a Judge you ought
not to be. But what a one a good Judge should be, let him have an eye unto
David's practice, Psalm. 101. 8: I will early destroy all the wicked of the land,
that I may cut off all wicked doers from the city of the Lord: A Judge should
have respect unto Samuels appeal to the people, 1 Samuel 12. 3. Behold, here I
am, witness against me before the Lord, and before his anointed: whose Ox have
I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I
oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes
therewith and I will restore it you? It was Jobs Character, Job 29. 14, 15, 16,
17. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: my Judgment was as a Robe and
a Diadem. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame: I was a father
to the poor; and the cause which I knew not, I searched out. And I brake the
jaws of the wick^d, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth. Such you must be as
Jethro charge you: And because his counsel was the Archetypum or first
draught of Magistracy, for a well ordered Body Politic; this instar omnium I
shall propose for an exact pattern for your imitation, Exodus 18. 21, 22.
Moreover thou shall provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God,
men of truth, hating covetousness, and place such over them, to be rulers of
thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens: and
let them judge the people at all seasons, and it shall be that every great
matter they shall bring unto thee: but every small matter they shall judge; so
shall it be easier for thy self, and they shall bear the burden with thee.

He must be an able man: 1. He must first be a man of judgment Qualif. I. A
Judge must be an able Man.
and understanding, well skilled in the Laws: He must have a spirit of
discerning, to discern between right and wrong. Judges pass many years study at
Inns of Court before they come to this promotion: They must be men of mature
age and solid parts, Learned, Grave, and Judicious

2. He must be able in respect of moderation and equanimity; able to subdue and
get the mastery of his own passions, not suffering his affections to pervert
judgment. Hercules Club, they say, was made of Olive Wood: There must be (...)
and (...) in a Judge, he must be willing to bear and forbear the rusticity and
homely delivery of Evidences from illiterate people, and stoop to the capacity
of the meanest Countryman who comes for Justice.

3. A Judge must be able in respect of courage: Judges are to turn the Wheel
over the Wicked, they are to encounter with Beasts of Ephesus; they must be of
such a Lion-like spirit, as to pluck the prey out of the Lions mouth: Hereupon
it is conceived that Judah, the Law-giving Tribe, had the Lion couchant sitting
by the prey for its Scutcheon: The Lion couchant is not afraid of any Res^uer.
This likewise was symboliz'd in the steps of Solomon's Throne adorned with
Lions. A Judge must grapple with the Hydra of sin, and oppose the Current of
Times and Torrent of Vice; he must be of a resolved courage with Esther, If I
perish I perish; and with Luther when he went to Worms, If every tile was a
Devil, yet he would go to Worms and preach Christ. Come what will come, a
good Judge accounts this Maxim like the Law of the Medes and Persians, Fiat
justitia, ruat coelum.

The second Qualification of a Judge is, He must be a man fearing Qualif. 2. A
Judge must be a man ^ea^ing God.
God, 2 Samuel 23. 3. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke unto me;
he that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Only a godly
man is fit to be a Judge, though I abhor that Anabaptistical Opinion Dominium
temporale fundatur in gratia: yet I am assured that the fear of God planted in
the heart of a Judge, moves him to judge righteous judgment: This serves him
as a compass to steer his actions by: And when he is tempted to pervert Justice
by great men's Letters, he sets Joseph's resolution before him as a continual
Monitor, How shall I do this great wickedness and sin against God? He will
neither be threatened nor entreated, nor Courted, nor Complemented, nor
Flattered, nor Overawed to wound his Conscience by perverting Justice: This,
this it is, even the fear of God that will beautisi^ the soul of a Judge. The
Judges Scarlet Robes puts a glory and luster upon the Beholders eyes; but
Divine Graces make him more glorious within. Such a Clothing is of wrought
Gold: If the fear of God be wanting, in a very short time judgment will be
turned into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock: Wisdom will
degenerate into craft and subtilty; Power into private revenge; Valor and
Courage into violence and peremptory obstinacy. Now the fear of God will set
all right; if this be in the heart, it will set all right in the practice of
the life.

3. A Judge must be a man of truth: A true-hearted Nathaniel; Qualif. ^. A
Judge must be a man of tru^^,
no Machivilian, nor Iesuitical Politician: He must be a plain-hearted man: His
heart must dictate to his tongue, and the Spirit of God dictate to his heart:
He is such a Prudent Man, that his Heart adds Learning to his Lips, Prove. 16.
23. The heart of the wise teaches his mouth, and adds learning to his lips:
He Is a Man of Integrity; he speaks truth, loves truth, and searches every
Thicket, and sifteth the matter to the bottom to find out the truth: and it is
his care to keep men of truth about him, even such servants as are persons of
integrity, Psalm. 101. 7. He that works deceit shall not dwell in my house:
he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight.

4. A Judge must be a man hating covetousness. Covetousness is Qualif. 4.
the mother of Oppression: Bribes blind his eyes, he dares not meddle with
them: Bribes are pitch, he dares not touch them, lest he be defiled: He Is
afraid that his hands will wither, therefore he shakes his hands of them: He Is
afraid that they will prove like Equus Sejanus, or aurum Tholossanum, a Moth, a
Canker to consume the rest of his substance, Job 15. 34. The c^ngregation of
hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall consume the Tabernacles of
Bribery. Corrupt Judges are Icterici, they (as was before hinted) cannot see
aright: But an upright Judge sees clearly, he washes his heart and his hands
both: He dares not take a Bribe in a private Chamber, he fears lest the Timber
and Stones may cry out against him: When he comethon the Bench he fixes his
eye, neither before him on the person, nor about him on the Beholders, nor
behind him for Bribes; but he looks upward toward God, remembering that he who
sits now to judge others, shall himself be judged at a higher Tribunal by the
impartial Judge of Heaven and Earth, and there give an exact account of all his
proceedings.

Thus (Right Honorable) you have the Glass of J^thro set before you, wherein
you may behold your own face: You have heard what manner of Persons you ought
to be, who undertake this weighty Calling.

2. In the next place give me leave to set down the Rules which 2.
you ought to observe in execution of Justice. You must execute judgment
speedily, yet deliberately, impartially, according to truth, regularly and
compassionately.

Justice must be executed speedily: Such a charge we read, Ezra Rule. 1.
Justice must be executed speedily.
7. 26. Who will not do the Law of God, and the Law of the King, let judgment
be executed speedily upon him, whether it be to Death, to Banishment, or to
Consiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment. English delays (as some have
observed) are worse then Spanish Strappado's: Let not the poor Client be tired
out by tedious attendances, tossed up and down (and never a whit the nearer)
from Court to Court, but let his business be dispatched with all convenient
expedition. Unconscionable Lawyers deal like unconscionable Chyrurgions, who
keep the Wound long in Cure for their own advantage. Non missura cutem nisi
plena cruoris hirudo. You that are Lawyers, do not snarle and entangle a cause
and so bring it into Mazes and Labyrinthes, but with what facility and
expedition may be, let the controversy be decided. Bernards counsel to
Eugenius may be a good motto for the Counselor at Law: Frustratorias and
vexatorias praecide dilationes. By unnecessarie delays and tedious suites many
are served by Lawyers, as the poor woman, mentioned in the Gospel was served
by Physicians. They left her uncured of her disease and poverty Mark. 5. 26.
to boot. I have read of a Chancellor of England who in a fore-noone
dispatched all the causes brought before him, and he asked whether there were
any other causes, and they answered, no. I wish Law suits (especially Chancery
suits) were ended with more expedition, lest by reason of tedious waiting, the
remedy ofttimes proves worse than the disease.

But secondly, Justice must notwithstanding be executed deliberately. Rule. 2.
Justice must be executed deliberately.
It must not be delayed on the one side, nor rashly determined on the other
side. It must be performed with mature advice and deliberation. There Is Pondus
Causae and Pondus Legis to be taken in to ferious consideration. Justitia licet
sit coeca exequendo, tamen ^culata dijudicando. A Judge must not be Vir
Ten^dius (as Lycophron mentions) nor must his instrument of Justice be Tenedia
bipennis: making (as our Proverb is) more haste then good speed. -- Nulla
unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa. If there be an Acre of ground, an Ox
or an Horse in question, Oh! what ado is there to get an ablesufficient Jury?
And surely the life of a man is more precious. Can Ignoramusses serve for life
and death? You that are concerned herein seek for sufficient men, men of
conscience and understanding, take not up men that can neither write nor read,
who must take all upon trust. Judgment on life and death is a serious work,
and requires prudence and deliberation. Joh. 7. 51. Does our Law judge any man
before it hear him and know what he does? (...) goes before (...) and (...)
before (...): your Commission is of Oy^r and Terminer: First you are to hear
before you determine. Job searched out the cause which he knew not. Job. 26.
19. There must be a serious inquisition after the truth. The greatest pains is
little enough for the investigation of the truth, and the right administration
of Justice.

Justice must be executed impartially. Levi must know neither Rule. 3. Justice
must be executed impartially.
father nor mother. Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica Veritas. A
Judge he mustnot pervert Justice to pleasure my Lord or my Lady, mine ancient
friend and acquaintance. Threats, flatteries, gold or silver may not turn him
one jot out of the Bias of Justice. It Is said of Fabricius, That the Sun might
sooner be turned out of it is course, then he out of the course of Justice.
Neither does a just Judge favor a poor man in an unrighteous cause. Exodus 23.
3. Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause. He dares not judge
for popular applause, to get himself a name, to be the poor man's Advocate,
and so swerve from the rules of Justice. A just Judge will frequently and
seriously catechize his own conscience, and ask this question; how shall I
answer this great Judgment before the great Judge of heaven and earth? How
shall I answer that charge, Levit. 19. 15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment: thou shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the
person of the mighty: but in righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor. It
was a gallant speech of Worthy Mr Pym, a renowned and true hearted Patriot of
his Country. See Mr Marshals Sermon at his sunerall.
Such a one indeed is my good Friend, but I will never pay my private d^bts out
of the public stock.

Justice must be executed according to truth. Truth is of such an Rule 4.
Justice must be executed according to truth.
invaluable price, as we must buy it at any rate, Prove. 22. 23. There Is an
heavy charge, Is. 59. 4. None calls for justice, nor any pleads for truth,
they trust in vanity and speak lies, they conceive mischief, and bring forth
Iniquity, v. 14. And judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands a
far off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter. You call
your Jury good men and true, (I heartily wish they were all so) and the
witnesses must be men of truth. The ninth Commandment forbids
false-witnesse-bearing. False witness was so abominable among the purblind
Heathen that the Law of the 12. Tables ordered, That if any bore false
witness, he should See Beards Theater of God's Judgments.
be tumbled down the Tarpeian rock. Many fearsull judgments have overtaken
perjured persons. They are upon record in diverse writers, and others are
sufficiently known by experimental Knowledge, even in our days. Be sure, you
that give evidence, that you keep your oath to swear the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth.

Justice must be executed regularly. Neither passion, nor prejudice, Rule 5.
Justice must be executed regularly.
nor friendship, nor gifts, may rule, nor any unknown arbitrary Law. There Is a
Buoy in maritime Laws to give warning of an Anchour. There Is a Pole-starre to
direct the Pilot. And the Law of God and of the Land, in subordination
thereunto, must rule. The Law of God is the Archetypum. All other Laws are but
Transcripts, An able Judge is well-skill'd in the Law of God, he has a copy of
it before him. So he is charged, Josh. 1. 7. Only be thou strong and very
courageous, that thou may observe to do according to all the Law which
Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand or to the
left, that thou may prosper wheresoever thou go^st. And he is well skilled in
the Laws of the Land; he needs not the Tutoring of a Clerk; he fears no
contradiction of Bystanders, to say, This is against Law. We read, Esth. 1.
15. What shall we do unto the Queen Vasti according to Law, because she has
not performed the commandment of the King Ahasuerus by the Chamberlaines. So
that hence it is evident, that the Law is the rule of Judicature. Both sides
are allowed a fair hearing. None may be praejudged and condemned without
hearing. Thus many laid the charge as a terrible Tyranny on Richard the 2d, who
first hanged men and afterward proceeded in a trial against them. Qui statuit
aliquid part inaudita altera aequum licet statuerit haud aequus fierit.
Judgment is to be given, secundum allegata and probata. And this is a regular
administration of justice.

6ly, and lastly, Justice must be executed compassionately. Rule 6. Justice
must be executed compassionately.
Judges were usually Fathers and so more likely to show compassion. A Judges
Motto is, Peccata interficio, hominem amplector King Edward the sixth wept when
he gave his consent to put Joane Butcher to death, though she highly deserved
it, as being one ofthe worst of Haereticks. An ingenuous spirit relents with
tears, Ille dolet qu^ties cogitur esse ferox. Judgment must be given with
abundance of humanity and commiseration.

And now (Right Honorable, and the rest beloved in the Lord Jesus) give me
leave for a close of the whole to apply all in a word of exhortation. Let me
divide to every one his portion. You that sit in Judgment remember the text.
Establish judgment, Use for exhortation.
etc. Consider your Authority, in what an eminent place you are set, lay out
your dignity to do God and your Country good service. You are a Beacon set
upon a Hill, the whole country gazeth upon you. There are many eyes upon you,
and if you swerve from the rule of Justice; the people will serve you as the
Levite served his Concubine; they will quarter your faults and send them up and
down the Kingdom, with a was it ever thus? I commend Jehoshaphats counsel to
your serious consideration, 2 Chronicles: 19. 6. 7. He said to the Judges, Take
heed what you do: for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you
in the judgment; wherefore let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed
and do it: for there is no Iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of
persons, nor taking of gifts. You are summoned and have a charge given you by
the spirit of God, Psalm. 2: 10. Be wise now therefore ye Kings: and be
instructed ye Judges of the earth. You have the name Elohim, Psalm. 82. 6. I
have said ye are Gods, and all of you are children of the most high. Do you
as God would do. He would relieve the oppressed, acquit the innocent,
condemn the nocent, stand for the poor man in a righteous cause. He would
have Achans, Zimri^s, Cosbies, Blasphemers, Murderers, Idolaters, Adulterers
punished. Remember (I humbly entreat you) that Justice is God's Legacy and you
are Executours and Administratours thereof; be careful to have the will of God
performed. I beseech your patience in a few humble requests which I shall make
unto you before I conclude.

I entreat you for poor Prisoners, for their souls and bodies. For To the
Judges.
their souls that they may have some to teach them the Knowledge of God. And
for their bodies that they may not be starved in prison, and lie in a pit,
wherein is no water. Prisons are often times Nurseries of all wickedness: and
that which is a place of restraint is employed in all manner of licentious
outrage: so that none are more vile, and wicked than Iaylours and their
Prisoners.

2. I entreat you to encourage the faithful ministry of the Kingdom. As for
Baals or Bacchus Priests that make God's sacrifice to be abhorred, I wish an
Ostracisme to them, a tumbling out of their places, (if they evidence not
signal Repentance) I plead only for men pious, orthodox, learned, help them to
bread, help them to books. If the nurse be starved, the child will be
starved. Help them to encounter with the mighty, who refuse to pay them their
dues, because they dare not give the Sacrament to them that are Scandalous,
when as many times such as they refuse are fitter to go a grazing with
Nebucadnezzar amongst the beasts of the field. Because some Conscientious
ministers have refused to give the Sacrament to drunkards, swearers and
adulterers, some have detained their maintenance from them.

3. I have a word to speak in behalf of this University. I speak to a Person
of learning, my argument is, maintain that (my Lord) which maintains you. We
desire no Prelaticall Pomp or domination, but only our just rights and
privileges, that Religion and learning may be countenanced by your Authority.

4. I have a word to speak for the Town. I beseech you subdue the Alehouses,
the Nurseries of the Devil. There Is a good expedient and a pious work begun
very lately, a workhouse and some poor are set to work in it. I humbly crave
your encouragement, and counsel that it may not be crushed in the Bud, nor
sink for want of your assistance.

And you the honorable Bench, the Justices of the County. I beseech To the
^ono^^ble bench.
you to lay forth all your Interests to promote the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.
Labor to be as so many isntrumental Saviors for your Country: punish
swearing and blasphemies. There is an Act in the beginning of Q. Eliz: that
such as maintained Heresies condemned by the four General Counsels should be
burnt to ashes You have a late Ordinance of Parliament for your warrant, nay
rather the Ordinance of God, Levit. 24. 16. He that blasphemeth the name of
the Lord, h^e shall surely be put to death, and all the congregation shall
certainly stone him; as well the stranger, as he that is borne in the land,
when he blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall be put to death. Try your
skill, and put forth your skill to subdue the lewd Alehouses. Mr Bolton said in
an Assise sermon, that it was easier to take Dunkirke than put down an
Alehouse. Dunkirke was not long since taken; would the Alehouses were put
down. You must sear these Hydras, else new heads will spring up. Give not any
just cause to any to complain that the Justice swears himself, and will not
punish swearing; that the Justice is a good fellow himself and will not punish
drunkenness. I hope better things of you. Purge your families; keep no
swearers, drunkards, adulterers, sabath-breakers within your roof. Give them
not harbor for secular Interest, but resolve that if they will not serve God,
let them not serve you, according to Joshuas practice, chap. 24. 15. If it
seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve,
whether the God's which your fathers served, that were on the other side of the
flood, or the Gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and
my house we will serve the Lord. Set the 101 Ps. as a just standard and rule
to go by. TheMaxime of Constantius was, He cannot be faithful unto me, that
is unfaithful unto God. Remember the National Covenant taken in a day of
distress, for which there will be a day of account; to go before each other
in a real example of reformation. That Covenant is not an Almanac out of
date, but obliges us (as the Tenor runs) all the days of our life.

You the learned, Lawyers I have a word to say to you. To the Lawyers.


Do not patronize unrighteous causes. Set not your tongues to sale, to bolster
a bad cause. See Isai. 5. 20. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good
evil, and put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter. Do not wiredraw Clients suites. Do not snarle
and entangle a cause with needless perplexities to tire out the poor Client
with tedious attendances. Take heed likewise of base mercenarie silence, when
the right of the cause and just engagements require you to speak. Tamper not
about secular business on the Lord's day: Verbum sapientibus: abundans cautela
non nocet.

You the grand Inquest, let me be a remembrancer of your To the Grand-Inquest.
duty.

Inquire into the sins of your County. Are there not Blasphemers,
Sabbath Breakers, Prodigious swearers, Opressers, Adulterers? Make of them
faithful Presentiments. Do not you see what abundance of mischiefs Alehouses
produce? what a great deal of service they do the Devil? Labor I beseech
you to disposess the Devil of his strong holds. Purge your Towns and
Families. Who knows but that ye are called to such a time as this? You have a
price put into your hands, Oh! let it not be a price put into the hands of
fools, who want hearts to make the best improvement of it. As you love the
Gospel, your lives, livelyhoods; as you consult the good of your Country, and
tender the safety of the land of our Nativity, strive to beat down sin, to
reform your lives, that so God may turn away from his fierce anger.

And to you all high and low; of what rank or condition soever I address my
exhortation, as Amos 4. 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel, and
because I will do thus, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Zeph. 2. 1. Gather
your selves together, yea gather together O Nation not desired: etc: so Joel 2.
12. Therefore also now, thus says the Lord; Turn ye unto me with all your
hearts, with weeping, fasting and mourning.

And you that remember least, be sure to remember my text. Carry it home with
you and put it in practice, Hate the evil, and love the Good, and establish
judgment in the gate: It may be that the Lord God of hosts will be gracious
to the remnant of Joseph.

The Fountain opened: Or Free Grace discovered,
From Zech. 13. 1. In that day there shall be a Fountain opened to the House of
David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness.


A Word spoken in due season, is like Apples of Sermon. 8. At St. Mary's Oxon.
May. 17. 1649.
Gold in Pictures of Silver, Prove. 15. v. 11. My Text is such a precious,
seasonable Word, even a Word of Comfort opportunely administered to the Mourners
in Zion: For you may cast your eyes on chap. 12. v. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and
there you may read how deeply the Children of God drank of the Cup of Mourning;
they had tears plentifully given them to drink, and their sorrow is not an
ordinary, but a soaking, bitter sorrow, ver. 10. And I will pour upon the house
of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of
supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourn^th for his only son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.

A midst these sorrows, this Evangelical Prophet holds forth the M^ssias Jesus
Christ, the chiefest joy, to swallow up an Ocean of sorrows.

So that the words read are a Prophecy of Jesus Christ, tendering his free
grace and mercy to a people broken with godly sorrow for sin: Whilst tears are
in their eyes, and sorrows in their hearts, soulravishing joys and consolations
are promised from the presence of God: In that day there shall be a fountain
opened.

Wherein observe, First a Mercy promised; not a stream, but a The Text divided.
fountain.

2. The extent and greatness of the Mercy in hand; not a fountain sealed, locked
up, but opened.

3. The opportunity, In that day.

4. The persons to whom this great rich Mercy is promised, to the house of
David, etc.

5. The end and benefit accruing, for sin and for uncleanness.

To give a brief Paraphrase on the Words: They are a Prophecy of the wonderful
Redemption and Sanctification of sinners by the Blood of Christ; It Is said; In
that day, (i. e) a day of sorrow and mourning for sin, after they had been
sensible of sin, thoroughly humbled, felt the Gall and Wormwood, bewailed the
bitterness of sin, then joy comes after sorrow: After the people had mourned
for their sins against Christ, then Christ washes them and cleanses them;
when sin has been their greatest sorrow, then comes Christ, and is their
greatest joy. It is said, A fountain, O rich mercy! A fountain opened, O
height of mercy! Free grace is offered, justification, and sanctification by
the blood of Jesus Christ: He is the inexhausted fountain; his blood is never
drawn dry; neither is the Exchequer of his grace locked up, so that none can
come at it: but it is opened, and freely tendered for the house of David, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem. This fountain is opened for them, they are washed and
cleansed in the meritorious laver of Christ's blood. But why to them? v. 10. to
them is promised the pouring of the spirit, and to them is Christ promised,
they are sensible of the bitterness of sin, they know how to relish the
sweetness of a Messiah. The fountain is opened to them exclusive, and to them
only; To others it is a Fountain sealed. Christ came to save his people. There
are a peculiar people, whom Christ loves, washes, saves; and these are the
house of David and Jerusalem, (i e) the Children of God in Covenant. It Is said
for sin and for uncleanness: whatever pollutions and impurities are in the
Saints, here they are invited to come and wash and Rev: 1. 5.
be clean. This fountain of the blood of Christ washes and cleanses the
house of David and Jerusalem from all sin and impurity.

This scripture requires a fuller Exposition: but it is my purpose to draw forth
the Doctrines, and in the explication of the doctrines to insist on a larger
exposition of the words.

Two doctrines which are principally held forth are these.

1. When the children of God are soakt in their tears of godly sorrow for sin,
then in that season divine refreshing consolations come from the presence of
God.

2. There Is a fountain of free grace and mercy in Jesus Christ opened to purge
and cleanse his people, from all their sins and impurities.

I resume the first doctrine, andfor the enlargment of it I propound Method of
handling the first Doctrine.
this following Method.

1. To select scripture examples for illustration and Encouragement.

2. To confirm it by scripture reasons for conviction and plenary probation.

3. To draw down some scripture counsels and exhortations for the better
ordering of our lives and conversations.

The former shall constitute the doctrinall part of the text: This last the use
and application.

For the first, for scripture examples, time would fail me, if 1 Scripture
Examples.
I should enlarg my self in so great a Cloud of witnesses. There Is a
plentiful heap, I shall gather sparingly, and select only some choice
remar^^ble examples.

God comforts profane people and exiles from the Covenant, in the day of their
distresses, much more will he comfort his own people. A father will not take
care of a Kite and neglect his child. Hagar was comforted and Ishmael in a
necessary instant, when the bottle was spent, and they knew not what to do.

Further, in temporal mercies God answers his people seasonably: When
Aegypt's flower was spent, then it rained Mannah. I may instance in Sampsons
thirst, Elijahs fasting, etc. An Angel, a Raven, a Brook, a Widow-woman, were
his Purveyers. But I Will enlarge the proof in spiritual things and persons.
Daniel found divine assistance in the Lions den. Dan. chap. 6. 22. chap. 9. 21,
22. My God has sent his Angel, and has shut the Lions mouths, that they have
not hurt me: Forasmuch as before him innocence was found in me: and also
before thee, O King, have I done noe hurt. chap. 9. Yea whiles I was speaking
in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the
beginning, being caused to fly swiftly touched me about the time of evening
oblation. David amidst multitudes of distracting thoughts found God his
comfort. Ps. 94. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts
delight my soul. Paul in a ^ore conflict met with seasonable refreshing
comforts. 2 Cor. 12. 9. And he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee:
for my strength is made perfect in weakness: most gladly therefore will I
rather glory in my infirmities that the power of Christ may rest upon me, so
true is that Ps. 126. 1. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we
were like them that dream; then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our
tongue with singing: Then said they among the Heathen; the Lord has done great
things for them. Isai. 16. 1, 2, 3. The spirit of the Lord God is upon me;
because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he
has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the
captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaim
the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to
comfort all that mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto
them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise, for
the spirit of heaviness, that they might be called trees of righteousness,
the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified. When there is a double
tale of bricks required, Cum duplicantur lateres veni^ deus.
then comes God, and brings deliverance: when 430 years for Isreal's coming
out of Egypt, 70 for coming out of Babylon, 13 for the daughter of Abraham,
36 for the impotent cripple were expired, then came seasonable deliverance. So
for morning for sin, In that day, and whilst Mary was weeping, Christ came.
When the Disciples were going to Emmaus and discoursing of Christ, then comes
Christ and cleares up their judgments. 2 Scripture Reasons. Reason. 1.


The scripture reasons are, 1. Because God has prefixed and limited a peculiar
time for deliverance. When the fit season is come, the appointed time of God,
then deliverance will come and will not tarry. Heb. 10. 36, 37. For ye have
need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the
promise, for yet a little while and he that shall come, will come and will not
tarry.

2. God would have a people prepared for him. Mat. 3. 3. This is he that was
spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.

3. The price of the mercy will be the more esteemed. O how Israel in the
brick-Kilne? misery will make us priz^ mercy at the highest rate.

4. The greater glory will redound to God, when he helps at a Ps. 46. 1. God
is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.

5. It Is usual with God to look upon a people in a low estate that Isai. 33.
9. 10. The earth mourns and languisheth, Lebanon is ashamed and h^wen down;
Sharon is like a wilderness; and Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits, Now
will I rise, says the Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my
self. Deuteronomy. 32. 36. For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself
for his servants, when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none
shut up or left. 2 Kings. 14. 26. For the Lord saw the affliction of Israel,
that it was very bitter, for there was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any
helper for Israel. Thus was the poor woman healed by Jesus Christ, when she
lost all upon Physicians. And joy came after a great mourning in my text.

6. All the gifts and graces of the spirit will be set a working; viz.

Now I Will cast the scripture counsels into an use of exhortation.

1. Be exhorted to possess your souls with patience. Luke. 21. ^9. In your
patience possess ye your souls. Heb. 10. 36. For ye have need of patience,
that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise. Be
patient, wait quietly upon God.

2. Encourage your selves in God. so did David. 1 Samuel: 30. 6.

3. Learn to live by faith. Heb. 2. 4. The just shall live by faith.

4. Be much in prayer. Ask, and ye shall receive.

5. Limit not the holy one of Israel to times or means. It was the Israelites
great fault, in Limiting the holy one of Israel.

6. Take heed of omitting duties, or of abating of love, zeal, meditation,
etc. Add to thy duties. If God send not comfort at one time, it may come at
another, and that may be a more convenient time. Knock harder, cry louder,
wrestle, tug harder at the oar.

But the other doctrine is the Principal (which I intend) and I That there is a
fountain etc.

The invitations are many Isai. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye
to the waters, and he that has no mon^y: come ye, bye and eat, yea come, buy
wine and milk without money and without price. John. 7. 37. If any man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink. Rev. 22. 17. And the spirit and the bride say,
Come; and let him that hears say, come, And let him that is athirst come, And
whosoever will, let him come and take of the waters of life freely. Rev. 21. 6.
I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life
freely. And the virtues of this fountain are set forth, John. 4. 14. Whosoever
drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but the water
that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up into
everlasting life. This fountain was opened for Manasseh, a bloody sinner. 2 Chronicles. 33. 12, 13. And when he was in affliction he befought the Lord his God,
and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers. And prayed unto
him, and he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him
again unto Jerusalem into his Kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he
was God. This fountain was opened for Saul, a cruel persecutor. Act. 9. 3, 4.
And as he journyed he came near Damascus, and suddenly there shined round
about him a light from Heaven. And he fell to the earth and heard a voice
saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? This fountain was opened
for the poor woman, a grievous sinner. Luke 7. 47. Wherefore I say un to thee,
Her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much: but to whom little
is forgiven, the same loves little. The woman with the bloody issue believed
it, and she will make trial. Mat. 9. 20, 21. And behold a woman which was
diseased with an issue of blood 12 years came behind him, and touched the hem
of his garment. For she said within her self, if I may touch his garment, I
shall be whole. The woman when she had spent all upon Physicians, which were of
no value, was cured by Christ both in body and soul. Luke. 8. 48. And he said
unto her, Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole; go in
peace.

And what is the reason? why is there such a fountain opened? No other but free
love and bowels opened. Sin endeavors to lock up this fountain: free grace,
love, and mercy opens this fountain.

But how comes such virtue in this fountain?

A. This is the fountain and original of all virtue.

Q. But who are to wash in this fountain?

A. All are invited, none excluded, but such as exclude themselves, such as are
not sensible of their sins, who apprehend not their pollutions, will never take
the pains to come hither and wash.

My text is free grace exalted, bowels opened, mercy heightened, gospel
enlarged. Here Is the Gospel Exchequer full of riches and precious things.
Here Is the brazen serpent erected, the golden scepter held forth; If we come
not to this exchequer, look not up to this serpent, take not hold of this
scepter, the fault is our own. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in
me is thine help. Hos. 13. 9.

Q. But who are washed and cleansed?

A. The house of David and Jerusalem, the children of God, that are sensible of
their misery, mourners for sin: such as apprehend themselves stunge look to
the brazen serpent. Such as are humbled for sin are in a capacity of receiving
Christ: such as are mourners in Zion shall have beauty for ashes, the oil of
joy for mourning. And those that have thus mourned as for an only son shall
have the benefit of this fountain.

The invitation is large, Luke 14. 17. And he sent his servant at supper time
to say unto them that were bidden, Come: for now all things are ready. But read
their shifting excuse in the verse following. They all with one consent began
to make excuse, The first said, I have bought a piece of ground and I must go
and see it, have me excused. Jesus Christ is freely tendered and offered sermon
after sermon, and frequently in these gospel dispensations; but how few
embrace him. Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation,
which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by
them that heard him? The fountain is full enough, large enough, O come hither,
wash and be clean. But you cannot come, unless you be drawn by the father;
neither will you come unless you be sensible of your own vileness,
pollutions, impurities, and of the wondersull virtue Ca^. 1. 4. John. 6. 44.
that is in this fountain to wash and cleanse you. Of this more anon.

You hear my text is pure gospel: It holds forth the pearl of the Gospel
Jesus Christ. My message from God to you is to persuade you to imitate the wise
Merchant, To fell all for the purchase of the Pearl of great price, Its a
fountain, and there is no fcarcity at Math. 13. 46.
the fountain. Its a fountain opened, and there is riches of mercy. My
invitation from God this day is to humble sinners such as are sensible of their
lost condition, to come and wash in this fountain. Be thou never so much
polluted: yet this fountain can cleanse thee. Let not thy sins hinder and
discourage thy coming; but come quicklier, and hasten thy pace. This Exchequer
will pay all thy debts; This Fountain will make thee clean: I do not, I dare
not open a gap to Licentiousness: But I enlarge the riches of free grace and
mercy. Do thou thirst? Here Is an invitation. Art thou a godly mourner this
day? Here Is a fountain opened. Be thy sins crimson sins, double dyed? O
now come in to Jesus Christ. Here Is a plaster every way as broad as the sore.
Be they as scarlet? Christ's blood will make them as white as wool. This
fountain does miracles, which none other can do. For it washes the
Ethiopian, and cleanses the Leopard. Will you then perish for want of water,
and there is a fountain? Will you lie and die in your sins, notwithstanding
salvation is tendered, and thewater of life offered freely? O! desperate,
sottish sinners, though God would heal them; yet they will not be healed:
though God would enrich them; yet they look not after his riches, nor value
them at all: Though he would cleanse them, yet they will not come to the
fountain. It Is said Genesis 21. 19. God opened Hagars eyes to see a well: It is
God alone that can open thine eyes to see this fountain. The fountain may be
hard by us, Christ may be tendered, and yet we may not see nor hear him. Let
God be true and every man a Liar.

More I shall speak in this Kind, when I come to the Application. Meth^d
propounded.


For a more full and profitable handling of this precious Doctrine, I shall
propound this Method.

1. I shall discover the Analogy and Resemblance between Christ and a
Fountain.

2. How Christ may be said to be a Fountain opened.

3. For whom this fountain is opened.

4. The wonderful benefits that flow from this fountain to the Children of
God.

Fifthly, and Lastly, I shall set all home unto your Consciences by particular
application. 1. What Analogy there is between Christ and a fountain^.


First, What Analogy and resemblance there is between Christ and a fountain.

The Analogy holds good in these ensuing particular respects.

1. There Is fulness of water in a fountain; No want at the well spring, the
well head: There Is the confluence of waters, there is water in abundance; bring
never so many vessels, yet there is water enough to fill them. So there is
fullness in Jesus Christ, of mercy to pardon, wisdom to counsel,
righteousness to justify, holiness to sanctify; fullness of grace and
fullness of glory. Col. 1. 19. For it pleased the father that in him should all
fuln^sse dwell.

2. There Is a communication of the water of a fountain to the streams: So
there is a communication of grace from Christ to his members, John. 1. 16. Of
his fullness we receive, and grace for grace. The Head has influence upon the
members: From Christ we receive Union. John. 17. 21. So runs Christ's prayer,
That they all may be one as thou father art in me, and I in thee, that they
also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent me. And
from Christ we receive Communion. 1 John. 1. 3. That which we have seen^ and
heard that declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, and
truly our fellowship is with the father and his son Jesus Christ. Now Christ
derives virtue upon his members. Virtue flows from him to cure his peoples
maladies. Christ is the tree Rev. 22. 2. In the midst of the street of it, and
on either side of the river was the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of
fruits, and yielded her fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree were for
the healing of the nations. Christ's blood is diffusive, and takes in all his
people, not one member can be wanting. Look upon the fountain and acknowledge
Christ: whatever grace thou receivest is derivative from Jesus Christ.

3. A fountain is said to have liveing waters. Waters in a Pond are dead in a
metaphorical sense: they stir not, they run not, they purge not: But waters in
a fountain are called liveing waters; they convey waters to the streams, they
are continually running from it: So in a peculiar manner Jesus Christ is a
fountain of liveing waters. The Lord complains, Jer. 2. 13. My people have
committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of liveing waters,
and hewed to themselves cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no water. God
is called the fountain of life. Ps. 36. 9. For with thee is the fountain of
life, in thy light shall we see light.

The Lord Christ alone can give life unto his people. His blood is not dried
up, it stands not still, but is continually running and flowing to his members.

4. A fountain sends forth pure waters. James 3. 11, 12. Does a fountain
send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter? Can the fig tree (my
Brethren) bear olive berries? either a vine, figs: so can no fountain both
yield salt water and fresh. A fountain entertaines no Garbidge nor Carrion.
And most properly is Christ compared to a fountain in regard of purity. He is
purity it self, and purifieth his people: There Is no Impurity in him: yet some
impurity cleaves to his people as long as they are in this world. There Is
fullness of purity in him, in us only a measure; in him absolute persection, in
us a mixture of sin, Rev. 22. 1. And he showed me a pure river of water of
life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and the Lamb.
Such shall be the Saints condition in Heaven.

5ly and lastly. Christ is compared to a fountain for perpetuity. A sountaine
continually supplieth the streams, and is never drawn dry. Now Christ is a
fountain inexhausted. Many go with Pitchers and return, and we meet with
many men in the way going to fill their Pitchers: yet there is enough for thee
too. Be sensible of thy want of Christ, entertain a spiritual thirst of him;
and there is an invitation for thee too. Though a thousand come unto him with
Pitchers, and go away replenished: yet there is enough in the fountain for
millions more: Therefore go not to creatures, broken empty cisternes, streams
quite dried up, or running very low. But to Jesus Christ the inexhausted
fountain; Millions of Pitchers filled cannot draw him dry: by communicating to
them the fountain loses not one drop of water.

2. But in the next place it comes to be enquired; How 2. How may Christ be
said to be a fountain opened?
may Christ be said to be a Fountain opened? we read the contrary, Cant. 4.
12. A garden enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse, a spring shut up, a fountain
sealed. By a fountain opened Diodate. understands the grace of God in
remission of sins and sanctification of spirit shall be proferred to all
believers in Christ. The fountain is sealed to Unbelievers and Reprobates: Yet
because we know not the secret decrees of God concerning election and
Reprobation, we are to make an Invitation to all to come in, and to make a
Proclamation to all thirsty souls, Isai. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts,
come to the waters, and he that has no money come buy and eat, yea come buy
wine and milk without money and without price. Our duty is to invite all
sinners to repentance, And we have a warrant to tell all true penitent
sinners, that mourn for sin, that the fountain is open for them. In this
sense Christ is said to open the kingdom of Heaven to all Believers. Opening
does imply a shutting. Sin shuts us out of Heaven, and bolts the door
against us. Every sin thou committest ponit obicem, hinders thy access unto
Christ. But Jesus Christ opens the door and takes away the bolt. Jesus Christ
is said to be a fountain opened in these particular Respects.

1. When he opens his bowels of Love and compassion, and 1. God opens his
bowels of compassion.
tenders himself, his virtue, his holiness to sanctify, and his
righteousness to justify. The free offer of himself in his Gospel
dispensations is a clear manifestation of a Fountain opened.

2. When he takes off the bars and bolts from the door, remooves obstacles
and Impediments that lie in the passage. We cannot 2. God takes off bars and
bolts from the door.
find the door; the Lord opens our eyes and directs us to it. When we have
found it, sin puts bars and bolts and locks on it; Christ removes them.
Sin lies in the way as so many stumbling blocks: But Christ removes these
stumbling blocks, and admits us into the presence chamber. By him we have
access unto the Throne of grace, Romans 5. 2. The partition wall is taken away
and distances are removed.

3. It appears the fountain is opened, because so many come 3. Many come with
Pitchers to the Fountain.
with Pitchers to be filled at the Fountain. There Is such a great concourse of
thirsty persons to the waters. When the Fountain is locked, you shall see none,
but when it is opened, many are there ready to fill their empty Tankards. Isai.
55. 1. Whosoever is thirsty is invited there to come and draw water. When the
Fountain is opened and men apprehend their thirst they will hasten to the
waters.

4. The fountain is opened, because God sends messengers to 4. God sends
Messengers to invite.
invite, and guides to direct to it. The ministers Embass^e is to invite men
and women to come unto this Fountain, to persuade them to reconciliation, 2
Cor. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God. It Is our
maine business to beseech and entreat men to take Christ, and to come unto this
fountain.

5. Now is the day of grace, the opportunity and season offered from 5. Now is
the day of grace.
God, a price put into our hands. Now Christ tenders himself and his benefits;
Now the counsel is a word in due season, Isai: 55. 6, 7. Seek ye the Lord
while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy 6. The Lord opens to us.
upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

6. The Lord himself now opens to us; and this is evident, because he knocks
for us to open to him, Rev. 3. 20. Behold, I stand 6. The Lord opens to us.
at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will
come in unto him, and I will sup with him and he with me. And the Lord affords
us several Hammers to knock at his door withal, viz. especially,

4. Hammers God uses to knock withal.

1. The Hammer of his word. Every sermon you hear is a 1. Hammer of the word.
knocking at the do^res of your hearts. God makes use of his Messengers as his
mouth, Jer. 15. 19. Thou shall stand before me, and if thou take forth the
precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth. However the Ministers of
God be despised and evil entreated, Christ accounts the affronts offered to
them, equal to those he met withal immediately offered unto himself, Luk
10. 10. But into whatsoever City you enter and they receive you not, go out
into the streets of the same, and say, even the very dust of your City that
cleaves on us, we shak off against you. By the sermons you hear God knocks
at your hearts, Ezekiel. 25. and Ezekiel. 33. 30, 31, 32, 33. They speak each one to
another, saying, Come and hear what is the word that comes forth from the
Lord, they sit before thee as my people and hear thy words, but will not do
them.

2. The hammer of his spirit. The spirit breaths upon the waters. 2. Hammer
of the spirit.
How many strivinges, waitings, whispers of the spirit are there to draw us
unto God. We are exhorted not to quench the spirit, nor grieve the spirit. The
Lord will once say as Genesis 6. 3. My spirit shall not always strive with man.

3. The Hammer of mercies. God knocks at our hearts by mercies, peace,
prosperity. There Is a prevalent exhortation, Romans 12. 1. 3. Hammer of mercies.
I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.
To us he speaks by mercies. We are brands plucked out of the burning, and have
our lives for a prey. It Is mercy we enjoy peace in our Borders, we are free
as yet from the Plague, Famine, and the sword; we enjoy the peace of the
Gospel, and the Gospel of peace.

4. God knockes sometimes by the Hammers of judgment, sometimes 4. The Hammer
of Judgments.
by the Sword, Plague, and other Calamities (though at present we are free) our
duty is, Jer. 6. 8. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from
thee, lest I make thee desolate and a land not inhabited. We should learn
righteousness at all times, especially when judgments are amongst us, Isai. 26.
9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within
me will I se^k thee early: for when thy judgments are in the earth, the
inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness, Micah. 6. 9. Hear ye the
rod, who has appointed it.

It appears, farther that the fountain is opened, because God God affords the
right key. One false key is Free Will.
has afforded us the right keys to open it. There are three false keys, and
four true keys.

The first false Key is free will. O says the sinner, I Will repent hereafter: I
shall have time enough.

But is repentance in thy power? Velle naturae, male velle corruptae naturae,
b^ne velle gratiae, Phil. 2. 13. For it is God who works in you both to will
and to do of his own good pleasure, Jam. 1. 18. Of his own will begat he us
with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his
Creatures. Free Will is an Egyptian reed, it will deceive us. Jer. 10. 23. O
Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that
walk^th to direct his steps. Sams^ns case is very observable, Judge. 16. 20. And
she said, the Philistines be upon thee Samson, and he awoke out of sleep, and
said, I will go out as at other times before and shake my self, and he wist
not that the Lord was departed from him. Man can undo himself, and mar
himself, but cannot save himself, Hos. 13. 9. O Israel, thou have destroyed
thy self, but in me is thy help.

2. A second false key is universal grace and redemption. Christ died A 2d
false key is universal Redemption.
for all, (say some) tasted death for every man, for Cain and Judas, as well as
David and Paul, many plead and think by this key to open the Fountain: but
it is a false key and will not unlock the fountain Door. The latter part of the
Text which they urge expounds the former: they urge, Joh. 316. God so loved the
world that he gave his only begotten-Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have life everlasting. And that in 2 Cor. 5. 15. And
that he died for all: But what follows? that they which live should not
h^nceforth live unto themselves, but unto him who died for them and rose
again. They urge likewise, Heb. 2. 9. But we see Jesus who was made a little
lower than the Angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and
honor, that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man. The grace
and free love of God moved him to bestow this transcendent benefit on his
people, only, not for the whole world. Romans 5. 18. Therefore as by the offense
of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation: even so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to justification of life.
Here is hended the universality of Christ's body. Adam was a common Root, and
brought death unto all his Posterity. And Christ was a common Root and brought
life unto all his Posterity. They urge likewise Joh. 1. 29. Behold the lamb of
God which takes away the sins of the world. A. Those in the world whom he
loves, washes and justifies, it is not universal, not singula gen^rum, but
genera singulorum. Compare this with Mat. 1. 21. And she shall bring forth a
son, and thou shall call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from
their sins.

The third false key is presumption of long life and mercy. Neither A third
false key, Presumption of long life.
space nor grace are in thine own power. God gave Jezabel space, but denied her
grace, Rev. 2. 21. And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she
repented not. This presumption has ruined many a soul. Many neglect their
opportunities, run their swinge and career in sin and presume of mercy; but
the door of mercy is shut against them, and this key cannot unlock it.

Now God affords four true keys.

1. Knowledge. The eyes are opened to see the fountain, to 1. True key,
knowledge.
look up to the brazen serpent. The knowledge of the worth of Christ provokes
us to come to him. God's people have enlightened judgments, they are renewed in
the spirit of their minds, Ephesians. 4. 23.

2. Faith to believe that there is virtue enough in Christ to cure all 2. True
key, Faith.
our diseases, both of body and soul, Matthew 9. 21. For she said within her
self, if I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole.

3. Love. And this will make us take many journies, long and dangerous, through
foul weather, and it will sweeten all. The 3. True key Love.
beloved object when enjoyed will make amends for all the waiting for it.

4. Repentance, mourning for sin. Repentance in us causes 4. True key,
Repentance.
God to repent and make his bowels like the sounding of an Harp, Jer. 31. 18
19, 20. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; Thou have chastised me,
and I was chastised as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; turn thou me and
I shall be turned: for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was turned
I repented; and after that I was instructed I smote upon my thigh; I was
ashamed, even confounded, I did b^are the reproach of my youth. Is Ephraim my
dear son? Is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I do
earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will
surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. You must understand these clave non
errante, not as if the fountain was merited for any of these duties: for when
we have done all we can, we must acknowledge that we are unprofitable
servants. But God has afforded these means, keys, and helps, we must make
use of them, but may not make them our Christ's, and our Saviors.

5. I will add a 5th, Prayer. This is a key to open and shut 5th True key
prayer.
Heaven, James 5. 17, 18. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are,
and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not upon the
earth by the space of three years and six months. And he prayed again, and
the h^aven gave rain and the earth brought forth her fruit. Pray that God
would wash thee and cleanse thee, Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me, O Lord, a clean
heart, and ren^w a right spirit within me.

3. I proceed to the third head propounded. For whom is this 3. For whom is
this Fountain opened.
fountain opened? To give in my answer, 'Ile lay down this truth by way of
corollary inferred from the premises. That the fountain of free grace is only
opened to the adopted children of God.

This I shall open and apply briefly, for opening whereof I shall propound
these ensuing considerations.

1. God from all eternity has elected a peculiar people unto himself Consid.
1. God from all eternity has elected a peculiar people unto himself.
according to his owngood pleasure and purpose of his will.

Now election is of here and there one. It Is an act of choice, taking some, and
passing by others, Jer. 3. 14. Turn, O backsliding children says the Lord:
for I am married unto you, and I will take you, one of a City and two of a
family and I will bring you unto Zion. Like gleaning grapes. Isai. 17. 6. Yet
gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shak^ing of an olive tree, two or
three berries in the top of the uppermost bough: four or five in the utmost
fruitful branches thereof, says the Lord God of Israel. This election has no
other motive but free love and grace. We were in our blood, Ezekiel. 16. 5: When
I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy own blood; I said unto thee when
thou wast in thy blood live; yea I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood,
live. No provision of faith, or Repentance moved God to set his heart upon us,
as appears, Romans 9. 11. For the children being not yet borne, neither having
done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might
stand, not of work^s: but of him that calls, etc. This Postulatum being laid
down for undeniable, God from all eternity has elected a peculiar people;
Hence I frame this syllogism; only the elect have interest in the fountain of
free grace and mercy. But only God's adopted children are elect, ergo, they
only have interest in it.

2. There are a peculiar people who alone are justified by the free grace of
God in Christ, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith we have Consid. 2. There
are a peculiar poople justified by free grace.
p^ace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 3. 24. Being justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Now thus I
argue. Only justified persons have interest in the fountain of Christ's blood:
But the sons of God by grace and adoption are only justified persons, Ergo,
they alone have interest in the fountain of Christ's blood, Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
Blessed is he whose trangression is forgiven, whose sin is covered: Blessed
is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there
is no guil^. Justification is a forensicall term took from an earthly
Tribunal, where a person arraigned and condemned, is afterward by virtue of a
pardon acquitted.

3ly. Consider there are a peculiar people effectually called. Many Consid. 3.
There are a peculiar people effectually called.
have an outward calling, and take upon them an outward profession few are
inwardly and effectually called. This the Apostle presses, 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election
sure: for if you do these things you shall never fall. There are a few, and
but a very few, called out of the world, partakers of a holy calling, called to
be Saints. These alone have interest in this fountain.

4. Consider there are a peculiar people for whom alone Christ Consid. 4.
There are a peculiar people for whom Christ prayeth^
prays, Joh. 17. 9. I Pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them
which thou have given me, for they are thine. Those for whom Christ prays
have alone interest in this fountain. But the adopted children of God are
those for whomalone Christ prays, ergo, etc.

5. There are a peculiar people whom Christ washes and sanctifies, Consid. 5.
There are a peculiar people whom Christ washes.
Revel. 1. 5. And from Jesus Christ who is the faithful witness and the first
begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth, unto him that
loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood, Joh. 13. 8. Peter
says unto him, thou shall never wash my feet, Jesus said unto him, If I wash
thee not, thou have no part with me, Ephesians. 5. 26. That he might sanctify and
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word,

6ly, and lastly; There are a peculiar people whom Christ will Consid. 6. There
are a^peculiar people whom Christ justifies.
glorify and save. He came to save his people. The Climax is on this wise,
whom he elects, those he calls, and whom he calls, those he justifies, and
whom he justifies, those he sanctifies, for them he prays, and them he
glorifieth: and these are his adopted children. They that are outcasts from the
covenant of grace: even all Unbelievers and Reprobates have no interest in this
fountain, They have the false Key and cannot open it.

1. Now to apply this briefly (before I come to the larger Application,) Inf. 1.
The first inference will be to justify the ways and proceedings of God. On
whom he will, he has mercy, and the Potter has power over the clay; and who
dare make responsations against his maker? God chooses poor, mean,
contemptible; passes by great, wise, rich men. All comes from his (...), his
decrees of election and reprobation are just and righteous altogether; they
stand not, nor fall to our Consciences and determinations. God chooses a David,
passes by an Eliab; chooses a Jac^b, passes by an Esau: chooses an Isack, and
passes by an Ishmael; and all according to the counsel of his will, without
prevision of works in the creature.

2. Be informed how few come to Heaven; few have interest in Christ, few shall
be saved, (...), the house of David and Inf. 2.
inhabitants of Jerusalem.

3. Make have to this fountain: Labor to be of this number: Clear up your
evidences for Christ: But this shall further be applied in it is peculiar place.

I come to the 4th Head propounded, what are the virtues of this Inf. 3.
fountain? 4. What are the virtues of this fountain. 1.


Amongst many I shall instance in five.

1. Here Is a cleansing virtue in this fountain to wash the Ethiopian, to make
crimson sins as white as wool, to purify thy nature, to wash filth and
guilt from off thy soul.

2. There Is an healing virtue. Many wells among us cure diseases: But this well
of salvation cures both kinds of diseases, Psalm. 103. Who forgiveth all thine
iniquities, who heals all thy diseases.

3. There Is a cooling virtue. Water cooles thy body: This cooles thy spirit,
allayes thy passions, takes away thy heat. God's children

4. A fountain has a filling, sufficing virtue; it quenches the thirst, Joh.
4. 14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never
thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water
springing up unto everlasting life,

When we thirst after Creatures, our thirst is the more enraged: we are never
satisfied with broken Cisternes, empty pleasures, profits of the world. But
there is a fullness in Christ to satisfy our desires. Do we desire wisdom? In
him are treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Do we desire riches? his riches
are unsearcheable. All our fresh springes are in him. Open thy mouth wide and I
will fill it. He has fullness of righteousness, holiness, mercy, salvation;
Thou shall have as much as thy vessel can hold. According to a measure he
will derive of his fullness to thee.

5ly, and lastly. This fountain is perpetually running. The virtue of many
medicines last but for a month, a year, etc: but the virtue of Christ's blood
lasts to all eternity. This fountain can never be drawn dry: you can never
empty this fountain.

Now then to draw all home unto particular Application, (the larger part I
promised) I shall make 4. uses. viz. For consolation, examination, exhortation,
direction.

1. For a bundance of consolation unto the children of God; Use 1. For
Consolation.
the house of David and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, who have interest in this
fountain. To them it is wide open to cleanse them from all sorts of sins
and impurities.

Be they scarlet sins? yet by the blood of Christ they are made as white as
wool. Be they double dyed? yet Christ's blood washes them away. Manasseh,
David, Paul, Peter, Mary Magdalen found benefit by this fountain to wash and
cleanse them from all their sins and impurities. This I speak, not for wicked
men to snatch at, to encourage them in their presumption: but to encourage the
children of God to come and wash in this fountain, which is full enough, broad
enough, never drawn dry. Come then, make speed, wash and be clean. The blood
of Jesus Christ washes us from all sins, of all sorts and sizes, 1 John 1. 7.
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one
with an other, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.
It Is usual with the wicked of the world to reproach and cast into the teeth of
the godly their former faylings. I remember (says one) whatever he professes
now, this man was a swearer, a drunkard, etc. Let this rule be our monitour
where God forgiveth and forgets, we must forgive and forget. It Is true
peradventure a Saint now, was before his conversion scandalous in his life:
Blessed be God that has now opened his eyes that he sees, that he is pulled
out of Satan's snare from darkness, etc. And if thy eyes were open too, thou
durst not cast into his teeth his former failings. The child of God says, Ego
non sum Ego -- Quantum mutatus ab illo! There Is a real change for the better, a
work of grace wrought on the soul. Take heed of scandalizing and scorning the
generation of the righteous, 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you, but ye
are washed, but ye are sanctified; but ye are justifyd in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

You then that are washed in this fountain, rejoice and be glad that your
names are written in the book of life, that you have received a white stone, a
new name, the hidden Mannah. Stand then admiring and praising God that has
done so graciously for you, that when many even the greatest part of the world,
are shut out, cannot find the Door, are denied the right key, and the fountain
is locked and barred against them: yet it is opened wide to thee, thou art washed
and cleansed in this fountain: Not any goodness in thee; but free grace and
mercy makes the difference. Whatever aspersions, calumnies, reproaches thou
meetest withal in the world from ungodly men, be of good comfort, all is
washed away by the blood of Jesus Christ.

The world casts dirt on thee: Christ washes thee clean. O then do not
desponde, do not droop as without hope by reason of hardships, sufferings,
evil entreaties in and from the world. Drink of the waters of this fountain,
They are the Restorative to revive and refresh thy spirit. Thou meetest with
diseases, corporal, spiritual, oh come to this fountain. Its a medicine made
up of the blood of Jesus Christ: It will cure both diseases, of soul and body.

Thou see by experience, that the Cisternes of the creatures are dried up.
Honors, Pleasures, Profits decay and fail: tarry not at these cisternes, go
to the fountain, it is inexhausted. Thy manifold sins trouble and torment
thee; sin is a havy burden upon the conscience; thou art afraid to come. O!
be not afraid to do good unto thy own soul. This fountain works miracles,
cleanses the Ethiopian and the Leopards spots, even a persecuting Paul, a
perjured Peter, an adulterous David, and it is not shut against thee, unless
thou shut out thy selse. Be then of good comsort you that are God's children;
amidst your fainting fits you have this Aqua vitae. In your diseases and sores,
you have this sovereign plaster. Amidst your pollutions and defilements, you
have a fountain opened wide to wash and cleanse you in. In diseases,
afflictions, pollutions and all conditions whatsoever repair to this
fountain: the streams are healing, reviving, refreshing streams; O but my
sins are a bar against me! Ans: Art thou sensible of sins? thou art the
fitter to go: bewail thy sins, allow not thy self in them. Though sin
locks the Fountain door yet, free grace will open it wide again.

O! But I have been there and have not found any virtue!

Ans: Go again. The virtues of medicines are not presently discerned.
Medicines may work when thou least think of them.

A sermon preached now, if the Lord work by it, may do good many a year after.
Imitate Eliah's servant, who went over and over again; at last a cloud was
seen which maskt the whole Heaven. O but I question whether I have any right to
come, it is opened only to the house of David.

Ans: Do not shut out thy self, do not destroy thy self; the Invitation is
very large, Isai 55. 1. Ho every one that thirsts let let him come, etc. If
thou do but thirst thou have an invitation. To this purpose I proceed to a
second use which is for Use 2. for Examination.


Examination Let Us search andtry whether we have right to come, whether we
are so qualified as to receive benefit and virtue by this fountain.

I shall therefore propound 7 Qualifications.

1. We must see fully and discern the emptiness of all creature Qualif. 1.
We may see the emptiness of creature Cisternes.
cisterns. Jer. 2. 13. My people have committed two evils, they have forsaken
me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisternes, broken
cisternes that can hold no water. Creature cisternes are broken, they run
through (as a sive lets water fall to the ground) or are quite drawn dry.
Honor could not satisfy Haman. Riches could not satisfy Solomon. Luther
would not so be satisfied valde protestatus sum me n^lle satiari ab co.

2. Discern their vanity and emptiness, we must forsake them, Qualif. 2. We
emust forsake Cisterne Comforts.
Isai. 55. 2. Wherefore do do you spend money for that which is not bread? and
your labor for that which satisfies not, hearken diligently unto me and eat
ye that which is good and let your soul delight it self in fatness. We must
forsake these lying vanities, we must not stay by them, we must relinquish
them, and lean no more to broken staves: but value the world at it is own rate,
and break off all carnal confidences; we must bid honors, riches, profits,
pleasures adieu, so far forth as they stand in competition with or opposition
unto Christ.

3. We must be sensible of the want and necessity we have of Qualif. 3. We
must be sensible of the necessity of Christ.
Christ, that we are poor, blind, miserable and naked. We must apprehend our
selves stung with the fiery Serpent.

4. We must discern fullness and Excellency in Jesus Christ, Qualif. 4. We
must discern fullness in Christ.
beauty, wisdom, holiness, abundance of virtue flowing from him. There are
cleansing and healing streams in this fountain. Emptiness discerned in our
selves will enhance Christ's wroth. Scarcity raises the market.

5. We must come with faith to be healed. In the whole dispensation Qualif.
5. We must come with faith to be healed.
of Christ's miracles, there is a question premised, believe thou? or a
condition interposed, be it unto thee as thou believe.

6. Mourn for sin, like the mourning of Hadadrimm^n, in the valley of
Megiddo. They who mourn for sin are prepared to wash Qualif 6. We must mourn
for sin.
in this fountain. Their eyes are blubbered for sin, and they come and wash
themselves in this fountain.

7ly, and lastly. We must come in the strength of Christ. We Qualif. 7. We
must come in the strength of Christ.
can do nothing without him, Cant. 1. 4. Draw me, we will run after thee.
Noe man comes unto me, except the father draw him. We must perform our
duties in the strength of God, (...), through Christ that strengthens us.

The third use shall be for exhortation. This has two parts. Use 3. For
Exhortation.
General and special.

1. In general. My invitation from God is for all to come in and wash in this
fountain. Christ is here offered and tendered to all. The Brazen Serpent is
erected upon a pole. The free grace of the Gospel is enlarged; mercy is exalted
O come come in quickly and accept of Christ. O! that God would work upon your
hearts this day to embrace the free tenders of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Now
the fountain is open, come unto it: but you must be thirsty, have a spiritual
appetite; else you will never come. It is not a bare coming. Take heed least
you come without a wedding garment. You must be qualified as I mentioned
before. I call upon the young ones this day; O bewail your misspent time, your
trading in the vanity of the world. It Is too too much, that you have given so
much of your fresh green years unto Satan: Now come; and O that God would draw
you, else you can never come: Give up your strength and marrow to God. You have
tried the flesh, the Devil the world, they cannot help nor comfort you. You
have gone to King Jareb, Hos. 5. 13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah
saw his wound: then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jar^b yet
could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wound. Youthful pleasures and
vanities cannot afford any real satisfaction. O! that God would persuade you
to make a better choice, to go to Christ for Physic, to make him your
Physician. You have spent all upon Physicians of no value, imitate the poor
woman and come unto Jesus Christ, let not the Devil steal this precious truth
out of your hearts, that the present time is the time of repentance, and tempt
you to put off Repentance 'till your spectacle days, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember
now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor
the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.

I call also upon old ones, you that have lived so many years, spent so much
time as is not worthy of reckoning in the sacred Chronologies. Though I dare
not flatter, or give the least advantage to any to put off repentance 'till old
age: yet I dare not set a bar against you. If now God open your eyes, and
give you a hungring and thirsting after Christ, and discover to you more of
Christ in your old age, than in your young, happy is it for you. Some God calls
at the eleventh hour and they receive their penny; Now then though you begin
late: yet set upon the work seriously. Commend God in your old age, that now
he has opened your eyes to see this fountain, and because you have set out
late, therefore you must work the harder.

To every one young and old, to all sorts of sinners, single, double died, I
address my invitation, come, come unto this fountain, Isai. 55. 1. Ho every
one that thirsts, come to the water, and he that has noe money: come ye,
buy and eat, yea come buy wine and milk without money and without price, Joh.
7. 37. In the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried,
saying if any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink, Rev. 22. 17. And
the spirit and the bride say, come; And let him that hears say, Come; and let
him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will let hiw take of the water of life
freely. Neither do I proclaim universal grace: but free grace. Come and take
Christ upon the Gospel terms and conditions. Cast down your rebellious
weapons, try conclusions noe longer with God. Isai. 55. 6, 7. Seek ye the
Lord, while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near: Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and unto our God for
h^e will abundantly pardon, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead,
be ye reconciled unto God, Romans 12. 1. I beseech you therefore, brethren, by
the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. O! that God would move
some soul this day, open some heart this day. O! that God would pluck some
soul out of the Devil's snare, wash some Ethiopian, some polluted sinner in
this fountain. My Errand and Embassy this day is to proclaim free grace, to
offer Jesus Christ; what message shall I return to him that sent me? I have
the office of a Barnabas to be a son of Consolation, to tender the riches of
Christ; What will you not accept of Christ? Will you undervalue the glorious
excellencies of the Gospel? Will you not have this man to reign over you? Your
blood be upon your own heads, you are left without all excuse.

2. My exhortation is special, to the house of David and inhabitants of
Jerusalem, to those that have received virtue from this fountain. Go, go
often to this fountain, wash and wash again, take heed of thinking you have
enough of grace, enough of Christ already. The oftener you have been at the
fountain; the more your desires will be enlarged -- Quo plus sunt potae, plus
sitiuntur aquae. This is a holy warrantable covetousness, to covet grace, never
to think you have enough of Christ: still labor for more of him. Cry with the
Horse-leech's daughter, give, give, Lord give me more of Christ. I want grace,
more grace, more grace. Thou that have tasted of Christ, wilt desire to drink a
full draught. Thou that have a sparkle of true grace, wilt desire it may
increase into a flame, Phil. 3. 13, 14, 15. Brethren, I count not my self to
have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth unto those things that are before. I press toward
the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let
therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded, and if in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. Then go again and
again to the fountain, never leave going. Whilst thou have pollutions, thou
can never get rid of the body of sin in the Church militant, thou have need
of dayiy washing and cleansing in the fountain. None other can cure thee; none
can cleanse thee but this fountain, but this laver of Christ's blood.

The 4th and last use shall be for direction. Use. 4. For Direction.


1. Be broken of all those cisternes that are broken and can hold no water.
Say not with Naaman, are not Abana and Pharphar, etc. No other streams are
healing: but those that are from this fountain.

2. Neglect not the due season of coming to the fountain. The five foolish
Virgins mist their opportunities: and so did Esau, Heb. 12. 17. For ye know
how that afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing he was
rejected; for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully
with tears.

3. Make use of all the right keys, knowledge, faith, love, repentance, prayer.

4. Wait patiently upon God, who will open the fountain. Tarry at the poole
of Bethesda, wait at the posts of wisdome's gates. Continue knocking, never
give over, 'till God open the fountain. Be not impatient of delays, but
still tarry at thy Father's door; resolve to take no repulse, no put off, with
Esther resolve, If I perish, I perish.

5. VVash in this fountain continually. The streams are clensing. Beseech God
to wash and make thee clean. The streams are healing; Here Is a medicine made
up of Christ's blood. Apply this to thy sores: It cures all diseases of body
and soul. Never leave this fountain. Take heed of going to Abana and Pharphar:
Prefer not them before the waters of this Fountain. If thou will be a
tasting of all waters, thou must never look to be cured. If thou will go from
creature to creature, and hew out their broken cisternes, and depart from the
fountain, to thy peril be it. If thou desire to be made whole, sin no
more in trusting to Creature Cisternes, lest a worse thing come upon thee. Go
to Christ, wash in the fountain of his blood keep close to him, never go from
him, nor let him go, and thou shall be healed.

6ly and lastly. When thou art healed, return thanks for thy healing (as the
Samaritan did) Bless God that he has loved thee, given his Son for thee,
and washed thee. And do not speak only, but act thankfullness by thy Obedience
to God all thy days: Then is thankfulness best performed, when we praise God
with an holy life. 'Ile conclude all with Psalm. 50. 23. Who so offers praise
glorifieth me, and to him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show
the salvation of God.

The Pleasant and Peaceable ways of Wisdom.
Prove. 3. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness; all her paths are peace.


THe Proverbs of Solomon are Divine Aphorisms, Sermon. 9. At St. Mary's Oxon,
July ^5. 1649.
select, pithy Sentences, penned by Solomon; but Indicted by the Spirit of God.
It Is rare to find any coherence or dependence on the precedent words, they are
so entire of themselves, and omnibus numeris absoluta: Yet the Words read have
some dependence upon the precedent Verses. They are a Link of a goodly Chain of
Pearls: For if you review v. 13. that Man's happiness is admired who has got
this Jewel: Happy is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets
understanding. And to invite others, and draw them on to this rich purchase,
the wise Man dedicates an ample Panegyric to Wisdom. Tully commends Pompey;
Pliny, Trajan; but they both come short of this Encomium. Many Arguments are
set down from the 14. to the 20. ver. inclusive, to inhance the matchless,
unvaluable worth and dignity of Divine Wisdom.

My Text is placed in the middle, and is a special encouragement to quicken our
Spirits, to wing our affections, and make them soar Heavenward: Her ways, etc.

And here a tacit Objection is removed: O say some, if we take upon us the
profession of Godliness, then we must bid adieu to all pleasures. Farewell all
mirth and delight: nothing now but mourning and lamentation, breaking the
heart, pensiveness of spirit, and going mourning all the day long. It Is no such
matter; you are mistaken, when once you make choice of the ways of Godliness,
and have got a spiritual acquaintance and communion with God, you shall not
loose pleasures, but change them: you shall loose carnal, and get spiritual
pleasures: you shall loose empty and unsatisfying, and get full satisfying
pleasures: you shall loose transient, and get permanent pleasures.

O but say some, we meet with many troubles, many oppositions in our way to
Heaven?

We are to encounter with the grand Enemies of our salvation, the Flesh, the
Devil, and the World; and much molestation we find from them: But however thou
may want peace with men, thou have peace with God, and Conscience: Though
thou want peace on Earth, yet thou art no looser, if thy peace be made in
Heaven. Her paths, etc.

The Argument of my Meditations is the singular commendation Text divided.
of the ways of Wisdom: Wherein observe a Subject and a Predicate. The Subject
termed ways and paths of wisdom: The Predicate, ways of pleasantness and
peace. I Will not injure them by any sub-division, lest I divide the sense: They
contain in them two precious Points of Doctrine.

1. All the ways of godliness are ways of pleasantness, and full of delight
unto the children of God.

2. The paths of godlin^sse are peaceable paths, and full of peace.

I resume the first Doctrine, and shall enlarge it in this easy Method. Method
propounded.


1. Clear the truth from some Doubts and Objections made against it.

2. Prove it by particular instances.

3. Confirm it by some evident Demonstrations.

Fourthly and lastly, I shall set it home upon your affections by particular
Application, and hope so to conclude, through the Grace of God, as to make you
in love with the ways of godliness.

1. Then let us remove the Objections as so many stumbling blocks 1. Head.
Objections removed. Object. 1.
out of the way.

It Is Objected, That Godlyness abridgeth men of pleasure^; it binds them to
their good behaviors: They must sanctify the Sabbath; they must set up God in
their Families; they may not swill, swagger, carrouse and game away their time.
Now what is so great an enemy unto the pleasures of Men and Women, as Religion?
It cuts them short of those Delights and Pleasures which others enjoy.

For Answer hereunto, 1. I say, Godlyness cuts us off unlawful, Austin, Quam
suave mihi subito factom est carere suavitatibus istarum nugarum.

2. Whatever pleasure Godlyness denis you, it makes it up abundantly with the
pleasures and ravishing consolations of Jesus Christ, Psalm. 16. 11. Thou will
show me the path of life: in thy presence is fullness of joy: and at thy right
hand there are pleasures for evermore. It takes away dross and gives thee Gold:
it takes away worldly, and gives thee heavenly pleasures; when thou have less
of the Creature, and more of the Creator, thou have cause to be glad of the
exchange. Abraham left his Country at Gods command, but the Promise made all
up with interest, Genesis 12. 2. The Lord said unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy
country, and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house, unto a land that I
will show thee: So did Moses, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. By faith Moses, when he was
come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the
treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of reward: As it was
said to Amaziah, The Lord is able to give thee much more then 2 Chronicles. 25. 9.
this: So it may be said of thy pleasures, either they are lawful or unlawful;
if lawful, God will make them up; if unlawful, happy art thou that God deprives
thee of them: It Is a sign that the Parents have a tender love to their
children, when they take away a Knife from them, for fear lest they should hurt
themselves with it: So it is mercy when God cuts thee off, and deprives thee of
such Delights and Pleasures, which if thou had liberty to enjoy, therewith
thou would dishonor Almighty God.

Object. 2. A second Objection is, How are the ways of God ways of
pleasantness, when they require abundance of Humiliation, brinish Tears, sorrow
for sin, and is not this irksome and unpleasant?

A. There Is more sweetness in this which thou call bitterness, (I mean
godly sorrow for sin) then in all the pleasures of the world; for as in the
laughter of the wicked, the heart is sorrowful; so in the sorrow of the godly,
the heart laughs and rejoices. Christ turns these Waters into Wine: Call not
the tears of repentance Marah, but Naomi: In the winding up we shall find that
the tears of repentance are not bitter waters, but sweet refreshing waters:
Every tear in thy eye, is a Pearl in Gods eye: Every tear is exhaled into Gods
bottle: All the laughter of the wicked is Risus Sardonicus: Their greatest
merriments are (...). Luther has an excellent saying, Vna guttula malae
conscientiae totum mare mundani gaudii absorbet: But the godly rejoice in their
sufferings, Romans 5. 3. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations. They
have inward joy amidst outward sorrows: When their cheeks run down with tears,
they have a cheerful spirit; something they feel of comfort coming in: They
have a principle of Joy within them, from the apprehension of Gods love in
Christ, and this swallows up all sorrows: One glimpse of Christ's countenance
will swallow up an Ocean of sorrows: And this will appear in two or three
Particulars.

1. The work of Humiliation has the melting work of the Gospel: The Law
breaks, but the Gospel melts the heart: No such kindly working upon the heart
as mercy, bowels opened, and the goodness of God: To sin against these will
deepliest affect the heart. When a soul is humbled for sinning against mercy
and goodness, and the heart is melted and dissolved into tears, there must be
pleasantness and sweetness in these, because they proceed from such a
Principle, even the Principle of the melting work of the Gospel, and this
cannot have much bitterness in it.

2. The Soul in the work of Humiliation melting before the Lord eases it self
of abundance of sin: We say, Leves curae loquuntur, Sen. Trag.
ingentes stupent: When people can shed tears, thereby they ease their heart;
but when the heart is so oppressed, as the eyes cannot shed tears, the sorrow or
passion of the heart is greater and more dangerous: By weeping for sin, thou
do ease and rid thy self of abundance of sin; thy heart feels some joy, and
draws, and sucks some sweetness out of these bitter herbs.

3. In the work of Humiliation there is much delight, because the soul has much
delight in looking back to that sorrow it has had: The wicked rejoice in their
pleasures; the godly rejoice in their tears. Epaminondas went sad about the
City, when the Thebanes were a revelling; when others have been in May-games
and Merriments, and lascivious Enterludes, it will cheer up thy spirit that
thou have been sorrowing for thy sin.

Object. 3. But thirdly it is Objected, That godliness puts us upon hard
services, we shall meet with many scandals, great sufferings and persecutions
for the name of Christ: we shall meet with sore temptations and trials;
Peradventure we may be brought to fry at a Stake for Christ: How then can the
ways of godliness be ways of pleasantness?

A. Notwithstanding the hardest sufferings that the heart of a godly man shall
meet withal: yet there is that delight in the ways of godliness, as to uphold
the heart under all sufferings, and carry it on sweetly: How much did the
Martyrs rejoice? They kissed the Stake, welcomm'd Fire and Faggot; some of them
leapt for joy, wrote singular Letters for the confirmation of their Brethren.
Godlyness will carry thee cheerfully through sufferings: It will make thee
account thy Chains as Ornaments, thy Prison thy Palace; thy Dungeon thy
Paradise. Gods people suck sweetness out of the bitterest herbs: They find an
Honeycomb in the carcass of Lions: They never see so much of God in prosperity
as adversity: Never do they feel more inward comforts, then amidst outward
sorrows; for then God settles the tranquillity of their spirits, and the
serenity of their consciences. Christ appeared to Mary weeping; to Jacob at
Bethel; to Elias after forty days fasting. God brings forth his Cordials to his
people in their forest trials; so that whatever sorrows, hardships and troubles
they meet withal abroad, yet they have joy at home; and though they may make
many a hard meal: yet a good conscience is to them a continual feast.

There Is one Objection more which I shall answer, and then proceed.

Object. 4. Some object from common experience: When people come into the ways
of godliness, they do not find that delight and joy as they had before: The
world observes them to be more melancholy, and of a heavy dumpish spirit.

This is a mere calumny of the Devils raising to keep men off from the ways of
God: This is a great pull-back and Remora to the conversion of many souls. I
shall give a more full, and, I hope, satisfactory Answer to the Objection, in
these following Considerations.

1. Religion denis not civil, courteous, and affable behavior: Consid. 1.
Religion denis not civil behavior.
Religion forbids not a cheerful disposition: Nay, there is a Judgment
threatened to the contrary, Deuteronomy. 28. 47. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy
God with joyfulness and with gladness of heart, therefore shall thou serve
thine enemies, says the Lord. A churlish Nabal is a dishonor to Religion: Take
heed therefore of discrediting the Gospel by your sad melancholy spirits, lest
the world bring an evil report upon the ways of godliness. None have such
cheerful spirits as true Believers: Their heart is full and must have a vent;
their tongues, countenances, carriages, will show that they have comfort in God.

But secondly consider, thou may mistake Gods children: Thou Consid. 2. Gods
children are serious.
accountest that sadness and sorrow, which is seriousness, gravity, and a
stayed composed carriage. The carriage of Gods children must be sober and
grave, their words serious, seasoned with salt, and their whole conversation
must be such as may adorn their profession, Phil. 1. 27. Only let your
conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

3. Consider Gods people may appear sad, because they are out Consid. 3. Gods
children are sad when out of their element.
of their element. When the Fish is out of its element of Water, it cannot
enjoy it self. Birds do not ordinarily sing upon the ground, but when they are
got up into the Air. When Gods children are out of their course of duties, when
they are in Meseck, and have their habitation in the Tents of Kedar, their
spirits are dumpish: But when their hearts are set in a right frame; when they
are exercising holy Duties amongst the society of Saints, then are their hearts
cheerful, then are their spirits revived, then are they merry indeed.

4. Thou complainest of Gods peoples sadness, maybe it is thy company that makes
them so. They hear thee Swear, see thee Drunk: O Consid. 4. Bad company cause
Gods peoples sadness.
how this troubles them! It so troubles the children of God to see any dishonor
offered to God, as they cannot be merry, Psalm. 119. 136. Rivers of waters run
down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law: But let them come amongst
Believers, and join with them in religious Exercises, their wonted joy comes to
them again: Then their joy is above the joy of Harvest, and the dividing of the
spoil with the mighty.

5. It is not Religion that makes Gods children sad; but because Consid. 5.
Gods people are sad because they are no better.
they are no more religious: They grieve that they can grieve no more: They are
sorry that, they are no more sorry for their sins: They find many failings;
they want former Love Tokens and feelings, then they mourn and cry out, Restore
to me the joy of thy salvation: They want Gods gracious countenance, wherefore
they cry out, Psalm. 4. 6. There be many that say, Who will show us any good?
Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.

6. This Joy is secret, an inward thing, which strangers shall not Consid. 6.
Joy is a secret inward thing.
intermeddle withal: A worldly man cannot judge of this Joy, Rev. 2. 17. To him
that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a
white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knows, saving
he that receives it. The joy of the godly is not in outward flashes, nor is it
to be measured by outward aspect. This is a hidden thing, which so ravisheth
their hearts as they cannot utter it. Saul could not be merry without a
Musician; nor Ahab without Naboth's Vineyard; nor Gardener that bloody
Persecutor, till he had received the news of the Martyrs death. A godly Man's v
Fox Acts and Monum. in Q. Mary's Reign.
joy proceeds from no outward principle: A covetous man joys and takes pleasure
in his Barns heaped with Corn, and Coffers crammed with Gold. A voluptuous man
joys in Cards, Dice, Hauks, Hounds: A Drunkard in his Cups: An ambitious man in
his Titles, Pedigree, Preferments: But a godly man can rejoice and be merry
without all these: His joy arises from another principle, even the reconciled
countenance of God in Jesus Christ.

Now these Objections being removed, and my passage thus cleared, I come in the
second place to prove the truth of the Doctrine 2. The Doctrine proved by
particular instances.
by particular instances: And I shall instance in particular Scriptures which
give testimony to this truth; then in particular persons, who by their own
experience subscribe to the truth of it.

And lastly, I shall survey the particular ways of godliness, and discover the
pleasantness of them all, and so from an Induction of Particulars sufficiently
numbered, I shall collect this universal Conclusion, That all the ways of
godliness are ways of pleasantness.

1. For Scripture Testimony, mere Quotations would fill a Sermon: 1. By
Scripture Testimony.
But I shall gather sparingly from the heap, Prove. 22. 17. Bow down thine ear,
and hear the words of the wise, and apply thine heart unto my knowledge: for it
is a pleasant thing, if thou keep them within thee. If Pleasure consists in
Honors, then Wisdom affords it abundantly, Prove. 4. 7, 8, 9. Wisdom is the
principal thing; therefore get wisdom, and with all thy getting get
understanding: She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace; a crown of
glory shall she deliver to thee. Exalt her and she shall promote thee, she
shall bring thee to honor when thou do embrace her. Prove. 8. 15, 16, 17, 18,
and 31. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice: By me Princes rule and
Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth. I love them that love me: and they
that seek me early shall find me: riches and honor are with me, yea durable
riches and righteousness.

If Life be a pleasure, it is to be found in Wisdom, verse 35. For whosoever finds
me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord.

If there be pleasure in Singing and Rejoicing, it is promised to the people of
God, Isa. 51. 11, 12. Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return and come
with singing unto Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their head; they
shall obtain gladn^ss and joy, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away. I, even
I am he that comfort you: who art thou, that thou should be afraid of a
man that shall die, and of the son of man, which shall be made as grass?

I Will instance in particular Persons, who by experience confess the ways of
godliness ways of pleasantness: They call the Sabbath a delight, Isa. 58. 13,
14. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my
holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, not doing thine own ways, nor finding
thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words, then shall thou delight thy
self in the Lord. Nehemiah accounts the joy of the Lord their strength, Neh. 8.
10. Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and
sena portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared: for this day is holy unto
our Lord: neither be ye sorry, for the joy of the Lord is your strength. So
Habakkuk, cap. 3. 17, 18. Although the fig tree shall not bl^ssom, neither
shall fruit be in the vines: the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields
shall yield no meat: the Flock shall be cut off from the f^ld, and there shall
be no Herd in the stalls: yet I will rejoice in the Lord, and will joy in the
God of my salvation. So David danced before the Ark with all his might: He
makes it the Character of a blessed Man, Psalm. 1. 2. But his delight is in the
law of the Lord: and in his law does he meditate day and night. And his counsel
is, Psalm. 37. 4. Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give th^e the
desires of thine heart. And his own practice is, Psalm. 40. 8. I delight to do
thy will, O God, yea thy law is within my heart. Psalm. 94. 19. In the multitude
of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. Psalm. 119. 16. I will
delight my self in thy statutes; I will not forget thy word. ver. 35. Make me
to go in the path of thy commandments, for therein do I delight. ver. 47. And I
will delight my self in thy commandments, which I have loved. ver. 70. Their
heart is as fat as grease; but I delight in thy law: So Paul, Romans 7. 22. I
delight in the law of God in the inward man. There was joy in the whole City
when Christ was Preached, Acts 8. 8. Joy in the Eunuch converted: Joy in the
Jailer, Acts 16. 34. And when he had brought them into his h^use, he set meat
before them and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house.

Great joy in rearing the material Temple, great joy at the bringing of the Ark
and celebration of the Passover: And such joy and delight is in the hearts of
all Gods people. They do not only perform duties, but delight in them: As a
man drinks when he is dry, eats when he is hungry, and delights in meat and
drink; so it is the meat and drink of the Saints to do the will of God.

3. We Will survey the particular ways of godliness, and see what cause of
delight there is in them.

The ways of Wisdom are either the ways of Gods Ordinances, or ways of exercise
of the Graces of the Spirit, or ways of obedience to the Commandments. These
are all ways of Divine Wisdom and Godliness, and all these ways are top full
of delight and pleasure.

1. The ways of Gods Ordinances are ways of pleasure: Every Ordinance is a
pleasant, sweet and delightful Ordinance.

1. The Word is a sweet Ordinance, Psalm. 119. 103. How sweet 1. The word is a
sweet Ordinance.
are thy words unto my taste? yea sweeter then honey to my mouth. It was his
comfort in all afflictions, Psalm. 119. 50. This is my comfort in my affliction:
for thy word has quickened me. Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. The law of the Lord
is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise
the simple. The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the
commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. The fear of the Lord is
clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous
altogether; more to be desired are they then gold, yea then much fine gold;
sweeter also then the h^ney or the honey comb. Moreover, by them is thy servant
warned, and in k^eping of them there is great reward. God speaks to us in his
Word by the mouth of his Messengers: O what sweetness does God communicate to
the soul out of this Ordinance! Therefore Mary chose the better part, Luke 10.
42. You may read her practice, ver. 39. She sat at Jesus feet, and heard his
Word: Prove. 8. 34. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my
gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.

2. Prayer is a sweet Ordinance: The Saints have conference with 2. Prayer is a
sweet Ordinance.
God, and feel much sweetness and delight coming in: Therefore Prayer is called
incense, Lev. 16. 12. And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire
from off the altar before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten
small, and bring it within the vail. Numb. 16. 46. And Moses said to Aaron,
Take a censer, and put fire therein from off the altar, and put on incense, and
go quickly and make an atonement. Psalm. 141. 2. Let my prayer be set before
thee as incense, and the lifting up of mine hands an evening sacrifice. Rev. 8.
3, 4. And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer,
and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it, with the
prayers of all Saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne. And
the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints, ascended
Solatium ^st habere cui pectus aperias. Ambr.
up before God, out of the angels hand. Hannah, after all her tears, felt joy
coming in, and she was no more sad, 1 Samuel 1. 18. When we are in great
afflictions, we account it matter of comfort to have a friend to whom we may
ease our selves, by way of communicating our condition, and unbosoming our
selves to him: These are such times when we can trust no person, never so near
nor dear, Micah 7. 6, 7. For the son dishonoreth the father, the daughter
rises up against her mother; the daughter in law against her mother in law: a
man's enemies are the men of his own house: Therefore I will look unto the Lord,
I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me. Yet at all times
we may go to God, unbosom our selves to him, make our requests known unto him
in the name of Christ: And though riches forsake thee, and friends forsake
thee; yet all is abundantly recompensed in this sweet promise, Heb. 13. 5. Let
your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as
you have: For he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Whatever
thou want, yet if thou want not a heart to pray, thou will find comfort.
The children of God would not loose the benefit of their Prayers, nor a good
look from Christ, smiling upon them in answer to their Prayers, for all the
Joys and Delights in the Universe.

3. The Sacraments are sweet, delightful Ordinances: For the Sacrament 3. The
Sacraments are sweet Ordinances.
of initiation, Baptism, it is a comfort to be admitted one of Christ's Family:
It Is that which Theodosius preferred before his Empire. But the fruit of this
joy and comfort will appear, when God has regenerated thee, and made thee a
new Creature, Titus 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration and renewing
of the holy Gh^st.

Now compare this Sacrament of Baptism with Circumcision, and we may see how
much God indulgeth us under the Gospel: That was a hard and irksome service in
cutting away the foreskin from the flesh. Simeon and Levi overcame the
Sichemites when they were sore. Now Baptism is far easier, the dipping or
sprinkling in Water. More delight and pleasantness was in this Ordinance then
that.

Then for the Lords Supper, This is a spiritual Banquet, a Feast of fat things,
such as is promised, Isa. 25. 6. And in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts
make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on lees, of fat
things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined: It Is a sealing
Ordinance: The word writes the evidence fair; Prayer prevails with God for a
sight of it. The Sacrament comes and sets a seal to it; and when there is such a
sealing day, then salvation is come unto thy soul. And these Ordinances must
needs be full of delight and consolation, which are the means of our eternal
salvation.

3. As the Ordinances are full of delight, so are all the Graces of 3. All the
Graces of the Spirit are sweet Ordinances.
Gods spirit, Cant. 1. 3. Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name
is as ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee. Cant. 4. 13,
14. Thy plants are an orchard of pomgranates with pleasant fruits, camphire
with spikenard. Spik^nard and saffron, calamus and cynamon, with all trees of
frankincense, myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices. As for instance,
Faith is a sweet, pleasant Grace; its our life, and nothing sweeter then life,
Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by faith: So Hope is sweet and pleasant, Pro.
10. 28. The hope of the righteous shall be gladness; but the expectation of the
wicked shall perish. Then patience is sweet; for it sweetens all hardships, and
bears, all crosses: It makes a virtue of necessity, Heb. 10. 36. For ye have
need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the
promise. Likewise Love is pleasant, for it, by a Divine Alchimy, turns the
basest Metals into gold, Cant. 8. 6, 7. Set me as a seal upon thine heart, and
as a seal upon thine arm, for love is strong as death: Many waters cannot
quench love, neither can the floods drown it. Another delightful Grace is
Meekness: A meek spirit is cheerful, and revived amidst storms of persecution:
And so is Humility. Passionate and Proud men take no joy in any thing, they are
of Haman's humor: But meek, humble, self-denying spirits, are full of joy and
tranquillity: when the mind is quieted and settled, whatever makes against it,
there is something to make for it, something coming in to support the soul, and
carry it on cheerfully: There Is the exercise of no Grace, but it is joyous and
delightsom to Gods children. Faith, Hope, Patience, Love, Meekness, Humility,
are the delight of Gods children.

4. Lastly, There Is much delight and joy in obedience to Gods 4. There Is much
delight and joy in obedience to Gods commandments.
commandments. O how love I thy law! Thy law is my delight, said David: All the
Duties of obedience are pleasant to Gods children: When the Spouse is once
drawn, she will be a running, Cant. 1. 4. Draw me and I will run after thee. So
David, Psalm. 119. 32, 77. I will run the ways of thy commandments, when thou
shall enlarge my heart. It was Paul's delight, in the place above mentioned; and
it was David's rejoicing, Psalm. 119. 14, 15, 16. I have rejoiced in the ways of
thy testimonies, as much as in all riches. I will delight my self in thy
statutes, and not forget thy word. Obedience to the commandments is easy to
Gods children: They do it with as much delight, as David danced before the Ark.
But profane persons do duties as Phaltiel followed Mic^l. It Is said, 1 John 5.
3. This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and his commandments
are not grievous. It Is easy with Gods children to forbear Swearing, they
covenant with their tongues: It Is easy to forbear Whoredom; they covenant with
their eyes: It Is easy to keep the Sabbath; for they call it a delight: It Is
easy to hear the word, and tarry it out patiently, for it is a joy unto them,
Matthew. 11. 28, 29, 30. Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and
I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am lowly
and meek: For my yoke is easy and my burden is light. Do not therefore
discourage any from the ways of Religion, as the Spies did from entering into
Canaan. You can subscribe to this by experience; you can do much more work,
when your spirits are cheerful, when you do your business willingly: A cheerful
mind will facilitate the weightiest enterprise. Many use Recreations to
refresh their spirits: And Recreation may not be used otherwise then as a File
to Devotion. Now the practice of holy Duties is the godly man's recreation: It
was Christ's meat and drink to do his Fathers work; and so it is of the godly:
Therefore they Pray, Read, Hear, Meditate, and live cheerfully: Their souls are
delighted and quieted in the performance of duty.

Carry home this truth with you, that there is more real, sollid joy in the ways
of Religion, then all the delightful ways in the Universe: And Oh! that this
might stir your affections to be in love with the ways of godliness.

I now come to the confirmation of the Point by some evident Demonstrations.

1. Whatever pleasure men find in the world, is much more to Demonst. 1. No
pleasure in the world like to the pleasure of godliness.
be found in the ways of godliness, Prove. 3. 14, 15. For the merchandise of it
is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof then fine gold:
She is more precious then rubies, and all the things thou can desire are not
to be compared unto her. Prove. 8. 14, 15. Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom; I
am understanding, I have strength. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice.

I shall instance in all the senses: The eye takes delight in beautiful
Objects. It Is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun: the Light is pleasant, but no
such beauty as in the ways of God. Solomon speaks much of the Ruby, and
compares Wisdom to it for its resplendent Luster. Could the beauty of godliness
be seen with these eyes, they would be dazzled. Excellens sensibile corrumpit si
sensu^. The eye of man has seen stately Buildings, rich Treasures, precious
Commodities; but the eye of Faith in a Believer sees the holy Trinity, the
Throne of God: In comparison whereof, the bravest sights in the World are
nothing, even less then nothing.

2. The ear is delighted with melodious music. Men love to hear a skillfull
Musician. But in a transcendent manner the ears of the godly are delighted
with hearing the word, the strong cries and prayers of God's people, the
singing of Psalms, Psalm. 89. 15. Blessed is the people that know the joyful
sound, they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance. Some ancient
Philosophers phansied music in the Orbs and Intelligences to wheel them
about. That opinion is much controverted amongst themselves: But this is an
undoubted truth that there is no music so delightful to the ear as duties of
religion. They are pleasant to God's ear. For he loves to hear his people
praying, and should not they be pleasant to ours? And besides, what we hear
of God now is but for a moment: what we shall hear heareafter shall be to
eternity. When the damned are a roaring, skriking, howling, blaspheming,
cursing, weeping, and hear nothing else: Then the Saints shall hear
Hallelujah's, praising, singing, and join themselves in a Celestial Consort.

3. The taste shall be delighted in the ways of godliness. Gluttons and
drunkards delight much in their taste. Curious tastes will not be pleased but
with sweet and delightful things. Now O Christian get another taste, a
spiritual relish of heavenly things, Psalm. 34. 4. O taste and see that the
Lord is good, blessed is the man that puts his trust in him.

4. The smell is delighted in the ways of godliness. Hence it is called the
savor of ointment. And graces are resembled to spices for their fragrancy.
When the Alabaster box of ointment was opened, it perfumed all the room. The
godly have a good savor, they leave a sweet sent behind them, Prove. 10. 7. The
memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. The
righteous have a good name, and they live, when they are dead. The wicked go
out like the snuff of a candle.

Then 5thly for touching, there is delight in that likewise. The Demonstrat. 2.
All the ways of godliness are rational ways
poor woman had the sweetest touch that ever she met with, Mat. 9. 21. Let
me but touch the him of his garment, and I shall b^e whole. And thus in every
sense there is delight.

A second Demonstration is: All the ways of godliness are rational ways:
There are observed (according to Philosophers directions) (...), rational and
irrational desires. As we are to pray to be delivered from unreasonable men:
so from unreasonable desires. The very heathens scorned sensual brutish
delights. Clemens Alexandrinus brands gluttony by two significant words, viz:
(...). And Tully tells us; Nemo dignus nomine hominis, qui unum diem velit ess^
in voluptate. So that drunkenness, gluttony, etc: are irrational, brutish,
sensual pleasures. Godliness only has rational pleasures, so that the
pleasures of Godliness are suitable to the principles of right regulated reason.
They indeed elevate and are above it: yet Romans 12. 1. (...), Quod nostrum
sacrificium sit ejusmodi ut de eo possimus ^ationem poscentibus reddere.
Origin. Demonstrat. 3. All the ways of godliness are made up of love.
not contrary to it. There Is reason in every holy duty, there is rationality in
the paths of wisdom. Carnal reason does not apprehend it: but spiritual and
illuminated reason apprehends the ways of holiness to be most rational, and
the godly man to be the man of understanding. Hence a wise man and a godly
man, a fool and a sinner are synonymous terms in the proverbes of Solomon.

The third Demonstration is, the ways of godliness must needs be ways of
pleasantness, because they are all made up of Love. What comes from a principle
of love has much delight and pleasure in it. Now every principle of the way of
God is love. God sets his heart upon us, and that love to us makes our love
reciprocal to him. Love I may term, Vehiculum animae, the chariot of the
soul. It carries on the soul swiftly unto God, Be the way smooth or ruggid,
fair or foul, love will carry the soul on with expedition. A love to
godliness will make thy soul delight in it abundantly, Cant. 3. 9, 10. King
Solomon made himself a Chariot of the wood of Leban^n, he made the pillars
thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the covering of it of purple,
the midst thereof being paved with love, for the daughters of Jerusalem. A
strange expression that the midst of the chariot should be paved with love.
The chariot whereby Christ does carry his people up and down in this world,
and bringes them to himself, is such a chariot, as the midst thereof is paved
with love, Peruse verse. 7, 9, 10: compared together. Behold this bed which is
Solomon's, threescore valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel. King
Solomon made him a chariot of the wood of Lebanon, etc. The bed of Solomon, is
to be understood of the rest and glory which the Saints shall have with Christ
eternally. And by the Chariot of Solomon, the ways wherein Christ carries his
people up and down in the world to himself and in the midst thereof is love.
Such ways then must needs be pleasant. What we love we delight in. Ps. 84.
1. How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts: my soul longs, yea
even faints for the courts of the Lord.

The 4th demonstration is; The ways of godliness must needs be ways of
pleasantness, because they have the presence of God; and Demonstrat. 4. Ways
of godliness have God's presence.
in these ways God communicates himself unto the souls of his people.
Holiness is God's Image* and God delights himself in his own Image; and
therefore he lets out the influence of his love, and manifests his peculiar
presence to those that walk in these ways. Thus Enoch walked with God, and
God translated him. Thus the Apostles sang in prison. They had merry hearts,
because God was with them. Thus David at Ziglag encouraged himself in the Lord
his God, 1 Samuel 30. 6. God is in them, and lets out himself unto them: Now the
quintessence of all good put together is in every beam of God's reconciled
countenance, and therefore when God thus manifests himself to a soul, there
mustneeds be delight. This made the Apostles rejoice, when they had been
beaten: This made the martyrs kiss the stake; For they apprehended a glymps of
God's loving countenance, and this revived their spirits: some of them said,
Be of good cheer, we have a sad breakfast, but we shall have a merry
supper with the Lamb.

5. The ways of godliness have all the properties of such a good as is
Demonstrat. 5. The ways of godliness have all the properties of a desirable
good.
most desirable and delightful to the soul. Philosophers distribute them in
honestum, ju^undum and utile. All these are appropriated to godliness.

1. It Is honestum, of good report, Phil. 4. 8. Finally, brethren, whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are hon^st, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things
are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things.

2. Jucundum. No delight like the ways of Religion. Then ther^s delight in the
soul, when its in a right frame and temper. Now the soul is in no such
temper; but in the ways of Religion. A good conscience, or as it is rendered, a
good or merry heart is a continual feast. And James 5. 13. Is any among you
afflicted? let him pray: Is any merry, let him sing psalms, (...), if ones
mind be right. Thus the Law was David's and Paul's delight.

3. Vtile, much emolument accrues to a godly man. In the left hand of wisdom
are riches and honor. And we read. 1 Timothy 6. 6. Godliness with contentment is
great gain. God is a liberal play master to his servants, and none ever went
away loosers by the service of God. Heathens faired the better for their
compassion to the Israelites, Exodus 1. 21. And it came to pass, because the
Midwives feared God, that he made them houses. Obed Edom faired the better for
entertaining the Arc. The Sareptan widow for entertaining the Prophet:
Potiser for Joseph. God's people receive benefits by others, and are
beneficial to others.

4. To these I add a fourth, Bonum Honorabile. Riches and honor are with
wisdom. None so honorable as God's servants.

Noe such honorable ways as the ways of Religion. The paths of wickedness
are base and ignoble. Antiochus is called a vile person, Dan. 11. 21. And in his
estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom they shall not give the honor of
the Kingdom, but he shall come in peaceably, and obtain the Kingdom by
slatteries. But godliness is honorable. Honor est in honorante. What shall be
done to the man, whom the King of Heaven delights to honor. And we read, Act.
17. 11. These were more noble than those in Th^ssalonica, in that they received
the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily whether
those things were so: (...). Hence Ignatius said, Nobilitas and antiquitas mea
Jesus Christus. Godliness is an honorable service. The ways of Wickedness
most ignoble and dishonorable.

5. It Is bonum conveniens, a good suitable and commensurate to the desires of
the soul. The soul is a heavenly borne being, spiritual, immateriall, and
nothing can be suitable, but that which bears a like proportion. The soul is
not nourished with husks, pleasures, profits, delights of the world. No
earthly thing can satisfy the vast and boundless desires of an immortal soul
when the Depth says, It Is not in me: the sea it is not in me: the eastern and
western treasures of gold and spices say, It Is not in us: from God alone
comes satisfaction. He alone can fill up the Angles of our heart, Psalm. 90.
4. O satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice, and be glad all
our days. We may eat and not be satisfied, that is a curse threatened, Micah.
6. 14. Thou shall eat: but not be satisfied, and thy casting down shall be
in the midst of thee, etc. We may see varieties of delightful objects: and
yet not be satisfied, Eccles. 1. 8. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor
the ear filled with hearing. We may love silver and yet not be satisfied,
Eccles. 5. 10. He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor
he that loves abundance with increase: But Jer. 31. 14. And I will satiate
the souls of the Priests with fatness; and my soul shall be satisfied with
goodness says the Lord. Pleasures, riches, honors, profits, are not suitable
goods. But holiness is suitable and satisfactory to the soul.

6. Bonum perman^ns. Riches make themselves wings and fly away. Friends are
perfidious. Creature comforts are like Job's deceitful brook. But godliness is
durable. Prove. 8. 18. Riches and honor are with thee, yea durable riches and
righteousness. Holiness lasts to eternity. When all leaves thee, a good
Conscience keeps thee company in Heaven. Do you then desire an eternal
permanent good! get the fear of God principled in your hearts. Demonstrat. 6.
Drawn from encouraging delight which God has promised.


The 6th and last demonstration shall be drawn from the many incourageing
delights that God has provided for them. They enjoy the garden of Eden, a
paradise of delights here upon earth, their lives are sweet and delightful:
for they have a God to go to, to call him Abba, father: They have Christ their
Mediator: the spirit of truth, their comforter. They have thee the sweet
springes and Rivers of Ordinances to refresh them, and rich and precious
promises. They have in them a grand Charter, full of immunities and glorious
privileges. And they have a Christ, the tree of life, and what he has is put
forth for their good. He Is a counselor to instruct them, a fountain to
cleanse them, a mighty God to defend them: so that having all these helps and
Encouragements from the holy Trinity, from the promises, from the ordinances,
they must needs suck sweetness out of these breasts of consolation.

Review all these demonstrations, and from them learn to set a high price of,
and delight your selves in the ways of Godliness.

Therefore this doctrine serves, 1. For an Use of conviction, to convince Use.
1. For conviction.
the world of their exceeding great folly in their prejudicate opinions against
the ways of godlyness. They are unacquainted with the amiable beauty and sweet
refreshings of divine wisdom, and therefore they speak evil of that which they
know not, prejudging and rashly censuring God's people for melancholy, dumpish
spirited persons. These deal with the ways of God as the Pagan Persecutors
with the primitive Christians: They put them in Bears and dogs skins, so
to render them odious to the multitude, then they baited and worried them. Just
so profane men now adays put religion into ugly conceits: they censure
Professors of religion for dissemblers, and hypocrites, and the profession it
self sour, unpleasant and burdensome, and thus they revile the ways of God.
But these peoples tongues are no slanders. They even fight against their own
shadows, or else make a man of clouts and then fight against him. This is
their fancy, their conceit, and their groundless misprission: Not that there is
any such thing as they fancy in the ways of godliness: For all the ways of
Godliness are lovely and excellent, sweet and delightful unto the Saints of
God; only thou judge ignorantly and rashly. Thy eye is like one that has the
yellow Jaundice, which see all things yellow. Thou have a natural eye and
therefore can not discern aright of the ways of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15. But
the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God: for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can h^e know them: for they are spiritually
discerned. But he that is spiritual judges all things: yet he himself is
judged of no man.

Thou have a dull ear and therefore wilt not hear the voice of a spiritual
charmer, charm he never so wisely. Thou have a carnal taste, and therefore
can not relish and taste sweetness in God's ways: Thou have all thy
affections disordered and out of frame, thy love, joy, desire are upon the
world. Thou followest other lovers, pleasures, lusts, profits. These have
bewitched thy heart and took up thy delight: and therefore thou art a mere
stranger unto the ways of godliness. I would gladly convince carnal men, that
there is no delight in carnal, sinful pleasures.

I have proved largely that the ways of godliness are the only ways of
pleasantness. I Will propound some convictions that the ways of sin and
wickedness have no real solid pleasure, no true delight and contentment in
them.

1. The ways of wickedness afford only sensual, fleshly pleasures. Convict.
1. The ways of wickedness afford sensual pleasures.
The drinking gameing, epicurizing of ungodly men only reaches to the sensual
part. And what shall I pamper a carcass, that which must be worms meat, and
shall I neglect my precious soul? what shall Christ, heaven, eternity be
neglected for satisfaction of a base lust, a few paltry pleasures, which last
but for a season? If carnal wisdom be sensual, much more carnal lusts,
Jam. 3. 15. This wisdom descends not from above: but is earthly, sensual
devilish. Will the glutton please his brutish appetite; will the drunkard dare
to make his throat his tunnell, his belly his barrel for a little sensual
pleasure, and hazard his immortal soul to all eternity?

2. There Is much mixture of inward sadness, many damps of spirit amidst all the
carnal pleasures of wicked men, Prove. 20. 17. Convict. 2. There Is inward
sadness amidst outward sinful pleasures.
Bread of deceit is sweet to a man: but afterward his mouth shall be filled
with gravel. And in the midst of laughter the heart is sorrowful. Ambrose
has a notable expression to this purpose. Vides convivium peccatoris,
interroga ejus conscientiam, etc. Thou see the wicked man's feasting* but
question with his Conscience; does not that stink more filthily than any
sepulcher. Thou see his joy, his lustiness, thou wonderest at the abundance
of his riches, children: but could thou look within, thou would see wounds
of Conscience, sadness and heaviness of spirit. A wicked man may put on a
merry countenance, though his heart may be sad. When Belshazar was a
carrowsing, a damp of heart seized upon him presently as soon as he saw the
hand writing. Damocles at a great feast had a sword hanging over his head with
a twined thread. All these pleasures are (...), mixed with sorrow and vexation
of spirit.

3. Carnal pleasures produce the curse of God. What delight Convict. 3 Carnal
pleasures bring a curse.
could thou take in a time of infection to have a brave suit of apparel
with the plague in it? what delight in drinking poison in a gilded cup.
Aggrippina tempered poison for Claudius in that meat wherein he most
delighted. Thou followest the careere and swinge of thy affections. God makes
thy strongest affections thy thy strongest afflictions. David was most crossed in
Absalom, and Adonijab, Amnon in Tamar, Jonah in his Gourd. A volup^uous man
delights in gameing, by gameing God bringes him to poverty. A glutton makes his
belly his God, God makes his table his snare. The drunkards cup is become his
poison. What seavers, dropsies and diseases accompany him? The slothful man,
who sleeps out his time, is clothed with rags. Give me, says Chrysostom,
one voluptuous man, that is idle and has his health. Idleness is the chamber
of all diseases. Drunkards pull the houses of their bodies about their ears.

4. Carnal pleasures are vanishing and momentary. All the Convict. 4. Carnal
pleasures are vanishing momentary.
merry meetings, sports, pastimes are but flashes, a blaze and soon gone, like
crackling of thorns, Eccles. 7. 6. For as the crackling of thorns under a
pot: so is the laughter of the fool. Either they leave us or we them. Haman
was banqueting and in great request with the King, upon a sudden out of favor
and hanged upon a gallows. Can any man of wisdom delight in fickle, flashie,
vain things? Isai. 55. 2. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not
bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not? hearken diligently unto
me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in
fatness. If the pleasures of the wicked would hold for ever, then they would
have somewhat to say for themselves: But they are gone upon a sudden. 1. They
are gone from thee. They are like a snow-ball, presently they melt away. Riches
make themselves wings. They are gone from thee in thy youth. The candle of the
wicked is soon put out. Or else when thou come to be old, thou will say as
Barzilla^ did, 2 Samuel 19. 34. How long have I to live, that I should go up
with the King unto Jerusalem? Or else 2. Thou art gone from them. When death
arrests thee to appear before the Judge of Heaven and earth, then farewell all
pleasures, merry meetings, boon companions: All sports will leave thee, then
thou must be in eternity; And O how doleful will that sound be to thee; The
season is past now, the Judge has vaild his face: thy cursed delights in
burning lusts will end in eternal burnings.

5. All the carnal pleasures in the world are not able to satisfy Convict. 5.
the soul. Haman was discontent amidst all his glory for want of Mordecaies
bended knee. Witty jests, melodious music, stately buildings, delicate cheer;
how can these satisfy the soul? Do they leave any sweet contentment behind
them? No, there is a sting in the Conscience. What man of wisdom can comfort
himself when he goes to bed, when he has spent the day past in carnal
lusts, sinful pleasures? Let me ask thee, and O* that thou would ask thy
soul the question, what benefit have I got by the society of debaucht
Ruffians? what comfort can I take from my chambring and wantonness? what
delight in my drinking, carrowzing and healthing? O ask thy Conscience, and if
it be not feared, it will tell thee, all these are miserable comforters.
Believe it Christians, soul delights only leave a sweet relish in our souls
after their acts are past. When we are reading, hearing, praying, meditating,
Oh! what joy does there remain upon our spirits. One dram of such spiritual
joy will more cheer up our spirits, then all the joy in harvest and the
dividing the spoil with the mighty. But on the contrary, sensual, carnal
pleasures, when their acts are over, then is the beginning of our torment.

6ly, and lastly. The final period and end of all finfull pleasures is
eternal destruction. Job. 20. 12. Though wickedness be sweet in Convict. 6
The end of sinful pleasures is eternal destruction.
the mouth, though he hide it under his tongue: yet his meat in his bowels is
turned; it is the gall of asps within him. Prove. 23. 31, 32. Look not thou
upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his color in the cup, when it
mooveth it self aright. At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth
like an adder. Prove. 7. 22. 23. He goes after her straightway as an Ox goes
to the slaughter or as a fool to the correction of the stocks, till a dart
strike through his liver, as a bird hastes to the snare and knows not that it
is for his life. Prove. 5. 11 And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and
thy body are consumed. Sensual pleasures lead to and fit us for destruction.
Isai. 5. 14. Therefore hell has enlarged herself, and opened her mouth
without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he
that rejoices shall descend into it. Job. 21, 12, 13. They take the timbrel
and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ: they spend their days in
wealth, and in a moment go down unto the grave. These are they that come to a
fearful end. Your sorrow shall be proportionable to your joy. Rev. 18. 7. How
much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and
sorrow give her: For she says in her heart, I set a queen, and am no widd^w,
and shall see no sorrow.

O that these premises might deeply affect all voluptuous livers. Consider
amid'st all thy delights, what will there not be bitterness in the end? will
not days of mourning come? cups of trembling for cups of healthing and
carrowsing? Eccl. 11. 9. Rejoyc^, O young man in thy youth, and let thine heart
cheer thee in the day^s of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart,
and in the sight of thine eyes: But know thou that for all these things God
will bring thee into judgment. If after every intemperate draught a cup of
scalding lead were poured down thy throat, how grievous would that be! The end
of all thy intemperate pleasures will be worse. Job. 2. 20. His eyes shall see
his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the almighty. Now thou
delights in long sitting amongst drunkards (though thou can not patiently
stay out a sermon) but thou shall drink of the cup of Gods wrath eternally. O
that what has been said might terrify all profane persons, voluptuous livers,
that seeing the sad, dismal condition of carnal pleasures, they would make a
better choice.

To which purpose I press a second use, for exhortation.

Let me beseech you as you consult the eternal good of your immortal Use. 2.
For Exortation.
souls to delight your souls in the ways of godliness. No true pleasure to
be found else where. O make God your delight, your joy, let your spirits be
solaced in the ways of God. David would rather be a dore-keeper in the house
of God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness. Be your condition never so
mean, your sorrows in the world multiplied: yet all is abundantly made up in
the joy of Gods loveing and reconciled countenance Account then the sabbath a
delight: Hear with delight, pray, read and meditate with delight. If you take
a delight in the ways of God, assure your selves, God will come in and you
shall see and taste more sweetness in God, then ever you did all the days of
your life. I formerlysurveyed all the ways of God, and concluded they were the
only pleasant, delightful ways in all the world, And the more I meditate on
them the more delight I find in them. The young Levit's heart was merry when
preferment was offered to him; much more joy is in that soul which is preferred
to a sweet communion with Jesus Christ. The soul is ravished with the love of
Jesus Christ, The joy is unutterable. A stranger cannot intermeddle with it.
It Is a saying of Bernard. Vis nunquam esse tristis, been vive. I persuade you
to make a blessed change ofearthly to get heavenly, of carnal to get spiritual,
of momentany and transient to get permanent pleasures. A rich man delights in
his riches, a voluptuous man in his pleasures, an ambitious man in his titles
of honor. And what real contentment can be found in all these? but a godly
man delights in Christ. Christ is his joy, his hope, his love, his desire, his
honor. 1 Pet. 2. 7. Unto you which believe he is precious: But unto them which
be dissobedient, the stone which the builders dissallowed is made the head of
the corner. Will beauty delight you? Christ is the fairest of ten thousand.
Will riches and honor take you? In the left hand of wisdom are riches and
honnours. What are your desires? Be they what they will (and the desires are
boundless) yet read, Ps. 37. 4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall
give thee the desires of thine heart. O! then be no longer a stranger to the
ways of wisdom. O delight in the promises, and you shall suck sweetness out
of these breasts of consolation. Delight your selves in the divine ordinances,
and with joy you shall draw water out of these wells of salvation. O delight in
Jesus Christ, Isaih: 12. 3.
let your whole desires beset upon him. And he is fair and pleasant for
delight, Cant. 7. 6. How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!
Get your hearts in Love with Christ and his ways; And one spark of love will
beget a flame of seraphicall affections. What you love, you will most delight
in.

I proceed to a third Use for trial and examination: Every one Use 1. for
examination.
lays claim to the duty: They profess delight in Christ and in his ways: As it
was said, When the Son of man comes, shall he find Faith on the earth? so when
Christ calls us to account, shall he find this true delight in his ways? This
pleasantness may be much mistaken, and many pretend to it, who have no right
nor portion in it. Many mistake natural pleasantness for spiritual
pleasantness: Therefore it nearly concerns us to examine our selves whether
this pleasantness be natural or spiritual. I Will lay down some Qualifications of
spiritual joy and pleasantness.

1. Spiritual joy and pleasantness is serious, grave, composed. Gods

2. Spiritual Joy is such as can stand with fear, and the work of Psalm. 2. 11.
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Psalm. 112. 1. Praise ye
the Lord: blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in
his commandments. This transcends the sphere of the activity of natural joy: It
never looks at Humiliation and godly sorrow for sin. These dash its mirth
presently, and spoils all the sport of a natural man.

3. Spiritual Joy has God for its object: The joy of the Lord Neh^miah) is
your strength. So David encouraged himself in God. Now natural joy looks no
higher then Farms, Pleasures, Friends, Profits in the World; If riches
increase, then are their hearts set on them.

4. Spiritual Joy delights in all ways of Wisdom: It Is said of Herod John
(...), sweetly; but he could not brook the seventh Commandment. Many natural
men can delight in some way of wisdom, so far forth as they please their
fancies. The stony ground received some truths with joy; but could not close
with other truths: That joy which is spiritual, delights in all the
Commandments of God respectively: There Is an equal and indifferent respect unto
all Gods Commandments.

5. Spiritual Joy is the strength of the soul, and carrys it on in the dead in
spiritual things. When men are full of worldly joy, if you interpose some
savory discourse of God, and his ways; those men who had fluent tongues before,
can say nothing, they are as it were dead men, their hearts are as Nabals, as a
stone within them.

Sixthly and lastly, Spiritual joy will support the spirit and bear up Hab. 3.
17, 18. Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the
vines; the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat;
the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the
stalls: yet I will rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my salvation. A
soul that has only natural pleasantness is all amort, and quite cast down,
when any affliction befalls it: But a soul that has spiritual pleasantness
amidst all sorrows, finds comfort in God to swallow them all up. When crosses
and afflictions befall a child of God, then is the time for trial of his joy,
Rom 5. 2. By whom also we have access by faith into this grace, wherein we
stand and rejoye in hope of the glory of God. He kisseth the rod: Amidst
outward sorrows he feels inward consolations; an exchange of worldly for
spiritual joys.

The fourth Use shall be for Direction: you will ask, How shall we Use 4. For
Direction.
carry on the work of God cheerfully?

A. 1. Take heed of allowing thy self in any secret sin: A secret sin allowed
of will dash all thy mirth. I told you before a^ saying of Luther: for its
excellency I reminde you of it again. Vnagu^tula malae conscientiae totum mare
mundani gaudii absorbet. No way in the world so conducible hereunto, as the
purging out thy corruptions, the exterminating of sin out of thy soul. The
fewer sins, the more will be thy joy, as I may instance in David, who
complained of broken bones, and Prays, Restore unto me the joys of thy
salvation, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.

2. Study seriously and frequently all the ways of godliness: The more
knowledge thou have of the ways of God, the more delight will thou take in
them. The saying is, Ignoti nulla cupido: Principle thy heart therefore aright
in the ways of godliness, and labor for more knowledge of them: Labor to know
the beauty, and excellency, and incomparable riches of Christ. The ignorant
people ask, What is thy beloved more then another beloved? Labor to comprehend
with all Saints the height, depth, length and breadth of the love of God: Be
not content with that measure of knowledge which thou have already attained,
but get accessions and additions to it, Psalm. 9. 10. And they that know thy
name will put their trust in thee: for thou, O Lord, have not forsaken them
that seek thee.

3. Put in practice the Divine Art of Meditation: This is the spiritual
digesting of the Food of Heaven: O what abundance of comfort do Christians feel
by Meditation! Meditation is Animae vehiculum, it carrys up thy Devotions to
Heaven. To go to duties with a barren, dull spirit, there is no delight; but to
go to them after spiritual Meditation, this is sweet and pleasant indeed. Thus
Isaac meditated in the fields. Mary pondred Christ's words in her heart:
Sequester therefore your souls apart from all worldly intanglements, and
meditate of the riches of Christ, of the excellency of his ways, and by this
means your spirits will be elevated, and you will perform duties with more vigor
and alacrity of spirit.

Fourthly and lastly. Be sure to walk uprightly: Get an upright heart, and thou
may take comfort in whatsoever thou do, Pro. 10. 9. He that walks
uprightly, walks surely: but he that perverteth his way shall be known. Many
complain, I cannot do as others do, I want those joys they have: I cannot
perform duties as well as they. I direct thee to be sure that thy heart be
upright, that what thou do is in sincerity, and God will accept sincerity in
lieu of perfection. Is then thy heart upright? Is it the desire and endeavor
of thy soul to close with God? Do thou not willingly allow thy self in any
sin, be of good comfort: It becomes the upright to be joyful.

I have one Use more for consolation to the people of God, who Use 5. For
Consolation.
by experience subscribe to the truth of the Doctrine, That all the ways of
wisdom are ways of pleasantness. To these comfort appertains as their peculiar
right and interest: They find comfort coming in amidst all their religious
services, amidst their tears and sorrow for sin, they feel joy coming in, they
have tasted and felt how sweet the Lord is. And if there be now such comfort in
via, what will there be in patria? Si adeo dulcis quaerenti (says a Father)
quid invenienti? You therefore that are acquainted experimentally with these
truths, That the ways of godliness are ways of pleasantness, I beseech you
manifest the truth of these things. Tell and discourse to one another, speak
what good God has done for your souls. Many are kept back from God hy reason
of scandals and calumnies, that Religion makes men of melancholy and dumpish
spirits: Confute therefore these mistakes both by your words and actions: Tell
others, and strive to win them to God, and allure them with the narration of
the delights and soul-ravishing comforts that you have found in these ways: O
^abor to comfort others, with those comforts wherewith you your selves have
been comforted in particular. And so walk in the ways of God: Let your actions
be so carried, and the whole frame of your soul so ordered, that it may appear
to the whole world, That all the ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness.
Rejoice therefore in the Lord. Delightfulness in the ways of godliness, put a
beauty upon them: We have a sweet promise, Isa. 65. 18. But be ye glad and
rejoice for ever in that which I create: for b^hold, I create Jerusalem a
rejoicing, and her people a joy. A joy in the abstract, and it is Gods work of
creation: You therefore to whom God has darted the beams of his reconciled
countenance, I counsel in the language of our Savior, Sons and Daughters, be
of good comfort, and go on cheerfully: Let your hearts, as Jehoshaphats was, be
lifted up in the ways of God: When the Spirit of God witnesses to your
spirits, that ye are the children of God, there must needs be abundance of joy
in your souls: And here is your ground of rejoicing, that your names are written
in the Book of Life: The Lord set home these truths unto your consciences, and
move your hearts to embrace the ways of godliness.

I proceed to the second Doctrine, That all the paths of Divine Wisdom or
Godliness, are full of peace to the sons and daughters of peace. This truth I
shall prove by Scripture, confirm by Reason, and press it home unto your
Consciences by way of Use and Application.

For proof of Scripture, Psalm. 37. 11. But the meek shall inherit 1. The
Doctrine proved by Scripture.
the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace, and v. 37.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace.
Isa. 26. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee. Isa. 48. 18. O that thou had hearkened to my
commandments, then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the
waves of the sea. Isa. 54. 13. And all thy children shall be taught of the
Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children.

So Isa. 59. 8. The way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment in
their goings; they have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes therein shall
not know peace. Jer. 33. 6. Behold, I will cure them, and reveal unto them the
abundance of peace and truth. Ezekiel. 34. 25. And I will make with them a
covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of their land,
and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness and sleep in the woods. Even
mountains bring peace, Psalm. 72. 3. The mountains shall bring peace to the
people, and the little hills by righteousness. So are the beasts of the field
at peace, Job 5. 23. For thou shall be in league with the stones of the field:
and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. Officers are made
peace, Isa. 60. 17. For brass I will bring gold, and for iron, silver: I will
also make thine officers peace, and thy exactors righteousness. Their
habitation is peaceable, Isa. 32. 18. And my people shall dwell in a peaceable
habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places. Their life
peaceable, 1 Timothy 2. 2. We are commanded to pray for kings, and for all that
are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness
and honesty. Their wisdom is peaceable, James 3. 17. But the wisdom that is
from above, is first ^ure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated;
full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

Let Us inquire into the reasons of the Point. Consider, 1. Godly Luke 10. 6.
And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it; if not, it
shall turn to you again. And if sons, heirs, peace is their inheritance and
legacy. John 14. 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. John 16.
33. These things I have spoken unto you, that you might have peace; in the
world you shall have tribulation: But be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world.

Consider their several paths and ways, either in this life and pilgrimage,

1. For their life: Notwithstanding afflictions and persecutions, troubles from
the world; yet their whole life is peaceable. A God reconciled, a Conscience
pacified, makes them full of peace amidst varieties of troubles.

2. In their deaths: The remembrance of their uprightness of heart, and their
utmost endeavor to serve God in sincerity, brings abundance of peace, inward
peace, a tranquillity in their spirits, 2 Kings 20. 3. I beseech thee, O Lord,
remember now how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight. Whatever storms may be from the
Flesh, Devil and World; yet a serene, pacified conscience, makes a great and
quiet calm in the soul.

3. After death, in Eternity they feel the fruits of peace, the complement of
blessedness.

A third Ground shall be taken from the nature of Divine Wisdom

For first, Wisdom only can direct to peaceable paths: Ways of wickedness
lead us into Precipices and Dangers: Wisdom shows the good and right way: This
Samuel showed the people, 1 Samuel 12. 23, 24. Moreover, as for me, God forbid
that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you: but I will
teach you the good and the right way. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in
truth with all your heart: for consider how great things he has done for you.

2. Wisdom protects its followers in the ways of peace: It shows them the good
way, and protects and defends them in it, Prove. 4. 6, 7. Forsake her not, and
she shall preserve thee; love her, and she shall keep thee.

3. Wisdom and Godliness remove all stumbling Blocks, Envy, Malice, Pride, etc.
Enemies to peace, Prove. 4. 12. When thou go, thy steps shall not be
straightened; and when thou runnest, thou shall not stumble.

4. Wisdom satisfies the hearts of those who are its followers: The spirits of
the godly are quieted, and established in those ways; whereas still there are
troubles, and vexations, and disquietness in ways of wickedness: But godliness
pacifieth the conscience, and quiets the spirits of Gods children.

The fourth and last ground shall be drawn from the causes of true

1. Because they have a God reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 19. to wit, That God was in
Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them, and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation.

2. They have a Mediator and Prince of peace, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. For he is our
peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of
partition betwixt us. Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of
Commandments, contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one new
man, so making peace. Isa. 53. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he
was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed. Isa. 5. 6. For unto us a Child is born, a Son
is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder, and his Name shall be
called Wonderful, Councellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The
Prince of peace.

3. They have the Gospel of peace, Romans 10. 15. How beautiful are the feet of
them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things?

4. They have a conscience at peace: The answer of a good conscience quiets
their spirits. Hic murus aheneus esto, etc.

And now let us apply this by way of Information, Instruction, and Consolation.

1. For Information, That the ways of godliness are the only peaceable ways:
Not only eminenter, but exclusive: What p^ace, said Jehu, etc. No peace with
lusts, no peace in the ways of wickedness, Isa. 57. 20, 21. But the wicked are
like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.
Th^re is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Whatever jollity and quietness
wicked persons enjoy from without; yet there is war at home: A tortured
conscience will dash all thy sports: But a child of God, though wars may be
without, yet he injoys peace at home with God and a good conscience.

I showed formerly the causes of peace, wicked men want all these. God is their
enemy, Christ their enemy: The Gospel thunders out Anathema's against them: As
for those mine enemies that would not have me to reign over them, bring them
out, and slay them before me.

For Instruction* 1. Be instructed in these particular Duties.

1. Select the ways of godliness, and walk close in them: Turn neither to the
right hand nor to the left: Walk straight forward, and square all your actions
by the rule, which is the Word of God. When men relinquish their callings, and
walk out of Gods ways, then troubles and calamities befall them, and they can
take no comfort in them. But when thou walk exactly, and keep close to
God, whatever crosses befall thee, thou may take comfort: inward peace thou
may enjoy in the midst of outward troubles.

2. Get a spiritual acquaintance with God, Job 22. 21. Acquaint thy self with
him, and be at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee, Job 34. 29. When he
gives quietness, who can make trouble? and when he hides his face, who then
can behold him? Get thy peace made in heaven.

3. Prize at an invaluable rate the pearl of a good conscience, and take heed
of sinning against thy conscience: Would thou walk without trouble? walk
uprightly (as was before mentioned) for it is undoubtedly true, That he that
walks uprightly, walks truly: but he that perverteth his ways, shall be
known. It Is true, offenses will come, and many scandals and hardships we shall
meet withal in our way to Heaven: But if we can (...), we shall be as bold as
Lions: Uprightness only has boldness: The upright is as bold as a Lion.

4. Choose any affliction, rather then wound thy conscience by the least sin,
Job 36. 21. Take heed, regard not iniquity: for this have thou chosen rather
then affliction. To procure peace with men, O do not hazard thy peace with
God, and the serenity of a good conscience: No peace like to the peace of a
good conscience.

Here Is comfort to Gods people: Amidst all their troubles they enjoy abundance
of peace: The serenity of a good conscience quiets their spirits, so that the
fiercest turbulent Euroclydons cannot shake them.

Object. O but I have many perplexities of conscience: I go mourning all the
day long: God shoots his keen Shafts at me, and vexes me in his sore
displeasure.

1. For answer I demand: Art thou weary of the burden of thy sins, and art
thou sensible of thy insupportable burden? Art thou acquainted with thy
miserable condition, and apprehensive of thy wretchedness?

2. Do thou willingly allow thy self in no sin, though never so secret,
though sin of delight or constitution?

3. Do thou desire grace for to sanctify thee, as well as mercy to pardon
thee?

Would thou rather be rid of thy sins, then the punishments due to them? Then
thy condition is full of hope: And I shall propose these counsels to thee.

1. To lie in the way where Christ comes by, at the Pool of Bethesda.

2. Unbare thy Wounds unto him: Look unto the Brazen Serpent.

3. Stand not in thine own light, but hearken to Gods voice in his Messengers,
Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will say: for he will speak peace
unto his people and to his saints: but let not them turn again unto folly.

4. Continue thy duties: Add more Oil to the flame: Be more swift to hear,
more fervent in the spirit: When God holds up thy spirit to continue cheerfully
in the performance of thy duty, there is mercy in store for thee.

5. Remove all hindrances of thy peace, all murmuring discontented
expressions: If peace comes not as soon as thou would have it; take heed of
Rachels passionate language, Give me children, or else I die.

6. Cherish those motions of the spirit and feelings that Christ puts into thy
heart: When Christ gives thee one good look, O make much of it! It Is mercy thou
have one good look: O set a high prize of it! Christ sometimes comes and dines,
and sups with his Spouse, and then she is overjoyed: other while he absents
himself from her, then she is sick for him. Now whenever Christ inspires a good
motion into thy heart, be sure thou cherish it: When ever he smiles upon thee:
O! observe it and make much of it.

And seventhly and lastly, VVait, and resolve not to be driven from thy Fathers
door: Though he slay thee, yet put thy trust in him: Though he be angry with
thee, yet still praise him: Wrestle with him, as Jacob did, and at last thy
desires will be granted, and thy joy shall be full.

The dignity of the Soul.
Mark 8. 36. For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the Sermon. 10. St
Mary's Oxon. March 10. 1650.
whole world, and lose his own soul?


OUr Savior Christ in the verses immediately foregoing, exhorts his
disciples, to deny themselves, v. 34. He lays down a Reason verse the 35th,
wherein he prevents a tacit objection, Is it not good (methinks) to look to our
selves, and to sleep in a whole skin? No, thou mistakest thy self, whilst
thou think to save thy life, thou will lose it; For whosoever, etc. But
further, they might say, we must bid adieu to the world, our loss will be
wonderful great: But compare thy loss and gain together; If thou gainest the
world, O miserable gain! oh dreadful loss! if in the interim thou hazardest
thy precious soul; For what shall it profit us, etc.

The words are a weighty reason evidently convincing us of this truth; That the
gain of the world is a miserable, unprofitable gain, purchased with the loss
of the soul. The words are propounded by way of question, and contain
virtually a vehement negation. As if he should say; The gain of the world will
not profit; there is no comparison, the world is base, and contemptible, the
soul excellent, and invaluable; Is there any compare between gold and dross,
excellency and baseness, the soul and the world? Wherein observe, Division.
1. The things compared, the soul, and the world. 2ly. The purchaser. A man.
3ly. The price paid, and shall lose, etc. 4ly. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
The purchase. The whole world. 5ly. The miserable bad bargain. What shall it
profit, etc.

I Will a little insist in the explication of the words, and then draw forth the
Doctrines contained in them.

Here Is a question propounded of, (...); This affirmative question has the
force of a strong negation, (...). It will not profit, not the least advantage
will ensue; He Will reap no gain, no profit at all. (...), indefinitely,
Indefinita in materia necessaria aequivalent universali; Any man, all men,
every one shall be thus served. Let the man take what pains he will; make the
most of what he has got, yet unprofitableness will be the Catastrophe; No man
shall fare better, all the Merchants of the world shall speed alike; all that
negotiate for the world, and make merchandise of the soul shall be bankrupt,
and broken. (...). It Is spoken ex hypothesi, supposing a man might gain the
world so Alexander having conquered the world, whined, that there was not
another world to conquer. -- Paeleo juveni non unus sufficit orbis. The
Scripture speaks of several worlds. As, 1: The elementary world, Heb. 11. 3.
2ly. The reasonable world, all mankind in 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
earth, Romans 5. 12. 3ly. For Reprobates; Joh. 17. 9. 4ly. For the elect, Joh.
3. 16. 5ly. For the present life here, 1 Cor. 7. 34. 6ly. For the pomp and
glory, the good things of this life, as Gal. 6. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 31. And thus I
take it; by world, I understand all earthly excellencies, and accommodations:
honors, pleasures, profits, riches, in their greatest estate and confluence,
whatever is pleasant, delightful, and esteemed of in the world. The treasures
of the East, and West Indies, were all the honors, glory, dignity, pomp,
riches met in one, and were thou the purchaser of them all? were thou as great
as Nimrod, Alexander, etc: what are all these in comparison of thy soul?
(...), mulctabitur anima. O dreadful loss! oh lamentable hazard! the worst
bargain that ever was made, the most mad purchase that ever was got; To lose
thy precious soul for base dirt, trash, pelf, vanity, to lose one soul for a
whole world, is a lamentable bargain purchased at too dear a rate. By soul is
here meant the rational soul; which is defined, (...), some render, actus
primus, perfect habea, (...). Anima est tota in toto, and tota in qualibet
part corporis, the most noble part, for wa informans. The soul of beasts,
their sensitive soul is annihilated: the soul of a bruit-beast might admit a
fair dispute. That which has life is more noble than lands, buildings, etc:
which are inanimate. But there is no compare, between the soul and the world,
an immortal soul, a material earthly world, and immateriall, and spiritual
soul, of all created things the soul is a nonesuch, beyond compare,
invaluable, and has the pre-eminence. It Is far from my intententions to read
a natural Philosophy lecture upon the essence and operations of the soul; I
may not mistake the Pulpit for the Schools, and stuff up a Sermon with
Philosophical notions: though I discard not Philosophy as a handmaid to
Divinity, yet I had rather have one proof from the scriptures than from them
all, I prefer this one verse before all their elaborate volumes: my proofs
therefore shall be altogether scripture proof.

That which from these words I lay down for a foundation of my discourse, is
this entire doctrinall conclusion.

That the gain of the world can in no wise countervaile the loss of o^^ Doct.
propounded.
soul.

For the unfolding whereof, I purpose ((...)) to make a comparison between the
soul and the world, the excellency of the one, and the baseness of the other;
that shall constitute the doctrinall part: Which done I shall improve all to
point of practice, for the better ordering of your lives and conversations.
This shall constitute 1. Unfolded by a Comparison. 1.
the Use and Application.

1. Then, wherein consists the excellency of the soul? For representation of
the souls exellency; 'Ile inhance the dignity, price and value thereof in
these 7 ensuing singularities.

1. The excellency of the soul consists in it is excellent and high original.
Singul. 1: The soul is the breath of God.


The soul is the very breath of God, Genesis 2. 7. Job. 33. 4. The soul is not
ex traduce, by carnal generation, nor by derivation or propagation from the
Parents, but it is immediately inspired by God Zech. 12. 1. Cr^ando infunditur,
and infundendo creatur; so St. Augustine.

2ly. Consider the pattern after which the soul was created, and Sing. 2. The
soul was created after God's image. Corruptus corruptum, leprosus leprosum.
that was the exactest pattern, the perfect Archetypum and exemplar, the image
of God, see Genesis 1. 27. Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. It Is said Adam be got a son in his own
likeness, (i. e.) a sinner like himself, Genesis 3. 5. But that was statu
corrupto. The Apostle argues the case concerning the decent carriages of man
and woman in external circumstances, 1 Cor. 11. 7. It Is the commendation of a
child to resemble it is father: this inhanceth the soul, that it resembles it is
Creator.

3. Consider the souls spirituality, and immateriality. The soul Singul: 3.
The soul is spiritual.
was not made of dust, nor shall ever be resolved unto dust. It was not made of
the gross substance of the earth, but immediately formed by God. The soul and
spirit are coupled together, 1 These 5. 23. Heb. 4. 11. Luke 23. 46. The soul
is a spiritual, immateriall, incorporeall substance.

4. Consider the souls immortality, and eternal duration, Eccles. Singul. 4.
The soul is immortal.
12. 7. Matthew: 10. 28. Both body and soul shall be immortal at the
resurrection and reunion. The soul is capable of no corruption nor mortality
at all. As soon as the body moulders away, the soul leaves the body; But not
only the soul, but the body at the resurrection shall be immortal and
incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15. 34. Phil. 3. 21. The soul runs parallel with the
longest line of eternity. The soul has no contrary corrupting qualities; It
depends not on the matter, not on the body; for when the body is corrupted, and
putrified, made meat for worms, the soul is incorruptible, and immortal.

5. Consider the noble faculties of the soul. 2. Noble faculties appertain to
the reasonable soul, the Understanding and the Will. Singul. 5. The The soul
has noble faculties. 1 The understanding.


1. For the understanding, it is the bright luminary of the soul, (...) and
(...), are used promiscuously in scripture. It Is the Pilot to steer the ship;
it sits at stern and guides the affections, and rules over all the members.
The understanding was created marvelous quick, knowing the Creator's mind,
discerning the natures of things, Adam gave all the creatures names, suitable
to their nature.

2. The Will, and this was created pliable and obedient unto the 2. The will.
will of God, to yield ready obedience to it is Creatours commands. And though
the understanding be blinded, and the will depraved, the affections disordered
by reason of Adam's, fall: yet Christ gives his eye salve to his people to
clear up their understanding, and subdueth their wills unto his will. These
are noble faculties: The memory, conscience, affections are reduced unto these
two: These faculties difference men from bruit beasts.

6. Consider the invaluable price paid to purchase the soul. Even Singul. 6.
The price paid for the soul.
no less than the effusion of the blood of Christ. He paid his life for the
redemption of his people, the soul must needs be of invaluable worth, that was
bought, purchased, and paid for with the blood of the Son of God: O!
invaluable price more worth than millions of worlds, more then all Angels in
heaven could do, more than if Adam and all his posterity had suffered unto
eternity; That the Son of God, (...), the eternal, God should become a child,
the Ancient of days should become the Infant of days, the Divine person should
assume an humane nature by an hypostaticall union, that he should disrobe
himself, and wear the rags of mortality, come into the world, not to reign
as a King, but as a servant, to dye a painful, shameful, and cursed death,
this was an incomparable price, never to be paralleled: And what was the end of
all, but to save the souls of his people to pacify God's wrath, reconcile man
to God by the death on his cross?

7. Consider the difficulty to save our souls; We have a battle to fight, a
race to run, we must be wrestlers, warriors, racers, Singular. 7. It Is a
difficult matter to save the soul.
we are to enter in at a strait gate. Few are saved, (...). It Is no easy task
(as the ignorant world dreams of) to make our peace with God; when the Son of
man comes shall he find faith on the earth? so, shall he find Repentance, and
Love? A common temporary faith, a formal Repentance, a pretended love, are
every where to be found, as the sicamores in the valley for abundance: but a
justifying purifying faith, a repentance not to be repented of, a love without
dissimulation are hard to be found, rare herbs, which grow in few gardens.
The world cheates their souls with a shell, a picture, a fancy of faith, they
believe as their parents did before them; and so they cheat their souls with a
picture and fancy of repentance, they think repentance enough, if they can but
mumble over that neck-verse, Lord have mercy upon me; but such lasy, easy,
formal devotions, will not serve the turn, see 1 These: 1. 3. There is a work
of faith, a labor of love, and a patience of hope. Cheap, easy, lasy ways, are
suspicious ways: Its the greatest work in all the world, to work out our
salvation: some indeed have a sharper, some an easier birth: None are without
pangs and throws one time or other. Heart wounding goes before heart healing,
Act. 2. 37. But whoever belongs to God, shall feel the gall and wormwood,
the bitterness of sin.

Sin cost David, Peter, Mary-Magdalen, Paul, dear. Now then, that it is such
a weighty difficult work to save thy soul, hence the excellency of the soul
is the more inhanced and raised.

On the contrary, as I have inhanced the souls excellency in 7 singularities,
so I will debase, and vilify the world in as many aggravations.

1. The world is a stye and sink of impurity, 1 John 5. 19. Agrav. 1. The
world is a sink of impurtly.
What Is pure religion, see, Jam. 1. 27. To k^ep ones self unspotted from the
world. The world is the mother pollution: the daughter (...), Pet. 2. 20. The
world may not be loved, 1 John 2. 15. You may soon know that all the world
has, 1 John 2. 16. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride
of life.

2ly. The world is a grand impostor, an arrant jugler. There Agrav. 2, The
world is a gr^^d Imposter.
are three words, Ephesians. 4. 14: which describe the world to the life, (...), it
courts and complements as Joab did Abner, and Amasa, as Ja^l served Sisera, as
the Panther leaves a sweet sent, and allures the passenger to come to her, and
presently he is devoured (as they say) the Sirens songs first lull men asleep,
then devoures them. The world puts a gaudy fair vizzard on the soulest
actions: it calls drunkenness, covetousness, whordome, by mincing, plausible
appellations. The lewd strumpet tells of her bed of ornaments, and braveries,
Prove. 7. 16, 17, But mentions not a syllable of the dart striking through the
liver, verse. 23. So the wine wherewith the drunkard is intoxicated, allures him
with it is color, Prove. 23. 31; but forewarnes not of it is biting, verse. 32.
The world never represents sin in it is proper colors, but sub specie boni.
Take heed of the world, it will serve thee as Jacob served Laban, change thy
wages 7 times: It will serve thee as the Highpriests served Judas, Matthew. 27.
4. When an anguish came upon his spirit, and he restored the thirty pieces of
silver, saying I have sinned, in that I have b^trayed the innocent blood, and
they said what is that to us? see thou to that.

Then thirdly, the world is a merciless cruel tormentour; Sol^mon found it to
be so by lamentable experience, Eccl^s. 1. 14 The covetous man is upon a Rack,
his bed is a bed of thorns, his bread, gravel, for the loss of his God
Mammon. The ambitious man, loseing honor and preferment, is disquieted, that
he cannot enjoy himself, so was Haman, nothing could satisfy him, so long as
he wanted Mord^caie's bended knee. The want of a complement more vexed him,
than all his honors contented him. At what a great loss was the young man,
when he must foregoe all his possessions? At what a loss were the foolish
Gadarens, when their swine were drowned, they even preferred their swine before
a Jesus.

4. The world in it is best estate, is vanity, Eccles. 1. 2. The riches, Aggrav.
4. The world is vanity.
honors, and pleasures, in this world, are empty broken cisternes, trees
without fruit, bare leaves or apples of Sodom, which (as Historians relate)
are goodly to the eye, but being touched, dissolve into cinders, and ashes,
Isai. 55. 2. Not bread. The worlds goods are things which are but shadows,
pictures, shells, emptiness, vanity, nothing, in reality and truth, Chimera's,
entia rationis, brain fancies; Great expectations we have, Parturiunt montes,
etc. The world is a mere lottery, we come to it with heads full of hopes, but
return back with hearts full of blankes.

5. The world is unsatisfying and unsuitable to the soul. The Aggrav. 5. The
world is unsatisfying.
world is material, corruptible, earthly; the soul immateriall,
incorruptible, heavenly. How can these be reconciled? What agreement can there
be between them? There Is no proportion, nor reconciliation. The soul cannot
feed on gold, you may as easily fill a bag full of spiritual graces, as
satisfy an immortal soul with the world. The riches, pleasures, etc: of the
world, are no way suitable, noe way satisfying, not in the least measure
commensurate to the vast and boundless desires of an immortal heavenly-borne
being soul. The Highpriests money could not satisfy Judas; as soon as
conscience pricked him, he could keep the money no longer. Honors could not
satisfy Haman; What does all this avail me, etc? The fool in the Gospel
could not be satisfied with the barns he already had, he must have bigger? It
is not within the sphere of the activity of any sublunary thing, to satisfy an
immortal soul.

6. The world is unhelpful and unprofitable in the evil day. There Aggrav. 6.
The World is unhelpful in the evil day.
are 4 evil days wherein the world cannot help. 1. In the day of affliction,
loss of husband, wife, children, what can the world do thee good? In the day
of a tormented conscience; all the worlds goods cannot pacify a tormented
conscience. 2ly. In the day of death. The world cannot bribe death. 4ly. In the
day of judgment, no help no comfort from the world. A friend we say is known in
adversity; it plainly appears that the world is a very false perfidious enemy;
because it serves thee as Absolom's Mule served him, left him helpless in a
time of misery hanging between heaven and earth.

7 And lastly; The world in all it is bravery, in it is greatest estate and
Aggrav. 7. The World is momentany.
confluence is but momentary, transient, it cannot help beyond this life it
cannot carry us to eternity; It passes away, 1 John 2. 17. The ambitious man's,
honors, promotions, high places, cannot follow him to another world. An
ungodly great man, noble and honorable in the world, when he dies he shall be
degraded of all. His honors will not follow him to hell, he shall be there,
base, ignoble, inglorious. The riches of the covetous Mammonist shall not go
to bell with him, they cannot corrupt the flames, nor bribe the tormentours.
The voluptuous man's hawks, and hounds, cards, dice, cups, shall not go to
hell with him: as soon as death surprizeth him, all these leave him. What
distinction can be given between the rich man's skull and the poor man's? What
difference does death make, between the noble, and ignoble, rich and poor?
Death cuts down all with it is sith. It Is mercy, and free grace that makes all
the difference. Those 4 Summa Imperia were dissolved, -- Sic transit gloria
mundi. The world is a Jonah's gourd, like a vapor, a bubble, transient,
momentany, uncertain, of short continuance; Now weigh these together, the
excellency of the soul, and vileness of the world, as I have represented them
in several particulars. We know Contraria juxtase posita magis eluccscunt;
And upon serious premeditation give in your verdict, which would your rather
have? Oh! that God would move, and persuade your hearts to make the better,
choice to prefer your precious souls before all the kingdoms of the world,
and the glory of them. Thus much for the doctrinallpart of the Text.

The doctrine being thus proved and cleared by the forementioned comparison, it
now remains that I should make the best improvement of it, and set it home
upon your consciences by particular Application. I shall hold forth a sixfold
use of this Doctrine, which I shall endeavor to set home upon your
consciences, for Terror, Expostulation, Exhortation, Examination, Direction,
and Consolation.

The first Use is a word of terror and commination; it speaks heavy tidings
to all those who prefer the pomp and glory of the world 1 Use for Terror.
before their precious souls? how many prefer a base lust before their
souls? a penny profit before an immortal soul? This is the condition of
thousands, the far greater part, even of the Christian world. Now because
every one will plead not guilty, I Will single out particular persons notoriously
guilty.

1. Ignorant persons, who know not the excellency of a reasonable soul, and
Ignoti nulla cupido. Discourse of the dignity of their souls; and tell them of
the infinite price paid to redeem the souls of the elect, they plead
ignorance, they are not book-learned. But will this plea lick thee whole? If
thou art not book-learned, yet thou must be heart-learned. No kind of ignorance
can acquit thee a toto, though it may a tanto. A sin of ignorance in the
Leviticall law had a trespass offering. An invincible gross ignorance, amongst
blind guides, and blind corners, where there has been wanting a teaching
ministry, is lamentable, but not excusable. They shall be punished with fewer
stripes: Hell shall not be heat so hot for them as for presumptuous sinners,
who sin against illumination of judgment, and the bright shining light of the
Gospel. But they that suffer the least pains in hell, shall suffer enough: Do
not then plead thy ignorance, that is to purge one fault with another. Now if a
bare ignorance, Ignorantia purae negationis; an invincible crasse ignorance,
where means are wanting, (which we have, and enjoy) if this be damnable, and
no excuse for a sinner, for Romans 1, (...), there is enough to leave any without
excuse, what shall we say of an affected ignorance? which is Ignorantia pravae
dispositionis, a shutting of the eyes against the light, to be ignorant of the
worth of Christ, and the soul in these days, when knowledge aboundes as the
waters cover the seas, when as for the time and means they might have been
teachers: when notwithstanding such a marvelous light shining brightly, yet
they are in darkness, notwithstanding sermon upon sermon, etc: a constant
powerful ministry, shining lamps, yet still people are ignorant, they know
not God, what shall I say of them? Let me tell them that they are under a
dreadful curse, as Jer. 10. 25. 2 These. 1. 8. Thou have a precious soul, and
know not of it, notwithstanding so many warnings, and admonitions by the
messengers of God, whose fault is that? thy own, questionless thou may know,
O! desperate, damnable ignorance!

2. Negligent persons are to be reproved, these are heedlesse and 2. Neg^gent
persons.
careless what become of their souls; For their bodies and estates, they
turmoyle and vex themselves, rising early, etc. For a gainful bargain, for
increasing their estates, for boon, joviall company, they can find time
enough; but press them to the practice of religious duties, they plead want of
time. They want not time, but good hearts. Manna is even ready to drop into
many men's mouths, and yet they will not take pains to gather it. Many are so
supine and lazy, that they will not step over the threshold to hear a Sermon.
Many have gifts, and good abilities, but let them lie rustie for want of using:
slothful persons shall be clothed with rags. The fountain is opened,
people are not sensible of their thirst, and therefore they will not come; God
affords food for our body, and food for our soul in abundance: now an hungry
man will go apace for corporal food, and had we a spiritual appetite, a
soul hunger, we should quicken our pace, and run as fast for the sood of our
souls, see Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation?
God puts a prize into our hands, if we neglect to use it, our condemnation will
be the greater. A sluggard will tell of this Lion, that mountain, and that
shrubbe in the way: so your lazy negligent people will tell and reckon up all
the difficulties they can, to flatter themselves in their idleness, whereas
indeed when we consider the battle we are to fight, the race to run, the
strait gate to pass through, and the great difficulty to attain salvation,
this should excite and provoke us to beg strength from God, and act in his
strength, tugge hard at the Oar, wrestle harder, mend our pace, that we may
enter in at the strait gate, fight the good fight of faith, and so run that
we may obtain.

A third sort of persons to be reproved are unbelievers. They believe 3.
Unbelievers.
not such worth, and excellency in the soul as we speak of. This is the grand,
capital, damning sin of the Gospel; Unbelief is a complication of many sins,
made up of a fraternity of iniquity. See John 8 24. Unbelief as well as
covetousness, caused the young man to prefer treasures on earth, before
treasures in heaven. Unbelief as well as covetousness made the foolish
Gadarens to prefer their swine before a Savior. Did people in good earnest
believe that the soul is more worth then a world, that the soul is of a
heavenly-borne being, and runs parralell with eternity, they durst not
graspe the world, make an Idol of Mammon, Volupia, etc. and put their precious
souls in jeopardy. What hindered Christ's miracles? see Matthew. 13. 28. What Is
the portion of unbeleevers? see Luk 12. 46. Rev. 21. 8. The Jews had a saying,
that, every sin that they committed had a spice of the golden calfe. Every
sin without question has a spice of infidelity: Unbelief, and misbeliefe
are destructive to the soul.

4ly. Impatient sinners are to be reproved; these are worst of all, 4.
Impenitent sinners.
they throw away the remedy, spurn away the plaster that God ordains for
their cure. We say, falling into the water drownes not, but lying there, for a
man may fall into a water, and may be plucked out alive: so falling into sin
damnes not, but lying in it without repentance. It Is true that every sin
deserves damnation, but all sins do not actually damn, otherwise who could
be saved? There are two sorts of sinners, penitent, and impenitent sinners.
Penitent, broken hearted sinners are received into mercy, through Christ: their
sins are washed away in his blood, their sins are imputed to his score, and
his righteousness imputed to them for justification. But impenitent sinners,
such as swear, and will swear, are drunk and will be so, break sabbaths,
and will do so, without remorse or regret of conscience, these shut the door
of mercy against themselves; An impenitent person is Felo de se, his own
executioner, see Rev. 16. 11. Romans 2. 5. Impenitent persons take not the
dignity of their souls into consideration, little do they think what will
become of their souls unto all eternity. The law requires exact obedience,
will not abate a tittle, not the least transgression; God has given us a Court
of mercy, the Gospel, and in it a surety, Christ, and the isntrumental means,
faith, and repentance. Now, impenitent Persons, despise the Gospel, the suerty,
the remedy, they reject the great salvation tendered in the Gospel, and so they
are left unexcusable. Their blood be upon their own heads. God would heal
them, they will not be healed; they are filthy and impure, the Lord proclaims
a fountain to wash in it, but they will not come unto it, and so their
damnation is just, and they are, (...), self condemned, and their destruction
is from themselves. Of all judgments, deprecate this of impenitency. The Lord
never give you over to impenitency.

2. The next Use shall be for expostulation; and here I would expostulate Use
2. For expostulation.
the case, as Isai. 55. 2. Romans 6. 21. Who of any understanding would serve so
unprofitable a master as sin is? who would be so mad as to be penny wise and
pound foolish? as to get riches, lands, revenues by cozenage, fraud,
oppression, and hazard their precious souls? What if you could get never so
much gold, purchase never so much land honestly, and justly, and yet with the
care, and turmoyle of getting and keeping all, you neglect your soul? what
advantage would all this be unto you? Call your selves to an account, and
reckon what you get by purchaseing the world, and loseing your souls, cast up
your accounts, and you will find, you have made a miserable bad bargain; 'Ile
draw this Use unto particular instances.

1. Let me expostulate the case with the voluptuous persons, who eat, and
drink, and rise up to play; Hawks, hounds, cards, dice, whores, cups are the
voluptuous man's: companions. He Is lul'd a sleep on the lap of pleasures, and
follows his own swinge, and careere against the counter-blasts of a reclaiming
conscience. Let me ask the voluptuous liver, what do all his pleasures
conduce to the advantage of his soul? what comfort can a man take at night when
he goes to bed, when all the day he has past away in gameing, drinking, and
carrowsing? How many spend more upon their hounds, then they do toward the
maintenance of a faithful Ministry? How many prefer a pack of cards, a pack
of hounds, a cast of hawks, before the word of God? How many prefer a
drunken merry meeting before a Sermon? They can sit whole days and nights at
cards and dice, and at their cups upon ale-benches, and yet how weary at a
Sermon? Double duties are tedious to them, sabbaths, fasts, are heavy burdens
unto them. This sin of voluptuousness, is the crying sin of the nation, for
which God lets us blood by his heavy judgments at this very time; O that all
voluptuous Epicures would seriously lay to heart the sacred Irony of the wise
man! Eccles. 11 9. O! that God would persuade you to have special regard of
your precious souls! O that God would open your eyes to see your vanities and
wicked pleasures, and turn the stream into the right channel, as Prove. 3. 17.
To account the ways of wisdom the only ways of pleasantness.

2. Let me expostulate the case with the covetous Mammonist; He rises early,
etc: he is a scrapeing, and carking for the world, the trash and pelf here
below, filling his barnes with corn, his coffers with gold, still laboring
for corn and oil, never satisfied, never thinking he has enough.

But what is all this to the soul? His Mammon is his God, the wedge of gold is
his confidence. He Is eathed before his time, his heart is rivetted upon the
world. Surely he dreams of an eternity upon earth, and of heaven upon earth:
He heeds not, nor regards any hereafter. His breath smells of earth, his
discourse is earthly, his whole life and conversation is an earthly worldly
conversation. But what will all his riches avail him when death arrests him?
See, Zeph. 1. 18. Luke 12. 17, 18, 19, 20, and the 21. v, makes the
Application. Thou can not carry thy riches to another world, they cannot
bribe the flames of hell, nor corrupt the Tormentor; wherefore then should
thou labor thus greedily for that which is not bread, for those things which
are not? wherefore should thou take such care for trash and pelf, the base,
transitory trash of the of the world, which lasts but for a short season, and
in the interim neglect thy precious soul, which abides unto all eternity? O!
that God would alter thine affections, as Col. 3. 2. O! that God would work in
thee a serious belief of this truth, that thy soul is more worth than all the
world!

3ly. Let me expostulate the case with the ambitious man, who aspires unto
great places, dignities, honors, and promotions in the world? What are all
these in comparison of his soul? Many have great Titles, honorable names in
this world, who shall be degraded of all in the world to come. What Is honor?
It Is but momentany. Honor est in honorante; it is that which a wicked man may
have, Haman, Nimrod, H^red, had it. What would rich Coats of arms, great
dignitis, popular observance, advantage thy precious soul? The Apostle tells
us, not many, 1 Cor. 1. 26. etc. He does not say not any, some are ennobled by
a spiritual, as well as by a natural birth. But often times great dignities,
preferments, honors, promotions, are clogges, and hindrances to the soul.
Marcus Gal^acius Caracciolus knew it well, and renounced all for Christ; so did
Moses, (...); Heb. 11. 24. So must thou. What high places, preferments,
dignities, thou fear will ensnare thy soul, and withdraw thee from Christ,
thou must foregoe them all, so far forth as they stand in competition with,
or opposition unto Christ. What will it profit thee to have a great name
written on earth, but no name at all written in the book of life? Wherefore then
do thou pursue high preferments, see Jer. 45. 5. Art thou fit and preferred
for those great high places thou look after? Have thou taken an Antidote
before hand to prevent the poisonous inflations of pride? Or art thou sure thou
shall speed, and obtain thy desire. Honor fugientem sequitur, s^quentem fugit,
see Psalm. 75. 6. Prove. 3. 35. Remember Haman's period; Wolseyes fall, etc. Thou
that art higher by the head than thy brethren, as Saul was elevated to great
dignities, must come the same way to heaven as the poorest Christian. Wherefore
then, should any man labor more for greatness than goodness, preferring favor
of men before the favor of God, high places on earth, before the high places
in heaven? The reason is, because they prefer the world before their souls;
Consider seriously of all these. The voluptuous Epicure never cease
swallowing, the covetous Mammonist, never cease scraping, the ambitious
Parasite, never cease climbing. But what will it profit the voluptuous man to
have his fill of pleasures, the covetous man to have his coffer crammed with
gold, the Ambitious man to have honors, promotions, and great titles, enough
to clogge his memory, and yet in the interim to lose their precious souls? Let
your serious thoughts be exercised herein, and then return an answer, whether
your souls be not of more value than the whole world?

I proceed to a third Use for exhortation: Suffer I beseech you the Use 3. For
Exhortation.
word of exhortation, above all other things to take special regard, and care
what will become of your souls to all eternity, above all your gettings get
this understanding, to know the incomparable worth of your immortal souls.
Above all trades which you drive for the world, learn this soul trade, this
soul thrist. I persuade you to take the most thriving, most gainful way in
the world: whereas others labor for corn and oil, wealth, dignities, which
are failing perishing things, which are not bread, and cannot satisfy, let me
persuade you to labor for that which endures to eternity. Be therefore good
husbands for your souls, learn this spiritual husbandry to improve your
time, talents, and opportunities for the everlasting benefit of your precious
souls. Tell men of a wise, rich, honorable, thriving way for the world, they
will readily embrace it; I represent before you this day, the most wise, rich,
honorable, thriving way for your precious souls. This course is wise, Deuteronomy.
32. 29. It Is rich and honorable, Prove. 3. 16. The godly are most honorable.
It Is thriving and gainful, 1 Timothy 6. 6. Up and set about the work. Above all
works work out your salvation with fear and trembling. Methinks I might spare
Motives; what? will ye not do good to your own souls? Will you neglect your
choicest Jewel? will you leave your soul at random, neglected, unregarded?
Do ye not know the singular worth of your soul? To quicken your affections, I
shall recommend to your serious thoughts these 9 moving considerations.

1. One soul is more precious then all the kingdoms of the Consid. 1. One
soul is more worth than the world.
world, and the glory of them; See thou a poor man picking off a dunghill old
cast rags, another picking sticks or coals out of the kennel, almost ready to
famish by reason of hunger, or to starve for want of fire: see thou others
working for a penny a day, going many a mile to earn a penny, and scarce able
to go through weakness; however these poor people may seem vile and
contemptible in the eyes of the world, yet their souls are more worth, and
highlier to be valued, then all the pomp and bravery of the world: My Reasons
are,

1 Because the world is transitory, fading, perishing; the soul permanent,
abiding to eternity. The form of the world passes away; this goodly structure
of this visible globe, shall be dissolved and burnt up with fire, but the soul
is incorruptible, capable of no consumption; now that which is permanent is of
more worth then that which is transient, therefore the soul is more worth then
the world.

Secondly, all the riches, honors, bravery, etc. in the world cannot redeem
one soul; If a man would give all his lands, gold and silver, etc. to save his
soul, it could not be obtained: the Manors, Lands, and richest treasures of
the whole world put altogether, cannot purchase one soul: the soul cannot be
bought nor purchased by such a price, when death arrests a sinner to appear
before the judgment seat, the sinner would give ten thousand pounds for a good
conscience, nay all his estate, riches, etc. but all these cannot bribe death
to stay one minute longer, nor can they all make any atonement for the soul.
Riches, honors, etc. are not a suitable proportionable price, sor these are
material and corruptible, the soul immateriall and incorruptible, and between
these there is no proportion.

Thirdly, The price paid to redeem our souls is infinitely, superlatively more
worth then millions of worlds, what is that, see 1 Pet. 1. 18. The soul was
redeemed with the price of blood, even of him who was (...): not one soul
saved any other way; not the richest in the world, nor the poorest can come any
other way to heaven, but by Jesus Christ. The soul of the poorest saint
(though his person be trampled on by the world) is bought by so great a price,
as the effusion of the blood of Jesus Christ. Hence it evidently appears, that
the soul is more worth then the world, Christ died not for the world, he prayed
not for them, John 17. 9. but he died for his own, whom his father had given
him out of the world. O Consid. 2. Jesus Christ alone, and the graces of his
spirit can adorn the soul.
precious, heavenly-born-being soul!

2ly. It Is Jesus Christ alone, and the graces of his spirit that can beautify,
enrich, and adorn the soul. Ask a covetous Mammonist where lies his riches?
he will tell you in such a stock of cattle, such lands and revennues, gold and
silver, etc. Ask a child of God where are his riches? he will tell you his
riches are in Christ, his treasures are in heaven, his high place and
preferment is in his fathers house. Ask your stately Gallants wh^re their
ornaments are? They will show you their necklaces; and bracelets of pearls,
their Diamond-Rings, Gorgeous apparel. But what is all these to the soul? The
soul is not beautified with golden chains, costly raiment, precious jewels.
I Will tell you of a chain of pearls, which will adorn your souls, and enrich
you more then all the precious gemmes the Universe can afford, read 2 Pet. 1.
5. Ps 45. 13, 14. Ezekiel. 16. 9, 10, 11, etc. Thou may be rich in the world,
yet poor in grace, thou may have a beautiful face and a polluted soul;
goodly, brave, stately apparel, and a foul rotten conscience; outward
beauty, inward deformity; fair without, foul within. Now Christ his graces can
alone make thy soul beautiful; His graces are the best ornament, and
therefore beseech him to beautify thy soul, and to adorn thee with faith,
love, and the rest of the Graces of his spirit.

Thirdly Consider, God out of the riches of his free grace and mercy Consid. 3
God puts a price into our hands to improve for our souls.
puts a price into your hands by the Gospel dispensations, which he expects
you should improve for the best advantage of your souls. Force not the Lord to
complain, as Prove. 17. 6. you have sermon upon sermon, Manna falls frequently
round about your tents, will you not stir out of your doors to gather it? you
have the ordinances frequently dispensed amongst you, you have bread in the
morning, and bread in the evening, many occasional sermons. All these helps
and means are afforded by God for the good of your souls: you have public
assemblies continued, your eyes behold your teachers, you enjoy Sabbaths, days
of humiliation, days of thankesgiving, wherein Gods keeps open market for the
good of your souls, and its your duty to husband them all for the eternal
welfare of your souls? The Spirit knocks at your hearts, by the sermons you
hear, by all the mercies you enjoy, to take care of your precious souls. The
salvation of your souls is the intention and end of all our preaching. It Is
the only design we have upon you, to win you to Jesus Christ: all the
Ordinances are the food of your souls, to keep your souls in heart, the
sabbaths are the market of your souls, you have soule-fatting Ordinances. Oh
take heed, lest a leanenesse enter into your souls. The markets will not
always last, the shops will not always be open, now come and buy wine, etc.
Improve the Sabbaths, Sermons, all your Gospel-opportunities for the eternal
benefit of your souls.

Fourthly, Consider, This present time of life whilst you are in this Consid.
4. This is the present time to regard our souls.
world, is the only season and opportunity offered to make provision for your
precious souls, see John 9. 4. This is the time to work out your salvation
in, as Phil. 2. 12. The time of seeking God, Isa. 55. 6. This is the time of
working the work of faith, the labor of love, and patience of hope, 2 These.
1. 3. This is the time of making our peace and reconciliation with God. Now we
press upon you the Doctrine of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 20. If thou live
and die in an unregenerate and unreconciled estate to God, thou will remain
so even to all eternity. Now thou must run, otherwise thou shall never obtain;
now thou must fight the good fight of faith, otherwise thou shall never obtain
the end of thy faith, the salvation of thy soul. Now thou must wrestle,
otherwise thou will never obtein the blessing. Now thy peace must be made,
whilst thou art on this side hell, otherwise it will never be made hereafter.
There Is no time for purgation in another world, for perfecting thy faith and
hope; this time of life is the seed time, and according as a man sows, so
shall he reap. This time of life is a time of working, in heaven there will be
a resting from our labors. As therefore thou tendrest the eternal welfare of
thy soul, whilst thou have life, breath, space, opportunity, whilst thou art
on this side the grave, on this side of eternity, set seriously upon the
business of greatest weight and consequence, to make thy peace with God, to
make thy calling and election sure, that so when death separates thy soul from
thy body, nothing may be able to separate it from the love of Jesus Christ.
Consid. 5. This present life is but for a moment.


Fifthly, Consider, This present life is but for a moment, and upon this moment
depends eternity. The longest life is but a mo^ent, if compared with eternity;
and this moment is a short moment, compared in Scripture to bubbles, vapors,
spans, weavers shuttles, flowers, things of shortest continuance. And this
moment is a shortning moment, each day, each hour, each minute shortneth thy
life, and makes thee nearer eternity; each step thou treadest is a step nearer
thy Grave; each moment thou breathest, is a drawing on to thy home. And
further, this moment, when once past, is irrecoverable; all the world cannot
call back one minute of time; and when this little inch and moment of time is
past, thou shall be in eternity, in that condition which is unalterable, as
long as God and Christ are, world without end. Oh that God would work this
consideration, and set it home upon your serious thoughts! that considering
your life daily hastens to an end, you might timely and seriously prepare for
that life, which shall never end. The Lord give you grace to make the best use
of this moment, to beautify your souls, to trim up your lamps, to walk every
day as if it were your last day, that so when the Lord summons you by death,
you may have nothing to do but to die, and with comfort and confidence, you may
breath out your souls into the arms of Jesus Christ. Cons. 6. There will ^e a
day of Judgment.


6. Consider, there will be a day of judgment for soul and body. There Is a day
of visitation, a day of account, a general Assize held for all the world, 2
Cor. 5. 10. And Christ's coming is like a thief in the night. There Is a
different sentence, Matthew. 25. viz. Come ye Blessed, Go ye cursed. A different
place, heaven, and hell; no medium no tertium; Purgatory is a Popish dream: If
thou be not purged here, thou shall never be purged hereafter: Body and
soul shall be reunited, and either be companions in woe, or bliss, unto all
eternity.

7. Consider, as death leaves thee, so judgment will find thee. As Cons. 7. As
Death leaves us, so Judgment will find us.
the tree falls, so it lies; If thy soul be filthy and guilty, and unwasht by
the blood of Christ, when separated from thy body, it will ever so remain in
that condition. If thou die unreconciled to Jesus Christ, judgment will find
thee so, and so thou shall remain even unto all eternity. If sanctification be
not begun, yea and in some measure wrought in this world, it will not be
wrought in another. If here thou have not the first fruits of the spirit, the
hansell, part of payment, thou will never reap the whole harvest in another
world. If thou art not justified by grace, nor sanctified by the spirit, nor
acquitted by the blood of Christ, before thou departest this world, death will
give a return, unjustif'd, unsanctify'd, unacquitted, and judgment will so
find the return, and pass upon thee an irrevocable sentence: O then be
persuaded so to live as ye may have hope in your deaths; and so to die, as you
would have judgment to find you: judgment will neither find you better nor
worse then death has left you.

8. Consider, the riches of Gods mercy, free love and grace abounds
exceedingly, That thou art yet alive, on this side the grave, Cons. 8. The
riches of free grace and mercy.
hell, and judgment, and God gives thee this gracious warning. God might justly
cut thee off in thy wickedness, and send thee to hell speedily. But Oh!
infinite patience, and long suffering. Now God expostulates, why will ye die,
oh house of Israel! God delights not in your blood, see Acts 17. 30. Isai. 55.
7. Isai. 55. 1. God gives you warning, sends his messengers to premonish you,
to bid you look to your sou^es. It Is the whole drift, and scope of Gods
messengers, to persuade you to have a special care of your souls; Now you
have food for your souls; now you have sabbaths, the desire of days, and many
precious Gospel opportunities. It Is free grace you enjoy them. For you have
forfeited them all, Oh! wonderful mercy, that God does not take the
forfeiture. Consid. 9. This may be the last warning.


9. And lastly, Consider this for ought any of us know, may be the last warning
that God will give any of us. You may not live to hear another Sermon, you may
not live to enjoy another sabbath. God may say to you, because you loath this
spiritual Mannah, I Will take it from you, Because you misuse my messengers,
I Will take them away from you: Because you s^eight all the admoniti^ns and
counsels for the good of your soul, I Will not have these pearls cast any more
before you. I will suffer my messengers no more to be abused, my pearls no
more to be trampled un^er foot; this is the last warning I will give y^u, my
spirit shall no longer strive with you, I Will no longer stand and wait knocking
at your doors. Brethren, we cannot promise to our selves a moment of time; we
have none of us a lease of our lives. We are Tenants at will, whether many or
any shall live to hear any further warnings, none of us can determine. Let Us
therefore be persuaded to look upon these counsels I have given you, as for
ought you know may be the last warning we may have. And Oh! that God would give
us grace to take warning; Weigh seriously in your most retired, sad thoughts,
those 9 forementioned considerations, and the Lord go along with them.

The 4th Use shall be for a strict trial, and examination, whether Use 4. For
Examination.
we take care for our souls yea or no? Ask the vilest of people, what! do ye
not take care for your souls? They will tell you it were pity else they should
live: But to undeceive the world, I Will propound some searching queries.

1. Do thou set a higher price of thy soul then all things under Qu. 1.
the sun? Do thou foregoe pleasures, profits, father, mother, wife, children,
the dearest and nearest relations, when they come in competition with or
opposition to thy soul? Do thou foregoe thy beloved sins, thy constitution
sins, sins of profit, antiquity, delight? Do thou take up weapons against thy
souls enemies, and resolvest never to give over till thou returnest with the
trophies of victory? If so, it is apparent that thou love thy soul.

2ly, Do thou survey the windings, diverticles, and turnings Qu. 2.
of thy soul? Do thou study to know thy soul, it is angles, and lurking
places? Do thou reveiw the breaches in thy soul; and endeavourest the
reparation of them? Do thou take a twofold Candle, the Candle of the word,
and the Candle of thy conscience, and searchest into the meanders, recesses,
and most inward corners of thy soul? This is a sign that thou have a care of
thy soul.

3ly, Do thou keep strict watch and sentinel over thy soul? Qu. 3.
Do thou watch over thy thoughts, words, and actions? As watchmen examine
passengers, so do thou examine thy heart, call thy self to account for vain
thoughts, misplaced words, evil actions? and when thou find them, do thou
labor to exterminate them, and to execute justice on them? Do thou watch
against vagrant lusts, not willing to give entertainment to straglers, but as
thou find them thou casheerest them? if so this is a sign that thou take
care of thy soul.

4. Do thou endeavor to wash and cleanse thy soul? A pure Qu. 4.
fountain is still a purging. Do thou purge out thy corruptions? Do thou
lament over thy soul for sin, water thy couch with thy tears? and as sin
comes and corruption surprizeth thee, art thou a purging rinsing and cleansing
thy soul? Art thou unwilling to allow thy self in any sin unconfest,
unrepented of? If so, it is evident that thou take care for thy soul.

5. Do thou make use of those means which God has appointed for the good of
thy soul? God gives thee ordinances, do Qu. 5.
thou feed on them? he scatters many precious promises, do thou gather them
up, and apply them for thy comfort? God reveals many precious graces, as
faith, love etc. do thou attire, and beautify thy soul with them? God
affordes means publicly, privately, hearing, reading, praying, meditation,
conference, do thou make use of these means? do thou improve this prize
put into thy hand, for the good of thy soul? if so, thou take care for thy
soul.

6ly And lastly, Do thou go to the fountain of the blood of Qu. 6.
Christ? Do thou look to the brazen serpent to cure thy soul? Do thou see
Christ with the eye of faith, and lay hold on him with the hand of faith,
believe on him, with the heart of faith? If when thou have done all thou can,
thou look through all unto Christ, and actest all thy duties, not in thy own
strength, but in the strength of Christ, questionless thou have a special
regard of thy soul. Examine your selves by these 6 Queries; and if in truth
and sincerity you can give affirmative answers to them, I may safely pronounce
you such, as regard the eternal advantage of your immortal souls.

The Fifth Use shall be for Direction. To handle this Use for your Use 5. For
Direction.
greater advantage, I shall acquaint you with some Impediments, which must be
removed, and then I shall prescribe some Duties that must be performed. These
Impediments must be removed.

1. Love of the world. This is the souls clog and hinderance, Imped. 1. Love
of the world.
which keeps it from soaring aloft. The earth worms of the world love their
Mammon; their Gold is their confidence, Luke 16. 14. The young man in the
Gospel, Judas, the Gadarens, preferred the world before Christ. If you would
regard your souls, you must sit loose off the world, your hearts must be
alienated from the love of it.

2. Too much love of the body, such pampering a carcass with Imped. 2. Too much
love of the body.
variety of delicate meats, so much time spent inter pectinem and speculum, in
trimming up the body, these hinder the care of the soul. The body must be
loved in a subordinate way; shall we take more care of the carcass which must
be worms meat, and neglect the soul which runs parallel with eternity? The
soul is animae mancipium, will you prefer the servant, and the drudge before
the Master?

3. Remissness in spiritual duties. These are the spiritual viands, Imped.
3. Remissness in spiritual duties.
which keep the soul in heart. Take away these you starve the soul: they are
as necessary as meat and drink for the body. If you keep not time and touch
with God in a constant, conscientious performance of duties, it is evident you
have no care of your souls. The soul has need of all duties, prayer,
reading, hearing, meditation, conference, these are Pabula animae, and animae
vehicula: they wing the soul, and make it soar aloft. As you love your souls
neglect not spiritual duties.

4. Presumption of long life. Its a dangerous thing to presume of Imped. 4.
Presumption of long life.
long life, when as neither space nor grace is in our power. This is that
soule-murtherer, that has slain many thousands. Many presume of time, God
cuts them off in the midst of their sins. Many have time, and presume of grace;
though God gives them space, he denies them Grace, as he did to Jezabell, Rev.
2. 21. Its an exceeding great folly to presume of that which is out of our
power, its an high contempt and affront offered to God, to offer him the lame
and the blind, to offer him (that I may speak it with reverence) the Devils
leavings; when the Devil has sucked out the marrow, to leave unto the Great
God the empty dry bones.

5ly. Carnal security. See dreadful judgments of carnally secure Imped. 5.
Carnal security.
persons, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. Having removed these Impediments, and dangerous
stumbling blocks out of the way, I shall prescribe some Duties which you must
put in practice.

1. Labor as much as in thee lies to keep thy soul unpolluted Duty 1. Keep
thy soul pure.
with sin. Every sin pollutes thy soul; watch therefore against sin, fight
against it, account sin thy soul's enemy. Harbor not, hug not in thy bosom
thy desperate enemy, but stir especially against that encompassing sin,
mentioned Heb. 12. 1. (...). Consider that the Lord sees all thy sins, he
loatheth and abhors them. Do thou hate that which God hates; make no peace
with Gods enemies, give not quarter to Benhadad, make no league with any
Gibeonites, spare no Agag, foster no Delilah, no Herodias, etc.

2. Covenant in the strength of God against thy corruptions. Duty 2. Covenant
against corruptions.
Resolve I will swear no more, be drunken no more, etc. All sin defiles my
soul: Lord, give me grace to crucify my corruptions, and to get victory over
my sins. Lord I cannot of my self get victory over any one sin: I have
covenanted against my pride, and I am proud still; against my passions, and I
am froward still; against my earthly-mindednesse, and yet am earthly-minded
still; I desire now to get out of my own strength, and to act in thy strength;
Lord, give me thy strength, then I shall do thy work. I can do nothing without
thee, but I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

3. Set time apart every day for a serious search and examination Duty 3. Set
times apart for self searching.
of thy soul; Examine how it fares with thy soul. Does it grow leaner or
fatter? does it thrive or decay? How does the Pulse of thy Devotion beat? are
there not many intermissions?

Fourthly, Frequently and seriously consider of the inestimable price paid to
redeem a soul. No less price than the blood of Christ; Duty 4. Consider the
price of the soul.
shall I neglect that which cost Christ so dear? shall I disregard that which
extracted the precious blood of Christ out of his veins? Did thou frequently
consider the worth of thy soul, the inestimable price paid to purchase it, it
would make thee look to thy soul.

5. Labor to get all thy soule-pollutions washed away in the Duty 5. Go to the
fountain. Duty 6.
blood of the covenant: go to the fountain and wash there.

Sixthly and lastly, Make use of all means God has ordained for the good of
thy soul. Apply the Promises, feed on the Ordinances, Make use of all means
appointed. Use 6. For Comfort.
support thy self on the Attributes.

The last Use shall be for comfort unto those, whose care above all other
things is employed for their souls; whose business and labor it is, to work
out their salvation with fear and trembling: Oh happy people, whose hearts are
lifted up in the ways of God, whose maine design is to storm heaven, and take
it by violence; who whilst others labor for pelf and muck of the world, they
labor for the salvation of their souls. Whilst others adorn and beautify
their bodies, i. e. the outward man, these labor to adorn the inner man, i.
e. their immortal souls. Others labor to be rich and great in the world,
these labor to be rich in grace, and great in the Favor of God. Others not
knowing, nor understanding the worth of their souls, prefer earthly
treasures before them: but true Believers set a higher rate upon their souls,
than all the Treasures under the Sun. Oh happy people, that make it their
business to beautify their souls with all the saving graces of the spirit! As
they have sown, so they shall reap. In this world they shall reap the first
fruits, but in heaven the full harvest. There they shall attain unto the end
of their faith and hope, even the salvation of their souls unto all eternity.

THE END OF THE FIRST DECAD.
A SECOND DECAD OF SERMONS Preached to the UNIVERSITY AT St. MARIE'S, OXON.

BY HENRY WILKINSON, D. D. Principal of Magdalen-Hall, Oxon.

2 Timothy 4. 2. Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering, and Doctrine. OXFORD, Printed by A.
LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, for THO: ROBINSON: M.DC.LX.

To the Christian Reader.
I Conceive it altogether impertinent and foreign from my Work in hand, either
to prefix an Epistle by way of Apology, or detain thee any longer with a
praeliminary discourse. Only be entreated (Courteous Reader) to take notice
that this Second Decad of Sermons agrees in the same style with the other two.
I know not wherein I vary from my self, but pursue one and the same Method,
both for Matter and Form, endeavoring (to my best apprehension) to declare all
the Act. 20. 27.
counsel of God. Insomuch as comparing Sermon with Sermon (notwithstanding the
revolutions of times, and various dispensations) one and the self same Author
may be easily discerned -- Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat.



I purposely wave all along, and abhor all uncouth, 2 Cor. 3. 12. (...). 2 Timothy 1. 13. (...)
unscripturall Phrases, and affectation of words coined at the Mint of
counterfeit Teachers. My endeavor is to use plainness of speech, and (as the
Apostle exhorts) to hold fast the form of sound words. What censures I may
incur from such as have (as was said of Bolsecus) Religionem Ephemeram, I
value not; nor of others, who kick and winch because they are rubbed on the
galled sore: I heartily wish their amendment, and then they will be of another
mind, and like that afterward which they mislikt formerly.

Although I Preached these Sermons to a Learned University, yet what at first I
had in design (through Christ that strengthens me) I endeavor to carry on to
this day (and so hope to do always) (i. e.) to make it my business to affect
the hearts, and speak home to the consciences of my Auditors, by reproving and
exhorting, without partiality, and not in the least to gratify, and tickle the
fancy of any wanton wit of Athens, or any itching Auditor, whose fancy
outruns his judgment.

How plain soever these Sermons may seem, I am no whit discouraged, hoping the
plainer they are, the better may be the success; because where least appears
of Man, God usually does great things, That no flesh may 1 Cor. 1. 29.
glory in his presence; but that the praise and glory of all may redound unto
God alone. Neither may I conceal such a mercy (for which I can never be enough
thankful) that I have been informed by several persons, who professed to me,
that they had received much good by several of these Sermons. Wherefore
(though when I have done the best I am but an unprofitable servant) I am the
rather encouraged to make these Sermons of Public Use, hoping that (through
the blessing of God) they may do much more good for the future, and help
people forward in the narrow way to life, and give them a lift to Heaven. As
for my own failings (for which I desire more and more to be humbled) I shall
thank him heartily, who shall in a brotherly way discover them unto me. It was
David's desire (and may mine ever run parallel with his) Let the righteous smite
me, it shall be Psa. 141. 5.
a kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil, which
shall not break my head. If these labors (such as they are) be any way
instrumental for the advancing of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; or if but one
poor soul be by them (as instrumental means) begotten unto Jesus Christ, I
shall conceive that Eternity it self will he little enough to praise God for so
great a mercy. I often consider, how God brings great things to pass by weak
means, as by empty Pitchers the Midianites were discomfited, and at the
sounding of Rams Judge. 7. 20. Josh. 6. 20. 1 Cor. 1. 21. 2 Cor. 8. 12.
horns the walls of Jericho fell down; And by the foolishness of Preaching to
save them that believe. And I likewise consider, that a willing mind is
accepted; Badgers skins, Goats hair were accepted, when with a willing mind
dedicated to the Tabernacle; the Widows two Mites were accepted, and Abraham's
real intention of Heb. 11. 17.
offering Isaac, was accepted for the deed. What I shall add further is this,
that I have offered these Labors according to my ability (and should rejoice
if I could bring better;) and shall entreat thee (Reader) to help me with thy
prayers and counsel, that these may not lose their desired success, nor (if
God give life) what I intend hereafter for public view in a Decad of
Practical ireatises. In a word, be persuaded (whilst 'its day) to set a high
estimate upon all the means Joh. 9. 12.
of Grace put into thy hand, as so many prices to get Wisdom withal. Neglect
not the great salvation tendered in the Gospel: Lie at the Posts of Wisdoms
gate, and labor to digest what thou hear, and make thy own by Prayer,
Meditation, and particular Application. Dr. John Reynolds Pres^dent of C. C. C.
By every Sermon thou may reap some good, if thou be not wanting unto thy
self. * One of the most eminently Godly, and Learned Divines that ever I read
of (since this was an University) often professed, that he could get good by
every Sermon he heard. As he was a constant hearer of Sermons, so he made
charitable constructions of what he heard, and was a ready counselor and
encourager unto Preachers. I shall add no more, but entreat thee (Reader) to
lay aside all prejudices and expectation of Novel Opinions and Phrases; and as
for the failings either of Author or Printer, be pleased to cover them with the
Mantle of a charitable Interpretation. I beg thy Prayers, and commend these
Labors to thy acceptance, and commit thee unto Gods gracious providence: I
remain,

Thy Servant for Christ's sake, Henry Wilkinson.

The Contents of this Second Decad.
SERMON. I.
JOb 13. 26. For thou writest bitter things against me, and make to possess
the inquities of my youth. The Text divided, p. 2. and explained by answering
5. Queries, 1. What Is meant by bitter things, p. 3. 2. What Is meant by writing
of them, p. 3. 3. What Is meant by the sins of youth, p. 4. 4. What Is meant by
possessing the sins of youth; p. 5. 5. Why does Job a holy man (whose sins were
pardoned) complain of himself, p. 6. Doct. That sins committed in our youth
will cause much smart and bitterness in our elder years. Method of handling
the Doctrine. 1. By Scripture proof, p. 7. 2. By three Reasons. 1. D^awn from
the rule of Justice: p. 8. Reas. 2. Drawn from the nature and quality of sin,
p. 9. Reas. 3. Drawn from four Aggravations of youthful sins, viz. 1. They are
committed with a great deal of violence, p. 9. 2. They are committed with
abundance of delight. p. 10. 3. Young men make many vain pretenses, ibid. 4.
Youthful sins are committed after many Invitations, Calls, and Warnings, p.
11. 3. By improving all in four Uses, 1. For Humiliation, p. 12, 13, 14. Here
are four sins especially reproved; 1. Voluptuousness, p. 15. 2. Contempt of
Superiors, p. 16. 3. Affectation of Novelty, p. 17. 4. Pride, p. 18. Use 2.
For Exhortation, p. 19. Four Considerations are pressed. 1. From Gods
Omniscience, p. 20. 2. God keeps Record, ibid. 3. Consider what sin will cost
thee, ibid. 4. Consider the four last things, p. 21, 22. Use 3. For Direction.
1. Be humbled for all sins, p. 22. 2. Look through thy Humiliation to Christ,
p. 23. 3. Walk circumspectly, ibid. Use 4. For Consolation, ibid.
SERMON. II.
Genesis 6. 3. And the Lord said, my Spirit shall not always strive with man, for
that he also is flesh, yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. The
Text Divided and Explained, p. 28, 29. Doct. 1. That it is a most dreadful
judgment upon a people when the Spirit of God refuses to strive any longer
with them, p. 30. Doct. 2. That it is an exceeding great mercy to a people, when
the Lord vouchsafes them time and space of Repentance, ibid. Method of
handling the first Doctrine. 1. From Scripture Testimony, p. 30, 31, 32. Three
signs of Night, 1 When shadows grow long, p. 32. 2. When wild beasts go
abroad, and 3ly. when Laborers go to their rest, p. 33. 2. Seven ways the
Spirit strives: 1. By its Motions, p. 35. 36. 2. By the Ministry of the Word,
p. 37, 38. 3. By the checks and convictions of conscience, p. 39, 40. A
fourfold Rule for examining of conscience, p. 40. 4. By the tenders of mercies,
p. 41. 5. By the exercise of patience, p. 42. 6. By National Judgments, p. 43.
7. By Personal Judgments, p. 44.
SERMON. III. upon the same Text, viz. Genesis 6. 3.
3. Reas. 1. Because man is flesh, p. 45, 46. Reas. 2. Because the Spirit is a
free Agent. p. 47. Reas. 3. Drawn from the rule of Divine Justice, p. 48, 49.
4. For Application. Use 1. For Information, of the greatness of the Judgment
when the Spirit cease striving; in 4. Aggravations: 1. God takes away his
Ordinances, p. 50. 2. God suffers not the Spirit to work by the Ordinances. 3.
God gives them over to a Spirit of delusion, ibid. 4. God gives them over to a
hard heart: p. 53. ^se 2. For Exhortation. Three Morives: 1. From the brevity
of our lives, p. 55. 2. From the Uncertainty of the Spirits striving, ibid. 3.
From the certainty of the Day of Judgment, p. 56. Use 3. For Reproof of 4.
sorts of persons especially. 1. Such as contemn the Spirit, p. 56. 2. Such as
are barren and unfruitful, p. 57. 3. Such as are secure, p. 57. 4. Impenitent
persons, p. 57. Use 4. for Examination in three Queries. 1. How we may
distinguish the strivings of Gods Spirit from a spirit of error and delusion,
p. 58, 59. 2. How we may distinguish the strivings of Gods Spirit from our own
spirit, p. 59. 3. How we may know whether Gods Spirit has effectually stroven
with us, p. 59, 60. Use 5. for Direction, in four particulars, p. 60. Use 6.
for Consolation. Doct. 2. That it is an exceeding great mercy, when the Lord
vouchsafes unto any person time and space for Repentance, p. 60. Reas. 1. To
glorify the Riches of Gods Mercy, p. 61. Reas. 2. To glorify his Justice,
ibid. Reas. 3. At the request of Gods servants many are spared, ibid. Use 1.
For admiration of Gods infinite mercy. Use 2. For terror unto presumptuous
sinners Convictions. 1. It Is great folly to put off Repentance, 2. It argues
great contempt, 3. It argues high presumption. Use 3. for Exhortation, in four
Considerations. 1. Now the Spirit strives, 2. Now is the limited time, 3. Now
is the accepted time, 4. Now once past cannot be recalled. Use 4. for Caution,
in five particulars, 63, 64. The 5. ^se for Admonition, in five particulars, p.
64, 65. The 6. Use is for Comfort, ibid.
SERMON. IV.
2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what
manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness? The
Coherence and Text explained and divided, p. 65, 66, 67, 68. Doct. That the
serious consideration of the day of Judgment should in an especial manner
engage us unto an holy life and conversation, p. 69. Method of handling the
Doctrine. 1. By Scripture Testimony, p. 69, 70. 2. By evidence of three
Reasons. 1. Because only holy persons shall be able to stand in judgment, p.
71. Q. Whether the Saints shall have their sins mentioned at the day of
Judgment? p. 71. Reas. 2. This is the present time, ibid. Reas. 3. Judgment
returns all as death leaves them, p. 72. 3. By particular Application in five
Uses. 1. For terror unto three sorts: 1. Scoffers at holiness, p. 73. 2.
Hypocrites, p. 74. 3. Secret sinners, p. 75. Use 2. for Exhortation, p. 76, 77.
9. Motives 1. We are elected unto Holiness, p. 78. 2. We are created unto
Holiness, ibid. 3. We are redeemed to be holy, ibid. 4. Its Gods will that we
should be holy, ibid. 5. Holiness is our calling, p. 79. 6. Heaven is a place
for holy persons, ibid. 7. There shall be holy employment, ibid. 8. There shall
be holy company, ibid. 9. This is the time of laboring after holiness, ibid.
Use 3. for Examination. in 12. Characters: 1. Spiritual poverty, p. 80. 2. High
estimation of Jesus Christ, ibid. 3. The heart is in love with holiness, p.
81. 4. Irgenuous sorrow for sin, ibid. 5. Mourning for others sins, p. 82. 6.
The heart approves it self to God, ibid. 7. There will be a pressing forward
toward perfection, p. 83. 8. A strict watch over the heart, ibid. 9. The
desire and endeavor must be universally extensive, ibid. 10. The Spirit is
without guile, p. 84. 11. There will be the practice of Mortisication and
Vivification, p. 85. 12. A burning in love to Jesus Christ, ibid. Use 4. for
Direction, in 6. Particulars: 1. Pray for the spirit of sanctisication, p. 85.
2. Wash and cleanse thy heart, ibid. 3. Be exercised in Meditation, p. 86. 4.
Consider the Omnipresence and Omniscience of God, ibid. 5. Set an high estimate
on Gods Ordinances, ibid. 6. Associate your selves with holy company, p. 87.
Use 5. for Consolation.
SERMON. V.
Joh. 3. 10. Jesus answered and said unto him, art thou a Master of Israel, and
know not these things? The Text divided and expounded, p. 91. Doct. There
may be, and are many men, otherwise of great Learning, yet grossly ignorant in
the maine Fundamental Doctrine of Regeneration, p. 92. This is proved by
Scripture Instances, p. 92. and by 3. Reasons. 1. From the nature of
Regeneration, p. 93. Reas. 2. Drawn from the Nature of Unregeneracy in a
foursold estate. 1. Of Impurity, p. 94. 2. Of Enmity, ibid. 3. Of Blindness,
ibid. 4. Of Death, p. 95. Reas. 3. From the Free workings of Gods Spirit.
Application in 5. Uses. 1. For Exhortation, and that to Teachers, p. 96, 97.
and to Disciples, p. 98, 99. Use 2. For Information. 1. What Regeneration is
not. 1. Not in Nicodemus his sense, p. 100. 2. Not in a new Physical Being,
ibid. 3. Not in Civility and Morality, ibid. 4. Not in great parts and
abilities, p. 101. 5. Not in common graces, ibid. 6. Not in a bare Profession
of Christ, ibid. 2. What Regeneration is: 1. The new Nature, p. 102. 2. A new
Understanding, ibid. 3. A new Will, ibid. 4. New Affections, ibid. 5. A new
Heart, ibid. 6. A new life, ibid. Use 3. for Excitation. Mot. 1. From the
Necessity, p. 102. 2. Unregenerate persons can obtain no acceptance, p. 103.
3. Nothing defiled shall ever come into heaven, ibid. Use 4. for Direction. 1.
Pray hard for Divine Wisdom. 2. Wait upon God in his Word. 3. Pray for the
Spirit. Use 5. for Consolation. And their duty is: 1. To pra^se God. 2. To walk
as becomes Converts. 3. To set an high price on Gods love.
SERMON. VI.
Esth, 9. 27, 28. The Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed,
and upon all such as joined themselves unto them, so as it should not fail,
that they might keep these two days, according to their writing, and according
to their appointed time every year, etc. The Text divided and expounded. Doct.
That it is the duty of a delivered people to keep mercies upon Record, and make
a thankful remembrance of signal deliverances, and perpetuate the Memorial
thereof from Generation to Generation, p. 108. Reas. 1. Because Gods name and
honor is from Eternity to Eternity, p. 109. Reas. 2. Because Thankfulness is
Gods Tribute, ib. Reas. 3. Drawn from the excellency of the Duty. Reas. 4.
Drawn from many obligations, viz. 4. Vinculo Creationis, Redemptionis,
Gratitudinis, Gloriae divinae promovendae, p. 110, 111. Use 1. For Information.
In the Popish Treason eight particulars are considered. 1. Length of time in
projecting, p. 112. 2. Unwearied pains, p. 113. 3. Cunning conveyance, ibid. 4.
Inveterate malice, ibid. 5. The persons acting, p. 114. 6. The persons against
whom, p. 115. 7. The place, ibid. and 8. their cruelty, ibid. Observe, 1. The
Means of discovery by Auricular Confession, p. 116. 2. The seasonablenesse, p.
117. 3. The just Retribution, ibid. Use 2. for Caution. 7. Popish opinions. 1.
That the Pope is Christ's Vicar, p. 119. 2. That he has power of b^nding and
loosing. 3. That he may depose Princes, ibid. 4. That Protestant Princes may be
Excommunicated, ibid. 5. That they may be murdered, ibid. 6. That Faith is not
to be kept with Heretics, ibid. 7. That Equivocation is lawful. Protestants
Principles: 1. That the Pope is (...), p. 120. 2. That a Papist cannot go
beyond a Reprobate, ibid. 3. That the e^ought to be no peace with Rome, ibid.
4. That a Papist living and dying in the opinion of his own merits cannot be
saved, p. 121. 5. That Babylon is Rome, ibid. Use 3. for Exhortation. 1.
Remember, and transmit the memory of this day to Posterity, p. 121. 2. Praise
God for the Deliverance, p. 122. 3. Remember and be vigilant, ibid.
SERMON. VII.
Romans 2. 16. In the day that God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ
according to my Gospel. The Text divided and expounded, p. 124, 125, 126. Doct.
1. There shall be a day of Judgment, p. 126. Doct. 2. At that day the secrets
of all men's hearts shall be judged. Doct. 3. Christ shall be Judge at that
day. Method of handling. The first Doctrine proved by Scripture out of the Old
and New Testament, p. 126. and confirmed by six Arguments: 1. From Gods Decree,
p. 127. 2. From Gods Justice, ibid. 3. From conviction of conscience, p. 128.
4. From the dependence and connection between the Resurrection and day of
Judgment, ibid. 5. From the general expectation of the Saints, p. 129. 6.
From Gods glory, ibid. Use 1. For Reproof to ungodly persons, p. 131, 132. Use
2. for Instruction, to Magistrates and Ministers. 6. Lessons commended. 1.
Entertain serious thoughts concerning the day of Judgment, p. 134. 2. Let this
consideration engage us to holiness of life and conversation, ibid. 3. Let
this read us a Lecture of Patience, p. 135. 4. Lets be engaged to
watchfulness. 5. Lets learn to fear God, ibid. 6. Lets learn compassion and
charity, ibid. Use 3. for Consolation. 1. From the nature of the day, p. 136.
2. From the Judge, Christ, ibid. 3. From the sentence, ibid. 4. From the
eternal happiness, ibid. Doct. 2. That at the day of Judgment the secrets of
all men's hearts shall be judged, p. 136. Reas. 1. Drawn from Gods Omniscience,
p. 136. Reas. 2. From Gods justice, p. 137. Reas. 3. For the acquitting of the
godly, ibid. Reas. 4. For the further condemnation of the wicked, p. 138. Use
1. for terror unto the wicked, ibid. Use 2. for comfort to the godly, p. 139.
3. For counsel to both, p. 140. Doct. 3. At the day of Judgment Jesus Christ
shall be Judge, p. 140. 1. Proved by Scripture, p. 140. 2. By 3. Reasons. 1.
From Equity and Retaliation, ibid. Reas. 2. For the comfort of the godly, ibid.
Reas. 3. For the terror of the wicked, ibid. Q. 1. Is the Father excluded? A.
p. 141. Q. 2. How shall Christ appear? A. p. 141. Q. 3. Whom shall Christ
judge? A. ibid. Q. 4. What will be the manner of Christ's judging? A. ibid. Q.
5. What signs are there of this day? A. p. 143. Q. 6. Why God defers the day of
Judgment? A. ibid. Q. 7. Whether man can determine when the day of Judgment
shall be? A. p. 143. Q. 8. Whether we must desire this day? A. p. 144. 4.
Ob^ections answered, p. 144, 145. Use 1. for comfort unto the godly, ibid. Use
2. for terror unto the wicked, ibid. Use 3. for Exhortation to prepare for the
coming of Christ, p. 148.
SERMON. VIII.
Mat. 10. 17. Good Master! what shall I do that I may inheherit eternal life?
page 148. The Text divided and expounded, p. 148, 149. Doct. The main inquiry
and business of Christians ought to be employed concerning their eternal
condition, p. 150. Method propounded. 1. What Eternity is? It is answered
negatively by four Propositions: 1. Eternity admits no succession of time, p.
150. 2. Eternity admits no alterations, ibid. 3. Eternity admits no
augmentation nor diminution, p. 151. 4. Eternity admits no revocation, ibid.
Eternity is defined and explained particularly, p. 152, 153. 2. The Doctrine is
illustrated by Scripture examples, p. 153. 3. By Scripture Precepts, p. 153,
154. 4. By Scripture Reasons. 1. Privatively: Because 1. We are freed from sin.
2. From Tentations of Flesh, Devil, and World, p. 154, 155. 3. We are freed
from Punishments, p. 155. 2. Positively. 1. The Saints shall enjoy the blessed
vision, p. 155, 156. 2. They shall enjoy the Society of Saints and Angels,
ibid. 3. They shall be busied in rare employments, p. 156. 4. This employment
shall be in our Fathers house, p. 157. 5. Glorified Saints shall keep an
Eternal Sabbath in heaven, ib. Use of Exhortation, p. 157. 4. Motives pressed.
1. The study of Eternity is an honorable study, p. 159. 2. This is a sweet
study, p. 160. 3. This is a profitable study, ibid. 4. This is a seasonable
study, p. 161.
SERMON. IX.
Mal. 1. 14. But cursed be the Deceiver, which has in his flock a Male, and
voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: For I am a great King,
says the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen. The
Coherence and Text expounded, p. 162, 163, 164, 165. Doctrine handled. In all
our services, its Gods expectation, and our obliged duty, is offer the best we
can possible unto the Lord, p. 166. Method propounded. 1. How must our services
be performed in the best way? A. In six distinguishing Characters. 1. All must
be performed with a pure heart, p. 167. 2. The beauty of the season must be
regarded, ibid. 3. We must make Religion our business, p. 168. 4. We must do
all in Faith, p. 169. 5. We must do all in the Name of Christ, ibid. 6. We must
do all with reverence and godly fear, p. 170. 2. The Doctrine is asserted and
proved by Scripture, p. 171, 172. 3. By Application: 5. Uses are made. Use 1.
For Exhortation: 1. To all in general, p. 173. 2. To Magistrates and Ministers
in particular, ibid.
SERMON. X. upon the same Text.
7. Considerations: 1. From the Majesty of God, p. 176. 2. From the Holiness
of God, ibid. 3. From the Equity of the Duty, p. 177. 4. From the credit of the
Gospel, p. 178. 5. From the greatness of the sin, made up of 4. Ingredients,
viz. Folly, Contempt, Presumption, Sacrilege, p. 179, 180, 181.
Notwithstanding failings all will be accepted through Christ, p. 181, 182. 7.
Consider the dreadful curse against Hypocrites, p. 182. Use 2. for Reproof. 1.
Of the Hypocrite, p. 183. 2. Of negligent, lazy persons, p. 184. 3. Of such who
put off Repentance to old age, p. 185. Use 3. for Examination. 1. Whether we
give God the best in Duties, p. 186, 187, 188, 189, 190. 2. Whether we give God
the best in our Graces, p. 191. 3. Whether we give God the best in our lives
and conversations, ibid. and p. 192. Use 4. for Direction. 1. What impediments
are to be removed? A. 1. An ignorant mind, p. 192. 2. A frothy vain spirit, p.
192, and 193. 3. A worldly spirit, ibid. 4. An unbeleeving heart, ibid. 2. What
duties are to be practiced? A. 1. Set God before thine eyes, p. 193. 2. Labor
for sincerity of heart, ibid. 3. Embrace the present season, p. 194. 4. Be much
in prayer, ibid. 5. Make Religion thy business, ibid. Use 5. for Consolation.
Consid. 1. Infirmities befall the best, p. 194. 2. Gods Children allow not
themselves in sin, p. 195. 3. A sincere heart is accepted, ibid. 4. A sincere
heart labors for more Grace, ibid. 5. We must not go by others examples,
ibid. 6. Perseverance obtaines the Crown, ibid.
ERRATA.
PAge 96. lin. 5. r. 6. Uses. p. 110. l. 21. r. upon us. p. 113 l. 23. r.
implacable. p. 115. l. 33. r. King. p. 116. l. 1. r. on one stone. p. 119. l.
29. r. (...). p. 120. l. 12. r. of our own. p. 121 l. 17. r. Revelations. p.
125. l. 4. r. In the which. p. 129. l. 15. r. 2 Cor. 5. 1. p. 131. l. 4. r. and
such like. p. 137. l. 13 r. 2 Cor. 5. p. 140. l. 5. r. peace. p. 158. l. 20. r.
of our. p. 180. l. 20. r. Isa. 43. p. 189. l. 28. r. accepted.

For litteral faults, and want of points, the Reader is desired to amend them.

DECAD II. OF SERMONS Preached at St. Mary's, Oxon.
JOB 13. 26. For thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to
possess the Iniquities of my youth.


YOU are all well acquainted with the History of Sermon. 1. at St. Mary's Oxon.
June. 25. 1650.
Job, this eminent pattern of Integrity, as to his sufferings and patience,
which are upon Divine Record, both for our instruction and imitation, Jam. 5.
10, 11. I shall wave the Narrative, being so abundantly known, even to a
Proverbial Speech: Only thus much I shall premise to make my passage clear
unto my Text: Job being on the Dunghill sorely afflicted with variety of
sufferings, his Friends came with an intention to comfort him, but, through
mistakes, they proved miserable Comforters, even Physicians of no value; and
added affliction to affliction, passing uncharitable Censures upon him, and
looking upon all his Sufferings as just Punishments of his Hypocrisy: Many
Dialogues there passed between Job and his Friends, with several Answers and
Replies. At this time he has to deal with Zophar the Naamathite; Zophar gives
him good counsel indeed, To put iniquity far away, Job 11. 13, 14. It Is true in
Thesi, but not in Hypothesi: The Doctrine is good, the Application, as to this
upright man Job, altogether impertinent; thereby he insinuates, as if some
Bribery was in the hands of Job, being an innocent Person, as to Men; and
indeed chastened thus by God, not because he was a greater Sinner then others,
but for his trial, the demonstration of his Faith and Patience, and to make it
appear to all the World, that the Devil was a Liar; Job, I say, vindicates
himself from his Friends aspersions, and betakes himself, in the 12, 13, and 14
Chapters, to a plenary answer; his affliction makes him to speak, Job 12. 3, 4.
he is sensible how cheap an esteem they had of him, Job 12. 3, 4. He was as one
mocked of his neighbor: The remedies they apply to Job 13, 4.
him, are worse then his disease; he speaks plainly to them, Job 13. 4. But ye
are forgers of lies, ye are all Physicians of no value: He Is surrounded with
miseries, he is like a very Skeleton, all his Bones may be told; he lives a
dying life. Mark his Question, Job 13. 14. he gives in an excellent Answer and
Resolution, Job 13. 15. But that which renews his grief, is Gods hiding his
face from him; if men fail him and despise him, he can easilier brook that; he
stands upon his vindication, quoad hominem; but if God be angry, and account
him an enemy, there is his grief, that is the wound indeed, v. 24. He further
expostulates the matter, v. 25. (i. e.) Will thou break that which has no
power? A leaf is a weak thing, its driven too and fro; Will thou set thy power
against weakness? and will thou pursue the dry stubble, that will be soon on a
flame, and consumed? Now Job is inquisitive after the cause; God is angry, but
there is good cause for it; God writes bitter things against him, but youthful
sins are called to remembrance, and now reckoned for in old Age.

The words read are a heavy Charge, or a Bill of Indictment against Divis. 1.
2. 1. 2. 3.
a Delinquent; wherein you have two generals. 1. The Charge it self. 2. The
Sentence given upon it. In the Charge, you are to consider of the matter or
thing charged, 1. Iniquities. 2. The aggravation of them, drawn from the Age
that commits them; they are sins of youth. 3. The person against whom this
Charge was drawn, viz. against Job. In the Sentence given, you have here set
down sore afflictions, which Job reckons as exceeding heavy upon him, which may
be represented by these aggravations.

1. These are not ordinary afflictions, but bitter things. 2. They 1. 2. 1. 2.
are assured, and made firm to him two ways. 1. By writing, there is as it
were, a writing drawn firm and sure. 2. By possession: And make me to
possess, as if he had authentic Scribis tand^m sententiaque tua, manu and
sigillo munis, ut acerbissuna morte plectar, Pineda in Loc. Ascribis sive
imputas mihi quae admisi in juventute, quorum non recordor amplius. Vatabl.
Rev. 10. 10.
Writings, and Livery, and Seisin, given for these bitter things. Now in
handling this Scripture, I shall first premise an Explication of the words,
then draw forth a point of Doctrine, and prove it, and so conclude with
particular Application.

For Explication of the words, these Queries are to be resolved. 1. What is
meant by bitter things in the Text? some understand by bitter things, the evil
of sin, and indeed, sin is a very bitter thing, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. It is called a
root that bears gall and wormwood: There Is an Exposition of this place, Heb.
12. 15. where it is called a root of bitterness. Though sin be sweet in the
acting, yet there will be bitterness in the end; like the Roll, which was sweet
in the mouth, but bitter in the belly. This is a plain truth, that sin will
bring all bitterness to the soul: yet I shall rather incline to Malim acerba
intelligi supplicia, dolores gravissimos qui bus discruciatur. Merc.
Mercers Exposition, By bitter things he understands bitter punishments, and
grievous sorrows, wherewith Job was afflicted: And this I take to be the proper
meaning, you shall hear Job complaining of terrors, pouring out his soul, etc.
Job 30. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Now amongst several kinds of savours, bitterness
is most offensive to the Palate: Bitterness is spoken of, and applied to sad
afflicted conditions, Ruth 1. v. 20. Call me not Naomi, (i. e.) pleasant and
delectable, but call me Marah, (i. e.) Bitter, for the Ruth 1. 20.
Lord has dealt very bitterly with me. Afflictions in themselves are very
grievous and bitter, most distasteful to the Palate; No chastening for the
present, seems to be joyous, but grievous: So then Heb. 12. 11.
by bitter things we are to understand those sad crosses, and bitter
afflictions which were incumbent upon Job, those Arrows of the Almighty which
stuck fast in his sides, all evils of punishment or chastisement.

2. What Is meant by writing of bitter things: This, says Learned Q. 2.
Scribendi verbum judiciale ^uto ut Grae^i dicunt. Merc. in Loc.
Mercer, is a judicial phrase, the Graecians were wont to write these Sentences
in their judicial proceedings: Writing alludes to that which in Civil Law is an
a^cusation called Libelling. Its the usual course of Law, to bring in Charges
or Bills of Indictment in writing against the Offender Caryl In locum.
A Reverend Divine observes on the place, That God has a double Book, and both
in a Figure; he has a Book of resolved Decrees, and a Book of his acted
Providence: This Book of his acted Providence, is but a Transcript of the
former; Job is to be understood of this latter Book of Providence, in which
God writ bitter things against him. By Writing, Chrysostom.
Chrysostom understands, The firm and irrevocable Decree of the Judge: This
writing is firm and steadfast, (...), says John 19. 22. Dan. 6. 8. Job 31. 35.
Pilate, which is as if he should say, It is written under my hand, it shall
stand; like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which alter not: Jobs wish
gives a good gloss to our assertion, Job 31. 35. where he marketh, that that
his Adversary had written a Book against him. The Laws of Draco were written in
Blood, and the Decrees of God against Job (as he conceived) were written with
gall and wormwood.

3. Why does Job make such peculiar mention of the sins of his Q. 3.
youth? Quidam in locu^ existima^t suae Adolescentiae peccata vocare quae a
filiis suis Adolescentulis perpetrata fuissent. Pineda in Loc. Job 1. 5.
Why is such a brand of Infamy put upon young men? For Answer, Pineda mentions,
That some think that God imputes his childrens sins unto him, as if he were
remiss in his duty toward them: And the version of the 70. seems to favor this
sense, (...), (i. e.) Thou have imposed or laid upon me: But this sense is
foreign, though God does punish Children for their Parents, and Parents for
their Childrens sins; yet I conceive it not so to be understood here; and we
have a good warrant for a more charitable opinion of Job, c 1. v. 5. because we
read he sanctified his sons. Job here is to be understood, speaking of his own
personal sins: Sins of Infancy and Childhood could not so well be remembered,
but youthful sins may more easily be called to remembrance: Ita Jobus ipse
meditatur, Sanctius in Loc.
quia eum recentium peccatorum non morderet cruciaretque conscientia, etc. As
if Job had not been conscious to himself of late sins, therefore he conceives
that he now suffers for former sins; thus some con^ecture, as Sanctius observes
on the place: But this savors not of Jobs spirit, though he was exemplary for
holiness, yet he was sensible of daily sins, he knew himself to be a daily
sinner, he knew what a sinful nature he had, full of pollution, yet his
youthful sins carried the greatest filth and guilt in them, which, in his
apprehension, made the greatest gashes and wounds upon his conscience; he knew
that his youthful sins had most aggravating circumstances in them, that a Bill
of Indictment drawn up against them would be blackest, and charge him homest:
Where upon Judicious Mr. Calvin gives two reasons why he speaks of the sins of
his youth; one is, Because in that age lusts are most predominant, the Calvin.
in l^cum.
nature of a man, which is sinful, does then cast up his greatest froth; the
passions are most violent, and therefore that age has need of the strongest
Bridle. Another reason is, Because Job meant to declare, that God brought all
his sins to remembrance, as if he should frame an Indictment against him of all
that he had done ever since he was a child. And herein he seems to complain of
rigor, seeing thou have pardoned them, wherefore do thou lay them before me?
But we may not find fault with God, he punishes less then we deserve: The
Lord is righteous, we have sinned against him.

A fourth Query is, what is meant by possessing the sins of Q. 4. Hieronymi
translatio. Chald. Parap. Jun. in Loc.
youth: Jerome reads it, consumere vis, youthful sins may bring Consumptions
upon old Age. The Chalde Paraphrase reads it, Me haereditare facis: Thus Junius
interprets, Efficis ut possideam haereditario jure. As if elder years did
inherit youthful sins: Gray Hairs, even old persons gray headed in sins,
receive the punishment of their youthful green headed sins for their
inheritance: It Is an observable note of Pineda on the place, * Punishment is
the Poena est quasi culpe prognata and filia, atque adeo ipse homo grandevus
and senex, succedit sibi ipsi puero and Adol^s^^nti. Pineda in Loc.
Daughter of sin: An old man is successor to himself a young man. There is, as
it were, a natural succession and derivation of sins committed in youth, to
become the inheritance of old age: So that a sinner becomes his own Heir, the
old sinner the young man's Heir. The meaning is, A man that runs on in a riotous
ungodly course, following his swinge and full career in wickedness in the days
of his youth, shall feel the smart and bitterness of his sins in his old crasie
bones: We render the word in the Text ordinarily to possess, and that is
Emphatical: A man that has present possession of his Inheritance, has most
points in the Law; The right next Heir has a legal Title. Now when the Heir
has possession of his Inheritance, this adds to the strengthening of his right.
Now an old sinner does inherit and take possession of his youthful sins; and
this is a sad possession, to possess the inheritance of sin. It was charged
upon Ahab, for killing and taking possession; there is the killing of the soul,
when there is possession took of sin. He then may be said to possess the sins
of his youth, who feels the smart and pain of them, who suffers bitter sorrows
for them, when the sins committed in his youth, even breaks his bones when he
comes to be old.

I have one Query more to propound: How is it, since Job an holy

For answer, you must know, 1. That sins repented of and pardoned,

2. Though sins may be pardoned, yet the soul may not be able

3. We are to know, that Fatherly chastisements are the lot and Heb. 12. 5, 6.
Rev. 3. 19.
portion of Gods dearest Children, as the Scripture plainly shows There is a
Judgment of Revenge, and a Judgment of Chastisement; Judgments of Revenge
are the portion of the wicked; Judgments of Chastisement are incident to the
generation of the righteous: As a Judge, God will not pass an eternal Judgment
against his people; They are the beloved of his Soul, and he loves them to the
end; but as a Father he may, and does pronounce many temporal Judgments as
Chastisements against them: The fruit whereof is, to take away their Dross and
Tin, and to make them partakers of his holiness.

4. It is wisdom in a godly man, when present sufferings are upon Job looked
back upon his former failings, he was not unmindeful of his present failings,
but his former, in an especial manner, might call for a rod of correction to
whip out his folly. When afflictions befall us, we should inquire into the
cause, and search out our sins, and be humbled for them: So Joseph's Brethren,
when distress befell them in Egypt, called to mind their Genesis 42. 21.
cruelty against Joseph, many years before committed.

Thus you have heard the Explication of the words, from which I Will draw one
Point of Doctrine, which I take to be the fundamental Doctrine of the Text:

That sins committed in our youth, will cause much smart and bitterness in our
elder years.

This Point lies plainly in the Text, and I shall make it the groundwork of my
ensuing Meditations: In the prosecution whereof, I shall pursue my plain and
accustomed method, by proving the Point from Method. of handling the Doctrine.
Scripture, confirming it by evidenc^ of Reason, and reducing all to point of
practice, by way of Use and particular Application.

For Scripture proof, Job speaking of the momentary joy of wicked men, cap. 20.
v. 5. sets forth his judgment, v. 11. His bones are full of the sins of his
youth, Hos. 12. 14. He shall leave his blood upon him, (as Diodate and others
observe) God will not pardon him his sin, nor cleanse him from it, but will
keep it still in remembrance, to punish him for it at his appointed time. God
makes a grievous complaint against Samaria and Jerusalem, under the names of
Aholah and Aholibah; Aholahs youthful Whoredoms are charged upon her, Ezekiel. 23.
v. 8. And likewise the same charge is given in against her Sister Aholibah, v.
19. See their doom, v. 33, 34. The cup of astonishment and desolation should be
their portion. David being sensible both of the sins of his youth, and riper
age, how heavy they would be upon him if God called them to remembrance, prays
earnestly, That God would not remember them against him, Psalm. 25. v. 7. Though
he was a potent King, and an excellent Musician, a Man of a sanguine
complexion, (and such naturally are most cheerful) yet after he had committed
those two scandalous sins, Murder and Adultery, he lost his former
cheerfulness, he complains of broken bones, Psalm. 51. 8. of restless bone,
Psalm. 37. 3. of diseased bones, Psalm. 6. 3. His sad condition is fu^ther
aggravated, Psalm. 6. 6, 7. and 38. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. You know by
experience, that some sprains and bruises that you have got in the heat of your
youth, afflict you sore in your old age; old men feel some blows, some aches
and pains which they have got many years before; some over-strain themselves by
running, wrestling, or such like violent Exercises, and they feel the smart
thereof in their old bones: So likewise the sins which young me^ venture on,
their Whoredoms, Voluptuousness, Carousing and Gaming, which they make light of
now, may lie heavy upon their spirits in old age; so that when green sins and
gray hairs, young sins and old bones meet together, there will be more
bitterness in the remembrance of them, then ever there was pleasure in the
commission of them. The Devil will let a man alone a great while, whilst he is
young and follows his Voluptuousness: The Devil thinks he is sure enough of
him; But when old age comes, and a sinner then is awakened from his security,
then the Devil bestirs himself all that he can; bringing all his sins to
remembrance, and tempting him to d^speration. It Is a good note of Estius,
Estius.
Insidebit calcaneo: The Serpent will be most busy to do us mischief in the
end of our life; So then, take it which way you will, when God comes to reckon
with sinners, there will be bitterness: Sin it self is a bitter thing;
Affliction is the punishment of sin, and that is a bitter thing; and
Repentance, which is the instrumental means prescribed, is no pleasant potion.
The issue is indeed sweet, because they that sow in tears shall reap in joy:
Yet the Scripture sets forth Repentance by breaking the heart, afflicting the
soul, going mourning all the day long, like the mourning for an only Son,
Zech. 12. 10. Sin will cause bitterness in the end. That this may appear more
evidently, I will give in the demonstration of the Point, by evidence of Reason.

The first shall be drawn from the rule of Equity and Justice: There is a
Commutative and a Distributive Justice; in the Commutative R. 1. Drawn from the
rule of Equity and Justice.
Justice, Inter vendenda and emenda, equity and good conscience must take
place; the Commodity sold must be worth the money given, and the money given
must be worth the Commodity, this is most true, yet not in that sense which I
drive at this present: But there is a distributive Justice, and the rule
thereof is, suum cuique Tribuere, this serves for my purpose: It Is just with
God to give a sinner his own, to pay him in his own coin, to let him reap what
he has sowed; That as in his youth he has sown the seeds of wickedness, so in
his old age he should reap the fruits of sorrow and bitterness: It Is Eliphaz
experience, Job 4. 8. They that plow iniquity and sow wickedness, reap the
same; youth will have its swinge: No bands will hold them, no bounds will keep
them in, they will have their own ways, and its just with God to let them be
filled with their own ways, Prove. 5. 22, 23. His own iniquity shall take the
wicked Prove. 5. 22, 23.
himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sin: he shall die
without instruction, and in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray: Isa.
3. 10, 11. Romans 6. 23. (...), Pro stipendio and quovis salario accipitur,
Piscut.
Compare those two different Sentences together, Isa. 3. 10, 11. Sin has a
voice, it cries aloud for it is wages, and that is a dead pay, Romans 6. 23.
(...), Young men rush into sin with greediness, but they take not into their
thoughts the consideration of a day of an account: There will come a day of
visitation a day of recompense, when God will reckon with thee for thy most
delightful sins. In thy elder age thou must feel the smart of them and
possess a bitter inheritance: Read that sacred Irony of the wise man, Rejoice O
young man etc. Eccles. 11. 9. Reas. Second, drawn from the nature and quality
of Sin.


A Second Reason shall be drawn from the nature and quality of sin, every
sin is a pollution, a defileing of the conscience, there is an abundance of
filthiness in every sin, this the Psalmists question implies wherewithal
shall a young man cleanse his ways? Psalm. 119. 9. Sin in Sctipture is called
lewdness, folly, perverseness, uncleanness, compared to a menstruous cloth, to
dung, vomit, mire, poison etc. There is nothing so loathsome in our eyes, as
sin is in the pure eyes of God, sin is the poison of the soul, sin is
worse then hell, then the Devil, more black, more ugly then either of them,
Quod efficit tale est magis tale. There would be neither hell, nor devil were
it not for sin. Now then if every sin be thus filthy, what shall we say of
youthful sins, which are committed with vigor, greediness, alacrity. when
men sell themselves to work wickedness, and spend their marrow and strength in
the devils service, these (though they little think of it) will one day feel
the smart of their youthful vanities if God open their eyes to see the
filthiness of their ways and to loath themselves, their sins will cost them
many a salt tear: Hence will follow an holy self-confusion self-displacency,
and abhorrence, Jer. 13. 19. Job. 42. 6.
as was i^ Ephraim, and Job. Though they wanted (...) fore wit, Its a great
mercy if they have (...) after wit.

A Third and last Reason shall be drawn from the several aggravations of those
sins which are committed in the days of our youth. Reas. Third. from the
aggravations of youthful sins 1 Aggravat. because youthful sins are committed
with greater violence. Job. 11. 12. (...) etc. Arist. Eth. l. 1. ^ 1.


1. They are committed with a great deal of impetuousness and violence: Though
the story of Phaeton be fabulous (and I purposely wave Poetical Fictions) yet
the moral is sound, that rash young men may set all in a combustion: Job has
a full comparison: A young man is like a wild Asses Colt. Aristotle accounts
him an unfit hearer of moral Philosophy. Neither Aristotle his Ethics, nor
Tullyes offices, can break a young colt. This one word Volo is the bane of many
young men. They are refractory, and will have their own will, and a
self-willed-man is felo de se, his own executitioner: with what violence do
young men pursue their lusts? They leave no stone unmoved for the satisfaction
of their humors: They measure not things by the light of judgment, much less
by the rule of the word, but they act according to fancy and passion. And there
is an Anarchy in their passions, or such a tumult or Ataxy in them, as that
they love what they should loath, desire what they should abhor, rejoice when
they should mourn: Nitimur in vetitum, is the main trade they drive. And thus
unbridled youth, without all government, is like a City without gates and walls
Satan and all his instruments will enter in speedily and surprise them.

A Second aggravation is because s^nnes committed in days of 2. Aggrav. Because
youthful sins are committed with greater delight.
youth are with abundance of delight and complacency acted by sinners. Old men
cannot act some ^innes (though their hearts are as naught as ever) by reason of
natural Impedements, and indisposition of their present constitution: But
yong-men whose bones are full of marrow, they delight in joviall company,
drinking, gameing, seeing Theatricall Enterludes, They are young, and therefore
they put far from them the evil day, Let them read that dreadful woe Amos 6.
3. 4. 5. 6. Its the young man void of understanding that was enticed by the
Whore, Prove. 7. 22. Absolon was a young man that rebelled against hi^ Father, O
what eager pursuits was there, what delight what desire and endeavor to
accomplish his designs? He falls a fawning and flattring and so steals away
the hearts of the people, and then he will not tarry till his fathers death,
but on he goes with his design, A vow to God he pretends in his mouth, but
he meditates Treason and ^ebellion in his heart, And you know what became of
him. David seems to extenuatet he matter, when he bids deal gently with the
young man Absalom. However the Rebel is no whit less in excuseble.

A Third aggravation is drawn from the many Pleas, and vain 3 Aggravat. is
drawn from the waine pretenses which young men make.
pretenses that young men make, they will tell you that youth must have a grain
allowed, what is a Gentleman but his pleasure, Now they are young hereafter they
will think upon their souls, They must have a time to sow their wild Oats,
They can quote the Laetitia juvenem Frons ^ecet, tristis senem. Sen. Trag.
Tragedian; Mirth becomes a young man, gravity an old man. Would they were as
well verst in the book of God, there they may read 2 Timothy 2. 22. Flee youthful
Lusts: I have often seriously thought that Its no wonder to see so many wanton
youths, when as there remain so many wanton Authors (Poets I mean especially)
such as Horace, Martial, Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius etc. ^ho corrupt many
young men, Its high time that all such books were either thoroughly purged or
else condemned to the fire as theirs were Act. 19. 19. You youngmen do not
plead for your pleasures, Solomon tells you that Childhood and youth are
vanities. I remember Tertullian has a saying Vides convivium peccatoris
interroga ejus conscientiam etc. There is death in the Pot; In the midst of
Tertul.
laughter the heart is sorrowful. There is death in the Adulterers bed, death
in the Drunkards cup, death in the deceivers false weights, never plead
pleasure in sinful ways.

But youth will plead, will you allow no Recreation? Ephesians. 5. 16. (...).
Emercantes, hoc est, dato pretio ^sserrere in libertatem. Erasm. Est curiose
merces considerare, u^ emas meliores. C. a Lap:


I Answer that no recreation that is sinful may at any time be allowed, no
recreation of ill report and scandalous, no recreation as a vocation, no
mispending of time, for we are commanded to redeem time or making a good
Market of time. Only such recreations may be used as are of Good report, which
may serve as files and whetstones to devotion, to draw thee nearer to God, and
not to keep thee farther off. I may say of recreations as a Reverend Divine
said of Ceremonies some are tolerable, none necessary, but most be abominable,
Would you know the right pleasure? It Is in the ways of wisdom Prove. 3, 17.
would you know the right object of rejoicing? Vis nunquam esse tristis been
vive. Bern. de modo been vivendi
It Is in God Phil. 4. 4. Bernard has an excellent saying Would thou never
be sad, live well. Lay aside all your vain pleadings, study the scripture, be
much in prayer, much in meditation, and s^earching your own hearts, and then
you will find by experience that there is more true pleasure in one moments
communion with God, then in all the delights and vanities of the whole world
were they all put together.

The fourth and last Aggravation that I shall name, is this, Sins 4 Aggravat.
Sins of youth are greater because committed against warning and invitations
of youth are greater sins, and will cause the greatest bitterness, because
young men sin after so many invitations, calls and warnings from God. The soul
of God loves the first ripe fruits; The Holy Ghost calls to day, not to morrow,
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth: Thou must consecrate thy
fresh green years to God; Thou must dedicate the first fruits, the^^ first
born, the Mich. 7. 1. Eccles. 12. 1.
^^^^dren of Israel were to give their first fruits, their first born, the best
of their flock, a Lamb withot blemish God calls for thy youth, Will thou put
him off with the refuse, thy old crazy bones, (that I may speak it with
reverence) when the Devil has sucked out the Marrow? Will thou offer God empty
bones? Mal. 1. 8. Thy Governor will not accept of it: Now thy sin is
aggravated, Hin^ colligit se affici nimis gravi Injuria, quod Judaei audeant
offerre, quod mortalis homo respueret. Calv.
because thou do refuse Gods call at present, upon presumption of space, and
grace for the future, neither of which are in thy power; He may give thee
neither, whilst thou art a refusing at the call of God, to give him thy youth.
and thy fresh green years, he may be a sweating that there shall be no more
time, and cut thee asunder in the midst of thy sins, and cast thee into eternal
torments; or if God give theespace, it is doubtful whether he will give thee
grace, It Is said of Jezabell, Rev. 2. 21 I gave her space to repent but she
repented not: There is a Peradventure, 2 Timothy 2. 25. They encouraged the blind
man, saying, Behold he calls thee: Christ Loquitur non de fidelibus ta^tum
sed de omnibus hominibus in genere, praesertim nondum credentibus in Christum.
Muscul.
knocks at the doors of your hearts, he offers to be your guest, Will not you
now open to entertain Jesus Christ: Now we are sent on Embassy, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
To pray you to be reconciled unto God: If you hearken not to day, our
commission may be out of date tomorrow; I know Christ calls at several hours, I
dare not set a bar against ancient people, I invite them to come unto Christ,
and Ministerially persuade them: For, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 10. We
persuade men: Now let them begin and bewail their misspent time, and though
they have begun later, let them work the harder that work of faith, that labor
of love, that patience of hope: 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
Yet I dare not encourage any, for all the world, to put off their repentance
to their old age; They that begin soonest, will find the most comfort, the
most experience, and the less work to do when they come to die: Yet let not
elder persons say it is too late, let them not shut the door of mercy against
themselves, and so judge themselves unworthy of eternal life: But let them lay
aside all excuses, and now come and work in Christ's Vineyard, and be faithful,
and they shall receive their penny.

Thus I have given you the Doctrinal part of the Text, I shall improve it in
four Uses for Humiliation, Exhortation, Direction, and Consolation: This shall
be my particular Application of all unto our selves.

The first Use shall be for deep Humiliation: Let us all be humbled Use 1. For
Humilia^ion.
for the sins of our youth* Let us smite upon our Thighs, sigh to the breaking
of our loins: Let us abhor our selves, and repent in dust and ashes. Youth is
easily over-taken with sin: Plato tells us, Furiosus est Juvenibus animi
habitus: Aristotle says, He is headstrong, given to his passions: (...).
Aristot. Eth. l. 1.
But Solomon gives his experimental verdict, instar omnium, Eccles. 11. 10.
Youth is vanity: Let us refle^t upon our youthful sins, and aggravate them with
all their sinful circumstances, and be confounded and abased even to the dust,
at the remembrance of them. Mr. Bolton in that excellent Tract, Entitled,
Helps to Humiliation, takes it for granted, that Christians Mr. Boltons Helps
to Humiliation.
keep two Catalogues of their sins; one before, another after their conversion:
Did we indeed keep a Diary of our lives, we should find abundant cause of a
heart-melting Humiliation; as for all, so especially for those notorious
Pollutions that cleave to our youthful days. Austin made Confessions and
Retractations, which Books, amongst his Works, can never be enough admired, but
are accounted the very Marrow and Quintessence of all his Works: In his
Confessions, amongst other sins, he sets out a sin which many idle Truantly
Boys now adays would laugh it out, and would make nothing of, accounting it
only as a trick of youth: It was Aug. Conf. l. 2.
This sin which I committed, was not only forbidden in the book of God, but I
had it daily in my heart. 2. I did it with a previous resolution, with full
purpose of heart. 3. I did it not for want, but in disdain of goodness, and out
of an eager desire to do wrong. 4. I had abundance of the same kind at home,
and better. 5. I did steal them not so much to enjoy the thing, as my own lust,
That it might be said to my old companions, that I robbed an Orchard. 6. He
aggravates his sin from the bad company, there were a great many swaggerers,
and incarnate Devils with me. 7. From the unseasonableness of the time, It was
at midnight. 8. From the base employment they had been at, before they came
there; we did it when we had been Sporting, Dancing, and Drinking. 9. We
carried all away, so that they were a burden to us. 10. When we came home, we
gave them to the Swine. I have enlarged this Confession of Austin, hoping,
through the Grace of God, that it may do a great deal of good. My Brethren, I
beseech you look back on former sins, call to remembrance your many mad pranks
committed in your youth: Some now adays glory in their youthful sins, and will
make a Jest of them: But you know Solomon's censure of such, Prove. 14. 9. That
fools make a mock of sin: Some will boast even of those sins that they never
Prove. 14. 9.
^^mmitted, thereby to ingratiate themselves with their boon Companions. Many
there are, who will find matter for discourse, by talking of their old sins,
with what delight and merriment can they talk of youthful vanities, such
slippery tricks and wanton carriages? and by the delighting in the narration
and repetition of them, they possess their youthful sins, and they act them
over again. I am fully of that Reverend Divines opinion, who has took
excellent pains in his Exposition upon the place, That so often as a Caryl on
the Text.
man remembers a sin which he has committed, with consent, he commits it
again: Take heed then of boasting and telling pleasant stories of your youthful
sins; Be humbled, be humbled for every sin, especially for youthful sins: Call
to mind your prophanations of Sabbaths, Sabbath sins will sit close upon the
conscience: Call to mind your barrenness under the means of Grace, your
rashness, precipitancy, frothyness of wit, wantonness, self-willedness, all
your youthful vanities; spread the letter before the Lord (as Hezekiah did in
the case of Rabshekah) spread the black Bill of Indictment against your selves,
take shame to your selves, glorify God, by making confession to him; if there
may be any possibility of hope, any healing of your errors; you are yet alive
on this side Hell, on this side the Grave and Eternity, you cannot promise unto
your selves the least moment of time. Now there is hope, there is a door of
mercy opened, the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land, you live under the
sound of the Gospel: Now I am sent in ^mbassy, the substance whereof, is to
persuade you to make sin your greatest sorrow, and Jesus Christ your greatest
joy, to be sensible of the stingings of the Fiery Serpents, to be affected with
the wounds of sin, and then to look up to the brazen Serpent Jesus Christ for a
perfect cure. Had not you better mourn for sin now, whilst you have breath,
space, hope, then weep and wail, and gnash your teeth in Hell fire, in that
hopeless condition whence there is no redemption, where the Judge has veiled
his face, and past a Sentence irreversible: And because many Scholars bewail in
an especial manner their University sins, considering, that here they have
committed those sins with delight, which in their elder age, will prove Gall
and Wormwood, even Gravel, as Solomon speaks: Prove. 20. 17.
Give me leave, out of love to your souls, to deal plainly with you, and to be
your Remembrancer of some peculiar reigning sins, which upon observation, I
find more ripe amongst young men; I exclude not, nor excuse them from other
sins, for who can say his heart is clean? whose heart is not a Womb, to bring
forth the most hideous Monsters? whose heart is not a Garden to bring forth the
most rank poisonous weeds? whose heart is not a sink, to entertain the most
noisome carrion? but that Grace preventing, renewing and sanctifying Grace steps
in, and keeps a soul from such foul acts: ^ut I say, upon grounded experience,
these sins amongst young men are most notorious, for which there is exceeding
great cause of humiliation.

The first sin I shall mention, is Voluptuousness: Young men 1. The sin of
Voluptuousness.
are all for their pleasures, addicted to their sports and vanities: It Is
lamentable to consider what a great deal of precious time is thrown away in
vain pleasures by some young men (I wish there were none such within our Walls)
What abundance of time is spent, I say, misspent by many young men, in
Ball-courts, Cards, Dice, Tables, with Hawks, Hounds, one of which hours cannot
be recalled. I have read the Story of John Husse, whom Luther calls
Sanctissimum Martyrem, when the Bishops put a ridiculous Crown upon his head,
to make him their Ludibrium; he made this Answer, My Lord Jesus for my sake did
wear a crown of Thorns, why should not I then for his sake wear this l^ght
crown, be it never so ignominious? Truly I will do it, and that willingly: You
know (says he) In my younger years (which grieveth me now) I have d^lighted
oftentimes to play at Chesse, have neglected my time, and have unhappily
provoked both my self and others to anger many times by that play: You may make
good use of the words of this Holy Martyr, which were the words of a dying Man;
and an eminent Martyr for Christ: I shall not dispute at present the lawfulness
or unlawfulness of that Play: Be it never so innocent, never so indifferent,
where those ill consequences are produced, viz. Loss of much time, and
provocation to much anger; its the safest way to lay it aside: and the like may
be said for other Games, which Cicero.
are doubtful and disputable, Abundans cautela non nocet: Aristotle by no means
will have happiness to consist in pleasure: He calls voluptuous persons Slaves,
(...), that lead a life more beseeming a Beast then a Man. The best of Orators
gives this character of Pleasure, That it is esca omnium malorum, and looks
upon a voluptuous person, as one that has un-manned himself, and not worthy
the name of a man. It was a famous Speech of Titus Caesar, That he had lost
that day wherein he had done no good: Consider of O amici perdidimus di^m. Tit.
Caes.
this, that day is lost wherein you have done God no service; when you have
wasted your time in idle Company, Drinking, Gaming, Carowsing, What comfort can
you take when you come to die? What good will your boon Companions do you? They
will prove as miserable Comforters, (as the High Priests to Judas) Matthew. 27.
3. They said, What Is that to us, see thou to that: O this sin of Voluptuousness
reigns thorowout the Land; How many make their Recreation their business, their
employment, eating and drinking, and rising up to play, with the Idolatrous
Israelites: Believe it (my Brethren) misspent time will lie heavy upon your
consciences when you come to die: Then thou will cry, Call time again, call
time again, as some have done on their Deathbeds: Then what promises would
thou make if thou might live a little longer? Thou would redeem every
vanity with an age of preciseness. O how thou will curse those profane
Companions that called thee from thy Study to the Tavern; that enticed thee
from a Sermon to a Whore-house! Then thou will find by experience that thou
have been mistaken all the while, and that there is no solid real pleasure in
the ways of sin: May these considerations disengage and wean your hearts from
sensual Pleasures: Neither do I cry down all Pleasures this day, only I
persuade you to make the best choice, to turn the stream of Carnal and Sensual,
into Spiritual and Heavenly Pleasures: Would you have Pleasures follow Wisdoms
Tracts? Prove. 3. 17. Are you all for Delights? Delight your selves in God,
Psalm. 37. 4. Are you for Joy? rejoice in God, The joy of the Lord is your
strength, Neh. 8. 10.

A Second sin I shall name is contempt of superiors, Young 2. Contempt of
Superiors.
men would gladly have the reins of government let loose, they will fain be
lawless, left to their own liberty, every one to do that which is good in his
own eyes, no Bonds will hold head strong refractory spirits, they join with
those in their resolution to break of all bands. Psalm. 2. 3. I could wish
heartily those complaints were not verified of our times Isa: 3. 5. Lam. 5. 12.
Lam. 4. 16. I am sure the 5th commandment is obligatory, so is the precept.
Heb. 13. 17. God is the God of order, and not of confusion: if the order primi
and secundi be not observed, If there be not governing and obeying: But if
Levelling designs of a rude multitude that bellua multorum capitum, take
place, there will be a dissolution of the continuum, and we shall be reduced
into the first Chaos. Therefore to you (my Elder Brethren) I address my
exhortation, to keep up that authority that God has put into your hands; Let
no man despise you: Keep up good discipline: Set up Catechizing in all your
houses: Teach those under your charge their particular duties, season them with
the knowledge of God in their youth and train them up in their duty, and when
they are old, they will This I heard Mr. Herbert Palmer preach at Aldermanbury
never forget it. I have heard that in the beginning of that horrid Irish
rebellion, some Servants cut their masters throats, and told them they should
have taught them better. Were there better Masters, there would be better
servants. You that are Tutors and have the inspection of others, look upon your
selves as Pro-parents, and be faithful in your trust. Do you read diligently
to them? I wish you all did else. Take heed of sloathfulness, of hiding your
Talents in a Napkin. But let me ask you plainly, you that find young men
licentious, headstrong and refractory, do you pray frequently with them, and
for them? Do you Catechize them? Do you teach them knowledge in Aristotle,
and do you not much more teach them knowledge in Jesus Christ? Let us then all
in our places and capacityes look to our charge, and do our duties with
diligence and fidelity, and leave the success to God.

A Third sin is an affectation of Novelty, or devising ways 2. Sin,
affectation of Novelty.
besides, or quite contrary to the knowledge of the word of God; We brayd of
the humor of old Athens: we have Itching ears after novelty. It is sad to
consider how many young men's heads affect froth of wit, and spend much time in
reading stage plays, Poets, Pasquills, Romances, high-flown nonsense of late
Scriblers: Others out of curiosity are not afraid to meddle with Judicial
Astrology, which was Mr. Perkins his sin in his younger years, and his sorrow
in his elder years. Another sort there are, who are much affected with
New-Lights, (i. e.) Antinomian and Familisticall writers, who with a swelling
Title in the frontispice, allure men, as the Sirens do with their Music, and
then devour them; Some of their books are no better then gilded Pills, or
gilded Rats-bane, which whilst they pretend the exaltation of Christ and
bright morning beams (as som^e of their Titles pretend) they deceive young
heads, and whilst they pretend new lights, they revive old Antiquated Her
esies, and like an ignis fatuus mislead multitudes, ho follow after to their
own destruction. Therefore lets all as one man be exhorted not to be wise above
what is written, not to follow any further then they follow Jesus Christ. Keep
close to the good old rule, unto the law and the testimonies, study the
Scriptures and converse with those Mnasons, those old disciples, study their
works such as were Greenham, Perk^ns, Regers, Hildersham, Dod, Dyke, etc. Their
memory is blessed, their works praise them in the gate. And let me communicate
an experience unto you: I have observed of some, that at first out, of
pregnancy of parts, and singularity, they would be scepticall and hold
Paradoxes in Philosophy: In tract of time they stayed not there, but they would
set their wits a working and afterward they became scepticall and Heterodoxe
in Divinity. And therefore take heed of Sceptisme: There is Mr. John Bidle a
notorious Heretic.
One whom I knew very well, a man of a proud spirit, that used in the schools
to be s^epticall and maintain Paradoxes, and to go against the principles of
Philosophy: He is gone further now, and has wrote a blasphemous book against
the Divinity of the holy Ghost. Whither will not pride and vain glory carry
any man? And what becomes of the best wit, the best parts, when God leaves any
man unto himself?

The Fourth and last sin I shall now name is pride, and of all 4. Sin, Pride.
pride, spiritual pride is most dangerous, when a man is proud of any gift of
God, his pride will prove like the wild gourd, est mors in olla. Pride is the
poison of the soul, it soon swells a man, and then bursts him. And many times
men of learning smart for their pride, God bereaves them of their senses and
they do even obrutescere with Nebuchadnezzar, who in the midst of his proud
vainglorious boasting, was sent a grazing among the beasts of the field. And
there is another sort of pride, which I dare not let go unreproved (i. e.) the
strange Exotic Garbes of these times, worse then former ages, many cannot be
content with the hair v. Mr. Pryn's unlovelyness of love-looks
that God gives them, they like not the color of it, but they borrow other
folks hair, some are so fantastical as to Crisp and Powder their hair, and
wear long Locks, fitter to be called Pride-locks then Love-locks. I cannot hold
my peace, to see such vanities and prodigious sights, even like bushy Comets
p^^tending some mischief to the place where they live. You shall not talk
scarce with any Tradesman, but he will tell you, its a hard time, he has much
ado to live: And many poor householders have much ado to keep themselves
alive: when as in the mean time a Fantastical Gallant wears so many Ribbands
(even all the co^lours of the Rainbow) in his Hat, so many Ribbands about his
waste, so many Points about the knees, as the price paid for them would
maintain many poor families a great while. Brethren, I speak these things
sadly and seriously, when I consider such superfluityes and vanities, which if
they were pared off, and that money converted to the poor, it might supply the
honest necessity of many a poor servant of Jesus Christ. Hopeing therefore of
your Reformation, I proceed to a Second Use for Exhortation.

Let old men call to mind their youthful sins, and mourn for 2 Use, For
Exhortation. Admonentur hic senes ut ipst delicta juventutis suae ^gnoscant,
detestentur, illorutnque veniam precentur. Davidem non imitantur, qui gloriando
de praeterita sua stultitia garriunt, and adhuc tales esse vellent. Musc. in
Psalm. 25. Quid^m ex hoc loco colligun eximiam viri sanctissimi sanctitatem, qui
in aetate jam confirmata and matura nihil sibi conscivit, Sanct.
them: I am confident there are diverse aged persons, that have repented of
their youthful sins, which sins were they to commit again, they would not
commit them for all the world. And do not pass by the sins of your riper
years: David prays that God would charge neither upon him, but remember him
according to mercy, Psalm. 25. 7. Covetousness and Passion are amongst others
two especial sins that accompany old age. Beware of these in an especial
manner. These are beloved bosom sins, O subdue them: when Goliath was slain
the Philistines were vanquished presently. When Covetousness and Passion (which
are the championsins, the accustomed sins of old age) are conquered, other sins
of ordinary incursions will more easily be subdued. I have read of Bellarmine,
that when the Priest came to confess him, he could not remember any particular
sins of his present age, but was fain to call to mind the sins of his youth:
put surely this man was a mere stranger to his own heart, he had not studied
his own heart, otherwise he might have found many present sins to bewail, if
he had not gone back as far as his youth: ^owever the oldest Saints find
matter of humiliation, for daily and hourly sins, and they lam^n^ their
sins committed in all ages, (viz) Infancy, Childhood, Youth and old age: and
to you that are young, let me beseech you to give God the prime of your youth,
consecrate your youth to God. A young Timothy O how delightful is he to God,
The time you have before you, O redeem it, and be good husbands of it, and
improve every minute of time to the glory of God! and the best advantage of
your precious souls. O labor with a holy greediness to get saving graces,
faith, love, hope, patience, meekness and humility. Now you have a time of
plenty, store up against a year of famine. Now you have many prices put into
your hands, to get wisdom withal, O that God would give you hearts to make a
right improvement of them! You have strength and marro^ in your bones, you are
in the flower, and prince of your age, your spirits are vigorous, your memories
mos^ retentive, O then consecrate all the members of your bodies, and faculties
of your souls to the service of the Lord. We usually say Spes Ecclesiae in
Juventute: There are many hopeful young plant^ in Gods garden, they must bring
^orth more favory fruit in their elder age. In a word, let me exhort you so to
spend your time, as when you come to be old, you may look back upon your young
days with comsort, and bless God, that has seasoned you with his fear from
your youth: Both to old and young let me apply my self, and fasten on them
these few moving considerations, which may be as so many (...) or
preservatives, and means to prevent sin.

1. Consider seriously the omniscience of God, so did Joseph 1 Consider the
omniscience of God. Metaphora ab animalibus dissectis, and excoriatis, Hyperius.
Genesis 39. 9. This was a Monitour to Job, chap. 10, 14. and Heb. 4. 13. (...),
as I may say naked and anatomized before him. Imagine God to be, as the
Arabians fansied, (...) all eye to see thee, He knows thy thoughs, penetrates
thy secretest recesses, knows the Meanders, windings and diverticles of thy
heart. Did men seriously consider that they are always in the presence of an
Omniscient Lord; This consideration might prevent sin.

2. Consider, as God knows thy ways, so he keeps exact Records. 2 Consider
God keeps exact records.
Here is a Chirograph in the text for iniquities, and he keeps a Book of
remembrance of the Saints religious conferences together, Mal. 3. 16. In a
proper sense we cannot say that God keeps a Book, the formality of writing down
is infinitely below God. This is a sigurative speech, the meaning is, that all
that is thought, done, or spoken is always before him. Conscience likewise
keeps a Book that one day will act the part of witness, accuser, and judge.

3. Consider before hand what sin will cost thee. Reckon the 3 Consider
before hand what sin will cost thee.
cost of it. Romans 6. 21 old, and young will have cause of shame, as Peter
Martyr *observes. Who of understanding would be a slave to so unprofitable a
master as sin is? When you are tempted to sin, ask Si vel Seni vel Juveni
aliquid revocetur inmemoriam, quod non recte videatur factum, erubescunt ob
dolorem dedecoris, in quod sevident incurrisse. Pet. Martin.
thy self the Question, shall I displense an holy God? shall I defile my soul?
wound my Conscience by sin? will there not be bitterness in the end? When thou
art tempted to uncleanness consider ^ore hand that he that is abhorred of God
is enticed of a Whore, and would thou be abhorred of God? I'have read that a
young ^^an thus tempted by a Whore, bit off a piece of his Tongue, that so he
pain of it, might divert him from so wicked a Temptation. Say ^ot Who^edome is
a Trick of youth, such youthful tricks (unless ^epented of) will damn thy
soul to all eternity. When thou art empted to Immoderate Drinking, consider
before hand thy body should be the Temple of the Holy Ghost, shall I make it a
Tem^le for Bacchus? will not days of mourning follow days of Jolli^ye and
Carrousing? will not cups of trembling follow cups of health^ng? may not there
be such an Handwriting against me as was against Belshazzar? In a word could
men seriously premeditate a^orehand, what sin would cost them, they would not
so rashly ^dventure upon it, to wound their conscience, and displease so holy a
Lord God.

4. Consider the four last things, Death and Judgment, Hell and 4 Consider the
four last things. 1 Consider Death.
Heaven: 1. Consider Death, Its the statute law of Heaven: That all shall dye,
and every one shall see death, as we read Heb. 9. 27. Psalm. 8. 9 40. This life
is of a short continuance; compared to a flower, a vapor, a Weavers Shuttle:
Young dye as well as Old: Upon this moment depends eternity: And in eternity we
return to the Land of the living. We all stand at the door of eternity: we may
be summond by death presently, for ought we know. So ought we to live every
day, as if it were our last day that we may have nothing to do but to dye.
Would thou have death call thee suddenly? art thou prepared? Do thou so
live, as thou can look the King of ^errours in the face, and with comfort and
confidence breath out thy soul unto Jesus Christ? O therefore cleanse thy soul,
set upon the work of purification, Trim up thy soul to entertain Jesus Christ.

2. Consider of the day of judgment, 2 Cor. 5. 10 Consider before 2 Con^ider
the day of Judgment.
hand that of Solomon Eccles. 11. 9. Consider there will come a day of account.
As death leaves thee, so judgment will find thee. If thy peace be not made with
God before thou dyest, Judgment will return thee an enemy to Jesus Christ: And
if Christ be thy enemy who is thy Judge, thou will wish that the hills might
fall upon thee, and that the mountains might cover thee from the face of the
Lamb. Let the consideration of the day of ^udgment be always in your thoughs,
and ask thy self the Question, Do I that which I can answer at the day of
judgment? shall I not be called to an account for these things?

3. Consider the Torments of Hell, the lot and portion of all 3 Consider the
torments of Hell.
those who are unreconciled to Jesus Christ. Ask thy self the Question, does
not Whoredom, Drunkeness etc. lead thee away into the pit? will not cursed
delights in burning lusts end in eternal burnings? Will not sin cry aloud
for its wages, and bring with it but a dead pay?

4. Consider of the joys of Heaven, the inheritance of the 4. Consider the
joys of Heaven.
Saints, noe unclean thing shall enter there; nothing that defiles shall ever
enter into the new Jerusalem. Would I then be in Heaven hereafter? Heaven must
begin in me upon earth. Do I desire happiness? I must labor to be holy: Mark
to whom blessedness is appropriated Psalm. 119. v. 1 To the undefiled and pure
in heart, Matthew. 5. 8. Every one of these considerations seriously laid to
heart, may be preservatives against sin.

In the next place I must prescribe some Directions which that I may do, I Will
descend to

A third Use, which shall be for direction: You that would Use 3. For direction
gladly have this Ch^rographum in my Text cancelled, and be healed of the sores
and wounds of sin, I prescribe these means.

1. ^e humbled to the dust for all your sins: Be afflicted and Dir. 1. Be
humbled for all your sins.
mourn, let your laughter be turned into heavyness, and your joy into mourning:
Let there be such a bitter sorrow for sin, as for the loss of a firstborn;
like the mourning of Hadad-rimmon in the valley of Megiddo: Peter denied
shamefully, and wept bitterly: David watered his Couch with his tears: Mary
Magdalen, out of whom Christ cast seven Devils, washed Christ's feet with her
tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head: Let it be bitter to remember,
that thou have been so undutiful to so gracious a God, that thou have provoked
such a merciful God to wrath, whose nature is to show mercy: O how this
consideration should melt thy heart into a soul-reforming sorrow! Sins may be
compared to the waters of Marah, so bitter as none could drink of them: Sin is
a very bitter thing, it produces bitter effects: But God showed Dir. 2. Look
through all Humiliations unto Jesus Christ.
Moses a Tree, which made the Waters of Marah sweet. The bitter Tears of
Repentance, and the most bitter afflictions which sin produces, will end in
joy to those that are truly penitent.

2. Though thou must be humbled (and he that was never humbled, never truly
believed) yet thou must not rest in thy humiliation, but look unto Jesus Christ
for a cure; Thou must be sensible of the stings and wounds of sin, and look
unto Jesus Christ, by the eye of Faith, for a cure: He is our peace, Ephesians. 2.
14. No reconciliation but by him, 2 Cor. 5. 19. No way to get healing, pardon,
salvation, but by him; sue then out a Pardon sealed by the Blood of Christ: O
pray that be would cancel the handwriting against thee, and that by his Blood
he would Justify, Sanctify, and Save thee: No name, no Mediator, no Blood can
make an Atonement for thee, but this Blood of Sprinkling, which speaks better
things then the Blood of Abel.

3. Having got a pardon through the Blood of Christ, walk Dir. 3. Walk
circu^^spectly. (...), Qui exact vivunt nolunt vel in minimis deficere.
cedere, solent enim vel minutissima observare. Favorinus.
circums^ectly in thy whole conversation, Ephesians. 15. 5. There is an Emphasis in
the Adverb (...), bids be watchful and circumspect, take heed of re-acting thy
youthful sins; ^ill be renewing thy repentance, and pray for more manifestation
of Gods love unto thy soul.

4. And lastly, To conclude, here is one word of comfort unto those, upon whom
God has poured the Spirit of Repentance: Old people, that have truly repented
of their sins, shall have them imputed unto Christ, and Christ's righteousness
unto them for Justification; and let them read their blessedness, Psalm 32. 1,
2. Happy are they, whose souls are washed white in the blood of the Use 4. For
Consolation.
Lamb: You that mourn for sin, you shall be comforted: You that bewail your
sins and hate them, and endeavor to walk closely with God, in a holy conformity
to his will, you shall have this handwriting blotted out: And whether your
sorrow be right and genuine, you must try it by those Apostolical Characters, 2
Cor. 7. 10, 11. Let no man apply comfort to himself, but upon Gospel terms: And
to you that are young, upon whose hearts God has wrought saving Grace in your
tender years; I must pronounce comfort to you, Happy is it with you, that God
has begun with you betimes, and has planted his fear in your hearts betimes:
You have heard how dear youthful sins cost many in their elder years, O now be
advised, take warning, fly youthful sins, labor to be grave and serious in
your carriages: God has done much for you, what will you do for him? speak
good of his name, advance his glory, encourage your fellows to come unto God:
Remember that counsel which Christ gives Peter, When thou art converted, streng
then thy brethren. I beseech you all in the fear of God, in the close of my
Sermon, to beware of youthful levity: There is Mr. Jeremy Buroughs.
a great deal of frothy with amongst young men. A Reverend Divine, now with
God, used to pray, That of all spirits, God would be pleased to deliver him
from a frothy spirit: Beware of foolish Jesting. Though the word (...) be
allowed in Aristotle, yet it is condemned by St. Paul. Ephesians. 5. 4. Let young
Timothy be a pattern for your imitation, of whom Paul had such confidence: And
always labor to cleanse your ways, according to that rule which I shall leave
with you for a close of all, Psalm. 119. v. 9. By taking heed thereto according
to the word.

Judgment and Mercy.
Set forth upon Genesis 6. 3. And the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive
with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and
twenty years.


IN the precedent Chapter you have the Genealogy of the long Sermon. 2. At St.
Mary's Oxon. Jan. 12. 1652. Genesis 5. 27.
lived Patriarchs of the old World: It Is observable, that every ones particular
age is exactly reckoned, and though they lived some more, some fewer years; yet
every one agrees in the same conclusion, And he dyed. Methuselah, who lived the
longest of all, lived nine hundred sixty and nine years, and he dyed: The
longest livers saw death, and could not deliver themselves from the hand of the
Grave. These ancient Fathers, though dead, may be said to live in their
Posterities: They left behind them a numerous offspring, the Earth is full of
people, and mankind is now multiplied into multitudes, v. 1. And as the
People, so their wickednesses are multiplied: The more people, the more
sinners: O stupendous ingratitude! God multiplies their offspring, and revives
their memory in the fruit of their loins: For what are Parents of many
Children, but themselves so much the more multiplied; yet these wicked
Wretches, by how much the more God increased and multiplied them in their
Posterity, by so much the more they increased and multiplied their wickedness
against him their Creator: And now their abominations are come to the full, and
they are ripe for destruction.

The Lord exercised Mercies, bowels of Mercies, patience, long-suffering
toward them, waiting upon them many years, Preaching to them by the
Patriarchs, calling them to Repentance, and notwithstanding all the loving
kindnesses, forbearances, patient expectations of a gracious God, ye^ they
remain obstinate, refractory, incorrigible, whereupon the Lord will not suffer
his patience to be abused any longer, his Servants and Ministry to be
contemned, his Holy Spirit to be grieved, v. 7, 8. The Creatures were made for
the service of Man, both he and they should be took away together: Man was the
Lord over the Creatures, and when he was took away, what use would there be of
them, as Chrysostom observes: Man had abused the Creatures over which he had
dominion: Master and Servants both fall together; thus the whole Creation
gro^neth, by reason of man's Apostasy from God. As the Beasts were made for Man,
so they became subject (...), Quod subjiciuntur Contra ingenium naturae suae
agnoscamus naturam Dei quae cogit illa nostris usibus inservire. Pet. Mart.
Poenitentia Dei est Muta^dorum immutabilis ratio. August. Hunc adulterinum and
degenerum pro meo jam agnoscere dedignor. Calv. in Loc. (...) omni die (...).
70 Inter. Seeds vitae, seeds animae and principium intellectus, vo luntatis
affectnum and mo^um.
to vanity and destruction. through Man's iniquity, Romans 8. 20, 22. But this
sharp Sentence God pronounces with a great deal of reluctance, he is said to
repent in this verse, and v. 6. both to repent, and be grieved at his heart:
This is an (...), repentance cannot in a proper sense be attributed to God:
Repentance in God, is the unchangeable disposition of changeable things, as
Augustine observes: God may will a change where he does not change his will.
There Is no change in the Creator, the change is in the Creature; and here we
may see how God takes upon him our affections, and so condescends to our
capacity: As we repent, and are grieved when any thing displeases us, so God
here speaking after the manner of men, is said to repent and grieve: Hence we
may observe what an heinous and abominable thing sin is, that causes God to
grieve. Calvin, on the place, supposes God pleading on this wise: This is not
my work, this is not the man created after mine Image, endowed with such noble
faculties; this adulterous and degenerate world I scorn to own for mine.

But wherein consists the greatness of the sins of the old World, against whom
the Lord threatens destruction?

You have a general charge given in by God himself, v. 5. compared with Genesis 8.
21. It Is said there, The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth: They
were habituated in wickedness generally, both heart and life stark n^ught; they
were gray hair'd in wickedness. and now arrived at the (...), the highest point
and degree of impiety; and the heart, which the Philosophers say is the seat of
life, and Scripture says; It is the seat of the soul, and principle of the
understanding, will, affections and motions, this is depraved, and become the
forge of all abominations: It Is said, Every imagination of the thoughts of his
heart were only evil continually: Of this change in general, the Lord gives a
clear proof by particulars, v. 2. The sons of God saw the daughters of men,
that they were fair, etc. By sons of God, some understand Angels: This was the
conjecture of Tertullian, Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexardrinus, and others: But
Chrysostom urges that Scripture, which to me seems a full confutation of
their opinion, Matthew. 22. 30. In the resurrection, they neither marry nor are
given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven. Others understand by
sons of God, the sons of Princes, and those great Personages that lived in
those days: I shall rather wave these ^xpositions, and concur with Calvin,
Luther, Musculus, Ainsworth, and other solid Commentators, who unanimously, by
Sons of God, understand the Posterity of Seth, such as were the sons of God by
external Profession, the men of the Church of God, and these took the daughters
of men, (i. e.) The Posterity of Cain: The holy Seed mingled themselves with
the profane Seed, they looked at naught (...). Mus. (...). Chrysostom. (...). 70
Interp.
else besides Beauty and satisfaction of ^usts. Beauty was the *object of their
Love: This desire of Beauty was the Harbinger of their ruin. It seems they
took any Women whatsoever, having no regard to goodness, no regard to God, none
to their Parents advice, they made their own choice: Beauty, Lust, Violence,
their own will was the rule they went by, and might prevailed above right:
Violence and power carried all before them, v. 4. some derive the word quasi,
(...), sons of the Earth. This Etymology savors of a Poetical Figment,
therefore I discard it altogether. The word in the Original is Nephilim, it
comes from Naphal, to fall; they were Apo^ates and fell from God, and by reason
of their tyranny and cruelty, caused many to fall before them. It Is said
Haggibburim, they were mighty men. The Caldee calls them Gibbaraja, mighty men:
So Nimrod was Gibbor, mighty, Genesis 10. 8. He hunted souls, he was a monstrous
Tyrant and Persecutor of the Church of God. These men were famous, they had a
great name, but they were famous only for oppression and cruelty; their Will
was their L^w, and their strength and might bore down all before them: They got
power and a name by the Injuries and Persecutions which they exercised upon the
Church of God. Calvin gives a remarkable observation, That it was the Haec
prima fuit mundi nobilitas nequis longa and famosa imaginum serie nimium sibi
placeat, Calv. in Loc.
first Nobility of the world, That no one should too much please himself with a
long and famous series of Images of Ancestors. And Luther gives another note,
writing of the fame of these wicked Giants, and the renown they got by their
Villainies; he compares them to the Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops, who would not
be called by those names they deserved; they would not be called Tyrants,
Impious, Qui salutantur principes and regna tenerent non Tyranni, etc. sed
clementissimi, sanctissimi, reverendissimi appellantur. Luth.
Sacrilegious, but Merciful, Holy, Reverend: So the renown of these Giants is
mentioned for their Villainies. They were famous Oppressors, cruel
Blood-suckers, wicked Tyrants. And thus you have a draught of the old World set
before your view: Their crying sins were profaneness of heart and life,
promiscuous Marriages, Polygamies, contempt of God and Parents, Oppressions,
Cruelty and Persecution: They had many warnings from God, many reproofs and
admonitions by the Ministry of the Patriarchs, and all in vain, wherefore the
Lord threatens in the Text, My spirit shall not always strive, etc.

Which words are a Sermon Preached by the great God of Heaven and Earth, to the
old wicked World; which Sermon is a Pattern, and the Archetipam for Ministers to
Preach by, and consists of Judgment and Mercy.

1. Here Is a dreadful Judgment, or a sad Commination of Divis. 1. A Judgment
and the reason thereof.
the heaviest punishment that can befall a people on this side Hell: My spirit,
etc.

2. Here Is a strong reason to enforce: For that he also is flesh. In the Mercy
contained in the Text.

1. You have something employed: Its said, Not always, implying, that it has
striven some time, and a long time too: In Justice God might cut sinners
asunder in the midst of their rebellions, and send them to Hell: But O the
infinite mercy and patience of God thus to strive at all, and to strive so long
with rebellious sinners.

2. Here Is a mercy expressed: It Is wrote in such legible Characters, 2. A Mercy.
as he that runs may read it: Yet his days, etc.

The words have need of a Paraphrase: I shall open them briefly in their order.
By Spirit, Ainsworth understands that holy Spirit of Christ, by which he
Preached in the Patriarchs, and especially in Noah, to the disobedient spirits
of the old World, and exhorted them by the Fathers to amend their lives; so I
take the Lo-iiddon. Non vaginabit Pagninus and Grotius. (...). 70. Lo-jadon.
sense to be: It follows, Shall not strive. The 70 read it, My spirit shall
not abide: But this I take not to be the meaning: the word has many
significations; it signifies, to judge, to chide and dispute: As if the Spirit
of God should say, I have set Judges over you, I have chid you, reproved you,
argued the case with you, sent my servants, Noah, Enoch, Methuselah, exhorting
you to come and repent, but you are incorrigible, impenitent, you are never the
better, notwithstanding all my patience, forbearance, waiting on you, trying
you, therefore now my spirit shall no longer strive with you, I will take no
more pains with you, I will dispute the case no longer, but send a Deluge to
decide the controversy: And so I understand the words.

In seculum, so the 70 read it, (...). Here you may see an (...) Chrysostom.
Abyss of kindness to mankind: So Chrysostom: That the Spirit has ever
strove with any, is a great mercy: But if the Spirit strive by Messengers,
rising early, and going to bed late, and by its motions and whispers, if the
Spirit be still resisted and abused, it will leave striving, and leave a people
inexcusable. Luther speaking of this Text, says, This was a public Sermon,
preached in a Fuit publica concio in publica Synodo proposita. Luth.
public Assembly: When those that were Gods Messengers spent their spirts in
vain, and saw that the people were desperate, past all hopes of reclaiming,
they let them alone to take their course, and to be filled with their own ways.

Then here is a Reason given, For that he also is flesh: The word sets forth the
corrupt nature of mankind, and is here put by way of opposition unto the
Spirit: It is the same with Animalis, or Conqueritur Deus tantopere turbatu^
esse ordinem d^se positum ut image sua in carnem transformata esset, Calv.
Centum and viginti annos si fo^te conver^antur. Called: Paraph:
Carnalis homo. Man that was created after the Image of God, has defaced that
Image, has corrupted his way, and is become fleshly. This God complains of,
That the order which he put is inverted, and his Image transformed into flesh,
as Judicious Calvin observes.

Lastly, Here Is a gracious reprieval and space allowed for repentance: Yet his
days, etc. This is not to be understood as if an hundred and twenty years were
the limited term of years for mankind to live in this world: It Is apparent,
that many after the Flood lived longer: But the meaning is, that an hundred and
twenty years shall be given them, if happily they be converted. This space God
allows them for repentance, and they had Noah a Preacher of righteousness, and
they saw the Ark a building, and every stroke stricken: The building of the Ark
should have been a Monitor of repentance; this was great and wonderful
long-suffering, as we read, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. By which he went and preached
unto the spirits in prison, which sometime were disobedient, when once the
long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah.

The words thus opened, contain two fundamental Doctrines.

1. That it is a most dreadful judgment upon a people, when the Spirit of God
refuses to strive any longer with them.

2. That it is an exceeding great mercy to a people, when the Lord vouchsafes
them time and space for repentance.

I resume the first, and I shall cast the Heads of my Meditations Method of
handling the Doctrine.
into this plain and familiar method.

1. I shall assert the truth of the Doctrine from Scripture Testimonies.

2. I shall particularly represent unto you how the Spirit may be said to
strive with man.

3. I shall enquire into the Grounds and Reasons for confirmation of the truth.

And lastly, Conclude with particular Application unto our selves.

1. To prosecute the first Head propounded, time would fail me 1. The Doctrine
proved by Scripture Testimony.
in Scripture Quotations; but I shall gather sparingly from so great a cloud of
Witnesses, mentioning some select Proofs, and leaving the rest to be supplied
in your Meditations.

Now that this is so great a Judgment, for the Spirit of God to leave striving
with a people, may be exemplified in several persons, recorded in Scripture as
signal Spectacles of Divine vengeance to Posterity. The Lord spared Sodom and
Gomorrah a long time: Abraham undertakes, though dust and ashes, to intercede
for them. He entreats, That if fifty righteous persons be found there, that
they may not be destroyed: His request is granted, he abates five of fifty, and
then comes down to forty, after that to thirty, from thirty to twenty, and at
last to ten; and it is to be observed, that God never left off granting, till
Abraham left off begging: They had good Lot to reprove and exhort them, and
they vexed his righteous soul day by day with their unclean conversation; he
spent his spirits, his counsels, admonitions, all in vain: Now God will spare
them no longer, the Angel delivered Lot from them, and as soon as ever he was
gone, the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah with Fire and Brimstone, Genesis 19.
24, 25. The Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the
Lord out of Heaven, and he over-threw those cities and all the plain, and all
the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground. The Lord
waited a long time upon Jerusalem, sending his Prophets, and warning them; he
puts them in remembrance of his exemplary Judgments upon others, Jer. 7. 13. I
spoke unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not; and I called
you, but you answered not, therefore I will do to this house, etc. as I have
done to Shiloh: He expostulates the case with them, Jer. 13. 27. I have seen
thine adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdness of thy whoredom, and thine
abominations on the hills in the fields: Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem, Will thou
not be made clean? When shall it once be? and Ezekiel. 18. 32. I have no pleasure
in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God, wherefore turn your selves
and live ye: The House of Israel was the Vineyard upon which God had bestowed
so much pains, cost and charges, Isa. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. My well-beloved has a
vineyard in a very fruitful Haec omnia usu venisse populo Judaico, cum in
Babylonica tum in Romana captivitate, testantur palam Hist^riae, fieri hoc
denique quotidie testatur experientia. Timeamus ergo Dominum, simusque palmites
fructiferi, ne post hanc vitam eliam tradamur igni sempiterno. B^lling.
hill, and he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it
with the choicest vine, and built a Tower in the midst of it, and also made a
wine press therein; and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it
brought forth wild grapes, etc. But all is labor lost, v. 5, 6. And now go
too, I will tell you what I will do with my vineyard: I will take away the
hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up, and break down the wall thereof, and
it shall be trodden, and I will lay it waste; it shall not be pruned nor dug,
but there shall come up briars and thorns: I also will command the clouds that
they rain no rain upon it. *They had many choice spirited Prophets, Isaiah,
Hosea and Jeremiah, etc. They were knotty pieces, wherefore the Lord hewed them
by the Prophets, Hos. 6. 5. Therefore I have hewed them by the Prophets, I have
slain them by the words of my mouth, and thy judgments are as the light that
goes forth. They had warning upon warning, Prophet after Prophet; yet no more
hope of doing them any good and working reformation upon them, then of changing
the Aethiopians skin, or Leopards spots, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change
his skin? or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, who are
accustomed to do evil. Now let us hear the doom, God will smite them no more,
Isa. 1. 5. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more;
the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. God will not let them fare
the better for those righteous persons that are amongst them, who are Advocates
for them, Jer. 15. 1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me; yet my mind
could not be toward this people, cast them out of my sight, and let them go
forth: So Ezekiel. 14. 20. Though Noah, Daniel and Job were in it, as I live,
says the Lord God, they shall deliver neither son nor daughter, they shall but
deliver their own souls by their righteousness. Further, God will straiten the
spirit of Prayer in his Prophets, Jer. 7. 14, 15, 16. Therefore will I do unto
this house, which is called by name, as I have done to Shiloh; and I will cast
you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole seed
of Ephraim: Wherefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor
prayer for them, neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee.
Ephraim he is obstinate and incorrigible, I will strive no longer by reproofs
and admonitions, let him be filled with his own ways: He is given to idols, let
him alone. Hos. 4. 17. Luseris opera^ fi ad poenitentia^ invitaris, Ephraim
Gravissima est poena relinqui a Deo. Vatab.
It Is a dreadful Judgment upon Jerusalem, Luke 19. 42. If thou had known,
even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace,
but now they are hid from thine eyes. This is further employed in the parable of
the fruitless fig tree, Luke 13. 7. Behold, these three years I come, seeking
fruit on this fig tree and find none, cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground?
All these are Types and Examples, and as so many warning-pieces unto us. God
waited a long time upon them, woed and entreated them by the Ministry of his
Messengers to come in and repent; but they (as much as in them lay) tried
conclusions with God, and ungrateful wretches as they were, strove to tire out
and weary the patience and long-suffering of God, wherefore his spirit would
strive no longer with them; and when Gods spirit will no longer strive, what is
the sequel, but ruin and destruction?

Let us reflect upon our selves, in Isreal's glass we may behold our own faces,
and they will gather blackness.

The inferences we should make are set down, Luke 13. 5. I tell you nay, but
except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: And Amos 4. 12. Therefore thus
will I do unto thee, O Israel, and because I will do thus unto thee, prepare to
meet thy God, O Israel: Likewise I will add, Zeph. 2. 1. Gather your selves
together, yea, gather together, O nation not desired, before the decree bring
forth, etc.

Some Reverend Divines have given three Signs of night.

1. When the shadows grow long, when wild Beasts go abroad, 1. When shadows
grow long, it is a sign of night.
and when Laborers go to their rest. Now he is a mere stranger in Israel, who
knows not how of late years Shadows, fruitless and ridiculous Ceremonies, have
been advanced and stickled for, and violence has been offered unto many tender
consciences: Hinc illae lachrymae: Many godly Ministers, with their Families,
have been ruined for nonconformity; and others have been forced to leave the
Land of their Nativity, when as in the mean time the fundamentals of Religion,
Faith, Repentance, Love, Regeneration were neglected, and much discountenanced,
and the zealous Preachers of these Doctrines, stigmatized with the odious
nicknames of Puritans, which in a proper sense, is that proud Heresy of
Novatus, as Eusebius records in his Ecclesiastical History: But Eusebius. Eccles.
Hist.
through the iniquity of the time, was used as a brand of Infamy to reproach
the most strict and conscientious Professors.

Secondly, Wild Beasts went abroad: Then those of the Tyrannical 2. Wild
Beasts go abroad.
Prelacy persecuted the old Puritans, under the name of non-Conformists: May
such persons never range again, under more plausible names and specious
pretenses; or more covertly, like wolves but in sheeps clothing. I wish the
Jesuit may appear barefaced, that we may know him, and beware of him: It is a
plain Jesuitical design, to set Brethren together by the ears in circumstantial
matters, and so make them almost dispute and jangle away their Religion. I wish
what was blameworthy amongst some, be not Preached and practiced by others
that succeed them; though names may differ, yet if the same thing remain, it is
to the same purpose. Melancton was desirous to die for two reasons: One was,
That he might be with Christ: The other was, That he might be freed from those
bitter contentions that were in the Church in those days.

Thirdly, And likewise Laborers go to their rest: It is to be observed, 3.
Laborers go to their rest.
that within few years as many able men, both of the Magistracy and Ministry,
have gone to their long home (as the oldest alive can remember in a greater
space of time) so true is that of the Prophet, Isa. 57. 1. The righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous is taken from the evil to come. Methuselah, that
godly longest lived Patriarch, dyed but the year before the Flood came: His
name signifies a Messenger of death: His death did presage the Flood. Thus
Austin was taken away by death, immediately before the sacking of Hippo, where
he lived. Pareus dyed a little before the taking of Heidelbergh. Luther a
little before the Germane Wars: And we have many Reverend Preachers, the
Chariots and Horsemen of Israel (it were easy to give you a Catalogue of
them) who of late years have gone to their Graves in peace. By all their
Ministeries Gods Spirit has stroven with us, and waited for our amendment of
life: We read Histories, that we may not be subjects of History. Herodotus
tells us of an Inscription upon Legimus historias, ne ipsi fiamus historiae.
(...). Herodo.
Senacheribs Statue, Look upon me, and learn to be righteous. Peruse the sacred
Annals, read the History of the old World, the destruction of Jerusalem, the
casting off the Jews to this very day; read the History of the Church in all
ages, acquaint your selves with the History of Germany and Palatinate of later
years, and be not like many Travelers, who are better acquainted with foreign
Lands, then that of their Nativity. Take notice of the acts, the strange acts
of the Lord in our L^nd: Has not God, to this very day, continued many
faithful Laborers in his Vineyard, notwithstanding some of the Prelatical party
suppressed (what lay in them) powerful Preaching: yet like the Palm Tree, The
more it is pressed down, the more it grows; o^ like Pharachs afflicting the
Is^aelites, Quo magis deprimitur, eo magis emergit.
the more he afflicted them, the more they multiplied, and notwithstanding the
subtle practices of many, what name to give them, I cannot tell, for they know
not what names to give themselves, neither know they what they would have: I
say, notwithstanding their Stentorean voices, crying down Ministry, Sabboths,
Ordinances, yet God graciously confirms them all in their liberty and purity;
and if we improve not these prices of Grace put into our hands, if we hearken
not to the calls and whispers of the Spirit of God, if we neglect and despise
this great salvation tendered in the Gospel, the Spirit of God will be gone, and
take the Ordinances from us, or us from the Ordinances. The Spirit will
threaten this dreadful judgment in the Text, to strive no longer: And that
people are under a most dreadful Judgment, with whom the Spirit of God will
not strive any longer: That Commin^tion runs parallel with this of my Text,
Hos. 9. 12. Though they bring up their children, yet will I bereave them, that
there shall not be a man left; yea, woe also to them when I depart from them.

And thus I have dispatched the first Head propounded, namely, The assertion of
the truth of the Doctrine from Scripture Te^^imonies: I proceed in the second
place, according to my method propounded, to make a particular representation
unto you, how the Spirit may be said to strive with man.

The Spirit of God, though it be a most free agent, blows 2. The Spirit of
God strives seven ways.
when and where it lists; yet from experience we may discern, that it usually
strives some of these seven ways, viz. By its motions and whispers. By the
Ministry of the Word. By the checks and convictions of conscience. By the
tenders of mercies. By the exercise of patience and long-suffering, by
inflicting of s^gnal, exemplary judgments upon others: And if none of these
will prevail by the execution of personal judgments upon our selves: Thus
ordinarily upon a ground of experience, we may discern the several strivings of
the Spirit.

For the enlargement of these particulars. 1. The Spirit of God 1. The Spirit
of God strives by its motions and inspirations.
strives by its motions, inspirations, and sweet whispers, when we hear, as it
were, a voice behind us, telling us, This is the way, walk therein: Thus the
Spirit of God infuseth holy thoughts, holy motions into us: We have not one
good thought, we cannot of our selves think one good thought without the
inspiration of the holy Spirit. The Spirit of God rebukes sin in us, quickens
us to our duties, moves, woes, beseeches us to try conclusions no longer with
God, nor to offer any violence to the Spirit of Grace, but to cherish its sweet
motions, and hearken to its whispers. We may know the Spirit of God from the
spirit of delusion the same way we discern good Gold from counterfeit, by
examining them by the touchstone of the word of God, Isa. 8. 20. To the Law,
and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them: The Spirit of God directs the^e to the rule of the
word: It is not any rule that will serve, but it is this rule, Gal. 6. 16. As
many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon the
Israel of God. But the Spirit of error directs thee to devised ways, it
counsels thee to be wise above what is written. The word of God is the just
Standard, we must not add to it, nor take away from it, if we would escape
that dreadful curse, Rev. 22. 18. I testify to every one that hears the
words of the Prophecy of this Book, if any man shall add unto these things,
God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book: And if any
man shall take away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take
away his part out of the Book of life, and out of the holy City, and from the
things which are written in this Book. There be many that pretend to voices,
dreams, revel^tions, now adays, they would have a Platonic Christ, and fain a
teaching of the Spirit besides, and contrary to the written word: Many of them
are led like Absoloms followers, in their simplicity, knowing nothing for whom
we must pray, as the Prophet did for his Servant, Lord open their eyes that
they may see, and let them read with fear and trembling, that dreadful Anathema
from the written word, Gal. 1. 8. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any
other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed: I Will be your remembrancer of one story, 1 King. 13. 17, 18, 19. It
was said unto me by the word of the Lord, Thou shall eat no bread, nor drink
wa^er t^ere, nor turn again to go by the way that thou came: He said unto
him, I am a Prophet also, as thou art; and the Angel spoke unto me, saying,
Bring him back with thee into thine house, that he may eat bread and drink
water, but he lied unto him: So he went back, and did eat bread in his house,
and drank water. The man of God had a sure word of Prophecy, the word of God
was in his mouth; yet he must be harkening after a new devised word, a new
pretended light or revelation from the old Prophet, he forsook the true word,
and believed a lying word; what a sad Catastrophe befell him, v. 24. When he
was gone, a Lion met him by the way and slew him, and his carcass was cast in
the way, and the 1 King. 13. 24.
Ass stood by it, and the Lion stood also by the carcass: Yet notwithstanding
extraordinary Revelations, Dreams, Visions, Ecstasies, Enthusiasms, though they
have ceased long ago, and we have no warrant to expect them, because we are to
keep close to the revealed will of God written in his holy word: Yet I say, we
are to take notice of the sweet motions and spiritual illapses upon our souls:
Though Prophesies cease, yet there are manifold discoveries of Christ unto the
soul: The secret and intimate acquaintance of the soul with Christ, the souls
ravishing consolations, the breaking in and flashes of heavenly light upon the
soul, the heavings, aspirings, and harmony of the heart with Christ, experience
of mercies, issues out of temptations, protections of Angels; all these are
Heavenly, constant revelations out of the Word of God, manifested to the souls
of the faithful by the Spirit, according to the word: Let us therefore embrace
and cherish the gracious motions of the Spirit of God: Where the spirit of
Grace is in the heart, it cannot be idle or lie dead, but it is exceeding
operative. The Spirit gives light to teach thee, it gives heat to warm and
comfort thee: It is a spirit of burning and purging, to burn up the stubble of
corruption, to purge out thy sins: It is a spirit of refining and purifying:
Therefore when the spirit of God strives by its gracious motions, inlightning,
purging, inflaming, comforting, wooing thee to walk closely with God, bidding
thee beware of wounding thy conscience, of resisting the light, and going
against known truth: O beware of grieving this holy Spirit of God! Do not, O do
not force the spirit to depart sadded and grieved from thee. This is one way
whereby the spirit strives, viz. by its motions and whispers.

A second way whereby the spirit strives, is by the Ministry of 2. The Spirit
strives by the Ministry of the Word.
the word: It is said, Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any
man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with
him, and he with me. The Spirit of God knocks at the doors of your hearts by
the hammer of the word: The spirit knocks louder and louder, and the Ministers
are to cry aloud and spare not, Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy
voice like a trumpet, and show thy people their transgressions, and the House
of Jacob their sins. The Lord calls upon us by every Sermon we hear: Why will
ye die? Why will ye bolt the door against the frequent knockings of the Spirit
of God? The Spirit of God has strove with some of us ten years, some twenty,
some fo^ty, some sixty years: How many years have we lived under the sound of
the Gospel, having heard the voice of the Turtle crying in our Land? How many
powerful Preachers have spent their strength, their breath, wasted their
spirits, wooing, entreating, beseeching us to be reconciled unto God? many of
them are gone to their rest, their works praise them in the Gate, their memory
is blessed, and their name is like sweet Ointment poured forth: How many are
yet alive to this day, who Preach Jesus Christ faithfully and experimentally?
how do they pray and wrestle with God? how zealously do they preach? how many
admonitions, reproofs, exhortations, warnings, do they give us? And if we will
not take warning, the Ministers shall deliver their own souls, and our blood
will be upon our own heads; and the time will come, when it shall be known that
we have had Prophets amongst us. I shall make an allusion to that Scripture,
Deuteronomy. 20. 11, 12, 13. It shall be if it make thee answer of peace and open unto
thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein shall be
tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee: And if it will make no peace
with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shall besiege it; and when
the Lord has delivered it into thy hands, thou shall smite every male thereof
with the edge of the sword. Just so God proclaims peace, and the Ministers are
Ambassadors of Peace, and deliver their commission after this manner, Into
whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to Luke 10. 5, 6.
this house: And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it;
if not, it shall turn to you again. The Lord now bese^^eth your hearts by the
Ministry of the word, and offers you peace and reconciliation; if you will
submit unto his Scepter, and cast down your rebellious weapons, the Lord will
have mercy on you; but if you hold out the flag of defiance, and will not come
in to Jesus Christ, what remains but utter ruin and destruction? Every Sermon
you hear, is like the water of Jealousy, when he has made her to drink the
water, then it shall come to pass, that if she be defiled, and has done
trespass against her Husband, that the water that causes the curse shall enter
into her, and become bitter, Number. 27. 28.
and her belly shall swell, etc. but if she be not defiled, she shall be free:
When the word is received into an honest and good heart, it does it good and
makes it fruitful, when into a corrupt heart it rots it, and makes it worse.
Its an observation of a Reverend Divine, That it is an indignity beyond all
apprehension to the spirit of Dr. Ed: Reynolds,
grace, when we suffer him to wait daily at our Bethesda's, our houses of
mercy, and all in vain, to spend his sacred breath in the Ministry of
reconciliation, in doubling and redoubling his requests unto our souls, that we
would be content to be saved: Yet all this while we harden our hearts, and stop
our ears, and set up the pride and stoutness of our own reasonings, till we
even weary the spirit of God, chide him away, and cause him to depart sadded
and grieved from us. O my Brethren, despise not prophesying, undervalue not the
Ministry of ^ Thessalonians. 5. 20.
reconciliation: An indignity or affront offered unto Christ's Messengers,
Christ takes it as done unto himself, Luke 10. 16. He that hears you, hears
me, and he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me. Be then exho^ted to set an high price of the
Gospel, and make much of the motions of Gods holy Spirit in the Ministry of the
word.

Ursin relates, in his Preface to his Catechism, That those godly Vrsini Praf.
Catech.
Protestants that fled beyond the Seas for their Religion, in that Marian
quinquenium of Persecution, ackno^ledged, That that great innundation of misery
came justly upon them, for the neglect and unprofitableness under the Gospel in
King Edward the sixth's days. And if they were so severely punished for a few
years unprofitableness under the means of Grace, of how much forer punishment
shall we of England be accounted worthy, who well nigh a hundred years have
enjoyed the purity of the Gospel, and yet we are barren and unfruitful: Let us
every one acknowledge his own unfruitfulness, that notwithstanding fatning
Ordinances we have lean souls; and let us every one pray in particular, Lord,
lay not my unfruitfulness under the Ministry unto my charge. The Spirit will
not always strive and wait at those Bethesda's. God may in judgment say, I
will take this kingdom from you, and give it to others who will bring forth the
fruits of it: I will no more suffer my servants to be abused, no more suffer my
word to be despised; I Will rain Mann^h no more round about your tents, if you
have so cheap an esteem of it. Let us all deprecate this dreadful judgment
which the P^ophet Amos threatens, Amos 8. 1. Behold a basket of summer-fruits,
and he said, What see thou? and I said, A basket of summer-fruit; then said
the Lord unto me, The end is come upon my people of Israel, I will not again
pass by them any more: This is the second way whereby the Spirit ^^rives, viz.
By the Ministry of the word.

A third way whereby the Spirit strives, is by the checks and 3. The Spirit
strives by the conviction of conscience. Multi habent scientia^, pauci vero
conscientiam. Bernard de interiore domo. In cord puritatem, In ore veritatem,
In action rectitudinem. Bern. de interdomo.
convictions of conscience. Bernard makes a sad complaint in that excellent
Tract, De interiori domo: Many have knowledge, but few have conscience. He lays
down there three choice qualifications of a good conscience, To have sincerity
in the heart, truth in the mouth, and rectitude in the conversation: These are
distinguishing Notes for trial and examination. Now the spirit of God strives
by the checks of conscience: Conscience flew in Judas his face, a legal qualm
came upon him, I can call it no better: It sprang from the horror of the wrath
of God, and Hell fire flashing in his face: It was no Evangelical repentance:
Judas got thirty pieces of silver, but conscience forced him to a restitution.
Conscience is a reflect act, it looks back upon a man's self: It is like a
Musket overcharged, it will recoil upon a sinner: It is like a Blood-hound
that will follow by the scent, and will never leave searching till it has
descryed the Delinquent.

Wherefore Brethren, let us take special notice of the checks of Conscience:
Let us keep faith and a good conscience joined, as the Apostle exhorts: Let us
not break Gods link. Let Paul's (Herein I exercise) be our continual Monitor,
Acts 24. 16. Herein I exercise my self, to have a conscience void of offense
toward God and toward men. A Christian may have a pardon in the Court of the
Judge, and yet not discern it in the Court of his conscience: In case of
desertions, withdrawings and suspensions of Gods gracious countenance, a
Christian may not be able to apprehend Gods reconciled countenance; but in this
case there are encouraging, supporting promises, Isa. 50. 10. Who is among you
that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in
darkness and has no light? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God: We read likewise Psalm. 97. 11. Light is sown for the righteous,
and gladness for the upright in heart: and Psalm. 112. 4. Unto the upright there
arises light in the darkness: God is gracious and full of compassion, and
righteous in all his ways: But what shall we say when a sinner is condemned
both in the Court of the Judge, and of conscience? how great is that
condemnation? Spira had a check of conscience, and a voice forbidding him, O do
it not! He paid full dear for the wounding of his conscience. It Is an
observatian of an excellent Divine, in a precious Book, called, Moses
self-denial: We had better (says he) have all the world Mr. Buroughs Moses
Selfdenyal.
cast shame in our faces, and upbraid us, then that our consciences should cast
dirt into them: It Is better to endure all the frowns and anger of the greatest
Potentates on earth, then to have an angry conscience within our breast: It Is
better to want all the pleasures that earth can afford, then to loose the
delights which a good conscience will bring in: O let the Bird in the breast be
always kept singing, whatsoever we suffer for it! We all subscribe to this in
The^, whether we do thus in Hypothesi, let us examine our awakned Conscience:
Let us every one deal impartially with his own conscience: All our hearts are
naked unto him, with whom we have to deal. Let every one pray, study, confer
for the information of his own Conscience; nothing may be done doubtingly, for
that is not of faith, and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. In the whole
course of our lives, let us bring all our actions to the rule of the word of
God, and let that decide the controversy.

Here Is a fourfold infallible rule. Let A fourfold rule for the examining of
conscience.


1. Every one be persuaded in his own heart.

2. Let us abstain from all appearances of evil.

3. Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

4. Hold faith and a good conscience.

Let us keep close to these known, plain rules, discarding carnal policy,
carnal interests, which are the devised ways of men, and then let our
resolution concur with Luthers: I bear this title, I Hu^c gero titulum, cedo
nulli. Luth.
yield to none.

Now then when the Spirit thus strives by the checks of conscience, let us not
resist nor stifle those motions, let us not shut our eyes against known light
breaking in upon us. This is a third way whereby the Spirit strives, viz. by
the checkings and convictions of Conscience.

A fourth way wereby the Spirit strives, is, by the tenders of 4. The Spirit
strives by the tender of mercies.
mercies and loving kindness, openings of bowels of compassion toward poor
sinners: These mercies are tender mercies, and there is a multitude of them,
Psalm. 51. 1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindeness,
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions:
They are the sounding of Bowels, the fountain opened, Zech. 13. 1. In that day
there shall be a fountain opened to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. Here is a free tender of Jesus
Christ, and the riches of his mercies; The spirit makes many Proclamations and
Invitations to come in to Jesus Christ: One is, Isa: 55. 1. Ho, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money: come ye, buy and
eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk without money, and without price: A second
is, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. A third invitation is, John 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him
come unto me and drink. Rev. 22. 17. A 4th is, The Spirit and the Bride say,
Come, and let him that hears, say, Come, and let him that is athirst, come,
and whosoever will, let him take of the waters of life freely. The l^st I shall
name, is the most prevalent obtestation in all the world, Romans 12. 1. I beseech
you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.
Put forth thy labor to make a Catalogue of the mercies of God, they exceed all
Arithmetic; measure them, their dimensions are infinite. The Apostle makes
four dimensions, breadth, length, height, and depth, Ephesians. 3. 18. The mercies
of God reach to the Heavens, his faithfulness to the clouds: All the paths of
the Lord are mercy and truth, to such as keep his covenant and testimonies,
Psalm. 25. 10. His mercy is from everlasting to everlasting, his mercy is above
all his works. Had we the tongues of Men and Angels, we could not sufficiently
set forth the mercies of God; yet let us summon up all the members of our
Bodies, and all the faculties of our Souls, to praise the Lord for his mercies,
and tell the wonders which he has done for the children of men. How many
National mercies and signal deliverances have we received, and we yet are in
peace, even to a miracle of mercies, our fleece is yet dry, whilst others are
wet with blood? Thousands have fallen beside us, and ten thousand at our right
hands, and no evil comes nigh our dwelling.

What variety of personal mercies do we receive? How many deliverances have we
received from the Grave, being ready to fall in, and yet we are reprieved, and
have space to repent? How many deliverances have we received from Fire, Water,
Pobbers, unreasonable men, and all the plots and projects of Malignant Enemies
unto the Gospel of Jesus Christ? Further, What mercies do we receive for our
souls? Do we not enjoy Sabbaths, Ordinances, public assemblies? Blessed be
God, our eyes yet behold our teachers, and our Gospel is not driven into
corners: How many mercies, Quot misericordiae tot ora. Isa. 30. 20.
so many mouths: All these mercies, have so many mouths calling upon us to
thankfulness and amendment of life. Now the holy Spirit of God strives by all
these mercies to win us to repentance: It is our obliged duty, as God strives
with us in mercy and loving kindness, so we should strive with him in our
return of thankfulness and reformation of our lives: Every mercy should be a
Lord-stone, to draw us up to Christ: Every mercy should be as a footstool, to
raise us up higher to Heaven: Every mercy should be as a Looking-glass, wherein
we should behold the visible resemblances of the loving kindness of God. O
then, take heed of neglecting the voice of the Spirit, when he calls by
mercies: For if he be neglected when he speaks in the sweet music of mercies,
he will speak terrible things in the thunder of judgment. 5. The Spirit
strives by the exercise of patience.


5. Yet further, The Spirit strives by the exercise of patience, forbearance
and long sufferance toward sinners: God is not willing that any should perish,
but that they should repent and be saved: O the unwearied patience of a
merciful Father! How long did God bear with the old* world, with the Amorites,
Jerusalem? The Lord waits to be gracious, he delights in mercy: It is his
nature to be merciful: Judgment is called his act, his strange act, Isa. 28.
21. The Lord will rise up, as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth, as in the
valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work, and bring to pass
his act, his strange act: This is to show his unwillingne^s to punish sinners
till needs must: He is said to hyer a Razour to shave them, as if he had none
of his own, Isa. 7. 20. In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that
is hired, namely, by them beyond the river, by the King of Assyria, the head
and the hair of the feet: See and admire the wonderful patience of God, though
we provoke him every day: O wonderful patience! that the Drunkard dies not in
his vomit, that the Swearers and Blasphemers tongues fall not presently out of
their heads: Still the Lord waits knocking at the doors of our hearts,
exercising infinite patience and forbearance toward poor sinners: He whets his
Sword and bends his Bow, Psalm. 7. 12. He might cleave us asunder presently, but
there we have experience of singular patience: God was but six days in creating
the world; yet (as Chrysostom observes) he was seven days in encompassing the
Walls of Jericho, before he destroyed it: Patientia laesa fit furor.
but let us take heed of abusing patience; patience abused, breaks forth into
extremity of fury: Mercy pleads, I am slighted, I am abused, I will no more
have mercy on them; then patience interposeth, I will wait longer, but patience
being abused, it pleads, I will be no longer tired out nor abused: At last
comes long-suffering, I am gentle and merciful, and I will wait longer and
longer; but if long-suffering be wearied out, What will plead for us? What will
become of us? The long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, whilst the
Ark was preparing, as the apostle Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 3. 20. 2 Pet. 3. 9. The
Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some men count slackness) but is
long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance: We should account the long-suffering of the Lord our
salvation, Romans 2. 4. or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and
forbearance and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness of the Lord
leads thee to repentance.

6. The Spirit of God strives by many signal exemplary Judgments 6. The spirit
strives by many signal and exempla^y Judgments inflicted upon others.
inflicted upon others: We have read of the Wars of Jerusalem in Josephus, but
more pathetically set forth in the ^ook of the Lamentations: We have read of
the heavy Judgments of God upon Germany and Palatinate: We have read of the
barbarous butcherings of those blood-sucking Caribals in Ireland, upon the
Protestant Party: We hear now of a Sword letting out blood in Scotland, good
blood and bad blood being let out together, the Sword destroying one as well as
another: We hear of sad breaches and heart-divisions widened more and more in
England: You hear a general complaint of poverty and decay of Trade: By all
these Judgments the Spirit of God strives with us, and woes us to repentance,
to Dan. 4. 27.
break off our sins by repentance, that our tranquillity may be lengthned, and
that there may be a healing of our errors. The use we are to make, is that of
the Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 6. Now these things were our examples to the intent we
should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted: Let us not pass
uncharitable censures upon others, as greater sinners, for greater sufferings,
but remember, that except we Luke 13. 5.
repent, we shall likewise perish.

Seventhly and lastly, Let us consider how the Spirit of God 7 The Spirit
strives by personal judgments.
strives by personal Judgments inslicted on our selves: There is a Judgment
of chastisement, and a Judgment of revenge. God sends Judgments by way of
revenge upon the wicked of the World, but by way of chastisement unto his own
children: When God takes away thy riches, and other outward comforts, as a
child, a wife, etc. by these the Spirit of God strives with thee, and sends
thee to God to inquire into the cause, and walk more closely and humbly with
God; and thy duty is, to pray to God to teach thee what thou understandest not:
If God send thee a sore disease, a grievous pain; suppose the Stone, Strangury,
Colic, etc. by all these the Spirit strives with thee, and reads thee a
Lecture of thy Mortality, and warns thee to make a serious and speedy
preparation for death. Afflictions are sent by God, as Scullions, to scour away
the rust and canker of Gods children: They are the Shepherds Dogs, to bring
home the straying Sheep: Luther says, Afflictions teach us to understand
Scripture: Where God teaches with the rod, there he bestows a choice
blessing, Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and
teach him out of thy Law. God sends affliction on an errand: Go affliction,
take down such a man's pride: go, awaken another from his security: Affliction
is Gods Ordinance, and with the same hand he gives Jesus Christ, that he gives
correction to his own children: Thus the Spirit strives by personal judgments
and afflictions.

The use we must continually make, is Heb. 12. 5, 6. My son, despise not thou
the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom
the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives:
Hence says the Apo^^le, Romans 5. 3. We glory in tribulation, knowing that
tribulation works patience, and Jam^s 1. 2. My brethren count it all joy,
when ye fall into diverse temptations: The rod has a voice, and we are called
upon Mich. 6. 9. Hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.

Thus you have heard how Gods Spirit strives, by its motions, by the Ministry
of the Word, the checks of Conscience, tenders of Mercy, exercise of patience
and long-suffering, inslicting of exemplary and signal Judgments upon others,
and personal Judgments upon our selves. Now the Lord give us his Grace, and
teach us to make much of, and cherish the strivings of his holy Spirit, and let
us all deprecate the fearful judgment in the Text, My spirit shall no longer
strive with you.

Judgment and Mercy.
Set forth from Genesis 6. 3.
HAving dispatched those two Particulars, according to my Sermon. 3. at St. Mary's
Oxon, Jan. 19. 1651. Three Reasons of the Doctrine. Reas. 1. From the Text,
because man is flesh.
method propounded in the unfolding of this Text: In the third place, I am to
enquire into the Grounds and ^easons for the further confirmation of the Point.
Amongst many that may be given, I shall reduce the Reasons of the Text into
three Heads.

The first shall be drawn from the very reason in the Text, for that he also is
flesh. Man is corrupted by reason of sin. Man was created, statu integro, in
integrity and innocence, resembling the Image of God in righteousness and
holiness; but now statu corrupto, by reason of Adams prevarication, he became
depraved in the faculties of his soul, and all the members of his body, and
they are become instruments unto wickedness. The Holy Ghost sets forth sinful
man in a full Character, Psalm. 14. 1, 2, 3. The fool has said in his heart,
there is no God, they are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is
none that does good. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the children of
men, to see whether there were any that did understand and seek God: They are
all gone aside, they are become altogether filthy, there is none that does
good, no not one. Suppose we heard the Lord thus expostulating the case: Is
this man? Is this he that I advanced to the highest rank of visible Creatures?
whom I created after mine own Image, whom I endowed with noble faculties, an
understanding, the bright luminary of the soul to know his Maker, and a will to
obey him: Is he now become flesh, fleshly in his imagination, fleshly minded?
Does he walk after the flesh, minding the things of the flesh? Has he thus
turned Apostate, and rebelled against his Lord and Maker? This charge being all
very true, wherefore should I have any more to do with him? wherefore should my
Spirit strive with vile sinful flesh? Thus God might plead, and in judgment
withdraw the strivings of his holy Spirit: Betwixt the spirit and the flesh,
what agreement can there be? The Spirit will not thus be unequally yoaked;
since man is become thus fleshly, thus depraved, such a degenerate Plant, so
corrupt, its just with Gods spirit to strive no longer with man.

By flesh, in Scripture, is comprehended a Mass of corruption, Apostoli verba
docent haec duo affectuum genera esse opposita. Quae ut intelligamus,
constitutu^ fit, affectum carnis nihil aliud esse, quam usum virium humanaru^
semota gratia. Affectus autem spiritus est impulsus divini afflatus, and usus
gratiae Christi. Pet. Mart. in Loc.
man in his worst estate, Romans 8. 5. They that are after the flesh, do mind
the things of the flesh: What is predicated of it, v. 6, 7, 8, 9. To be
carnally minded is death, because the carnal mind is enmity against God: So
then, they that are in the flesh cannot please God. And what an Antithesis is
there between flesh and spirit, v. 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall
die; but if ye, through the spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall
live. The same disproportion there is, as between death and life, heaven and
hell, salvation and damnation: That God strives with any, is a great mercy,
that the Spirit waits knocking at our doors, when as he might knock us down
dead: O great mercy! But when the Spirit strives, and flesh resists its
motions; the Spirit spends his sacred breath, wooing us, and inviting us to do
good unto our own souls, and the carnal mind bids defiance unto the Spirit of
grace, when notwithstanding all the beseechings, wooings, and solicitations of
the Spirit, the flesh rebels, carnal men will not hearken to the voice of this
spiritual Charmer, though he charm never so wisely; what then remains but utter
ruin and destruction, but that the Spirit should leave striving, and fall a
destroying rebellious sinners, and carnal minded persons? This is one reason,
He also is flesh; the spiritual part that is obliterated, he has degenerated
from his original, he is become corrup^^d, he also is flesh.

Another reason may be, because the Spirit is a most free agent. Reas. 2.
Because the Spirit is a most free Agent.
This holy Spirit moves when and where it pleases. The Spirit of God is bound
to none. The Spirit is not at our command and beck; yet vile man puts the
Spirit of God to the condition of a slave: for so the Lord complains, Is. 42.
24. Thou have bought me no sweet cane with money, neither have thou filled me
with the fat of thy sacrifices, but thou have made me to serve with thy sins;
thou have wearied me with thine iniquities. It Is more than the Spirit owes any
of us to move once; he may move once, and may never move more; he may choose
whether he will move at all: God now shootes warning-pieces; the Spirit woes
you to come in and make your peace with God, to break off your sins by
Repentance, no longer to stand out in opposition unto Jesus Christ, if you will
not take warning, God may suddenly shoot his Murdering-pieces and destroy you.
The Spirit cries, to day, to day, now is the accepted time, now is the (...). 2
Cor. 6. 2.
day of salvation; if we accept not of this golden opportunity, and now ^e
come not in and embrace this great salvation tendered, for ought we know the
Spirit may be gone, and never make a further tender of grace unto us. Though
the Spirit it self is most free, and limits not, nor ascribes to it self when
and where to work, but calls some sooner, some later into the vineyard; yet the
Spirit limits and prescribes us a time of repentance: Again, he limiteth Heb.
4. 7.
a certain day, saying in David, To day, after so long a time, as it is said,
to day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. It Is a common
observation; He that has promised time to the penitent, has not promised a
morrow for repentance: Wherefore we are Qui poenitentibus promisit veniam,
diem non promisit crastinum. Gerr. Medit. Isa. 55. 6. (...). Antipat. Act. 24.
25.
commanded, Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is
near: and Acts 17. 30. The times of this ignorance God winked at, but now
commands all men every where to repent. The Spirit now knocks by its motions,
by the Word, by conviction of Conscience, and invites you to come presently to
Jesus Christ. When a Treatise of Happiness was brought to Antipater, he
answered, I am not at leisure; a lamentable case not to be at leisure to read a
Treatise of Happiness. Felix would hear Paul at a convenient time; we never
read that he sent for him any more. In proverbial speeches we say, Strike
whilst the Iron is hot; When there is a fair gale hoyst up thy sails; and
delays are dangerous. Shall we then neglect the present opportunity upon a
presumption of a future? Shall we presume either of space ^^ grace, neither of
them being in our power? God is not bound to give space; he struck Vzzah dead
in the place for meddling with the Ark: It Is said, the 1 Chr. 13. 9.
Oxen stumbled: Vzzahs intention might be good, but a good intention cannot
justify a bad action: He invaded the Priests function; his work was to drive
on the Oxen, not to touch the Ark. God struck Ananias and Saphira dead for
their hypocrisy: So often times God strikes dead the Drunkard in his vomit,
the Liar, Swearer, Blasphemer with the lie, oath, blasphemy in each man's
tongue. But suppose (which is uncertain) God gives thee space, yet often times
where he gives space he denies grace, as it was said of Jezabel, Rev. 2. 21. I
gave her space to repent of her fornication, but she 2 Timothy 2. 25.
repented not. There is a peradventure put in, 2 Timothy 2. 25. In meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure may give them
repentance unto the acknowledging of the truth. My brethren, consider in your
most serious and composed thoughts, that we deal for life and immortality, and
our negotiations are for the great things of Eternity: Shall we dally in such
weighty matters? Shall we procrastinate our Repentance? And shall we stop our
ears, bolt the doors of our hearts when the Spirit calls and knocks? In matters
of worldly employments, what post-haste, what expedition do men make? they fear
delays may much prejudice them: And shall we be thus wise for the world, and
such errand fools for our souls? Shall we be penny-wise and pound-foolish?
Shall we be so industrious to grasp the trash and pelf of the world, and
neglect our souls? Every ones soul being a precious jewel is more wo^th than
the world in all its pomp and bravery. Let us lay hold on the golden season of
the present time, the time which the Spirit limits. If thou neglectest this
day, for ought thou know, thou may be in hell to morrow. Whilst thou art
dallying and delaying God may be a swearing in his wrath, that thou shall never
enter into his rest.

The third reason, and the last, that I shall name shall be drawn Reas. 3.
Drawn from the rule of divine Justice.
from the rule of divine justice. It Is most just when people neglect Gods
limited time for God to allow them no more time, when people squander out Gods
seasons and mispend their choice opportunities, it stands with justice to deny
any further opportunity. When the season is past, it is like an Arrow out of
the Bow, like a swift stream, not to be called back. There Is a dreadful
judgment threatened, Prove: 1. 24. because I have called and ye have refused, I
have stretched out my hands, and no man regarded, therefore I will laugh at
your calamity, and mock when your fear comes. God usually pays sinners in
their own coin, and punishes them by way of retaliation; As appears in
Adonibezeks confession, who said, Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs
and great toes cut off gathered Judge. 1. 7^
thered their meat under my table, as I have done so has God requited me. God
punishes number with number, according to the number of their cities so were
their gods. Jer. 2. 28. Where are thy Gods which thou have made thee? let them
arise if they can save thee in the time Jerem. 2. 28.
of thy trouble, for according to the number of thy cities, s^ are thy gods, O
Judah. And the Lord numbered them out to the sword, and left them few in number.
God punishes choice with cho^^e; they chose new gods, and the Lord in
judgment left them to their choice, and in their extremities bade them go to
their gods, and see whether they would deliver them. The Lord punished
contrariety with contrariety; If ye will not be reformed by these things, Lev.
26. 23. 24.
but will walk contrary unto me, then will I also walk contrary to you, and
punish you yet seven times for your sins. And when we refuse to hearken to him
when he calls, he will refuse to hearken to us in our greatest extremities when
we call upon him. It Is a broken, but a very pathetical speech of Christ to
Jerusalem, O that thou had Luke 19. 4^.
known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy
peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. There is a Critical day set down;
there is a dreadful judgment upon those that brought not the Lords offering
in its season: The man that is clean, and is Numb. 9. 13.
not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the Passover, even the same soul
shall be cut off from his people, because he brought not the offering of the
Lord in his appointed season, that man shall bear his sin. The old world gave
no heed to Noah's Preaching, they neglected the time that God allowed them for
repentance. No mo^e time was Matthew. 25. 10 (...).
allowed, when that was once expired, a deluge overwhelmed them. The five
foolish Virgins sl^mbred and slept, when they should have been preparing of
their lamps, they went to buy oil, and in their absence Christ came and
perpetually shut them out. Esau sought Heb. 12. 17. ^enedictionem illam
exquisiss^t. Beza.
the Blessing carefully with rears, yet he was rejected, he came when it was
too late: How many mischiefs befall men for neglecting their opportunities? All
these considerations should be as so many warning-pieces unto us, and as so
many prevalent incentives to cherish the whispers of the Spirit, to take the
benefit of the season: Now whilst the Lord bids us, seek his face, our hearts
must echo back, Thy face, Lord, we will seek. Let us hearken to the motions of
the Spirit, and the checks of our conscience, let us make much of the Spirit,
let us take heed of quenching and grieving of the holy Spirit whereby we are
sealed unto the day of redemption. An Angel swears in the Revelations, There
shall be no more time. How soon Revel. 10. 6. ^
time may cease, and the Spirit cease working, we cannot tell, and time may be
swallowed up in Eternity. And therefore take this Caution as a word spoken in
due season: Beware of sadding the Spirit, drive him not away from you; for once
having a repulse, for ought you know, he may come no more.

And th^^^ have dispatched three Heads propounded of my Method: I have asserted
the truth of the point from Scripture ^e^timonies, plainly evidencing the
greatness of the Judgment when the Spirit of God departs from, and will
strive no longer with a people. I have showed how many ways the Spirit usually
strives with a people, I have given in the reasons for the confirmation of the
point. In the next place it remains that I should reduce al home unto point of
Practice, by way of Use and particular Application.

This Doctrine affords six special Uses: For Information, Exhortation,
Reprehension, Examination, Direction, and Consolation.

In the first place, this serves for Information; what a dreadful Use 1. For
Information.
judgment lies heavy upon any person whatsoever, with whom Gods Spirit will
strive no longer. Was it not an heavy judgment when Gods Spirit left Saul, and
an evil spirit was sent to torment him? Was it not an heavy case, and
dreadful, when the Philistines made war upon him, and the Lord was departed
from him: And Samuel said to Saul, why have thou disquieted me to bring me up?
1 Samuel 28 15
And Saul answered, I am sore distressed, for the Philistines make war against
me, and God is departed from me, and answers me no more, neither by Prophets,
nor by dreams, therefore I have called thee, etc. When Gods Spirit quite
leaves a soul, then the evil spirit takes possession of it. Satan entered into
Judas his heart, and set him on work to betray Christ; and when conscience gave
him a bang, and made him throw down the money, he felt Hellfire flashing in
him, and betook himself to a desperate remedy, to be his own executioner. So I
have read of Julian after he had departed from God, and turned Apostate, he had
in his conscience more blows and butcherings. Plures ictus and laniatus.
At last, when a dart hit him, and gave him his fatal wound, no man knowing
from whence that dart came (for it was a signal blow from heaven, and was
indeed the immediate hand of God) at last he confessed, Thou have overcome, O
Galilean, thou have overcome. Vicisti, Galilaee, vicisti.


Now a little to set forth the greatness of the judgment upon those with whom
Gods Spirit will strive no longer, I Will represent it you in these ensuing
aggravations.

When God takes away his Spirit, he usually takes away his Ordinances. Whilst
the Palladium remained with the Trojans, they Aggrav. 1. When God takes away
his Spirit, he usually takes away his Ordinances.
thought themselves secure. The Jews put great confidence in the Ark, they fet
the Ark, and went to battle with it against the Philistines, and afterward
cried up, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: Herein they were
superstitious, they f^iled in putting too much confidence in the Temple: They
were Idolaters, and followed Baal and Ashtaroth, and thought the Ark would
secure them. The Ark would no more shelter profane, idolatrous people, than
the horns of the Altar would secure and shelter a Murderer: Yet questionless
the Ark of Gods presence was a very great mercy and privilege. The Ark was
kept away twenty years, and they thought it long, and the Text says, all the
house of Israel lamented after the Lord. The sad report of the loss of the
Ark, brake Elies heart first, and he fell down backward and his neck brake: He
heard 1 Samuel 7. 2.
of the death of his sons, their death went near, but the loss of the Ark
went nearer: and Phinehas his wife named the child I^habod, saying, the glory
is departed from Israel, because the Ark of God was taken. She fell in travel
upon that sad news, and dyed presently. 1 Samuel 4. 18, 21, 22.
The taking away Ministers, Ordinances, Sabbaths, are dreadful judgments upon
a people: This the Prophet Amos foretells of; Behold the days come, says the
Lord, that I will send a famine in the Amos 8. 11.
land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word
of the Lord. And Christ himself threarens, The kingdom of Matthew. 21. 43.
God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof. And these judgments God oftentimes inflicts upon those that contemn
his Ordinances, and often ^imes causes a people to know the worth of them, by
the want of them. Aggrav. 2. God will not suffer his Spirit to wo^ke in the
Ordinances.


Or secondly, if God continue his Ordinances, and a people still resist the
strivings of his Spirit; this is another aggravation, that the Lord will not
suffer his Spirit to work in the Ordinances. What Is the Word without the Spirit
but a dead letter? The Word is the seed, it is the Spirit that quickens it. Now
when God denies his Spirit in an Ordinance, and people hear only a bare
sound, which goes in at one ear, and out of another, and reap no profit, and
are never a whit wrought upon by an Ordinance, this is a lamentable condition.
Enthusiasts cry up the Spirit, and cry down the Word. Formalists cry up the
Word, they keep their Church well (that is their own phrase) but they regard not
the workings of the Spirit. This is Argumentum a been conjunctis ad male
divisa. We have no warrant to leave the bright shining light of the Word, and
to follow a wild rambling light of our own. The Spirit works by the Word, and
ties us to the rule. New devised lights may Levit. 10. 2,
meet with the same judgment as Nadab and Abihu met withal for offering
strange fire unto the Lord. Neither may we (as Formalists do) rest in our
coming to, and hearing of Ordinances; we must examine the working of Gods
Spirit upon our souls: When God gives quickening Ordinances, let us pray for
the energetical effectual working of Gods Spirit. Deadness of Spirit (says
Mr. Greenham) is the grave of spiritual graces. Between a lazy and a fervent
performer of duties, you may see the difference, Greenham.
2 Kings 4. 31, 32, 33, 34. Gehazi went on in a careless formal manner, and
laid his staff upon the child, but there was neither voice nor hearing: But
when Elisha put his eyes upon the child's eyes, and his mouth on the child's
mouth, the flesh of the child waxed warm. O beware of slighting, or resis^ing
the spirit in an Ordinance, lest in judgment God may give thee a bare
Ordinance, or resting contented with a bare outside formal service, without
any lively workings of the Spirit upon thine heart, and that will be but as a
carcass when the soul is gone.

When people drive away Gods Spirit and will not regard its strivings Aggrav.
3. God gives over those that resist his Spirit unto a spirit of delusion.
then God gives them over in judgment to a spirit of delusion. 2 These. 2. 11.
For this cause God shall send them strong delusions that they shall believe a
lie. When Ministry, the Lord's Day, and other Sabbath-Ordinances are trampled
under feet, when the plain infallible rule of the Scriptures is laid aside,
when some flatter themselves with high swelling conceits of their own gifts,
upon pretense of a Light within them, Dreams and Revelations, then God in
judgment gives them over to a spirit of delusion. The Devil works upon their
fancies, and puffs them up with pride, and their pride swells them and bursts
them. Beware of Pride, and above all Pride of spiritual Pride. Beware of
itching ears after novel Doctrines. Upon pretense of new truths many suck in
antiquated, long since explo^ed ^rrours. And if it be an error (though I take
it not so) yet account it an error of love, I advise, especially young
beginners, to beware of Skepticism, and high-slown curiosities in the study of
divinity. It Is a ground of experience, Skepticism Romans 14. 1. Quod si
observassent Scholastici non tot^ spinosas and salebrosas ne dica^ impi^s and
sacrilegas quaestiones in eorn^ libris habere. mus. P. Mart. Aggrav. 4. God
gives those over to a hard heart, who resist the motions of the Spirit.
frequently produces Heresy, and ^ere^e terminatesin Atheism, and my counsel
is grounded upon the known rule; Him that is weak in the faith receive you, but
not in doubtful disputat^ons. Would Schoolmen (says Pet. Martyr) had observed
this Scripture. Study Fundamentals, and get a Body of Divinity in your heads
and hearts, before you venture upon Polemicals. Be well provided and furnished
with weapons from the Principles of Divinity, before you grapple with
gainsayers.

A fourth and last aggravation I shall mention is this; when Gods Spirit has
stroven long, knocked and waited, and is abused and resisted, then God gives
over such persons to an hard heart, and a reprobate mind: And an hard heart and
a reprobate mind is an hell upon earth. Isa. 6. 9, 10. Go and tell this people,
Hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make
the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes,
lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with
their hearts, and convert and be healed. It Is cited by all the four
Evangelists, and in the Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistle to the Romans, by
such frequent repetition of the self-same thing, aggravating the greatness of
the judgment. It Is accounted the grand curse of the Gospel, Joh. 9. 39. For
judgment am I come into this John 9. 39.
world, that they which see not might see, and that they which see might be
made blind. When men have been a long time under the sound of the Gospel, and
the Spirit has moved and woed, beseeching us to amend our lives, and walk in
an holy obedience and conformity to the will of God; and yet we stand out, and
bid defiance to the Spirit of Grace, then it is just for God to say, hard
heart, seize upon such a one, reprobate sense, take hold of another, let them
be Sermon-proof, and Judgement-proof, let them remain insensible, let their
consciences be cauterized. O wha^ a fearful judgment is this, as the Apostle
mentions! But after thy hardness Ro^. 2. 5.
and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of
wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. May these aggravations
make deep impressions upon all our spirits, and make us fear and tremble any
more to withstand the sweet motions and whispers of the Spirit of God.

A second use is for Exhortation: I entreat, beseech, exhort, conjure Use 2.
For Exhortation.
you by all the motions of the Spirit, by all the tenders of mercies, patience,
and long-suffering of God, that you would take heed of quenching, resisting,
sadding the holy Spirit of God, but cherish, embrace, make much of all the
strivings of the Spirit of God with your souls. To day the Spirit calls, hear
his voice; to day the Spirit woes and would make a contract with your souls, O
now accept of him; to day the Spirit invites, lay aside all excuses and come.
It Is the Embassy that Gods Ministers are sent upon: Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech 2 Cor. 5. 20.
you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. O^r
commission may be out of date to morrow: Christ now waits till his locks be
wet with dew, now he calls sinners to repentance. He has sent me on an errand
this day to invite thirsty souls to come unto him, and he will give them
drink; to invite those that are heavy laden, and he will give them rest. It Is
my business this day to tender Jesus Christ, the Fountain opened; to press
home the Exhortation of the Holy Ghost, Let the wicked forsake his way, and
Isa. 55. 7.
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him, and to our God for he will abundantly pardon. Now
what answer shall I return unto him that sent me? Suffer I beseech you (Fathers
and Brethren) the word of exhortation, not to suffer the holy Spirit to spend
his sacred breath in vain: You have many prizes put into your hands, improve
them in your several capacities to the glory of God, and mutual edification one
of another. Let Rulers rule with diligence, let Governors, Tutours, Masters of
Families, all unite their endeavors to promote the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
put Joshua's resolution into practice, but as for me, I and my house we will
serve the Lord. O that Josh. 24. 15.
we could be spiritual Fathers to those that are committed to our charge.
Governors and Tutours should look upon themselves as Pro-parents, and upon the
Scholars under them as children, and therefore ought to have special care over
them, and principally to enquire how it fares with their souls, what knowledge
they have of Jesus Christ: What a comfort will it be another day when we can
say, Behold, Lord, here we are, and the children which thou have given us. Thou
lord have made us spiritual Fathers unto these young Pupiss. Now whilst the
Spirit stays waiting upon us, whilst we have time, talents, and opportunities
vouchsafed unto us, whilst we live under the sound of the Gospel, and hear
admonitions, reproofs, and many Exhortations to repentance; let us not put off
the Spirit with any more delatory answers, but resolve with the full purpose of
our hearts to cleave unto the Lord.

I have two or three plain moving considerations to add, for the better
setting home of my Exhortation.

Consider the brevity of our lives: What Is our life but a bubble, Consid. 1.
The brevity of our lives. John* 4.
a flower, a vapor, a shadow? By these resemblances, the Holy Ghost sets forth
the shortness of our lives: We had need be a working while day lasts: I must
work the works of him that sent me, while day lasts; the night comes, when
no man can work: A night of death is coming, wherein no man can work, and we
must always remember, that the Spirit strives not always, not during the whole
course of our lives: It moves when it pleases, and on a sudden cease; yet
at the most it moves no longer, nor striveth no longer, but this little moment
of time, whilst we are on this side the grave. After death there will be no
more warnings, no more admonitions, no place left for repentance, no Purgatory,
that is a Popish dream: He that dies filthy, will so remain unto all Eternity.
Now then, my Brethren, considering you have but a little time, and upon this
moment depends Eternity, and after death there will be no further tenders of
Grace and Mercy, let us husband this time to the best advantage: Let us prize
Sermons, Sabbaths, and all those Evangelical Dispensations vouchsafed to us,
more then ever we did: Let us redeem the time, as we are exhorted, Ephesians. 5. 16.
(...).
Ephesians. 5. 16. buying out, or making a good market of the season. Every thing is
beautiful in its season; there is a season acceptable, and there is a season
perilous: Let Us come when God calls, that is the accepted time; let us not
prescribe a time of our own, that is the perilous season; let us not account
time a slight matter, for each minute ought to be valued.

A second consideration shall be drawn from the uncertainty of the Consid. 2.
The uncertainty of the spirits striving. Nil pretiosius tempore, and heu nil
hodie vilius invenitur. Bern. Veniet tempus quo vel unam horam ad resi^iscendum
redimere, mirum quantum optabimus. Otho Casmannus.
spirits strivings: If the holy Spirit be rejected, its uncertain whether ever
he will come again: The Spirit will not always bear reproaches and indignities:
If we refuse to give God the glory of his mercy, he will show upon us the glory
of his Justice and Power: If we will not open when God knocks at our doors, he
will not open when we knock at his door: Unkindness will drive away a friend
from our houses: When the Spirit invites himself unto us, if we will open, he
will come and dine, and sup with us; if we refuse this Heavenly guest, how
shall we escape? our destruction will be inevitable. This Spirit is often
compared to fire, nothing more comforting, nothing more consuming than fire: If
thou will not suffer the Spirit to purge and refine thee, it will consume thee:
Nothing more comfortable then light, warmth, and witness of the Spirit: Nothing
more terrible then the bondage, conviction and condemnation of the Spirit:
Therefore beware of resisting any good motions that the Spirit of God puts into
thy heart this day, lest if the spirit have a repulse, he may go away and never
return any more.

3. Thirdly, Consider the certainty of the day of Judgment, 2 Cor. 5. 10. For
we must all appear before the judgment seat of Consid. 3. The day of Judgment.
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad: Then there will be an account to
be given for all the Sermons which we have heard, for all the Sabbaths we have
enjoyed, for all the motions of the Spirit, for all the admonitions, reproofs,
Gospel opportunities and advantages that we have received; we should therefore
hear a Sermon now, as for ought we know, we may be presently summoned by death
to appear before the Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ: Let us imagine that now we
hear this day, as if it might be our last day: We hear for Eternity: Preachers
and Hearers shall be called to an account at the great Assise: The Lord grant
that we may all give up our accounts with joy.

The third Use shall be for reprehension of those who resist or Use. 3. For
reprehension.
stifle the strivings and the sweet motions of the holy Spirit: To come to
particulars.

1. How sad is their condition, who are contemners of the sweet motions of Gods
Spirit: Let them read Romans 8. 9. If any man has not the spirit of Christ, he
is none of his: Such as quench the Spirit, which is forbidden 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
such as deride praying by the spirit, such as slight and scorn men of the
spirit; I mean such as are of a precious anointing, in whom the Spirit of
Christ dwells: O how sad will their Audit be!

2. It reproves barren and unprofitable hearers, who notwithstanding all the
strivings, wooings and waitings of Gods Spirit by the Ministry of the Word, yet
remain barren and unfruitful: The Apostle tells their doom, The earth that
drinks in the rain, that Heb. 6. 7, 8.
comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is
dressed, receives a blessing from God; but that which bears thorns and
briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned: When
Christ found nothing on the Fig Tree but leaves, he said unto it, Let no fruit
grow on thee henceforward for ever; and Matthew. 21. 19 Luke 13. 7.
presently the Fig Tree withered away: And the Vine-dresser said, Behold, these
three years I come, seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none, cut it
down, why cumbreth it the ground?

3. It reproves secure persons settled on their. Lees: Let Gods Spirit strive
never so often, it is all in vain: They think all is well with them, they
conceive their Estates very good: Multitudes now adays are possessed with a
spirit of slumber and drousiness, and this is a dreadful sin, and a judgment
both, Romans 11. 8. God has given them a spirit of slumber, eyes that they
should not see, and ears that they should not hear to this day: Is not he a
desperate fool that dares sleep upon the top of a Mast? Is not he much more,
that notwithstanding judgments threatened in Gods Word against rebellious
sinners, yet is secure, heedless, and satisfied in his present condition? This
is that carnal security mentioned, which is under such terrible woe, Deuteronomy. 29.
19, 20. It shall come to pass, when he hears the words of this curse, that he
bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart to add drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will not
spare him; but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke
against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall lie
upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven.

4. And lastly, This reproves all impenitent persons, who notwithstanding all
the Sermons they hear, notwithstanding all the reproofs, admonitions, wooings,
knockings of Gods spirit, yet remain impenitent: Impenitency is that great
soul-damning sin. Christ tells us, Rev. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and
knock, Rev. 3. 20. Ezekiel. 18. 31.
if any man open to me, I will come in and sup with him: And the exhortation of
the Prophet runs, Cast away from you all your transgressions, for I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, wherefore turn your selves and live:
So God expostulates the case with them: Though by our own strength we cannot
stand, not by our own power will any good thing; yet we may do much more good
then we do: Can not the same legs carry a man to the Church, which carry him to
an Alehouse o^ Tavern? Its want of a good heart and love to the Ordinances of
God, that make men so negligent of the good of their souls: Who forces thee to
swear? thou say thou can^^ not leave it, custom is become another nature: Is
it not thine own corrupt heart that causes corrupt communications? The Devil
cannot compel to sin, he persuades and enticeth, neither does God tempt any
man, Jam. 1. 13, 14, 15. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his
own lust, and enticed, then Jam. 1. 13, 14, 15.
when lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished
brings forth death: Tremble and stand amazed, thou impenitent person that
resiste^^ so many strivings of Gods Spirit, so many checks of conscience, so
many warnings from the word: O that thy heart might be touched with remorse and
repentance for thine impenitency! yet thou live under the sound of the
Gospel, who knows but the spirit may this day once more move, woe, and
beseech thee to be reconciled? O do not refuse! O do not slight these
invitations! A City besieged (as we read) Deuteronomy. 20. 11, 12. If it make thee
answer of peace, and open unto thee, thea the people that are found therein
shall become tributary unto thee; but if it will make no peace with thee, then
thou shall besiege it, and smlte every male with the edge of the sword. Just so
now the Lord besieges thy heart, offers thee peace, entreats thee to repent of
thy Oaths, Sabbath-breakings, contempt of the Gospel, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness: If thou will not receive such a gracious offer of peace, to thy
peril be it, thou art the murderer of thine own soul.

4. I proceed to a fourth Use, which is for examination: Three Use 4. For
Examination.


Q. 1. How may we distinguish of the strivings of Gods spirit from a spirit of
error and delusion?

I answer in this wise.

1. Gods Spirit strives by the Ministry of the word, and directs 1. Gods spirit
strives by the Ministry of the word.
us according to that rule, Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this rule,
peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God: But a spirit of
delusion devises ways of its own, and is wise above what is written, whereunto
a curse appertains, Gal. 1. 8. Though we, or an Angel from heaven, preach
another Gospel then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

2. Gods Spirit leads into all truth: It is a s^irit of truth: But 2. Gods
spirit leads into all truth.
the spirit of delusion leads us into all errors: God will send strong
delusions, that they shall believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.

3. Gods Spirit makes us humble, meek, gentle: A spirit of delusion 3. Gods
spirit makes us^ humble and meek.
makes us to swell with pride and pride and passions: Gods Spirit meekens our
spirit: An Antichristian deluded spirit makes us boystero^s, ino^dinate in our
affections.

But secondly, The Quaery will be, How we may distinguish the strivings of Gods
Spirit, from the strivings of our own spirits or natural conscience?

I answer thus. 1. A natural conscience acts from a principle of A natural
conscience acts from a principle of fear.
fear, of punishment, and upon legal convictions; hence come many torturings
and strivings in natural men's consciences, as in Ahab, etc. Herod feared John
Baptist: But Gods Spirit strives and moves the soul to act from a principle of
love to Jesus Christ; when the love of Christ constrains to duty, that is
genuine altogether.

2. The striving of a m^ns own spirit, and a natural conscience, 2. The
strivings of a man's own spirit, are pacified with natural means.
are pacified with natural means, eating, drinking, sleeping, idle company,
vain pleasures quiet mere natural convictions: But where Gods Spirit strives,
the soul cannot be quieted but by supernatural means; the in omes of God, the
ravishing consolations of the holy Ghost, a white Stone, a pardon sealed; no
mirth, sports, company, can satisfy a wounded conscience, only one remedy is
reserved for a perfect cure, and that is the Medicine made up of the Blood of
Christ.

3. The strivings of a man's own spirit are flashy, sudden, and soon gone when
the judgment cease: As soon as the judgment 3. The strivi^gs of a man's own
Spirit are flashy and sudden.
is removed, the strivings cease; but when Gods Spirit strives, it is solid and
serious: If the Jvdgement be removed, and the s^n unpardoned, there can be no
quiet: If the Judgment be over, Pharaoh is quiet; but no quiet in David's
spirit, till the sin be removed.

Q. 3. A third Quaery is, How may we know whether Gods Spirit has effectually
stroven and prevailed with us.

1. When we hearken to the call of Gods Spirit, Psalm. 27. 8. Thou 1. Wh^^ we
answe^ the call of God^ spirit.
said, seek my face, my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seek.

2. When we have the testimony of Gods Spirit, as Romans 8. 16. The spirit it
self bears witness with our spirits that we are the 2. When we have the
spirits testimony.
children of God.

3, When we have the sealing of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13. In 3. When the spirit
seals.
whom, after ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise.

4. When we have the earnest of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 14. 4. When we have the
earnest of the Spirit. 5. When we have the spirits anointing. 6. When we have
the fruits of the Spirit. Use 5. For direction. 1. Pray for the Spirit. 2. Set
a high price on the Spirit. 3. Cherish the motions of the Spirit. 4. Observe
the call and knocking of the Spirit.


5, When we have the anointings of the Spirit, 1 John 2. 20. Ye have an Unction
from the Holy One, and ye know all things.

6. When we have the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22, 23, 24. Love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance.

The fifth Use is for direction.

1. Pray for the Spirit to sanctify and cleanse thee: No work of
sanctification but by the spirit.

2. Set an high price of, and be a diligent attendant of Gods word: The Spirit
usually works by the Word: The Spirit and Word agree together.

3. Cherish the sweet motions of Gods Spirit, make much of every holy motion
and inspiration: O do not grieve nor sad! O do not quench the Spirit of God,
but account Gods long-suffering your salvation! God waits, and is patient: O do
not provoke, do not abuse his patience!

4. Observe all the calls, knockings and invitations of Gods Spirit: The Lord
calls by his word, by checks of conscience, by mercies and by judgments, do
not then bolt the doors of your hearts, nor stand out against all the warnings,
threatenings and promises; all these are upon record, Heb. 2. 3. How shall we
escape, if we neglect so great salvation.

Lastly, Here Is one word of comfort unto all those who make Use. 6. For comfort.
much of the strivings of Gods Spirit: These shall be filled with the
consolations of the Spirit: The Spirit will comfort, support, help them: In
Prayer, The Spirit helps their infirmities, Romans 8. 26. The Spirit purges
and purisieth them: The Spirit of God is their Counselor in doubts, their
Comforter in all distresses; and the Spirit will guide them by his counsel till
he bring them unto glory. Doct. 2. Its a^ exceeding great mercy, etc.


I now proceed in a few words to the second Doctrine: That it is an exceeding
great mercy when the Lord vouchsafes unto any person time and space for
repentance: Here the Lord allows to the old World 120 years, so long it was
that the Spirit of God strove with the old World. We read in Genesis 18. 24, 25.
the Lord staid communing with Abraham; making abatements from 50 to 45, from 45
to 40, from 40 to 30, from 30 to 20, from 20 to 10: Was it not a great mercy
for the Lord to bear so long with the Amorites? They had a long time of
forbearance: Thus did the Lord deal with Niniveh, Jonah 3. 4. Yet forty days,
and Niniveh shall be overthrown: So the Lord waited long on the Israelites,
Psalm. 95. 8. Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, and as in the day
of temptation in the wilderness: So Jerusalem, Luke 19. 42, 44. If thou had
known, even thou at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy
peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes: The five foolish Virgins had a
time allowed; both wise and foolish slept and slumbred, but the foolish wanted
oil, and lost the accepted season: Jezabel had time alloted her, Rev. 2. 21. I
gave her space to repent of her fornication, but she repented not.

The Reasons are. 1. To glorify the riches of Gods mercy: Mercy Reas. 1. To
glorify the riches of Gods mercy.
waits upon us, wooing and alluring us to repentance: The Lord invites, Isa.
55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, let him come, etc. He calls sinners to
repentance: He entreats by his Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20. He waits to be
gracious, Rev. 3. 20.

2. To glorify the Justice of God, and to leave a people without R. 2. To
glorify Gods justice,
excuse: When mercy, patience, goodness, graciousness, long-suffering, are all
abused, what remains but destruction, never fruit grow on thee more, Cut it
down, I will take this kingdom from you, I will send you a famine of the word:
These are terrible threatenings.

3. The Lord oftentimes is pleased to spare a people longer at the R. 3. God
spares a people at the request of his servants.
request of his servants, Luke 13. 8. The Vine-dresser prayed, Let it alone yet
longer, till I dig about it and dung it: Gods Ministers pray hard, and tug hard
at the oar, they cry night and day, Lord, spare, try this people a little
longer, exercise a little more patience toward them; let thy Word work upon
them, they live under the sound of it, let it effectually prevail with them.

The Uses are, 1. For admiration: O admire the infinite mercies of God, who
does thus bear with sinners! notwithstanding Use 1. For admiration.
their provocations, yet he tryes, waits, and allows them a great deal of
space, when as in Justice he might cut sinners assunder in the midst of their
sins.

This breathes terrors unto all presumptuous sinners, who presume Use 2. For
terror.
of space and grace, neither of which is in their own power: To some God gives
space, others he destroys presently, in the midst of their rebellions: But
admit he gives space, though he is not bound unto that; yet he denis grace to
many to whom he vouchsafes space, as unto Jezabel; and we read of a
peradventure 2 Timothy 2. 25. In meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, if peradventure God may give them repentance. This Doctrine speaks
terror unto all them that procrastinate repentance: I Will lay down these
convictions.

It argues exceeding great folly and madness: Do we not see how Convict. 1. Its
great folly to put off repentance.
many are cropped off in their buds? how many are cut off in their sins? we are
wiser for the World: In gainful bargains we make haste, saying, Do not delay
for fear of danger; and yet we are stark fools for our souls.

2. It argues a great contempt, an high affront and indignity against Convict.
2. It argues great contempt.
God, Mal. 1. 8. If ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? etc.
offer it unto your governor, will he be pleased with thee?

3. It argues high presumption, to presume of patience, mercy, Convict. 3. It
argues high presumption.
and long-suffering, when as we abuse them all, Romans 2. 4, 5. Despisest thou
the riches of his goodness, forbearance, and long-s^ffering, not knowing that
the goodness of the Lord leads thee to repentance: A ter^ible curse will
follow, if we neglect Gods time when he calls, when we call he will neglect our
time, Prove. 1. 24, 25. Because I have called, and ye have refused, etc.
therefore ye shall call, but I will not answer.

The third use is for Exhortation, to lay hold upon the present Use 3. For
Exhortati^n.
tenders of Grace, and make the best of this opportunity: Defer not thy
repentance a moment longer; lay aside all excuses: ^ne pleads for his Oxen,
another for his Form, another for his Merch^ndise: All these are unfit guests
for Christ: Now therefore come into Christ. Is it not a great mercy that thou
art yet alive, on this side Hell and the Grave? Now then close with God, set an
high price of Gods mercies, and let the riches of his mercy lead thee to
repentance.

Consider, 1. Now is the Spirits striving time.

2. Now is the limited time, Heb. 4. 7. To day if you will hear his voice, etc.

3. Now is the accepted time, thy soul-saving time, 2 Cor. 6. 2.

4. Now once past cannot be recalled: I therefore now beseech you by the
mercies of God, by all the Sermons and Invitations of Christ, to make your
peace with God, to embrace the mercies tendered, to break off your sins by
repentance, and to regard the strivings and wooings of the Spirit of God.

The fourth use is for caution. 1. Beware of presuming of future Use 4. For
caution. 1. Beware of presuming of Grace.
offers of Grace, James 4. 13, 14. Go to now, ye that say, To day or to morrow
we will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy and sell,
whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow. The fool in the Gospel was cut
off in the midst of his presumption, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be
required of thee: Esau mist his Luke 12. 20
season: The five foolish Virgins mist their seasons: The old world presumed of
life, never thinking of a Deluge; but when the Flood came, How did they wander?
some got upon House-tops, some upon high Mountains, some would, questionless,
have been entertained in the Ark, but the day of Grace was expired, the
commission of Preaching of Repentance, was but for 120 years, that is past, and
a Flood overwhelmed them all. O my dear Brethren! be persuaded to lay hold on
the present season of Grace, lest ruin overtake you whilst you procrastinate.

2. ^eware of sadding the Spirit of God, and resisting the sweet motions
thereof, Ephesians. 4. 30. The Spirit invites, calls, woos, entreats 2. Beware of
sadding the spirit of God
thee to be re^onciled and make thy peace with God: Thou hear a voice
behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk therein: Hearken to the voice of
this spiritual Charmer, which charmeth so wisely.

3. Beware of low and mean thoughts of the Ordinances of God, 3 Beware of low
^houghts of Ordinances.
Heb. 2. 3. The Israelites slighted Mannah, but they paid dear for it: Gods
Spirit strives by the Word, by Prayer, by the Sacraments: Take heed of
undervaluing all these ways of striving: Sometimes God strives by an
affliction, for that is Gods Ordinance likewise, and calls upon thee to learn
instruction, to smite upon thy thigh.

4. Beware of neglecting observations of particular experiences: 4. Beware of
neglecting observations, etc.
Sometimes God strives with thee in a way of mercy by tenders of Christ,
sometimes by threatenings; neglect not these strivings, but make a review of
them, observe Gods dealings with thy soul, how the Lord woos, invites, and
waits on thee, how sometimes thy heart has been opened, like Lydia's, to close
with God; sometimes thou art quick, other times dull; sometimes thou have hold
of Christ, other times thou want his presence: This is the lot of Gods
people, sometimes they are in an ebb, some^imes in a float; sometimes their
Faith is strong, other times they know not whether they have any at all or no:
This was David's case, and thou must apply David's remedy: Why ar^ thou cast
down, O my Psalm. 4. 2. v. ult.
soul, and why art thou disquieted within me, still trust in God: Beware of
trusting to thine own resolutions: O say some, I resolve hereafter to repent
and close with God. This is that which ruins multitudes, because they presume
in their own strength: What are our resolutions, but as the early dew which
soon passes away? What are the best of men, if God leaves them unto
themselves? we must therefore take heed of sacrificing to our own nets and
drags, trusting to our own strength; but come off from all those, and act in
the strength of God: We can do nothing without him, but all things through
Christ that strengthens us: Samson said, He would go out and shake himself, as
at other times; And he wist not Judge. 16. 20.
that the Lord was departed from him. 5. Beware of pride and stoutness of heart.


Lastly, Beware of pride and stoutness of heart, trying conclusions with God,
and reasoning and counter-striving against God: The proud men would not believe
the Prophet, saying, Thou speak falsely, the Lord our God has not sent thee
to say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there, Jer. 43. 2. Use 5. For admonition.


The fifth Use shall be for admonition: O that we could account the
long-suffering of God our salvation! And O that the goodness of God, and the
riches of his mercy, might lead us to repentance! In few words be admonished:

1. Take the benefit of the season, To day: Repent speedily, 1. Repent
speedily. 2. Repent seriously.
Isa. 55. 6. Heb. 4. 7.

2. Repent seriously and Evangelically, make not a slight matter of so great a
work, neither rest satisfied in a legal repentance, extorted from the fear of
Hell, and the wrath of an angry God; but let it be done Evangelically, from the
love of God, the consideration of the displeasure of so good a God, and the
sinfulness of sin; let those considerations melt thee into tears, and cause
thee to mourn ingenuously.

3. Be continually renewing thy repentance, and when thou have 3 Be renewing
thy repentance frequently.
felt a pardon, get it fairer transcribed and renewed through the Blood of
Christ: His blood cleanses from all sins: And there is redemption through his
Blood, the forgiveness of sins.

4. Be thankful for the space that God gives thee, thou can never 4 Be
thankful for the space given thee 5. Improve every mercy to more says full
performance of duty.
acknowledge enough the patience and forbearance of God, who gives thee time,
and allows thee space, and whers his Sword, and bends his Bow to give thee
warning to escape the blow: What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
mercies and loving kindnesses? Will Eternity be enough to praise the Lord?

5. Improve every mercy to more faithful performance of duties.

The last Use is, for comfort unto those who make much of the strivings of Gods
Spirit, and make the best improvement of the Use 6. For consolation.
time that God alots them for repentance: This will yield them comfort in their
lives, and on their deathbeds, 2 Kings 20. 3. Remember, O Lord, I beseech
thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and
have done that which is good in thy sight. And to all Eternity, Happy are they
that have hearkened to Gods call, and made a good use of all the means of Grace,
and spent the allotted time to Gods glory. Here they shall reap the firstfruits
of Joy and Comfort, and hereafter the full Harvest, unto all Eternity.

An Engagement unto Holiness, from the consideration of the Day of Judgment.
Unfolded from 2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing then that all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and
Godliness?


THat Christ shall come to Judgment, is an Article of our Ser. 4. at St.
Maryes Oxon July 27 1651.
Faith: We profess we believe it, yet how many deny it in their practices: Some
put far from them the evil day, or think not of a day of account; like
desperate Bank-rupts, adding more to the score, not considering an after
reckoning. Hence multitudes live as they list, without God in the world,
running into all excess of riot, frolicking it in all manner of Epicurism and
Voluptuousness, thus denying the Day of Judgment by the wickedness of their
lives: Others are much offended because the day is so long a coming, because
Christ stays so long; they are hot-spurs, and will not wait: If Gods clo^k
strike not according to their Dyal: If the Resurrection, Day of Judgment,
Christ's second coming, be not as soon as they expect, they call all in question,
and propose a question full of Blasphemy and Infidelity both, ver. 4. Where is
the promise of his coming? These blasphemous Scoffers, ver. 4. Arg. 1. Ver. 5.
the Apostle consures by several Arguments: The world was created by the word
of God, v. 5. It was not ab aeterno, (as Philosophers dreamed) now the Argument
is valid; The same God who by his word made the world, can by his word destroy
it when he pleases.

A second Argument is drawn from experience, v. 6. By the Deluge Arg. 2. Ver. 6.
the old world was destroyed: God bade the water overflow, and destroy man and
beast, and it did so: And the time will come, that he will bid the fire to
destroy this visible World wherein we no^ live, and it shall be so, v. 7.

A third Argument is drawn from the Eternity of God: We Ver. 7. Arg. 3.
poor Creatures measure things by time, we speak of days, weeks, months, and
years, of times past, present, and to come, thus we apprehend; but time past,
present, and to come, are all one in God; His Decree delays not: He Is not
measured by time, Ver. 8.
v. 8. If God seem to defer this day, yet this is an argument of singular
patience, mercy, and loving kindness, not of any slackness, Ver. 9.
v. 9. Gods long-suffering should be our salvation; Gods patience and waiting
upon us, roads us a Lecture of Repentance: O infinite forbearance! bowels of
mercy opened; when as the Lord might cut us asunder in the midst of our
rebellions, and send us to Hell immediately; yet he wooes, invites, and
beseeches us to repent; and he waits, and trys us, whetting of his Sword,
bending of his Bow, that whilst the Sword is a whetting, and the Bow a
bending, we should prudently foresee and take warning, that so we might escape
the blow.

The fourth and last Argument, to confute those scoffers, who Where is the
promise of his coming? This, I say, is drawn Ver. 10.
from the manner of Christ's coming, v. 10. Hoc additum est (says Calvin) ut
semper sint in excubiis fideles, nec crastinum sibi promittant.

This may be considered three manner of ways.

1. It Is unexpected, as Thieves come unlooked for, when men 1.
are asleep and most secure, then the Thief comes. When the old World was
secure, in the midst of their jollity, then came the Flood and swept them away.

2. There will be a change of the whole frame of the Universe, 2. Matthew. 24.
38. 39. Beza. Erasmus. (...) 3.
v. 10. The heavens, etc.

Impetum veluti Sibillantis procella declarat: So Beza, In morem procellae, in
manner of a storm: So Erasmus.

3. There shall be an utter conslagration of all things, even of those wherein
worldlings place their happiness, The Manors, Lands, goodly Buildings, the
Wonders and Idols of the World, shall be burnt up at that day. Now it will be
our wisdom, neither to question the truth of these things (for Truth it self,
the Lord Jesus Christ, has told us that these things shall come to pass)
neither ought we to be curiously inquisitive after the particular time, when,
(as some of the Jewish Rabbis have been too bold in this pa^ticular) neither
ought we to be impatient or querulous, because its not yet accomplished.

4. Our duty to wait and believe: And our main duty and wisdom will consist in
this, to make preparation, to be in Procinctu, 4. Hab. 2. 3, 4.
to have our Garments girt about us, to have our Lamps burning, and Oil enough
in them against that great day. Far be it from me to raise a dust, or rake into
the Dunghill of those ancient lately (...)
(...) Heretics, who deny the Resurrection, the Day of Judgment: Hac fide
vivo, the rule of the Scripture is clear and infallible, there shall be a day
of Judgment: All this world shall be dissolved: This is a Doctrine most true;
My Text makes the Application, (...), etc. Divis.


Which words contain a Supposition and an Inference.

1. Here Is something supposed, Seeing, etc. Its a Principle undoubtedly 1.
to be believed, That the Heavens and Earth shall be dissolved, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent ^eat: Compare this with Psalm 102. 25, 26,
27. Let Us not introduce, nor believe vain Philosophy which holds amongst many
other dotages, Quod coeli sunt incorruptibiles. To me it is out of question that
he that made them by his word, will one day by his word destroy them: Now
whether the heavens are so perfectly made as in their own nature uncap^ble of
corruption, is not here to be disputed of; or whether the celestial
influences be as vigorous as at first (though a learned Dr. of our own holds
the affirmative, in that excellent Dr. George Hackwill in his Apology.
book entitled The Power and Providence of God in the government of the world)
Yet I shall wave this Question, being loath to intermixe any Philosophical
dispute, in matters of faith. We believe it, We have sure ground, plain
scripture for our assertion, that all these things shall be dissolved.

2. Here Is an inference (...), Jts inferred by way of admiration, what manner of
persons (i. e.) we should be eminent in holiness, we should act in an
extraordinary manner, we should be rare, singular, even a non-such for piety;
its Diodats observation upon the place. If heaven and Earth be purified by
fire, what care ought Diod. in loc. Calvin in loc.
we to take to be purged and cleansed from our corruptions? An ergo nos in terra
demersos esse convenit etc. says Calvin on the place? The heavens and earth
shall pass away, and shall we be s^allowed up in the earth, and not rather
meditate on a holy and a godly life? The argument I may thus frame; There shall
at the day of judgment, be a dissolution of this visible Globe of heaven and
earth, therefore we ought in an especial manner to labor after holiness: This
is the argument of the Text of incomparable strength. But why is it in the
Plural number (...); This is an Hebraisme; when the Scripture would express a
thing with a greater emphasis, it uses the plural number, so Cant. 1. 4: We
will remember thy loves, thereby inhancing the greatness and multitudes of
Christ's loving kindness: Likewise we read Psalm. 20. He is the God of our
Salvations (i. e.) that he is the God from whom all Psalm. 110. 3.
salvations come in the most high and eminent way. And the Psalmist further
specifies Psalm. 100. 3. Thy people shall be a people of willingness, to show
their singular readiness and willingness, as if they were all made up of a
willing mind and ready spirit for Jesus Christ. Thus in the text in all holy
conversations and Godliness: Which expression, some refer to duties of both
tables: its most true that a godly man respects both, and labors to keep a
Good conscience both toward God and men. For the genuine sense of the text,
Beza gives me full satisfaction: Vsurpatur numerus multitudinis ex Haebreorum
more, ut pietas significetur omnibus suis partibus constans, quam pro viribus
sectari nos oporteat. The scope of all I conceive to be this, as if the Apo^^le
should thus enlarge himself. You are secure and careless, you shall be suddenly
surprised: The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night: You commit
Idolatry with the world, your hearts are married to these outward things, on a
sudden all shall be consumed, all wherein you trust shall be burnt up: ^owever
you put the day of judgment far of, yet its a coming, its nigher then you are
aware of, and the heavens and the earth shall be dissolved: At that day none
but holy persons can hold up their heads with comfort. Therefore seriously
bethink your selves; anticipate the terror and sorrow of that day, by an holy
conversation: Make timely provision for that day, Labor for holiness, and
then you need not fear, notwithstanding the burning up of the present world,
you that are holy here shall behold that day with comfort: Therefore now have
that day in your eyes, in your thoughts, in your frequent meditations, in your
prayers, that you may be found blameless at that day.

The words thus divided and expounded, presents unto you one entire, plain, and
practical Doctrine.

That the serious consideration of the day of Judgment should in an especial
manner engage us unto an holy life and conversation.

For the unfolding of this excellent and practical point, my work will be

1. To prove it by scripture testimonies. Method. 1. 2. 3. 1. For Scripture
Testimony.


2. To confirm it by evidence of Reason.

3. To improve all to your consciences by particular application.

1. For Scripture, it contributes abundant testimony to the proof hereof, I
shall gather sparingly from so great an heap, selecting only some more eminent
proofs, leaving the rest to be supplied in your serious meditations: Peruse v:
14 of this chap. (...). But can any walk so? Yes Zechary and Elizabeth walked
so, they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord blamlesse. It was Paul's exercise, Acts 24. 16. go thou
and do likewise. Labor to make strait paths. Labor to approve thy heart to
God, always walking as in the presence of God; Beg strength from Christ, and
thou can do all things through Christ that strengthens thee. Another proof
we have 1 Pet. 4. 7. The end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober,
and watch unto prayer. The consideration of our latter end, should be a
forcible argument to persuade us unto sobriety and watchfullness. That Is a
pregnant proof of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10. Upon this consideration
he lays down those 3 adverbs, (...), hopeing to gain them over to the
practice of them, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. This was a motive to him and the rest of
the saints, to have their conversation in heaven, because hence they look for
the Lord Jesus Christ. You read of a sacred Irony Eccles. 11. 9. The meaning
is, rejoice in God, walk in the ways of Gods commandments, that Ironicall
speech commands the contrary. Now what is used by the wise man, as a moveing
consideration? But know that there will be a day of judgment. Entertain
frequent and serious thoughts concerning it, which through the grace of God,
set home upon thy heart, may prevail with the circumspect walking in all holy
conversation and Godlyness. The consideration hereof should make us look better
to our hearts and lives and keep strict Luke 16. 2.
sentinel over both. That saying give an account of thy stewardship, should be
still ringing in the ears of Ministers, Governors, and Tutors: We shall one
day be called to an account, let us labor to be faithful Stewards, that so we
may give up our account with joy and not sorrow. It Is a known story, that the
young man committed by Eusebius. Hist.
the Apostle to the Elders care, was dissolute and a companion of Theives, and
is there termed a dead man, (i. e.) dead to God and goodness. O let it not be
our default, our negligence, that any under our charge are dead souls. As the
Captain beseeched, that his life, and the life of his fifty might be precious
in the Prophets eyes: 2 Kings 1. 13
When her we have more or fewer, let their souls be precious, and let us put
forth our selves in all our places and capacityes to give one another a lift
toward heaven: A day of judgment is coming, let that be a Frontlet before our
eyes: upon this consideration let Christians do brotherly offices, and
manifest their love to the souls of their brethren. Hereupon we are exhorted,
to avoid rash judgment Romans 14. 10. 1 Cor. 4. 5. There Is wisdom, understanding,
consideration all joined together. Deuteronomy. 32. 22. Its a patheticall speech, and
he is a wiseman in the esteem of the Holy Ghost, who considers his of latter
end. We should all of us fix this meditation upon our hearts, and entertain
serious thoughts, what will become of our our precious souls to all Eternity?
Will not a day of Judgment come? May not thou or I be summoned forthwith at
that impartial Tribunal? This being so, What manner of persons ought we to be
in all holy conversation and godliness?

In the second place, to confirm the Point by evidence of Reason, why the
consideration of the Day of Judgment should engage us unto holiness.

1. Because only holy persons shall be able to stand in Judgment: Reas. 1.
Because only holy persons shall stand in Judgment.
When the wicked, the Goats that stand on the left hand, and shall wish that
the Hills might ^all on them, and that the mountains might cover them from the
face of the Lamb: Then shall the godly lift up their heads, and behold Christ
who is their Judge, their Redeemer: This comforted Job on the Dunghill, Rev.
20. 6. Job 19. 25. Matthew. 5. 8. Heb. 12. 14.
I Know that my Redeemer lives.

They that are holy here, shall be happy to all eternity. They only shall be
partakers of the blessed Vis^on.

Now its much controverted, whether the Saints shall have their sins mentioned
at all at the day of Judgment; some conceive, that their sins shall be brought
in only as a cancelled ^ond; others are of opinion that they shall be
mentioned, that Gods mercy may the more be glorified in the greatness of the
Pardon: And others say, they shall not be mentioned at all, because in several
Scriptures the Lord says, He will remember their sins no more; and that he
will c^st all our sins into the depth of the Sea; and that he casts Isa. 43.
25. Mich. 7. 19. Isa. 38. 17.
our sins behind his back: without all controversy that shall be done that
conduces most to ^ods glory, and their happiness: There Is no condemnation to
the Saints, the day of Judgment will be a day of refreshing to them, an
addition to their happiness, soul and body being reunited, and made companions
in bliss unto all ^ternity. Seeing then holy persons shall be able to look the
Judge in the face, since they only shall stand in judgment, the consideration
of this great day should sink deep into our hearts, and make deep impression
upon our spirits, exciting, alluring, and prevailing with us to a sanctified
life and conversation.

2. because the time of this life, is the only Season appointed 2 Reas. This
is the present time.
by God to labor after holiness: The Exhortation runs in the present ^ense, 1
Pet. 1. 15. 1 John 3. 3.

Q. 3. But can we be perfectly holy?

A. We must have perfection of parts (i. e.) Sincerity: In Heaven there will be
perfection of degrees; we must have truth of holiness, we must begin here, and
strive after more: In Heaven we shall attain the complement thereof; we may not
content our selves with what we have attained unto, but we must labor after
perfection, pressing forward toward the mark, for the price of the high calling
that is in Jesus Christ, as Id qui faciunt fructum colligent satione, sua
dignum, coacervabunt enim quod male dispereat. Calv in loc. Gal. 6. 8.
the Apostle did, Phil. 3. 14. Now then consider, the time of this life is the
Seed-time, the Harvest is reserved in Heaven: As you sow, so you shall reap: If
you sow to the flesh, you shall of the flesh reap corruption; if you sow to the
spirit, you shall of the spirit reap life everlasting: Therefore in your most
serious thoughts, consider that you deal for life and immortallity; your
negotiations are for the great things of Eternity. In this World, in this
present time of life, you must labor to be holy. Purgatory is a Blasphemous
Popish dream: No purgation left for another World: No Prayer, no Sermon will
work upon thee after this life: Here then holiness is wrought, lay these things
to heart.

3. Because Judgment returns us just as death leaves us: As the 3. Reas.
Because judgment returns us, as death lest us.
Tree falls, so it lies; and as death leaves us, so judgment will find us: He
that is filthy, let him be filthy still: He that dies unreconciled to Jesus,
shall be so returned: The day of Judgment is most impartially just in all
proceedings: And Judgment returns none, neither better nor worse, but as death
leaves them. Now then, if thou live and die in an unregenerate estate, so
thou will remain unto all Eternity. After death, no tears, no cries will
prevail: There Is no door of hope, the damned are without hope, and this
heightens their misery: Time is past, time is past; The Judge has veiled his
face, having past a Sentence irrevo cable: No^ whilst you are alive, on this
side Hell and Eternity, there is hope left, you are under the sound of the
Gospel, and the Ambassado^ are sent, offering unto you terms of reconciliation,
We pray you, in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. O follow after
holiness! (...), pursue it hard, give not over: This day is a working 2 Cor. 5.
20. Heb. 12. 14.
day, and it is but short; a day of Judgment (which is a day of restitution and
recompense) is approaching: So live, as you desire to die: Do you desire to be
happy in your deaths? Labor to live holy in your lives.

Thus much for the Doctrinal part: Now to set all home by particular
Application: I have five Uses to make of this Doctrine: for Terror,
Exhortation, Examination, Direction, and Consolation.

1. This Doctrine breathes forth terror and dreadful Judgment Use 1. For
Terror.
unto all unholy persons: If the righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall
all unholy persons appear? If only holy persons are blessed, surely then
unholy persons are cursed: If holy persons shall be admitted into Gods
presence, and enjoy communion with God, and see God the Father reconciled, God
the Son their Redeemer, God the Holy Ghost their Comforter, where shall unholy
persons appear? They shall stand without; they are the dogs whipped out of Gods
presence; they shall see God no otherwise then the Malefactor a Judge
condemning of him: Then all the Attributes of God shall plead against profane
persons; My mercy (says God) my patience, my loving kindness, my goodness,
have been despised: All the Sermons they have heard shall plead against them;
so many Sermons of Repentance; so many Sermons of Reconciliation, of Holiness,
bring in black Bills of Indictment against them: All the Messengers of God
plead, We have spent our breath and strength in vain; We have labored all
night, and caught nothing: We have tendered Christ, offered to these profane
Wretches terms of peace and reconciliation, but they have scorned them all, and
undervalued the glorious excellencies of the Lord Jesus: All the passages of
Providence will come in against unholy persons. Providence will plead, I have
clothed and fed thee, I gave thee the dew of Heaven, and fatness of the Earth;
I sustained, preserved thee, but thou have abused all the Creatures, not eating
for health, but for gluttony; not drinking for strength, but drunkenness: All
thy friends will plead against thee, such as have been real friends to thy
soul, as have spent their spirits in Exhortations, Counsels, Admonitions, all
these are upon Record, and will cry out for vengeance against thee: O that God
would smite the hearts of all unholy persons, and loosen the joints of their
loins, as Belshazzars were, and make their knees smite one against another,
that now, in this time of life, this short day, they might be effectually
wrought upon to a holy conversation!

This Use in an especial manner reproves those that scoff at holiness: Athens:
That which is the true Believers honor to be a Saint, is cast by some profane
persons into the teeth of Professors, as if it were a Character of infamy,
These are your Saints. In the Act; and Monuments, v Fox Acts Mon in Q. Mary's
days
a Martyr reproved a proud Prelate for Swearing: He answered profanely, I am
no Saint: What was he then, surely an incarnate Devil? If you be no Saints here
in the Militant Church, you shall never be Saints* in the Triumphant Church:
What shall we say to such as deride holiness, and exercise their wits to cast a
flam or a jeer upon Religion, and make a mock at praying by the Spirit: Let
them read that dreadful Sentence, each word is a thunderbolt, Romans 8. 9. If
any man has not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his; whose are they then?
the Devils questionless; either Christ's or the Devils; If none of Christ's
Sheep, then surely of the Devils Goats: Of all others, a Scoffer is hardest to
cure, seldom are such brought home; if they are, it costs them dear. If any
such be present (though I hope better things of you) let me tell you, when you
come to die, holiness will be holiness indeed, then holy persons will be holy
persons: Then when conscience is awakened, you will wish you were in their
stead whom you so much contemned, you will wish your tongues had fallen out of
your heads when you spoke against holy persons. You that make Gods children,
even real Saints, your subject of obloquy, What will you say at the day of
Judgment, when they shall be at the right hand, and the Judge shall say, Come
ye blessed; and you shall be on the left hand, and the Judge shall say, Go ye
cursed; when you shall Luke 14. 28.
see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Saints in the kingdom of Heaven,
and you your selves shut out of doors: Are any such present, are any young
wanton wits, that will rather loose a friend then a jest, rather loose the
friendship of a good conscience, then the frothy issue of a scurrilous wit? To
such let me speak, with abundance of love to their souls: Non est tutum ludere
cum sanctis: It Is not safe to make a jest of holy persons, or holy things: If
ever Qui ludit in Cathedra, lugebit in Gehenna.
they belong to God, they will with Austin make Confessions and Retractations.
University sins, abuse of wit and parts, contempt of holiness, neglect of
seasons of Grace, will cry loud, and make such a gash in the conscience, as may
be a long time clawing off.

2. This Doctrine reproves Hypocrites: These seem better then they are, and put
on a Vizard of sanctity; these are painted Sepulchers, rotten at the core,
gilded rotten Nut-megs; and by how much they pretend to Religion, they are so
much the worse, because they satisfy themselves in a bare pretense. There
shall be a day of Judgment, and that will be a day of terror and vengeance
unto them: Seldom (as a Reverend Divine says) an Hypocrite dies undiscovered.
It pleases God to unmask him, and discover his Tor shell of Hypocrisy.
counterfeit profession before he dies. so that usually in this world a
^ypocrite is discovered. However, in the world to come, all shall be laid open;
his glozing formalities, outside, glorious shows, all his painted dresses shall
be made known to men and Angels: And what is the portion of Hypocrites? If there
be one place in Hell lower then another, any torment greater, that is his
portion, Matthew. 14. 15.

3. This Doctrine reproves all secret sinners, who by reason of their secret
cunning conveyance, hope for impunity: They little think of the all-seeing eye
of God: Could a Homer say, (...) Homer Il.
(...), and shall not Christians believe that the God of Heaven knows all
things? All thy Reservations, Equivocations, subtle Distinctions and Evasions,
are obvious and naked to the Allseeing eye of God. The Adulterer waits for the
twy-light, he would fain escape the sight of men, but he cannot escape the
sight of God: Speculative, as well as practical defilements, are all known to
God: Thy Curtain, Closet-sins, thy Imageries in the dark, the sins that no man
living knows of, are made manifest unto God: The Trades-mans Sophisticated
Wares, his false Lights, scant Measures, all his mysteries of Cousenings in the
Trade, are apparent unto God; the Liars obstinate standing in a lie, cannot
escape Gods knowledge; all his tricks of wit and collusions, to baffle his
conscience, will not serve his turn at the day of Judgment. The Popish
distinctions of (...), will not acquit them at Gods Tri^^nal: The cheating of
the Laborer in Gods Vineyard, upon pretense that his maintenance is J^wish or
Antichristian, will not be excused at the day of account, when as covotousness
and self-interest is the usual moving cause of defrauding the Ministers: It
plainly appears, that many, like Watermen, look one way, and row another; they
serve the Ministers in these days, as the Pagans did the Primitive Christians:
They put them first into Bears skins, and then they worryed them: For there are
many who stigmatize their ^alling and Maintenance, as Antichristian, that so
they may the more securely run away with their maintenance. Just like Demetrius
and the Crafts-men, who cried up Diana, Great is Diana of the Ephesians; but he
had more mind to Act. 19. 34. ver. 25.
the Silver Shrines, By this craft (says he) we get our living: Now all these
things one day shall come to light, even the most hidden things of darkness:
All the Machivialian politic juglings of men; all the secret designs men drive
at for advantage; all the Hypocritical defalkations and reservations, such as
were in Ananias and Saphyra; all the Meanders, Windings, Diverticles, shall all
be made naked at the day of Judgment; then unjust persons, Hypocrites,
Time-serving Politicians, false-hearted persons, shall appear pourtrayed forth
in their proper colors, and be the astonishment and open disgrace ^^ men and
Angels.

But I proceed to a second Use, and that is for Exhortation: I Use 2. For
Exhortation.
beseech you, in the fear of God, in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, to labor
after holiness, (...), etc. Let the motive of the Text be set home upon your
hearts, What manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy conversation and
godliness; You that are young, vigorous, and have marrow in your bones, labor
to be holy, Remember now your Creator in the days of your youth: God loves the
Eccles. 12. 1. Mich. 7. 1.
first ripe fruits, our best service, away with that wicked Proverb, --
Angelicus juvenis senibus satanizat in annis: The Sun cannot rise too early,
unless it be to a sluggard: You cannot begin too soon. Defer not a day, not a
moment longer: O that in this Garden of Learning there might be a great
increase of Plants of Righteousness, that as Plants, planted in Gods garden,
they may bring forth more fruit in their elder age: It Is usually said, Spes
Ecclesiae est in juve^tute: Far be it from me to envy, but I desire to be
thankful, and rejoice to see a sprinkling of holy young men, who are grave,
serious, and studious, and breath after God, and bend their studies to attain
to the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ: The Lord of heaven add unto their
number an hundredfold. Its oftentimes observed, that the Universitie proves
the marring or making of many; insomuch as a Scholar has a censure given him,
like that of Origin, Vbi bonus nemo melior, ubi malus nemo pejor. Look to it,
you are in your prime and fresh green years: O consecrate your selves unto the
service of God. It was the exhortation of Joshuah, Josh. 3. 4.
Sanctify your selves; for the Lord will do wonders amongst you. The Lord may
employ you in great services, and make you instruments of great good; What a
wonder is it for a young Timothy to be able to grapple with the old Leviathan,
and throw him on his back. Consider with your selves all your Philosophical
learning (though I discard not, but ^commend in its due place and distance)
will do you no good at the great day. It Is holiness, an holy life that will
comfort you when you come to dye. It Is the knowledge of Jesus Christ that will
stand you in stead, when all vain Philosophy will Mat. 27 3.
do you no more good than the High Priests did Judas, They said, what is that
to us, see thou to that, Mat. 27. 3. O therefore now in your youth labor to be
holy: Happy is it for any of you, with whom God begins betime. And to you that
are old I address my Exhortation, you should be examples of holiness; you are
Beacons Job 32. 7.
set upon a hill, the eyes of thousands of young ones are upon you: Let days
speak, and multitude of years teach wisdom. You have one foot in the grave,
would you have comfort in your death, O labor to lead holy lives: Would you
die the death of the righteous, O labor to live the life of the righteous:
your riches, your dignities, your learning will do you no good when you come
to dye; you shall then be degra^ed, levelled, stripped naked of all, and if you
have not the robes of Christ's righteousness for your cover, you had better
never have been born. What was that which comforted Hezechiah when he received
the sentence of death, you may read it to be the walking before the Lord in
truth, and with a perfect heart. This 2 King. 20, 3
is that which will give you comfort, and this alone, even the remembrance of
an holy lise. The assurance of a God reconciled in Christ, will cause you to
bid welcome to the King of terrors. That which the Philosopher accounts (...),
will be your Marriage day, the welcome^^ day that ever your eyes beheld: And
because I love from myheart plain dealing, give me leave yet a little more
plainly and particularly to set home a seasonable word of Exhortation.

You Fathers and Brethren whom God has made ^ulers in Israel, Govern: in the
University, O labor for holiness your selves, and to plant holiness in your
societies: Root out scossing Ishmaels, profane Esaus, suffer not a scoffer at
holiness to be within your walls: Let Joshuahs resolution be your continual
Monitor, I and my house will serve the Lord: Set up holy Ordinances, Preaching,
Divinity Lectures, and a plain way of Catechizing; what abundance of good may
this do? Some do give good examples in this kind, I hope the rest will follow
after, that all our societies may be called Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there:
In your Elections principally look after holiness; Encourage such as have the
Image of Christ stamped on them, and are willing to receive Instruction. You
that are Tutors have great prices put into your hands; you have young, tender
twigs, flexible, tractable, they are some of them instar tabulae rasae, in some
sense; pray with your Scholars, Catechize them, ground them in the Principles
of Religion, and season them with grace betimes -- Quo semel est imbuta recens
servabit odorem testa diu: Trouble not young heads with disciplinarie
Controsies and doubtful Disputations: Instruct them in the mystery of
Regeneration, in the Doctrines of Holiness, Faith, and Repentance and
Self-denial, these are the most needful things. In doing good to one Scholar,
you may do good to a whole City or Parish; if you quit your trust and be
faithful, and play the men, thousands may have cause to praise God, and rise
up and call you blessed. You that are Masters of Families, be exhorted to set
up Holiness in your Families: Teach your children and servants to know God,
keep up your authority, give not liberty to them under your roof to live as
they list; Abraham gave no toleration, he commanded his household to keep the
way of the Lord. Let all sorts and sexes, old and Genesis 18. 19.
young, learned and unlearned, lay this Exhortation to heart: I press
holiness upon you all. O that the Priests Motto were writ upon your hearts and
lives, Holiness unto the Lord. You cannot say as Sheba the Son of Bichri said,
We have no portion in David, etc. as if this concerns not us, but holiness
concerns you all, you must all follow after holiness.

To excite you to your duty, I Will lay down some moving considerations. Consid.
1. We are elected unto holiness. 2 These. 2. 13.


1. Consider you are elected unto holiness; not for holiness, nor through
praevision of holiness, that is a false Arminian gloss, but unto holiness.

2. We are created unto holiness. All the members of our bodies Consid. 2. We
are created in holiness. Ephesians. 4. 24.
and faculties of our souls should be instruments of holiness: The tongue
should speak holily, holy communication should drop from the tongue; the heart
and hand both should be clean, as James specifies c. 4. 8. The feet must keep
the ways of Gods commandments; Consid. ^. We are redeemed to be holy. Luke 1.
74. 75.
the understanding, will, affections, the whole man, all must be holy; to this
purpose they were created.

3. Consider we are redeemed for this end and purpose, that we may be holy.

4. It Is Gods will that we should be holy, 1 These. 4. 3. Now our Consid. 4. Its
Gods will that we should be holy:
wills must be subject unto Gods will: He commands us to be holy, we should pray
for his grace to enable us to perform his command: Holiness is suitable to
Gods will, and we have an encouraging promise, 1 John 5. 14.

5. ^olynesse is our calling, 1 Pet. 1. 15. 1 These. 4. 7. We can Consid. 5.
Holiness is our calling.
have no comfort, but when we are in a lawful calling; when our ways are
according to Gods ways, we may hope for Gods gracious protection according to
the promise, Psalm. 91. 11. When any commit wickedness, are unclean, drunk,
associate themselves with wicked persons, they are out of their calling, and so
out of Gods special providence. Consider this seriously when you are tempted to
Whoredom, or any other sin, God has not called you unto un^eannesse, but unto
holiness.

6. Heaven is an holy place only appointed for holy persons: Nothing Consid. 6.
Heaven is a holy place.
that's defiled shall enter there, Rev. 21. 27. Only holy persons shall be
acquitted before Christ's Judgment Seat: They only shall enter into the new
Jerusalem.

7. In heaven there shall be no other but holy employment, Consid 7. In Heaven
there is holy employment.
singing Hosannahs and Hallelujahs to him that sits on the throne, and to
the Lamb for evermore. A profane person hates holy Ordinances and holy
employments here on earth: Were it possible for him to be in heaven, he would
be weary of the employment; whereas the Saints shall have their hearts put into
such an high and excellent frame, as they shall without molestation, weariness,
or intermission, be ever setting forth the praises of the Lord.

8. And there will be in heaven the most holy company, the holy Consid. 8. In
heaven there is holy company.
Trinity, God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, the most holy,
blessed, and glorious Trinity. There will be holy Angels, the spirits of just
men made perfect, holy Martyrs, holy Ministers, holy people: No company there
but all holy company.

9. And lastly, to close up all: Now whilst we live on earth is Consid. 9. The
present time is the time to labor after holiness.
the time or never to labor after holiness: now I mean in this time of life
we must make provision for eternity: This is Gods summons, to day if you will
hear his voice. Delay not a minute longer: Resist not the movings of the
Spirit; great is the danger of resisting the Spirits movings. The Lord set home
all these considerations upon your hearts; and if hereby the Lord should be
pleased to gain any soul to the love and practice of holiness, I should never
be enough thankful for the mercies of this day.

The third Use is for Examination and Trial: Every one will Use 3. For
Examination.
plead for himself, and pretend to an holy conversation: As it was said, When
the Son of man comes shall he find faith on the earth? So shall he find an
holy conversation; a formal Professor, a Christian at large, are every where to
be found, like Sycamo^es in the valley for abundance; but the power of
holiness, an holy, circumspect walking are rarely found. Now then, because its
the grand Ministerial duty to distinguish the precious from the vile; according
to that high commendation and privilege given, as to be the mouths of God,
Jer. 15. 19. And because God has gone forth in a signal exemplary blessing
upon this way, which has been so frequently used by old Disciples, faithful,
laboring Ministers (whose plain Preaching would it were more revived now
adays) It shall therefore be my task to lay forth some distinguishing
characters and signs of a gracious, sincere heart, whose life is accordingly
ordered in an holy conversation, and by them you may put your selves upon the
test and trial, as in the presence of God, whether you are such manner of
persons, in all holy conversation and godliness.

The first sign is spiritual poverty; and this consists in the emptying
Charact. 1. Spiritual Poverty.
of the heart of self-confidence, self-opinion, self-sufficiency, and
self-righteousnesse; whereby a Christian becomes nothing in himself, altogether
lost, undone, blind, miserable, poor and naked: He is thoroughly sensible of
his own misery and wretchedness: He is apprehensive of his own undone
condition, and what need he has of a Savior; such an one Christ pronounces
to be in the state Mat. 5. 3.
of blessedness.

2. There follows the highest prizing and estimate of Jesus Charact. 2. High
prizing of Jesus Chr.
Christ: That soul which is spiritually poor, accounts Christ the greatest
treasure; it apprehends it self blind, that Christ may give it eye salve;
miserable and lost, that Christ may save it; naked, that Christ may cloth it
with his righteousness: See what an high price the Spo^se puts upon Jesus
Christ, Cant. 5. 10, 11, 12, etc. He is precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7. a plant of
renown, Ezekiel. 34 29. Such an high price had the wise Merchant, to sell all for
him, Mat. 13. 45, 46. So Moses, who preferred the reproach of Christ before
Egypts treasure: Bradford wept often, even at meals, because he could not
bring his dull heart to love Jesus Christ; so the Martyr in the flames cried
out, None but Christ: Thus highly did John Baptist testify of Christ, Joh. 3.
30. so Christ may be exalted, he cares not what becomes o^ himself: So every
faithful Minister puts the highest value upon Jesus Christ; so Christ's honor
may be advanced, Christ's cause and interest promoted, he cares not what
sufferings, what persecutions he mee^s withal: Though he encounter with Beasts
at Ephesus, Sons of Anak, and fry at a stake, none of these things move him,
so Christ may be glorified in him, and by him. It Is a sign of true grace to
prize Christ highly, and enhaunce his esteem and honor above all things
besides.

3. The heart is in love with holiness for it self. ^olynesse is Charact. 3.
The heart is in love with holiness.
the image of God, Ephesians. 4. 24. and there is beauty in Gods im^ge to enamour
the soul. What was said of Moral virtue, may be much more said of Theological,
Si ^erreno oculo possit cerni, admirabile sui desiderium excitaret. Could we
discern by a spiritual eye the luster and excellency of Holiness, O how would
our hearts be in love with it! Multitudes followed Christ for the Loaves, and
accounted gain their godliness. Self-seeking interests, covetousness is that
Master-wheele that sets many on working; but a true Believer accounts
Godliness his gain, Christ his honor, ^eligion his preferment: His eye is
single, his heart sincere: He Will do his duty, do his work faithfully, and trust
God for his wages: Nay Jsa. 49. 4. Psalm. 119. 7
the work is a reward: O how I love thy law, says David: It was his delight:
he loved the Commandments above sine gold: And what was the Law? it was holy,
just, and good: Holiness was the object of his love. To love God for himself,
Holiness for it self, is a good sign.

4. There must an ingenuous sorrow for sin: I call it ingenuous, Charact. 4.
An ingenuous sorrow for sin.
in opposition to all slavish howling under the rod. There is a vast difference
between Ahab and Paul, between that sorrow which is (...), and that which is
(...), 2 Cor. 7. 10. and you have there seven Apostolical characters of godly
sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 11. There Is a vast difference between the howling of dogs
and crying of children; between the crying of wicked persons, as Pharaoh, Ahab,
Cain, under a heavy judgment, for the punishment and smart upon them, and the
crying of Paul, Peter, and Mary Magdalen: Pharaoh said, Take away this plague;
the plague of Locusts, Caterpillars, etc. he never was affected with the plague
of his heart, which was the greatest plague of all: But take away my sins,
cries David: Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my
sins, here is a (...) of godly sorrow; it mourns for sin more than the
punishment; it mourns for sin because it is sin, because it is a breach of
Gods holy Law, because thereby God is dishonored; this sorrow is kindly,
ingenuous, when the heart is melted and mourns, and is broken for displeasing
so good and gracious a Lord God.

5. There will be a cordial mourning for others sins: This affection Charact.
5. Thheres mourning for others sins. Psalm. 119. 136
was singular in David, Rivers of water run down mine eyes, because men keep
not thy Law. A godly man lays to heart the sins of the times and the place
where he lives. It grieves him at the heart to see God dishonored by any.
Bradford, that rare spirited man grieved at the miscarriages of one of his
Scholars, and laid the fault upon himself for not looking better to him. If he
so charged himself, surely our faces will gather blackness, and a great deal
of guilt will lie at our do^es for not discharging our trust as we ought to
do, concerning so many Scholars, as so many Depositums committed to our
charge: But let us do our duties, and mourn over them that are refractory, and
keep them strict to discipline: Lets pray for them, and mourn over them, and
questionless prayers and tears are prevalent weapons. When thou hear a man
swear, feast him drunk, break Sabbaths, and takes no heed, nor makes any
conscience to walk in the way of the Lord, O mourn for him, and weep that God
is dishonored, and reflect upon thy self, thy nature is as bad as his: Who art
thou that differs from thy brother? What difference there is, it is not of thy
making, it is Grace, free Grace that makes all the difference.

6. The heart approves it self to God, so did David, put himself Charact. 6.
The hearts approving it self to God.
upon Gods Examination: Such a one walks always as in the presence of God;
knowing that God is all eye to see, all ear to hear, all hand to write down
all: He stands not to man's day, and man's judgment, he appeals to God the
searcher of all hearts, whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the
Sun. Hereupon Job raised a ground of comfort and confidence, because his
Redeemer was his Judge; he that was his Savior should acquit him, his Witness
was on high: See his excellent protestation, that his heart should not reproach
him, Job 27. 4, 5, 6. Now when a Christian is hardly censured and condemned by
the world, yet if he can approve his heart to God, that he has walked before
God with an upright heart, here is ground of abundant comfort; If God be for us,
who can be against us? If God speak peace, who can speak trouble? It Is God
that justifies, who is he then that condemns? Let Us all then labor to tread
even paths, to keep close to the rule of the Word, always Romans 8. 31.
to set the fear of God before our eyes, that whatsoever evil entreaties we may
meet withal from abroad, we may have comfort at home, having approved our
hearts to God, who searches all hearts, and tries the reins, and rendereth
unto every one according to the fruits of their doings.

7. There will be a pressing forward toward perfection. A heart Charact. 7.
There will be a pressing forward toward perfection.
that approves it self to God, as it labors for truth of every grace, so it
labors for growth of them: Joshuahs Sun stood still, Hezechiahs Sun went back:
Neither of these are for their imitation; but they are like David's Sun, which
like a Giant refresht with wine runs its course. I well know, that there are
Lambs as well as Sheep, weak as well as strong Christians, Christians of the
Lower and of the Upper Form, and that Faith admits degrees; yet every true
Believer contents not himself with that measure of grace whereunto he has
attained, but labors after perfection, as you may see Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14.
Psalm. 48. 6, 7. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. There are many things which a godly man
finds lacking in his Faith, Love, Humility; and therefore he desires and
endeavors after the increase of every grace, more Faith, more Love, more
Humility; thus he cries as the Horsleach's daughter give, give.

8. There Is a careful strict watch set upon the heart and life against Charact.
8. There Is a care. full watch ov^r the heart and life.
bosom sins: Be they ancient customary constitution, complexion sins as dear as
a right hand, and a right eye, they must be cut off, plucked out; David professed,
I kept my self from mine iniquity, Psalm. 18. 23. Be it peccatum in deliciis, an
Herodias, a Delilah, away with them; be it a Gibeonite, a pretending sin,
m^ke no league with it, be it a Benhadad, an Agag, give no quarter to them, bid
adieu to every sin, though delightful and pleasing to flesh and blood, say to
it as to a menstruous cloth, get thee hence. Let Joseph's resolution be as a
Monitor, and as a Frontlet before thine eyes, How can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God?

9. Yet further, the desire and endeavor must be universally extensive as to
hate and turn from every sin, so to have respect to Charact. 9. The desi^er
and ^ndeavour must be universal.
every commandment, Psalm. 119. 101. It is an argument of a gracious heart,
neither to divide in duties nor commands; neither to plead a dispensation in
the first nor in the second Table: This was Paul's exercise, he as it were drove
that trade (...). And this is consonant to the doctrine of the Gospel.
Universality is a divisive difference, it distinguishes a Sheep from a ^oat, a
true from a formal Professor; and a constitutive difference, to constitute
Act. 24. 16. Ti^. 2. 11, 12 Psalm. 119. 6.
a child of God. The universality respects (as I now mentioned) the object, the
whole Law, all Gods Commandments; the subject, the whole man, at all places,
and in all companies, to walk closely with God all the days of our lives.

10. The Spirit is without guile: Here Is an Israelite indeed without Charact.
10. A spirit without guile. Psalm. 32. 2. Joh. 1. 17.
guile, such was that excellent commendation that Christ gave Nathaniel. There
are three words whereof a godly man is compounded (...) singleness of heart,
(...) simplicity, and (...), sincerity: You have two of them in one verse, and
thence was matter enough of rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1. 12. This we must labor for,
even singleness, simplicity, and sincerity, and acting upon these principles,
we may with comfort look the King of terrors in the face, when all carnal
Machiavilian policies will prove Physicians of no value.

11. There will be the practice of Mortification and Vivisication, Charact. 11.
The practice of mortification.
The mortifying of the deeds of the body, and the quickening of the graces of
the Spirit, these are fruits of Regeneration and Repentance, Col. 3. 5. Romans 8.
13. Never dream of a shorter cut to h^aven than the rule of the Word
prescribes. Mr. Perkins says, He that was never truly humbled, never truly
believed. O set upon the practice of Mortification, put to death these br^ts of
Babylon, crucify, slay, mortify thy corruptions: ^et this day be a slaughter
day for thy sins; spare not an an^ient sin; let not thine eye pity thy most
delightful sin, butlet thy ^ow be like the Bow of Jonathan, that never
returned empty without the blood of the slain: This is a severe way, but
there is comfort in it. The Apostle uses two words, (...) (i. e.) the making of
the body black and blew, and the bringing it into subjection. There may be no
toleration of any sin. Take heed of easy, lazy ways, pleasing to thy
corrupt nature, they are dangerous ways. Follow the old light of the Word,
that presses Repentance, Humiliation, Mortification, that is Gods Law: Take
heed of any Antinomian Ignes fatuos, which decrie so row for sin; if thou
followest them, thou will follow a blind guide, and if the blind lead the
blind, both will fall into the ditch.

12. And lastly, there will be a burning in love to Jesus Christ; Charact. 12.
There will be a burning in love to Jesus Christ.
such a love as many waters cannot quench, nor stood-gates drown it, Cant. 8.
7. The love of Christ will con^^rain him, 2 Cor. 5. 14. He will do and suffer
out of a principle of love to Jesus Christ: This man loves Christ's image,
holiness, Christ's Members, Joh. 13. 35. Christ's ^rdinances they are his
delight and counselors, Christ's Messengers, the appearance of Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 4. 8. Tit. 2. 13. He longs for Christ's coming, Rev. 22. 20. By all these
signs and discriminating characters, we may judge of the Tree by the fruit,
and conclude that heart to be a gracious heart that can produce these
evidences; and where the heart is upright and holy, the conversation cannot but
be suitable; when the heart is enlarged, the feet will run the ways of Gods
commandments. Put your selves to these Trials proved to you from the Word of
God, and your own consciences.

The fo^rah Use shall be for Direction, how we shall make the best Use 4. For
direction.
use of this day of Judgment: In pursuance of this consideration, what rules
of directions must we observe, that from hence we may be engaged to a holy
conversation? amongst many I shall press six Rules to be reduced to point of
practice.

1. Pray for the Spirit of Sanctification: It Is Gods will our Sanctification,
we must pray that his will may be done in us, and by Rule. 1. Pray for the
Spirit of Sanctification.
us; that Christ's kingdom may be within us, that Christ would love and wash
us, and make us Kings and Priests unto God. This is a new creation, and
requires an omnipotent hand, Psalm. 51. 10. This is the Apostles prayer for the
Thessalonians, that the God of peace would sanctify them. This is the prayer
suitable to Gods will, and if ^e^ ask any thing according to Gods will he
hears us. We read of a spirit of holiness, Romans 1. 4. and sanctification of
the spirit. Pray hard for holiness, wrestle with God, be importunate for
Grace, and when it is begun pray for the consummation of it, that he that
has begun a good work will not leave it unfinished till the day of Jesus
Christ.

2. Be much employed in washing and cleansing thy heart. This Rule 2. Be much
employed in washing thy heart.
God calls for, Jer. 4. 14. There Is a great deal of filthiness that lies
lurking in thy heart, many foul corners, O wash and rinse thy heart: there are
many vain and wicked thoughts, there is in thy heart a stye, a sink of
filthiness, a cage of unclean birds: Many nasty rotten thoughts, and wicked
imaginations does this womb conceive: Try thy heart thoroughly, be better
acquainted at home; do thou hope to have benefit by Christ, see to thy duty
to purify 1 John, 3 3. Jam. 14 8
thy self, to cleanse thy hands, and purify thy heart; this is a needful
study, its time well employed in searching our hearts, in washing and purifying
of the inward man.

3. Be much exercised in divine meditation: Meditate frequently Rule 3. Be
exercised the divine in art of meditation.
of the four last things, Death, Judgment, Hell, and Heaven Entertain
frequent, and serious thoughts of ^ternity. It Is a point: of understanding and
wisdom to consider our latter end. Meditate what a holy place heaven is, what
holy company, and what holy employments aret here. Nothing that defiles shall
ever come there Get up into the Mount with Moses; let thy affections soar
aloft, being carried aloft with the wings of heavenly meditation. This was
Isaacs practice, David's, and Paul's: Were you acquainted with the singular
benefit of Meditation, you would not lie grovelling here below; your words,
thoughts, whole conversations would be in heaven.

4. Consider the omnipresence and omniscience of God; whither Rule 4. Consider
Gods omnipresence.
can thou go from his presence? how can thou escape his knowledge? If I
sin, (says Job) he marketh me, Job 10. 14, 15. God sees thy secret sins,
he knows all thy reservations and cunning conveyances. All things are naked
unto him with whom thou have to deal, and without holiness thou shall never
see the face of God with comfort. The serious consideration of the Omnipresence
and Omniscience of God, through the grace of God may prevail with us to a
circumspect, and holy conversation.

5. Set an high estimate upon, and frequent diligently the holy Rule 5,
Consider Gods Ordinances.
Ordinances of God: They are called, The beauties of Holiness, Psalm. 110. 3.
There is a cleansing virtue in the Word of God, Psalm. 119. 9. Gods face is
beautiful, his holiness is his beauty. Now by the face of God, Calvin
understands the Ordinances of God, Psalm. 27. 8. Wait then, O* Christian, at the
posts of Wisdoms gate; lie in the way where Christ comes by; tarry at these
Bethesdaes. The Ordinances are the golden Pipes to conveigh the golden Oil;
take heed of sitting loose from them: Bless God that your eyes behold your
Teachers, and that your Gospel is not driven into corners: Improve these prices
and spiritual advantages for the good of your precious souls.

6. And lastly, associate your selves with holy company: Love Rule 6. Associa^e
your selves with holy company.
where God loves; now the Lord loves his Saints: It was David's profession,
that his delight was in the Saints, Psalm. 16. 2, 3. Be a companion to those
that fear God. If a dead coal be near a live co^le, it may be inkindled by
it; but if two live coals be together, what abundance of heat will they give?
We read, Mal. 3. 16. That they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another.
Let not Christians be strange and shie of one another company: But let us unite
as one man to conserre all our interests to give each other a lift to heaven:
Make them thy companions on earth whom thou hopest to enjoy in heaven to all
eternity.

The last Use (and so in a few words to conclude) is a word of Use 5. For
Consolation.
Consolation, unto holy persons, true believers, the adopted sons and
daughters of God, when the day of Judgment comes, and the whole world is in a
flame, they shall be of good comfort: That day which will be a day of terror
and revenge to the wicked, shall be a day of refreshing and restitution unto
them. The Saints that sleep in the grave shall be awakned at the sound of the
Trumpet, and their bodies and souls shall be reunited, and they shall receive
the consummation of their happiness: The Saints that are alive shall be caught
up together with those that are dead in Christ in the clouds to meet the lord
in the air, and so shall be ever with the Lord. The inference the Apostle makes
should be ours; wherefore 1 These. 4. 18.
comfort one another with these words.

O but I cannot see this in me, I would be holy, yet I cannot find this growth
of holiness in me. Is this thy case? go thy way to God, challenge him with
his promise; put his bond in suit: He commands, make you a clean heart, but
does he not promise to give it, Ezekiel. 36. 25. Comfort thy self with Christ's
prayer to the Father: He prays, Father sanctify them through thy truth. And
know, there may be grace where feeling may be wanting. Its an excellent Joh.
17. 17. Ephesians. 1. 13.
saying of Mr. Greenham, We hold Christ by faith and not by feeling: Feeling is
an after thing: After ye believed ye were sealed with that holy spirit of
promise. Is it the desire and endeavor of thy soul to be holy?
Notwithstanding infirmities, yet is thy heart single and without guile, be of
good comfort thou shall hold up thy head with comfort at that great day of
account, when the wicked shall wish that the mountains might fall upon them,
and the hills cover them from the face of the Lamb, thou shall behold Christ in
the face with comfort, when all these visible things shall be dissolved, and
the elements shall melt with fervent heat, thou shall be glad and rejoice at
that day, and enjoy eternal felloship with the blessed Trinity, in whose
presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures
for evermore. Did we but seriously consider of Psalm. 16. 11.
these things, we should desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; we
should cry, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: we should have the Moon under our
feet, we should negotiate for the great things of eternity. May all things that
have been said, make deep impression upon our spirits, and prevail with us to
the love and practice of holiness, looking for, and hasting unto the coming
of God. Though at that day the world be on fire, we shall be safe, though there
shall be a general Assize we shall be acquitted, and that day of Judgment
will be the Saints refreshing day; Christ is their Redeemer and Intercessour.
Who would not now be in love with holiness? holiness will be holiness indeed
at that day. Only holy persons shall hold up their heads with comfort, they
only shall be able to stand in judgment: God only that made the heart can
cleanse it; Christ does love and wash his people: Lets therefore pray for
holiness, follow after holiness. Thus our fruit being unto holiness, our end
will be happiness.

The Necessity of the Knowledge of Regeneration.
Discovered from Joh. 3. v. 10. Jesus answered and said unto him, Art thou a
Master of Israel and know not these things?


THE report of Christ's Miracles being famous every where Sermon. 5. at St. Mary's
Oxon. Aug. 14. 1654. v. 1.
(insomuch that multitudes followed him) at last, one of an eminent Rank comes
to visit and confer with Christ, v. 1. By degree he was a Doctor, by his Sect
a Pharisee, by his place and calling a Ruler, (as is supposed) an
Ecclesiastical Governor, one of the Jewish Sanedrim; his name was Nicodemus:
The time when he came to Christ was by night. What? a Tenebrio, a night Bird?
surely he was afraid to be seen or known by his fellow Pharisees. He had
riches, honors, dignities to lose, and therefore he would carry his designs
with all privacie, for fear of being put out of the Synagogue. Thus
preferments, riches, degrees, Joh. 9. 22.
dignities, fear of men, are oftentimes as so many fetters and shackles to clog
men, and keep them off from coming unto Christ.

Now follows a Dialogue between Christ and Nicodemus. First Nicodemus makes a
declaration of his faith in Christ, grounded upon v. 2. v. 3.
the great Miracles that he wrought, v. 2. Christ give^ him an answer
concerning Regeneration. A Sophister would cavil, as if this answer had been
impertinent, and not suitable to what Nicodemus spoke, but indeed it was the
most pertinent Answer that ever was given: For Christ sp^ke to the spiritual
necessities and wants of Nicodemus: He knew wherein this Learned Doctor was
ignorant, and therefore Christ teaches him his A, B, C, the Llements and first
^udiments of Christianity. Christ took the Doctor out of the School of the
Pharisees, and he himself becomes his teacher, (...) etc. Here is a vehement
asseveration in a matter of highest importance: Its said (...): From above,
some Beza Erasm.
re^d it (...), From Heaven. Beza and Erasmus, (...) and (...) again, and the
second time come to the same pass, all which produce this fundamental
assertion: No Regeneration, no Salvation. Now Nicodemus proposes an ignorant
and un-doctorlike question, v. 4. concerning entering the second time into his
mothers womb: Christ takes yet more pains to instruct him, v. 5. of being
born of water and of the Spirit. The Spirit of God is the sole Author of our
Regeneration. The Spirit sanctifies and works like water: As water washes
away the filth of our bodies, so the Spirit besprinkleth us with the blood of
Christ, and washes away the filth from our souls: This washing of water is
mentioned Ezekiel. 16. 9. Hence some understand these expressions of Water and the
Spirit, of Spiritual water opposed to the ceremonial washings of the
Pharisees, to which Nicodemus ascribed too much, or else, which is in effect
all one to the Spirit working like water, and thus Calvin and Musculus
understand the words Aqua nihil aliud est quam interna Spiritus Sancti
purgatio, so Calvin, Calvin. in loc. Musc. in loc.
Omnis regenerationis operatio est Spiritus Sancti, so Musculus. Aqua tanquam
operationis Sancti Spiritus Symbolum ac Signum adhibetur. Further Christ
confirms his assertion, in 2 Propohtions v. 6. That which is born of the flesh
is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. By Flesh we are to
understand the corruption of our nature, by reason of original sin, by Spirit
the renovation of our nature by the holy spirit of God. Here Christ
distinguishes of a two fold birth, Natural and Spiritual, to instruct
Nicodemus, who though a Doctor of the Law, and had read Jeremy, Ezekiel and
other Scriptures speaking of a new heart, a heart of flesh, and circumcising of
the heart, washing of the heart, yet understood not at all what those
Scriptures meant, and was altogether ignorant of the distinction of a natural
and spiritual birth. Christ leaves not his Scholar suddenly, but takes more
pains yet to teach him to understand so hard a lesson, v. 7, 8. Christ sets it
out by a similitude of the wind: Motum scimus, modum nescimus; a man may be
regenerate, and yet not know, how and when he came to be so. How a man is made
in his mothers womb, who can tell? How a man lives may be told by the effects:
and so we may tell we are regenerate by its effects and operations, as the tree
is known by its fruit. Some know how and when they came to be converted: so Paul
and Lydia: others say (as was said of the blindman) we know he was born blind,
but by what means he now sees we know not: Notwithstanding all that has been
said, Nicodemus is still ignorant, and cannot by his reason Joh. 9. ^, 21.
understand these things: though he cannot gainsay and disprove what Christ
said, yet he holds his conclusion, and proposes a question full of doubting
and unbeleife, v. 9. How can these things be? Now Christ deals roundly with
him, and sharply rebukes him, him that was a Doctor of the Law, an Interpreter
of Moses and the Prophets, a man ocherwise of great learning, and yet unlearned
in the main fundamental doctrine, A man that was a teacher of others, and yet
one that needs a great deal of teaching himself in the maine principle of
Religion. (...) etc. Which words contain a person reproving, a person reproved,
and the Crime for which he was reproved.

1. The reprover is Jesus Christ, the great Prophet and Teacher, Division. 1.
The Person reproving, Christ.
he that spoke as never man sp^k^ He is a reprover, and an Instructor both to
Nicodemus: Christ knew with whom he had to deal, with a Pharisee, one that
stood upon outward righteousness and legal ceremonies, one that was a teacher
of others, and yet had need of teaching himself.

2. The person reproved is Nicodemus, described by his degree and employment.
The Article presixt is Emphatical (...), 2. The Persons reproved. Beza in loc.
ille Doctor, hoc loco videtur Articulus suum pondus habere, quo significatur
Nicodemum non modo pro doctore, sed etiam pro excellenti Doctore habitum fuisse
ab Israelitis. So Beza. Nicodemus was the Master (...), a Doctor of the
greatest repute and eminency among the Jews; he was not a Disciple, but a
Master, the renowned teacher of all Israel, as if all Israel had been his
Scholars, and yet this great Scholar must go to School to Jesus Christ. He
Jun. in loc.
that was ille doctor Israelis tanta authoritate and existimatione (as Junius
observes) yet was ignorant in the maine things.

3. For what was Nicodemus reproved? Ans. For his gross ignorance, 3. The
things reproved.
and that not in circumstantialls, but in Fundamentalls, not in smaller
matters, but in the greatest of all, (...) (i. e.) know not thou these
things concerning regeneration, this birth from heaven, the new and second
birth, this being born of water and of the spirit. Tu es ille magister
Israelis, magister insignis ad Israelitas verbo Dei erudiendos Praefectus:
ideoque indignissimum est etc. so Calvin on the place. Because the Scripture so
often inculcats Calvinus in l^c.
this doctrine, the lowest Scholar ought to know it. And therefore its
insufferable that he who professes himself a Doctor in the church, should be
ignorant of that doctrine. Cogitemus hic quanta caecitas necessario obtineat in
eo populo, in quo Doctoribus ipsis Musculus in loc.
potest objici, rerum ad ingressum Regni Dei necessariarum ignorantia: so
Musculus. What blindness must there be in that people, when their very teachers
are ignorant of the most necessary things. These things being p^emised for the
opening of my text, I shall ground my discourse, upon this experimental truth
of doctrine, That There may be, and are, many men, otherwise of great Learning,
yet grossly ^gnorant in the maine Fundamental Doctrine of Regeneration.



The instance of my Text is instar omnium, and it sufficiently proves my
assertion: yet notwith^^anding I Will add thereunto other instances out of the
word of God. Paul was bred at the feet of Gamaliel, of the strictest sect, a
Pharisee, as touching the law blameless, and yet all this while he knew
nothing of Christ, and Regen^ration, until Christ me^t with him by the way, as
he was going to Damascus: His confession is upon record, That he was a
Blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
a Persecuter, and injurious, 1 Timothy 1. 3. The Pharisees were of great
learning, and knowledge in the Laws, they stood strictly upon outward
washings, yet were unacquainted with the washing of the heart. Luke 11. 39. The
Pharisees were the Rabbis and learned Doctors of their time, they boasted much
of outward righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 3. 19. (...) Act. 17. 18.
yet their righteousness came short, and was exceedingly defective. Our Savior
tells them (...) Matthew. 5. 20. Those (...) of Greece who attained a great
measure of knowledge, were ignorant of this great point, and therefore their
wisdom has the brand of foolishness put upon it, by the learned Doctor of the
Gentiles, I Cor. 3. 19. 1 Cor. 20, 21. Simon Magus did so bewitch the people,
and was accounted of such great abilities, as he was esteemed the great power
of God, Act. 8. 10. and yet he was a man unregenerate, for he was in the Gall
of bitterness, and Bond of iniquity, v. 23. Tertullus was an eloquent Orator,
yet never did man abuse his parts more then he, who pleaded with strength of
eloquence, in so bad a cause against Paul. What need I add more? The Magicians
of Egypt, the Wise men of Babylon, the old Heathen Philosophers, the
Epicureans and Stoics were all ignorant of Christ, and the great work of of
his spirit to regenerate souls. They accounted Paul but a Babbler, and they
would in all probability have asked the same absurd question as Nicodemus did,
can a man enter into his mothers womb the second time? By all their
ratiocinations they could never evince a second birth, this (...): This subject
came not as a (...) in their disputations, it was beyond their ken and
cognizance, and this was never spoken of in Aristotle's Lycaeum, Zeno's Stoa,
nor in Plato's Academy.

I shall now descend to the Reasons of the point, and then conclude Reas. 1.
Drawn from the nature of Regeneration
with some useful Application.

There are 3 Reasons or Arguments drawn a fortiori, viz.

From the Nature of Regeneration, Of unregeneracy, and the free working of Gods
spirit: and in relation to these three, you will clearly see the assertion
proved abundantly.

1. ^et's consider the nature of Regeneration, what it is, which being
discovered, it will plainly appear, that there may be a great deal of Learning
and other kinds of Knowledge, even to admiration Jer. 4. 4. Romans 12 2. Romans 12.
2. Ephesians. 4. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 17. 2 Pet. 1. 4. 1 Cor. 5 7. Gal. 4. 19. Joh 3 6.
Mat. 3. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
of the world, whilst in the mean time, men may be mere strangers, to this
great work of Regeneration. Let Us enquire how the scripture speaks of
Regeneration. Sometimes its compared to circumcision, Jer 4. 4. its called the
renovation of the mind, Romans 12. 2. The renewing in the spirit of the mind,
Ephesians. 4. 23. The new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. The divine nature, (...), not (...)
2 Pet. 1. 4. a new Lump, 1 Cor. 5. 7. The forming of Christ in the soul, Gal.
4. 19. To be regenerate is to be born of the spirit, Joh* 3. 6. to be baptized
with the Holy Ghost, and fire, Matthew. 3. 11. And these are new born babes, 1
Pet. 2. 2. This gives a man esse supernaturale, a supernatural heavenly-born
being. Regeneration looks at the inward man, the hidden man, and there makes a
blessed change. All the documenta, principia (...) (as they are called) of the
strictest Philosophers could never bring any: to understand what Regeneration
meant. Their counsels tended only to the re^ormation of the outward man, to
keep men in a decorum, and within bounds of morality, to follow those dictates,
which were (...), but they never aimed at heart-pollution, heart-reformation,
the searc^ing out of Spiritual filthiness, vain thoughs etc. The best of your
heathen Philosophers, were Mole-ey'd and bat-ey'd, they could not see nor
understand, what purification of the heart meant. Now then Regeneration being a
supernatural work, as is forementioned by plain scripture Testimony, its no
wonder that many men of excellent parts, who act upon dictates and principles
of nature only, that they are strangers unto this great mystery of the new
birth.

2. Another argument may be drawn from the nature of unregeneracy. Reason 2.
Drawn from the nature of unregeneracy
The state of unregeneracy, is a state of impurity, enmity, blindness and
deadness.

First its a state of impurity. Original sin is an universal pollution Psalm.
51. 5. Job 14. 4. An unregenerate man is a compound of all sin, he is a Cage of
unclean Birds, a Sink of impurity: He is (as a Reverend Divine gives a fit
expression) A Pitcher of earth, filled up to the brim with the poysonfull
liquor of Hell. Original sin is Mr. Wheatly of Banbury. on the new Birth.
that spawn, whence is multiplied an innumerable fry of actual rebellions.
What is corrupt nature but a filthy dunghill of all abominations? The heart is
the Devils Magazine to store up all manner of wickedness, the tongue is set on
fire of hell, a fountain of all sorts of evil communication: The hand an
instrument of deceit and violence, The eyes windows and thorowfaires, to let
in all sorts of impurities, the feet swift to run the devils errand, and the
whole life is a continued trade in sin, to use the expression of the same
precious Divine, now with God, The life of an unregenerate man is one continued
Web of wickedness, made up by the devil and the flesh, an evil spinner and
a worse weaver. This is that estate which the Psalmist mentions Psalm. 14. 1, 2,
3.

2ly. The state of unregeneracy is emnity against God: Natural 2. A state of
Enmity.
men are (...) Romans 5. 10. That Is the concrete; but we read it in the abstract
(...). Romans 8. 7. An unregenerate man is Gods enemy, and no greater opposition
then between God and his enemies Is. 1. 25. Luke. 19. 27. To have a potent man
thy enemy is sad, but what is it to have the great God? All the attributes of
God put forth themselves against his enemies, his Justice, truth, power,
holiness, abused patience. His justice in punishing, his truth in making good
all his threats against them, his holiness, abhorring impurities, his power in^
mustering up all his forces against them, his abused patience, that has so
long forborne, now breaks forth into extremity of fury.

3. The state of unregeneracy is a state of blindness (...): He neither does
nor can perceive. A beast may as soon understand reason, 3. A state of
blindness.
as a natural man, qua talis, the things of God. So we read 2 Pet. 1. 9. (...),
nihil pr^^ul cernens, as Stephanus Steph. Beza.
and Beza observed, which word, according to Stephanus, is derived from, (...)
connivere, and (...) oculus. Dicuntur (...), qui oculos saepe claudunt quadam
debilitate visus, quod vitium aliquando natural est, Aretius.
as Aretius observes. Unconverted persons are in a state of darkness Ephesians. 5. 8.
(...) darkness it self in the abstract, Act. 26. 28. and Ephesians. 4. 18. They are
said to have (...), callosam concretionem, Gerhard Har.
as Gerhard observes in his Harmony: its a kind of hardness that is joined with
this blindness.

4. This estate is a state of death. An unregenerate man is a dead 4. A state
of death.
man, Ephesians. 2. 1. 1 Timothy 5. 6. (...), and some will have it from Spa^hale, which
signifies ornamenta mul^ebria, or (...) which is cibus delicatior. She that
lives thus luxuriously is a dead woman: So Jude describes ungodly unregenrate
men by this Character v. 12 (...). This is the second reason.

A third reason shall be drawn from the free workings of Gods Reason 3. Drawn
from the free working of Gods spirit.
spirit. The spirit blows where it lists. God is a most free agent, and his
gifts are various: to some he gives humane wisdom, to other divine wisdom; to
some he gives speculative head-knowledg, to others practical heart knowledge.
His gifts are free, some had skill given from God to be builders in the Arc,
notwithstanding they themselves perished in the waters. You know Saul had a
spirit of Government and Prophesy (...) both for a time, yet he was a wicked
man. The Philosophers of Athens, were men of great learning, but they were
ignorant of Jesus Christ; and those wise men of Greece, accounted the Gospel
foolishness. Though the world accounted them wise men, and cried them up for
men of eminent learning, yet they were fools in matters of Christ and eternal
salvation. There Is a vast difference between Parts and Graces: God gives
plentifully many times great parts, where he gives not one dram of saving
grace. How many know the mysteries of nature, and yet know not of the new
nature? Many are acquainted well with moral and intellectual virtues out of
Aristotle, and yet ignorant altogether of Theological graces, such as are
Faith, Repo^tance, Love, Humility and the like. Put then all these Reasons
together. Is Regeneration such a supernatural work, and is an unregenerate man
in a state of Impurity, Enmity, blindness and deadness? Does Gods spirit work
freely, dispensing gifts and graces when he pleases, being a most free agent,
tied to none, then my Assertion will prove it self; That many Learned men are
ignorant of the great work of Regeneration. This is hidden from the wise and
learned of the world. Now to conclude all with some useful Application.

There are 4 Principal uses, which I purpose to make of this Doctrine. Use 1.
For Exhortation.
viz. For Exhortation, Information, Examination, and Direction.

1. Then here is an use of Exhortation: And this I shall direct to two sorts of
persons (and so take in my whole Auditory) viz. to Teachers, and to Disciples;
my endeavor shall be with all plainness of speech to press your duties home to
you, and so to divide to every one their portion.

1. To Teachers; was Nicodemus a Doctor, a profound Scholar, 1 To Teachers.
and the chief Rabbi amongst the Jews, and yet ignorant of Regeneration; Then
let me press two duties upon you that are Teachers of others,

In the First place let me beseech you all that are Teachers of others, 1 Let
Teachers go to school to Christ:
that you would all go to School to Jesus Christ, to learn this grand
fundamental Doctrine of Regeneration. Of all others Ministers should be
acquainted with this Doctrine of the new birth. The maine end of the Ministry
is to beget men a new unto God, to convert souls unto Jesus Christ; And he is
the fittest to comfort others, who himself has been comforted, with those
things in particular, which he communicates unto the comfort of others. Of all
others, Ministers should be men of knowledge, Mal. 2. 7. An ignorant Minister
is none of Gods making, the lame and the blind may not be offered in Sacrifice.
Where God gives a calling, he gives gifts, and therefore a Teacher of others,
ought to have the tongue of the Learned. Gualterus in locum.
Isa. 50. 4. Blind guids are not of Gods approbation: For if the blind lead the
blind, both must fall into the ditch. It Is Gualters observation: Admonemur non
modo vulgus hominum, verum etiam ipsos Bullingerus in locum.
Doctores propter ignorantiam atque inscitiam argui at que corripi debere. And
Bullinger gives an excellent note upon the place. In Ecclesia nihil est melius,
utilius, praestantius Doctoribus sive Pastoribus side^ibus, and solid doctis.
Such then as are unskilful and ignorant of ^^ this soul trade, are unfit for a
Ministerial employment, and it is high time to give a vomit to all such, who
make the sacrifice of God to be abhorred. No^ we are to distinguish of a
twofold knowledge of Regeneration, Theoreticall and Experimental: A
Theoretical knowledge is when a man is convinced by argument, and study of
Scripture that there is a necessity of Regeneration; but this Theoreticall
knowledge is not like Aarons oil, that descended from the head to other parts;
it only lodges in the brain. A natural m^n (its possible) may preach for it,
discourse of it by strength of parts, reading and study. Nicodemus came not so
far, and many there are that come short of him. But besides this speculative,
there is an experimental knowledge of Regeneration, when a man finds the
sweetness, and lively power thereof, upon his own soul: when a man apprehends
the image of Christ, which consists in righteousness and holiness stamped upon
him: when a man finds a real, powerful and effectual change upon his heart
and life; this is the knowledge a minister ought chiefly to have. Let him study
the Theory, and be able to instruct others what this new birth is; but above
all let him labor for the practical and experimental knowledge thereof, in
his own heart, that he may feel it operative, and active in his own heart, and
so be more able to discourse from observations, out of the book of his own
heart, 2 Teachers should teach frequently doctrine
rather then out of the choicest writers that handle that subject.

2. You that are Teachers of others, let me beseech you in the bowels of Jesus
Christ, to preach frequently this fundamental Doctrine of Regeneration. ^his
is a most needful Lesson which can be never enough taught, never enough
learned: Christ crucified, Faith, Repentance, Holiness, Regeneration, are maine
necessary doctrines to be Preached, in season, and out of season: do not throw
away and wast your time about unnecessary controversies, vain ^^nglings;
doubtful and curious disputations, where the scripture it silent. It was said
of old, Elias cum venerit solvet dub^um. And we say now, that where Gods spirit
is silent, our curiosity deserves a check. Let such as bend their wits to force
blood out of the Scriptures, and coin new interpretations at the Mint of a
whimsical brain, let them be convinced of their great folly: and O that for the
future, such would preach Regeneration more, and in all their Preaching hold
fast the form of sound words. A preacher will do more good (through Gods
blessing) by preaching one Sermon on this Argument, from an experimental
feeling of Gods spirit upon his heart; then if (to pleasure any w^n^on ears of
Athens) he preach a thousand Sermons full of high-flown Poetical expressions.
Fathers and Brethren suffer the word of Exhortation: Round about the country,
near to the University, the poor people cry for your help, as the man of
Macedonia, come and help us. Charity binds you, Conscience binds you. In some
places you have Impropriations, these help to feed you with corporal food, and
in conscience you are bound to feed them with spiritual food; Why then stand
any of you idle in the Market? Why do not you arise and be doing, and travel,
East, West, North and South, preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ? And when
you go, do not stuff up your Sermons with fragments of Poets, and fag-ends
of Philosophical distinctions. It was the ^^nne of your Predecessors removed
lately, sometimes to preach strong lines, uncouth Phrases, at some Neibouring
Parish, and this they called, Ayring of a Paul's, or a Court Sermon, and so they
seemed to the people no better then Barbarians, preaching in an unknown tongue.
High-flown Poets formerly, and Familists of late, (both unsit for a Pulpit)
amuse the people with sublime non-sensical strains, speaking as the Apostle
Jude ^ude 16.
says, (...). Take heed none of you be such. Therefore let it be the (...) to
preach Christ crucified; Show men their misery by nature, the necessity of
Regeneration, The excellency of Christ, thisis that unum necessarium.
Governors, Tutors, Masters, Parents, all in their places had need take more
pains in examining those under them, concerning the Doctrine of a new birth.
You will upon search find many men that can discourse of State Controversies,
and Church Controversies, that can discourse of Discipline, that can readily
fall upon the Ministry, and Vehemently cry down their maintenance, as Jewish or
Antichristian etc. and yet often times such are very ignorant in the maine
necessary Point of Regeneration. This is the grand point that should be more
preached then it is now adays.

2. To Disciples, the other part of the Use respects them. Let me beseech you
to lay aside itching Ears, after novell Doctrines: 2. To Disciples
come not here with an appetite to have your fancy tickled: Be not like those
of old Athens (of our Athens we hope better things) ever expecting some new
thing, some Brain Fancy, some Chimara or Ens rationis, some new coined
Interpretation, besides, and against the rule of the word of God: But rejoice
in plain preaching, and delight in that which tells you plainly of the
necessity of holiness; new creature, interest in Jesus Christ. This is the life
of preaching, to preach Christ crucified, in the demonstration of the Spirit.
And this is the life of hearing to yield ready obedience thereunto. Let every
one say, let the plain, powerful, profitable preaching come, let it come, let
it come closly, particularly and effectually into my soul, let Gods word find
me out, divide unto me my portion, and separate between the joints and marrow,
even between my self and my bosom corruptions. Some of you are the sons of
Nobles, Ancient Families, O remember wherein consists your best Nobility; and
that is in this New Birth. The Bereans were (...). The Kings Daughter is said to
be glorious within, her clothing is of Act. 11. 12: Psalm 45. 13.
wrought Gold. The graces of Gods spirit, Faith, love, meekness, temperance,
goodness, and the like, these ennoble your souls, these make Nobility it self
truly noble: And these will last when honorable persons shall be degraded, and
all honors lie in the dust: Therefore labor for this true Nobility. It was
Ignatius his saying, Nobilitas and Antiquitas mea Jesus Christus. It was an
excellent saying of Lewis of Bavyer Emperor of Germany, Hujusmodi comparandae
sunt opes, quae cum naufragio simul enatent. Such goods are worth getting, that
when a shipwreck happens, will swim along with us. And these are the riches
of Christ, the graces of his spirit, this great grace of Regeneration. When
storms, and tempest, even Euroclydons, the most blustering winds come, when
concussions, overturnings, and hurlyburlyes come, there is safety, for that man
who has made God his portion, who has an interest in Christ, he shall not be
afraid of evil tidings, because his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord; he
has the name of the Lord to go unto, a rock of ages to shelter himself upon,
and so shall be safe. Brethren, I speak to many men of great learning, well
skilled in Arts and Sciences; I acknowledge singular use of them, and I know
none that will speak against them, unless such, of whom the Apostle speaks,
they speak evil of that which they know not; yet notwithstanding here is a
Science that out bids all your Sciences, and that is the knowledge of Christ.
Paul the learned Doctor of the Gentiles thus determines 1 Cor. 2. 2. I
determined to know nothing amongst you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified.
And he calls other things in comparison of this knowledge Phil. 3. 8, (...).
Above all knowledge, labor to get this knowledge, and above all your gettings,
labor to get this understanding. And unless you be newborn, you can never
attain unto a savory knowledge of Christ. An ignorant person will ask, what is
thy beloved more then an other beloved? but the Spouse answered, my beloved is
white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand. Here lies our duty to pray for
the spirit, and wait upon God in his word; the word is the seed, the spirit
that formative virtue that makes it effectual. O prize Gods ordinances, and
wait upon God in them. Happy will it be for any of you of whom it can be truly
said, Lo there was he born, Lo there was he new born, and washed with the
laver of Regeneration. In such a place, and at such a Sermon, God came in, and
changed the heart. This is the Nail we are a driving, we let down the
Casting-net of the Gospel, hopeing to catch some: and it is the desire of our
souls to be isntrumental, to beget souls unto Jesus Christ. Let Us all do
our duties faithfully, and leave the success with God.

The 2d Use is for Information. To handle this use more distinctly, 2 For
Information.
my work will be.

1. To show you negatively, what Regeneration is not.

2. To show positively, what it is.

1. Negatively, and this I shall discover in these ensuing particulars.

1. It consists not, as Nicodemus grossly apprehended, in a second 1.
Regeneration is not understood in Nicodemus his sense.
entering into the womb. Suppose that a natural man could be born in a natural
way, a thousand times over, yet there is such defilement in his natural being
and birth, by reason of Original sin, that it is infinitely different and
disagreeing with spiritual Regeneration: this natural birth would be but flesh,
and our Savior tells us, that which is born of the flesh, is flesh.

2. Regeneration consists not in a New Physical being, (i. e.) to 2
Regeneratiom consists not in a Physical being,
loose the essentials we had of a soul, and the faculties thereof. We have some
Familists, and vain Dreamers, who talk of being Goded and Christed, and tell of
a strange Deification, of being made God with God: This is Blasphemy in a high
measure, see 1 Pet. 1. 4. (...). We have by Christ not a new substance put into
us, but new qualities. In a Theological sense, he is wholly a new man, who is
changed in quality from bad to good, yet the substance remains still the same.
The alteration is not in the essence, but in the operations and qualities of a
man. 3. Regeneration is not Civility, and moral honesty.


3. Regeneration is not civility and moral honesty, though civility and moral
honesty are both commendable, and a shame for any Christians to be strangers to
them; yet men may be morally honest, just in dealings, and yet not outstrip
heathens, who never heard of Christ. A Socrates, a Plato, a Regulus, a
Fabritius by their principles may go a great way, and walk inoffensively to
the eye of the world, and yet may be a mere Ignoramus of Regeneration. What Is
the reason, the Apostle will tell us, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives
not the things of the spirit of God. Heathens have called the new moulding of
their life, a new birth. Seneca tells us, Nobis ad arbitrium nostrum nasci
licet. Yet this is far short of that heavenly birth, which the Scripture
discovers. How were Heathens new molded, but according to those (...) common
natural principles, according to those institutions which they had in the
Schools of Plato, Zeno and Aristotle. Its the property of Gods word only to
beget this new nature: It Is called Incorruptible seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Now not
only a pro^ane man must be born again, but a civil man, Joh. 3. 3. It Is spoken
Indefinitely, except a man be born again etc. A man outwardly virtuous, a man
of a sweet disposition, a man of a good nature, he must be born again. It was
a Blasphemous Hyperbole, used in commendation of Bonaventure, In hoc homine non
peccavit Adam; yet let the nature be nere so ingenuous, it must be born from
above.

4. Regeneration consists, not in great parts, and abilities. Many 4.
Regeneration consists not in great Parts and Abilities,
may have great learning, both natural and acquired parts to admiration, and
yet remain altogether ignorant of Regeneration. The learned Orators and
Philosophers, attained unto a great measure of knowledge, and yet were ignorant
of the mystery of Regeneration. Where Regeneration is, there is a wonderful
change wrought upon the heart, the inward man is purified, the thoughts are
sanctified, the heart cleansed; But all the Documenta and Principia of the
chiefest of Philosophers and Orators mention not one syllable of heart
cleansing, heart purifying; they direct no further then the outward man.

5. Regeneration consists not in common graces. There may be a 5. Regeneration
consists not in common Grace.
common Faith, a common Love, and a common Hope in such as are unregenerate. To
have a temporary, opinionative Faith, to have a common verbal Love, a
presumptuous Hope, these are common to those that perish: But to have a Faith
that purifieth the heart, a Love without dissimulation, a Hope that makes not
ashamed, these appertain only to regenerate persons.

6. Regeneration consists not in a bare profession of Christ, and 6.
Regeneration consists not etc.
acknowledgement of the Gospel. Many have an external profession, and profess
that they believe in Christ, and yet cannot tell what this New birth means.
Many may be turned from Paganism to Popery, from Popery to Protestantism, and
yet be unregenerate all the while. There must be a conversion from an outward
profession at large, to a holy conversation. There must be a saving work of
grace upon the heart. We must not only be externally professors, but
internally, and really changed in our natures; we must be took off the old
stock, and planted into the new; we must not be contented to be accounted
nominal professors, unless we be really wrought upon, and thoroughly changed.

Now as I have showed you in six particulars wherein Regeneration is not, I
shall now endeavor to show in six particulars wherein it consists, viz. in a
new Nature, a new Understanding, new Will, new Affections, a new Heart, and a
new Life and Conversation.

1. For the new Nature, this is called (...), Ephesians. 4. 1. There Is a new nature.
24. (...), 2 Cor. 5. 17. (...), 1 Cor. 5. 7. This consists not only in the
change of some particular actions, but the change of the whole Nature.

2. There Is a new Understanding, Ephesians. 4. 23. Rev. 3. 18. 1 John 2. A new
understanding.
2. 20. when Saul was converted he had a new understanding; he was another
manner of man, he was inspired from heaven, and had divine illumination.

3. There Is a new Will, Psalm. 110. 3. Paul asked, Lord, what 3. A new will
would thou have me to do? after Christ met with him by the way.

4. New Affections, Col. 3. 2. 4. New affections. 5. A new heart. 6. A new life


5. A new Heart. It Is commanded Ezekiel. 18. 31. and promised Ezekiel. 36. 26.

6. A new Life; there are new paths, there are new ways; the fruit of
Regeneration is newness of life and conversation; the fruit of a regenerate
man is to holiness; he brings forth fruits meet for repentance, as we are
commanded, Mat. 3. 8.

I proceed to another Use, for Exhortation, to exhort and excite Use 4. For
Exhortation.
every one, to search and enquire, and let every one ask his own heart, whether
or no he be regenerated. This is a matter of eternal consequence, and therefore
we should make it a Question, and ask every one himself particularly, Am I
regenerated yea or no. For Motives consider,

1. The necessity, Joh. 3. 3. No coming to heaven withou

2. All the Actions, Services, and Duties performed by unregenerate For
whatsoever is not of Faith is sin: Now the most gaudy, specious pretenses of
unregenerate men arise not from a Principle of Faith; there is Self-love,
Vainglory at the bottom. Now without Faith ^ere is an utter impossibility of
pleasing God, Heb. 11. 6.

3. Nothing defiled shall ever enter into heaven: Now an unregenerate

The fifth Use is for Direction. Use 5. For Direction.


First, Pray hard for Divine Wisdom, Jam. 1. 17. All Secular Learning, all the
accomplished knowledge in the Arts and Sciences, are not able to teach this
Mystery of Regeneration. It comes from heaven, it is the work of the Spirits
illumination to open the understanding, to bring a soul from darkness unto
light.

2. Wait upon God in his Word; the Word is the ^eed of Regeneration; it is
immortal, incorruptible Seed.

3. Pray for the Spirit; the Spirit causes this Seed to fructify.

The sixth Use is for Consolation: O how happy are their conditions Use 6. For
Consolation. Rev. 1. 5.
who are savingly wrought on by the Spirit of God! It Is God that has loved
them, and washed them, and made them Kings and Priests unto God. They are new
born, and are of the family of the Firstborn. Not flesh and blood, not the
greatest birth, nor accomplished parts has revealed this Mystery of
Regeneration; this is only the work of Gods Spirit. Now what is the Duty of
regenerate persons?

1. To praise God, and tell of his goodness: So did Paul, reciting the History
of his Conversion, break forth into Praises, 1 Timothy 1. 17.

2. To walk as becomes converted children, Ephesians. 5. 8. Regeneration must be
evidenced by the fruits of a sanctified conversation.

3. To set an high price on so great a distinguishing love and mercy, That God
should change thy heart, and purify thy nature.

This is 1, a work of an Omnipotent God.

2. In instanti.

3. Ex nihilo; it is a pure Creation; pray then with David, Psalm. 51. 10. Create
in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Unconverted
must pray for Regeneration, and Converted must pray for further Manifestations
and Evidences there(...) that this great work is effectually wrought upon their
souls.

The Feasts of Purim:
OR, Two Solemn Festivals instituted, and ordained in remembrance of that
wonderful Deliverance from Hamans bloody Plot, applied to our Anniversary
Commemoration of Gods gracious Deliverance from the GUNPOWDER TREASON.
upon Esther c. 9. v. 27, 28. The Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon
their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves unto them, so as it should
not fail, that they would keep these two days, according to their writing, and
according to their appointed time every year.

And that these days should be remembered and kept throughout every Generation,
every Family, every Province, and every City, and that these days should not
fail from among the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish from their seed.


THE Text and Solemnity of this day of Thanksgiving answer Sermon. 6. at St.
Mary's Oxon. Nov. 5. 1654.
each other, as in water face answers face. The Jews having obtained a signal
deliverance from a barbarous Mass^cre, plotted and contrived by Haman the son
of Hammedatha the Agagite, their inveterate and implacable Adversary, set apart
by way of gratulatory Commemoration, the fo^rteenth and fifteenth day of the
Month Adar, that they should make them days of feasting and joy, and of
sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor. Ver. 22.


And we of this Nation, being wonderfully delivered from a Romish, Devilish
design of the Gunpowder Treason, are here on purpose met to commemorate with
thankfulness this fifth of November, when the Blow was intended to be given,
but through Mercy was disappointed. Some Parallels might easily be drawn
between Hamans hortid Assassination, and the bloody Butchery intended this day,
though in many things this Popish Plot wants a parallel: Haman was an old enemy
to the Jews; he was an Ag^gite, of the Family of Agag King of Amalek, and
therefore, upon an old grudge, the greater enemy: And this Haman was a
^avo^rite in the highest deg^ee of King Ahasuerus, and so in a fitter capacity
to bring his mischief to ^ass. The occasion of the first quarrel, was but a
petty, trissing, inconsiderable matter, Mordecai did not bow, nor do reverence
to Haman: The want of a bended knee first blew Es^h. 3. 2.
the co^l of contention, fir^ incensed Haman against Mordecai. Several
Questions are raised, whether Haman expected from Mordecai more than a civil
worship? or whether Mordecai refused to do reverence because Haman was a
Persian, and (as their custom is) had the Sun pictured in his breast? or
because he was of the Family of Amalck, with whom God would have War from
generation to generation? Exodus 17. 16. Hence there are raised several
disputes, and many co^jectures, neither is it necessary to be too peremptory in
our determination, seeing the Scripture is silent; but Human thought scorn to
lay hands on Mordecai alone, Esth. 3. 6. Aquila non ^aptat muscas; he aims at
the utter ruin of Mordecai and all his people: Tutum est nescire quod tegitur.
Ambr.
He complains to the King against the Jews, pleads an argument, ab inutili,
that it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them, Esth. 3. 8. The King gives
Haman his ^ing, and gives the Jews into his hand, ver. 10. The Scribes write
the Letters, the Posts carry them with expedition, the day of their Massacre
was appointed, viz. on the thirteenth day of the Month Adar. The news hereof
was cause of great sorrow and perplexity to the Jews; Esther and her Maids
fasted, Mordecai cries and rends his clothes, but withal Mordecai puts Esther
in mind to do what she could for prevention, Who knows whether thou art come
to the kingdom for such a time as this? Esth. 4. 14. A very good argument to
make the best use of that providence and prize put into her hands, to be the
Jews Advocate: After fasting and praying, she is steeled with courage and
heroic resolution, and so she resolves, then will I go in unto the King,
which is not according to the Law, and if I perish, I perish, Esth. 4. 16. She
goes into the inward Court, the King holds forth the Golden Scepter, he asks
her what her request was? she invites the King and Haman to a Banquet, the
King and Haman go to her Banquet, the King bids her make her request, she
invites the King the second time, and in the mean time Haman braggs of that
great honor put upon him, whereas the banquet indeed proved but a snare to
him. The Queen impeacheth Haman of a bloody Plot, the King was wroth with
Haman, they cover Hamans face, the Chamberlain informs of a Gallows that Haman
had made for Mordecai, by the Kings appointment he was forthwith hanged
thereon: Further yet to reverse the mischievous device of Haman, upon Esthers
supplication the Scribes were called, and the Posts sent with letters to give
liberty to the Jews to stand upon their guard. Hamans ten Sons were hanged; so
that the devices of that wicked Haman fell upon his own pate: now the day of
sorrow being turned to a good day, from a day of mourning to a day of joy and
rejoicing, it is high time to set a special mark upon so special a deliverance,
to set time apart for the commemoration of so eminent a deliverance; and this
was their practice in the words of the Text.

The Jews ordained, etc. which words contain an institution of Divis.
two Festival days in memorial of that wonderful deliverance from Hamans
intended massacre, wherein you have, first, the names 1. The Names.
given to the solemn Feasts, or Eucharistical days, Purim (i.) Lots, Pur the
Persian word signifies a Lot, in Hebrew it signifies to disappoint, and in
Greek it signifies fire; the Lot was cast for destruction of the Jews, but it
fell not on those upon whom the enemy would have cast it, it was disappointed,
and therefore (as a Learned B. Andrews.
man wittily observes) that the God of the Hebrews gave an Hebrew Pur to the
Persian Pur, disappointing the Persian Lot, so though it was cast it was not
suffered to light upon the people of the Jews; and (...) which signifies fire,
which was intended to blow up the Parliament (blessed be God) did not singe any
of their garments, neither did the smell of fire pass upon them.

Secondly, the strict observation of those days, it is said, should 2. The
observation of the days.
not fail among the Jews, etc. The 70 render the words, (...). They take care
that they and their children after them, every Generation, Family and Province,
and City should keep these days; thus they hand them over to Posterity, and
transmit these Records of Deliverance to their childrens children, and would
have the memory of them perpetuated from generation to generation.

Thus you have heard the deliverance, and the duty ensuing thereupon, from the
example of the Jews in my Text, I commend one observation unto your practice,
which compriseth the sense of the Text: That its the duty of a delivered people
to keep mercies upon record, and make a thankful remembrance of signal
deliverances, and perpetuate the memorial thereof from generation to
generation.



This takes in the scope and drift of this Text: It Is a word spoken ^n due
season, the Lord make it as profitable for us as it is spoken seasonably unto
us: Neither do we tread in untrackt p^ths; I might enlarge my self in a cloud
of witnesses: We have many Parallel examples of Nations and persons delivered,
who in perpetuam rei memoriam have set a mark upon the place, and upon the day,
resolving never to let slip the remembrance of the mercies or deliverances
vouchsafed; never to pass an Act of Oblivion of the loving kindness of the
Lord. As for instance, the Israelites made Songs of Thanksgiving in memorial of
their deliverance from Pharaoh, Exodus 15. and from Jabin and Sisera, Judge. 5.
Jehoshaphat and his people met together at the valley of Beracah to ^raise the
Lord. Goliahs sword was kept as a trophy of victory, 2 Chr. 20. 26.
The Israelites set up stones as Pillars for the remembrance of the drying up
of Jordan: they used to set a mark upon the place, and call it Eben-ezer, 1 Samuel 7. 12. And for personal deliverances, sometimes they gave significant
names, as Laeah called her fourth Son Judah, Now (says she) will I praise
the Lord. Hezekiah made a Poem of gratitude, Is. 38. 9. David made multitudes
of Psalms for peculiar deliverances, as we may read, Psalm. 7. Ps. 18. Ps. 34.
Ps. 52. Ps. 54. Ps. 57. Ps. 59. and least his memory should fail, the 38 Psalm
and the 70 Psalm have one and the same inscription, A Psalm of David to bring
to remembrance: I need add no more examples, you have here given you good
measure, full pressed, and running over: Let us go and do likewise.

Likewise we have variety of Scripture precepts in this particular; there is a
special injunction Deuteronomy. 32. 7. Remember the days of old. There was a special
command, Deuteronomy. 16. 1. Observe the Month of Abib: And to remember Amalek, as we
may read Deuteronomy. 25. 17. 18. compared with Exodus 17. 14. The self-same numerical
day must be Chronicled, Ezekiel. 24. 2. Balack's and Balaam's mischievous plot are
to be remembered, Mich. 6. 5. ^ Chronicle is required, Ps. 102. 18.

And now let us enquire into the grounds of this Doctrine: Some reasons thereof
may be these.

1. Because the name and honor of God is from eternity to eternity; Reas. 1.
Because Gods name and honor is from eternity to eternity
and its an evidence of our love to God, when we desire that Gods name may
outlive ours. We poor creat^r^s, dust and ashes, live but a little while in
this world, and what is our life but a vapor, a hands-breadth, a flower, swister
than a Weavers Shuttle? ^e must therefore tell of the goodness of God in the
ears of our children, and let them tell it in the ears of their children; let us
make a Chronicle of Gods deliverences, and leave behind us a standing Record,
that when we are dead and rotten, the memo^ial of Gods deliverances may be
revived. and the remembran^e of them never fail. The Mariners used to hang up
after their deliverance, Votivas Tabulas, as Monuments of gratitude for their
deliverance. What are we to offer but Thanksgiving? Ps. 50. 14. what are we
to render but the Calves of our lips? Hos. 14. 2. No^ if we thus I bour to
eternize Gods name, he will have regard unto our names: if we honor him, he
will honor us: so he declares, Them that honor me I will honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30.

Secondly, a grateful commemoration of Mercies and Deliverances Reas. 2.
Thankfulness is Gods Tribute.
is that Tribute that God requires, that Homage due unto him. We are all
indebted to God, nec solvendo sumus, whatever we can do at the best, holds no
proportion with the mercy received, yet the Lord is pleased to accept of a
thankful heart, and where it is, graciously rewards it. What special notice
does Christ take of the thankful Samaritan? and the Apostle joins unthankful
and unholy together: what a brand of infamy lies on the ungrateful? Impudence
and Ingratitude go together: How many are like Swine, that eat the Acorns, but
never look up to the Tree? what great ingratitude was charged on Ieshurun, to
forget the Ro^k that made them, and lightly esteem of the Rock of their
salvation? Now what a poor pittance is this Rent-penny, and acknowledgment to
vouchsafe unto the father of Mercies? Shall we not return a drop of Praises for
an Ocean of Mercies? where is David's, Quid retribuam, What shall I render? etc.
Psalm. 107. 8.

A third Reason shall be drawn from the excellency of the duty: Reas. 3. From
the excellency of the duty.
to record Mercies, to speak good of God, and bless his name, to tell what God
has done for thy self, and for others, what national, what personal mercies he
has heaped on thee, and to be exuberant in the praises of the Lord, this is an
excellent service: To set thy Hosannahs and Hallelujahs on the highest Key, and
to break forth into the praises of God: This is a good thing, Psalm. 92. 1. and
as it is a good thing, so it is a pleasant thing, Psalm. 147, 1. further, it is a
comely thing to tell of Gods mercies, and to say, blessed be God, is in
discourses a comely Parenthesis. The Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 5. 14. that
filthiness, foolish talking, and jesting, are unseemly, and inconvenient; but
what is to be used in their room? it follows, but rather giving of thanks, but
add further, praise is permanent; for praise is to all eternity, we shall for
ever be praising of the Lord, we shall sing praise, honor, and glory unto him
that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore: David professes,
Ps. 146. 2. that he will praise God whilst he has any being: we should thus
exercise our selves in that language on earth, which will be our employment
unto all eternity.

Reas. 4. Drawn from many obligations. 1 A Bond of Creation.
A fourth Reason shall be drawn from those many obligations that lie us upon: As

1. Vinculo creationis, God it is that made us, and not we our selves, Psalm.
100. 3. Now we should be to the praise of God, and set forth his praise, we
should be thankful unto him, and bless his name: as Rivers return unto the
Sea whence they first came; so we should return all we have to the praise
and service of God: Auius Fulvius said to his Son when he found him in
Catilines conspiracy, Non ego te Catilinae genui, sed patriae: So does God say,
I gave thee not a soul and body to serve sin withal, but to serve me withal.
Quot membra tot ora, So many members of our body, and so many faculties of our
souls are as so many mouths to call upon us to praise the Lord.

2. Vinculo Redemptionis, here is matter of praise for ever, and eternity 2 A
Bond of Redemption.
will be too little to praise God for Jesus Christ our Redeemer, who has
delivered us from our enemies to this pur^ose, That we might serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives, Luke 1. 74, 75. So
that Thanksgiving is a special service due unto God. Quot inimici tot ora, so
many enemies as we are delivered from by Christ's death, call upon us to serve
Christ for ever, and to bless God for the riches of his mercies in Jesu Christ.

3. Vinculo Gratitudinis, Quot beneficia tot ora, we receive mercies 3 A Bond
of Gratitude.
at our lying down, and ri^ng up, we are compassed about with varieties of
mercies, mercies on the right, and mercies on the left hand: mercies for our
bodies, and mercies for our souls; so that every mercy is a mouth to call upon
us to be thankful. Haman plotted most mischief, and was counterplotted, and
the Jews accounted themselves bound even by the bond of gratitude to keep a
solemn remembrance of so great a deliverance; so the Romish ^un-powder ^rayto^s
plotted the destruction of Protestants, and laid their designs as low as
Hell. God has vou^hsafed a gracious deliverance unto the land of our Nativity;
wherefore the very bond of Gratitude engages us to keep this day, and offer
unto God praise and thanksgiving d^e unto his name.

4. Vinculo gloriae divinae promovendae. What lies in us, we should 4 A Bond
to promote Gods glory.
unite all our members and faculties to advance the glory of God: Now this is a
way of gloryfying God, he is glorysied by the praises of his people: ^or he
that praises God glorisieth him: Psalm. 50. 23. Now put all these together, and
you will conclude what good reason we have to keep in memory divine Deliverances,
and ascribe unto the Lord the praise and glory of his Deliverances.

I shall insist no longer in this proof of the Doctrine, but make a Applicat.
seasonable improvement thereof in some useful Application: I shall only
ins^st on three ^ses, for Info^mation, Caution, and Exhortation, and
accordingly apply the point unto the solemnity of the day: Lend me (I pray)
your patient attention, whilst I make a suitable application of all.

1. This serves to inform us of the warrantablenesse of our present Use 1. For
information.
meeting upon this day, and what good grounds we have to set apart this day for
an Anniversary Thanksgiving: Gods people formerly upon like occasions, kept a
day of remembrance; so did the Jews here in the Text keep the Feast of Purim;
and truly we of this Nation have as great cause as ever any had to keep this
memorable day, wherein the hand of God was eminently seen in our deliverance,
wherein his own right arm wrought a glorious salvation for us. Now to make you
more sensible of the greatness of the deliverance, I con^eive it very proper
to my business that lies before me, to make a brief Narrative, and acquaint
you with the ^istory of this day. In pursuance whereof I shall observe two
heads, into which I shall cast my following Narration.

1. We are to consider a Popish, Devilish design and plot contrived.

And secondly, a seasonable and gracious deliverance vouchsafed.

1. For the Popish devilish design, we are to consider these eight
particulars: v. z. Length of time in pro^ecting: Unwearied Industry: Cunning
Conveyance: Inveterate Malice: the Persons active: the Persons that were
intended to be passive: the place or stage whereon they acted: and the horrible
cruelty intended. Review but these eight circumstances, and follow me as I go
along, and you will conclude it to be a Treason not to be paralleld in our Age,
not the like to be heard of by the eldest person that is alive.

1. Lets consider the length of time in projecting: This Treason Circumst. 1.
Consider the length of time in projecting.
was a long time a brewing, and the Traitors were as long with child of this
Treason, as an Elephant was with young: the Treason was originally intended
against Queen Elizabeth; she desied the Pope, and made strict Laws against the
Papists: whereupon Pius quintus (more properly, called Impius quintus) to show
his detestation of her, set forth his Bulls, one whereof was fixed upon
Londonhouse, and he excommunicated the Queen, and under an Anathema absolved
the people of England from their obedience: The first design was to bring in
an Army, Anno 1601. Garnet wrote to Creswell the Legier Jesuit in Spain, and
Winter and Tesmond were employed to negotiate with the King of Spain to invade
England: First the King of Spain entertained the motion, withal the Pope sent
two Bulls to Garnet, and gave his Blessing both to the Clergy and Laity of
England, that were Catholics: But before they could ripen their designs, the
Queen dyed, and then, being disappointed of their firstintention, they thought
of this hellish design of blowing up the Parliament with Gunpowder: For the
first design was not against King James chiefly; for in the two first years
of his Reign, he did nothing against them, but it was first of all designed
against Queen Elizabeth; but because they feared that the King would act
against them, as that renowned Queen his Predecessor did; and likewise some of
the Jesuits raised a loud Lie (the common trade they drive) which was carried
up and down, that there was a design on foot to cut all the Catholics
throats; wherefore, though the Queen was dead, yet they resolved to go on in
their design.

In the second place note their unwearied industry; they dug Circumst. 2.
Unwearied pains.
a long time under ground; these Romish Pioneers were indefatigable in their
endeavors, they wrought oftentimes both night and day; they stuck at no
pains, nor cost, no^ charges; their labor might be called Labor improbus in
the most pro^er sense, these wicked persons wrought a deceitful work.

3. Note their conveyance, the Traitors took an Oath of secres^e, Circumst. 3.
Cunning conveyance.
neither directly nor indirectly to disclose their design. They wrought under
ground, laid Barrels of Gunpowder in fashion of Barrels of Beer, covered them
with Faggots, hired a Cellar on purpose, that so they might work without
suspi^ion; these were their Romish deeds of darkness: Here are underground
villainies, wickedness in the dark, Mysteries of Iniquity, a Vault, a Cellar, a
close Cavern in the earth, where they might act their wickedness and not be
seen nor discovered by any man: Just like those adversaries of the Jews,
mentioned Nehem. 4. 11. and those Psalm. 10. 8, 9. and so confident was Faux,
that Arch-Pioneere of the Devil, of the success, in that he feared no
discovery, as the words of his Letter run, that they shall have a great blow,
and rot know who hurt them; the danger is past as soon as you have burnt the
Letter.

4. Note their inveterate malice, it was prepens'd and implacacle; they were
enraged against Protestants, and cried against the Circumst. 4. Inveterate
Malice.
Protestant Religion, as the children of Edom did in the day of Jerusalem, Down
with it, down with it, even unto the ground. The Popish Traito^s acted from a
Principle of Malice and h^tred against the Protestant ^eligion: they resemble
the Scorpions, who (as Pl^^y writes) put forth their sting every moment, so
they are continually p^tting forth their sting, and would fugn sting to death
the (...)st^nt Religion: Ga^net being asked whether it was lawful to de^^oy the
inno^en^ with the no^ent? peremptorily resolved, no ^oubt it was, if the good
coming thereby m^g^t make recompense: ^ee never thought of the Apostles ^ule,
We may not do evil, that good may come thereof, Romans 3. 8. But he, and the
rest of his devilish f^^ternity, were acted by th^^ principle which Aug^st^ne
ch^rgeth upon the old Heretics, the Manichees, Pereant amici, modo pereant
inimici. A suitable, blasphemous speech I have read of a bloody Assassinate,
Occidite eos omnes, quia Deus novit quinam e us sint.

5. Consider the persons acting in this business, and they are Circumst. 5. The
persons acting.
Jesuits, and other Papists, inverate enemies to the Protestant Religion. The
names of the principal Counselors were Garnet, Tesmond, Creswel, Gerrard,
Hammond, Hall, and other Jesuits with them were joined, fit Agents for the
villainy, Birds of the same Feather, Faux, Winter, Catesby, Rockwood, Piercy,
Digby; and these acted according to the counsel of Garnet, the Superior of the
Jesuits; and to these thus acted by the Jesuits counsel, we may apply that
common Prove b, They must needs go whom the devil drives. Faux was a desperate
^ngineere of Satan, Catesby such another, of whom this character is given of
him, Erat homo subacto and versuto ingenio and profunda perfidia, and so fitter
for the se^vice: For the more wicked they were, they were the more fit
instruments to do the Devil servi^e in this design. Faux after his
apprehension professed, that he repented for nothing more, but that he had not
done the fact; and had he not been so suddenly surprised, he would have given
fite to the powder, though he knew that he should be burnt in that slame; and
its the special remarkable hand of God to discover this Hellish plot; for had
it took effect, the Jesuits, who are Ma^^ers of the Art of Lying, would have
laid all upon the Puritans (although none more abhorred such villainies than the
Puritans did) but God prevented this their wicked intention likewise; and
though some few were only apprehended and executed, yet the whole Conclave of
Rome, Pope, Cardinals, Jesuits, Priests, even all that black Regiment of Hell
joined hearts, heads, hands to promote this design for the good of the
Catholic cause: How many Masse^, how many Prayers did their Priests put up?
The Actors were absolved, had the Popes blessing, they should have been
Canonized for Saints: nay Faux is put long since (as its reported) and so
stands to this day (for ought I know) in the Romish Calendar. Strange kind of
Saints these, who were indeed Limbs of Antichrist, and Members of the Synagogue
of Satan; but its no new thing for Heretics and Sectaries to look upon their
Patrons as Saints; Ignatius Loyola, Becket, etc. such are the Papists Saints,
Machiavel the Politicians Saint, John of Leyden the Anabaptists Saint, Henry
Nicholas the Familists Saint: If such as these Circumst. 6. Note the persons
against whom.
be Saints, I know not what are Incarnate Devils: Such kind of Saints (falsely
called Saints) enlarge at^ns kingdom.

6. Note the Persons against whom all this mischief was framed, against King,
Queen, Prince, Lords, Judges, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses; and after they were
destroyed, their design was to destroy the Protestants throughout the Land;
what else does that prayer of Garnet intimate; Gentem auserte perfidam
credentium de finibus, ut, Christo lauds debitas persolvamus alacriter: They
would have destroyed the Protestant Religion root and branch that (as far as
in them lay) there might be no memorial thereof. What Amilcar, the Father of
Hannibal said of his sons, may be applied to Seminary Priests and Jesuits,
he confessed that he bred them, tanquam Leoninos catulos in perniciem Romani
Imperii, as Lions Whelps for the destruction of the Roman Empire: Hannibal when
he was but nine years old, swore upon the Altar, that he would be a deadly
enemy unto the people of Rome. So the ^esuits are Con^urati Hosts Ecclesiae
and Reipublicae Protestantium, and therefore they leave no stone unturned to
destroy Protestantism; through the sides of both Houses of Parliament they shot
at the whole body of Protestants throughout the kingdom.

7. Note the place which they purposed to blow up, and that Circumst. 7. Note
the place.
was the Parliament House, first built by Edward the Confessor; their rage was
not only against men but walls: within the Parliament walls many severe Laws and
just were made against them, and therefore their rage was against those very
walls. Thus Polymnestor struck blind, out of rage to Hecuba, sought to murder
all the women he could meet withal. Thus Fulvia, by thrusting Needles into the
Tongue of ^^cero, after he was dead, sought revenge of his sharp Invectives
against her Husband Anthony; and Anthony himself after Caesar's death, warred
against the very walls of the Senate^ ^ouse of Rome; this was the mad humor of
these savage beasts, to destroy buildings and walls.

8. And lastly, note their cruelty: an Epithete I cannot s^udy Circumst. 8.
N^^e heir cruelty.
bad enough: Shall I call it Savage, Farbarous, Stupendous, nay rather,
Romish, Jesuitical, Devilish: This was their design at one blow to destroy
Kings, Lords, and Commens. This exceeds Hamans cruelty, they were to be put to
the sword, so it was possible that some might escape, here all had gone at a
blow; these Senators had been served as Nero would have served his, even all
had been cut off at one blow, not one had escaped. The Sicilian Vespers, the
Parisian Massacre were monstrous cruelties, but there some escaped with their
lives, and were brands plucked out of the burning; here it was most probable
(had the blow been given) not one could have escaped. Abimeleck slew with one
stone threescore and ten persons of Gideons sons, yet Jotham escaped. Saul
flew fourscore and five Priests, yet Abiathar escaped. Athaliah destroyed the
Seed Royal, but Joash escaped. The Devil himself left one Messenger ^live
always to tell Job bad tidings. Job had more favor from the Devil than the
Parliament should have had from these desperate villains; but here is such a
merciless cruelty, that not a man had escaped, had this Plot took; what a
Vesuvius, an Aetna, an Aceldama, a Golgotha had there been? What huge piles of
torn bodies, what havoc of Royal and Noble blood? What multitudes of Cark^sses
so mangled, as not to be discerned whose they were? This fact bespeaks them not
men but Monsters, not Monsters but Tigers, not Tigers but Incarnate Devils. The
Rhetoric of Orators, the fabulous phansies of Poets are here at a stand, and
out-stript in their own art. Hell was broken loose, and all the Devils in Hell
were the inventors of this horrid Treason: Had this took place it had exceeded
Joels day of blood, it had brought all the Kingdom into a Chaos, it had been
the most dismal, ghastly sight that ever eye beheld; and when we had been in a
maze and perplexity, even at our wits end, then some foreign force had invaded
the land, and captivated it to Popery, this was the design, thus was the plot
laid according to the eight forementioned circumstances: It was laid as low as
hell, but when we know not of any danger, then appeared deliverance; and though
we slept, the Keeper of Israel neither slumbred nor slept: Inter pontem and
fontem, inter calicem and labra, between the match and the powder, the Lord
himself appeared, and wrought a great salvation for us,

In the next place (as I promised) lets in two or three particulars discover
what a gracious deliverance the Lord was pleased to 2. A great deliverance.
vouchsafe unto our forefathers. And here we are to note,

1. The means of Discovery, and that was first of all by Auricular 1. The means
of Discovery.
confession: I well remember what I heard this day fourteen years in this
^^lpit, by the learned and worthy Primate of Ireland, how that Delrius wrote
five years before of the Powder Treason, and tells of this discovery by
Auricular Confession -- Consitotur maleficus se posuisse pulverem in tali
limine, and magnum inde periculum venturum. Dr. James V^^er. A. B of A^magh.
It Is much to be observed, that Auricular Confession which they laid as a Net
to catch others, caught themselves: -- Lex non est jus^ior ulla Quam necis
Artifices a rte perire sua --



2. Observe the season^bleness of a full discovery of this ho^rid 2. The
seasonablenesse of the Discovery
Treason; that which was discovered by Auricular Confession ^id not mention the
particul^r place but the night before this horrid villainy was to be acted,
through the miscarriage of a Letter, and the Kings Interpretation thereof
against Grammatical construction, this was discovered, and the Devils grand
^ioneere, Guido Faux, apprehended.

3. Observe the just retribution of Gods judgments unto evil men, 3. Just
retribution.
causing their iniquities to f^l upon their own pa^e, so that destruction
befell them who aimed at the destruction of the Parliament. It Is recorded of a
profane Prince, that he said, that he would ride his horse up to the belly in
the blood of the Lutherans; but through the just, and seasonable revenging hand
of God, the same night he was cho^kt with his own blood. Thus Haman was hanged
on the Gallows which he had prepared for Mordecai. This is the Lords doing, and
it should be mavelous in our eyes: This is the day which the Lord has
changed, from mourning to joy, from destruction to salvation: If we then forget
the memory of this day, may our tongues cleave to the rooss of our mouths.

But I proceed to a second Use, which is for abundant Caution: Use 2. For
Caution.
Beware of men (says the Apostle) Beware of the leaven of the Scribes and
Pharisees, says Christ. Beware of the leaven of Popish Doctrines; I will not
now make a Catalogue of the Murders, Adulteries, So^omies, Witch^rafts, of
Hildebrand, Boniface, Silvester, and other Popes; neither will I at the present
rake into the Dunghill of the lewd and abhomin^ble lives of many ^riests and
Jesuits, etc. To ^^nsack this ^age of unclean birds, this den of Thieves, to
rake into this Augaeum stabulum, being so filthy and loathsome, as it is, will
require a large volume. I refer you to what is recorded in the Acts and
Monuments, there you will find their Murthe^s, Treasons, Persecutions: Bonner,
Gardener, Story, and other Popish blood-^ounds are recorded in that Marian
Quinq^unrium, who hungered after the v. ^ox Act. and Monum Maryes reign.
flesh, and thirsted after the blood of Protestants, and persecuted them with
fire and faggot: I refer you likewise to Platina, who writes of the lives of
the Popes: like wise you may see more of the Papists Lives and Tenets in the
Romish Bee-hive, and in a Book called the Genealogy of Monks and Friars; there
are many more that Lewis Owen
might be named, but I forbear quotations of other Authors besides those I have
by me, and have had occasion more or less to peruse. What shall I say further?
beware of Popery, beware of Idolatry, save your selves from this wicked
Generation, Enter not into the way of these wicked men, avoid them, pass not
by them, turn from them, and pass away. But it will be said, There is no fear
of Papists now adays; I would there were not: For he is a mere stranger in
Israel, that knows not what broyls and disorders Jesuits have made, and are
still a somenting in this Nation. Sir Edward Coke, that learned Lawyer professed
in his Speech at the Araignment of the Gunpowder Traitors, That there was never
any Treason committed See Sir Edw. Cokes speech.
in England, but a Popish Priest had a hand therein. Do not Jesuits set people
together by the ears? Do not the Heresies and damnable opinions of these
licentious times gratify the Jesuits? These are meat and drink to them. Do
not they love to fish in troubled waters, hoping to catch a prize for the Popes
coffers? Do not Jesuits go up and down like the Devil, encompassing the earth,
acting in Courts, Cities, Countries, Universities? Will they not become
Church Members (as one Ramsey was lately detected at Newcastle) that so they
might promote the Catholic cause? I will repeat to you the words of a dying
man upon the Scaffold, not an hour before he was to give up his account to God:
his words are these, The Pope (says he) had never such an harvest in England
since the Reformation W: Lawd A. B. of Cant.
as ^ow, for by reason of the errors and opinions of the times, the Kingdom is
like an Oak cleft in pieces with wedges made of its own body: But of the
increase of Papists I Will give you a late, and (questionless) a true
information, in a Speech spoken by a great Personage; these are the words, even
totid^m verba, We know very well, that Emissaries of the Jesuits, never came in
those swarms, as they L Prot. speech, Sept. 4. 1654.
have done since these things were set on foot, and I tell you, that diverse
Gentlemen here can bear witness with me, how that they have had a Consistory
abroad, that rules all the affairs of things in England, from an Archbishop
with other dependants upon him, and they had in England (of which we are able
to produce the particular instruments in most of the limits of the Cathedrals)
an Episcopal power with Archdeacons, etc. and had persons authorized to
exercise and distribute those things which pervert and deceive the people:
These things being so attested, we had need look about us; we had need be
circumspect, and not associate our selves with Papists; we had need take heed
lest we bite at the devils bait: lets not be so Foolhardy as to venture into
their companies, lest (as Peter ventured into Caiaphas his hall) we return with
a wound upon our consciences.

That you may detest Popery, have but a little patience, and I will tell you
the opinions of some of their Champions.

One is, that the Pope is Christ's vicar, head of the Church, not only Popes
threw his keys into Tybur, and took his sword, and said, If Peter's keys would
not keep him, Peter's sword should.

Another opinion is that the Pope has power of binding and

3ly. That the ^ope may depose Princes at his pleasure, for Heresy,

4ly. That Heretical Princes (and so are Protestants in his account)

5ly. That Princes that are Protestants: excommunicated by the Bellarm. c. 5
Officio Principis
Pope may be murdered by their subjects, Simanca, Creswell, and Mariana hold
this opinion: And Bellarmine tells us, Princeps subditus esse debet suo
Episcop^, non Episcopus Principi.

6ly. That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics: John Husse that Constance
was burnt to death.

7ly. That Equivocation is lawful: and indeed Equivocation is one great pillar
to support Po^ery: their principle is Jura, perjura, secretum prodere noli: If
you ask a Jesuit, is such a one at his house? Though he knows him to be
there, he will say no, and keep a mental reservation, no, that is, not that he
means to tell you of. Arrius Diaboli Primogen^tus, who was ancienter then the
Jesuits, taught v Mason of Equivocation.
them this art of Equivocation. And we may say (...), he professed that he
acknowledged the Orthodox faith, and laid his hand upon his bosom, and there
were written papers hid, containing his Arrian Heresies, which he accounted for
the Orthodox faith: I he^rily wish that there were not a (...) of the spirits
of Jesuties into many of these times, who account themselves Protestants, and
yet are Interpendent, hanging between Ignatius Loyala, and Machiavell: their
words are so amphibologicall, such Legerdemain is in their actions, as a man
knows not where to have them, nor what to make of them, whether they be for
you, or against you: you know whence that Oracle came, Ibis redibis nunquam per
bella peribis. And what was the event of that Amphiboly without a comma, but to
put a period to King Edward his life -- Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum
est? Let all vizards be plukt off, let men appear in their colors, lets not
come too near the Camp of our adversaries, let us not act the Jesuits part, nor
pl^y their game for them. What shall I tell you further of their seven
Sacraments, and other Trent Doctrines, viz, Justification by work^, Purgatory,
Indulgences, Transubstantiation, the Mass, praying to Saints? I would not at
this time conjure up these devils, unless I had more time to lay them down, by
a particular confutation: I refer you to the learned confutations of Chamier,
Dr. Whitaker, and Dr. Reynolds, each one the glory and o^nament of his
^niver^ty, and our Nation: One of them kills his enemy and hewes him to pieces:
Another buries him: I will give in a few Principles, which are not my judgment
only, though I heartily subscribe thereunto, but of many others whose ^ookes I
am not worthy to carry after them.

One is that the Pope is (...) the Antichrist, let us not be afraid 1. The Pope
is the Antichrist. v. G. Downham.
to give him his right name, and call a spade a spade, a Whore a Whore,
Antichrist Antichrist.

Learned Downham in several demonstrations abundantly proves the Assertion,
its a book worthy your perus^ll. K. James asked Sir Francis Bacon whether the
^o^e were Antichrist, he returned this answer, that if a hue and cry were made
after Antichrist, and he should apprehend the Pope, he would make him clear
himself of the marks of Antichrist before he would let him go.

A Second Principle is this, that a Papist cannot go beyond a 2. A Papist
cannot go beyond a Reprobate. v. Mr. Perkins
Reprobate, I refer you to the Learned and satisfacto^y tract of judicious
Mr. Perkins, who will give you (if you be as willing to re^eive) abundant
satisfaction in this particular.

A 3d. Principle is, that there ought to be no Peace no ^econciliation with
^ome: I am herein fully of that Reverend Drs^o^inion. 3. There ought to be no
peace with Rome. B. Hall.
that there ought to be no peace with ^ome (though I cannot agree with him in
saying that Rome is a true Church, no more then I can say that a wom^n is
honest, who is know^ to be a common Whore) As for Cassander of old, Sancta
Clara of late, who would be reconcilers, and join the Ark and Dagon, Rome and
England together (for ought I know) they may as well reconcile the two Poles,
as unite those that differ in several fundamentals: A Pottle of Tyber and a
Pint of Thames will make a strange Medley, Ballderdash, Gallimaufrie (what
shall I call it?) Christ and Antichrist will not be thus yoaked,
Protestantisme and Popery, Rome and Geneva can agree, no more than fire and
water,

Frigida cum calidis pugnant, humentia siccis,

Lead and Gold cannot agree in the same Furnace, no union with Antichrist, no
peace with Jezabel, no reconciliation with Babylon.

A fourth Principle is this, That a Papist living and dying in 4. A Papist
living and dying in the trusting to his Merits cannot be saved. 5. Babylon is
Rome.
the opinion of his own Merits, cannot be saved, because he overthrows the
Foundation, cuts off that Bough whereon he should lean, he overthrows the
Righteousness of Christ, and without Christ's righteousness no salvation.

5. That Babylon is Rome, Vrbs septicollis, and shall be destroyed: Rome is
that Mother of Fornications and Witchcrafts: and herein you have the consent of
the most Orthodox and learned Interpreters of the Revelation, who concur in
this principle: These are the Principles which I am not afraid to own, and I am
pers^^ded that few or none of you differ from my judgment, but believe these
Principles to be true.

I will have but one word more for a close of all, in my last use, Use. 3. For
Exhortation.
which is for exhortation, and then I shall dismiss you: My Brethren, you have
heard of the Mercies of this day, singular Deliverances, singular Testimonies
of the loving kindness of the Lord: Now what eminent things shall we do for
God? What shall we render unto the Lord for all his benefits? Let me be your
Remembrancer, after what manner we should remember the mercyes of this day, and
then I shall commend you to the grace of God.

1. Remember to transmit the memory of this day to your Posterity. Let this
Anniversary solemnity be kept in record; let it be told by the Father to the
children, and to the childrens children, from Generation to Generation: Because
some question the truth of the day, and look upon it but as a politic
invention, and Trick of State, let us be more diligent to keep it in memory,
let us speak one to another of the mercies of this day, be well acquainted with
the History of the day, and let us speak of this deliverance in the house, in
the field, at our down-lying, and rising up, what things of old, what ancient
mercies the Lord has vouchsafed to our Fathers, and to us in them. May this
day be wrote in the Calendar in Letters of Gold, which the Papists would have
wrote in letters of blood.

2. Remember and praise God for this miraculous deliverance, 2. Praise God for
the Mercies of this day.
let our mouths be filled with the praises of the Lord, Ps. 107. 8. Lets take
up the Ps. 124. and make application; let our lips praise the Lord, and let us
say the name of the Lord be praised: let our hearts praise the Lord, let all
that is within us bless his holy name.

3. Remember and be vigilant, watch against Papists, trust them 3. Remember and
be watchful.
not, we know their equivo^tions, we know their blood-thi^sty^ess, lets ever
deprecate and ^bhorre any Toleration, any connivance or compliance with them;
no mo^e trusting to them than to Simeon and Levi, Brethren in Iniquity, in
whose habitations were instruments of cruelty, Genesis 49. 5, 6. Be cu^telous,
come not near the brinke, venture not upon Armini^n, F^milistical, and other
mungril opinions, which partly speaks in the language of the Jews, and partly
in the language of Ashdod: Give the Devil his Option, he would have for his
Agent a. Familist as soon as a Papist: for a Familist can aequivocate, and tell
you he means Christ and him crucified, when as he means not the Christ
crucified at Jerusalem; but a fancy of his own addle brain, a Christ in him,
or a Platonic Christ.

4. And lastly, show some tokens for good of your joy and rejoicing 4. Show
some token of thankfulness.
in the mercy of this day. This day is a day of Thanksgiving, let it be a day
of Almes-giving, to cloth the naked, and feed the hungry, that their loins may
bless you; send to such for whom nothing is prepared: This day is a feasting
day, and there ought to be a sending of port^ons one unto another: I come in a
good day, I hope you will not say me my; there are many poo^e Householders, and
poor Scholars too, it is far more charity to help them than your wandering
Peggars. In Florence (as I have read) there was special provision made for
such householders as were poor, and ashamed to beg; let these be the objects
of your charity: Florioes View of Tuscany.
Do good to all, but especially unto the household of Faith; this is the
special duty of such a day as this is, to honor God with our substance, to
distribute our bread to the hungry: Wherefore forget not this duty, it is a
sacrifice where ^ith God is wel-pleased. I commend this duty unto your
practice, and the Lord stir up your hearts, and cause you to draw forth your
hearts to the relief of the distressed, afflicted, especially the poor members
of Jesus Christ, that this may be a good day, and a day of rejoicing to you,
and a good day, and a day of rejoicing to them; and let the memorial of this
day be Monumentum aere perennius. Lets imitate the Je^s in the Text, and use
all the care we can, that such days as these are, may never fail, nor the
memorial of them perish from our seed.

The Day of Judgment
Discovered from Romans 2. 16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men
by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel.


A Serious discourse of the day of Judgment, is both seasonable Sermon. 7. at
St. Mary's Oxon. December. 9. 1655. 1. This Doctrine is seasonable. 2 Pet. 3. 3,
4.
and profitable; seasonable, because (as the Apostle informed long ago) there
shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and
saying, where is the promise of his coming? There have been of old multitudes
of Heretics, who have decried, and endeavored to expunge this Article out of
the Creed concerning the day of Judgment: Such were the Sadduces, Epicures,
Dositheans, Samaritans, Mar^chees, Prod^anitae, Floriani, Symmachiani; and of
all these Sects the vilest were the Borboritae, against whom Augustine made an
elaborate Confutation. Aug. lib. de Haeresibus ad Quod vult Deum c. 6. V. Act.
and Mon. vol. 1.
Near of kin to those filthy beasts were the Harlots (against whom there was
long since by King Hen. 2. a Proclamation sent into Northhamptonshire) and the
lewd Ranters, their genuine, abominable offspring, in these last and worst of
times. Now adays Hell it self is broke loose through the variety of
Heretics, who though differing from one another, yet all agree against the
truth, like Herod and Pilate, who of enemies were made friends, and they both
agreed together against Christ. What shall we say when Scepticks,
Antiscripturists, Atheists in print and practice, in their works and deeds deny
the day of Judgment? Surely, as at all times, so now especially, the Preaching
of this Doctrine of the day of Judgment is exceeding seasonable.

2. This Doctrine is as profitable as seasonable: And this will 2. This
Doctrine is profitable.
be evidenced by two Reasons, which are of great weight and consequence.

1. Because the Preaching of this Doctrine is an incentive, and a 1. Because it
is an Incentive to godliness.
special motive to excite unto the practice of godliness: Why does God
command all men to repent? there is a strong reason used by the Apostle to
persuade, Because he has appointed a day it the which he will judge the world
in righteousness. And from the consideration of the day of Judgment, the
Apostle draws a strong engagement unto Holiness of life and conversation,
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for, and
hasting unto the coming of the day of God? 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12.

2. Because this Doctrine of the day of Judgment is the foundation 2 This
Doctrine is the foundation of comfort.
of comfort unto the godly. Hence Paul triumphed; I have (says he) fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth there
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day, etc: 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Such as have been troubled, who
belong to Christ, they shall have rest (as the Apostle says) When the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty A^gels: and the
righteousness of God is engaged for performance, 2 These. 2. 6, 7 Seeing it is a
righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you,
and to you who are troubled rest with us.

Now to come nearer the words: Their connection and dependence is upon ver. 12.
For as many as have sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law: And as
many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. Although they had
not the Moral Law promulgated to them by the Ministry of Moses, yet they had
the Law of Nature written in their hearts: And the Law of Nature, though
unwritten in Tables of stone, shall condemn them that sinned against the
written Moral Law. What else is the Moral Law, but a Transcript, more fairly
wrote, of that Law of Nature, which was first wrote in Adams heart? Those
likewise that sinned against the written Law (as the Jews did) shall be judged
by it: For there is a dreadful curse threatened, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Cursed is he
that confirms not all the words of this law to do them. Now if the Question
be propounded, When shall this judgment be executed upon Jews and Gentiles?
My Text gives in the Answer, In the day, etc.

Which words contain a plain assertion, and an evident proof of a grand
Article of our Faith concerning the day of Judgment: Wherein we may observe,

1. A Fundamental Doctrine asserted, That at the day of Judgment the secrets
of all men's hearts shall be judged by Jesus Christ.

2. Here Is a full proof of this assertion, (...), according to my Gospel: Which
is not to be understood as if Paul Secundum quod annuncio per Jesum Christum.
Hier. Suum appellat ^atione Ministerii. Calvin.
was the Author of the Gospel, but only the Publisher thereof. Jerome thus
understands the Apostle, According to that which I declare by Jesus Christ. And
this the Apostle calls his own (as Calvin observes) in respect of his Ministry.
So that I conceive Paul may be thus understood, as if he should say, This is
the Gospel that Christ, my self, and all the Apostles have taught: This and no
other Gospel I preach unto you.

The words thus opened and divided contain three Doctrines.

1. That there shall be a day of Judgment.

2. At that day the secrets of all men's hearts shall be judged.

3. Jesus Christ shall be the Judge at that day.

I resume the first Doctrine in order, according to this Method.

1. To lay down evident proof for clearing of so great a truth. Method. 1. 2.


2. To make some useful improvement of all by particular Application.

For proof hereof, Scripture and Reason both contribute abundantly The Doctrine
proved.
to the evincing and stablishing of us in this Article of ou^ Faith, I begin
with Scripture Testimony, which is instar omnium: And I shall select some
principal in the Old and New Testament not mentioning so many places, as might
easily be produced, les^ quotations only fill up my Sermon.

1. For the Old Testament, read with deliberation, Psalm. 9. 8, 9. Eccles. 11.
9. Eccl. 12. 14. Dan. 7. 22.

2. For the New Testament; in the Text it is said (...), ver. 5. And (...).
It Is called (...), that day, Luke 21. 34. 2 Timothy 4. 8. It Is called (...), a day
of Judgment, (...), the judgment of the great day, (...), a day of Redemption,
(...), a day of refreshing and restitution. Christ himself foretells of this
day, Luke 13. 41. Mat. 26. 41. Mat. 26. 64. His Apostles foretell thereof,
Paul, Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Phil, 3. 20. Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 5. 2 Pet. 2. 9.
The Apostle Jude quotes Enoch, ver. 14. St. John, Rev. 1. 7. chap. 20. 11. And
he cites the testimony of Christ in the conclusion of his book. c. 22. 7. and
v. 20. Surely I come quickly. To scripture testimonies I might add Fathers,
Councils, Confessions. It were easy to call in heathens for witnesses as
Hydaspes, Hermes, and such like, mentioned by Eusebius de praeparatione
Evangelica, or I might quote the Sybils, according to Lactantius his Relation:
But that I judge it superfluous to light a candle to the Sun. To Scripture
proof I Will add some evidences of reason, or Arguments a fortiori, for
confirmation of the Doctrine.

The first Argument shall be drawn from the decree of God: Arg. 1. Drawn from
Gods decree.
Heb. 9. 27. It Is the statute law and decree of heaven, which cannot be
reversed. God is immutable and changes not; Omnia alia futura quae praedixerat
Spiritus Sanctus, evenerunt etc. says Austin. All other predictions are
fulfilled, concerning the coming of Christ, concerning the destruction of
Jerusalem, and this also concerning Christ's second coming, shall come to pass,
God has appointed a day to judge the world in Act. 17. 31. Gods decrees and
purposes cannot be disappointed nor dis^nulled. Truth it self has spoken, the
word is gone out of the mouth of God, and therefore undoubtedly shall come to
pass, Balaam gives a true testimony in this particular, Numb. 23. 19. Has he
said, and shall he not do it?

A second Argument shall be drawn from the justice of God: Arg. 2. Drawn from
the Justice of God.
Gods children have not their portion in this life, it is reserved for them in
heaven. The best of Gods children meet with many hardships, they are afflicted,
persecuted, tormented, killed all the day long. This question posed heathens,
as Seneca and others, Car bonis male sit, and malis been fit? It put David to a
stand, to see the prosperity of the wicked, Psa. 73. 12. He never had his
judgment rightly informed, till he went into the Sanctuary Psalm. 73. v. 17.
The day of judgment will set all things right and straight; shall not the
Judge of the world do right? read 2 These. 1. 6, 7, 8. We read Isa. ^. 10, 11.
That it shall be well with the righteous, and ill with the wicked. In this
world it goes often very ^ill with the righteous, they are made a prey unto
wicked men, and the wicked are advanced. The rich man went in sumptuous
apparel, and fared deliciously every day, when Lazarus wanted the crumbs to
sustain nature. Pharaoh was in prosperity, whilst the poor Israelites endured
slavery at the brick-kiln. Joseph was in prison, Daniel in the lions den,
Jeremiah in the dungeon, the city Shushan in great perplexity whilst the King
and Haman were at a banquet. But at the day of judgment the scene will be
altered, the righteous will be happy, the wicked miserable. The godly shall be
at Christ's right hand, the goats at the left. In die judicii cum Aug. in Psalm.
72.
justi introducentur in regnum Dei, injusti autem abjicientur for as, tunc
justitia Dei ostendetur, says Austin on Psa. 72. The righteous are misjudged,
accused falsely, and maliciously persecuted: at that day they shall be cleared.
Luther used to say, At the day of judgment John Hus and Jerome of Prague will
appear to all to be faithful and holy martyrs, When the Pope and his Cardinals,
will appear to be vile wicked wretches. It is a good observation of Bernard in
his Epistle Bern. in Epist. ad Nepotianum.
ad Nepotianum, Veniet, veniet, qui male judicata rejudic abit dies. There will
come a day, there is a day comeing wherein all illjudged cases and causes shall
be reviewed and rectified, when all perverse judgments shall have judgment
against them.

A 3. Argument shall be drawn from the convictions of conscience. Arg. 3.
Drawn from the conviction of conscience. Lipsius ^. 2. de Constantia.
The bangs of conscience, those ictus and laniatus, which Julian the Apostate
had; these (which are assidua and domesticae Furiae, as the Orator speaks) do
testify a judgment to come. Haenc conscientiam Deus impiis imposuit, in qua
poenas luant, priusquam luant, so Lipsius. But read the verse preceding my
Text. Conscience gave Judas a bang, and made him restore the thirty pieces. The
horror of conscience made Cain to roar, and changed Pas^ur's name to Magor
Missabib, a terror round about, a terror to himself. When the Doctrins of
righteousness, and temperance were preached by Paul to Felix, he fell a
trembling: A strange change, that the very Judge should tremble before a
despised prisoner. However men commit sin never so secretly, and think that no
man living knows thereof, yet conscience lasheth fore. The consideration of a
day of judgment makes the sinner afraid of himself. Hereupon the wicked Arg.
4. Drawn from the connection between the resurrection and the day of judgment.
^ Mat. 25. 33. Heb. 6. 2. Heb. 9. 27.
flee when none pursue. Conscience when it is awakened slies into the face of
the abominable sinner. It makes him afraid wherever he goes. His fansy is so
troubled, that he thinks every bush to be a man, every man an executioner to
hale him before the judgment feat of God.

A 4. Argument shall be drawn from the near dependence and connection between
the resurrection and the day of judgment. The resurrection goes before, the
judgment must needs follow after. The general judgment is a necessary
consequent of the resurrection: Christ will come to raise up the dead and judge
them. Resurrection and judgment are coupled together, and death and judgment
joined together. And that place Joh. 5. 29. wherein we read of a resurrection
of judgment; Gerrard conceives that (...) may be fully rendered per (...).

A 5 Argument shall be drawn from the general expectation of the Saints, Romans
8. 19. It is an emphatical word (...), It Is Arg. 5. D^awn from the general
Resurrection of the Saints.
derived (...) caput and (...) videri: it signifies the looking for something
with the lifting up of the head, or strerching out of the neck, with earnest
intention and observation. Thus do the Saints long for the appearance of
Christ, Heb, 9. 28. it is not an ordinary looking for, it is said (...). And the
Saints cry Rev. 22. 20. Come Lord Jesus. The Saints look for a better life, 2
Cor. 15. 10. a house not made with hands. Their desire is to be dissolved and
to be with Christ, and when their bodies are in the grave, their souls are in
heaven. They wait for a glorious resurrection, and at the day of judgment it
will be known who are Saints, who are not. Many that the world accounts
hypocrites, will prove real Saints then: Many that the world accoun^e^h
Saints, will then appear to be painted hypocrites. Those whom the world has
falsely condemned shall then be acquitted, and those whom the world has unjustly
acquitted shall then be condemned. That Tribunal is impartial and just, no false
judgment can be given there, no unjust sentence, no wrong Verdict shall be
given by that Judge; wherefore the Saints long for that day, they earnestly
desire the appearance of Jesus Christ. And these breathings and longings are
not invain, for the elects sake Christ has promised to shorten these days of
sin and misery.

The 6 and last argument shall be drawn from Gods glory. To Arg. 6. Drawn from
Gods glory.
this purpose was man created to glorify his maker unto all eternity. Now, God
will be glorified either in our salvation or damnation. God has ordained
mankind to an eternal condition, either of happyness, or misery. Now God will
glorify himself in the fight of men, and Angels, in an eminent manner at the
day of judgment, when Christ shall pass a sentence of eternal absolution, and
say, Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Then will be glorified the mercy of
God, and when he shall say, go ye cursed, then will be glorified Gods justice.
Thus you have heard the Doctrinal part of the Text proved by Scripture and
reason: It now remains that I should improve all unto our consciences, by some
useful Application. A 3 fold Use I shall now make of this Doctrine, for
reproof, Instruction, and consolation. 1 Use, For Reproof.


1. For Reproof. This brings heavy tidings to all ungodly persons, who live as
if there were neither death nor judgment, heaven, nor hell. Because this great
day is not yet come, they put it far from them. How soon a particular judgment
may befall them, as it did Korah, Dathan and Abiram, Sennacherib, Herod, and
others none can tell. And how soon the general judgment may come, is a secret
locked up in Gods Cabinet. As for Prognosticators and Wizards who determine the
time when, we are not to put the least confidence in such presumptuous persons,
who are no better then the Devils Chaplains. But here is the great wickedness,
that people consider not how soon they may be surprised: They have not this day
in their thoughts; drunkards, swearers, adulterers, oppressors, voluptuous
persons, they run on in their mad careere, and think not of this day.
Flagitious profligate sinners add iniquity unto iniquity, and treasure unto
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the declaration of the righteous
judgment of God against them. What shall we say of heretics and blasphemers?
who like that horn (which was Antiochus* (...), or (...)) Dan. 8. 12. which
cast the truth to the ground. Desperate heretics are broke loose, Socinians,
Familists, Enthusiasts swarm like those flies of Egypt, and make the whole land
to stink. But there will be a day of visitation, a day of recompense, all
their varnishes, pretexts and dissimulations will^ly open to the sight of men
and Angels. Manes, Arrius, and others, met with dreadful particular judgments
in this life. However at the general judgment Macedonians, that deny the
Diviny of the Holy Ghost, Arrians, that deny the Divinity of Christ,
Circumcellians, whose apes the Quakers are now adays, and tread their steps,
all these shall appear before that judgment seat, which they now dread not,
that God whom they now vilify, shall judge them. What shall we say of loose
Libertines, Jovialists, Epicures, dissolute livers, who are mighty to power in
strong drink, game, and carouse away many precious hours? what shall we say of
hypocrites, who dawb, juggle, dissemble, whose words are smoother then butter,
but within are sharp swords? What shall we say of Apostates that desert their
profession, and relinquish their Principles, and fly from Christ's colors, and
fight under the banners of Arrius, Macedonius, Donatus, or some of the same
bran? What shall we say of abominable livers, Antinomians, Athists, and who
overthrow Laws, Rule, Government, and live as they list, who run into all sorts
of lasciviousness, and follow sin with greediness? Let me tell all such that
they are already dead, dead to God and goodness, they are dead in sins, and
follow Satan their chief commander, they dance after his pipe, go when he bids
go, come when he bids come. But a day of judgment will come, then thou will be
called to account for those cups which thou have been mighty to pour down thy
own throat, and for those which thou have forced on thy brother: Then thou will
be called to an account, for thy secret whoredoms, and abominations committed
in the dark: Then thou will be called to an account for those Sermons, which
thou have scoffed at, and gave no heed unto, for those Sabboths which thou have
profaned, and for all thy misspent time, for all those precious seasons which
thou have squandred away. All the creatures will bring in their Indictments
against thee, Imprimis, For gluttony and drunkenness, thou have eaten not for
health but gluttony, drunken not for strength, but drunkenness: The clothes
thou wearest will come against thee; Thou spendest more for superfluities then
would cloth many poor servants of Jesus Christ: Thou followest thy fansy, the
Garb, and fashion of the time, these thou art curious to observe, and thou
harkenest after all the new fashions, but in the mean time considerest not how
many of Gods children want clothes for their nakedness. All thy books in thy
study shall come and witness against thee, such great helps thou had, such
prices were put into thy hands, but they were prices put into the hands of a
fool, for want of a heart to improve them. All thy parts and gifts shall
witness against thee, thou have hidden all thy talents in a napkin, thou have
let thy gifts lie rusty for want of using. All the Sermons, Sabboths,
exhortations, admonitions, waytings, treaties, and striveings of the Holy
Spirit will come and prefer a black bill of Indictment against thee, who
notwithstanding these precious means, yet did not regard thy eternal
condition. Thou did not consider in that day those things that concerned thy
peace. Now if at that great day of judgment the righteous shall scarcely be
saved, where shall the wicked and sinner appear? What will be the doom of
ungodly men? The Apostle tells us 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. and the Holy Ghost tells us
of their doom, Rev. 21. 8. Rev. 22. 15. At that day however wicked men have
been flattered and idolized in this world, they will appear vile and
abominable. The swearers are those dogs, that are whipped out of the presence of
God. The drunkards are swine, unclean beasts, these shall not come to heaven.
The unclean persons are the goats, these stand on Christ's left hand, and shall
hear the sentence of condemnation pronounced against them. Then will the wicked
sinners wish that the mountains might fall upon them, and that the hills might
cover them from the face of the Lamb. The wicked shall appear in judgment, but
they shall not be able to stand in judgment. I might further inlarg this Use,
but there are many who have in print bestowed fruitful pains on this argument,
as Carthusianus, Drexelius, Gerrard, Vossius, Alsted. Among our own country
men, Babington, Perkins, Smith, Bolton, etc. In an especial manner I commend to
your serious reading and meditation that powerful and patheticall application
concerning the day of judgment, by the reverend and learned Dr. Hackwel in his
14th chapter, and 8 Hackwell Apology. ^ib. 4. c. 14.
last sections of his 4th book of the Apology for the power and providence of
God in the government of the world. I must profess that I conceive that
Application which that worthy Dr. there uses, to be one of the most full,
pithy and particular Applications of any that ever I met with-all on that
argument; I commend the perusal of that to you.

And in the second place I proceed to an use of instruction: Let the Use. 2.
Instruction.
consideration of the day of judgment be our instruction, and put every one of
us according to our several stations and capacities, in mind of the great duty
incumbent upon us. Let Magistrates from the consideration of the day of
judgment, be instructed in their duty, to be a praise unto them that do well,
and a terror unto ^evil doers. Let them execute justice impartially; let them
in the distribution of justice be like Levi, who knew neither father nor
mother, nor brother nor sister. Let not a Magistrate show more pity to a
blasphemer then to a murderer or thief, considering that those that murder
souls are the worst of murderers, and those that rob God of his honor are
the worst of thieves. Let Ministers be instructed in their duty to cry aloud
and spare not, to speak as the oracles of God, to divide the word aright, and
walk aright. Such as are Pastors and Doctors let them discard that
Antiphrasis, Pastores, a non pascendo, and Doctores a non docendo. That rotten
distinction per se and per alium, will not excuse a lazy Minister at the day of
judgment. Let Governors, Tutors, and all that have the inspection over others
remember the day of judgment. It is Apostolical counsel, Romans 12. 8. (...),
whether he be Secular or ^cclesiastical Ruler, the duty is of weight by both
sorts to be put in practice; The Maxim is most true, Every onthat rules ought
to rule with diligence. Let there not be any among you, who (as Diogenes his
servant was called Manens a non manendo; because he used to run away) I say,
let not any be called Prafecti, a non praeficiendo, and Tutores a non tuendo.
^emember the day of judgment. Then those young-ones, those Deposita, Parentum
charissima Pignora, will be required of you. Let all tradesmen be instructed in
their duty, from the consideration of the day of judgment, to deal justly, to
use a just weight, a just measure, a just balance, and a just ^phah.
Sophisticated wares, false lights, false weights, adulterated wares, cousenage
in the trade, will ly heavy upon their account at the day of judgment. Let
young scholars whose wits are green, wanton, and frothy, remember the day of
judgment, then they would not adventure upon Platonic fancies, vain
speculations, and bend their wits to m^intain them after they have discovered
them, for no other reason but that they are new discoveries, like some new
African monsters. It Is a sad thing to consider that men now a days bend their
wits to be skeptical, to defend any Chimaera or abortive issue of their sterile
brains. Men are so sool-hardy as they will venture upon any opinion, any notion
that so (as Simon Magus designed) they might be accounted some great ones, like
Erostratus that burnt Dianas Temple to get himself a name. Many that have parts
care not whether they employ them for the truth or against it. Hence it comes
to pass that Judaisme, Socinia^isme, Familisme, Enthusiasme all these shall
have their patronage. Many will plead for them and defend them with eagerness.
I will tell you a story (though I use very few stories in a Pulpit) which is
recorded by Matthew Paris an historian of good repute among us. There was one
Simon Carnatensis a Master of Paris Anno 1201, who having most subtly and
acutely disputed about the Trinity, some of his familiar friends persuaded him
to put his disputation in writing, that so the memorial of such excellent
things might not be lost, whereupon he proudly brake forth into this
blasphemous speech, O little Jesu! how much have I confirmed and advanced thy
Law in this Question! but if I list to deal crosly, I know how with stronger
reasons and arguments to weaken, and disprove the same: Which proud,
blasphemous speech was no sooner spoken, but he was stricken dumb, and became
an errand I deot, and stark fool, and so made a Ludibrium, a laughing stock to
all that saw him. Let all wanton Scepticks, Novelists, and Platonicks take heed
by this sad example: Let this be their Warning-peece.

Now that I may more particularly set forth your duty, I shall commend these
serious lessons of special concernment for your instruction and practice.

1. Let us entertain frequent and serious thoughts and meditations Less. 1.
Entertain frequent and serious thoughts concerning the day of Judgment.
(...). Chrysostom. Bosil.
concerning the day of Judgment: It was a saying of Hierome, that learned
Father, Whatsoever I am a doing, whether eating, drinking, reading, or writing,
methinks I hear the shril sound of the Archangels Trumpet, summoning all flesh
to appear, and crying aloud, Surgite, mortui, and venite ad judicium.
Chrysostom professed, that whatever others do think of it, for my self, it
makes me often tremble when I consider of it; wherefore upon this very Text he
says, that its a dreadful Judgment, and a Tribunal to be trembled at. When
thou art tempted to sin, be it Pride, Passion, Uncleanness, Covetousness,
Oppression, Dissimulation, etc. O! consider seriously there will be a day of
Judgment, wherein thou shall be called to an account for all by thoughts,
words, and deeds. It Is excellent counsel which Basil gives, Cum senseris te ad
aliquod peccatum provocari, ad mentem revoca formidabile illud judicium, and
hoc quasi fraeno and paedagogo utere (i. e.) when thou art tempted to sin, call
to mind the dreadful day of Judgment, and this will be as a bridle to curb
sin, and as a Schoolmaster to instruct us in our duty. Let this be a
Monitor, a Frontlet before thine eyes, a perpetual vade mecum. In all places
and companies consider there will be a day of an account, a day of Judgment
will come. O that this consideration were more frequent in our thoughts!
Through the grace of God it would be a special preservative against sin.

2. Let the consideration of the day of Judgment engage you to Less. 2. Labor
to be holy.
holiness of life and conversation. That Is the practical use which the Apostle
commends to our practice, 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12. Only holy persons shall be able to
stand in judgment. This consideration moved the Saints to have their
conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20.

3. This consideration should read us a Lecture of Patience. Amidst Less. 3.
Learn Patience.
all sufferings, persecutions, losses, crosses, hardships, evil entreaties,
amidst all perils at home, abroad, and among false brethren: Let us consider
that a day will come which will make amends for all sufferings: Be patient
(says the Apostle) for the coming of the Lord draws nigh, Jam. 5. 8. Let us
therefore be patient under crosses; yet a little while and the day of the
Revelation of Christ will come, when the righteous shall be delivered out of
trouble, and the wicked shall come in their stead. Learn hence by patience to
possess your souls.

4. Hence let us be put upon continual watchfulness. The time Less. 4. Learn
watchfulness
of Christ's coming is (like a theif) in the night. We know not the time, to the
intent we should always keep strict sentinel, always stand upon our watch,
and be in procinctu, like the wise Virgins, with our Lamps trimmed, and oil in
our Lamps: Watchfulness is commended at all times, Mark 13. 33, 34, 35, 36.
Shake off all security and drowsiness. If the Watchmen sleep, the City will
soon be surprised.

Invadunt urbem somno vinoque sepultam.

Let our Saviors caution ring aloud in our ears, Luke 21. 34. Take Less. 5.
Learn to fear God.
heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged, etc.

5. Hence learn to fear God, Rev. 14. 7. Ungodly men (though Preachers amplify
these things) look upon them, but as so many Scare-crows: But that which they
now fear not, shall make them tremble, and wish that some Rock would so much
favor them, as to fall on them, and hide them from the wrath of a sin
revenging God. O Christian! fear God, and walk in his fear all the day long;
tremble at the consideration of this day, and let it be thy (...), to work out
thy salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2. 12. Less. 6. Learn compassion
and charity.


6. And lastly, hence learn compassion and exercise of Charity toward the poor
Members of Christ. Not a cup of cold water but shall be rewarded in that day.
The visiting the sick, the clothing of the naked, the releeving of the
distressed shall be all remembered in that day; Christ brings them all to
remembrance, Mat. 25. Let us then cast our bread upon the waters, and after
many days we shall find it, Eccl. 11. 1. The Apostle prays for Onesiphorus,
his benefactor, that he might find mercy in that day, 2 Timothy 1. 18. What day
was that, but the day of Judgment and recompense? Then God will remember all
the Saints good deeds, but all their bad deeds shall be blotted out of the Book
of Remembrance, or brought in only like a cancelled bond for the further
manifestation of the riches of Gods mercy.

And now here is only one Use more of the Doctrine, which shall Use 3. For
Consolation.
be for consolation unto the godly. In these respects the consideration of the
day of Judgment administers unto them abundance of consolation; I shall name a
few particulars, and so conclude this Doctrine.

1. From the nature of the day, the Saints reap comfort; for that 1 Comfort
from the nature of the day.
day is a day of Redemption, a day of restitution, a day of deliverance.
Wherefore in expectation of this day, they lift up their heads, Luke 21. 28.
This is the day of the appearance of Christ, and this is the foundation of the
Saints comfort, Col. 3. 4.

2. Here Is comfort in respect of the Judge, and that is Jesus Christ, who is
their Head, their Husband, their Elder Brother, their 2 Comfort in respect of
the Judge.
Advocate, their Intercessour. He is their Judge who is their Savior, and he
will pronounce the sentence of Absolution. Christ is their Judge, who has
loved them and washed them in his blood: Rev. 1. 5. Christ is their Judge who
is their peace and reconciler, Ephesians. 2. 14.

3. Here Is comfort in respect of the sentence which Christ shall pronounce; Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared 3 Here^ comfort in
respect of the sentence.
for you before the foundation of the world.

4. And lastly, their happiness shall be to all eternity, Psalm. 16. 11. 4 This
comfort shall be to all eternity.
And of this presence the godly shall be partakers. They shall see the blessed
vision, enjoy an uninterrupted communion with the holy Trinity. I Will close up
the first Doctrine with leaving you to meditate upon 1 These. 4. 16, 17, 18. And
so much for the first Doctrine.

I proceed to the second Doctrine, That at the day of Judgment the secrets of
all men's hearts shall be judged. Though men dig never Eccles. 12. 14.

The reasons of the Doctrine may be drawn,

1. From the Omniscience of God, Psalm. 44. 21. He knew the secret whoredoms
of Aholah, and Aholibah, all the chambers Reas. 1. From Gods Omniscience.
of imagery, and all their wickednesses done in the dark, Ezekiel. 8. 12.
Darkness and light are both alike to him, Psalm. 139. 12. All things are naked
unto him with whom we have to deal, Heb. 4. 13. God knows all things, 1 John
3. 20. So that words secretly whispered, actions secretly done; nay more,
thoughts, purposes, intentions, before ever they are thought, purposed, and
intended, are fully known to God: Thou have set (says the Psalmist) our
iniquities before thee; our secret sins in the light of thy countenance,
Psalm. 90. 8.

A second Reason shall be drawn from the Justice of God, which is to render to
every one according to the fruit of their doings. And Reas. 2. Drawn from Gods
Justice.
this is the end of our appearance before Christ's Judgment seat, 2 Cor. 15.
10. It Is impossible but that the Judge of all the world should do right;
secret Murders, secret Adulteries, secret Thefts, secret Abominations, secret
Cousenage, secret malicious Heartburnings, Murtherous intentions, secret
Back-bitings, Detractings, Calumniatings, all these shall be made manifest at
the day of Judgment. Now Justice requires, that as the sinner sows so he
should reap, that as he has sown seeds of wickedness, so he should reap the
fruits of destruction.

3. The secrets of men shall be judged for the vindicating, acquitting Reas. 3.
For the acquitting of the godly.
and clearing of the godly. What se^ret wickednesses are unjustly and falsely
laid to their charge? What calumnies, forgeries are invented to blast the name
and reputation of those that fear God? The Primitive Christians in their night
meetings were slandered, and such horrible aspersions cast upon them, as the
Father of Lies could invent: What horrible slanders have been cast on Luther,
Calvin, and other eminent Pillars of the Church? How are the Prayers, Fasts,
strict walkings of Gods children traduced, reproached, and scandalized? How do
the men of the world reproach the Saints for hypocrisy, false-heartedness? but
at the day of Judgment the innocence of the Saints will be cleared. What hard
measure do the godly meet withal from the wicked of the world? They are
buffeted, tormented, slain, all the day long. All they say, think, and do, are
misconstrued and reproached. But at the grand day of Account God will clear
where men have reproached; God will justify where men have condemned; so that
secret Prayers, Fasts, Watches, secret communion with God, will appear, and be
openly known and made manifest to the honor of the Godly, and to the shame and
infamy of their malicious enemies.

4. The secrets of men's hearts shall be judged for the further Reas. 4. For the
further condemnation of the wicked.
condemation of the wicked. All their cunning conveyances, secret pollutions,
all the impure abominations of their hearts shall be laid open in the sight
of men and Angels. We read Psalm. 50. 21. I will reprove and set them in order
before thine eyes. God will at that day set all a man's secret villainies, and
closset abominations in order before him. And this will add further to the
condemnation of the wicked, that their most secret wickednesses shall be
disclosed to their eternal confusion and horror. These things being premised,
I shall infer three Uses; for Ter^our unto the wicked, Comfort unto the
godly, and Counsel to both.

1. For terror unto the wicked. Is it so, that at that day the secrets Use 1.
For terror unto the wicked.
of all hearts shall be made manifest and judged; then in vain do hypocrites
dig deep, and seek to hide their counsel from the Lord, as if they thought
themselves secure, and undiscovered. Though no eye of man can see them, yet the
eye of God, which is ten thousand times brighter than the Sun, will descry
and discover all. Then will all varnishes, painted glosses, vain pretenses, and
outside professions be discovered, and all such who plead for them appear in
their colors. In vain do Adulterers wait for the Twilight, as Job speaks, c.
24. 15. Though the doors be bolted, and though it be dark night, yet the
All-seeing eye of God finds out all. What shall we say of secret cheating
Tradesmen, who think themselves secure, because man cannot find them out? Yet
let them know that all their mysteries of cousenage in their Trade, all their
secret, fraudulent dealings shall be discovered at the day of Judgment. When
men profess one thing, and practice another, pretending friendship with their
mouths, but meditating ruin and destruction in their hearts: When men make
but Religion a stalking-horse, for getting a prey, and as a cloak to cover
wicked projects. When men have no regard to the All-seeing eye of God, so they
can but escape the eye of men, what shall we say of them, but put them in mind
of the words of the Wise man, Eccl. 11. 9. But know thou, that for all these
things God will bring thee to judgment. Then every vain thought, every idle
word, every lascivious glance, all mental reservations, all hypocritical
collusions, all time-serving complyances, self-interests, ends, and aims, shall
be all called to account, and laid open in the sight of men and Angels.

2. Here Is matter of comfort to the godly. At that day, their secret desires,
breathings, longings, and pantings after God shall be Use 2. For comfort to the
godly.
discovered. The broken prayers, fighs, cries, inward compunctions of heart
shall be all made manifest. The imputations, scandals, ignominies cast upon the
Saints shall then be wiped away. Many that have been condemned by men, shall be
at that great day pronounced innocent. Holy Martyrs that laid down their lives
for Christ, against whom the wicked of the world pronounced a sentence of
condemnation, shall at that day have a sentence of absolution pronounced by
Jesus Christ, and be acquitted before that impartial Tribunal. It Is a ground
of great comfort to Gods children that God knows their hearts, how vehemently
their desires are toward him, as Psalm 42. 1. Isaiah 26. 9. Though the Saints
cannot ofttimes express how their hearts stand affected, and are not able
fully to discover themselves, and open their condition to man, yet God knows
their inward groanings, their secret breathings, vehement desires after Christ:
Now all these are regarded by God; for there is not a tear, nor a desire, nor a
sigh, which are not taken notice of by the great God of Heaven and Earth. The
secret, closset devotions, fastings, prayings, meditations, which the world
knows not of, nor understand the value of such divine services, all these shall
be made known at the day of Judgment. Thou see one cheerful, thou know
not why: It Is neither corn, nor wine, nor oil, nor any thing of the world
that revives his spirit. It Is only the light of Gods countenance, Psalm. 4. 6.
that is the cause, hidden to thee, but a child of God knows it. Thou see
another sad and troubled, though he may have riches and honors in abundance,
yet there is a secret damp upon his spirit, a secret cause of grief. It may be
God hides his face from him; it may be thou art the cause of his grief; he
sees and hears God dishonored by thee, and this is matter of mourning and
sadness to his spirit.

Let then Gods children amidst all sorrows, comfort themselves with the
consideration of a day of refreshing, a day of restitution, a day of redemption
and consolation, which will one day be at the great and general Assize of the
just Judge of Heaven and Earth.

Thirdly Here Is matter of counsel, both to the ungodly and godly: Use, 3. For
counsel to the ungodly.
1. To the ungodly: Will there be such a day then. 1. ^e counseled to break
off your sins by repentance. Be sensible of the evil of your doings. 2. Kiss
the Son; have and delay not to make your peace with Jesus Christ, for he is our
praise, Ephesians. 2. 14. 3. Make choice of other paths, enter into the way of
holiness, Isa. 35. 8. 2 Pet. 3. 14. Then to the godly, Here lies your duty, 1.
To have your thoughts, meditations and desires fixed on that day. Be longing
for the sight of Christ coming in the clouds; and pray, come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. 2. Comfort your selves with the assurance of Gods love to you, so was
Paul comforted. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. 3. Let your conversation be in heaven, Phil. 3.
20, 21. 4. Be not afraid of death, for to the Saints death is a conquered
enemy, the sting is taken away; the Serpents teeth are knocked out. What need
they be afraid of death, who shall be acquitted before the Judges. And their
Judge is their Advocate, their friend; their Redeemer Jesus Christ, which
brings in the last Doctrine.

That at the day of judgment Jesus Christ shall be the Judge.

In handling of this Doctrine I shall give clear proof from Scripture and
Reason; then answe^ several Que^ies and Objections; and conclude with
particular Application.

1. For Scripture proof. That Christ shall be judge is plain from 1 The
Doctrine proved by Scripture.
several Scriptures, viz. Joh. 5. 22, 27. Act. 10. 42. Act. 17. 31. Mat. 28.
18. John. 5. 21. Christ for this purpose rose again, that he might be Lord over
quick and dead, Romans 14. 9, 10. and part of his dominion is the last judgment.

The Reasons why Christ shall be Judge, are drawn: 1 From equity Reas. 1. From
equity and retaliation.
and retaliation. Christ shall judge those that judged him. Christ shall judge
Pontius Pilate, the High Priest, the Jews etc. And this will be for the
confusion of Christ's enemies, that though Christ was reproached, buffered;
crowned with thorns, and crucified, set at naught by the wicked of the world,
yet now he shall be in triumph and be the judge of quick and dead, Joh. 19. 37.
They shall look upon him whom they have pierced. Reas. 2. For the comfort of
the godly. Reas. 3. For the terror of the wicked.


2. Christ shall be Judge for the comfort of the godly, Heb. 2. 11. Ephesians. 5. 30.
Christ is their head, redeemer, elder-brother, intercessour; Christ has
promised everlasting life. Joh. 3. 36. Joh. 5. 24.

3. For the terror of the wicked, Rev. 1. 7. But in the next place, here are
many questions to be resolved.

Q. 1. Is the Father excluded from judgment? I answer. Neither the Father nor
the Holy Ghost are excluded. The Father is said to judge by the Son, Act. 17.
31. Now judgment is peculiarly by a kind of appropriation ascribed to the Son,
Joh. 5. 22. Pater occultus, Filius manifestus (as Austine observes) (...), to
the whole Trinity: (...), to the Son this judgment appertains.

^ut 2. It will be asked, How shall Christ appear at that day?

Ans. ^e shall 1. Appear visibly. This judgment the Father has committed to
Christ, God and man. and Christ shall not only judge according to his divine
nature, but also according to his humane nature. So that Christ shall be seen
vissibly and locally. Act. 1. 11. Mat. 24. 30. 2. Christ shall come gloriously,
and this will be cleared in sour Particulars, 1. He shall come in the glory of
his Father, Mat. 10. 27. 2. With an innumerable company of Angels, Mat. 25. 31.
3. With the sound of the trumpet, 1 These. 4. 16. 4 With Power. Mat. 24. 30.

3. Christ shall come suddenly, as a thief, Mat. 24. 4^. As a snare, Luke 21.
34. Unexspectedly, Luke 12. 46. 1 These. 5. 2, 3.

A 3. Question is, whom Christ shall judge?

Ans. The Scripture is evident; Men and Angels. 1 For Men, universally, all
Men, Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. both quick and dead, Act. 10. 42. 1 Pet. 4. 5.
2 Timothy 4. 1. 2. For Angels, Jude v. 6. Rev. 20. 10.

A 4. Question is, What will be the manner of Christ's judging?

To answer this Question, we are to consider the preparation to this judgment,
the Proceeding of this Judge, and the ^ule of judging.

1. For preparation. That will appear in these particulars, 1 1 Consider the
preparations to the day of judgment.
There will be a transmutation of heaven and earth, Rev. 21. 4, 5. 2 Pet. 3.
10. 2. Christ will appear in a throne of glory, Mat. 19. 28. 3. There will be a
summoning of all sorts of men; quick and dead shall be summoned to appear
before the judgment seat of Christ. Joh. 5. 28, 29. 1 These. 4. 16, 17. 4 There
will be a separation and division, a placing of the sheep on the right hand,
and the goats on the left hand, Mat. 25. 32, 33. 2 Consider the proceedings of
the judge.


2. Let us consider the proceedings of the Judge. Wherein we are to note 1 The
books shall be laid open, Rev. 20. 12. The devil shall accuse, Angels shall be
witnesses. And no need of their accusation, or witness; for each man's
conscience, shall be accuser, and witness, and judge. Every book of conscience
shall be opened, and there shall be either excuseing or accuseing, and Dan. 7.
10. There Is a book of Gods remembrance mentioned, Mal. 3. 16. And there is a
book of a man's own conscience, which shall be opened at that great day. This
is the book for rectifying whereof all other Ideoscribuntur omnes Labri, ut
unus emendetur conscientiae. Bern.
books were written. Now there lies no appeal from these books, no possibility
of falsifying Gods book, and the book of Conscience. And if any one should
plead not done, not guilty, conscience, as good as a thousand witnesses, would
protest against it.

2. In Christ's proceeding we are to consider of a different sentence, one of
absolution, the other of condemnation; 1 For the sentence of absolution, Mat.
25. 34. Come, there is a gracious invitation, ye blessed, there is a
comfortable appellation, of my Father, there is a glorious adoption, inherit,
there is their title and donation, the Kingdom, there is the royalty of it,
prepared, there is the predestination, for you, there is the propriety of the
Saints, from the foundation of the World, there is the antiquity, the ancient
tenure, before the creation of Adam; 2 There is a sentence of condemnation,
Mat. 25. 14 Depart, there is a bar of exclusion; a dreadful dismission; from
me, there is the punishment of loss, the heaviest of punishments. Qui te non
habet (Domine Deus,) totum perdidit, says Bernard. Ye cursed, there is their
brand of infamy; Into Bernard.
everlasting fire, there is poena Jensus, exquisite unspeakable torments,
there is fire to burn, and torment, and eternal fire, no mitigation of pain unto
all eternity; prepared for the devil and his Angels, there is their wicked
company. And just it is that Associates in sin should be Associates in
suffering. 3 There follows the execution of these sentences, Mat. 25. 46.
Joh. 14. 3. 1 These. 4. 17. Thus you have heard the proceedings of the Judge.

In the third place we are to consider the rule whereby all shall 3 The Rule of
Judging.
be judged. The sentence shall be given according to Law and Gospel both, Joh.
5. 45. Joh. 12. 48. Romans 2. 16. The godly shall be principally acquitted
according to the Gospel, Joh. 3. 18. And this their acquittance shall be
approved on by the Law, Mat. 5. 17. Gal. 3. 13. The condemnation of unbeleevers
shall be chiefly according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. And be
confirmed by the Gospel, Joh. 3. 19. Absolution shall be pronounced of singular
grace, for Christ's merits. And the sentence of condemnation shall be pronounced
out of gods severe justice, and the sinners own deserts.

I proceed to a fifth Question. What signs and forerunners of this day of
judgment are set down in Scripture?

Ans. 1. The publishing and receiving of the Gospel throughout the world, Mat.
24. 4. 2 The Apost^sy of some Professors, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 3 The revealing of
Antichrist, 2 These. 2. 3, 4, 8. 4 Common corruption in manners joined with
security, as in the days of Noah and Lot, Mat. 24. 12, 37. 2 Timothy 3. 1. 1
These. 5. 3. 5 Wars and troubles both in the World and Church, Mat. 24. 6, 9.
6 False Christ's attended with false Prophets, and armed with false miracles,
Mat. 24. 24. 7 The calling of the Jews unto the faith of the Gospel, Romans 11.
25. Whether their call shall be ordinary or extraordinary we cannot determine.
8 Signs in Heaven and Earth, and all Elements, as the trembling of the Earth,
the roaring of the Sea, the darkening of the Sun and Moon, Mat. 24. 20. L^k.
21. 25. Yea the firing of the whole frame of Heaven and Earth, 2 Pet. 3. 7, 10,
12. 9 The appearance of the son of man, (i. e.) Christ, God-man, whereby his
comeing shall then be clearly apprehended of all men, Mat. 24. 30.

I proceed to the 6 Question, Why God desers the day of judgment, and prolongs
the time?

Ans. 1. There are these reasons 1 For the exercise of the faith, hope,
patience, and prayers of the children of God. They must believe, wait and stay
Gods leisure. Though the vision be dark and seem to stay, yet they must wait
for it, Hab. 2. 3.

2. God defers this day to give space of repentance, and leave all impenitent
rebellious sinners without excuse, Romans 2. 4. Romans 9. 22. 2 Pet. 3. 8, 9. But
for the elects sake he is said to shorten them, Mat. 24. 22. That they may
neither be broken by grief, and sorrow, v. 21. nor seduced by Impostures, v. 24.

3. That all the elect may be gathered together into the Church. Joh. 10. 16.
Rev. 6. 10, 11.

The 7 Question is, whether it be within the power of a man's understanding to
tell the determinate time when this day shall come?

I answer, No, Mar. 13. 32. This day we read, shall be in the end of the
world, Mat. 24. 3. But of that hour, day, month, year, no man knows. Jewish
Rabbis, Astrologers, etc. are abominable, who are so saucy and presumptuously
inquisitive into the secrets locked up in Gods cabinet. There are special
reasons why the particular time is hid from us, and God will not let us know
when this day of judgment shall be.

1. Reason is for the exercise of our graces, Mat. 6. 10. Jam. 5. 7. Rev. 22.
17, 20. Another reason is to bridle our curiosity, Act. 1. 6, 7. A 3 reason is,
to keep us in our duty, Mat. 24. 42. Luke. 21. 34, 35. A 4 reason is that the
wicked may take heed, and by no means defer their repentance upon hope of a
longer time. Because they know not the hour thereof, they must be provided
always, Mat. 24. 43. Mat. 25. 13. Luke 19. 13.

The 8 Question is, Whether we must desire this day?

I answer, We may, 1 Because this is a Character of discrimination to
difference good from bad. At the day of judgment there will be a separation
between good and bad, Luke 21. 26, 27, 28. Romans 14. 10, 15, 16, 17. 2 We have
the command of Christ, Mat. 6. 10. Rev. 22. 17. 3 We have the example of the
Saints, Romans 7. 24. Phil. 1. 23. 4 Because this is the day of redemption and
deliverance of the Saints. Luke 21. 28.

In the next place we must answer several objections; amongst Joh. 12. 47.

For answer, We are to distinguish of a twofold coming, a first Austin, Sedebit
judex, qui stetit sub judice, and damnabit veros reos, qui factus est falsus
reus. He that stood at the bar to be judged of others, shall there sit on the
bench and judge others. He that was causelessly found guilty here, shall find
others justly guilty there.

But 2. It Is objected, that the Apostles shall judge the twelve Israel, Mat.
19. 28. How then is Christ the only judge of the world.

Answer, The Saints shall be Christ's Assistants, by way of suffrage

A 3 objection is that the believer shall not come into condemnation, Joh. 5.
24. how say we then that all shall appear before Christ's judgment seat?

For answer, we are to distinguish of a twofold judgment, of absolution and
condemnation. A believer shall not come into the judgment of condemnation, but
only of absolution.

But a 4. objection will hence arise, He that believes not is judged already,
Joh. 3. 18.

Answer, Wicked men and devils are already judged, 1 By 2. 3. 4.
Gods decree, Jude, 4. 6. Mat. 25. 41. 2 By the revealed word, Joh. 12. 48. 3
By their own consciences, Matt. 8. 29. 4 By the beginning of their punishment
here on earth, Rev. 12. 9, 10. But at the day of judgment they shall have a
complete judgment, and receive the full measure of their sufferings, the
sentence shall be pronounced, and it shall never be recalled, no repeal, no
reversing of that sentence.

In stead of urgeing more objections, I shall betake my self to a threefold
application, viz. For Comfort to the godly, Terror to the wicked, Exhortation
to all. Use, 1. For Comfort.


1. For Comfort. Here Is abundance of consolation to the Saints of God, that
Christ is Judge. He that is our elder brother, Heb. 2. 11. A man as we are,
Phil. 2. 8. Sin only excepted, our advocate 1 John 2. 1. It Is Bernard's
observation, Vult per hominem homines judicari. Hence we may securely expect
the comeing of our Judge, in so much as our Advocate is gone before us, and is
already retained on our side. Quia Advocatum praemisimus, securi judicem
venturum speremus. v. Joh. 14. 23. Christ is the life of the Saints, Col. 3. 4.
Christ is the end of our hope, whom the Saints look for: His appearance the
ground of the Saints hope and strong consolation. So that the day of judgment,
will be a day of refreshment, deliverance, restitution, redemption, the most
comfortable day, that ever the eyes of the Saints beheld. Use, 2. For Terror.


2. Here Is Terror unto the wicked. They are enemies unto Christ, and they that
have peirced him, shall see him, Rev. 1. 7. But they shall see him no otherwise
then a malefactor the Judge, to their terror and condemnation. Use, 3. For
Exhortation.


3. This may serve for exhortation to prepare for the comeing of Christ. In
order whereunto, these special exhortations I press home unto us all, 1 Kiss
the Son, Psa. 2. 12. Make your peace with Christ speedily, we are commanded to
agree with our adversary quickly. 2 This should stir us up to sobriety and
watchfulness, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Prayer, sobriety and watchfulness are joined
together, 1 These. 5. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 8. 3 This should excite us to repentance,
Act. 17. 30, 31. 4 This should excite us unto holiness, Joh. 3. 36,
2 Pet. 3. 11. 5 This should strengthen our faith in the promises. Believers
shall not come into condemnation, He that believes shall not come into
condemnation, But I am a believer therefore I shall not come into condemnation.
6 And lastly, This should make us long for the coming of Christ, Tit. 2. 13.
Rev. 22. 20. Christ's appearance is the Saints day of rejoicing, That day we
should believe, hope for, and desire with all earnestness. This consideration
that Christ shall be the Judge is matter of singular consolation unto the
Saints. Christ is the Saints Redeemer, he Adopts them, he is their Intercessor
and their Judge, and will plead for them, and pronounce a sentence of
Absolution at the day of judgment.

ETERNAL LIFE
Unfolded from Mark 10. 17. Good master, what shall I do that I may in herit
eternal life?


IT will be requisite before I give in the sense of the words to Sermon 8. ^ S.
Maryes Oxon. April. 13. 1656.
take into consideration the Harmony of the Evangelists in relation to this
History, S. Matthew. c. 19. v. 16. sets it down on this wise. And behold, one
came and said unto him, Good master, what good things shall I do that I may
have eternal life? He dreamed of Pharisaical righteousness, of salvation by
works: He does not ask simply by what way and means he must be saved? but,
what good he must do? As if his own righteousness contributed to his salvation.
This was a gross error among the Pharisees then, and is still retained and
improved among Papists, and Ignoramus's now a days. S. Luke sets down this
history, And a certain Ruler asked him, Luke 18. 18. He was not one of the
common sort, but a man of chief authority; and he came not as many did to tempt
Christ, but to learn of him. And it is remarkable, that he a great man, a person
of quality among the Jews, in the time of his youth, did busy himself in such
excellent things, as to inquire after his eternal condition: He was said to be
(...), a young man. It Is the young man's duty to remember his Creator in the
days of his youth. Now Eccles. 12. 1.
let us consider the History as related in the Text. Before he propounds his
question, we are to observe his great diligence and reverence, 1 His diligence,
he came running, he made have to 1. His diligence.
Christ, willing to be quickly resolved in a great question. Lest Christ should
have been gone before he came, he mended his pace. This shows his f^rvour,
desire, and eagerness to meet with Christ. And this in a young man, and a
Ruler, was the more remarkable. 2 His reverence, he kneeled to him. He comes
as a petitioner to 2 His reverence.
ask that which most of all concerned him. This posture shows his humility,
and what high estimate he puts upon Jesus Christ. These things being premised,
he propounds this question, which is of the greatest moment. (...); etc. What
answer Christ gave him, and how he replied, and how Christ rejoyned, and what
was the product thereof are not my present busyness. The enlargement of these
things by way of Paraphrase with observations upon them, would take more then
the allotted time. My work intended is to fix upon the maine scope and
substance of the Question. That which was in the eye, aim, and design of this
young man was what should become of him to eternity. Wherein you have, 1 An end
propounded, eternal life. 2 The means inquired after, what shall I do? Or Divis.
what good thing shall I do, as Matthew relates the story. Here he failed
grossly in the standing upon his own works, dreaming of Pharisaical
righteousness. He was a young man, and had learned from the Pharisees school to
be confident of self-righteousness, and plead for his own merits, as afterward
it follows how he boasted v. 20. But when Christ touched him to the quick v.
21. he discovered how far he was from that perfection whereunto he pretended. 3
Of whom does he inquire? To whom does he propound this question of the greatest
consequence? Unto Christ, whom he calls, Master, a Teacher, one whom he
thought able to instruct him, and he add's this Epithete, Good, Christ checks
him v. 18. Christ does not refuse the name of Good, sed eo sensu quo Carthw.
Harm. Calv. Harm.
Adolescens intellexit, ideo repudiavit, quia in Deum solum competebat. The
young man took Christ to be no more then a man. Si in me nihil altius agnoseis,
quam naturam humanam, falso, elogium boni, quod soli Deo convenit in me
transfers, so Calvin (i e) If thou know no more then a humane nature in me,
thou falsely ascribest to me the name of Good, which belongs to God alone. Aut
ergo G^rth. Harm.
agnosce me Deum, aut a boni titulo abstine, so learned Gerrard.
Notwithstanding this young man fails in the manner of propounding the
Question, and prescribes his own works, his own Pha^isaical righteousness,
which was his gross error, took upon trust from the Pharisaical Rabbis: Yet
it is worth our special observation (and it is that which is my chief design in
the choice of this Text) that this young man, a Ruler, who came with an intent
to be instructed of Christ propounds no frivolous impertinent question, but one
of the greatest concernment in all the world. He had enough for the present
world; but he looked for afterward; what would it avail him to live
delicately here, and miserably to all eternity? Wherefore he inquires after his
everlasting estate, a Question worthiest of all our inquiry, pains and
diligence. What I purpose (through Christ that strengthens me) to speak on
this Scripture, I will comprise in this Doctrine

That the maine Inquiry and business of Christians ought to be employed
concerning their eternal condition.

The great question worthiest our asking, studying and stateing is this, What
shall we do to inherit eternal life? In the unfolding of this great point, my
Method shall be, 1. To inquire into the nature of Eternity, Meth. 1.
or Eternal life, what we are to conceive of it? 2. Give in the proof of the
Doctrine. And lastly, conclude with some useful Application.

1. To resume what I first propounded, To inquire what Aeternity is, is to
lanch into a boundless Ocean. The well is very deep, 1. What Aeternity is.
and we have not wherewith to draw. Men and Angels are at a stand admireing
what they cannot sufficiently comprehend. We cannot shadow it forth, but very
imperfectly, and as for the perfect apprehension thereof, we must leave it till
we come to Heaven. Concerning eternity, the Scripture by these names expresses
it. It Is called (...) in the Text. Romans 1. 20. (...). in Isa. 57. 15. God is
said to inhabit eternity: That is the highest expression. And elsewhere its
called a Crown of glory, and emphatically (...), 1 Pet. 5. 4. (...), 2 Cor. 4.
17. This is that glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8. 18. This is that house
in Heaven not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5. 11. And this is said to be (...),
Mark. 10. 30. And what is that life but eternal life, as follows in that
place: This is called Salvation, Heb. 5. 9. and Redemption, Heb. 9. 12. It is
called the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12. Eternal life is
Christ's purchase and the Saints inheritance: And this inheritance has these
singular Epithetes (...), 1 Pet. 1. 4. incorruptible, undefiled, never fadeing;
and if you ask where this is, the next words specify [reserved in heaven for
us] What need I seek out more expressions of the same thing? Abraham's bosom,
the Kingdom of Heaven, the blessed vision, fullness of joy, rivers of
pleasures, the right hand of God, all these ar^ ^hrases setting forth the
eternal condition of happiness, or that life eternal which is the inheritance
of Saints. And because these things cannot sufficiently be expressed positively,
the Apostle by way of negation tells us. 2 Cor. 4. 18. The things which are not
seen are eternal. Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive etc. 1 Cor. 2. 9. Further to
represent unto you, what Eternity is, or that Eternal life, which is the
portion of Gods children, I Will lay down these ensuing propositions, which I
shall propound by way of negation.

1. Eternity admits no succession of time. Time is defined by Prop. 1. Eternity
admits no succession of time.
the Philosophers, to be (...). But eternity has no first and later estate.
It Is an Identical condition, simul and semel. Time past, present, and to come
are no parts of eternity: For all these shall be swallowed up in eternity.
There shall be no distinct seasons of the year, no observation of months,
Scotus.
days, and years. Scotus himself will tell us, Aeternitas tota simul.
Aeternitas est indivisibilis nec habet parts sibi invicem succedentes, Bonav.
So Bonaventure. The Angel in the Revelation swear (...). Rev. 10. 6. And this
is in eternity. Numerus which is Species quantitatis discretae has no
reckoning in eternity; For there is no Arithmetic, no numeration of Centuries,
or Millions of years. The greatest number (if the greatest could be given) in
Arithmetic, stands but as a Cipher in comparison of eternity.

2. Eternity admits no alterations. Alterations are in quality either Prop. 2.
Eternity admits no alteration.
from better to worse, or from worse to better. The Saints shall neither lose
their graces nor their glory. In this world the evidences of the Saints may be
dimmed and darkened. They may lose the luster and sense of their graces, though
they cannot lose the seed abiding in them, nor the truth of their graces. But
in heaven there shall be all light, no darkness, no fears, no clouds, no weak
faith; for they shall enjoy the blessed vision, no faint hope, for there they
shall have a perfect fruition. All the glorified Saints shall keep their
ever-abiding mansions; They cannot change from better to worse: Neither can the
damned change from worse to better. The darkness of the damned shall never
alter into light. Their sorrows shall never be changed into joy. Origin dreamed
that there should be a relaxation for the damned after a thousand years; but
this is an old, exploded error.

They that are holy shall remain so, and they that are unholy shall so remain
in Eternity. Their condition is unalterable, as we read Luke 16. 26. They
which would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they pass to us that
would come from thence. There is no fear of worse times to glorified Saints,
nor any the least hope of better times to the damned: Weeping, wailing, and
gnashing of teeth shall be the everlasting curse of the damned: Triumphing,
singing Hosanna's and Hallelujahs shall be the everlasting blessedness of
glorified Saints:

3. Eternity admits of no augmentation nor diminution: Where Prop. 3. Eternity
admits no augmentation nor diminution.
is augmentation and diminution? that is in the Predicament of Quantity. All
things in Eternity are at their (...). All things are in the superlative
degree. No mixture of joys with sorrows: No damp upon the spirits of Saints in
heaven; nor any diminution of the damneds punishments in hell. In eternity, the
Saints enjoy a kingdom, they are all Kings and Priests unto God. They are not
in such a condition as may be bettered? For they enjoy the height of
happiness, the price of Christ's blood, an inheritance by him purchased for
them. They shall see God, and this can be no ordinary happiness: it is indeed
the perfection of the Saints happiness: And therefore Augustine upon Psalm. 85.
propounds the Question, Quid quaeris, ut ascendat in linguam, quod in cor non
ascendit? Nothing shall be there in a moderate mean condition, but all shall be
stretched out to a superlative capacity, either height of happiness, or height
of misery, either transcendent joy, or transcendent sorrow.

4. Eternity admits of no revocation. We cannot call back an Prop. 4. Eternity
admits of no revocation.
Arrow out of a Bow, we cannot call back the least minute of time: Deeds of
Lands are made oftentimes in this world with power of revocation: But man's
eternal condition admits of no revocation. When once death has dissolved and
put a period to our life in this world, then we are lanched into the ocean of
Eternity, and there is no possibility of returning to the shore of this world;
no new life to re-act in this world. After this life ends we shall be in a
neverending condition. The Saints shall no more return to the world: for the
world was their prison, Death is their Jail-delivery. Multitudes of sorrows and
sufferings they have met with in the world; now in Eternity they are freed from
all, and shall never return to re-act all those Tragedies and sufferings which
they brake through in this life. Neither can the damned (...) any relaxation,
or revocation; for they are in a hopeless and Christlesse condition: They
sinned against an infinite God, and in Justice he proportions infinite
punishments for sinning against so infinite a Majesty. Thus you have heard what
Eternity cannot admit of, by way of negation, I have shaddowed it forth in
those Propositions.

Now what Eternity is, I shall positively thus define unto you. Definition of
Eternity.
Eternal life is the perfection of happiness, given by Christ unto the Saints
in glory, whereby they have an everlasting fruition of God, and communion with
him.

To open this Definition.

1. I call it the perfection of happiness. It Is the aggregation of 1. Eternity
is the perfection of happiness.
all good things, the comprehension of all blessednesses. Many Stars make a
Constellation, many waters make a sea: All good things put together make up
this happyness. There Is no imperfection, no decay, no alteration: Eternal life
takes in perfection of joy, perfection of glory, perfection of degrees.

2. This is given by Christ unto the Saints, Joh. 10. 28. I (says 2. Eternity
is Christ's gift.
Christ) give unto them eternal life. God the Father gives eternal life by
the Son, and the Son by the Spirit. God the Father, the fountain and author
of all life, gives this life. God the Son laid down his blood, a price
abundantly sufficient to pay to the uttermost farthing for the purchase: And
God the holy Ghost seals and gives assurance, and applies the love of God the
Father, and the love of God the Son with all his meritorious sufferings unto
the Saints.

3. I said, by this eternal life the Saints in glory enjoy fruition 3. The
Saints enjoy fruition of, and communion with God.
and communion with God. Here they enjoy some glimpses and parcels of this
communion, they have tasted how good God is: But in Heaven, in Eternity, in the
fruition of, and communion with God, there will be these singularities.

1. They shall enjoy God immediately. They shall enjoy the 1. They enjoy God
immediately.
blessed presence of God, communion with the holy Trinity, not as here, by
ordinances and means, but immediately, 1 John 3. 2. they shall see him as he
is. If it be so sweet to enjoy a Sabbath, and communion with God in Ordinances,
and communion with his children here on earth, Oh! how ravishing must that
sweetness be to enjoy God in heaven. Si adeo dulcis quaerenti (says Bernard)
quid erit invenienti! If we meet with sweetness in our way, what shall we do
at our jou^^^ys end in our country?

2. They shall enjoy God fully, In thy presence is fullness of joy, Ps. 2. They
enjoy God fully.
16. 11. God will never hide his face, he will never withdraw his comforts.
There will be no low ebb, but it shall be full tide always: Every vess^l shall
be as full as it can hold, even brim full of glory.

3. They shall enjoy God everlastingly; At thy right hand there are, pleasures
for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. Eternity admits no period 3. They shall enjoy God
everlastingly.
of time, no conclusion. A Ring, which is an emblem of Eternity may be broken
to pieces, and will wear away. The Vestall fires are quenched. Methuselah, that
long-lived Patriarch, dyed. But Eternity admits no conclusion. As long as God
and Christ is, so long shall the Saints be happy, and that is to all Eternity.
Non beatitudo esset, si certum Sancti non haberent se ibi semper futuros. Aug.
de Civit, Dei.


Having now given you some glimpses of Eternity; and having, though but darkly,
represented to you that which is indeed inconceivable and inexpressible, but by
those who are partakers of it; I come now in the next place to prove my
assertion, That this ought to be our inquiry and grand business, the (...), the
work of works, to examine what shall become of our souls and bodies to all
eternity, I shall give attestations to the truth delivered, 1. From Scripture
Examples. 2. From Scripture Precepts. 3. From Scripture Reasons.

1. From Scripture Examples. This was the maine Question of 1. From Scripture
examples.
those that were touched at Peter's Sermon, Men and Brethren, what shall we do?
Act. 2. 37. And of the convert Jailer, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? Act.
16. 30. Eternity was in the eyes of Enoch, Genesis 5. 24. And in the eye of Moses,
Heb. 11. 26. This was in the meditations of David, Ps. 17. 15. When I awake I
shall be satisfied with thy likeness. This was that Country which those
renowned Patriarchs sought after, Heb. 11. 16. This was in the heart of Paul,
Phil. 1. 23. and he speaks in the name of all the Saints, Phil. 3. 20. Our
conversation is in heaven, whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ. The worthy Martyrs, of whom the world was not worthy, laid down
willingly this temporal life for an eternal, Heb. 11. 35. And what is the great
ground of consolation, 1 Cor. 5. 1. but a house eternal in the heavens. It
were easy to give a Catalogue of many rare precious servants of Jesus Christ,
who have made this their design and business to enquire concerning their
everlasting condition. But this that has been said may suffice.

2. For Scripture Precepts: To this purpose tends the weighty 2. From Scripture
precepts.
exhortation of Christ, to lay up treasure in heaven, Mat. 6. 19. 20. to seek
first the kingdom of God, Mat. 6. 33. Joh. 6. 27. to labor for that which
endures unto eternal life. And those of the Apostle, Phil. 2. 12. 1 Timothy 6.
12. v. 19. the word is (...), which is not a bare taking, but a laying hold
with both hands: We must make it our business to get assurance of our eternal
condition.

3. I will lay down some Scripture Reasons, and they shall be 3. From
Scripture Reasons.
considered under two heads, either privatively what we are freed from by our
interest in this eternal life, or positively what we gain by the fruition
thereof. There Is great reason to persuade us to labor and secure our
everlasting estate, if we consider,

1. When once we are in eternity, consider what we are freed from. There are
several privative Immunities which glorified

1. Freedom from sin: Nothing that defiles is in heaven; ^. We are f^eed
from sin.
there is no conflict between the flesh and spirit, no struggling against lust,
no combating with the flesh: It Is the greatest desire of Gods children, that
they may sin no more. In this world the best of Gods children are subject to
many infirmities; they carry about with them a body of sin: But then there
shall be no infirmities, no corruptions, no lusts to conflict withal, as
appears more fully from Isai. 44. 22. Jer. 50. 20. All which Prophesies have
reference unto the Triumphant Church, Jerusalem which is above, the Mother of
us all.

2. We shall in eternity be freed from all tentations to sin, from 2. We are
freed from all tentations
the Flesh, the Devil, and the World.

1. There we shall not be troubled with corrupt flesh to lust against the
spirit: There we shall not be troubled with the deeds of the flesh, Envy,
Hatred, Malice, Heresies, Variances, etc. Here we are in part carnal, there we
shall be wholly spiritual.

2. There we shall not be troubled with the Devils temptations, his methods,
snares, depths, shall do us no harm. In this world he is a Lion let loose,
running about, seeking whom he may devour; there he is a Lion chained, shut
up; he may (like as dogs, bark at the Moon) rail against the Saints, but he
can do them no harm: This Accuser of the Brethren is shut up. In this world
the Devil is busy to winnow the Saints as Wheat; but in the world to come, the
Saints are like Wheat laid up in the Garner, out of his reach and meddling
withal, as we may read Rev. 20. 10.

3. The Saints shall be freed from all the worlds temptations; what is in the
world is reckoned up 1 John 2. 16. viz. the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life. But in that day the world shall be burnt up, and
be dissolved. There shall not remain a wicked world to seduce the Saints. The
Devil cries, come to me, but he will deceive thee. The flesh cries, come to me,
but it will assuredly fail thy expectation. The world cries, come to me, but
it will destroy thee: But in the world to come there will be neither a devil to
deceive, nor a flesh to fail, nor a world to flay.

And lastly, we are freed in heaven from all punishments of sin, 3. We are
freed from punishments.
all sorrows, calamities, afflictions of all sorts and sizes, Rev. 21. 4.
Heaven is a place of rest: There the weary go to rest: Heaven is a place of
security, no enemy can pursue thee there, no persecutor can reach thee there,
no slanderous tongue can there do thee harm; there thou shall be hid from the
scourge of tongues; there shall be neither thirst, nor hunger, no sorrow nor
mourning: All tears are then wiped away, sorrow and mourning shall flee away.
In heaven thou shall not be troubled with an aching head, nor with a sad heart:
None shall complain there of fainting fits, nor of stone, chollick, gout,
strangury, tooth-ake, or such like pains full of dolor and anguish: Nay more
than this, after once thou art in heaven, thou shall no more taste of death; a
temporal death thou sufferedst before, that was the wages of sin; but a
second death thou shall escape, as we may read Rev. 20. 14. When once thou
gettest into heaven thou art out of gunshot, out of all dangers, out of the
rage and malice of wicked men; the Whip, the Rack, the Block, the Gibbet, all
the threats of ungodly men, can do thee no harm. Thou have a life secured from
the malice of men and devils: it is a hidden life: it is in the safest custody,
Col. 3. 3. Your life is hid with Christ in God. These are privative immunities.

But in the second place, another Reason to persuade us to the Reas. 2. Drawn
from Positive Benefits.
search, study, and inquisition after eternal things shall be drawn from those
positive singular benefits, which the Saints shall reap in eternity.
Particularly. 1. They shall enjoy the blessed presence of the holy Trinity, the
vision and fruition of God. This is a transforming sight. They are like unto
God so far as a creature can be capable of assimilation unto a deity. Though
Saints are not deified and become Gods, yet they are in an eminent manner
partakers of the divine nature. They shall see in heaven, God the first being
of all, and their gracious Father reconciled to them in Jesus Christ. They
shall see Christ, God and man in one person, their Redeemer and Intercessor,
and they shall see the holy Ghost their comforter. Neither shall they as
strangers and travelers see other men's Lands, or as men by maps see far
Countries, wherein they have no interest;

But they shall see the blessed Trinity as having themselves a special
interest therein, God as their God, Christ as their Redeemer, the Holy Ghost as
their Comforter. Toll meum (says a Father) and toll Deum. In My God and my
Lord, there li^th the great consolation.

2. Glorified Saints enjoy the society of Saints and Angels, the 2. Glorified
Saints enjoy the society of Saints.
spirits of just men made perfect. There they shall see Abraham the father of
the faithful; David, a man after Gods own heart, Moses and Job, Mirrours of
meekness and patience; Paul, the great Dr. of the Gentiles. There the godly
Pastor, and godly People, the godly Husband and godly Wife, the godly Father
and godly Children shall meet together. O what precious company is there! None
but holy persons are admitted into the new Jerusalem. Whether the Saints shall
know one another in heaven, who have been so well acquainted on earth, is a
question much controverted. But there are two Scriptures that make much for the
affirmative, viz. Mat. 17. 4. At Christ's transfiguration which was a type and
glimpse of heaven, Peter knew Moses and Elias, who were dead many hundred years
before. Another is 1 These. 2. 19, 20. For what is our hope or joy, or crown of
rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming? For ye are our glory and joy.

3. The glorified Saints shall be busied in a rare transcendent 3. Glorified
Saints shall be busied in a high em^loyment.
employment. In heaven they shall be for ever praising of God, and Selah shall
be put to the end of each praise. Their spirits shall be raised and fitted for
that great employment. Their work will be their delight for ever, to sing
Hallelujahs unto him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever
more. Thankfulness runs parallel with the longest line of eternity. It Is the
language of militant saints on earth, and of triumphant in heaven to celebrate
the praises of God, and bless his name. Praise is comely. It Is both good and
pleasant to express the praises of God. Eternity it self will be too little to
speak forth the pralses of God.

4. This employment shall be in our Fathers house. When once 4. This employment
shall be in our Fathers house.
we come to Heaven we have fixed mansions, never to be removed. There we shall
not sing the songs of Zion in a strange land, but in our fathers house. Oh! how
sad a reproach was it when the men of Babylon tauntingly called upon the
children of Israel, sing one of the songs of Zion, v. Psa. 138. 1, 2, 3, 4.

5. And lastly, Glorified Saints shall keep an eternal Sabbath in Heaven. They
shall have but one Sabbath in eternity, but that 5. Glorified Saints shall keep
an Eternal Sabbath in Heaven.
shall be continued, and never cease. And in that Sabbath there shall be no
tediousness: Their spirits shall be suited for the greatness of that
employment. There shall be no intermission, nor interruption: But there shall
be one continued strain, one constant act of glorifying God to all eternity.
There will be no complaining of double duties, of wearysomeness of the flesh,
there shall be no tireing of the spirits. In this Paradise all the spirits of
the Saints shall for ever be fresh and green: There shall be no decay of
strength, abilities, and fitness for such high employments. Now put all these
things together, consider what we are freed from, and what we get by this
future condition of glory, who of understanding would not be in love with these
things? who is there that has but once tasted, that would not desire to drink
deeper of these rivers of pleasure? Who is there that knows what an excellent
life that is which is to come, that would not study, enquire, and labor to get
assurance of it? And yet this is the madness and folly of the men of the world,
that prefer dross before gold, the transient base things of the world before
the precious treasures of eternity.

What now remains, but that I should set all home in an Useful Use. Of Exhort.
Application, and so at present dismiss you. Men, Fathers, and Brethren suffer
the word of Exhortation, to make it your business, inquiry, and care to make
sure of your eternal condition. O eternity! eternity! This word eternity should
ly upon our hearts, it should be in our frequent serious thoughts, and in our
retired meditations. In our conversings with men in the world, the
consideration of eternity should abide upon us: In our studies let us study for
eternity. It was a boasting speech of a Painter that said, Aeternitati pingo: I
am sure we ought to study and drive our designs for eternity. We should so
improve our time, husband our talents, and so lay out the gifts and graces
which God gives us, as we may take comfort therein to all eternity. O! that men
addicted to pleasure, would consider that all the pleasures of sin are bitter
sweets, And for all these things God will bring them to judgment, Eccles. 11.
9. And, what? Will ye be such fools as for a few paultry, vain, pleasures to
hazard your immortal precious souls unto all eternity? O! that covetous
Mammonists would take the consideration of eternity into their thoughts,
Wherefore do you spend your money for that which is not bread? Isai. 55. 2. How
greedily do men graspe riches, how do they make have to be rich, and put both
their hands and both their shoulders to purchasse great estates, and never
think they have enough, like the horse leaches daughter crying still give,
give. And all this while they set their hearts upon perishing things, upon that
which is not. v. Prove. 23. 4, 5. But eternity comes not into their thoughts;
Transient riches take up their thoughts, heart, all; but eternal riches, a
durable substance is no whit regarded. There is a sad example of that miserable
rich fool, of whom you may read Luke 12. 19, 20, 21. O! that all dissemblers
and hypocrites would lay the thoughts of eternity to heart! How many dissemble
and belly their consciences, and pretend one thing openly, when as they intend
another secretly. Their hearts give their lips the ly. Did these consider of
another world, of an everlasting estate either in happiness or misery, surely
they durst not baffle their consciences, and turn any way for temporary
advantage, and in the mean time wound their consciences? Questionless if
eternity was more in our thoughts, we should be better in secret, we should
pray with more faith and fervency, and be more watchful over our hearts, more
conscientious in all our carriages. Did we entertain in our hearts the frequent
thoughts of eternity, we should be better in our capacities and relations,
better masters, and servants, better parents and children, better husbands and
wives. It was the Motto of Meursius a learned man Aeternitate^ cogita. Did we
think of eternity, we should not be so loath to lay out our selves for God; did
we consider often how frail our life is, as a vapor, a bubble, swifter then a
weavers shutle, swifter then an arrow out of a bow, swifter then a post, then a
thought: Certainly we should not then be so hardly entreated to labor in Gods
vineyard. Did such who are entrusted with the inspection of others consider of
the account they must give in another life, they durst not neglect those
Depositums, the parents choycest jewels committed to their trust, and excuse
themselves with a distinction per se and per alium, which in eternity will
prove an unsound rotten distinction, and will not in the least help them out,
who eat the bread of idleness. If this consideration of eternity were in the
tradesmans thoughts, he durst not vend sophisticated wa^es, and cousen in his
trade (as if in his trade a mystery of overreaching were tolerable) O
miserable gain to be penny wise, and pound foolish, to get a little petty
profit in the trade, and in the mean time adventure the loss of an immortal
soul for ever! Behold, Brethren, we all stand at the door of eternity;
Thousands of diseases, casualties, molestations may dispatch us; and send us to
our long home. Here lies our great wisdom and understanding, in making timely
provision for our eternal condition. This should be o^^ study, this should be
our inquiry, to ask, what means must we use to inherit eternal life? What must
we do to be saved? How must we make our peace with God? Yet a little while and
our souls shall be separated from our bodies. Yet a little while and grisly
death the King of terrors will seize on us; Here then must we be inquisitive,
what will become on our souls afterward? We see God writing vanity on all
sublunary things, and they are full of vexation. The greatest riches are
uncertain, and perishing; All the honors, and riches in their greatest estate
and confluence, cannot help a man in the evil day, nor satisfy an immortal
soul, nor bring a man to eternity. Wherefore our great care and wisdom should
be, to get an endureing substance, to get assurance of the love of God in
Christ, and his love isan eternal love. We should be exhorted in the language
of the Apostle, Col. 3. 2, 3. Set your affections on things above, and not on
things below. For ye are dead, etc. Let me, in a few words (to press upon you
the study of eternity,) add these Moving considerations.

1. This study of eternity is an honorable study. It Is a most sublime, noble
study, suitable to the soul. The understanding of 1. Consid. This is an
honorable study.
man is a noble faculty of the soul, and what more suitable for such a noble
faculty to contemplate, then the thoughts of eternity? God and Christ, and
Glory, the blessed vision, communion with the Father and the Son, these are
objects fittest for the contemplations of an immortal soul. What a degenerate
sordid thing is it, for Princes children to converse with base persons? All
Gods children are children of the great King of Heaven and Earth, and for such
to have their thoughts stuffed with trash and pelf of the world, O how
unsuitable and unworthy is it! The Lapwing is accounted an emblem of
infelicity; because she feeds on dung, though she wears a Coronet upon her
head. Shall then our heavenly-born-being souls be prostituted to Mammon? shall
our thoughts be low and creeping? Our thoughts and negotiations ought to be on
life and immortality, even the great things of eternity. Our studyes and
meditations should be on the things above, heavenly treasures, an inheritance
that is immortal, undefiled, that fades not away. This is that noble, that
honorable study, wherein we ought to be employed.

2. This study of Eternity is a most sweet, delightsome, soulravishing 2.
Consid. This study is sweet and delightsome.
study. Job on the dunghill was comforted with the consideration of a better
life, and a glorious resurrection, Job 19. 25, 26, 27. For I know that my
redeemer lives; and this comforted Stephen, when by the eye of faith he saw
Christ, even when the Acts 7. 55.
stones were about his ears: his temporal life was then a going away, and he
was hastening to a better. That life was transient, this permanent. Oh! how
sweet is the meditation of a God reconciled, of a crown of glory, the price of
our high calling. This makes the Saints desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. The consideration of heavenly consolations, sweeten the bitterest pills
of afflictions. For one moment in heaven will abundantly make amends for all
our sufferings and sorrows on earth. This serious consideration of Eternity
will be a cordial in all troubles: I have read that Q. Eleanor sucked the
poison out of the wound of the King her-husband I am sure the meditation of our
everlasting estate, will suck the poison out of those wounds which affliction
bring. Oh! how delightful is the thought of a haven to such as are tossed up and
down with storms and tempests: This world is a tempestuous sea, rough and
troublesome, how delightful is this meditation to a child of God, to think, I
am passing through the rough sea of the world to an eternal Harbor.

3. This is a most profitable study. We read of treasures, crowns, 3. Consid.
This is a most profitable study.
high places, inheritances, laid up for the saints. In this world riches fail,
in heaven is an enduring substance. In this world honors lie in the dust, many
are degraded, in Heaven no degradation. That honor is permanent, Godliness
has the promise of this life and that which is to come 1 Timothy 4. 8. Wherefore
then should we carke and care and turmoile for the pelf of this world, and in
the mean time neglect eternal riches? What a do? What a hurry? What
sollicitous turmoyling is here to get estates in this world? What projecting,
torturing of men's brains, complying with men and times, to get honors and
riches in this world? Whereas all these things are not bread, they are not the
true treasure nor abideing substance. But in the mean time how few are there
that labor for spiritual riches, and lay up their treasures in heaven. No
treasure like this, this only inricheth the owners.

4. And lastly, this is a seasonable study. What are our life's but Consid. 4.
This is a most seasonable study.
a blast? Our breaths soon depart, and then all our thoughts vanish, every
affliction, every disease puts us in mind, that here is not our rest, here we
have not an abideing city. Revolutions of Providence; read Lectures to us of
the changeable condition of the world. What then more proper and more
seasonable then to have our hearts took off these transient things, and fixed
upon permanent things? There is no certainty here, but there is in another
world. The world with all it is bravery passes away: And there shall be a
dissolution of this frame visible to our eyes. How nearly does it concern us,
and how seasonable a duty is it, to mind heavenly things, to fix our thoughts,
meditations, totum hominem, totumque hominis, upon those excellent things of
eternity. Let Us study this subject more then ever, and let us make more
diligent inquiry after our eternal condition.

THE MALE IN THE FLOCK, OR The best must he offered to God,
Unfolded from Mal. 1. 14. But Cursed be the deceiver which has in his Flock a
Male and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great
King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen.


THe first word (But) imports a Connection on what went before. Sermon. 9. at S.
Mary's Oxon October. 21. 1657 1 Gods love. 2 The peoples ingratitude. 1.
Wherefore I hope it will be time well spent, to premise a brief Analysis upon
the whole chapter, before I fall upon the words of the Text: The whole chapter
may be divided into two parts. The former whereof contains a Protestation of
Gods abundant love unto the people of the Jews: The latter contains a sad
complaint and charge against them for their stupendous ingratitude: Then
here is abundantly declared Gods singular love unto them and to their father
Jacob, v. 2. I have loved you says the Lord; yet ye say, Wherein have thou
loved us? was not Esau Jacobs brother, says the Lord? Yet I loved Jacob and I
hated Esau, Jacob was elected, and Esau was reprobated. Neither the election of
the one, nor the reprobation of the other was upon praevision of works. All
such Arminian Glosses which corrupt a good Text are quite overthrown by the
Apostles Determination Romans 9. 11, 12, 13. Where this numerical Scripture is
quoted and expounded, 2. 1. Contempt of God.
2. Here Is set down the ingratitude of the Jews. And this brand is set upon
their foreheads in legible Characters, as may appear by these ensueing
instances: 1. Their signal contempt of God. v. 6. 12, 13. A son honors his
father, and a servant his master: If then I be a father, where is mine honor?
And if I be a master, where is my fear? Says the Lord of Hosts unto you, O
Priests, that despise my name: And ye say, wherein have we despised thy name.
v. 12. But ye have profaned it in that ye say, The table of the Lord is
polluted, and the fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible v. 13. 8. Ye
said also, Behold, what a weariness is it, and ye have snuffed at it, says the
Lord of Hosts, and ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick:
thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this of Proved by 2. Aggravations
Aggrvv. 1. From their Relation.
your hands, says the Lord? The aggravations are great. 1. From their
Relations, they were sons, and servants, yet though sons, honored their
fathers, and servants, their masters, yet those Jews were undutiful: Nay they
had nea^e^. Relation then this, as Priests consecrated after a peculiar manner
Quicunque vult: Every one might not take upon him the Priests office; As they
might not then, so neither may every one now take upon him the Ministers
office. God has set some Pastors, some teachers in his church Ephesians. 4. 11. Some
cannot signify all, Now the fault was the greater, because they being Priests
polluted the table of the Lord, as may appear by comparing v. 7. and 12
together v. 7. Ye offer polluted bread upon mine Altar, and ye say wherein have
we polluted thee? In that ye say, the table of the Lord is contemptible: v. 12.
But ye have profaned it, in that ye say, The table of the Lord is polluted, and
the fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible. A 2. Aggravation is their
insensibility v. 6. They expostulate the case, Wherein have we despised thy
name? Aggravat. 2 The Insensibility of sin.
Thus sinners are apt to excuse themselves, and are not easily brought to an
acknowledgement of their offenses. And of all others, those stains which are
in a linen ephod are most conspic^ous: It Is a common saying -- Nugae in ore
Laicorum sunt blasphemiae in ore Ministrorum. It Is Calvin's observations -- Non
levatur culpa populi Calvin in loc. 2. Proof of the Evidence
etiamsi gravius sit crimen Sacerdotum: 2. You have the evidence proved v. 7.
8. Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar, and ye say, Wherein have we
polluted thee? In that ye say, the table of the Lord is contemptible. v. 8. And
if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? And if ye offer the lame
and the sick, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy governor: Will he be
pleased with thee or accept thy person, says the Lord of Hosts? 3. At last
follows the dreadful punishment and 3. The dreadful Punishment. 1.
vengeance of God upon them for their sins, Amongst others three Judgments are
most remarkable. 1. Rejection of their prayers and persons both. v. 9. And now
I pray you beseech God, that he will be gracious unto us: This has been by
your means: Will he regard your persons, says the Lord of Hosts? 2. A
transferring of Gods worship v. 11. For from the rising of the sun, even unto
the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the gentiles, and in
every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering; for my
name shall be great among the heathen, says the Lord of Hosts. 3. A terrible
curse in the Text: So the Anathema is pronounced, Cursed be the deceiver etc.
Divis. 1. 2. 3.


Not to detain you any longer in the context, The words may be divided into
these ensueing particulars. 1. A dreadful curse threatened, or woe denounced. 2.
The person decypherd upon whom this curse justly falls (i. e.) The deceiver,
hypocrite, jugler. 3. The greatness of his crime which is amplified by these
aggravations, 1. He sacrifices a corrupt thing. 2. This was not done
accidentally, Dolosus Machinator (as he is usually termed) had a male in his
flock, and in contempt to God offers that which was vile and refuse. Wherefore
this circumstance aggravates his sin beyond all degrees of comparison. As if
the Lord should say, what vile, unthanke-full wretch do thou thus requite me
for giving thee of the best, to make returns of the worst unto me? Do thou
thus requite me, foolish and For I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts.
The other is drawn from the dreadfulness of Gods name among the Heathen, and
my name is dreadful among the Heathen.

There may be many choice Doctrines raised from the words. But I conceive it
needful to premise a brief Paraphrase upon the words, which I shall endeavor
to do, by giving resolutions to these three ensueing Inquiries.

1. We are to inquire what we are to understand by the deceiver 1. Drus. in loc.
in the Text? For answer Drusius thus brands him. Qui aliud vultu and in
oratione prae se fert, and aliud pectore clausum tenet (i. e.) He is one who in
his pleasing countenance and speeches pretends one thing, but in his heart
intends another. The Psalmist gives such hypocrites a remarkable Character
Psalm. 55. 21. The words of his mouth were smoother then butter, but war was in
his heart: His words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords. Now
this Deceiver in the Text, which (according to the version of the Interpreters)
is called Quadruplator, Impostor, Machinator, etc. is an errand Hypocrite, who
makes many fair pretenses, and thereby flatters himself, hoping to collude, and
cosen God, conscience, and the world: He is a crafty, subtle, dissembling
fellow, who is most in semblance, least in substance; greatest in pretenses,
least of all in intentions: One he is (in a word) that is a Nominal Professor,
and a real Atheist: None more forward than he to profess Religion, none more
backward to practice what he professes: wherefore Mr. Calvin on the place
gives him this brand of infamy, Qui ergo putant se posse elabi Calv. in loc.
ex Dei judicio talibus artificiis eos Propheta maledictos esse dicit: Such who
by such tricks and juglings think to escape Gods judgment, they are accursed
persons.

In the second place we are to make enquiry what is to be understood

A. By Male we are to understand the best of the flock, such as the Law
required without blemish, Lev. 1. 3. 10. This Male must have these properties
according to Vatablus his observation; It must be Integer, immaculatus, absque
ullo vitio. The 70. renders the words (...) (i. e.) that man that is able to
give a better sacrifice: A man of ability to give a Male, and offers a vile
contemptible sacrifice, O what a horrible affront and indignity is this to God!
Haec Hierom.
autem dicendo ostendit eos habere quae optima sunt, and offerre quae mala
sunt: So Hierome on the place. They had the best in the flock, and yet offered
the worst; such are accursed persons, who carry themselves thus contemptuously
toward the great God of Heaven and Cyril. Alexan.
Earth, (...), so Cyril of Alexandria. This is nothing less than contumely and
injury offered unto God.

3. What are we to understand by a corrupt thing?

A. By a corrupt thing we are to understand that which is weak, vile, feeble,
and contemptible: Cyril on the place thus expresses them; (...): Such things
as seem of no account and reckoning: Such was the baseness of their spirits in
those days that they thought any thing good enough for God. No Vows, no
Engagements held them fast, so great was their falsehood and hypocrisy that
they offered the refuse and worst to God: They loved a cheap religion, easy
duties, slight services, wherefore if they could find out any thing more
cheap, easy, and contemptible than another, that these base hypocrites offered
to the Lord. These are the deceivers, and notorious juglers which come under
the Anathema of the Text: I wish there were not an Anabaptistical spawn in
these days, who love a cheap Gospel, and decry Ministers and their
maintenance: Some are best pleased with that portion which they have robbed the
Ministers of. Insomuch that many will brand Ministers with the odious names of
Jewish and Antichristian Priests, though only for demanding their lawful
dues: And further though a Minister demands only his own (he having as good a
right to his tenth part, as any other have to their nine parts) yet the
iniquity of these times are such, that many make no conscience at all of
defrauding the Minister, Siquid blae^um, siquid debile, siquid distortum, that
they will allot for the Ministers share: But such cheaters of Gods Messengers
will thrive by their fraudulent dealing, no otherwise than the Eagle which
stole a piece of flesh from the Altar, and with it took a live coal, which
burnt up her own nest.

And now the Paraphrase of the words being premised, Here are four Doctrines
which lie obviously in the words.

1. All such as deal deceitfully and hypocritically in Gods service, expose
themselves unto the dreadful curse of God.

2. In all our services, it is Gods expectation, and our obliged duty to offer
the best we can possible unto the Lord.

3. It Is a high contempt and indignity, to offer any thing vile, refuse and
corrupt unto the Lord.

4. The greatness of Gods Majesty, and the estimation that Heathens have of a
Deity do abundantly condemn the contemptuous carriages of seeming Professors,
who offer a contemptible sacrifice unto the Lord.

Of these I shall fix only on the second, as comprehending the rest, which I
shall lay down for the ground work of my ensuing Meditations. The other
Doctrines will fall in either as Reasons or Uses.

For the enlargement of the point of Doctrine propounded, my Method shall be:

1. To make strict inquiry, how must our services be performed Method.
in the best way, which we ought to offer unto the Lord? or what is that Male
in the Text which we ought to sacrifice unto the Lord?

Then in the second place I am to prove my assertion by Scripture Testimony.

And then thirdly, and lastly, improve the premises in some useful
Application, and I hope so to conclude with the assistance of Gods Spirit, as
to prevail with you to put this Doctrine into practice. (i. e.)

To give God your best services, best endeavors, even such as will be
acceptable unto the Lord

For what was first propounded, The Inquiry being, how must our services be
performed which we ought to offer unto the Lord? I shall by way of character
give in my Answer in these six distinguishing Qualifications.

1. What we do, even all we do, must come from, and be performed Charact. 1.
Al must be done from the heart.
with a pure heart. Purity and Integrity of heart are principally looked after,
and esteemed of in Gods account. The heart God calls for, Prove. 23. 26. My Son,
give me thy heart. And this heart may not be divided; It must be one heart,
Jer. 32. 39. And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear
me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them. It must
be the whole heart, Joel 2. 12. Therefore, says the Lord, Turn ye unto me
with all your heart, with fasting, with weeping, and with mourning. It must be
all the heart, Josh. 22. 5. But take heed diligently to do the Commandment
and the Law which Moses the servant of the Lord charged you, to love the Lord
your God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his Commandments, and to
cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart, and with all your soul.
Lo then a single, sincere, undivided heart must be offered up to God: And
whatsoever we do, we must do it heartily, as unto the Lord, Col. 3. 23. Quod
cor non facit non fit: When one of the Roman Emperors offered a Beast in
sacrifice, and it wanted a heart, their Augures upon the observation foretold
some strange misery to ensue: I am sure whatever we offer unto God, if we
bring not our hearts with the offering, all will be rejected. Wherefore the
sacrifice of the wicked is abominated by God, because he offers it with a
naughty heart, Prove. 21. 27. The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how
much more when he brings it with a wicked mind? Charact. 2. We must have
regard unto the beauty of the season.


2. In all our services we must have regard to the Beauty of the season; for
every thing is beautiful in its season: And a dreadful curse is threatened
against all those who brought not the Lord an offering in its season, Numb. 9.
13. Of this season the Prophet tells us, Is. 55. 6. And the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.
2. Now is the season to come in and close with God, ^now to agree with thine
adversary quickly whilst thou art in the way with him, so we are exhorted Mat:
5. 25. You that are youngest, ought to offer your Male to God, your marrow,
vigor, best strength, even all: Consecrate your fresh green years to the
service of the Lord, Eccl. 12. 1. Remember now thy creator in the days of thy
youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall
say, I have no pleasure in them, and Micah 7. 1. Woe is me, for I am as when
they have gathered the Summer fruits, as the grape gleanings of the Vintage:
there is no cluster to eat: my soul desired the first ripe fruit. O that from
your childhood, with Timothy and Samuel you would labor to know and fear the
Lord! You that are old, give your old age to God, and be more serious; bewail
with tear; of blood your youthful sins: In good earnest seek the Lord, now
though it be the eleventh hour, come and work in the Vineyard; and because you
have delayed the longer (which is your great wickedness) you had need for the
future work the harder. And O! that your last days might be your best days.
Its an observation of a Reverend Divine, That a Greenham.
young man should honor God with his youth, a middle aged man with his
strength, an old man with his wisdom: Wherefore lay aside all delays,
demurres, apologies, and vain excuses; and now take the benefit of the season,
now lay hold on the golden opportunity, and labor in this thy day to entertain
serious considerations of those things which concern your everlasting peace.

3. We must make Religion our business: Let this be (...), the work of works
to serve the Lord. The service of God, must be Charact. 3. We must make
Religion our business.
performed seriously and supreamly, Mat. 6. 33. Do not make an (...) in
matters of Religion: All other things must be subordinate and subservient unto
the Worship of God. Wherefore be exhorted to give God the morning and evening
sacrifice. Seven times a day, says David* I will praise thee: Daniel prayed
three times a day: Let Us not deal so contemptibly with God, as to leave the
worst of our time, that part of the day for God, when we are most indisposed
for service, shuffling over a few prayers between sleeping and waking, as if
such slight services would be sufficient. Be not deceived, God is not, God
will not be mocked: God requires the best of the Flock. I have often been
offended, and it has been sad upon my heart, to hear mock prayers of Beggars
from door to door mumbling over a few prayers: And I have ever thought it a a
shame, that such vile wretches should be suffered so to profane the Ordinance
of Prayer, and take the Name of God in vain: But much more are such to blame,
who have gifts and abilities, and yet content themselves with a formal service,
and a lazy, easy way of worship; such tie themselves to forms, and
prescriptions of Antiquity, and will force themselves to crutches, not making
trial whether they can go without. The Spirit is worth the asking for; and
there is a comfortable promise, that God will give the Spirit to those that ask
him, Luke 11. 13. God promises good things to those that ask him, Mat. 7. 11.
and questionless the Spirit of God is a good thing.

4. Whatever we do, we must do in Faith; if we pray, we must Charact. 4. We
must do all in faith.
pray in Faith, Jam. 5. 15. If we hear, we must hear in Faith. What Is the
reason of barrenness and unfruitfulnesse in hearing of the Word? It proceeds
from the want of Faith, Heb. 4. 2. If we receive the Sacrament we must receive
in Faith; for Faith is the maine qualification in a Receiver. The Scripture
compares Faith to an eye, Zach. 12. 10. to a hand, Joh. 1. 12. If we want
Faith, we have neither eye nor hand: Christ's body and blood is meat and drink
indeed to the Faith of a worthy Communicant. Now if Faith be wanting, there is a
mouth wanting to feed on Christ. The Apostle tells us, Heb. 11. 6. That without
Faith it is impossible to please God, and whatsoever is not of Faith is sin:
No services of an unbeleever are accepted in the eyes of God.

5. Whatever we do, we must do in the Name of Jesus Christ. Charact. 5. All
must be done in the name of Christ.
Faith makes not God to be ours, but in Christ: Christ is the object of our
Faith, the author and finisher thereof. No services can be accepted but in
Christ; for God will no other way show mercy but through Jesus Christ, 2 Cor.
5. 19. Christ is our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. He is the Mediator between God and
Man; He alone has trod the Winepresse of his Fathers fury. Christ is that
brazen Serpent to whom we must look with the eye of Faith, else we shall never
be cured of the stingings of the fiery Serpent. Christ was typified by the
dead Bird; the living bird must be dipped in the blood of th^^ dead bird,
otherwise no atonement could be made. Christ is that tree, whose leaves convey
healing to the Nation; the fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness:
Christ is that Shiloh Jacob prophesied of, that Star Balaam mentioned, that
Messiah prophesied by Daniel, that great Prophet foretold by Moses. Christ is
that great brazen Altar before the Throne, whereon all our Sacrifices ought to
be offered. Christ is the beloved Son, in whom the Father is well pleased. He
is the new and living way: He is the way, the truth, and life. I insist the
longer on this, and am your Remembrancer of these things (though ye know them
already) and the rather to settle you in the truth, against those wicked
opinions of some, who fancy a Platonic Christ, and of others, who tell us of
a Postern-door for Heathens, and are so lavish in their charity as they will
bestow a Dowry upon Pagans, I shall urge only two Scriptures for confutation,
Act. 4. 12. Joh. 17. 3.

6. And lastly, let us perform all the services of God with Reverence Charact.
6. All must be performed with reverence.
and godly fear; Heb. 12. 28. Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be
moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God with reverence and godly
fear. The serious consideration of Gods Majesty and Purity should mightily
prevail upon our hearts, and strike in us an awefull reverence of the great
and glorious name of the Lord our God. Whether it be Altar-worship,
Will Worship, or Men-worship, I look upon them all as abominable. Yet
notwithstanding when I cry down superstitious gestures (far be it from me)
to cry up irreverent gestures in the worship of God: For any in time of Divine
worship to be laughing one upon another, it argues a slight and vain spirit.
To have ones hat on one side according to the swaggerers fashion; or partly
off, according to a careless slovenly fashion, hanging in their eyes, is a
scandalous, irreverent, offensive gesture, whilst the Preacher is a praying.
Not a Governor among you would approve of such a ridiculous gesture in your
inferiors, when they come before you: Neither would any of you take such
gestures for capping you, and going bare within the Precincts of a College:
And yet this unseemly irreverent carriage is used frequently in public
Assemblies, even in time of Prayer. I mention this with a hope and earnest
desire of Reformation for the future; upon serious thoughts I recommend unto
you a reverentiall frame of spirit. Consider the presence of God and of Angels;
how many eyes are over you, both of good and bad; we ought neither to give
offense to Jew nor Gentile, nor the Church of God. Remember the Apostles
counsel, Phil. 4. 8. (...) -- Amongst other things the Apostle charge us to
regard such things as are of good report.

I have now dispatched my first head of Discourse, which indeed may serve as an
Use of Trial and Examination, Whether we offer unto God a Male, the best of
our services? do we offer all from the heart? do we lay hold upon the Lords
season? do we make Religion our business? do we in good earnest set upon the
service of God? do we all in faith, and in the name of Christ, with reverence
and godly fear? If in truth and sincerity we can as in the presence of God,
give affirmative Answers unto these Interrogatories, then questionless we
offer unto God a Male; not that there is any worth or merit in our services; for
when we have done all we can, we are unprofitable servants; for there is neither
dignitas operis, nec dignitas operantis, sed dignatio Domini, when there is a
willing mind, it is accepted. By Faith Abraham offered Isaac; God knew the
willingness and integrity of his heart, and it was all one in Gods esteem, as
if he had actually sacrificed him; for God accepted the Will for the Deed.

Now in the second place, I must make good the proof of my assertion; and this
I shall briefly do, by giving in evident testimony 2. The Doctrine proved. 1.
From Scripture.
from the Scripture. For Scripture testimony, peruse the whole Levitical
Pedagogy: In all Sacrifices the best was consecrated to God; particularly, a
Lamb must be without blemish, Levit. 3. 7, 8. This was for a Peace Offering:
For a Burnt-offering the Lamb must be of the first year, Lev. 3. 9. Why of the
first year? but because it was esteemed the best; and it is there added, it must
be without blemish: So likewise fine flower mingled with oil, must be offered
for a Trespasse-offering, Levit. 14. 21. the best of the flower, and the best
of the oil must be offered unto the Lord. In all offerings of Beasts it is
observed, that God gives a special command, that the inwards and legs should be
washed, Lev. 1. 13. A young Bullock ought to be without blemish, Lev. 4. 3. A
Ram ought to be without blemish, Lev. 6. 6. The Priests ought to wash
themselves: What great purification was required before the receiving of the
Passover? All these Types proves this Truth, that the best and purest service
ought to be offered up unto the Lord: Abel brought the firstlings of the flock,
and the fat thereof, Genesis 4. 4. He brought God the first fruits of his
increase, and the best, and fattest of his flock; whereas Cain, like a niggard,
cared not what he gave, as though any thing would serve the turn; wherefore
Abel was accepted, and Cain rejected. Further, to instance in all Spiritual
sacrifices whereof Carnal sacrifices are but a type: what ever duty or services
we perform to God must be with the whole man, so David professed, Ps. 119. 10.
With my whole hear^t have I fought thee. And our love to God must be with all
the heart, and with all the soul, and with all the might, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. It Is the
high commendation of David and all Israel that they played before the Lord with
all their might. 1 Chronicles. 13. 8. And its a singular commendation of Hezekiah 2 Chronicles. 31. 21. That in every work he began in the service of the house of God
and in the Law and in the Commandments to seek his God, he did it with all his
heart and prospered: And to the same purpose we have a parallel commendation of
Josiah that rare King 2 Kings. 23. 25. That he turned unto the Lord with all
his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might. We read of examples
of great sincerity and industry among the Saints of God: We find Daniel upon
his watch and fasting, and praying, David mourning, and watering his Couch with
his tears, Jacob wrestling with the Angel, and how did he wrestle the Prophet,
Hosea informs us. cap. 12. 4. Yea he had power over the Angel and prevailed,
he wept and made supplication unto him. Let no man deceive himself, for it is
not so easy a matter to serve God as he requires: It must be no lazy, careless
service: The Apostle gives thanks in the behalf of the Thessalonians for their
work of faith, labor of love, and patience of hope 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3. We read of a
straight gate, and a narrow way to heaven: That the Kingdom of Heaven must be
took by violence, and only the violent take it by force: We have a work to
work, and we must work it out. Phil. 2. 12. (...) etc. And there is (...) 2
Pet. 1. 10. We have a battle to fight, and a race to run. We have Methods of
Satan to discover, strong holds to beat down, depths to beware of, and devices
to find out: All these require singular pains and diligence. Wherefore we had
need take unto us the Divine Panoply; we had need to the utmost bend our selves
to the service of the Lord: We had need confer our endeavors to the utmost
to offer to God a Male, this best sacrifice and service unto the Lord.

Many uses might be made of this Doctrine, as for Exhortation, Reproof,
Examination, Instruction and Consolation: I shall at present only six on one
only Use. Use 1. For Exhortation


Use 1. Which shall be for Exhortation. Men, Fathers, and Brethren, suffer the
word of Exhortation, to give unto God back again what he has given unto you
the best parts and abilities and endowments, the best sacrifices and the best
services: My exhortation shall be first to all in general, and then to two
sorts in a special manner.

1. To all in general, Let me exhort you to give God your marrow and strength
of your age, the morning of the day, your first thoughts in the morning, let
them be consecrated unto the Lord: And if the first fruits be holy, the whole
lump will be sanctified. Pub. Scipio first went into the Senate to pray before
he went into the Capitol to consult: Christ was at prayer a great while before
day. Mark. 1. 35. David prevented the night watches. The Jews divided the day
into three parts, the first was for prayer, the second for the study of the
Law, the third for work. I have read that King Alfred the founder of the
ancientest College in our University, divided the day into three parts, eight
hours for prayer, study and writing, 8 hours for eating, drinking and
sleeping, and eight hours in the affairs of the estate. My Brethren let us all
make it our business to serve the Lord with all our hearts. Lets in good
earnest with all the members of our bodies and faculties of our souls give up
our selves to God: Let Us offer all we are and have even a whole burnt offering
unto the Lord. Let Us give God the best of the best. Let Us not sleep away a
morning Sermon, and be in our beds when we ought to be in the public
Congregation: Cannot we rise early enough for our secular interest, and shall
we neglect in the mean time the eternal good of our immortal souls? The Queen
of Sheba came from the uttermost parts of the earth, and the wise men came from
the East etc. And shall any be so lazy as not to step over their thresholds to
hear a Sermon? Will men loose this Manna for want of gathering it? Men ought to
labor more to be good then to be great, and to be more careful to discharge
their places of preferment, then sollicitous to procure them; What seeking,
riding, soliciting, undermining, what scandalizing, supplanting, perfidious
dealings are every where to be found? These ways of unbrotherly dealings are
very frequently practiced in these evil days. These things (my brethren) ought
not so to be. I fear those times and practices are revived now a days against
which the Prophet Micah complains chap. 7. 3. That they hunt every man his
brother with a net: Thence an exhortation is inferred v. 5. Trust not in a
friend, put not confidence in a guide. But here lies our duty to do all we can
to promote the honor of God, to lay out our selves, Interests, and all to
advance the Gospel of Jesus Christ. We seek our selves every where, our own
honor, ease, and Interest: How greedy are many to get more riches, how
sollicitous of increaseing their substance? But how careless are men of doing
their duties, and discharging the great trust reposed in them? Wherefore the
other part of my Use shall in an especial manner be directed to two sorts of
Persons, viz. Magistrates and Ministers.

1. Let Magistrates do their best in their capacity to promote 1. To
Magistrates.
the glory of God. They have great advantages put into their hands, and let
them remember that they bear not the sword in vain: A Magistrate in Gods cause
should be like Levi, who knew neither Father nor Mother, nor Brother nor
Sister. Of all others a Magistrate should be a man of zeal and courage, he
should bring the wheel upon the wicked: Be they honorable or worshipful, he
should not spare them in their wickedness. Swearers, Drunkards, Whoremongers,
Sabbath Breakers; these should be punished, and Blasphemers who are as bad as
the worst: For their abomination is never the less, because they have so many
to plead for them. It Is an old Moral Law, never yet repealed, that he that
blasphemeth the name of the Lord should be put to death. Lev. 24. 16. What
abundance of good may Magistrates do? How many prizes have they put into their
hands to serve God in their places? Let none be afraid to be good: Let them
have this Motto or Monitor in their serious thoughts; Those that honor God, he
will honor, but as for those that despise him they shall be lightly esteemed.
2. To Ministers.


2. Here Is one word to Ministers and so for the present I shall conclude. Must
God have the best, then let Ministers offer to God their prayers, studies, best
pains. Luther used to say that prayer Meditation and Tentation makes a
Preacher, And Bernard used to say Been orasse est been studuisse. Let all
Ministers pray much; let them first study their own hearts, and then study
their sermons, which they preach to their Auditors. The Preacher studied
acceptable words. A Minister must be an Interpreter one of a thousand: Gods
mouth to distinguish the precious from the vile: He must have the tongue of the
learned to speak a word in due season. I have often thought of David's
resolution to Araunah that he would not offer to the Lord, that which should
cost him nothing, Questionless, transcriptions, Extemporary effusions, vain
fancies, forced Allegories, Wiredrawne Expositions are unbecomeing a Pulpit.
There Is a curse, upon all those that do the work of the Lord negligently.
Let Us all endeavor to approve our selves workmen that neednot to be ashamed.
Thanks be to God, There Is a choice company of young men, who usually supply
this lecture. Their spirits are serious, and their language savory, and they
preach solid, Orthodox and soulesaving Doctrines. I must admire and can never
enough bless God for the same. The saying is no more common than true, that the
hope of our Church is in our young men. I will make no comparisons, I wish from
my heart that we were all better, that we would preach more solidly and more
frequently. And sor mine own part I am of opinion that those who preach most
frequently having a single eye at Gods glory, these are the best and most
profitable Preachers, and do most good to poor souls. Let none of us hide
our talents in a Napkin. Let Us not hide our Candle under a Bushel: But let us
employ frequently this sword of the spirit and draw it out, lest Ducentas
octoginta sex Conciones quotannis habuit Calvinus ad Popu'u^, Lectiones vero
centum, and octoginta sex, praeter Epist^las, Disputationes etc. Beza in vita
Calvin^.
by keeping it in the scabbard it grow rusty for want of using. When we read of
Chrysostomes (...). I (says he) preached yesterday and to day: And of Calvin's
indefatigable pains, (as * Beza writes in his life) we may be ashamed that we
do no more. Let not any ordained Minister especially stand idle in the market
place, and say none has hired me: There are many pulpits empty both here and
in adjacent Parishes. Yo^ have places enough to visit, were you but of the rare
spirit of Amaziah the son of Zichri, who did willingly offer himself unto the
service of the Lord. Brethren I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy: And
in love to your souls, I am your remembrancer of these things. Liberavi
animam. And so for the present I conclude; heartily desireing, that what has
been spoken may abide by you, and leave deep impression upon all your
Consciences.

Sermon. 10. At S. Mary's Oxon Nov. 1. 1657.
Having lately made some entrance on this text, in this place I proceed on in
the same use of Exhortation to drive the nail to its full head, pressing upon
you all this great duty of the weightiest importance (i. e.) to give God your
Male without blemish, that is, in all your services, worship, and duties that
you perform, to give the best of the best unto the Lord.

To set this use home, I Will press somewhat closer the duty of the text in these
seven ensuing considerations.

Consider the transcendent greatness and majesty of God. In my Consid. 1.
Thetranscendent majesty of God.
text he is called a great King and Lord of Hosts; which sets forth the majesty
and sovereignty of God, who is absolute Ruler, Governor and Commander of all.
All the Creatures are made by God; all are sustained and preserved by him:
Therefore it is a cogent reason to engage all creatures to subjection and
obedience to their Creator and Governor. Seneca was wont to say, when we are
about a business of great consequence, we should imagine that Scipio, Cato,
Laelius etc. were our Overseers: Much more ought we to remember the
sovereignty, Dominion, and omnipresence of God. Such serious considerations
might prevail with us to offer the best sacrifices, and services unto the
Lord. Gods greatness and power commands our fear and reverence. It Is an
excellent observation of Mr. Calvin on the place. The greatness of God ought so
to Magnitudo Dei debet nos humiliare, ne eum colamus pro sensu carnis nostrae;
sed offeramus tantum quod ejus coelesti gloria dign^^ est. Calv. in loc
humble us, as not to worship God according to our carnal sense: But to offer
to him what beseemes his heavenly Glory. Constantine the great, Valentinian and
Theodosius called themselves Christ's vass^ls; and well they might, because he
is absolute Monarch (...). All other things are his servants; All creatures are
at his sole command. According to our capacities there is but a shaddowing forth
and that very darkly of the glory of God. Ezekiel. 1. Isai. 6 Dan. 7. The Throne
is there said to be stately, costly and magnificent. Hence Bernard infers a
good note, Omnino oporlet nos orationis tempore etc. i. e. At prayer time when
we enter into the Court of Heaven where the King of all Kings sits in state, we
should approach with reverence, humility and fear, considering that we are dust
and ashes and we make our addresses unto the great God of Heaven and Earth.

A second consideration shall be drawn from the infinite Holiness Consid. 2.
Drawn from the holiness of God.
of God. This lays a strong engagement upon us, in all our services to put
forth our selves to the utmost to present unto the Lord an acceptable
sacrifice. The Lord is holy in his essence, holy in all his ways; his name is
holy, his word holy, his people holy, his worship holy: in Levitical
ordinances, all ought to be holy. As for instance the flesh was holy Lev. 6.
27. Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy; and when there is
sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment, thou shall wash that whereon
it was sprinkled in the holy place. The Instruments holy, Numb. 31. 6. And
Moses sent them unto the War, a thousand of every Tribe, them, and Phineas the
Son of Eleazar the Priest to the War, with the holy Instruments and the
Trumpets to blow in his hand. The Vessels holy, 1 Chronicles. 22. 19. Now set your
hearts and your souls to seek the Lord your God, build the Sanctuary to bring
the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, and the holy Vessels into the horse that
is to be built. The Offerings holy, 2 Chronicles. 35. 13. They roasted the Passover
with fire; but the other holy Offerings sod they in p^ts, etc. The ^ifts holy,
Exodus 22. 38. The Ointment holy, Exodus 30. 25. The Garments holy, Exodus 35. 21.
So likewise in Evangelical Ordinances all must be holy, as we may read, Zech.
14. 20, 21. All this is to be understood of the spiritual service in the
Christian Church. The ingraving of the Priests Mitre, was Holiness unto the
Lord. And this Motto must be upon our hearts and lives. We serve a holy God,
who is infinite in holiness, of purer eyes than to behold the least iniquity.
Holiness becomes his house, his day is holy, his service must be holy. God
will be sanctified in all that we approach unto him. His Name ought to be
sanctified by us, let us not then be so vile as to offer unholy services to a
holy God; let us not offer the lame and the blind to the holy Lord God.

A third consideration shall be drawn from the equity of the Duty. Is it not
most equal, to return, by way of gratitude to God Consid. 3. From the equity
of the duty.
again that which he has given unto us? All the cattle on a thousand Mountains
are at Gods disposing; all the parts and abilities thou have are Gods gifts;
all strength, vigor, marrow in thy bones are Gods bounty and largeness to
thee; What have thou which thou have not received? The Male in the flock is
Gods great bounty to thee, and will thou not give it back again unto God: We
read how David prepared with all his might for the house of God, as Brass,
Iron, Silver, and Gold, and precious Stones: Read his humble acknowledgement, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14, 16. Now shall not we render a Mi^e in return for Millions
received? shall not we render a drop of Praises for an ocean of Mercies? Quid
retribuam? says David: David thought no cost great enough for ^od: Solomon
spared for no cost in building the Temple; no more ought Christians to love
cheap services and lazy ways of devotion. We must think nothing good enough
for God: An only son Abraham would offer, Genesis 22. 12. Have thou a good
memory? is that thy best treasure? then employ it to remember thy Creator; have
thou a great judgment and understanding? labor more and more to know God, thy
self; and communicate what thou know, for the edification of thy brethren.
Have thou strong Affections, as Love, Joy, Desire, etc? let them be placed on
God, as that only centrum quietativum. Have thou great substance in the world?
Consider thou have the worlds goods but lent and entrusted to thee as a Steward
for a little time, and therefore thou must honor God with thy substance, by
dealing out thy bread to the hungry, and relieving of the distressed members of
Jesus Christ. In a word, whatever thou art or have, all the members of thy body
and faculties of thy soul must be employed as instruments in the service of
God. All come from God, and must be employed for God; what he gives to us must
be given back again: Wherefore we conclude this Motive with that Apostolical
Doxology, Romans 11. 36. For of him, and through him are all things, to whom be
glory for ever, Amen.

I shall add a fourth consideration, and that shall be drawn from Consid. 4.
Drawn from the credit and reputation of Christian Religion.
the Credit and Reputation of Christian Religion, which we should with our
lives, livelihood, and all, endeavor to upho^d. Shall Heathens think no cost
great enough, no pains, no service sufficient for their false Gods, and shall
we grudge at every thing which we do in the worship of the true God? We read
in the Text, that the name of God is dreadful amongst the Heathens (i. e.)
Gods greatness is astonishing amongst the Heathen: They have some dread and
fear of a Deity, Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar and others Drusius in loc.
have been forced to confess the power of God: Quod merito vobis pudorem
incutere debet: so Drusius on the place, (i. e.) This consideration ought to
make you ashamed, that ye who are my people, do not reverence me; yet the
Gentiles reverence and fear my name. The Christian Religion gives not its
Professors a Writ of Ease, but presses upon us running, racing, fighting,
wrestling, striving to enter in at the strait gate, contending for the Faith,
taking heaven by violence, working out our salvation, giving all diligence to
make our Calling and Election sure: If we sit loose from duties, or do them
superficially and slightly, we open the mouths of Heathens and ungodly men to
speak evil of Religion: Uncircumspect, and careless walking of many
Professors, causes the enemies of God to blaspheme: What will Turks say, they
give Mahomet the best service they can, and shall Christians be careless in
their service to Christ? shall Mahometans be more zealous to serve their false
Prophet, than Christians to serve the great true Prophet Jesus Christ. Pliny
tells us a story, that Alexander, when he had conquered Arabia, he presented his
Schoolmaster with a ship laden full of Frankincense, bidding him to spare for
no cost when he offered sacrifice unto the Gods. Let not Christians think much
of any cost, any pains and service offered unto the great God of heaven and
earth. As for instance, our prayers must be fervent, Jam. 5. 16. In giving
Alms, we must give with simplicity: in Ruling, we must rule with diligence,
Romans 12. 8. Love must be without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. Faith must be a
working faith, 1 Thessalonians, 1. 3. In every duty we must put our whole strength to
it, remembering the counsel of the Wise man, Eccles. 9. 10. to do with all our
might. It was a great wickedness in Aigolandus, King of Africa, to scorn the
Christian Religion, because he saw many Christians poor and ragged: But it is
much more evil in Christians, especially Professors, by their loose and
careless walking, to give advantage to profane men to asperse the Christian
Religion: Religion receives many a wound by licentious Professors. How nearly
then does it concern all Professors to look more narro^ly to their paths, to
walk worthy of God, as becomes the Gospel, that to their utmost they may keep
up the reputation of Christian Religion.

A fifth cons^deration shall be drawn from the greatness of the Consid. 5.
From the sin in offering the vile and corrupt. 1 It is a great folly.
sin in offering that which is vile and corrupt unto the Lord. This sin is
compounded of four ingredients; Folly, Contempt, Presumption, and Sacrilege.

1. It argues great Folly to put off God with the worst; to present unto an
omniscient God a worthless sacrifice, is exceeding great folly, and such folly
shall not escape unpunished. The heart is known to God; it is that which God
principally looks after. He it is which searches the heart, and tries the
reins: A sacrifice without a heart is rejected. In praying, if iniquity be
regarded the Lord will not hear, Psalm. 66. 18. Wherefore is Ephraim called a
filly Dove? the Prophet ren^ers the reason, because he was without Mr. Totshel
of Hypocrisy.
a heart, Hos. 7. 11. Now the heart is the chiefest thing which God requires,
and he requires the strength and bent of the heart, the integrity thereof: It
must be one entire, and undivided heart. Let Us not dare to collude with God;
though we may deceive our selves and the world, yet we cannot deceive God. It Is
exceeding great madness and folly to offer to the All-knowing, sin-revenging,
heart-searching God, any thing vile and contemptible.

2. It argues great contempt; v. 13. the words next proceeding: 2. It argues
great contempt.
v. 7, 8. The lame and the blind are abominable. God expects an intelligent,
reasonable service. Blind devotion, ignorant services are abominable: That
Popish opinion deserves an Anathema, that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion.
God requires the strength and vigor of the whole man: Therefore cold,
languishing services, lame, halting services are abominable. A governor on
earth would not be put off with a refuse, slight present: Jacob commands, Take
of the best fruits in the Land, Genesis 43. 11. And shall we present to the great
King of heaven and earth a contemptible, vile service? we read Zech. 11. 13.
its called a goodly price, by way of scorn and disdain, that such a sordid
price should be given: And what was that price? but thirty pieces of silver,
about five Marks of our money, which (as Josephus, and other H^storians mention)
was the price of a slave. And indeed, abominable sinners do what in them lies,
to put the great God to the condition of a slave, Isa. 34. 24. Consider what a
great affront and contempt it would be for a Beggar in his nasty ragge; to come
and set himself down at the Table of a Prince? How much more is it for
profane persons to sit themselves down at the Table of the Lord? No
uncircumcised person ought to eat the Passover, and no uncircum^ised in heart
ought to eat the Lords supper. The blind and the lame, ignorant and scandalous
have no right to this Ordinance, because they discern not the Lords body: It Is
childrens bread, holy food. In the Primitive times, when the Sacrament was to
be administered, one cried out aloud, holy things for holy persons. Though
unwarrantable separations do much harm, as one extreme, so I am persuaded that
promiscuous Communion will do as much harm on the other extreme.

3. It argues great presumption, to presume of acceptance of 3. It argues
great presumption.
that service, which is cheap, sordid, and slight: For any to think any torn
beast would serve well enough for a sacrifice, this was the great presumptuous
sin of the Jews: And for Christians to think a base outside Profession will
serve the turn, is a formal, lazy, cheap devotion. The bare sitting out of a
Sermon, the mumbling over in bed those few words between sleeping and waking,
Lord have mercy upon me: For people to lick themselves whole, and think to be
cured by such slight Medicines, what is this but high presumption? This is for
men to disparage Religion, as a cheap commodity: This is to undervalue the
Medicine of Christ's blood, by thinking it easy to be had: This is to presume
of Mercy at last, though in the mean time men live as they list: But be not
deceived, God is not mocked. The work of salvation is not so easy to work out;
it will cost sweat, and blood, watchings, fastings, humblings, repentings, and
when thou have done all, thou must deny thy self, and acknowledge thy self an
unprofitable servant. Take heed of presuming, and blessing thy self in carnal
security. There Is one maine Scripture, which should be as a Looking-glass set
before presumptuous sinners, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.

4. To give God that which is vile, and reserve a better to themselves, 4.
There is sacrilege in this sin.
to present God with any thing at a venture, when thou have a better by thee,
it plainly proves thee guilty of Sacrilege. The best thou should consecrate
to the Lord, the best in thy flock, the best of thy services, the best of the
best of thy heart, memory, understanding, will, and affections. Now if thou
do keep back the best from God, thou art guilty of the highest kind of theft,
even sacrilege, as we may read. Mal. 3. 8. upon this Scripture a good old
Disciple lays down this Doctrine: That it Mr. Stock on Mal. 3. 8.
is a sacrilegious and impious thing for them to withold, and withdraw the
Ministers maintenance. Suum merito vocat ac censet, quod destinat in cultum
su^m (says Calvin) And if it be a great sin, as it is questionless, to
defraud Gods Ministers, and rob them of their maintenance, how much greater is
it to rob Christ of his Deity (as much as in Blasphemers lies) and to rob God
of his Day and Worship: The Papists would take away the second Commandment,
the Anabaptists the fifth, the Antisabbatarians the fourth, and some Antinomian
and Familistical spirits would cut the whole Decalogue off at one blow; these
are sacrilegious in a high manner, Consid. 6. Notwithstanding all failings all
will be accepted through Jesus Christ.
who rob God of his Law and Worship. ^ut I come to a

6. Consideration: When we have done the best, offered the Male in the flock,
though there are many faylings, yet all will be accepted through Jesus Christ:
Two things I must premise.

1. That there are faylings in our best services: There are iniquities of the
holy things. Exodus 28. 38. The Prophet confss eth himself a man of unclean
lips. Is. 6. 5. The best of us all had need be humbled to the dust for those
very sins that cleave to our duties, for our distractions, deadness, coldness
in hearing, and praying; and when we have done our duty, we had need fall upon
our knees, to pray for the forgivenes of our faylings, in the doing of that
duty; We had need fast for our fastings, and be humbled for our humiliations,
because we have performed spiritual services in a Carnal and Careless manner.

But 2. If we do our utmost from a sincere heart, and offer all up in the name
of Christ, through him, we shall be accepted of the Father. Christ is that high
Priest that has entered into the holy of holies, and there he bare the Iniquity
of our holy things: He takes away our filthy garments, and clothes us with the
immaculate robes of his righteousness. Our prayers are raw and cold, but Christ
mends them in the carriage: Our services are imperfect, Christ presents them
perfect to the Father. Our duties have many stains and defilements by our
formal slight performance of them: But the Lord Jesus washes them, and so
presents them to the Father. So then in all our services we must act in the
strength of Christ: We must offer all our sacrifices upon this brazen Altar,
Christ is the only high Priest that can offer all for us: Nothing of our
selves, as of our selves we can do in an acceptable manner. All we must do,
must be in the strength of Christ, without him we can do nothing, but we can
do all things through Christ that strengthens us.

7. And lastly. The last Consideration shall be drawn from the Consid. 7. From
the dreadful curse in the Text.
dreadful curse in the Text: The hypocrite, the deceiver, that offers a corrupt
thing unto the Lord is under a dreadful curse. It was a heavy j^dgement for
Cain and Cham to be under a curse: And an Anathema, with a Maranatha at the end
of it is the highest Gospel Curse: How dreadful must the condition of
Hypocrites be, who deal deceitfully with God, who (as it is in the Text) make
vows and keep mental reservations; who vow under pretense of Zeal, and yet give
God the worst. This dissembled Sanctity is double iniquity. But what did Cain
meet withal, but a curse for his slight sacrifice? what did Ananias and
Saphira meet withal for their hypocritical juglings and defalcations from the
price, but death in the place, a signal judgment? What shall careless
Ministers meet withal, but a dreadful woe? Zech. 11. 17. What shall they all
meet withal which do the work of the Lord deceitfully, but a dreadful curse?
Jer. 48. 10. Gods curses are terrible, and light heavy upon hypocrites: Though
men oftimes cannot find them out, yet God will take them into his own hand; and
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. This Deceiver
in the Text is an accursed person, his sin will find him out; his juglings,
pretenses, hypocrisie^ are all naked unto God, and the vengeance of God will
overtake him.

Having dispatched this Use of Exhortation, I come now to a second Use, which
shall be for Reproof of that grand Hypocrite and Deceiver in the Text, who has
in his flock, a Male, etc.

Within the verge of this Reprehension come several sorts of Use 2. For Reproof
persons, whom I shall single out, and cry aloud against them: As for instance,

1. The Hypocrite, who makes a show, a shadow, a pretense of 1. The Hypocrite.
Religion, without the truth, ^eality, and substance thereof. The Hypocrite is
odious to God and man: Men hate him because he seems so good; God hates him,
because he is not what he seems. He may go a great way, and deceive men and
his own heart for a time, yet he cannot escape the knowledge of a holy,
omniscient Lord God. Its the observation of a Reverend Divine, that a Hypocrite
is usually discovered before he dye. But though he escape undiscovered, and
unpunished by man, yet the hand of God will reach him: The Psalmist sets him
out, Psalm. 36. 2. 3. Psalm. 55. 21. No man gives smoother words than a
Hypocrite; no man more full of complements, none will pretend more friendship,
and none will do less: Joab came after such a hypocritical manner to Abner
and Amasa, and made his flattering speeches, but a Preface to his Murder:
Ishmael came weeping as he went, before he ^lew them: Judas kissed Christ, and
then betrayed him. Multitudes there are that put on a Vizard of Religion to
cover their oppressions, treachearies, and Machivillian Policies: Such are set
forth by the Poet in a lively character,

-- Pulchra Laverna
Da mihi fallere, da mihi justum sanctumque videri:
Noctem peccatis and fraudibus objice nubem.
I will not English it, would men's contrary practices would make the
confutation. But can a Hypocrite think to put off God with the worst (i. e.)
shows, phansies, pretenses, and airy complements. Such empty slight services
as come from a rotten heart, are like the Prophets rotten girdle, good for
nothing; like Cains sacrifice, like the cutting off a Dogs neck, like eating of
Swines flesh, all which are an abomination unto the Lord. Histories make
mention V. Fox Act. and Monum. Vol. 1.
of William the Conqueror to have these Characters; He was wise, but crafty;
rich, but covetous; fair spoken, but false hearted. If a Professor be guilty
of these characters, he is a shame to his Profession. Ananias and Saphira
played the notorious Hypocrites: They entered themselves into Church Fellowship,
and would have been counted as good Disciples as the best; but they agreed
together to keep back part of the price; and their sin found them out, and left
them as signal spectacles of Gods dreadful judgment to Posterity. Thus
Hypocrites keep back part of the price; they may present their bodies before
the Lord in a public Congregation, but they keep their hearts afar off: They
may do many things out of custom, form, desire of applause, reputation
amongst men, for fear of the brawling of a natural conscience, yet
notwithstanding their hearts are not right before the Lord.

2. This Doctrine reproves negligent, lazy persons, who are so far from
giving God the best, as they think any thing will serve the turn; wherefore
they will be at no pains in Gods service, loath to rise out of bed to hear a
Sermon: Solomon describes such, Prove. 6. 9, 10. Men of lazy, supine spirits
have always excuses ready at hand, as we may read Prove, 20. 4. Prove. 22. 13.
This slothfulness is a very great sin, when men will not stir up
themselves, nor improve their parts and abilities to serve God with diligence.
Seneca calls Otium vivi hominis sepulturam: And a learned Professor calls it
Christiani Barathrum. There is a dreadful D. Arrowsmith Tact. Sacr.
doom upon the slothful servant, Mat. 25. 30. where God gives but one Talent,
he expects improvement thereof: But what shall we say of such as have many
Talents, great Gifts and Abilities, and yet hide them in a Napkin? It Is a hard
matter to get some into a Pulpit, though they have been solemnly set apart for
that great work, and have dedicated themselves thereunto. Consider with your
selves, where much is given, much is required; and for more Talents entrusted
to you, the greater shall your account be at the last day. What shall we think
of such, who should have inspection over those that are entrusted to their
government, but they fail that trust which Parents repose in them. Children
are the Parents dearest Jewels, and Governors and Tutors are Pro-parents, or
should be so. Now to let youth have their liberty, and run their course, to
let them choose whether they will come to Prayers or no, to Scholastical
exercises or no; this liberty will be their bane; and how heavy an account have
those to make to God, who have power to restrain them, yet are of Gallio's
careless temper. Brethren, let us take heed of sloth, and ease in our places;
but let us be vigilant, industrious, and active for God: Let Us look to all under
us; let us Catechize them, keep them close to Religious and Scholastical
Exercises: For Truants, idle, lazy persons, let us labor to reform them; and if
they will not be conformable to Discipline, lets remove them from our
Societies, lest their evil example may be the ruin of the Community. Let not
such Pleas be received; for they are vain and frivolous; That Gentlemen come to
learn fashions, and intend to stay but a short time, and must they be kept to
exercises? It Is an experimental observation, that such manner of Drones and
slothful persons, do the greatest mischief by their examples unto the place
where they live: And upon further experience it will be evident, that we had
far better be without such idle company than have them. Let Joshuahs
resolution be our practice: We and our houses, we and all our charge will serve
the Lord. Lets quicken our spirits, and shake off drowsiness; we serve a good
Master, we cannot take too much pains, nor bestow too much sweat in his service.

Thirdly, this Doctrine reproves all such who put off their ^epentance to Old
Age; what is this but to offer a corrupt thing, a lame, and a blind Sacrifice?
Thy youth, marrow, vigor, strength should be given unto God. It Is a Proverb
fetched from hell -- Angelicus Juvenis senibus satanizat in annis.



I am sure ^od began with Samuel, Timothy, Josiah in their youth, and in
their fresh green years they gave up themselves to God. That rare King Edward
the sixth was a mirror of his Age for parts and piety in his tender years.
Young Bullocks were offered up in Sacrifice, Numb. 28. 11. Fresh, green ears
of corn were to be offered up to God, Lev. 2. 14. And the soul of God desires
the first ripe fruits, Mich. 7. 1. Now what a great contempt is it to think,
that old decrepite age, dry bones are good enough for God (that I may speak
with reverence) that is to offer God the Devils leavings. I do not here set a
bar against the eldest, but invite them to repent, and bewail their misspent
time: But this is to forewarne, and caution people not to delay repentance till
old age; for it is doubtful whether ever thou may live to be old. God may cut
thee off in the midst of thy youthful vanities; or if thou live to be old,
it is as doubtful whether thou may have grace given thee to repent then.
There Is a peradventure whether thou may repent: And God gave Jezabel Rev. 2.
21.
space to repent, but she repented not,. Wherefore it is great madness and
presumption, and a most high affront unto God, to run a mad careere, and follow
the swinge of youth, and to hope for repentance and mercy in old age.

But I come to a third Use, which is for Examination. Three Use 3. For
Examination.
Inquiries I shall only make.

1. Whether we give God the best in the duties we perform unto him?

2. Whether we give God the best in the exercises of graces?

3. Whether we give God the best in our life and conversation?

In all these things God requires a Male, and the best of that Male, in the
best of the best duties, the best of the best graces, the best of the best
conversation. Let Us as in the presence of God, deal plainly and impartially in
this Examination.

1. Then, do we give God the best in our duties? do we give God our hearts,
our affections, and wills? Do we do all our duties as in the presence of God,
in obedience to God, with a single eye, and respect unto Gods glory? Such
questions as these put home, will search to the quick.

Amongst others, I shall fix only upon these three instances, eminenter non
exclusive (For in all the best is to be given to God.) This Rule admits no
exception.

The question is,

1. Whether in hearing of Gods Word, we give God the best? Q. 1. Whether in
hearing we give God the best?
This is a very weighty duty: And we are often enjoined to hear, Jer. 22. 29.
Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17. It Is a mark of Christ's Sheep to hear his
voice, Joh. 10. 27. But amongst hearers, three sorts in four miscarry,
according to Christ's own computation: for there are stony, highway, thorny
hearers; the Word of God is lost in all these: Only the good hearer profits by
the Word, and brings forth fruit with patience. Wherefore we are not only
exhorted to the duty of Hearing, but to the right manner of performing this
duty; Take heed therefore how ye hear, Luke 8. 18. Now whether in our hearing
we give God the best, we are to examine three particulars.

1. How we prepare our selves before hearing?

2. How we demean our selves in hearing?

3. How we behave our selves after hearing?

First, before hearing there is required preparation, Eccles. 5. 1. Keep thy
foot when thou go to the house of God. Publius Scipio first went unto the
Capitol to pray, before he went to consult amongst the Senators. Before we come
to a Sermon, our duty is to sequester our selves from earthly entanglements.
Abraham when he went up to the Mount to Sacrifice, he left his Asses at the
foot of the hill: Before the Jews offered Sacrifice, they used many washings
and purifyings, Exodus 19. 14. Mephibosheth dressed his feet, when he went to
David. O how should we wash our hearts before we come into Gods presence!
Before we come into the place where the name of God is recorded, we should
consider of that sovereignty, power, purity, and Majesty of God: We should get
our hearts sequestered from the world; our pride, passion, and all inordinate
affections should be mortified; we should have our spirits meekned; we should
approach with trembling, reverence, and awful fear of the great and glorious
presence of God.

2. In hearing there are two things required; Atte^tion of the ear, and
Intention of the heart.

1. There must be a serious attention; we read Luke 4. 20. The eyes of all them
that were in the synagogue were fastened on him. When we go to duty, we should
consider of the presence of God and Angels, and should behave our selves with
all reverence in the public Assemblies. The Preacher should be serious, grave,
reverend, and avoid all affected phrases, uncouth, unscriptural speeches: He
should hold fast the form of sound words. And hearers should deport themselves
with all reverence: Laughing at one another, idle gazing, wanton glances,
roving eyes, O! how unfit and unsuitable are they, as at other times, so
especially in places of Worship.

2. In hearing there is required intention of the heart: The heart must go
along with the ear; and what we hear, we must labor to let it sink into our
hearts, and there make its residence: The heart must be affected in hearing;
the heart must act vigorously, and be fully bent upon God. His Word is
precious, and none ought to fall to the ground: Wherefore we must ruminate,
ponder, meditate, apply, and labor for retentive memories. This caution is of
great concernment, (...), Heb. 2. 1. We must remember that in hearing we deal
for life and immortality; we negotiate for Eternity, and drive a trade for our
immortal souls: so we must hear to day, as for ought we know, we may never
live to have another opportunity: Wherefore the heart must be in good earnest,
with all the affections thereof set a work; The Love, Joy, Hope, Desire, all
must be seriously fixed and intent upon what we hear.

Thirdly, how we must demean our selves after hearing. To this purpose I shall
mention only two Duties, which if put in practice, it is without all question,
that we give God the Male.

First, it is required that we meditate on what we have heard: 1. We must
meditate in the Word.
For Meditation is the spiritual digestion of a Sermon. This Moses, Isaac, and
David much practiced. It fares with a good Sermon for the Soul, as with a good
meals meat for the Body: By digesting what we receive, we thrive the better:
Wherefore after we have heard a Sermon, we must call our selves to a strict
account, rub up our memories, and labor to make what we have heard our own,
that this food may turn into our nourishment, that we may eat and make a good
meal, and digest the food of our souls even to eat the roll (as the Prophet
did) Jer. 15. 16.

Secondly, it is required, that we yield ready obedience unto 2. We must yield
obedience unto the Word.
the Word of God: For not the Hearers, but the Doers of the Word shall be
justified. The life of a Preacher is the Application, and the life of a Sermon
in Preaching and hearing, consists in the particular Application: what we
hear, we must apply, and practice in our lives. Thus we give God the Male in
our hearing.

A Second Duty wherein we are to examine our selves in, is Q. 3. Whether we
give God the Male in our prayers.
whether we give God the Males in our prayers, and supplications? Prayer is a
great part of our religion, a great part of worship, wherein God is gloryfied;
wherefore I must take the best pains I can to examine this point; whether in
our prayers, we give God the best? whether we offer a Male, and not a corrupt
thing? For trial whereof, I Will lay down some distinguishing characters, to
differrence the precious from the vile.

1. Prayer must be humble, so did Abraham pray, Genesis 18. 27. so David prayed in
a most humble manner, 2 Samuel 7. 19. so Jacob, 1 Prayer must be humble.
Genesis 32. 9. There Is required an humble reverentiall frame of spirit in our
approaches and applications unto the throne of grace. Consideration of Gods
transcendent majesty and greatness, and the apprehension of our own vileness
should cause us in an humble manner to make our addresses, and prefer our
supplications unto the great God of Heaven and Earth. Consider likewise thou
art a Creature, dust and ashes, a worm, and no man, a sinner, a Rebel, an
enemy to God, by nature a child of wrath, This Consideration should humble thee
in the presence of the Lord.

2. Prayer must be in faith, Mat. 21. 22. No prayer but that of faith can be
accepted: No service but of a Believer is any 2. Prayer must be in Faith.
whit available in the sight of God: Its the prayer of a righteous man, which
avails much: And only believers are accounted righteous in the sight of God.

3. Prayer must be fervent, James 5. 16. Qui timide rogat, docet negare.

4. All Prayer must be put up in the name of Christ Joh. 15. 6. 3. Prayer must
be fervent. 4. All Prayer must be put up in the name of Christ. 5. Prayer must
be with perseverance. 6. Prayer must proceed from the spirit of Adoption.
No petition can be excepted unless it be preferred in the name of Jesus Christ.

5. This Prayer must be with perseverance 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Will the Hypocrite
(says Job) pray always? will he always call upon God?

6. Prayer must proceed from the Spirit of adoption Gal. 4. 6. Many have a gift
and are strangers to the grace of prayer. Many use a form, and yet are
unacquainted with the Spirit of prayer. Many use prayer as a duty, few as a
means; Wherefore we must shadow forth the spirit of prayer, by these
propertyes.

1. There Is a warming of the heart, the heart powers out its self before the
Lord: Hence comes groans, sighs, supplications. The heart is seriously
affected. Prayer is rather heart labor, then lip labor, and the heart
breaks, and pants after God in prayer: So was Hannah affected, in pouring out
her heart, before the Lord.

2. There is a Child-like language; There is Abba, Father. 2. Gal. 4. 6.
There is much difference between the language of Children, and Slaves, Gods
children learn his language, and they come as children unto a Father.

3. Their aim, ends, and designs are Gods honor and glory: 3.
Self Ends and interests, do not set men on work to pray; the spring that
moves, is love to God, his honor and glory and the end and aim they drive at,
is the glory of God.

In the next place its inquired, How may we give God the Q. 2. How we may give
God the Male in receiving of the Sacrament?
Male in receiving of the Sacrament.

For Answer hereunto we are to note, that if we rightly examine our selves, we
may participate of the Sacrament; To which purpose I will set down.

Self-examining-objects,

Self-examining-propertyes, and

Self-examining-graces.

1. For self-examining-objects, and they are either thoughts, Words, and Deeds;
as

1 For our Thoughts, we must examine whether they are sanctified 1.
Self-examining-objects. 2. Self-examining-Propertyes. 3. Self-examining-graces.
Jer. 4. 14.

2. As for Words, they must be such as minister grace to the hearers, Col. 4.
29. and

3 As for our Actions, they must be such as become the Gospel. Phil 1, 27.

2. For self-examining-propertyes, they must be,

1. Thorough and Impartial, we must take notice, both of less and greater
sins: No sin must escape us, without due and serious examination.

2. Regular; The rule of the word must be that whereby we must try and examine
our whole life, we must bring all to the Law and Testimonye: Then

3. For Graces, we are to examine in these especially.

1. Knowledge is required, whether we discern the Lords body: An Ignorant,
blind devotion is abominable, and rejected by God; we must know the nature of a
Sacrament, the Institutor, the end of it: we must know our happiness by
creation, our misery by sin in Adams fall, our restored condition by Christ's
Redemption, the benefits of Christ's purchases, viz. Justification,
Sanctification and Glorification.

2. Faith is required, and this must not be Temporary, Historical,
Dogmaticall, but a Justifying faith, such a one as purifieth the heart, Act.
15. 9. as is unfeigned and works by low.

3. Repentance, this must be Evangelical: This Repentance must have these
fruits 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11.

4. Love, both love to God, and love to the Brethren: Joh. 13. 47. Love is the
badge of a Disciple.

5. New obedience, newness of life is required, Isa. 55. 7. And thus we must
give God the Male, in the celebration of his Ordinance.

But the next Question has some affinity unto this: Q. 2. Whether we give God
the best in our graces?


Q. 2. Whether we give God the best in our Graces? Not to instance in what I
instanced before, I Will propound other instances, viz. In Humility, Meekness,
Temperance, Wisdom.

1. Do we give God the Male in the exercise of the grace of Humility? There
may be a voluntary Humility, and a natural humble carriage, but the question
is, whether we have that Humility which is of the same stamp with spiritual
Poverty? whether self be emptied, Christ advanced.

2. For Meekness; there is in some a more natural inclination to Meekness: But
when we are provoked to wrath, do we then show meek spirits to bear and forbear
with others? to overcome evil with good, to heap coals of fire upon enemies
heads?

3. For Temperance; where is our sober, temperate carriage, in Abstinence and
Moderation? Phil. 4. 5.

4. For Wisdom; do we labor for Wisdom, Divine Wisdom, and honor God
with it? lay forth our parts, interests, and all to honor God withal? Q. 3.
Whether we give God the Male in our whole life and conversation?


Q. 3. Then the last Question is, whether we give God the Male in our whole
Conversations?

To which purpose by way of character we must decypher out such a Conversation.

1. It must be holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15. 1. Holy. 2. Sincere. 3. Universal. 4. Wise.


2. It must be sincere, 2 Cor. 1. 12.

3. It must be universal, Ps. 119. 6, 101.

4. It must be wise and ordered with discretion; the wisdom of the Serpent is
required as well as the innocence of the Dove. 5. Fruitful.


5. It must be fruitful in the exercise of good works: A Christian
Conversation is not barren, it must bear twins. 6. Regular,


6. It must be regulated according to the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. Use 4. For
Direction.


The fourth Use in order is for Direction: For the better setting home this Use
as may be most profitable for you, I shall endeavor to answer two Queries.

The first whereof is; what impediments and obstacles we should remove that
hinder us from giving God the best?

Then secondly; What special duties are required to show the Q. 1. What
Impediments are to be removed. Imped. 1. Ignorance.
sincerity of our hearts, that we offer God the Male, even the best of all our
services?

For answer unto the first Question; the Impediments are these especially.

1. An ignorant, blind mind; when people understand not the excellency of Jesus
Christ, they will brayd of the Gaderenish humor, they prefer their swine
before him. There Is ignorance sufficient, when they asked, what is thy Beloved
more than another beloved? Cant. 5. 9, 10. But the Spouse gives an experimental
answer, v. 10. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand.

2. A frothy and vain spirit: How many entertain a low and Imped. 2. A frothy
vain spirit.
cheap opinion of Religion, and think any thing will serve, as if any thing
were good enough for God? Such a slight service was done by Gehazi, he went on
before, and laid his staff upon the child, and there was no appearance of life
in the child; but the Prophet Elisha laid his hand on the child's hand, his
mouth on the child's mouth, etc. and in good earnest set upon the work, and the
spirit of the child revived. It Is the observation of a Reverend Mr. Jerem.
Buroughs.
and precious Divine, that of all spirits, he desired to be delivered from a
frothy spirit: it is therefore a matter of lamentation, and ought in good
earnest to be bewailed, to consider with what irreverence, formalities, and
slightness of the spirit many set upon duty; some will pray partly between
sleeping and waking, so drowsily, that they can scarce pronounce their words
aright; Others will mumble over a few words of course in their beds. Neither of
these think of that reverence that belongs to the great God of heaven and
earth, and that he requires the Male, the best we can offer unto him.

A third Impediment is a worldly spirit: A heart swallowed up Imped. 3. A
wordly spirit.
with the love of the world will never give God the best; such spirits will
grudge any thing for God, because the world has seized on their spirits, and
took up their affections: Their breath, words, conversations, even all favors
of the world. Now this love of the world is the root of all evil, and enmity
against God: Demas forsook the Apostles society: The young man preferred
earthly treasures before heavenly; where the world sits close, and the heart is
enamoured with the love of the world, there Christ's riches and his excellencies
are undervalued.

A fourth Impediment is an unbeleeving heart. Christ is not a Imped. 4. An
unbeleeving heart.
whit regarded amongst unbeleevers; only believers account him precious, 1
Pet. 2. 7. He that knew the worth of the pearl of price, and believed there was
such virtue in it, sold all to purchase it, Mat. 13. 46, 47.

These Impediments being removed, some special duties ought to be practiced.

1. Always set before thine eyes the great God of heaven and Dut. 1. Set God
before thine eyes.
earth, as omnipresent, pure, and omnipotent, who sees, knows, and searches
all hearts. This consideration will make thee afraid to present any thing vile
and refuse unto so great, so holy a Lord God. How thou prayest in thy closet,
what thy secret, reserved thoughts are, what thy intentions are in any duty,
all are naked unto that great and glorious Majesty with whom thou have to deal.

2. Labor for sincerity of heart. That Is it which will carry thee Dut. 2.
Labor for sincerity of heart.
through all brakes, briars, difficulties, and perplexities whatsoever. It Is
said, Asa's heart was upright, there is a nevertheless put in, 2 Chronicles: 15. 17.
It Is this which comforted Hezekiah when the sentence of death was past against
him, 2 King. 20. 3. It Is that which God requires, even truth in the inward
parts, Ps. 51. 6. It Is that which is the cause of rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
Nathaniels character, to be an Israelite indeed without guile: Joh. 1. 47. The
upright are they which love Christ, Cant. 1. 4. And they are Gods delight,
Prove. 11. 20. Their Tabernacle shall flourish, Prove. 14. 11. Their high way is
to depart from evil, Prove. 16. 17. They walk surely, Prove. 10. 9. and no good
thing will God withhold from them, Ps. 84. 11. Their end is peace, Psalm. 37.
37. Upright walking with God will carry a man through all troubles whatsoever,
and in life and death will yield matter of abundance of consolation.

3. Embrace the present season of Grace; Seek ye the Lord whilst Dut. 3.
Embrace the present season.
he may be found, call ye upon him whilst he is near, Isa. 55. 6. Now give God
your strength and marrow, and lay aside all delays, Apologies, and
Procrastinations.

4. Be much in Prayer and Supplication, that what ever thou Dut. 4. Be much in
Prayer.
do, what duty, whatsoever service thou offerest unto God, that he would
accept thee through Jesus Christ. As the Ancients held the Plough and prayed,
so hear and meditate on Gods Word, keep the Lords Sabbath holy, and pray for a
blessing upon all from heaven: Bless Lord his substance, Deuteronomy. 33. 11.

5. Make Religion thy work, the grand design thou drivest: Let Dut. 5. Make
Religion thy work.
thy general calling as a Christian have the pre-eminence of thy particular
calling in the world; Seek first the Kingdom of God, Mat. 6. 33.

The last Use is for Consolation unto those who to the utmost in Use 5. For
Consolation.
sincerity of heart endeavor to walk before the Lord. Thus Enoch walked with
God, Genesis 5. 24. Zachary and Elizabeth walked in Gods Commandments blameless,
Luke 1. 6. David was a man after Gods own heart: Yet the best of Gods children
have their failings, Jacob confessed himself not worthy of the least of Gods
mercyes, etc. David confessed himself as foolish as a bruit Beast, and wise Agur
acknowledged that he had not the understanding of a man. It Is a great cause of
grief, and a burden to the spirits of Gods dearest children, to consider how
much they fail in duties: Their dullness, deadness, disorder of spirit much
afflicts them. What I shall further add shall be comprised in these ensuing
considerations. Consid. 1. Infirmities are incident to the best.


1. Infirmities are incident unto the best of Christians; I sleep (says the
Spouse) Paul complains of a body of sin, and of flesh, and of an antipathy
between flesh and spirit.

2. Gods children allow not themselves in sin, but mourn Consid. 2. Gods
children allow not themselves in sin. Consid. 3. Sincerity is accepted. Consid.
4. Where sincerity is, there is an endeavor after more grace. Consid. 5.
Others examples are not just standards Consid. 6: Perseverance shall obtain
the Crown.
for sin: Sin is their exceeding great grief and burden.

3. Where the heart is sincere, it is accepted; a willing mind is accepted, 2
Cor. 8. 12.

4. Where the heart is sincere, it is not contented with what it has already
attained, but labors for more grace, Phil. 3. 13, 14.

5. Consider, that others examples and seize are not that standard, for
every one to measure himself by: No examples but that of Jesus Christ is every
way authentic. Some will say on one hand, Such and such go no further, and
will not this serve my turn? others say, such go so far, and if I cannot
come near them, I may justly suspect my self to be an Hypocrite. Neither this
nor that must determine us.

6. And lastly consider, that Perseverance shall obtain the Crown, Rev. 2. 15.
Many begin well, and fly back. Of all, Apostates are most hated by God: But
as for such who persevere in Grace, and walk in sincerity before the Lord,
these shall be happy unto all Eternity; these having been faithful unto the
death, shall receive a Crown of Life. *

The End of the Second Decad.
A THIRD DECAD OF SERMONS. PREACHED TO THE UNIVERSITY, AT St MARY'S IN OXFORD.

By HENRY WILKINSON, D. D. and Principal of Magdalen Hall in OXFORD.

2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the form of Sound Words, which thou have heard of me,
in Faith, and Love, which is in Christ Jesus. OXFORD, Printed, by W. H. for
THOMAS ROBINSON Anno Domini M.DC.LX.

TO THE READER.
I HERE present unto thee (Christian Reader) A third Decad of Sermons, of the
same complexion with the rest, answering those two immediately preceding, as
face in water answers face. By them the Author may be known to be one and the
same man, not varying a whit from his Principles, by reason of vicissitude of
times. The first of these Sermons was preached at the Public Act, and was
formerly printed which (notwithstanding the derision of some) through the
Encouragement and approbation of others (whose Judgment I prefer many degrees
before my own) is now again presented to public View in this second Edition.
None of the other sermons of this Decad, and none of the two other Decads were
ever yet printed before: neither had now, if some both Godly and Learned (who
are better able to judge) had not thought far better of them, then I ever
durst of any thing of my own notwithstanding what pains soever it cost me.
It Is far from my Intention to justify my self, but I shall always with
Jacob acknowledge my self, not worthy of the least of all the mercyes, and of
all the Genesis 32. 10.
truthc which the Lord through riches of mercy has showed unto me. It cannot
be denied, but ought to be acknowledged with renewed thankfulness, that now
adays we have more helps on all hands, if we had our eyes in our Heads, and
greater advantages then our Predecessors ever enjoyed since Printing came up:
And since the Gospel in it is Purity and Liberty was restored unto England (as
Reverend Latimer used to pray that God would restore the Gospel unto England
once again, once again) We have variety of Prices both by printing and
preaching, put into our hands to get divine wisdom withal. Oh! that we had
this great mercy of mercyes vouchsafed to us, that the Lord would bestow upon
us such good hearts as to Husband, and improove all those spiritual Talents
for the best advantage of our immortal souls. That saying of a Learned Author
has often come into my deliberate thoughts -- Ideo scribuntur omnes Libri, ut
unus emendetur conscientiae. Now if by any thing that I have wrote, the of
Christians may thrive the better, and be built up in their faith, I have my
desire accomplished. Not unto me, not to the best of my pains and endeavors,
but unto the name of Jesus Christ be all the praise and glory. It Is not my
purpose to detain thee (Reader) in a longer Epistle. Only thus much I thought
good to premise, to assure thee that this last Decad is of the same stamp, and
breaths forth the same spirit, and pursues the same plain style with those two
which according to order went before; The design I only drive at (as far as
I apprehend) is the eternal good of mine and thine immortal soul; so that
our profitting may appear unto all, that some addition may be made unto our
spiritual stature. Be pleased therefore to read deliberately, and to join
prayer and meditation with reading. Lay aside all prejudicate opinions, and
through the meannesse of the Instrument, look with the eye of faith unto Jesus
Christ the great Counselor, and Prophet, who directs and instructs his
people, and guides them unto all truth: And what ever good thou receivest, give
Christ the praise of all, and set the Crown upon his head alone. And in thy
serious addressesse unto the throne of grace, remember him which in love to thy
soul has made these sermons public. Do not despise the day of small things,
undervalue not the Rear of the Christian Army. Do not entertain a slight
opinion of any of the meanest, (yet faithful) Laborers in Gods Vineyard, who
desires and endeavors to approove himself faithful; such a one I desire to
be, and remain

Thy servant and Brother in Christ Jesus, HENRY WILKINSON.

The Contents of the Third Decad.
SERMON. I.
2 COr. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. The
Context expounded. p. 2, 3, 4. The Text divided and expounded, p. 5, 6, 7. The
Doctrine handled by prooving, and improoving all by particular Application, p.
9. The Doctrine prooved first by Scripture, p. 10, 11. Then by three Reasons,
1. From four Properties of Ambassadors, p. 12, 13, 14, 15. 2. From the Benefit
of a reconciled estate, p. 16. 3. From the misery of an unreconciled estate, p.
17. Use for Exhortation, 1. To Ministers, p. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. 2. To
people, p. 25. 3. Characters of a reconciled estate, p. 27, 28, 29, 30. Five
Motives, p. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
SERMON. II.
HEb. 1. 14. Are they not all Ministering spirits sent forth to Minister for
these, who shall be heirs of salvation? Text divided, p. 38. Doct. It pleases
God to make use of the Ministry of Angels, for the good of his Children, p.
38. Q. 1. What Angels are, p. 39, 40, 41. Q. 2. How many sorts of Angel sthere?
p. 42, 43. Q. 3. What are the offices of Angels? p. 43, 44, 45, 46. Q. 4.
Whether every Saint has a peculiar Angel keeper? p. 46, 47. Q. 5. What is the
knowledge of Angels? p. 47, 48. Use 1. For Information in 2 particulars, p. 49,
50. Use 2. For Instruction in 3 particulars, p. 50. Use 3. For Consolation in 3
particulars, p. 51.
SERMON. III.
2. CHron. 16. 9. The eyes of the Lord run to and for throughout the whole
earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of those whose heart is perfect
toward him, p. 52. Text divided, p. 53. Doct. 1. That there is a Providence of
God, which extends it self to the ordering and governing of all the creatures
throughout the whole world, p. 55. The Doctrine prooved by Scripture, p. 55,
56. And by 6 Reasons, p. 57, 58, 59. Of the nature of Providence, p. 59, 60.
Use 1. For Confutation of Epicures etc. p. 61. Use 2. For Reproof, ib. Use 3.
For Instruction in 6 Duties p. 61, 62. Doct. 2. As there is a general
providence toward all: so there is a special distinguishing Providence
toward all Gods children, p. 62. Doctrine prooved by Scripture example, p. 62,
63. By 6 Reasons p. 64, 65. Use 1. For Reproof, p. 65. Use 2. For Instruction,
p. 66. Use 3. For Consolation, six Duties pressed* page 66. 67.
SERMON. IV.
I Sai. 66. 6, 7. Ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence, and give
him not rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the
earth. The Text divided and expounded, p. 69, 70, 71. Doct. That its the
obliged duty of all the Children of God, to be earnest and assiduous suitors at
the Throne of Grace in the behalf of the Church of God, p. 72. Method of
handling the Doctrine, 1. By propounding parallel Examples, p. 72, 73, 74. 2.
By Scripture Precepts, p. 74. 3. By 3 Reasons, R. 1. In respect of God, p. 75.
R. 2. In respect of prayer, p. 76, 77, 78, 79. R. 3. In respect of the Church,
p. 79, 80. Use for Reprehension, p. 80. 81. Use 2. for Exhortation, p. 83. 4.
Things especially to be prayed for, p. 83, 84, 85. 2. Motives, p. 86, 87. Use
3. for Direction. 1. We must pray in faith, p. 87. 2. With fervency, ib. 3.
With perseverance, p. 88. Use 4. for Consolation, ib.
SERMON. V.
GAl. 5. 24. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts, p. 89. Doct. 1. That there are a peculiar people that are
Christ's, and have special Interest in him, p. 89. Doctrine prooved from
Scripture Testimony, p. 90. What it is to have Interest in Christ? ib. 4.
Reasons drawn, 1. From the Promises 2. From the Fathers Donation. 3. Christ's
Redemption. And 4. From the sanctification of the spirit, p. 91. What are the
Benefits of those that are in Christ! Ans. In five particulars, p. 91, 92. Use
1. for Consolation, p. 92. Use 2. for Exhortation, ib. Use 3. of Examination:
five Notes of Trial, ib. Doct. 2. Those that have Interest in Christ, have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, p. 93. Method propounded. 1.
What Is meant by flesh? p. 93. 2. What Is meant by affections and lusts? ib. 3.
What Is meant by crucifying the flesh? p. 94. 4. The Doctrine prooved by three
Reasons, p. 95. Use 1. for Information, p. 96. Use 2. for Reproof of three
sorts, p. 96, 97. Use 3. for Exhortation, pressed by three Motives, p. 97. Use
4. for Examination, four Properties of a Crucified person, p. 98, 99. Use 5.
for Direction, 1. What we are to Crucify, p. 99. 2. What duties are to be put
in practice, Ans. in 7 Duties, p. 100, 101. Use 6. for Consolation, An
Objection ^ answered in six particulars, p. 101, 102.
SERMON. VI.
Romans 5. 8. But God commends his love toward us, in that whilst we were yet
sinners Christ died for us, p. 103. The Context opened, p. 103, 104. Doct. That
the death o^ Christ for s^nners is an Evident Demonstration of the Love of God
the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, p. 104. Method propounded. 1. By
^xplication. Q. 1. Wherein consists the love of God the Father? Ans. p. 105. Q.
2. Wherein consists this love of Christ? ib. and p. 116. Q. 3. Did not Heathens
dye, where lies the difference, Ans. p. 109. six Prop^sitions, p. 109, 110,
111, 112, 113. Three Objections answered, p. 113, 114, 115. Use 1. for
Information in five Particulars, p. 115, 116. Use 2. for Examination, six
fignes given o^ those that have Interest in this distinguishing love, 116, 117,
118. Use 3. for Exhortation, branched into six particular Duties, p. 118, 119.
Use 4. for Comfort, four Benefits of this special l^ve, p. 119, 120.
SERMON. VII.
2 Timothy 2. 19. And let every one that names the name of Christ depart from
Iniquity, p. 120. The Context opened, p. 121, 122. The Text divided and
expounded, p. 123, 124. Doct. That wheresoever there is the Profession of
Christianity, there ought to be a Godly life and Conversation, every way
suitable and correspondent therewith, p. 124. The Doctrine handled. 1. By
Scripture Testimony, p. 125. 2. Confirmed by four Reasons, 125, 126. 3.
Applied in four Uses, 1. for Information, p. 127, 128. Use 2. for Examination,
four Characters, p. 129, 130, 131. Use 3. for Exhortation in three Motives, p.
131, 132. Use 4. for Direction, 1. How we must depart from Iniquity? Ans. four
ways, p. 132. 2. What means must be used? Ans. 6 Means directed, p. 133.
134.
SERMON. VIII.
JOh. 8. 24. For if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins,
p. 135. Context opened, p. 135, 136. Doct. That of all sins, Insidelity
especially is a grand-damning sin against the Gospel. Method, propounded. 1.
What Infidelity is? Ans. in five particulars, p. 137, 138, 139, 140 2. The
Aggravations of unbeleefe in 6 particulars, p. 141, 142. 3. By 5. Arguments the
Doctrine is confirmed, p. 142, 143. 4. The Doctrine is applied in 6 Uses. 1.
For Reproof, p. 145. 2. For Caution in 4 particulars, p. 146, 147. 3. For
Exhortation in 2 Motives. 1. Drawn from the Benefit of faith, p. 147. 2. From
the mischief of unbeleefe, p. 147, 148. 4. For Examination 5 signs of faith,
p. 148, 149. Three signs of unbeleefe, p. 149. 5. For Direction, 4 directions,
p. 150. 6. For Consolation in 5 particulars, p. 150. Objections of unbelievers
answered, p. 151, 152, 153. Objections of Misbelievers answered, p. 153, 154.
Objections of Weak-believers answered, p. 154, 155, 156.
SERMON. IX.
HAb. 3. 18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation. The Context opened, p. 157, 158. The Text divided, p. 160. Doct.
Amidst all sorrows, lossesse, and crossesse, joys, supplies and comforts are
to be found in the Lord our God, p. 161. 4. Arguments in the Text explained, p.
163, 164, 165. 5. Demonstrations added for Confirmation, p. 167, 168, 169, 170,
171, 172, 173, 174, 175. Three Uses, 1. For Consolation, p. 176, 177. 2. For
Exhortation. 1. To make God our joy, p. 178. 2. To make God our Treasure, p.
179. 3. To make God our Refuge, p. 179, 180. Use 3. For Direction. 4.
Impediments to be remooved, p. 181, 182. 3. Duties to be practiced, p. 182,
183.
SERMON. X.
Romans 12. 2. But be ye transformed by the renewing of the mind. Doct. Every
Person who is really Converted, is transformed and changed in the renovation of
his mind, p. 184 Method propounded. 1. What Is understood by transformation: Ans.
p. 185, 186. 2. What Is meant by the renewing of the mind, p. 187. 3. The
Doctrine by Scripture prooved, p. 188, 189. 3. Cautions premised, p. 189, 190.
4. The Doctrine applied in 4 Uses, 1. For Information, p. 190. 2. For
Examination wherein are 6 False glasses discovered, p. 191, 192, 193, 194, 195.
Three signs of Real Conversion, viz. Universality, Sincerity, and Perpetuity,
p. 196, 197. Use 3. For Exhortation, 3 Motives pressed, p. 197. Use 4. For
Consolation, 3 Privileges of such as are really converted, p. 198.
ERRATA.
Page 4. Marg. r Calvin: In the same margent r delect i. p. 124. Marg. r.
nominet credens verum discedat. p. 125. l. 14. r. implied. p. 127. l. 20. r.
Angel. p. 185. l. 7. r. then. p. 186. l. 10. r. soever. p. 186. l. 16. r.
which is. Other Errataes the Reader is entreated to amend.

DECAD III. OF SERMONS, PREACHED AT St MARY'S OXON.
2 Cor. 5. verse 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
Sermon. 1. at S. Mary's Oxon July. 11th 1658. being Act Sab bath day morning.
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.


WIthout controversy, great is the mystery of Godliness. 1 Timothy 3. 16. The
word Omnium confessione magnum Ambros. Ad verbum declarat paribus verbis loqui,
ut iis solent qui petentibus assentiuntur. Beza. in Luc 22. 6. Ezekiel. 1. 16.
(...) carries an Emphasis with it in the determination of the Apostle. And
what he asserts, he as strenuously proves by an induction of particular
instances in the place forecited, viz. God was manifest in the flesh, justified
in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world received up to Glory.

Every one of these taken severally is a transcendent mystery, as we read in
Ezekiel, There was a wheel in the middle of a wheel: So here is one mystery
involved in another. Now forasmuch as we find the Well deep, and have not
wherewith to draw, since we are not able to fathom the depths of such
mysterious things, let us all as one man stand astonished with an holy
admiration of the wonderful counsels of God, lay aside all curious
disputations and learn to believe.

However so far forth as we can meet with a Scripture Clue, we may not be
wanting in our best endeavoures to wind our selves out of all the Labyrinths
whatsoever. Now to the business that lies before me, even the great mystery of
Reconciliation (which I have selected for the Argument of my ensuing
meditations) that I may the better clear a passage to my Text, I Will review what
the Apostle principally instanceth in, as one of the greatest mysteries 1 Timothy
3. 16.
of Godliness, viz. (...). This is the stupendous, unparalled mystery of the
Incarnation of the Son of God, and this leads the Van to all the rest, as
having priority of dignity and order both. This is one of those mysteries which
the Angels desired to peep into, 1 Pet. 1. 12. They stoop down, and with all
diligence sift and enquire into these mysteries. And if a comparison Prono
capite and propenso collo accurate introspiciunt Beza. Omnia summa diligentia
explorant, ac contuentur diligenter. Are^. Zach. 13. 7.
may be admitted with mysteries amongst themselves, questionless this mystery
of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, is the mystery of mysteries. Eternity it
self will be little enough for us, fully to comprehend it. That the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Eternal Son of God, equal with the Father, fellow, and fellow-like
with God, as great, and as good as himself, should assume humane nature, and
unite a clod of earth unto his Divine person, and become Immanuel God with us,
(...) God and man in one person by an hypostaticall union; the tongue of men
and Angels can never enough inhance the singularity of this mystery.

That this may be shaddowed forth according to our capacity, Q. A.
my endeavor shall be to solve one grand question, viz. What was the great
design and end of Christ's incarnation? I answer with the Apostle Paul, Hinc
non est cur miremur tam sero Christum venisse in carnem, venire enim debuit non
cittus quam (...) coelestis Patris exacta esset. Pareus in Loc.
Gal. 4. 4, 5. But when the fullness of time was come God sent forth his Son
made of a woman made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law,
that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. Further the Apostle gives an
attestation unto this truth, 1 John 3. 8. For this purpose was the Son of God
manifested that he might destroy the works of the Devil.

Wherefore to accomplish this great work of Redemption and destroy the works of
Satan (through harkening to whose temptations man fell from God) Jesus Christ
the middle person in the Trinity, the beloved Son came down from the bosom of
the Father to make up the breach and reconcile man the party offending, to God
the party offended. And this is that ministry of Reconciliation given, and
entrusted to the Ministers of the Gospel to declare, proclaim, and publish. v.
19. To wit that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. It Is said
(...).

This sets forth Emphasin habet quod dicit Deum fuisse in Christo. Neque enim
Deus in Christo fuit, quemadmodum in omnibus aliis rebus est, sed in ipso De it
as Corporaliter habitavit. Zuingl. in Loc.
the Deity of Christ and further this plainly evinceth that this reconciliation
was not of yesterday, but that there were transactions, and negotiaions between
God the Father, and God the Son concerning this admirable contrivance even from
all Eternity. Each syllal^le breaths forth love, bowels and wisdom raised to
the very highest (...) and highest pitch. Here is singular matter for
meditation, That when the Angels were past by, and left without a Mediator,
yet notwithstanding there should be Treaties of Peace before the foundation of
the World was laid, to reconcile so vile a thing as the World, sinful man unto
the most holy God, by Jesus Christ: Here Is met altogether in one a concurrence
of Wisdom, Mercy, Goodness, Graciousness, and Loving kindness. Yet though they
were all put together, they come infinitely short in the representation of that
superabundant love of God in Jesus Christ which transcends all degrees of
Comparison.

But the next Question will be, How is this Reconciliation Q. A.
wought? The answer is given in the subsequent words, Not imputing their
trespasses unto them. God does not reckon, account (so the word Significat tum
generatim aestimare, sive apud se statu^ere, tum specia tim imputare sive
reputare. Vorstius.
(...) imports) nor lay the sins of his people to their own charge, but charge
them all upon Christ their Surety. And most just it is that an innocent person
should pay the debt, when he becomes engaged as a Surety, notwithstanding those
Rotten cavils of the blasphemous Socinians, against the truth in this
particular. Luther has a strange passage to this purpose, that Christ was
peccatorum maximus. Such speeches (though I much honor Luther, and conceive
him to be a man of an excellent spirit) I confess as are not safe to use, and
I would many now a days were more cautelous than to adventure their fancies
too far, (as it is too apparent they commonly do through self admiration) lest
they outrun their judgment: But as there are some, that rather will lose their
friend than their jest, so there are some that will rather lose their Religion
than a wild new coined opinion. Yet (with submission to better judgments) I
conceive that Luther in the saying forementioned implies no more than what
Calvin, Musculus, Zuinglius, and other reformed Divines have expressed, viz. That
Christ was peccatorum maximus imputatione tantum; and for this assertion we
have a ground from the Apostle, verse. 21. of this Chapter, Sicuti in victimam
rejicebatur olim Maledictio hominis i^ a Christi damnatio nostra absolutio
fuit. Calv. Q. A.
He was made sin for us (i. e.) by assuming the Verse. 21.
nature of offenders, and imputing the guilt of their sins to himself, and so
making satisfaction unto the Father, and imputing his Righteousness unto them
for Justification.

But then another question will be propounded, Who are the Commissioners
entrusted in the declaration of this Doctrine? The next words specify, and
has committed unto us the word of Reconciliation. In the 18. verse it is said
(...) having given to us; plainly evincing, that the declaration of these good
tidings is the gift of GOD. But here in the 19. verse it is said (...); having
committed unto us, or put in us. The word (...) signifies putting, or placing,
intimating that a Minister of the Gospel should have the Doctrine of
Reconciliation first fixed and placed in his own heart, and so speak from his
own heart to the hearts of others, and so comfort others with those comforts
wherewith he himself has been comforted in particular. The note which Peculiar
is hujus formula emphasis qua significatur, and cor loquentis a Domino impelli,
and linguam ^egi and authoritate docendi praeditos esse, qui divinitus sunt ad
hoc munus del^cti. Beza.
Beza gives on the place. I conceive very apposite to my purpose, This is
(says he) a peculiar Emphasis of this form of speaking, whereby is signified
that the heart of the speaker and tongue likewise are ruled and moved by the
Lord. And the said learned Cri^ick and Judicious Expositor adds another very
seasonable observation -- And those who from above are appointed to this work
are endowed with authority to teach.

Now my text is the Use and Application of this Doctrine of Reconciliation.
This 20. Verse is an illative conclusion drawn from the premises delivered in
the 19. verse. In the former there is set forth the Reconciliation on Gods part:
He though pars laesa the party injured, contrives and designs this great work
of Reconciliation. In the latter is set forth the Reconciliation on our part.
We who are the Offenders and Rebels against God, are invited and entreated by
the Ministers of the Gospel, the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, we would not try
conclusions with God but forth with lay down our Rebellious weapons, and
embrace the word of Reconciliation. Although the Reconciliation long since is
perfectly made on Gods part, and Christ is a perfect Reconciler, and
thorough-working Intercessor, yet there is required a spirit of Application on
our part. This then is the grand design we drive at in our Ministry, It is the
sum and substance of our whole Gospel-Embassy, to pray and beseech people to
be reconc^led unto God.

In which words two main Generals lie obvious to our view, viz. The Ministers
Dignity, and Duty. The Text divided and opened.


1. For the Ministers Dignity. Before I raise Observations, I shall premise a
brief Paraphrase upon the words. (...); Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ,
or rather, as most agreeing with the Original, Therefore we do the 1. The
Ministers Dignity.
office of Ambassadors we act in our office, we are now upon our work, and are
even now adoing our duty, and negotiating in our Embassy for Christ: Legatione
fungimur, so Calvin, M^sculus, Junius, Zuinglius, and Beza render the word
(...). And the Vulgar edition (though I am far from believing it to be
Authentic) herein concurs with those Orthodox Interpreters. And wherein the
Vulgar Edition (though rarely) is Orthodox, we will not disown what is truth,
though from an adversary. For we usually say -- Virtus laudat^r in host. In my
apprehension it was a speech that savoured of malice and envy in a high measure
in Maldonate who though he could not Maldenatus.
but acknowledge Calvin's Exposition to be good, yet concludes. Quia Calvini est
interpretatio, nolo: like that cause less anger

Non amo te Sabidi nec possum dicere quare
Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te.
Now for the Grammatical construction of (...), we are not ignorant that (...)
is the Radix or Theme whence it is derived and signifies an ancient man, a
person of respect, gravity, and veneration; and sometimes is applied to Princes
Ambassadors, who usually have those qualifications. (...), etc. Suidas.
Suidas an accurate Master in that Language, tells us the original of this
name: There were (says he) certain Phil^sophers who went Ambassadors with
Areobindus into Persia viz. Damascius the Syrian, Simplicius the ^ilician,
Eulalius the Phrygian, Priscianus the Lydian, Hermias and Diogenes Phenicians,
Isidorus of Gaza; and these returned home with great profit and honor, and
these enjoyed great privileges for their faithful service, and were
afterward had in great estimation. So that hence it evidently appears, that
Ambassadors were persons of high repute and estimation amongst the Heathens.
If* Ambassadors of Heathen Princes were set at so high an estimate, and if so
much respect was showed unto those whom Kings on Earth did honor, what then
shall be done unto all those whom the King of Heaven will honor? The
Ambassadors in the Text are better and greater than all others, as being
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ -- Bibl. Polyglott.
Nos itaque vice Christi supplicamus: This agrees with the Arabic version. We
pray you in Christ's room or stead. Ex praemissis authoritatem Apostolatus sui
colligit. Musc. in Loc.
Hence (as Musculus observes) the Apostle proves the Authority of his
Apostleship. For the Apostle did not receive his commission of men, nor by men,
but from Jesus Christ. Whence It a vos o Corinthit non secus accipere debetis,
ac si ipse coram astaret. Bulling. in Loc.
Bullinger infers, That those things which Gods Ministers command in the name
of Christ, people ought no otherwise to receive them, then as if Christ
himself stood by and commanded them. The Ministers of the Gospel may not run
upon their own Errand, but upon Christ's. His Messengers and Ambassadors they
are, and therefore it concerns them in an especial manner, to discharge with
all fidelity, that weighty trust reposed in them.

Now having heard of the Dignity of Gospel-Ambassadors, let us inquire into
their Duty. God never advances any to great Dignities, where he expects no
great Duty: The greater the Ministers Dignity, the greater Duty is incumbent
upon them.

More particularly.

1. Let Us take notice of the substance or the contents of the Apostles
Embassy, and that is in his own name, and in all the names of the Ministers of
Jesus Christ, to beseech and entreat people to be reconciled unto God. The Text
expresses it thus, (...). (...). Chrysostom. in loc.
Chrysostom notes upon the place. It is not said (says he) Reconcile God to
your selves, for God does not make the breach, but reconcile your selves to
God. The word (...) properly signifies commutare, alium facere, to change, so
as to make a man another kind of person; of an enemy to make him a (...) est
facere, ut quis ex alienato fiat gratiosus. Alsted.
Friend: Reconciliation according to the nature of the word, presupposes a
breach: And indeed there was the greatest breach that ever was made by reason
of the sin of man. Man was in favor whilst he continued in the state of
Innocence; he had rectitude of judgment, a right order of affections, an exact
memory, but by reason of Adams prevarication, all these were defaced, Gods
anger procured, and man thrown out of Paradise; so that of a Favorite before,
he is now accounted an Enemy. Here then is the labor, here is the work and
grand employment of the Ambassadors of the Gospel, to entreat Sinners, Enemies,
Rebels to God, now to come in, submit, and make their peace with him, that so
they may be restored into favor, all breaches made up, and a through
Reconciliation made. And herein consists the great work of Reconciliation; when
parties between whom has been friendship, and afterward breaches, then they
are brought into favor again: God and man were at the greatest distance, and
the breach was made up by Jesus Christ, and he has Reconciled us to God. Ephesians.
2. 16.
Our Duty then is to apply this Reconciliation purchased by Christ, and to
labor to be reconciled to God. This is a Doctrine which concerns us all. Let
none say as Sheba did, What portion have we in David, what inheritance in the
Son of Jesse? Let none 2 Samuel 20. 1.
refuse the Sovereign remedy tendered, even a plaster made up of the blood of
Jesus Christ. By nature we are all Enemies, and this Reconciliation is of
indispensible necessity. For whoever lives and dies unreconciled unto Christ,
he shall undoubtedly miscarry unto all eternity.

And in the Preaching of this Doctrine of Reconciliation, those that are true
Believers, Real Saints, dare not exempt themselves as if this did not concern
them, (as if their high seize might procure a Writ of Ease:) They fly, as
from a Serpent, from all such rotten Antinomian Glosses which corrupt a good
Text. Mr. Calvin tells us, that The Observandum est hic Paulo negotiu^ esse cum
fidelibus. Testatur quotidie ad illo^ perferri hoc mandatum. Calv. in loc.
Aquinas in loc.
Apostles business is with Believers, and he daily testifies that he brought
that command unto them. Such as are actually reconciled are concerned in this
Exhortation. It Is their duty to clear up their Evidences for Heaven, and daily
renew their Repentance, and to pray for the manifestations of Gods reconciled
countenance toward them. It Is (as I am persuaded) a rotten gloss which Aquinas
himself gives on the place -- Deus reconciliavit nos sibi ut causa efficiens ex
part sua; sed ut nobis sit meritoria, oportet etiam quod fiat Reconciliatio ex
part nostra. He goes about to prove his assertion by particular instances,
but makes his matter much worse -- Et hoc quidem (inquit) in Baptismo and
poenitentia, and tunc cessamus a peccatis. But if there be such gross apparent
errors in that great Champion of the Schoolmen, who is commonly called
Angeli^us Doctor, so much Idolized, we had need take heed of taking any
Doctrine on trust only for the Doctor's sake: We had need have our eyes in our
head, and pray for a spirit of discerning, that our senses may be exercised to
discern things that differ.

It is a fit comparison made by one Robertus Gallus: Such (says he) as ^tudy
the Schoolmen, and in the mean time neglect the study of the holy Scriptures,
are just of their humor who have wholesome food set before them, and yet lay it
aside, and gnaw h^ngerly upon flint stones. But to this great Idolized
Schooleman I shall oppose that judicious and faithful Interpreter of Scripture
( Neque in hoc institutum Evangelium, ut quae ante Baptismum admiserimus
peccata, nobis remittantur; sed quemadmodum quotidie peccamus, ita etiam
quotidiana remissione a Deo recipiamur in gratiam. Calv. in loc. 2. The manner
of the Apostles pleading.
M. Calvin I mean) the Gleanings of whose judgment in Interpretation of
Scripture, I prefer before the whole vintage of all the Popish Doctors. Thus
he writes upon this Scripture -- Baptism (says he) was not instituted for that
end and purpose, that whatsoever sins were committed before Baptism, should be
forgiven unto us: But as we daily sin, so we should labor by daily pardon to
be received into favor.

Having taken notice of the substance of this Embassy, which is the Doctrine
of Reconciliation. Let Us in the next place consider the manner of the Apostles
pleading: It Is thus expressed. (...). We pray you in Christ's room, and stead: And
this does not only denote Actum exercitum, but Actum signatum also (as Cajetan
observes) Describit officia Legatorum novi Testamenti quatenus Legati sunt esse
ut ob. secrent vice Christi Cajet. in Loc. 3. A Prevalent Motive is urged.
Who thus interprets the Apostle -- That he teaches that the Duty of
Ambassadors is in general to use all sorts of entreaties, to draw men unto
Jesus Christ. Wherefore Ministers should study all the winning Rhetorique, and
use all persuasive Arguments, to prevail with men to come in, and close with
Jesus Christ.

Lastly, here is a Motive urged of great validity and prevalency (...): As
though God did beseech you by us. Neque quicquam dici potuit (...). Beza
Beza tells us that there could not be a greater Emphasis. (...) relates to a
similitude, Quia reipsa non precatur nos Deus sed ve^uti precatur in
ministrorum persona. Beza.
because God entreats us not immediately by himself, but mediately by the person
of Ministers. Here then is an unparalled act of Grace and condescension, that
God should entreat, woe, and beseech us by the Ministry of his Ambassadors,
that we should do good to our own souls, and Reconcile our selves to him,
against whom we have so grievously offended.

The words thus divided and expounded afford these choice observations.

First, That it is the great dignity and honor of the Ministers of Observe. 1.
the Gospel, to be the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, The greatness of Ministers dignity is a special engagement Observe.
2.
unto them for the faithful discharge of their duty.

Thirdly, It is a wonderful condescension, and an act of Singular Observe. 3.
grace, and mercy in God to employ messengers concerning treaties of peace and
Reconciliation.

Fourthly, Ministers of the Gospel should study and practice the Observe. 4.
most winning way to gain souls unto Jesus Christ.

As for these 4. It shall suffice at present only to have mentioned them,
considering that I have not leisure to handle them severally; neither am I
willing to handle them overhastily, and break of abruptly.

The fifth and last Observation, whereon I purpose to fix, is Observe. 5.
this -- That it is a main Duty incumbent upon all the Ministers of the
Gospel, with all earnestness to press upon people the Doctrine of
Reconciliation, and use all the Arguments they can to persuade men to be
Reconciled unto God.



This is that grand needful fundamental Doctrine which can never be preached
enough, never heard enough, never learned enough. You see (my Reverend
Brethren) what a large field lye's before me to expatiate in. Here Is matter
enough to be treated on, in a large volume. And how can a short hour's
discourse suffice, when many days are insufficient? Notwithstanding through
Christ that strengthen's me, by whose grace I am what I am, I shall 1 Cor. 15.
10. The Doctrine unfolded. Meth. 2. head's of discourse.
endeavor to Contract my self, and to speak as much as I can in a few words.

For Method's sake I shall only confine my self to two heads of discourse. The
former whereof only aims at the proof of the point asserted: the latter shall
be employed by way of self-reflexion, what may this concern us all as reducible
unto point of practice. That shall constitute the Doctrinall part of my Text,
this, my darticular use and Application.

To resume in order what I first propounded, I shall endeavor 1. Head.
to make good my assertion by a double proof: both by authority of Scripture,
and evidence of reason.

1. For Scripture Testimony, that I may not multiply many 1. For Scripture
Testimony.
instances, the Ministers of the Gospel (that I may speak it with reverence)
are as so many Feoffees in trust with the Ministry of reconciliation. They are
instruments employed by God in the dispensation of this great Doctrine. verse.
18. The expressions are verse. 18. (...), etc. Praeclarus Evangelii titulus quod
legatio sit ad reconciliandos homines Deo; singularis quoque Ministrorum
dignitas quod cum hoc mandato mittantur a Deo ad nos ut internuntii sint, and
quasi sponsores. Calv.
* (...). There you have one clear proof of my Doctrine, that unto the
Ministers are committed the Doctrine of reconciliation. This is the depth of
love as O humanitatis profunditatem! quoniam mortuo filio reconciliation is
Ministerium nobis Apostolis iterum credidit. Oecumen. in loc.
O^cumenius observes. The Angels were the first publishers of peace Luke 2. 14.
Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace, and good will toward men. This
office, which was first the Angels work, is now transferred upon men. As for
instance, the Angel told Cornelius that his prayers were heard, but as for the
Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ he referred him to the Ministry of Peter.
Hence (...). Chrysostom.
Chrysostom observes, that this shows the dignity of the Apostles, and what
work they undertook, and likewise the exceeding greatness of the love of God.
So that hence it plainly appears that this work of preaching reconciliation
is incumbent upon all the Ministers of the Gospel. One excellent observation
I Will give you more of Calvin upon verse. 18. of this Chapter, whose authority is
never a whit the less because lately so much unworthily Stumbling block
removed by P. H. wherein that eminent Servant of Jesus Christ Mr. Calvin is
aspersed and maliciously traduced.
traduced. The words of Quum ex Evangelio pronuntiat Minister^^te ordinatus
propitiatum nobis esse Dominum, non aliter audiendus atque Dei Legatus and
publicam personam sustinens, atque ad id asseverandum legitima authoritato
praeditus, Calv.
Calvin are thus translated: when a Minister (says he) rightly ordained
pronounces out of the Gospel, that God is reconciled, he is no otherwise to be
heard than an Ambassador of God, and as one that has the place of a public
person, and endued with lawful authority to assert the same. Another proof we
have verse. 11. of this Chapter: Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we
persuade men. We persuade men indefinitely, they have rational souls, and are
capable of persuasion: and what do we persuade them unto, but to be reconciled
unto God? Wherefore it is a base calumny of the Arminians who charge the
Orthodox (as these ears have heard in this very place) as if they made man no
more then a stock or a stone in his Conversion. As Jer. 10. 23. Propheta hic
non disserit ex professo quid possint homines, sed concedit illis hanc partem,
ut consultent, and decernant etc. Calv. Phil. 4. 13.
for our parts we acknowledge man passive in his Conversion, and according to
the Prophet, the way of man is not in himself: Further we acknowledge the
Antecedent, concomitant, and subsequent Grace, all to come from God: yet we
cannot deny but God has endued man with a reasonable soul, and made him a
subject capable of receiving the Grace of the Spirit infused in him: so that
man actus agit, motus movet, and is sano sensu, said to be a Co-worker with
God. He can do nothing without Christ, but he can do all things through Christ
that strengthens him (as the Apostle speaks.)

But the objection will be thus framed. If men (as all men by Ephesians. 2. 2.
nature are) be dead in trespasses and sins it is in vain to preach unto them,
we may as well preach amongst Tombs and Graves. For answer hereunto, we must
know, that notwithstanding men are dead in trespasses and sins, yet there is a
quickening virtue in the voice of Jesus Christ, to make even the dead to live.
When Christ called with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth, then he that was
Ezekiel. 37. 10.
dead arose out of his grave. Those dry bones mentioned by Ezekiel, as soon as
the spirit breathed on them, they had sinews and flesh, and stood on their
feet, and became an exceeding great army. So when the Spirit of God works
powerfully by the Ministry of the word, mirabiles effectus habet: The blind
see, the lame walk, and the very dead are raised to life. To this purpose tend
those Exhortations with those prevalent Obtestations, (...), Romans 12. 1. That
ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, etc. Another is, Ephesians. 4. 1. I
therefore the prisoner of the Lord beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith you are called. A third exhortation is exceeding pathetical,
1 These. 2. 11, 12. As you know how we exhorted, and comforted, and charged
every one of you (as a Father does his children) that ye Phil. 1. 27. Tit. 2.
12.
would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and Glory. All
these exhortations redound to this issue, that such persons as are already
reconciled, should produce evidences of their Reconciliation by their holy
conversation, and that is to walk (...), seemingly, meetly, as becomes the
Gospel. And according to those 3 Adverbs mentioned, Tit. 2. 12. Haec tria
perpetuo medit^^da adverbia Pauli Haec tria sunt vitae regula sancta tuae.
(...): soberly, righteously, godly. Now the Ministers of the Gospel are
sons of Peace, Ambassadors of Peace, and the Gospel which they preach is
the Gospel of Peace; and this is the fruit of the lips which the Lord creates;
and the main Isa. 5^. 10. Quasidicat per praedicationem Evangelii, and
renovationem Spiritus pacem dabo, atque eo modo sanabo hominem peccatorem.
Bulling. in loc. Mat. 5. 25.
design which they drive, and the scope they aim at, is to persuade men to
make their peace with God, and to throw down all their rebellious weapons, and
yield themselves unto his mercy. Sin has made God their adversary, wherefore
that counsel must abide upon them, Mat. 5. 21. Agree with thine adversary
quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him. At this time God has sent me
with an Olive Branch in my mouth, with a Commission of Peace; which if it be
neglected this day, for ought any of us know, it may be expired and out of date
to morrow. But I need add no further Scripture proof in so clear a point.

In the next place I am to enquire after Arguments for confirmation 2. Proof by
evidence of Reason.
of the Doctrine. Amongst many I shall reduce them to three heads of Reasons,
which I promised for the farther proof of the Doctrine.

The first Reason shall be drawn from the Office of the Ministers Reason 1.
Drawn from the office of the Ministers of the Gospel.
of the Gospel. Their names point out their office; they are called Watchmen,
Seers, Workmen, Stars, etc. But I shall go no further than the Metaphor of my
Text; they are called Ambassadors, a name of great Dignity and Duty; and the
great Duty incumbent on them, is to persuade people to be reconciled, to be at
one with God, as Mr. Tindal's Translation appositely renders it.

Let Us then view the name of Ambassadors, and therein we shall find 4.
special properties which may very appositely be applied 1. Ambassadors are
gifted and qualified for so great an employment.
unto the Ministers of the Gospel. The first whereof is this, that
Ambassadors are select Persons, gifted and qualified for so great an
employment. Princes never send ignorant, unfit Persons on their errand: So the
Ministers which are of Christ's sending, are qualified and fitted by him for
the manageing of so great and weighty employment. The Priest under the Law
ought to be a man of knowledge: Mal. 2. 7.
his lips should preserve knowledge. And the Prophet Isa. 50. 4.
ought to have the tongue of the Learned to know how to speak a word in season
to him that is weary. He ought to be an Job. 33. 23.
Interpreter one among a thousand: And such a one ought the Minister of the
Gospel to be, 2 Timothy 2. 15.
a workman that needs not to be ashamed, 2 Timothy 3. 17.
thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Ambassadors are men of renown and
estimation, they are highly honored for their gifts and employment; they do
not negotiate concerning slight, trifling, impertinent matters, but they
intermeddle about weighty affairs of State, and their transactions are about
their Prince's matters of highest concernment. And the resemblance holds alike
with the Ministers of the Gospel: They are persons of Honor iste and ista
sublimit as nullis poter it comparationibus adaequari. Si Regum fulgori
comparaveris, and Principum Diademati, long erit inferior comparatio. Ambr. in
Pastorali.
honor, of ability, and fitness (such I mean as are of Christ's sending) and
their business is to treat about matters of the greatest consequence, even of
Reconciliation between God and Man. Secular Ambassadors deal about weighty
affairs of the world, but Spiritual Ambassadors deal about Soul-affaires,
even the great things of Eternity. Isa. 52. 7.
How beautiful then should their feet be, who bring such glad tidings? Such
are 2 Timothy 2. 17.
worthy of double honor who labor in the Word and Doctrine.

2. Ambassadors are Persons in Commission; for they have 2. Ambassadors are
persons in Commission.
received a Commission from their Prince, by virtue whereof they act
accordingly. They dare not negotiate with other Princes without the Authority
of their Master. They are commissionated by the Prince that sends them: they
are bound up by instructions from him, neither dare they go beyond their
Commission. So the Ministers of the Gospel are Persons in Commission, they are
ordained Ministers into the Universal Church for the benefit of the Church in
general, though they may exercise their function ad hic and nunc in a
particular Congregation: yet their removal from one place to another (which
ought not to be done without a clear call) does not in the least null or make
invalid their Ministerial function. They are Persons called, approved, and set
apart for this great work 1 Timothy 4. 14.
by the laying on of the hands of the 2 Timothy 1. 16.
Presbytery which gift ought not to be neglected but Sensus est Timotheum quum
Prophetarum voce ascitus fuit in Ministerium and deinde solenni ritu ordinatus
simul gratia spiritus sancti instructum fuisse ad functionem suam exequendam.
Calv. 1 Timothy 4. 14.
stirred up as the Apostle gives an especial charge. These are those peculiar
Persons who have dedicated themselves to the service of God, they have put
their hands to the plough with a resolution never to look back. They have given
themselves up as Hannah gave Samuel for a loan unto the Lord all the days of
his life. But as for such who have no other call but from their own high
conceited fancies and others (such as themselves) flatteries (as a V. Mr.
Buroughs Irenicum.
Reverend Divine instanceth) who through the pride of their own hearts (as
Novatus consecrated himself a Bishop) run before they are sent, and make
have (more have then good speed) to invade the Ministers office, let them
consider (if ever they once come to themselves) that God who is the God of
Order and not of confusion will never bless their excentrick motions. Vzzah's
meaning and intention was good; he put forth his hand to hold the Arc, because
the Oxen shook it, yet his good meaning, and intention could not justify an
irregular practice: wherefore a fearful breach was made, and Vzzah struck dead
in the place 2 Samuel 6. 7.
for his error. Likewise 2 Chr. 26. 20, 21.
King Vzziah invaded the Priest's Office and was smote with Leprosy. The sudden
rising of the Leprosy on his face shows it was a judgment from the Lord as A
Deo praesentiam suam in altari testante, and eo lepram aspe^tabili signo
ejaculante. Jun. in loc. 3. Ambassadors ought to keep close to their
Instructions.
Junius well observes. It was a signal hand of God punishing him for his
presumption. These are judgments upon record, which should serve as so many
warning pieces to cause such as usurp the Minister's function to fear, and
tremble lest some dreadful judgment be their portion.

3ly. Ambassadors ought to keep close to their instructions and punctually
observe the very words of their Commission. They come not on their own, but
their Master's errand, and may neither add to, nor diminish from the same. So
the Ministers of the Gospel have a rule to go by prescribed by Christ, and
they ought Gal. 6. 16.
to walk according to that rule; they have a just standard to go by, and that
is Isa. 8. 20.
the Law and Testimony; They have a 1 Pet. 1. 19.
sure word of prophecy, a 2 Timothy 1. 13.
form of sound words. They have counsels of God to deliver; and they must be as
thorough paced as Paul was, who appealed to his hearers, and took them to*
record Acts 20. 27.
that he declared all the counsels of God. What then shall we say of such who
withhold the truth in unrighteousness, who are afraid to be good, and are so
pusillanimous as not to dare to speak out what in their judgments and
consciences they are resolved against, even the herefies, blasphemies and
abominations of the time: I shall give my opinion in the language of Impius
sim, avarus, adulter, imo omnium vi^iorum reus modo impii silentii non arguar,
dum Dominus patitur. Luth.
Luther that valiant Champion of Jesus Christ. Let me be wicked, covetous, an
adulterer, even guilty of all vices, rather then of wicked silence when the
Lord suffers. But rather let us look unto the determination of our Lord Christ,
Mark. 8. 38. In coelis Advocatus est eorum Christus qui ipsum non erubescunt in
saeculo isto. Carthus.
Mark. 8. 38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in
this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of Man be
ashamed when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels. And
what further shall we say of those, who devise ways of their own head (as
Jeroboam ordained a solemn 1 King. 12. 32.
festival) and pretend new notions, new discoveries, new light, though it be
no better then an Ignis fatuus to lead them into bogs and Quagmires: these are
exceeding subtle and skilled in the art of Legerdemain, still they keep a
reserve or posterne door to convey themselves cunningly away (as if they had
Gyges his ring) that they may escape invisibly: yet it is too too apparent that
they in the mean time revive sundry antiquated, exploded haeresies, condemned
by ancient Fathers and Counsels for many Centuries past. Surely such as these
do not act by virtue of a Commission from God: For his Commission runs in
terminis: Ad Legem and Testimonia: Isai. 8. 20.
But they act by their own Commission, just as that Prophet did who believed
the old Prophet of Samaria, and paid dear for his disobedience. He came and
Prophesied against the Altar of Bethel, so far he was in the right, but after
he hearkened to a new light, or false revelation of another Prophet, there he
was in the wrong, and was 1 King. 13. 24.
slain by a Lion for his too much credulity to the old Prophet, and
disobedience to God. By this sad example, let us all take heed of delusions and
pretended Revelations, of such Scepticks as fancy a Platonic Christ, and of
Familists, Quakers, and the rest of that leaven, whose opinions and Persons
both we ought to avoid with as much care as we would avoid a plague sore, lest
being once infected with them we do not only ruin our selves, but multitudes
together with us.

4ly. Lastly, An Ambassador ought to have audience, respect, 4. An Ambassador
ought to have respect and audience where ever he comes.
and honor where ever he comes. If an Ambassador be wronged, according to the
Law of Nations revenge ought to be taken in a signal manner, an ordinary
satisfaction will not serve ^he turn. An Ambassador represents the Prince's
Person from whom he comes and receives his Commission, and whatever affront or
injury is done unto an Ambassador is put upon the Prince's account, who sends
him: so the Ministers of the Gospel come in the name of the great King of
Heaven and Earth, and are his Commission-officers, wherefore their message
requires audience, and their Persons ought to be had in honor. But if any will
be so abhominably wicked (as these times afford many sad instances) as to
injure God's faithful Ministers, Christ will vindicate their quarrel, and
account the wrongs offered to them, all one as done to himself. Our proof is
very clear, Luke 10. 16.
Luke 10. 16. He that despises you, despises me: and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me.

I proceed to another reason which shall be drawn from the great benefit and
happiness intended even unto all eternity, toward Reason 2. Drawn from the
great benefit of a reconciled estate.
all those, upon whom this Doctrine of reconciliation works effectually. It Is
that great nail which the Masters of the Assemblies labor to drive to the
head, the great end and aim of all their preaching to persuade people to make
God their friend, to acknowledge their transgressions with all their
aggravations, and sue out a pardon through the blood of Jesus Christ. Now where
this Doctrine takes and proves successful, there God lets all suits fall,
cancells all bonds, quittes all scores, and receives the offender into favor.
This is Argumentum ab utili, and a most prevalent Orator. The happiness of
those that are reconciled is thus set down, Romans 5. 10. Quis non videt quam
nequeant deseri amici and reconciliati, qui cum inimici essent, tanto^ere
dilecti sunt, ut deseri nequiverint? Musc. in loc.
For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son: much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. Likewise we
have the whole series of the great Mystery of reconciliation, with all those
rich benefits attending the same expressed at large by the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 13.
We who sometimes were a far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. But
then this Question will be asked, who is the efficient cause of reconciliation?
Consult the Apostle, verse. 14.
For he is our peace. Christ is the Author and finisher of this peace. By what
means then is all this accomplished? The verse. 16. In eum finem utrique sibi
invicem uniendi^erant in unum corpus, and sublato omni dissidio pax inter
utrosque procuranda atque firmanda, ut possent ambo velut in unum corpus
compacti atque constricti Deo per Christi crucem reconciliari. Bodius in loc.
16. verse declares, And that he might reconcile both unto God, having slain
the Enmity thereby. Christ by his death destroyed death, took away it is sting,
left it like an adder without teeth, like Samson without his locks. Now the
cause being taken away, the fewd cease, and the hatred between God and Man
ends: All breaches are compromised by Christ our surety and Mediator. Hence
follow upon this reconciled estate two glorious privileges. One is verse. 18.
access by one spirit unto the Father, verse. 18. The phrase carries an
Emphasis with it -- (...): we are as it were led by the hand of Christ unto the
Father. Hereupon Vt intelligamus nos non sponte and ultro in gratiam hanc
adiisse and accessisse; sed huc adductos esse. Piscator.
Piscator observes, that we did not of our own accord bring our selves into
favor, but we are brought by Christ thereunto. The other privilege is an
enfranchifement or making of us free Denizons, Verse. 19.
Verse. 19. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and forreiners, but
fellow-citizens with the Saints and of the household of God. Hence from these
premises we conclude that there is singular happiness, and unspeakable
advantage, which is the portion of all those who are reconciled unto Jesus
Christ.

But if these two former reasons obtain not that effect which Reason 3. Drawn
from the miserable condition of an unreconciled estate.
is desired and hoped for, I Will add a third and no more, which is causa a
contrario to represent the sad, miserable and desperate condition of an
unreconciled estate. The Apostle calls them Enemies, and more then that they
are Romans 8. 7.
(...) enmity it self in the very abstract: and more then all this, they are
branded Romans 1. 30.
(...) haters, and hated of God: That word has both an Active and Passive
signification. Who then of any understanding durst venture to sleep in an
unreconciled condition? To have a potent man thy Enemy, this is matter of great
fear and perplexity, but what is it to have the omnipotent God of Heaven and
Earth thy Enemy? who protests, Isa. 1. 25.
that he will ease himself of his adversaries, and avenge himself of his
enemies. And Christ himself calls for speedy execution of slaughter to be
inflicted on his enemies, Luke 19. 27.
Luke 19. 27. But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over
them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. Such persons then whilst they
remain in their state of enmity against God Ephesians. 2. 12.
have no hope, and are without God in the world. And if they dye in this
unreconciled estate, they shall miscarry unto all Eternity. As the Tree falls
so it lies, and as Death has left them so Judgment will find them. As soon as
ever they are launched into the boundless Ocean of Eternity, they are put into
a^ utter impossibility of returning back into the land of the living, and into
an utter incapacity of suing out a pardon and reconciliation afterward.

Let these Reasons or Arguments mentioned suffice for the confirmation of the
Doctrine delivered. What remains now but that I should descend unto particular
Application, which is the life of every Sermon? Amongst many Uses (which I
intended) I shall at present only fix upon an Use of Exhortation; wherein I
shall address my self, 1. To Ministers; and 2. To People. Use of Exhortation.
1 Part to the Ministers.


The first part of this Use I direct principally to my dearly beloved Brethren
of the Ministry. Suffer I beseech you (my Brethren) the word of Exhortation, to
put forth your selves to the utmost, and with all your might endeavor to
press home the Doctrine of Reconciliation. Show people their hurt and cure,
their malady and remedy; discover unto them their lost and utterly undone
condition by nature, how miserable is that state which is of nature and Enmity
against God. Show them, that there is a way and means of reconciliation
purchased by the blood of Jesus Christ. Study all the alluring Rhetoric and
the art of persuading people to do good unto their own souls, and to make all
expedition to come unto Jesus Christ. This is the substance of your Embassy (as
if you were Christ's Vicegerents) to pray them in Christ's stead to be
reconciled unto God. My Brethren, let me be your remembrancer, as you preach
unto your people the form of sound words (which is your duty) so to converse
with them that are under your charge. Visit their houses and be willing to be
acquainted with them. Take heed of a stately, reserved, unsociable carriage in
spiritual affairs. Such as pray much with their people, and confer with
them, being inquisitive how their souls thrive, these are they who, through the
Grace of God, shall reap sweet and abundant fruit of their Ministry. It Is a
special exhortation of Solomon, Prove. 27. 23.
Prove. 27. 23. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flock, and look well
to thy heard. Which Scripture (though usually is applied to Masters of
families) judicious Carthwright applies Quanto magis cavendum est iis, qui
ovibus Christi pretioso ipsius sanguine redemptis praeficiuntur. Carthw. in loc.
unto the Ministers of the Gospel. If (says he) a Shepherd ought to take
such care of bruit Creatures, how much more should spiritual Pastors take care
of the flock committed to their charge. Hence all those rotten distinctions of
lazy Nonresidents are to be abhominated, such as were per se, vel per alium:
semper, vel (...) semper: Residentia loci, vel Officii: such sorry fig leaves
could never cover the nakedness of those that used them: And my charity
persuades me, that such kind of distinctions will never be taken up again, nor
so much as once named amongst you, Let me then press my exhortation a little
more home, that you would put both your shoulders to this great work, and that
you would make this the (...) the main and principal design which you drive,
to set close upon the consciences of your Auditors this unum Necessarium, this
grand necessary Doctrine of reconciliation, to beseech people to be reconciled
unto God.

And having endeavored this great work principally, in the next place I
conjure you and earnestly entreat you (as you are Ministers of the Gospel of
peace) that you would confer your best endeavors to cement, sod^r, and unite
diss^nting Brethren: that they may (what in you lies) be prevailed withal to
agree together in Unity on Earth, who shall agree in Unity in the highest
Heavens. I plead not in the least for any persons (how much soever admired by
some) who are either unsound in the says, or unholy in life: No reconciliation
can be expected, nor ought to be attempted with Gal. 5. 20. 21.
Idolatries, Drunkenesse, Heresies, and other such like deeds of the flesh. I
plead only for such as truly fear God, who are not only nominall, but real
saints. Here lies the labor, and here the work, to be reconcilers amongst
them: and such peacemakers are blessed. That I may speak, my mind freely (for
I love plain dealing) as for such Reconcilers as Cassander of old, and Sancta
Clara of late, who would join together the Ark and Dagon, the Ephod and
Teraphim, I mean Protestantisme and Popery, these are to be detested, and sent
back again to Rome from whence they came. V. Bishop Hall's Treatise, No peace
with Rome.
No peace with Rome, no quarter ought to be given to Benhadad: I may say of
them as Jehu said to Ahaziah, 2 King. 9. 22.
what peace so long as the whoredoms of thy Mother Jezabel and her witchcrafts
are so many, days without number. As for Ignatius Loyola, Father of the
Jesuits, John of Leyden, Ringleader of the Anabaptists, and the rest of their
Accomplices, of whose franctick practices we have ample Relations in Print, V.
Sleyd. Comment. and Baylyes disswasive.
they are so far from any real endeavors after reconciliation with us, as
rather, like Samsons Foxes, they run abroad with firebrands in their tails, and
so set all the standing corn a fire. These are the grand Incendiaries and
flabella seditionum. From Jesuitisme and Anabaptisme all heresies and damnable
errors receive their original. At Rome and Munster this counterfeit coin
receives it is stamp and impression. Hence as out of a Trojan Horse is let out
an Ambuscado to destroy the Protestant Religion. Therefore there is no ground of
hopeful success, if we should attempt any reconciliation with them. Let them
come to us and make serious Confessions and retractations, but let not us go to
them. Let them first abjure their principles, and practices, (though I know not
why we should trust a Papist upon his oath) till then there can be no
possibility of embraceing peace with such who either are of Babylon, or for
Babylon.

But what is chiefly in mine eye, and aim amounts to this brief issue, to
persuade all those to unite amongst themselves, who are sound in the faith and
holy in life. Amongst them there are some who come so far up to us (and we
hope they may yet come farther, if self interests make no obstructions) as to
acknowledge us true Ministers, the Church of England a true Church. Much is
granted to this effect by some V. Apolog. of the five dissenting Brethren.
Reverend dissenting Brethren in Print. When carnal Interests, secular
policies, and mental reservations are laid aside, and men declare plainly what
they would have, and when we know once where to find them, and where they will
fix, then Attempts of Accommodation may attain a happy and comfortable
success. That which much concerns us all is, to lay to heart and be deeply
affected with the divisions of Reuben, and to use our utmost endeavor to
comprimise differences, and make up breaches and animosities, lest otherwise we
gratify the Jesuit who is the common Enemy, who loves to fish in troubled
waters; or is like an Adder which seeks for shelter in broken walls. Let Us
leave off contention prius quam sese immisceat; so Junius renders the words of
Solomon, Prove. 17. 14.
Prove. 17. 14. (i. e.) Let not contention mix with our affairs. For once it
being mixed and joined, it is not easy to unmixe and separate afterward.
Wherefore let it be our care, and wisdom not to give advantage by our
domestic breaches to the wild Boar of Babylon; or the subtle Foxes of Munster
and Racovia, who when they see us a quarrelling one with another, they make a
prey of us both. I well remember about this time 24. years ago in the Vespers
of our public Act there was a Question discussed which the Dr. Wingham of St
John's.
Respondent held Affirmative -- An Calviniani (quos vocant) and Lutherani
possint in unam Ecclesiam coalescere? And in the like solemn Convention
another Question 7. years ago was affirmed homogeneous to the former by a Dr.
Wilkinson of Christ-Church.
learned Professor of our University -- An intersit pacis and salutis Ecclesiae
vere Evangelicos pium colere syncretismum? But especially let us have recourse
unto Scripture: What says the Psalmist, Psalm. 133. 1.
Psalm. 133. 1. Behold how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell
together in unity. I have often fetched a ground of hope against many fears,
from 2. Prophesies: The one is Zeph. 3. 9.
Zeph. 3. 9. For then will I turn to the people a pure Language, that they may
all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent. The other is
Zach. 14. 9.
Zach. 14. 9. And the Lord shall be King over all the Earth: in that day shall
there be one Lord, and his name be one. Non satis est si homines agnoscerent
unum Deum, nisi consentiu^t in re^ta and simplici aliqu^ fide ita ut celebretur
in terra nomen unius Dei. Calv. in Zeph. 3. 9.
Though there be but one Lord, yet his name is called on diversely; but here is
Prophesied an unity of worshipping God. And as for unity amongst Brethren, this
is accounted a fruit of our effectual calling, * Ephesians. 4. 3. Endeavoring to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. And for the better setting
home of this exhortation, the Apostle mentions 7. Ones in the following verses,
viz. One body, one Spirit, one hope of our calling, one Lord, one faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all. How pathetically does the Apostle press
unanimity? Phil. 2. 1, 2.
If (says he) there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercies, fulfill ye my
joy that ye be like minded, having the fame love, being of one accord and one
mind. Numerus binarius eo magis infamis, quia primus ausus est discedere ab
unitate. Pythag.
Pythagoras used to put a brand of infamy upon the number of two, because it
first departed from unity. But the Apostle propounds the Question in the
negative, which has the force of a strong affirmation, 1 Cor. 3. 3.
For whereas there is among you envying and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal and walk as men? Sects and factions have their source and original
from the flesh; so Notandum est etiam hoc loco unde sint factiones and sectae
in Ecclesia. Primum quidem ex carne, ut qui sectarii sunt, licet videantur esse
spiritualissimi, revera tamen carnales existant. Muscul. in 1 Cor. 3. 3.
Musculus a judicious Expositor observes.

Further let me be your remembrancer of that great duty that in an especial
manner concerns the Ministers of the Gospel, that is to unite amongst
themselves, and endeavor to draw in one yoke, and as one man, Jude 3.
contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints. Let the
Apostles exhortation be as a frontlet before our eyes, and as a Phylactery
sewed on the hemmes of our garments, Romans 14. 19.
Romans 14. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace,
and things wherewith one may edify another. The Phrase is (...), we must pursue
and run after peace, though it may seem to fly from us: But we must not take
any peace at a venture, but that which tends to edification, as Sectemur:
studium vehemens conservandae pacis requirit. Pac^ adj^ngitaedificationem
mutuam, ut non pacem quamvis, sed eam tantum praecipi intelligamus quae ad
aedificationem pertinet. Non aedificat pax, in mendacio, superstitione,
idololatria, impietate, sed in veritate. Zech. 8. 19. Veritatem and pacem
diligite. Pareus. His duobus, concordia and aedificatione continentur fere ^m^a
charitatis offici^. Calv.
Pareus and Calvin observe. Of all others let the faithful Ministers of Christ
endeavor after a right understanding of each other, and a loving
correspondence and oneness of heart and judgment amongst themselves. Tell it
not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest the Popish party
triumph when they hear that even the Lords Diamonds cut one another, and that
there are great animosities, evil surmises, and bitterness of speech one
toward another, amongst some that are truly Godly. How sharp was the
contention between two rare men even Paul and Barnabas, insomuch as they Act.
15. 39.
departed asunder one from the other. In several Centuries we read of the
great variances amongst Eusebius: L. 5. c. 26. and L. 7. c. 3.
those who were eminent Lights in the Church, as Iraenaeus was at great
variance with Victor, Cyprian with Stephan, Jerome with Austin, Basil with
Damasus, Chrysostom with Epiphanius, Cyrill with Theodoret. And their private
inconsiderable differences amongst themselves, gave great advantage to the
common Enemy Satan, who (as a learned Author observes) Dolebat hoc Diabolus qui
semper de fratrum pace torquetur. Optat. L. 2.
is vexed with the peace of the Brethren, but much pleased with their
contentions. Though it cannot be expected but offenses will come, and that in
the Church militant there will be sounding in our ears the noises of Axes and
Hammers, and often times it falls out that Doctors both Godly and learned differ
in some things from one another in their judgment. Yet every Minister of the
Gospel should imitate his Master Christ in being a Reconciler. It was storyed
of Athanasius that he was in lesser matters dissidentibus Magnes, (though in
weighty affairs he was Adamas, an Adamant not to be moved) even a Load stone to
draw those unto him, who differed from him. Wherefore abundance of wisdom and
candor is required toward such as dissent from us, if they keep those
Fundamental Principles of faith and a good conscience. Truth ought to be spoke
but in Ephesians. 4. 15. (...), hoc est, persistentes sinceri in vera doctrina ac
fide, and in charitate. Zanch.
Love. And a lapsed Brother ought to be restored or set in joint, so the word
(...) imports, but it must be done by such as are spiritual, and in the Spirit
of meekness. If matters be circumstantiall, abundance of gentleness,
moderation and mutual forbearance ought to be exercised. A flint may sooner be
broken on a Pillow then an anvile: Gal. 6. 1. (...) significat rem aliquam
resarcire, and collapsam reparare. Tarnov. in medull. Ev. * Si virtutum finis
ille sit maximus qui plurimorum spectat profectum moderatio omnium pulcherrima
est Ambr. de Panor. l. 1. c. 1.
And mildness in some cases may prevail, where roughness cannot. But if
matters be Fundamental; If some cry down the moral Law as an Almanac out of
date, as some Antimonian Spirits have endeavored, if others cry down
Magistracy and Ministry, as some Anabaptisticall Spirits have done; if some
cry down the Christian Sabbath (as some Tilham a pestilent Antisabbataria^, who
seduceth multitudes at Colchester, and writes for the Jewish Sabbath: and D.
Heylin who in a late book entitled Respondet Petrus, discovers himself a
professed Adversary to the strict keeping of the Lords day Sabbath and decries
strict observers thereof, and most unworthily asperseth that eminent Light of
the Church, D. Vsser A. B. at Armagh who though Orthodox as in other things so
in his judgment in the Lords day Sabbath: yet cannot escape the abuses of D. P.
H. which said P. H. is near a kin to Ismael, whose hand is against every man,
and every man's hand was against him.
Antisabbatarians have done with much impudence and profaneness of spirit) in
these and such like cases, let us not yield an inch, let us keep our ground. Let
Luther's heroical resolution be our pattern for imitation -- Hic gero titulum
cedo nulli. It was the prudent Counsel of Athanasius to the Orthodox Brethren,
that they should by no means receive any pacificatory Letters from George the
Arrian Persecutor, and (...) Basil. Epist. 235.
Basil in an Epistle to Epiphanius, assigns a strong reason, why Athanasius
gave such Counsel, If once (says he) we shake off the simplicity of the
faith, there will be no end of Disputations. However let us all confer our
heads and hearts together that we may agree so far as we can, still holding
Heb. 10. 23.
fast our profession without wavering. Let it be our endeavor Heb. 12. 14.
to follow peace with all men and holiness. Let Us preserve a happy union
between truth and peace. All the truths of God are more precious then the Gold
of Ophir. We are commanded to Prove. 23. 23.
buy the truth, but are prohibited from selling the least part of it. Wherefore
we ought all in our several places and capacities to be valiant for the truth,
even all steel to the back: The truth of God is a good matter, and it is good to
be Gal. 4. 18.
zealously affected in a good matter. Praedicare verbum Dei nihil aliud est,
quam derivare in se furorem totius inferni and satanae. Luth: loc: com. In
aliis mansuetus ero, in blasphemiis in Christum non ita. Zuing: in Epist: ad
Servet.
Luther used to say, That to preach the Word of God zealously, was a ready way
to bring the rage of all the Devils in Hell about our ears. But in Gods cause
let us go on courageously, and though we may be vilified by the vilest of men,
yet let us resolve with David to be more vile. A good God, a good cause, and a
good conscience will carry us through the greatest dangers and difficulties.
And let us still remember to show most meekness in our own cause, and most
zeal in the cause of God. So * Zuinglius answered Servetus, in other things I
will be mild, but not in blasphemies against God.

Now I have not yet done with the pressing of this Doctrine of union amongst
Brethren; I shall yet prosecute it farther, heartily desiring that my words may
leave deep impressions upon your Spirits, and obtain some comfortable success.
The breaches amongst the Ministers were as an Arrow stuck in the sides of that
good man Philip Melancthon: Whereupon on his death bed, V. Vitam Phil.
Melancth. per Melct. Adamum editam.
he professed -- I am very glad I am to leave this World, because I shall be with
Christ, and then shall be freed from the contentions of some Divines, which
were very great at that time. There Is a sad story of two eminent Martyrs for
the truth, viz. Epiphan. Haeres. 68.
Meletius and Peter, Bishops of Alexandria, who when they were put into Prison
fell at variance amongst themselves about a petty difference, whether the Lapsi
were to be received into communion? The Schism was very great, insomuch as
they drew a partition between each other in Prison, and would not hold
communion with each other, and yet afterward they jointly suffered Martyrdom.
And it is not easily to be imagined, what a great Rent their dissension made in
the Church of God, and gave advantage to the common Enemy. And what a dust was
raised between two choice, and constant Martyrs, Ridley and Hooper? one pressed
conformity too strictly upon his Brother, and contended with too much
eagerness for such kind of vain, useless Ceremonies (which Calvin calls
tolerabiles ineptias.) Yet notwithstanding these two Godly Bishops could not
agree in Blacks and Whites, they could both agree in Red, for they resisted
even unto blood, and sealed the truth of their Religion with the effusion of
their blood.

And now to speak my judgment more plainly as in the presence of God, without
partiality, having no man's person in admiration for advantage, I conceive it a
word spoken in due season, and that there is necessity of speaking of it, even
to exhort Ministers to study the things that make for peace, and especially to
agree in a sweet Harmony one with another. And I am fully satisfied in my
judgment, that to effect this much desired union, a special expedient will be
in several Counties (as London, Lancashire, Essex, Warwick, Worcester,
Norfolk etc.
some herein have given a good President already) to associate into
Presbyteries, and exercise that Government (which by experience is known to be
Flagellum Haeresium) and ordain Ministers, and to put Church censures into
execution. When Ministers meet together, and sosolemnly seek God by prayer and
fasting, they strengthen one another hands, and unite each others hearts. The
keeping up of Discipline, is a special means to preserve union amongst
Brethren, to extirpate Heresies, and sweep them away as dung, and promote the
power of Godliness. It has often lain sad upon my Spirit to consider the
mischief that has ensued upon want of execution of Church Discipline. Hinc
illae lachrymae. Hence for want hereof, a sluice has been opened to let in an
inundation of heresies and blasphemies. But it is much to be hoped that the
execution of Discipline will shut up the sluice, and stop the inundation. Faxit
Deus.

Now having spoken thus far to Ministers, the other part of 2. Part of this
use to people.
my use I will direct to people. And the substance of my exhortation is to
persuade them with all alacrity of Spirit to embrace the Doctrine of
Reconciliation tendered to them. It Is the great Doctrine of concernement in an
especial manner to be Preached, and practiced. The Ambassadors of peace
publish these good tidings, They come in the name of Jesus Christ offering
terms of Reconciliation. With what joy, with what ardency of love should you
embrace such gracious offers? O how sweet is the voice of Christ unto his
Church! His lips drop as an honey comb. If thou be the Spouse of Christ, thou will delight to hear the voice of the Bridegroom: So the Evangelist tel's us
Joh. 3. 29. Discimus etiam hic quod etsi amicus sponsi. (i. e.) Minister
Evangelii non gaudeat gaudium sponsi, neque fructum eum percipiat ex Ecclesia
qui sponsi proprius est; non tamen caret gaudio quodam suo, vel ex eo quod stet
and audiat vocem illam sponsi long suavissimam quam rursus bona fide tanquam
internuncius referet sponsae, Rollocus in locum.
-- That the Friend of the Bridegroom which stands and hears the Bridegrooms
voice rejoices greatly. Now consider Christ's messengers are his voice unto
people; They come on his errand, and deliver what he puts into their mouth. O
how sweet then will Christ's words be to a gracious heart! And this is that
sweet, welcome word which Ministers deliver to pray men to be reconciled and
make their peace with God. My brethren I beseech you in the bowels of Jesus
Christ, to set the highest estimate upon this Doctrine of Reconciliation,
prefer it before your appointed food, before thousands of Gold and Silver.
And have them in honor, and account their feet beautiful, who do the office
of Evangelists, and are dispensers of these truths, and Trumpetters of Gospel
peace. Though they be men of like passions, yet they are Persons of honor,
Commission officers, authorized by Jesus Christ to Preach the Gospel. Private
Christians may discourse of these things Charitative (but let them keep within
the compass of their own calling) and exhort one another to embrace this
Doctrine; but Ministers exhort Authoritative as Ambassadors and commissioners
of Jesus Christ. Wherefore (Brethren) let me be your remembrancer of the great
duty incumbent on you all, to love and reverence the Persons of your Ministers,
and have them in honor for their works sake especially. I shall put you in
mind of a Scripture or two, that so my exhortation may leave deeper impression
upon your hearts: one is 1 Cor. 4. 1.
1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us as Ministers of Christ, and Stewards
of the Mysteries of God. Another Scripture is, 1 Timothy 5. 17
1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be accounted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the word and Doctrine. Which place seems
to me plainly to set forth two sorts of Elders, viz. Ruling and Preaching
Elders. And being compared together that (...) the double honor is especially
to be given to the Preaching Elder. There Is an Emphasis in the situation of
the words, It Is not (...) but (...). I am non singular in my Interpretation,
but have the concurrence of judicious learned Duplices igitur Presbyteri
fuerunt, cum uni vacarent gubernationi, alteri sermoni and orationi, etc. V.
Bez. in loc. Quod duplicem interpretatur Chrysostomus victum and reverentiam
non impugno. Calv. Et deinceps subjicit -- Colligere autem hinc licet duo
fuisse tunc Presbyterorum genera, quia non omnes ad docendum ordinabantur: Nam
aperte verba sonant, quosdam been and honest praefuisse, quibus tamen non
erant commissae docendi parts. Calv.
Expositors who go before me in this Interpretation. I shall put you in
remembrance of the following verse: For the Scripture says thou shall not
muzzle the Ox that treads out the Corn: The labourer is worthy of his
reward. This plainly expresses the duty of people to maintain their Ministers:
if it were a cruel thing to muzzle the mouth of Oxen who tread out the Corn,
much more cruel to withold maintenance from those who labor in the word and
Doctrine. I shall only compare this with another Scripture, (and in speaking my
conscience I may the rather be more earnest in behalf of my dear Brethren,
because I plead not for any Interest of my own considering that I take no
tyths, Gal. 6. 6.
Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that
teaches in all good things. It Is said (...) not (...) not to contribute but to
communicate unto him as Hoc est, qui docetur Doctori suo communicet alimentum,
benevolentiam, honorem. Nam hoc indicat quod a^pendit, in omnibus bonis, and
non inepte communicet, impertiaturve dixit, and non retribuat vel rependat.
Communio siquidem id est: Ille spiritualia confert, tu qui doceris carnalia.
Oecum. in loc.
Oecumenius observes. So that hereby it is evident that the relief of Pastors
is not Eleemosynary, and precarious, but a kind of commerce and exchange of
spiritual for carnal things: For he that teaches bestows on his flock
spiritual treasures, and they that are taught should bestow on him part of
their temporal goods: And for the Quota pars (whereupon such a dust has been
raised) I cannot conceive how all the men on earth can ever be able to find out
so fit a maintenance as Gods own proportion, insomuch as thereby Ministers are
affected with the condition of their people according to Gods blessing of their
increase, whether in a less or a greater measure. I shall only name one
Scripture more to put you in mind of your duty to Ministers, and that is Heb.
13. 17.
Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your* selves,
for they watch for your souls as they that must give account, that they may do
it with joy and not with grief. By rulers and leaders are understood the
Pastors of the Church: I rather understand it so with (...). Duces Haud dubie
intelligit Ecclesiae Pastores and Gubernatores ut supra v. 7. Neque enim alios
Duces vel Gubernatores tune habuit Christiana Ecclesia. Pareus. Primum est
Reverentia, ut agnoscamus ordinem divinum, eosque ut Legatos Dei nobis missos
reverenter excipiamus and audiamus. Alterum est Amor propter officium. Tertium,
Obedientia, ut iis obtemperemus in iis quae ipsorum officii sunt propria, and
quae Dei nomine ex verbo ejus credenda, vel facienda praescribunt. Quartum est
gratitudo, ut officiis and beneficiis quibus possumus ipsis labores and curas
compensare studeamus. Pareus.
Pareus to be meant of Ministers, then of Magistrates as Zuinglius observes.
But Pareus adds four main duties of people to their Pastors, viz. Reverence,
love, obedience, and gratitude. All these things people owe unto the Ministers
of the Gospel.

But I draw to a close, what further remains concerns us all, both Ministers
and people. My business yet remaining is by way of Character to decypher those
who are reconciled, and by way of motive to excite you all to get assurance of
your reconciled estate. These are weighty arguments, which I shall dispatch
with what clearness, and Brevity I may, and so put a period to this Charact.
1. Every reconciled person relyes on Christ's Righteousness.
discourse.

1. We are to put our selves upon the test and trial, whether we are in a
reconciled estate. Amongst many distinguishing notes which may be assigned, I
shall only mention three instar omnium.

The first whereof is this (and it is a Proposition of eternal truth) every
reconciled person denies his own Righteousness, and relyes only upon the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ. No way to obtain Reconciliation, no other way
to preserve it, but by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness. The Garment of
Christ is absolutely complete, and needs not the patching up of our merits: For
what are all our Righteousnesses but Isa. 64. 6.
filthy rags? Christ is the High Priest, who Heb. 9. 28.
was once offered to bear the sin of many. He it is Isa. 63. 3.
who trod the Winepresse alone. He is the only mediator, for there is but one 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus: Christ is the 1 Cor. 6. 20.
price of our Redemption, and we Ephesians. 1. 7.
have redemption through his blood. The name of Jesus is the only name, for
Acts 4. 12.
there is no other name under Heaven whereby we shall be saved. Non solum
horribile est, sed etiam periculosum de Deo extra Christum cogitare. Luth. Loc.
Com. Qui cuiquam salutem promittit sine Christo, nescio utrum ipse salutem
habere potest in Christo. Aug.
There is no thinking of God without Christ: Neither will Christ admit any
competitors or Corrivalls in this great business. Christ is a total savior,
and he will have the whole honor (as is most due) unto himself. The whole
work of salvation is Gods peculiar Interest, Isa. 43. 11. Bellarm. L. 9: de
Justif.
Isa. 43. 11. I even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no savior.
Insomuch that Bellarmine himself that Champion of Rome is (...); For having
pleaded at large for merits, he gives his last Resolution as a correction of
the Premises, saying; It Is the safest way to rely only on the mercies of God
in Christ. Wherefore let Papists discard their own merits (however they
distinguish de congruo and condigno to elude their consciences) and let
Socinians abhor their blasphemy, who conceit that their obedience without
Christ merits can justify them. Yet notwithstanding let us wholly betake our
selves to Christ's righteousness. His robes are broad enough to cloth us, His
merits are of Infinite dignity and estimation. The great Apostle desired not
Phil. 3. 9. Deo homines examinante and probante inveniar insitus Christo ut
p^lmes viti qui non meos ex lege. Mosaica, sed ex virtute Christi me
efficientis fructus proferam deo gratos. Arias Mont. in loc.
to be found in his own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. And
Job that holy man propounds the Question, Job. 9. 2, 3. Quasi dicat; frustra se
defendere apud ipsum and prae ipso conetur. Nulla comparatio Dei and hominis
justitiae. Mercer. in loc.
How should man be just with God? if he will contend with him, he cannot answer
him one of a thousand. Should the holiest of men, such as were Enoch, Noah,
Moses, Abraham, David, etc. Stand upon their own righteousness and join issue
with Gods Justice, not one of them could be able to stand in judgment.
Wherefore we lay this down for a foundation and a certain truth -- That all
reconciled Persons account Christ their only Peacemaker, their rock and
refuge, their Counselor, savior, their only Intercessour, and 1 Cor. 1. 30
him who of God is made unto them, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption. This then is the first note of trial, whether we come off clear,
whether we throw away our own reason, merits, righteousness, and venture all
upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ. He is a Isa. 27. 16.
stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation. Wherefore we
must (as the Persians when the King was offended brought his Son in their
Arms) offer Christ unto the Father in the Arms of faith, and venture all upon
his meritorious satisfaction. There Is no danger of miscarrying, if with a
lively faith we cast our selves upon Jesus Christ.

Secondly, This foundation being necessarily laid, a superstructure Charact. 2.
The heart is new framed and fashioned.
may the better be raised on it; Therefore another note of trial I shall
assign to be, the new framing, new moulding, and fashioning of the heart. For
the heart of an unreconciled Person is rebellious against God; As it is recorded
of Julian the Apostate that he shot up arrows into the sky with a malicious
intention to hit Christ: So every natural man that lives without God in the
World, would dethrone God (if he could) he hates God, his ways, his people.
But as soon as the conquering power of the Spirit of God subdues the heart,
there is a marvelous change and alteration for the better. There Is a Rev. 3. 18.
(...) to anoint the eyes: So that the understanding is enlightened, and those
that are Gods Children are Ephesians. 4. 23.
renewed in the Spirit of their mind. They are all men and women of a precious
anointing, which is that 1 John 2. 20.
unction from the holy one whereby they know all things. And as for the wills
of these regenerate, reconciled Persons, they are now yielding, obedient, and
pliable to the will of God. For instance, Saul before his conversion raved in a
distempered zeal against the Disciples, and breathed threatenings and slaughter
against the Church, and through his distempered zeal thought he did God good
service by persecuting of the Church of God, but as soon as ever Christ met him
in the way, and threw down Horse and Man, and told him that I am Jesus whom
thou Act. 9. 5.
persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks; then his will
was changed, and he wholly devolved himself upon Christ's will, as appears by
his humble answer Verse. 6. Lord what wilt Verse. 6.
thou have me to do? Further, all the affections are changed. These a reverend,
Mr. Dyke in his book called the Deceit fullness of man's heart.
Divine in an excellent and Singularly useful book calls the feet of the soul.
By these the soul is carried along. And indeed the affections are the wings of
the soul, to help it to soar aloft in Divine raptures and contemplations. Now
in a reconciled Person all his a fections are alterd for the better. His love
was formerly upon sin, now it is placed upon God, and all the ways of
holiness: So that now what God hates a true believer hates, and what God
love's a true believer loves. It Is that (...) the Psalmist gives Psalm. 97. 10.
Psalm. 97. 10. Ye that fear the Lord hate evil. And the best of Orators tells
us; That to will and nill Idem velle ac idem nolle est summa pars amicitiae.
Cic.
the same is the chiefest part of Friendship. And as for the joy, hope, desire,
they are all changed in a regenerate man. Whereas formerly they were placed
upon worldly vanities, now they are placed upon God, and the great things of
eternity. In a word, where a Person is reconciled unto Christ, there is a new
heart, and clean water is sprinkled upon it, the proud heart is become humble,
the hard become soft, so that a new vergency and bent of the heart evidenceth
it self throughout the continual practice of the life and conversation.

And this put's me in mind of the third Character (which I Charact. 3. drawn
from the fruits of a Reconciled estate.
intended) drawn from the fruits of a reconciled estate, which put forth
themselves in the whole carriage of the life. Now we must know that the self
same fruits which belong to a justified estate (because none are justified but
those who are reconciled) appertain to a reconciled estate. The Apostle set's
them forth Romans 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. His ostendit competere quaecunque plenissime
justificatis and in gratiam Dei reposit is tribui possunt, eoque probat hac
fide Evangelii Domini nostri Jesu Christi justificationem haberi
consummatissime. Bucer. in loc.
Romans 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ: By whom also we have access by faith into this
grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. And not only
so, but we glory in Tribulation also, knowing that Tribulation works
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope. Likewise the fruits of
the Spirit belong to every reconciled Person, and by them as a touchstone he
ought to examine himself. The Apostle names one Catalogue, Ephesians. 5. 9.
Ephesians. 5. 9. Viz. Goodness, and righteousness, and truth: and he mentions
another much larger, Gal. 5. 22, 23.
Gal. 5. 22, 23. Viz. Love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, temperance. Here then is the great trial, whether the life
and conversation be ordered aright? Whether the conversation be in all holy
conversation and Godliness? Whether the new Creature exert it self through a
man's whole life? Whether a holy profession be adorned by a holy conversation?
Now if in truth and sincerity affirmative answers can be given to these
Questions, then without doubt such Persons have Interest in this Reconciliation
by Jesus Christ.

But I shall add no more to these Characters; I conceive that whosoever can
produce these tokens, has a sure and undoubted title. What yet remains is (as
I promised you) to excite you all by some moving considerations, to make it
your grand work and business to get assurance of your reconciled estate, which
is the business of the greatest concernment. Motive 1. Consider the riches of
mercy and bowels opened toward fallen man, and denied to the fallen Angels.


As for Motives, 1. Let us consider of the riches of mercy, and bowels opened
toward fallen man, which were utterly denied toward fallen Angels. And this
consideration heightneth the great contrivance of this Reconciliation, in that
it was from all eternity: Add hereunto that God himself was first in the
tender and contrivance of this great work. Man neither could nor would make up
so great a breach. It transcended the Sphere of his capacity. Had Adam and all
his posterity joined all their heads together, they could not understand what
way and means to undertake to make up so great a breach. But God the Father out
of the riches of his mercy found out a way, even a new and living way by Jesus
Christ. The Angels were past by, they fell once and that irrecoverably, without
any hope of reinvesting themselves in their first estate. For Christ shed not
one drop of blood for them, He Heb. 2. 16. (...) significat arripere,
apprehendere manum injicere. B. Andrews. Cura, sollicitudo, labor, festinatio
pro salute generis humani ea una voce significatur, Hyperius in loc.
took not upon him (says the Apostle) the nature of Angels, but the seed of
Abraham. Yet notwithstanding the riches of Gods mercy are inhanced toward
fallen man, because the promised seed, even that Genesis 3. 15.
the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head, was proclaimed in
Paradise, and appropriated unto mankind.

Secondly consider the great and inestimable price paid to purchase Mot. 2.
Consider the great price paid to purchase peace and reconciliation.
peace and Reconciliation. And what was that price, but the price of blood? And
this is called in Scripture, Act. 20. 28.
the Blood of God: Yet in such expressions we are to understand a communication
of Idioms. This blood was the blood of sprinkling, which Heb. 12. 24.
Speaks better things then the blood of Abel. This was the blood of the
immaculate Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World. Because Rev. 13. 8.
without shedding of blood there was no remission, Christ therefore took upon
him humane nature. There are two great significant words which evidently
declare his humane nature: one word is (...) Joh. 1. 14.
Joh. 1. 14. He pitched his Tent or Tabernacle amongst us: The other word is
(...) Phil. 2. 7. Verse. 8.
Phil. 2. 7. He emptyed himself, or made himself of no reputation. And Verse.
8. we read of the highest degree of Christ's humiliation, in that he became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. Thus Christ has made a
complete satisfaction, by doing and suffering all that the Father required. And
now Christ Romans 8. 34.
sits at the right hand of God who also makes intercession for us. And we
have a ground of strong consolation further laid down Heb. 7. 25.
Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. There Is a
word of great importance (...), which (as a (...) omnimodam significat
perfectionem. Camero in Myroth.
learned Author observes) signifies all manner of perfection. This shows
such an absolute perfection, that nothing else can be desired, nothing can be
added. And wherein does this all-sufficient Savior show himself to be so? We
have an answer, and strong proof drawn from Christ's intercession in the
following words where it is said, That he ever lives to make (...) non dicit
ut offerat, hoc enim semel fecit, sed superest altera sacerdotii pars nempe
Interpellatio. Beza.
Intercession for them. This Scripture is a fort Royal and impregnable
notwithstanding all the batteries that Socinian Heretics make against it.

But I proceed to a third motive drawn from the willingness Motive 3. Drawn
from the willingness of God to be recon^iled.
of God to be reconciled. Wherefore he sends his messengers upon this errand to
persuade people to embrace Articles of peace. The Lord entrusts his Ministers
with the word of reconciliation, which is the Doctrine of the everlasting
Gospel. And they spend their Spirits and lay forth their strength to the
uttermost, woing, entreating and exhorting people, to submit unto Christ's
Scepter, and through him to make their peace with God the Father. Now the
Spirit of God strives in the Ministry of the word. It Is a most terrible
judgment when Gods Spirit refuses to strive any longer with a people. And this
is threatened, Genesis 6. 3.
Genesis 6. 3. And the Lord said my Spirit shall not always strive with man (i.
e.) The Lord will not always dispute, chide, and argue the case with a people,
the Lord will not always strive by the Ministry of his servants, such as were
Enoch, Noah and Methusalah who lived the longest, and died but the year before
the flood. God will not always suffer his Spirit to be grieved, and the
motions thereof slighted: Neither will God always suffer the faithful labors
of his Ministers to be neglected. * Some Pagninus, Grotius.
render the word Lo-jiddon non vaginabit. He will not always put his sword
into the scabberd, but he will draw it out and fight against his Enemies. And
oh that you would all consider in your most serious composed thoughts, that now
you hear as it were a voice behind you saying; This is the way walk in it: This
voice is the Spirit speaking in the written word (for the Spirit speaks
according to the word.) Now by all the woings and whispers of the Spirit, and
by the unwearied labors of the faithful Ambassadors of the Gospel you are
entreated to consult the eternal benefit of your immortal souls. Now the
voice of the Turtle is heard in the Land: Manna falls round about your Tents:
The spiritual Manna of the word is plentifully rained down amongst you. You
never had more frequent, never more profitable preaching. Now the Spirit moves
by the Ministry of the word. And the Lord expostulates the case, Ezekiel. 18. 31.
Why will you die O house of Israel? The Lord delights not in your blood so he
professes. Verse. 32.
For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies says the Lord God:
Wherefore turn your selves and live ye. Now the Lord Jesus knocks at the doors
of your hearts, ^^ and waits for admission. He waits to be gracious, and even
waits till his locks be wet with dew. He invites himself to be thy guest, and
he invites thee to come unto him, and he will entertain thee with a banquet of
love. Now herein appears the great and wonderful condescension of our gracious
God, who to show his willingness to be reconciled, is himself first in the
motion. We sought not to him (though we were the offenders) but he sought unto
us. Hence appears how abundant in loving kindness and mercy the Lord is toward
us even always before hand with us in mercy, notwithstanding we unthankful
wretches are behind hand with him in duty. The Lord convinces all the World,
and stops the mouths of Cavillers, that he is not so austere (as some men
mis-understand him) but he seeks to us first, and is 2. Pet. 3. 9.
not willing that any should perish but that all should come to repentance. A
greater gift the Father could not give then his beloved Son, yet he sent him
out of his bosom, the Son in whom he was well pleased: not to reign according
to the state of earthly Kings, but to be as Mat. 3. 17.
one that serves, and not to save his life, but to lay down his life as a
ransom for all those that were given him of the Father. And to this very end
and purpose Christ came, Mat. 18. 11.
That he might seek and save that which was lost. We were all lost in the old
Adam, and there was no way of recovering our selves, but by seeking after our
Interest in the new Adam; yet we would not seek him, we ran away from him, and
when he invited, we made excuses and would not come: when he knocked we bolted
the door, when he called we would not answer. But Jesus Christ in the day of
his power makes us a Ps. 110. 3.
willing people, or a people of willingnesses (as the original expresses it.)
Now Christ's great errand was to seek us when we were altogether lost, and when
he found us he beseeched us by the Ministry of his Ambassadors that we would
be reconciled unto God.

Fourthly, consider Reconciliation once made for us by Jesus Motive. 4.
Reconciliation once made is made for ever.
Christ with the Father is abiding and permanent. There will be no breakings
out again. The Reconciliation once made is made for ever, and the Foundation of
it is the Faithfulness of God. He is a God Psalm. 89. 28. 34.
keeping covenant, 2 Chr. 13. 5
faithful that has promised, his Heb. 10. 23.
promises are yea and Amen. The covenant of God is 2 Samuel 23. 5
an everlasting covenant, it is a covenant of salt, and the love of God is Jer.
31. 3.
everlasting: And Christ's love is Joh. 13. 1.
to the end: Christ's prayers and intercession are everlasting (as in the place
forecited, Heb. 7. 25.) So that hence we may conclude that once justified and
for ever justified, once reconciled and for ever reconciled. Let us on our part
labor to get assurance of our reconciled estate, and get more evidences and
manifestations thereof unto our own souls, and so we shall reap the greater
comfort. As for Gods part there is no possibility of failing, he never was, nor
will be worse then his word. He is truth it self, and he glories in that
attribute of truth, that he is faithful in all his promises. Balaam though a
mercenary Prophet gives a true attestation Numb. 23. 19.
Numb. 23. 19. God is not a man that he should lie, neither the Son of man that
he should repent: has he said and shall he not do it? or has he spoken and
shall he not make it good? Such then as hold the Saints Apostasy (as Petrus
Bertius does, the Frontispice of whose book viz. Apostasia sanctorum, seems to
me to be contradictio in adjecto) and others both of the Popish and Arminian
faction now adays, do highly derogate from the faithfulness of God, and are
the greatest adversaries unto the consolation of Gods Children, by making them
sad whom God would not have made sad. Among many there is one special
Scripture, which overthrowes all the Arminian Cavils in this particular. Here
let us fix and (through Gods grace) resolve never to start a jot from that
truth delivered by our Savior, Joh. 10. 28.
Joh. 10. 28. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. Here Is our strong hold, that
our perseverance is not in our own but in Christ's keeping: And the perpetuity
of a Saints condition depends not upon his free will (which is an Egyptian
reed and is deceitful) but upon free grace, upon Christ's Intercession: And
there is Heb. 13. 5. (...).
help laid upon him that is mighty, and Christ is the rock of Ages, here is
security enough, here we may safely venture all. He has said it (and there is
enough in that promise) He will never leave thee nor forsake thee.

Fifthly and lastly (and with this particular I shall conclude) Motive 5. This
may be the ^last time of tendering terms of Reconciliation.
consider seriously, for ought either you, or I, or any other can discern, this
may be the last offer and tender of Gospel-reconciliation that ever may be
vouchsafed unto you. If you stop your ears, and refuse to give audience unto
Christ's Ambassadors this day, for ought any of us knows, their commission may
be expired, and quite out of date to morrow. In a short time the most holy,
industrious, and faithful Ambassador may have his Quietus est. Christ may say
to him Mat. 25. 21.
Well done good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord. As then
you desire that the Ministers of Jesus Christ may give up their account Heb.
13. 17.
with joy and not with grief, let it be your wisdom and care in this very day
(which may be a critical day) to entertain those things which concern your
everlasting peace. Now you enjoy Sabbaths, the desire of days, the Ordinances
the Is. 25. 6.
feast of fat things: yet your eyes behold your teachers, the door of the
Sanctuary is yet opened, and a Ezra. 9. 8.
nail is yet left in the holy place; you have bread in the morning, and in the
evening, and more plenty of spiritual food on the Sabbath day and week days,
then heretofore. Much is given unto you, and much required from you. Where God
has sown so liberally, he expects as plentiful an harvest. Now you hear the
joyful sound, even the word of reconciliation and substance of our Embassy is
to entreat you to consider the value and dignity of your Heavenly born being
souls, and to seek after reconciliation, otherwise you are undone to all
eternity. Now Christ holds out a white flag for a parley of peace, now the King
of Heaven holds out the golden Scepter, O come and touch the top thereof and
live: The Port-cullis is not yet let down: The Judge has not yet veiled his
face: The door of hope is not yet shut up; the holy Ghost calls: Isa. 55. 6.
Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, call upon him whilst he is near, 2
Cor. 6 2. Nemo tam divos habuit faventes crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri.
Senec.
Now is the day of salvation. None of us can promise to our selves a morrow, no
not the least moment of time: and if we neglect this golden opportunity, and
season of grace offered, we may never live to have another tendered unto us. All
the World cannot call back the least minute of time, when once it is past, it is
like a swift stream, or an arrow out of a b^w not to be recalled. Wherefore as
you consult the eternal good of your immortal souls be entreated to improve all
the prizes and Talents that God puts into your hands to get Wisdom withal.
When the Lord bids you seek his face, O that your hearts with all readiness
might return this answer, Psalm. 27. 8.
Thy face Lord will I seek. God has put this word into my mouth, and here fixed
my thoughts, (after I had several other subjects in my eye) and has sent me
on this very errand to treat on this great Theme, of reconciliation unto God.
And now what message shall I return unto him that has sent me? What account
shall I give at the last day of the entertainment of this word? What shall I
say more? You have life and death set before you this day viz. The happiness
of a reconciled estate, and the misery of an unreconciled estate; O that the
Lord would engage you all to make the better choice by heark^ing unto this word
of reconciliation, and unfainedly embracing the same, and so your souls shall
live.

2. Tim. 2. 7.
Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

THE MINISTRY OF ANGELS.
Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all Ministering spirits, sent forth to Minister for
them, who shall be heirs of salvation?
TO draw down the context to the text, we are to Sermon 2. Preached at S.
Marye's Oxon. Oct. 3. 1658. Verse. 3. (...). Solis radii sunt ejusdem naturae
cum sole, ab eodem propagatione distinguuntur, avelluntur nunquam: hac
Metaphora divinam filii naturam convenientissime expressit Apostolus. Et
character ^icitur expressa imago Archetypi. Pareus in loc.
take special notice of the Excellency and dignity of Christ represented unto
us in this chapter especially Verse. 3. Who being the brightness of his glory,
and the express image of his person and upholding all things by the Word of his
Power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of
the Majesty on High. And by way of Comparison, the Apostle further inhanceth
the honor and pre-eminence of Christ. For after he had compared Christ with
the Angels, he sets the Crown on Christ's head, his name is more excellent than
theirs. Verse. 4. 5. Being made so much better then the Angels, as he has by
inheritance obtained a more excellent name then they. For unto which of the
Angels said he at any time, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee?
And again, I Will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son. Christ is a
Son, the Angels his servants, they may not be worshipped themselves, but they
must worship Christ, Verse. 6. 7. Let all the Angels of God worship him. Of his
Angels he says, who makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flame of
fire. And further honor is ascribed to the Son, which is not to Angels, Verse.
8. 9. Unto the Son he says, Thy throne O God, is for ever and ever, a scepter
of righteousness, is the scepter of thy Kingdom. Thou have loved
righteousness and hated iniquity: therefore God even thy God has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And further Christ is a
Lord and Creator, the Angels servants and creatures: Christ is advanced to
the Throne, He is the Sovereign Lord of all, Verse. 13. The Angels ministering
spirits subservient to Christ, and at his command: and when commissionated by
him, helpful and serviceable unto all the children of God. It is demanded by
way of interrogation in the Text, Are they not all Ministering spirits etc.
Which scripture sets forth clearly the Protection of Angels, their Ministry
and serviceablenesse unto the children of God, A point seldom taught, yet very
useful, comfortable, and of singular concernment unto all the children of God!
And being that its the duty of the Minister to declare unto people the whole
council of God, that which has often been in my intention, I shall now
endeavor to handle with all the perspicuity that I can.

The words contain a question, Are they not all Ministering spirits? Divis.
which being resolved, the answer is obvious that the Angels are all
Ministering spirits: More particularly we are to observe a Description of
Angels.

1. From their nature, Spirits. 1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...). 4. (...) implied
(...) expressed. 5. (...).


2. From their office, Ministering.

3. Their commission, Sent.

4. Whose Ministers they are, 1. Primarily, Christ's. And secondarily, Christ's
children.

5. The universality, All: All the Angels. Here Is the universality of the
object, and it is (...), and universality of the subject all the Angels: All
that are heirs, none left out, none exempted from the benefit of the service
of all the Angels of God. All that are heirs of Salvation, all Christ's
children have interest in their protection.

Many scruples may be made, and many things require explication, what requires
opening shall be endeavored in the enlargement of one entire doctrine whereon
I purpose to fix. Thus I propound it to you.

That it pleases God to make use of the Ministry of Angels for the good of
his Children. This is the point I aim at from this Scripture. For the
Enlargement whereof, I shall propound several questions and give in Answers to
them, that shall constitute the doctrinall part of the Text, which done, I
shall draw inferences for our instruction and practice, and those shall
constitute the use and application.

For the resuming the first thing propounded.

The first question is, what Angels are? I have read many curious Q. 1. What
Angels are.
observations of Fathers and Schoolmen concerning Angels, which I conceive
not fit to communicate, being altogether unwilling to stu^e a Sermon with
Curiosities and conjectures which tend not to edification. For if Moses knowing
the original of the world had it not revealed what to write of Angels, if Col.
2. 18. Demissio illa animi vitiosa parit cultum superstitiosum Monentur hoc in
loco Colossenfes ne decepti ab Impostoribus tribuant Angelis cultum divinum.
Daven. (...) a Nuntiando.
Stephen, who had the heavens opened saw not those orders of Angels what they
were; if Paul, who was taken up into the third heaven, saw yet so little of
Angels that whosoever will teach so curiously of them, he says, they be puffed
up of a fleshly mind to speak of things which they never saw: Let no man
beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels,
intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind. If John in all his revelations had no such knowledge revealed of
Angels, then it is a duty to be modest and sober in inquisitions, to be wise
unto Sobriety, and to avoid curious speculations of Schoolmen, and confine our
selves unto the Word of God; Now what they are, we shall show from their names
and Nature.

First, from their names, they are Messengers, who carry a Their Name.
message: they are Gods messengers. *This name Angel is attributed unto
Christ. Genesis 48. 16
The Angel that delivered me from all evil bless the lads, etc. Ex. 23. 20.
Behold I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in the way and to bring thee
into the place which I have prepared. Nomen non naturae sed officii Aug.
Isa. 63. 9.
In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved
them, in his love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them and
carried them all the days of old. Christ is called (...) Nuntius Dei Steph.
the Angel of his presence, and the Angel of the Covenant. Behold I will send
my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me, and the Lord whom ye
seek shall suddenly come unto his Temple, even the Mal. 3. 1.
messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in.

This name of Angel is ascribed there unto John Baptist, who came in the
spirit of Elias, and unto Christ also, and likewise to our Ministers, pastors
and teachrs, Rev. 2. 12. Rev. 3. 1. Angels are took for Spirits, Messengers of
God employed for the fulfilling of his will and commands in Heaven or in earth!
And so in my Text.

For their Nature. Damascene gives this definition of Angels. 2. The Nature
of Angels. (...). etc. Damasc.
A most pure and perfect, intellectual, immateriall and immortal creature.,
created and appointed to be Gods attendants and messengers between God and man.
Not that God has any necessity of help or cooperation of his creatures; but
that he is pleased in his will and pleasure to employ those Instruments. So I
will, and so I command; God only can say, and we may not question, what he does.

But to set down their Nature more fully, I Will take notice of these properties.

1. Angels are Spirits. He makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a
flaming fire. In that they are called spirits, that declares 1. Angels are
spirits. Psalm. 104. 4. Spiritus vox naturam declarat, flammae vero ^oru^
potentiam. Gomarus. Facit Deus instar ventorum velocissimos Ministros,
eosdemque facit flammam ignis, hoc est, celerrime, instar fulg^ris exequendi
jussa paratissimos. Pareus in loc.
their Nature, and flaming fire, that shows their power. Winds and fire are
swift in their motion, and so are Angels. God makes his Ministers swift like
wind, and like a flame of fire, that is most ready, like lightning, speedily to
execute his commands. They are not compounded of matter and form, for Luke 8.
30. Many Devils entered into one man, and the Devils themselves were once
Angels of light.

And though we read that they have appeared in bodily shapes: yet we must know
that those bodies were assumtitious. They might assume a body for a time, for
the discharge of that particular service they went about.

And whereas we read of their wings, faces, hands, and tongues; all those are
to be understood Metaphorically. The disciples were terrified, and afrighted,
and supposed that they had seen a spirit: And he said unto them, why are ye
troubled! and why do thoughts Luke 24. 37, 38, 39.
arise in your hearts! Behold my hands and my feet that it is I my self, handle
me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have.

Angels are incorporeall, and though we read of their eating and drinking, as
the Angels with Abraham, Lot and others, we must know that when they assumed
bodies, God might give them those faculties that belonged to bodies, or they
might consume the food, and work miraculously above man's apprehension.

2. Angels are invisible. By him were all things created that are 2. Angels
are invisible. Col. 1. 16.
in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
Thrones, Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by
him and for him. And they acted invisibly, when they took upon them shapes, and
assumed bodies, for a time indeed they appeared unto men, but as spirits they
are as Invisible as a man's soul. Who has seen a spirit at any time, or the
soul of man, or an Angel?

3. They are Immortal. Good Angels are so, neither can the^ 3. They are
immortal. Luke 20. 36.
dye any more, for they are equal unto the Angels, and are the children of
God, being the children of the resurrection. Bad Angels are so, Then shall we
say to them on his left hand, depart from me Matt. 25 41.
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil an his Angels.

4. They neither marry nor are given in marriage. Hence Chrysostom 4. They
neither marry, nor are given in marriage. Luke 10. 33.
confutes their opinion, who from Genesis 6. 2. by the Sons of God, understand the
Angels, this must needs be a very corrupt exposition, because they neither
marry nor are given in marriage.

5. They are most numerous, a great multitude? Genesis 32. 1, 2.
Jacob went 5. They are most numerous
on his way, and the Angels of God met him, and when Jacob saw them, he said,
this is Gods host, and he called the name of that place M^hanaim. Deuteronomy. 33. 2.
The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them, and shined forth
from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of Saints, from his right hand
went a fiery law for them. Ps. 68. 17.
The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, the Lord
is among them as in Sinai, the holy place. Dan. 7. 10.
Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him; the judgment was set, and the books were opened. Rev. 5. 11.
I beheld and heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and the
beasts, and the elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten
thousands, and thousand of thousands.

They have great celerity and agility. They moove with all expedition. And
though they are not repletive in loco, we cannot ascribe an Ubiquity of
presence to them, because they are created substances, yet Philosophers say,
they moove in a point and in an instant. And this assertion is consonant to
Scripture, otherwise I should not meddle with it: For we read in Daniel,
Whilst I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriell, whom I had seen in a
vision at the beginning being caused to fly swiftly touched me about the
evening oblation. Hence we read of Cherubims in Scripture, that they have
wings. Hereupon Picturedrawers Exodus 37. 9.
paint Angels with their wings displaid, which discovers both their ignorance
and superstition. What are Images but teachers of lies? And (as the book of
Homilies observes) no more A Book of Homilies printed in Q Elizabeth's time.
adorn a Church then Brothel-houses a Commonwealth. They have wings ascribed
unto them, for our apprehension and according unto our capacity, not that they
have really wings, but thereby to set forth their swiftness, celerity and
agility, to do what God commands them.

7. They are of great strength and power. We read of the 7. Angels are of
great strength. Psalm. 103. 20. 2 These. 1. 7. (...).
strength of good Angels. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels, that excel in
strength, that do his commandments, harkening unto the voice of his Word. They
are called the powers of Christ. To you who are troubled, rest with us, when
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels. And bad
Angels are of great strength: The Devil is the strong man armed, compared to
a roaring Lion, a Dragon, a Leviathan. And bad Angels are called powers, and
principalities, spiritual wickedn^sses in high places! Ephesians. 2. 2.
Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this world,
according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now Ephesians. 6.
12.
works in the children of disobedience. We wrestle not against flesh and
blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.

The second question is, How many sorts of Angels there are? Q. 2. How many
sorts of Angels are there. V. Salkeld of the Nature of Angels.
I answer there are good and bad, Angels of light, and Angels of darkness.
For good Angels, Schoolmen and others make nine distinct orders of them, and
they rank them into 3 Hierarchies.

1. Cherubims, Seraphims, and Thrones.

2. Dominations, Virtues, and Powers.

In the 3. rank, Principalities, Archangells, and Angels.

I dare not follow the School-mens steps too close, but shall endeavor above
all to keep close to Scripture. That there are different degrees of Angels,
some higher in dignity then others seems probable, but that there are those
nine distinct orders, and that some are sent and not others, the Angels of the
lower rank and not others are employed, is an ungrounded conjecture, besides
the rule of Scripture, and we may not be wise about what is written. We read of
Seraphims and Cherubims to cover the mercy seat: Isa. 6. 6. Ephesians. 1. 21.
We read of Principalities, Rules, Powers, Dominions, Thrones. The Apostle
ventured not to reckon them all up: How dare the Schoolmen so peremptorily
determine? Augustine gives his judgment Esse seeds dominationes, etc. August.
thus: I do (says he) firmly believe that there be seats, powers, and
principalities: yet I hold with undoubted faith, that they differ in sort, but
how they differ, I know not: neither do I think that by such ignorance I
incur any danger. Questionless there is an Angel (...) above them all in
degree and dignity, to whom all the Angels must pay homage and worship, and
that is the Archangell, (for we read not of Archangells in Scripture) Michaell
the Archangell, when contending with the Devil, he Jude 9.
disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing
accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. The 1 These. 4. 16.
Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of an
Archangell, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first.
This is meant of the Lord Jesus Christ: All thrones, powers, dominions must
yield subjection unto him: He has a name above every name. He is Sovereign
Lord of all.

Now for the bad Angels. We read of the Devil and his Angels, and Beelzebub,
the Prince of the Devils, which implies Order and degree according to a common
acceptance: though some rather understand it spoken of their power, and this
is more probable. To be over-curiously inquisitive in these things I dare not.
The well is deep and we have not wherewith to draw.

I descend to a third question which is more profitable to know. Q 3. What are
the offices of Angels? 1. To behold the face of God. Math. 18. 10. Isa. 6. 2.
And that is, what are the offices of the Angels? I mean the good Angels, for
my text only speaks of them. They are these.

1. To behold the face of God. Take heed that ye despise not one of these
little ones: for I say unto you that their Angels do always behold the face
of my Father which is in Heaven. Though sometimes we read, they cover their
faces. Above it stood the Seraphims, each one had six wings, with twain he
covered his face, with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly.
They are not able to behold the infinite luster, and splendor of his Majesty;
but in Scripture account, to be as the Angels in heaven sets forth a state of
blessedness. In the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, but are as the Angels of God heaven: Mat. 22. 30.
And blessedness consists in the enjoyment of the blessed vision.

2. To execute the commands of God. Bless the Lord, ye his 2. To execute Gods
will. Psalm. 103. 20. Mat. 6. 10.
Angels, that excel in strength, that do his commandments, hearkening unto
the voice of his Word. Bless the Lord all ye his hosts, the Ministers of his
that do his pleasure. And we pray thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

3. To celebrate the praises of God. Isa. 6. 3.
One cried unto another, and 3. To praise God.
said, holy, holy, holy, Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory.
Luke 2. 13, 14.
And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly host,
praising God, and saying glory to God in the highest; and on earth peace, good
will toward men. Rev. 4. 8, 9.
The four beasts had each of them six wings about him, and they were full o^
eyes within, and they rest not day or night, saying, holy, holy, holy Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is and is to come.

4. To make it their work to preserve Gods glory. And I fell 4. To make it
their work to preserve Gods glory. Rev. 19. 10.
at his feet to worship him, and he said unto me, see thou do it not, I am thy
fellow servants, and of thy brethren, that have the testimony of Jesus, worship
God, for the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy. The Angel would not
bear with Gods dishonor, and would not permit John to worship him.

5. To be servants unto Christ. When he brings in the first begotten 5. to be
Christ's servants. Heo. 1. 6. Psalm. 97. 7. Luke 1. 19.
into the world, (he says) let all the Angels of God worship him. Confounded
be all they that serve graven Images, that boast themselves of Idols; worship
him all ye Gods. They brought the message of Christ's incarnation. I am Gabriell
that stand in the presence of God, and am sent to speak unto thee, and to tell
thee these glad tidings. They ministered unto him. Mat. 4. 11.
Then the Devil leaved him, and behold Angels came and ministered unto him.
Luke 22. 43.
And there appeared an Angel from Heaven unto him and strengthening him.
Christ is the head of them, and they are his servants: ye are complete in him,
who is Col. 2. 10.
the head of all Principality and Power.

6. Angels are serviceable unto men, not one, but all* not any (...). (i. e.)
Ministratores quos vulgo solemus officiarias vocare. Beza. Numb. 20. 16 2 King.
6. 16.
a^e exempted, They are all ministering spirits in the text. And these singular
services which they have done, and will do for Gods children, are upon record.
They deliver them from dangers, When we cried unto the Lord, he heard our
voice, and sent an Angel, and has brought us forth out of Egypt, and behold
we are in Kadesh, a City in the uttermost of thy border. Fear not (says the
Prophet) for they they that be with us are more then they that are with them,
Who were they but Gods Angels for the Prophets safeguard.

1. The Angel of the Lord incampeth about them that fear him, 1. The Angel
of the Lord incampeth about the righteous.
and delivers them. Dan. 3. 28.
Then Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said, blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach
and Abednego, who has sent his Angel and delivered his servants that trusted
in him, aad has changed the Kings word and yielded their bodies, that they
might not serve or worship any God, except their own God. And Daniel makes this
acknowledgment, My God has sent his Angel, and has shut Psalm. 91. 11.
the Lions mouth, that they have not hurt me, for as much, as before him
innocence was found in me, and also before thee; O King, I have done no hurt.
Dan. 6. 22.
He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all his ways.
Angels are Protectors and Guardians commissionated by God Dan. 10. 13.
to protect Gods children. The Prince of the Kingdom of Persia, withstood me
one and twenty days, but lo Michael, one of the chief Princes came to help
me, and I remained there with the King of Persia, Michael is generally
interpreted to be Christ the only Archangell.

2. The Angels are of mavelous wisdom to direct, counsel, 2. Angels are of
marveilous wisdom. Genesis 24. 7.
and advise the children of God. The Lord God of heaven which took me from my
fathers house, and from the Land of my kindred, and which spoke unto me, and
swear unto me, saying, unto thy seed will I give this Land, he shall send his
Angel before thee, and thou shall take a wife to my son from thence. The Lord
before whom I walk will send his Angel with thee, and prosper thy way, and
thou shall take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my Fathers house.

3. They comfort Gods children. Genesis 32. 2. This is Gods host said 3. Angels
comfort Gods children. 1 King. 19. 5, 6, 7.
Jacob, as Elias lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold then an Angel
touched him, and said unto him, arise and eat. And he looked, and behold there
was a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of water at his head, and he did
eat and drink, and laid him down again. And the Angel of the Lord came a
second time and touched him, and said arise and eat, because the journey is to
great for thee.

4. They punish their enemies. Genesis 19. 11
They smote the men that were at 4. Angels punish the saints enemies.
the door with blindness, both small and great, so that they wearied
themselves to find the door. 2 King 19. 35.
And it came to pass that night, that the Angel of the Lord went out, and
smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand, and
when they arose early in the morning, behold they were all dead corpses. Herod
was made a signal spectacle of pride, as is on record. Acts 12. 23
And immediately an Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the
glory and he was Rev. 12. 7.
eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost. They stand for Christ and his Church,
against Satan and his Angels. And there was war in heaven, Michael and his
Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels.

5. They resist the wicked, and their attemps. Balaam found 5. Angels resist
wicked men. Number. 22. 22. 6. Angels carry the Saints souls into heaven. Luke 16.
22. 7. They gather the elect unto Christ. Mat. 24. 31. Mar. 13. 27. Q. 4.
Whether every Saint has a peculiar Angel his keeper? Mat. 18. 10.
it so, And Gods anger was kindled because he went, and an Angel of the Lord
stood in the way for an Adversary against him.

6. They carry the souls of Gods children into heaven. And it came to pass
that the beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom: the
rich man also died and was buried etc.

7. They gather the elect unto Christ at the last day. He shall send his
Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his
elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.

The fourth question is, whether every Saint has a peculiar Angel to be his
keeper and Protector?

That every Saint has a peculiar Angel to keep him is the opinion of Fathers,
Schoolmen, and many Protestants: but although I am far from a hasty censure,
yet I cannot assent unto their opinion, because here in the text, it is laid
down universally, All. There are two Scriptures specially urged in behalf of
this opinion: The one is Mat. 18. 10. Take heed that ye despise not one of
these little ones, for I say unto you that their Angels do always behold the
face of my Father which is in heaven. The other is Act. 12. 15. They said unto
her; thou art mad, but she constantly Act. 12. 15.
affirmed that it was even so: then said they, it is his Angel.

To the former place I answer; the meaning is, that men ought and Individuum.
So that one Angel may protect many: as, The Angel of Psalm. 34. 7.
the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him and delivers them. One
Angel may protect many, and many Angels may protect one. The meaning of this
Scripture Calvin makes to be this That they are not to be contemned, whose
Angels are near and ready Non impune contemni eos, quorum Angeli propinqui
sunt and familiares, ut vindictam exigant. Calv.


to take revenge. The Angels will take revenge upon those who afflict the
children of God.

But there is more matter of doubt from Act. 12. 15. Then said they it is his
Angel.

For answ^r, 1. The word (...) is rendered a Messenger It Is his Messenger.

2. It Is spoken according to a vulgar opinion. There is an ancient opinion that
there is a good and a bad Genius. Empedocles the Philosopher taught that every
man had two Angels, one good another bad, And Grecians used to say that every
man has his own Angel to be the (...) of all his life. And Plutarch records,
when Brutus was ^laine, the night before, one appeared unto him and said, I am
thine evil Angel, oh Brutus. But among the Jews themselves there were
frequent apparitions of dead persons and phantasmes (which questionless were
diabolical) and they were thought by the vulgar sort to be the spirits, of the
persons, whom they represented, and they had a conjecture that there was some
good, or some bad, according to the diversity of the persons, and their
forepassed life. Now it should seem that these people amazed as it were, at an
unlooked for chance, followed the popular opinion and would thereby infer
that Peter's death was inevitable, seeing his spirit did already begin to
appear.

3. This may be understood, It is his Angel, that is some Angel that God had
sent for his deliverance, which was fully effected, For the Angel of the Lord
took away Peter's chain, and delivered Acts. 12. 17.
him out of Prison.

The fifth question is, what is the knowledge of Angels? Q. 5. What is the
knowledge of Angels.


1. We must premise that they are not omniscient. Of that day and hour knows
no man, no not the Angels of Heaven, but my Father Mat. 24. 14.
only. They increase in knowledge, says the Apostle Paul, Mat. 13. 32. Ephesians. 3.
10.
To the intent that now unto the Principalities, and Powers, in heavenly places
might be known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God. And likewise the
Apostle Peter concurres, Unto whom it was 1 Pet. 1. 12.
revealed that not unto themselves: but unto us they did Minister the things
which are now reported unto you, by them that have preached the Gospel unto
you, with the holy Ghost sent down from heaven, which things the Angels desire
to look into.

2. The knowledge Angels have is by intuition, and not discourse as men have.

3. Their wisdom and knowledge is excellent. So said the woman of Tekoah, My
Lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an Angel 2 Samuel 14. 20.
of God, to know all things that are in earth.

4. They are Creatures of great experience. Even bad Angels have great
knowledge. They have had long experience, and have made many observations of
the Actions of men.

5. God oftimes communicates unto good Angels the affairs of men. I cannot,
neither will I say, that the Angels know men's thoughts for: That Is Gods sole
Prerogative. Neither can I say, that the Angels know all our actions. But they
know very much, because God communicates them unto them, and they rejoice in
Luke 15. 7, 10
the conversion of a sinner, and bad Angels know much of a man's ways. The
Devil observes and takes notice of our failings, and though he knows not our
thoughts: yet he will guess near the matter, and by circumstances and carriages
put together, he will easily find out which is the bosom and constitution
sin, and so form his temptation accordingly. Q. 6. Whether Christ died for
Angels? Ans. 1. Heb. 2. 16.


The sixth and last question is, whether Christ died for Angels?

I answer, Negatively. For first, he took not upon him their Nature. Verily he
took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham.

2. God left the Apostate Angels without recovery. What their sin was,
whether pride, or any other sin, (though most are of opinion that pride was
the chiefest sin of them) we will not curiously inquire. But that they were
Apostates from God, and so became eternally miserable, is evident from
Scripture: And Jude. 6.
the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation,
he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of
the great day. They it seems fell from their primitive condition once and
irrecoverably.

3. We affirm that Christ's death is of great benefit unto the elect Angels.
For thereby they are confirmed in their happy estate. Christ's death established
the holy Angels in their state of blessedness.

The Apostle plainly proves our Assertion, That in the dispensation Ephesians. 1. 10.
of the fullness of times, he might gather together into one all things in
Christ, both which are in Heaven and which are on earth, even in him. Far above
all Principality, Power, Might, and Dominion, verse. 21.
and every name that is named, not only in this world, but that which is to
come, And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be verse. 22.
the head over all things to the Church, which is his body, the fullness verse.
23. Ephesians. 3. 10. Col. 1. 20.
of him that fills all in all. To the intent that now, the Principalities,
and Powers, in heavenly places, might be known by the Church, the manifold
wisdom of God. And (having made peace through the blood of his cross) by him
to reconcile all things unto himself: by him, I Col. 2. 10.
say, whether they be things in heaven, or things on earth. And ye are complete
in him, who is the head of all Principality, and Power. I purposely wave many
curious questions, wherein Popish writers abound. Wherefore in the last place,
I shall make a practical improvement of the whole, and apply only three
inferences, for Information, Instruction, and Consolation.

For Information. 1. For Information.


1. What excellent, knowing, glorious creatures the holy Angels are, and if
they be so excellent, how much more is Jesus Christ their Lord? Great is the
knowledge of these glorious creatures, but what they have is derivative from
their Creator.

2. Be informed that it is unlawful to worship them. See thou do Col. 2. 18.
it not, says the Angel to John, for I am thy fellow servants. And in the
place fore cited, Let no man beguile you of your reward, and in voluntary
humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things he has not
seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind.

3. Be informed of the singular benefit of the Angels ministry. The Angel of
the Lord encampeth about them that fear him, and delivers Psalm. 34. 11.
Josh. 5. 14, 15
them. The Angel stood for Joshua: It came to pass when Joshua was by Jerico,
that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold there stood a man over
against him, with his sword drawn in his hands, and Joshua went unto him and
said, Art thou for us, or for our Adversaries? And he said, nay, but as a
captain of the ho^t of the Lord am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to
the earth and did worship and said unto him, what says my Lord unto his
servant? And he said, loose thy shoe from off thy feet: for the place whereon
thou stand is holy.

This was the Lord Jesus, the Angel of the Covenant, for a Created Angel
would have refused adoration. An Angel preserved the three Children from the
flame and burning of the fiery furnace, and shut the Lions mouth. An Angel
praised for the Church, in Zechary that Angel was Christ. Then the Angel
Zech. 1. 12.
of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of hosts how long will thou not have
mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against which thou have had
Indignation these threescore and ten years? An Angel delivered Hezekiah, and
smote Senacherib: An Angel delivered Peter: An Angel brought the good news
of Christ's incarnation. The Angels of God preserve us in our beds, in our
houses, in our journyes, in our undertakings. The Angels will carry our souls
to Heaven.

By way of Instruction. Use 2. of Instruction. Psalm. 91. 11.


1. Labor to walk in Gods ways. For he shall give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: Whilst we are in our lawful ways (not
in our wanderings) we have a promise of Protection.

2. Pray to God for the Protection of Angels. We may not pray to Angels, we
may not worship them: but we may pray to God to vouchsafe their ministry to us,
to make our ways prosperous, to send us an Angel (as Abraham believed,) and
cause his Angels to pitched their Tents about us, as Gods messengers to defend,
Genesis 24. 7.
and rescue us out of dangers.

3. We should so live as remembering we are in the presence of God and Angels,
that Gods eyes are over us, that the Angels observe o^r carriage, and what
decorum we keep in the duties we perform. For this cause ought the woman to
have power on her head, because of the Angels. Though men (as Diodati
observes) 1 Cor. 11. 10.
would give consent and connive at this disorder: yet the Angels, who are
continual Guardians in their Assemblies would be offended at it. For I think
(says the Apostle) that God has set forth us the Apostles 1 Cor. 4. 9. 16.
last, as it were, men appointed to death. For we are made a spectacle unto the
world, to Angels, and to men. Wherefore I beseech you be ye followers of me.

For Consolation. Use 3. for Consolation.


This serves for comfort to Gods children, that the Angels are their Ministers.

1. In their lives, they have them under God their protectors, the Lord bids
them protect, preserve, succor, comfort, relieve such a one, he is in
distress, he is my servant: The very Angels 1 King. 19. 7, 8.
were purveyers unto Eliah. The Angels ministered unto Christ, they
strengthened him, when he was in the garden, when he suffered in his humane
Nature. So the children of God find it to their comfort that the Angels
refresh, comfort, support and protect them in their greatest extremities.

2. When they die, the Angels carry their souls into Heaven.

3. At the day of judgment, they gather the elect unto Christ. Mar. 13. 27.
He will send his Angels to gather his elect from the four winds, from the
uttermost part of the earth, to the uttermost part of Heaven. By all that has
been said, we are to understand the happiness of all the Saints, who are here
in the text called heirs of salvation. God gives them his Son, and that is the
height of mercy: God gives them his Angels for their Guardians, so those two
Scriptures are abundantly fulfilled. Psalm. 34. 9. O fear the Lord, ye his
Saints, Psalm. 34. 9. Romans 8. 32.
for there is no want to them that fear him. And Romans 8. 32. He that spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not but with him
freely give us all things. And these Scriptures bring a full measure of comfort
unto the children of God. -- Having Christ the Saints have all, he protects and
defends them, he is Lord over all, and commands all creatures services for the
good of his people. This Doctrine of the Ministry of Angels, is too much
Idolized by some, which fall to the worshipping of them. This is flat Idolatry;
(...), is abominable: And this Doctrine is too much slighted by others, who
are not thankful to God for the Protection of Angels. Both these extremes
are to be avoided, and our duty is to look upon Angels as fellow servants, and
beg of God their Ministry: And for all deliverances we should return unto
God the praise and glory of all, in the language of the Psalmist, Psalm. 115.
verse. 1. which shall be my conclusion, Not unto us, O Lord not unto us, but
unto thy name give glory Psalm. 115. 1.
for thy mercy and truths sake.

GODS PROVIDENCE COMMON AND SPECIAL SET FORTH.
From 2 Chronicles. 16. verse. 9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the
whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of those whose heart is
perfect toward him.
THE best of men in the Church Militant, have Sermon 3. Preached at St. Marye's
Oxon. Oct. 12. 1658. Deuteronomy. 32. 5. 2 Chr. 15. 12. verse. 16.
their failings: There Is no gold but has some ore, and dross in it, no wheat
without some chafe, none of Gods children but have some spots.

We need go no further then the Instance of my Text. Asa King of Juda a zealous
Reformer, one that entered into a solemn Covenant with the Lord, one so full of
courage as to depose his Mother Maachah for her Idolatry, and cut down her
Idol: and of this King the Holy Ghost gives verse. 17.
this final judgment -- Nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his
days. Yet notwithstanding here are upon Record; several 2 Chr. 16. 10.
faults of King Asa, viz. putting the Seer into Prison unjustly for pronouncing
a full and seasonable reproof, from the mouth of the Lord, for oppressing some
of the People, and in his disease not seeking the Lord, but the Physicians.
Hence the Apostles assertion Jam. 3. 2.
is evidently proved, That in many things we offend all: The Apostles
exhortation should be to every one of us, instead of a particular Application,
Be not high minded but fear: Let him that Romans 11. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 12.
thinks he stands, take heed least he fall. The sins of Saints should be
our warning piece, and hence we should learn caution, vigilance, and
heart-Inquisition. We are men of the like passions, and therefore ought to
commiserate our Brethren, and likewise entertain a holy jealousy over our own
hearts, considering that we also may be tempted.

To come to the Text: These words were spoken by Hanani the Seer to Asa King of
Judah. And although they met with no better entertainment then a Prison, yet
are no whit less to be valued. Plain faithful dealing is highly to be prised,
notwithstanding it meets with course usage almost every where. It was Asaes
great fault to rely on the King of Syria, and not on God verse. 7. Likewise he
sins against the experience of a signal deliverance from the Ethiopians and
Lubims verse. 8. But what are the best of men if left to themselves? Hezekiah a
rare King, failed in the business of the Ambassadors of the Princes of
Babylon: We read God left him to try 2 Chr. 32. 31.
him, that he might know all that was in his heart.

This plain-dealing Prophet having charged home, and thoroughly aggravated the
Kings faul^s, lays down in my Text a strong Reason, or Engagement for him to
rely on the Lord For the eyes etc. Wherein are observeable a description of
Providence, of Gods Divis.
Omni-presence, and the special manifestation and exhibition thereof.

1. Here is a descri^tion of Providence, by the eyes of the Lord. 1. A
description of Prov^dence.
The eye of the Lord is clear, and ten thousand times brighter then the Sun:
The eye of God searches, and penetrates the most secret things: It sees any
thing, observes, discovers, pierces, converts, (...). Hom.
revengeth. All things are naked, Diaphanous unto God: With him the very inside
is outside, secret or open, dark or light, night or day are all one with the
great All-seeing God. God at once perfi^ly sees and knows all things, by one
clear act of Intuition, unico actu simplicis Intelligentiae, (as Schoolmen
say) he universally, suddenly knows every thing. Creatures know successively
per prius and posterius: But the Creator knows all at once. Yet we must
interpose a Caution that when we read of Gods eyes, hands, feet, etc. We must
not understand them litt^rally and properly, but figuratively and improperly,
or rather (...), Herein God condescends to our capaci^y and apprehension, and
speaks after the manner of men. And the Rule in Divinity is to be especially
observed, Q^ae dicuntur (...) intelligenda sunt (...). The like passage we have
in Zechary, They are the eyes of the Lord, (i. e.) his Providence, Zech. 4. 10.
which observes all that is done every where.

2. Here is a description of Gods Omni-presence from these 2. A description of
Gods Omni presence. Deus est sphaera cujus centrum est ubique and
circumferenti^ nusquam.
words -- Run to and fro throughout the whole earth. Angels are said to be
definitive in loco: Bodies circumscriptive, but God is in loco repletive: His
Center is every where, and his Circumference no where. Chrysostom. in Col. 2.
Homil. 5. Deus totus in coelo est, totus in terra non alternis temporibus, sed
utrumque simul: Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 29.
Chrysostom observes that God is every where (i. e.) because he fills all
places, and yet no where (i. e.) confind to no place. Augustine goes further
and says, That God is wholly in Heaven, and wholly in earth, not by
vicissitudes but all at once: This is most fully confessed by David, Psalm. 139.
7, 8, etc. Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy
presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there etc. The scope of the
Psalmist is to show (as judicious Non est aliquis locus uspium, in quo possim a
facie tua abscondi. Musculus.
Musculus observes) There is not any place, any where, in which I may be hidden
from thy sight.

3. Here Is a Manifestation of special Providence to the children 3. Gods
special Providence is toward the upright.
of God, thus described -- Whose heart is perfect toward him, (i. e.) sincere.
A perfection of parts may and must be attained in this life. A perfection of
degrees is reserved for another world. Now as the general and common
Providence of God, extends it self toward all the creatures, so there is a
special distinguishing Providence, which exerts it self, and acts vigorously
for the Provision, Protection, and Consolation of those that fear God, and
walk uprightly before him. God puts forth his power to help them, so Vt firmum
se exhibeat (verto,) ut robustum se exhibeat erga illos ut robustam potentiam
suam exerat in opitulando ipsos: Piscat. in loc.
Piscator translates the words. So then the sense of the words I conceive to
amount to this effect, that all things come to pass by Providence, nothing by
chance in respect of God: For he sees all things, and knows all things; All
the affairs and transaction in the Universe, are manifest to Gods all seeing
eye, the hidden deeds of darkness, the secretest reservations of the mind and
thoughts of the heart are all known to him. Further there is no creature,
whether vegetive, sensitive, or rational, but is ordered and disposed by this
Omnipotent, and overruling Providence. The Providence in general, ad rerum
usque minima perting it. Every creature how mean so ever, is under a
Providence: But in a more especial and peculiar manner, the sons and
daughters of God by grace, and Adoption: the Family of the first born, which as
in the Text are described to be those, Whose hearts are uprigh before God:
these I say are under a choice distinguishing Providence.

From the word^ thus divided and expounded, I collect two points of Doctrine:
the first whereof I propound thus.

That there is a Providence of God, which extends it self to the ordering, and
governing of all the creatures throughout the whole world.

The other Doctrine (which chiefly I shall insist on) is this.

That there is a special distinguishing Providence, which in a peculiar manner
manifests it self for the benefit of the upright, even all the children of
God.

I resume the Enlargement of the first Doctrine, and will dispose of my method
of handling it on this wise. Method of handling the Doctrine.


1. By proving the truth of the point.

2. By making inquiry into the Nature of Providence, what it is, and how it
discovers it self in it is various operations.

In the 3. place, I shall make some profitable improvement of the Doctrine of
Providence, as reducible unto point of practice.

Now first I am to prove that there is a Providence. I purposely 1. That there
is a Providence.
wave all Heathenish names of Fortune, Fatal necessity, Augurium, Lucky
stars, Lucky Birds etc. Which are so far to be detested, as not once to be
named amongst Christians, (...). Hom. Il. (...).
Homer doubtless employed a Providence, by a golden chain hanging down from
heaven. Quicquid patimur mor^ale geni^^, Quicquid fa^^mus venit ex alto. Sen.
Trag. O^dip. 1. Proved by Scripture.
Seneca acknowledges more plainly a Providence, in that he says What ever we
do or suffer comes from above. But I know no Necessity of going to the
Philistines to whet my sword or spear. I shall according to Naomies counsel
to Ruth, (though in another case) not be found gleaning in another field, but
that of Scripture, and Reason: by help whereof I shall endeavor the proof of
what I have asserted from the Text.

1. I repair unto Scripture Testimony, and that is instar omnium. And because
the heap is so great, I shall gather sparingly, some only amongst many, which
are the most pregnant, and apposite Proofs, viz. From the testimony of Job,
David, Solomon, Christ and the Apostle Paul: and in the mouth of two or three
witnesses, the truth will be established.

Lets consider the Testimony of Joh, His eyes (says he (are Job. 24. 21. Job.
10. 12.
upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings. Thy visitation (says he)
has preserved my Spirit.

And to the Testimony of Job, we will add David, who plainly sets forth Divine
Providence, when he says that the Lord Covers the heavens with clouds, who
prepares rain for the earth, which Psalm. 147. 8, 9.
makes grass to grow upon the mountains. He gives to the Beast his food,
and to the young Ravens which cry. To the same purpose he speaks in another
Psalm, wherein he extolls the righteousness of God: Thy righteousness (says
he) is like the great Mountains: Psalm. 36. 6.
thy Judgments are a great depth, O Lord thou preservest Man and Beast. Which
scripture compared with Discamus hoc exemplo recumbere in Dei providentiam,
etc. Call. in Genesis 8. 1.
Genesis 8. 1. it will appear, how the mercy of God was extended to Man and
Beast, and likewise Jonah 4. 11. The multitude of Cattle were objects of Gods
compassion toward Niniveh. Further lets take notice what attestation Solomon
gives to the truth delivered: The wise man assures us, that the ways of man
are before the eyes Prove. 5. 21.
of the Lord, and he pon^ereth all his goings. And more fully he speaks Prove.
15. 3.
of Providence, both toward good and bad, that the eyes of the Lord are in
every place, beholding the evil and the good. This plainly declares that
nothing can escape Gods Providence, as an Excellent Summa est, nihil esse
omnium quae in mundo fiant, quod Providentiae divinae ambitu non
comprehendatur. Carthw. in Locum.
Commentator observes. Above all Testimonies Christ the truth and the life,
fully declares the government of Divine Providence. He instanceth in Lillies,
the grass of the field, Mat. 6. 28. verse. 30. In the Sparrowes, the heirs of
our head, Mat. 10. 29, 30. And Christ draws an Argument a minore ad majus:
wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the field, which to day is and to
morrow is cast into the oven: shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of
little faith? And the Apostles of Christ confirm the truth of him, their
Master. For Paul preaching at Athens plainly prooves, that God gives Mat. 6. 30.
to all li^e and breath and all things. And he quotes Aratus the Poet, Act. 17.
22.
For in him we live and moove and have our being? Follow the same Apostle in
his Epistle to the Romans, For of him and through him, verse. 8. (...). Aratus.
Romans 11. 36. Ephesians. 4. 11. Heb. 1. 3. 1. Cor. 12. 6,
and to him are all things. Likewise in the Ephesians, we read, that God
works all things after the counsel of his own will: and to the Hebrews, he
declares that all things were upheld by the word of hi^ power, (i. e.) the
power of Christ. It is God that mo^eth all in all.

Having thus by several Scripture Testimonies given abundant proof of the
Doctrine, I now come to the Confirmation of the Doctrine, by evidence of
Reason. Amongst many that might be alleged, I Will fix upon six Reasons, which
are as so many Demonstrative Arguments drawn a fortiori for the further
clearing the truth of our assertion delivered.

2. Confirmed by evidence of Reason.

1. The first reason shall be drawn from the order and harmony R. 1. Drawn from
the Order and Harmony amongst creatures.
amongst creatures. In the Nature of things there is an order, disposition,
succession, conservation, and propagation of each species. Fire and water would
consume each other, if they were not hindered by Providence. God is a God of
order, and preserves all things in order. He made all things in order, number
and measure He sets bounds to the Sea: Hitherto shall thou go and no further.
Were it not for a supreme overruling Providence, the Sea would break out and
drown the whole world. Now this order must proceed from an ordaining cause
which orders and disposes of all things, and this is God: He tells the
number of the stars, etc. Psalm: 147. 4.


2. We prove a Providence from the Provision that God makes R. 2. Drawn from
Gods Provision of each creature. Mat: 6. 26. Psalm: 104. 11, 21.
for all the creatures. God feeds the fowls of the air: Behold (says our
Savior) the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into barnes: yet your heavsnly Father feeds them. Are ye not much
better then they? He clothes the grass of the field. He takes care for the
beasts of the field: He sends the springs into the valleys, they give drink
to every beast of the field, the wild Asses quench their thirst. The young
Lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God. God knows how many
Ravens are in every nest, and sends them food. God feeds the worms, and
provides for all creatures. The Providence of God extends it self to the least
of creatures, and in a more plentiful manner to mankind. All sorts of men taste
of Gods Providence: For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he sees all
his goings. Hence Christ commands doing of good, That Job 34. 21. Mat: 5. 45.
ye may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven: sor he makes his
Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on
the unjust. But especially Gods children have experience of Gods gracious
Providence toward them. It Is a choice Promise mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah,
But now thus says the Lord Is: 43. 1, 2, 3.
that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee O Israel, fear not for I
have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. When thou
passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers they
shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be
burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. R. 3. Drawn from the virtue
accompanying the means for Gods childrens Preservation.
For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel, thy Savi^ur: I gave Egypt
for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.

3. We prove a Providence from that virtue that goes along with those means
which God has ordained sor our preservation meat, drink, and clothing: (...)
have neither heat, life, strength, nor comfort in themselves. They neither can
give, nor continue heat, or help: were it not for a special providence which
gives virtue unto them. It Is God that makes the meat to nourish us: It Is God
that makes the clothes we wear, to warm us. The whole virtue and benefit
which we receive from them, comes from the Providence of God: This in Talis
igitur men's mundi quum sit, ob eam^; causam vel Prudentia, vel Providentia
appellari recte possit. Cic. L. 2. de Not. Deorum.
Ciceroes language, is called Prudence, or Providence: And in Nullam terras
despicere Providentiam testor. Quinctil. in Proem. L. 6.
Q^inctilians it is put for God himself.

4. We prove a Providence from various events, distinctions, R. 4. Drawn from
various events. Prove. 8, 15.
appointments of affairs here below. God sets up one, pulls down another: By
me Kings reign (says Wisdom) and Princes decree justice. And in Daniel we
read of the Watcher, He cried aloud, and said thus; hew down the tree and cut
off his branches, shake Dan. 4. 14, 25
off his leaves and scatter his fruit, let the beasts get away from under it,
and the fowls from his branches: They shall drive thee from men, and thy
dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and they shall make thee to eat
grass as Oxen, and they shall wet thee with the d^w of heaven, and seven
times shall pass over thee, til^ thou know that the most high rules in the
Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. One is rich, another is
poor: one honorable, another contemptible: one a King, another a subject. All
these several stations in the world, come to pass by an overruling
Providence: (for even Mundus divina Providentia constitutus Cic. Deorum
Providentia mundum administrare Cic L. 1. de Divin.
Cicero himself consesseth, that the world is governed by Providence) That
there is any government in the world is a Providence: for the wicked are far
the greatest number, and they hate the righteous with a perfect hatred: were it
in their power and they might have their will, there would be no rule, no
government at all^: their lost and humor would be all the Rule they would go
by. But there is a Providence that curbes these men, to keep them in awe, and
strikes in them a sear of God and of men, who are in Authority, who although
they hate them, yet stand in awe and fear of them.

5. We prove a Providence from Gods pr^servation of his R. 5. Drawn from Gods
Preservation of his Church.
Church, from the rage of the Devil and his Instruments, in so much that the
gates of Hell neither can nor shall prevail against it. Though there be
Legions of Devils and wicked men, and they unite their forces, and
combinations, with all* their might and main, and the Church is but a little
flock: yet God graciously preserves it. That one promise, Lo I am with you
always, unto the Mat: 28. 20.
end of the world: makes more for the Church, then all the malice of men and
Devils can make against them. The Serpents seed always persecutes the
promised seed, and if Satan and his Instruments could obtain their will, they
would (as that monster of Rome wished of the Senators necks) destroy the whole
Church at one blow. But still the Church is preserved, notwithstanding all the
inveterate malice, and opposition of men and Devils: Maugre all their violent
oppositions, God will keep this vineyard of red wine (i. e.) his Church: so he
promises I the Lord do keep it, Isa: 27. 2, 3.
I will water it every moment least any hurt it etc.

6. From the horrors of Conscience, and dreadful punishments R. 6. From the
horrors o^ Conscience. Rom: 1. 18.
that befall the wicked, for the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness. So that a man shall say, verily, there is a Psalm: 58. 11
reward for the righteous, verily he is a God that judges in the earth. When
such puni^hments befall men, many are apt to bewail their hard fortune,
(that is their heathenish language) whereas they ought to consider of a
Providence disposing, ordering, and appointing all. We read concerning Christ's
sufferings on this wise, Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and
fore knowledge Acts: 2. 23.
of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and s^ain. There was
an Act of malice in the Jews, and even the height of wickedness but an Act of
Providence in God, by whose p^rmission and free appointment this came to pass.

2. In the second place we will inquire into the Nature of this 2. Concerning
the Nature of Providence.
Providence. Waving impertinent questions amongst Inter Stoicos and Epicuri
sectam secutos pugna perpetua est regaturne Providentia mundus? Quinctil: L. 5.
C. 7.
Epicures and Stoics, and likewise avoiding their Phrases, I shall accord with
Orthodox Divines, who give this Definition of Providence, viz. It Definition of
Providence.
is a temporary action of God, whereby he moves and directs all things after
the counsel of his own will to their proper ends.

1. I call it an Action, to distinguish it from the Attributes of 1. Its an Act.
God.

2. I call it temporary to distinguish it from the eternal decree. 2. A
Temporary Act.


3. I say that by this Providence, God moves and directs 3. Its Operative.
all things, to show that God is not idle in heaven, as Epicures ignoran^ly and
foolishly dream: this Providence is operative, this Job. 38. 41.
Providence goes through the whole world. It feeds the Ravens in the nest,
when the damme forsakes them. By this Providence Job. 39. 15, 16.
the O^triches eggs are hatched when they are forsaken, and left to the wild
beast, by the unnatural damme.

4. By Providence God acts after the counsel of his own will. 4 God acts by
Providence.
This shows that God does nothing unadvisedly and rashly, but uses his own
knowledge whereby he perfectly understands all things, and his wisdom whereby
he does dispose all things being known. And this God does of his own will. He
is a most free agent, and he is not in the least compelled, and he needs not
the Mr Pemble of Magd: Hall Oxon.
advice of any other: For (as a Judicious Divine observes) God directs both to
the mediate ends, and to the last ends of all after a set and determinate
manner, according to the most free decree and counsel of his own will, that
himself in all things may be glorified.

5. God does direct all things to their proper ends, to show that 5. God does
direct all things to their proper ends. ^
God does not only govern things generally, by ordering and disposing of all
the creatures, but every thing particularly, taking care of every worm, every
sparrow, even the meanest of all the creatures. Now then, by what I have said
will evidently appear that there are these eminent* properties in divine
Providence.

1. It Is permissive of all sorts of Actions. God permits not only 1. There is a
Permissive Providence.
the Act; but the obliquity of it: He suffers and bears with the Iniquities of
the Amorites: And yet God is not author sed ultor peccati. God hardened Pharaohs
heart: He may withdraw his grace being not bound to give it.

2. This Providence is only effective of and approoves what is 2. Gods
Providence approoves only what is good.
good. The Providence of God allows no man's w^ckednesse: God is good and does
good, and nothing can come from God, but goodness: As for sin it is a saying no
more common then true, malum non habet causam efficientem sed deficientem.

3, This Providence is Omniscient. All qualities, properties, motions 3. Gods
Prov^dence is Omniscient. Act. 15. 18.
and Designs, are all known to God with all their circumstances: so says the
Apostle, Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world.

4. This Providence is most wise. If we speak of wisdom, God 4. This is a wise
Providence.
is wise: With God is strength and wisdom. The Apostle admireth the depth of
his wisdom.

5. This Providence is distinct and particular to every worm, to 5. This
Providence is distinct.
every sparrow, to all the creeping things, to every herb, to every pile of
grass: They all grow by Providence.

6. This is always a working, always protecting, providing, careing. 6. This
Providence is always working.
Epicures deny a Providence: Stoics acknowledge a fatal necessity.
Peripateticks deny a government of the world: But christians fully believe the
power and Providence of God, in the government of the world. This then being so.

1. Here Is matter of confutation of Epicures, who denied all Providence, Use 1.
For Confutation.
and Stoics, who maintained a fatal necessity. And of Peripateticks, who
denied the ruling and governing power of God. These V. Dr. Hackwills Apollogy.
opinions, the Scriptures fore recited confutes, and I may say the less because
such excellent pains has been taken on this Argument by a Learned Dr. of our
University.

2. This yields matter of reproof unto two sorts. Of Reproof.


1. Such as observe no Providence, heedlesse, careless persons, of Gallioe's
indifferent temper: so they fare well themselves, they care not how it is with
others.

2. Such as abuse Providence, who run on in mad wicked ways and then father
their Actions upon Providence. Solomon says, The Prove. 19. 3.
foolishness of man perverteth his way: and his heart fretteth against the
Lord.

3. Here Is matter of Instruction. Let us hence learn our duties. Use 3. For
Instruction.


1. Take especial notice of Providences^: study these wheels of Providence.
These are wheels in the middle of wheels, and these require our special
inquiry and observation.

2. Be inquisitive and observe how Providence fulfill Promises, how God is in
every particular as good as his word.

3. Be thankful for all passages of Providence, for prosperity Job. 2. 10.
and adversity, shall we not (says Job) receive good at the hand of God, and
shall we not receive all.

4. Learn by all Providence to be more holy, and more circumspect in thy
life. He makes best use of Providence, who learnes more holiness, humility,
and conformity to the will of God.

5. Serve Gods Providence in the lawful use of means. Men may not lie in a
ditch and cry, Lord help us: God that appoints the end, appoints the means. We
may not make a separation between them.

6. In all straits and di^ficulties, comfort thy self with the consideration
of Gods Providence. O do not distrust Providence, It Is the Apostles
exhortation: Cast thy care upon him, for he cares for 1 Pet. 5. 7. Mat. 6. 31.
thee. And our Saviors exhortation is, take no thought, saying, what shall we
eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewithal shall we be clothed?

As there is a general Providence toward all: So there is a special
di^tinguishing Providence tow^rds all Gods Children. This is the second
doctrine. That the special Providence of God is extended Method.
toward the Protection of Gods Children, will f^lly appear by Scripture
examples, and Scripture Reasons, which when we have prooved, we shall reduce
all unto point of practice, by some useful Application.

1. For Scripture examples, amongst many these are most eminent. 1. For
Scripture examples. Genesis 22. 12.
A Providence in an especial manner delivered Isaac, between the Knife and the
Altar. The Angel calls out of heaven saying, Lay not thine hand upon the Lad,
neither do thou any thing unto him: We should consider (as Nostrum est intent
is mentibus considerare quam mirabiliter in ipso Articulo Deus Isaac revocaver
^^ a morte in vitam, Calv. Gen 33. 4.
Calvin observes) how God helped in the very Article of time, and delivered him
from death to life. What preservations and special Providence did Jacob mee^
withal, being delivered from Esau's rage, when bloody intentions were turned
into embraces. Jacob feared least he would ^lay the Mother and Children, yet by
special Providence Esau ran to meet him and embraced him, and fell on his neck
and kissed him and they wept.

In Joseph there is a Series of Providence, a conca^enation of preservations.
His brethren hated him and threw him into a pit: And in that pit there was no
water. He was bought and sold by the Ishmaelites and Po^ipher: cast in Prison,
and in the same Prison where were the Kings prisoners. The chief Bu^ler and
Baker, were in the same prison. They dreamed, Joseph gave the Interpretation:
But yet Gods time of deliverance was not come. Pharaoh dreams, Joseph
interprets his dream, and is advanced and made Ruler over all the Land of
Egypt. A f^mine f^ll out, Joseph's brethren came to buy corn, Joseph supplies
them. Stephen recites the History, and acknowledges a special hand of
Providence: The Patriarchs moved with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt, Genesis 50.
20, 21. Acts 7. 9.
but God was with him.

The History of Eliah, is remarkable: sometimes a Brook, sometimes a Widow
woman, sometimes the Angels themselves were his P^rveyors: and the very
Ravens, those greedy Birds of prey brought him meat.

The History of the Jews delivered from Haman is especially remarkable. Haman
utterly plotted their ruin: He had the royal assent granted, the day set,
Haman on purpose went to beg Mordecai for the Gallows, but see what intervened
by the special hand of Providence, On that night the King could not sleep, and
Esth. 6. 1.
he commanded to bring the book of records of the Chronicles, and they were
read before the King: after reading whereof the King advanced Mordecai, and
made Haman his desperate Enemy to make the Proclama^ion. And Esther being
entertained Q^eene in the room of Vasthi, she supplicated for her own life,
and the life of her people. And the mischievous devices of Haman were turned
upon his own pate: and as he meated to others, the same measure he received,
the Text expressly shows: So they hanged Haman upon the Gallows Esth. 7. 10.
that he had prepared for Mordecai: Then was the Kings wrath pacified.

The three Children in the fiery furnace, Daniel in the Lions den, Peter out of
Prison were all miraculously delivered by the Ministry of Angels. The Apostle
Paul delivered, when above forty had bound themselves with an oath in a
conspiracy against him. And Acts 21. 30, 31.
especially Acts 21. 30, 31. We read of a wonderful deliverance (as we say)
between the cup and the lip, And all the City was moved, and the people ran
together, and they took Paul, and drew him out of the Temple, and forthwith the
doors were shut, and as they went about to kill him, tidings came unto the
chief captain of the Band, that all Jerusalem was in an ^proare. By this
Diversion the Lord wrought a signal deliverance for his servant Paul. What
deliverances had David at Keilah and En-gedi, even when Saul had he^m'd him in,
and (as I may say) had him in a Pound, not likely to escape, yet then by way of
diversion he was delivered: and Saul went 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27.
on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on that side of the
mountain, and David made have to get away for fear of Saul: for Saul and his
men compassed David and his men round about to take them: But there came a
messenger unto Saul, saying, have thee and come: for the Philistines have
invaded the Land. In that needful Instant the Lord made a plain way for his
servants escape.

I might Instance in many remarkable passages of Providence rerecorded in
humane Authors. The tide brought in shel-fish for the besieged Rochellers.
There was one Merlin, who at the Parisian Massacre hid himself in a Hay Mow,
and every day a Hen laid an egg there, by which he was kept alive. Another was
hid in a close hole, and a spider weaved a web at the door, so the Persecutors
went away. But there is no necessity of lighting a candle to the Sun that went
before. No example may be compared to those which are recorded in the Word of
God. To Scripture examples, I Will add Scripture reasons, why does God extend
such special Providence toward his own people.

1. Let us consider the high estimate and value God puts upon R. 1. The high
Value God puts upon his Children. Mal. 3. 17. Is. 28. 5. Exodus 19. 5. Zech. 2.
8.
them. They are his Jewels: They shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in
that day, when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his
Son that serves him. They are a crown of glory and a diadem of beauty. They
are a peculiar treasure, they are as dear unto him as the Apple of his eye.

2. Consider the relations between God and the godly. R. 2. Drawn from the
Relation^ between God and the godly.


They are his Children, he their Father. They are his adopted sons and
daughters. Now it is the duty of a Father to take special care for the
preservation of his children. They are his spouse, and he their Husband: For so
the Lord professes, Turn, O backsliding children (says the Lord,) for I am
married unto you, and Jer. 3. 14.
I will take you, one of a City and two of a family and will bring you to
Zion.

3. All the promises of God are made unto the godly. For R. 3. All the Promises
belong to the godly Isa: 43. 1, 2.
(says the Apostle) all the promises of God are in Christ yea and Amen unto
the glory of God by us. Promises of Protection belong to Gods children: Thus
says the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel:
fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy Name, thou art
mine. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee: and through
the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the fire,
thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Promises of
direction are made to Gods children, Thou shall guide me with Psalm: 73. 24.
thy counsel and afterward receive me to glory.

4. All the Attributs of God put forth themselves for the good R. 4. All Gods
Attributes belong to the godly. Isa: 51. 14.
of Gods people, viz. His mercy to pardon them, his wisdom to counsel them,
his power to defend them: (as the Prophet Isaiah says) Fear not thou worm
Jacob and ye men of Israel: I will help thee, says the Lord and thy Redeemer,
the holy one of Israel.

5. The ministry of Angels is employed for their defense. The R. 5. The
Ministry of Angels is employed for the defense of the godly. Heb. 1. 14.
Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them. Are they not all Ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister for them, who
shall be heirs of Salvation? And for the offense of their enemies, as in the
case of Senacherib and Herod, who fell by the Angel of the Lord.

6. The Saints experiences are abundant proof hereof: Pa^l V. Ps. 18. t^tle.
R. 6. Drawn from Saints Experiences.
speaks how God delivered him out of the hand of the Lion. He spoke of Nero,
that cruel Persecutor of the Church. What Protections, deliverances have Gods
people met withal? What Providence to supply their wants in the most needful
instant? What deliverances from Fire, Water, Robbers, Murderers? Great things
can many of Gods children speak in this particular: Time would fail me to
produce those Instances, which Saints experiences have abundantly afforded in
this Particular.

This then being so, this Doctrine may be serviceable for these uses.

1. To reprove the madness and folly of wicked men, who Use 1. For Reproof.
Ps. 37. 32, 33.
set themselves in opposition against Gods children. They labor to root out
their memory, and plot their utter ruin and destruction: but, though the
wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to s^ay him, the Lord will not leave
him in his hand, nor condemn him, when he is judged. Wicked men are limited,
and can go not a jot further then God will permit them.

2. Here Is matter of Instruction to the children of God. Does Use 2. For
Instruction.
God take the care of them, Let them be sure to keep in Gods ways, and walk
according to the rule of his Word. Let none neglect means appointed by God,
under any presumptions of Providence, that would be a tempting of God. You know
how the Devil tempted Christ to leap down the Pinnacle, when as there was a
pair of stairs, an ordinary way to go up and down. Let none upon pretense of
secret impulses of their own spirits, act any irregular thing upon Pretense of
Providence. Gods Providence do not contradict the rule of the word. Let none
distrust Providence in their greatest straits and difficulties. God has
supplied, and is able still to supply: He has delivered and is able still to
deliver. Read two experiences one of David against the Lion and Bear. Thy
servant (says David to Saul) slew both the Lion and the Bear, and this
uncircumcised Philistine 1 Samuel 17. 36
shall be as one of them. Another deliverance we read, is of the children of
Israel against Pharaoh: Thou did (says the Psalmist) divide the Sea by thy
strength, thou breakest the heads of the Dragons in Psalm. 74. 14.
the waters: Thou breake^t the heads of Leviathan in pieces and gave him to
be meat for the people, inhabiting the wilderness, This was spoken of Pharaoh
and his host. These examples drawn from experience, and former mercyes should
be as so many Engagements to trust God for the time to come.

Here Is one Use more, and that is for consolation unto Gods Use 3. For
Consolation.
children. They are in Covenant, and under the wings of special Providence: As
an Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young, Deuteronomy. 32. 11.
spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears them on her wings: So the
Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange God with him. He promises to
be their Rereward: Then shall thy light Isa. 58. 8.
break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily, and
thy righteousness shall go before thee, the glory of the Lord shall be thy
Rereward. This is an allusion to Gods carrying his children out of Egypt: And
the Lord went before them by day, in a Exo. 13. 21.
pillar of a cloud to lead them the way: and by night, in a pillar of fire to
give them light, to go by day and night. Now against all despondencies, fears,
doubts, dangers, let Gods children comfort themselves, with the consideration
of Gods special Providence: God takes care and makes special Provision for
them, wherefore let them do their duty, and leave all issues to God.

The duties are these,

1. To study the Word, and be well acquainted with it. The Scripture is the
sure Word of Prophesy, certain, infallible: we must trust and venture all upon
it.

2. To live by faith: when sense fails, let not faith fail: Believe God is as
good as his word. Believe, though sense and reason be non-plusd. So did Abraham
in the case of Sarah, and so in the case of Isaac. No life to that mentioned by
the Apostle to live by the faith of the Son of God. Gal. 2. 20.


3. To set the Spirit of prayer a working. Pray for thy daily bread, and for
daily Protection: So that thou may feel all coming in as an Answer of
Prayer. And a Samuel a child of prayer is the most welcome mercy.

4. Beware of murmuring and repining when thou art delayed. Eligat
opportunitatem, qui libere dat miseric^rdiam Aug.
Learn to wait Gods time: His convenient time is the best. He helps in the
most needful time. Let him (says Augustine) choose the opportunity who so
freely gives the mercy.

5. What ever thou want, be sure to be more thankful then Efficacissimu^
pro Candid ato regandi genus est gratias agere. Plin. Pan. Trajano dictus.
ever, sor what thou have received before. Thankfulness is a cunning way of
begging: Put thy self in other men's cases, and consider how thou aboundest in
comparison of them. Look into Prisons, Poor men's cupboards, and how oughst
thou to pity them in their wants, and be thankful for what thou enjoyest.

6. Sixthly and lastly, be still renewing thy title and clearing up thine
evidences for heaven: for the more thou securest that, the more secure thou
may be of this special distinguishing Providence. For though I believe not
(but abhor that opinion) that Dominium temporale fundatur in gratia, and I am
far from the Anabaptisticall opinion of thinking wicked men usurpers, as
having no right of Creatures to outward things: yet I am fully assured, that
only the Godly have outward things sanctified through Christ. With Christ they
have all things: And having Christ, is that which makes a mercy to be a mercy
indeed: All Romans 8. 32. 1 Cor. 3. 20, 21.
things are Yours (says the Apostle.) The wicked of the world have outward
things ex largitate, by common Povidence and bounty, the godly have all ex
promisso by Promise and Covenant. Wherefore here lies the great duty to get
assurance, that what ever we have, we enjoy as a Covenant mercy, streaming to
us through the blood of Jesus Christ: for it is Christ alone that sweetens what
ever we enjoy, without him all is bitter: with him every thing is sweet.

JERUSALEMS REMEMBRANCERS UNFOLDED ON A SOLEMN FAST DAY.
Upon Isaiah 62. verse. 6, 7. Ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence,
and give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in
the earth.
UPON perusal of the 1. verse. We shall find that Sermon 4. Preached at St.
Marye's Oxon. Jan. 7. 1658.
self same thing put into practice, which is earnestly charged upon us, as our
grand duty in the Text for Zions sake, etc. Which words some learned expositors
understand to be spoken of the Prophet Isaiah, whose prayers were incessant in
the behalf of Jerusalem: But I rather concur with Scultetus, Scultet. Muscul.
Musculus, etc. Who understand them spoken of God promising, and not of the
Prophet praying. For the words are a prophecy of Isreal's deliverance out of
Babylon, and of the glory and happiness that shall be put upon the Church of
God. And Zion and Jerusalem are a Type of the Christian Church: So that God
will neither let the world nor the Potentates therein rest, until there be a
full, clear, and conspicuous deliverance, offered for the Church of God. Hence
the Gentiles shall take notice of such wonderful works of God. Verse. 2. The
Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all Kings thy glory, etc. The Church
that was so much afflicted, new name, verse. 3. No more termed desolate; but
Hephtzibah, and Beulah, verse. 4. And the moving cause of all this is Amor
complacentiae, For the Lord delights in them. Which delight is amplified by a
similitude, Verse. 5. For as a young man marryeth a Virgin: so shall thy Sons
marry thee. And as the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride: So shall thy God
rejoice over thee. For the accomplishment of this great work to make the Church
a glorious Church, the Lord raises up eminent Instruments, Verse. 6. I have set
watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, Hieronym.
which shall never hold their peace day nor night, etc. Jerome understands
Angels, Prophets, Princes, Teachers. And some conceive that faithful
Governors, and faithful Ministers are here meant by the watchmen of the
walls: even all such as are in public place and authority, who are diligent in
their watch and importunate sollicitors, such as will have no nay, and will
never cease begging, but are constant day and night, as well in bad as good
times in pouring out their hearts in prayer, in the behalf of Jerusalem.

These things premised, I resume the words of the Text, wherein there is offered
to our consideration, a charge of greatest concernment unto the watchmen: For
the Lord having promised such eminently useful Instruments, for the effecting
these great things promised to Jerusalem, and the Lord having given a Character
of their fidelity, that they shall never hold their peace: but shall be busied
in praying for, or instructing of the people of God in their duty: Now the Lord
by an Apostrophe directs his speech to those watchmen, and charge them with
the maine duty of the Text, Ye that make mention etc.

1, Wherein are three things to be observed.

1. The perrsons described by a note of distinction, to whom Divis.
the charge is given ye that etc.

2. The substance of their charge set down Negatively in two expressions.

1. Keep not silence.

2. Give him no rest.

3. The main end and design intended, that Jerusalem should be made a praise
in the earth.

4. The duration and continuance of this charge, or employment of these persons
that make mention of the Lord: keep not silence till Jerusalem be established,
(i. e.) Their prayer must so long continue, and they may not cease till
Jerusalem be established, and the gracious promises accomplished, in behalf of
the glorious condition of Jerusalem.

Before I give you the Doctrines, I shall for explication of the words, resolve
a few Queries.

1. What is meant by those that make mention of the Lord?

Calvin understands them of the Ministers that Preach the Word of God. The 70.
renders the words (...). And the vulgar edition renders it verbatim Qui
reminiscimini domini: Qui ad memoriam revacatis Dominum, Tig^r. Tran.
So Jerome, Vatablus, Osiander. And our Marginall note in our English
translation is, Ye that are the Lords remembrancers: some conceive this speech
to be an Allusion to that standing office in Kings Courts of Remembrancers:
Corn. A. Lapide upon the place tells us Corn: A. Lap: in Loc.
that the Kings of Judah had Maskirim, Admonitores whose office was to put the
King in mind of weighty affairs. Junius renders the words, Qui commemoratis
Jehovam. Rememorantes Dominum, So Vatablus and he gives a marginall note Qui
reminisci facitis Domini.

I shall not peremptorily determine, which is the best of these translations.
Neither shall I confine the duty of the Text only to Ministers. They in an
eminent manner are the Peoples mouth unto God, and Gods mouth unto the people.
And this duty of being the Lords Remembrancers belongs to them: not that God
needs any putting in mind or remembrance, but that he would have us do our duty
by assiduous supplications: Yet we may not exclude any of Gods children from
practicing the duty of the Text, in presenting prayers, making diligent
addresses unto the Throne of grace. Though it belong unto all godly men, yet in
a more special manner to Ministers. So Quamvis haec sententia ad pios omnes
pertineat: tamen praecipue Sacerdotes attingit. Call.
Calvin on the place.

2. What Is meant by not keeping silence, giving God no rest?

These two come to one and the same effect, implying that they ought to speak,
and continue importunate in speaking: They should speak aloud, and never give
over speaking. The words are Metaphorical took from those who are
indefatigable sollicitors, and will take no denial. Here Is a Character of
fervent prayer, which gives the Lord no rest. (i. e.) earnestly and incessantly
plyeth the Throne of grace, and will take no repulse. Of this more anon.

3. What is meant by Jerusalem?

For Answer, Jerusalem is either taken literally for the place and Metropolis
of Judea, or rather by a Meton^mia continentis, as it signifies the whole body
of the Inhabitants there: or else Mistically for that Jerusalem which comes
down from above. And this is either universal or particular. The universal
Church is the whole body of believers, dispersed through the whole world. The
particular Church is that wherein we live: And this according to judicious
Carthwrights division, is of one Nation, or of a narrrower compass. And the
same Learned Author gives distinct definitions of them both. A Church (says
he) of one Nation is that which is gathered under one politic civil
government. A V. Carthw. Catech.
Church of a more narrow compass, is such a particular Church or Parrish, that
dwelling in one place, may conveniently at one time, be taught by the mouth of
one Minister. Now both for the Church in general, and for the particular
Church especially wherein we live we ought to pray, and make frequent
supplications to the Throne of grace. For the whole body of Christ (i. e.) the
universal Church we must pray: for the National Church wherein we live, under
the visible Ministry and dispensation of visible Ordinances, and where there
are visible Professors. We may not straighten our prayers, nor confine the
Church of Christ (as the Donatists did of old) only to a narrow compass in
Africa. Although in a true Church, where are true Ministers, true Sacraments,
and God has blessed the Ministry with converting of Souls, yet there may be
many rotten professors, many formalists, many hypocrites: yet we must labor
to reform what we can, and pray* incessantly for amendment of what is amiss,
but we may not separate from a true Church: We must separate from Heathens, and
from Antichrist. We are to come out from amongst them, but we may not gather
Churches out of Churches, that were to make a schism between the members,
amongst themselves, and to subdivide the body of Christ, and make a separation,
where we ought to endeavor an union.

4. What is meant by establishing Jerusalem a praise in the earth?

To make the Church a praise is all one (as Calvin observes) Jerusalem may be
the subject, and matter of praise, that Christ may rule and settle his
Ordinances there, fill it with knowledge, make it eminent for graces, that as
verse. 1. The righteousness thereof may go forth as brightness, and the
salvation thereof as a lamp that burns. Then may Jerusalem be said to be a
praise in the earth. But of this more largely in the application.

To sum up all. Though principally this charge is given to Ministers: yet in
a larger sense, I shall take it according to the judgment of good Expositors,
as taking in Ministers and people both, injoyning to both the duty of
remembering the Church of God before the Throne of grace: And in an especial
manner (though the Universal Church must be remembered) the Particular Church
or National Church wherein we live must be remembered: And this remembrance
must be a fervent, incessant, and diligent remembrance, till the Lord be
pleased to settle it as a nail in a sure place, and bring forth the top stone
of Jerusalem with acclamations crying, Grace, grace unto it. This concerns
Zach. 3. 7.
us all, both Ministers and people: We must all pray for the establishment of
Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

Which words thus opened, contain one Principal Doctrine, which in it is
latitude, and compass, takes in the whole sense of the words.

That it is the obliged duty of all the Children of God, to he earnest and
assiduous suitors at the Throne of grace, in the behalf of the Church of God.
More briefly: We should all as one man continue praying to God, that he would
establish Jerusalem a praise in the earth?

1. In unfolding of this point my method shall be, Method.


1. To illustrate the truth propounded by parallel examples.

2. To prove it by variety of precepts, inculcating so great a duty.

3. To confirm it by strength of Reasons.

And 4. To conclude all with some useful Application.

1. For the resuming of what I first propounded, time would 1. The Doctrine
illustrated by Examples.
fail me to enlarge my self in so great a cloud of witnesses. Some of the
chief i will mention, and leave the rest to be supplied in your serious
meditations. How earnest was Moses for Israel, the people where God was named,
above all the people of the earth. When Amaleck was fighting against Israel,
Moses his hands were lifted up, and Israel returned Conquerours: when God
threatened the utter ruin of that people and offered to make Moses a greater
Nation than they: O how zealous was Moses in their behalf, Moses besought the
Lord his God, and said, Lord why does thy Exodus 32. 11, 12.
wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou have brought forth out of the
Land of Egypt with great power, and a mighty hand? Wherefore should the
Egyptians speak and say: For mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in
the Mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy
fierce wrath and repent of this evil against thy people, etc. So Numb. 14. 18,
19. The Lord is long-suffering and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity, etc.
Pardon I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people, according unto the
greatness of thy mercy, and as thou have forgiven this people from Egypt even
until now. Psalm. 106. verse. 23. Therefore he said he would destroy them, had
not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath,
lest he should destroy them.

To Moses, I Will add Samuel, as he himself was a Son of prayer, so he was a
praying man, 1 Samuel 7. verse. 9. He cried unto the Lord for Israel, and the Lord
heard him. 1 Samuel 12. 23. Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin
against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you, but I will teach you the good, and
the right way. Moses and Samuel have Characters of honor put upon them, for
praying persons, Jer. 15. 1. Moses, Aaron, and Samuel, are al^ three joined
together. And Psalm. 99. verse. 6. Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and Samuel
among them that call upon his Name. These were noted for choice Intercessours
with God. So likewise David was a man made up of affections toward the Church
of God. Psalm. 14. 7. O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Sion? when
the Lord brings back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and
Israel shall be glad. Psalm. 137. 5. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my hand
forget her cunning. Psalm. 51. 18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build
thou the wal^s of Jerusalem Psalm. 25. 26. Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his
troubles. How does Daniel urge the most prevailing arguments, in the behalf of
Jerusalem. Dan. 9. 18, 19. O my God, incline thine ear, and hear: open thine
eyes, and behold our desolations: and the City which is called by thy name etc.
O Lord hear, O God forgive, O Lord hearken and do, defer not for thine own
sake, O my God: for thy City and thy people are called by thy name. I might
instance in Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Ezra and Nehemiah, who all were much
upon their knees for the public, and made the very burden of their prayers
(as it were versus intercalaris frequently repeated) the establishment of
Jerusalem, upon the sure basis of truth and peace.

If we pass from the old Testament unto the New, we shall find the whole
Church earnest for one man, Act. 12. 5. Peter therefore was kept in Prison, but
prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him, (...),
Intentae, So Beza referring to the ardor of the mind. Sine intermissione, so
Erasmus. And how speed these prayers, Verse. 7. The Angel of the Lord came upon
him, and a light shined in the Prison, and he smote Peter on the side, and
raised him up: saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell off from his
hands. Upon this Scripture i will give you that observation of an excellent
Divine, lately gone Dr Harris Pet. Enlargement.
from us to heaven, in that rare Sermon called Peter's enlargement. The Enemies
(says he) shuts the Prison door, the Church opens Heavens doors, so there is
old tugging for the prisoner, but the Church will not let him go; says God, if
you will take no denial, there he is. And as the whole Church prayed for the
Apostle: so did one Apostle Paul, pray much for the whole Church, Romans 1. 9.
For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit, in the Gospel of his Son,
that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers. And Ephesians. 1.
16, 17. I cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my
prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory may give
unto you the spirit of wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of him.

2. To these examples i will add in the next place Scripture precepts for
Proof. Ministers are in a peculiar manner in joynd this 2. The Doctrine proved
by Scripture Precepts.
duty, Joel. 2. 17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep between
the porch, and the Altar, and let them say, spare thy people O Lord, and give
not thine heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should rule over them:
wherefore should they say among the people, where is their God? All are in
joined Psalm. 122. 7. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that
love thee: peace be within thy walls, and prosperity he within thy Palaces. And
James 5. 16. Confess your faults one unto another, and pray one for another,
etc.

In the third place i will assign some grounds, and reasons for confirmation: and
these I shall reduce unto three Heads. 3. The Doctrine confirmed by Reasons.


1. In respect of God.

2. Of prayer.

3. Of Jerusalem. All these are strong Arguments to persuade.

1. In respect of God, who both expects and promises a blessing R. 1. In
respect of God.
upon the means. The Lord so expects prayer, as that he will not grant great
mercyes unto his Church, but in and by his peoples prayers: God has engaged
himself in a Bond. His promise is his Bond, and he will have it put in suit
before he pay it: See what God promises, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day
of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And Jer. 33. 6.
Behold I will cure them, and reveal unto them the abundance of peace and
truth. And I will cause the captivity of Judah, and the captivity of Israel to
return, and will build them as at the first. So Zeph. 3. 20. In that time I
will bring you again, even in the time that I gather you: For I will make you a
name, and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turn back your
captivity before your eyes, says the Lord. What a glorious Church is
Prophesied, and what transcendent beauty will the Lord put upon them. Isai. 54.
11, 12. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest and not comforted, behold I will
lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundation with Saphirs, and I
will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy
borders of pleasant stones. By all these Hyperbolicall similitudes is set forth
the glorious condition of the Church in the days of the Gospel. These are
great Beauties and excellencies prophesied of the Church: yet as they are worth
praying for, so in good earnest they must be sought of God: Jer. 33. 3. Call
unto me and I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things, which
thou know not, c. 36. Ezekiel. 37. Thus says the Lord, I will yet for this be
enquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them, I will increase them with
men like a flock. Now prayer is Gods Ordinance, the language of his Spirit: the
music which he loves, no Melody in Gods account, like unto the prayers of his
people. Wherefore though God promises great things unto his people, who will
not fail one jot of his word: yet he will have his Children plye the Throne of
grace. He is the great Master of Requests and loves to see his Court full of
Suitors. He is the great God that hears prayers, and delights in prayers,
and it is his pleasure that his people should be his remembrancers, even to
spread before him the condition of his Church. For though it is best known to
him already: yet he will have them call, cry, and seek with Importunity, for
the accomplishment of those good and great things, which he intends for his own
people. Though deliverance was promised out of the Babylonish captivity at the
expiation of 70 years: yet they must pray for it, Psalm. 126. verse. 4. Turn
again our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the South.

A second Reason shall be taken from the great benefit of prayer. R. 2. From
the great Benefit of prayer
It is an isntrumental means under God, to obtain a blessing. By some it is
called Clavis viscerum Dei, virtus omnipotens. Their intentions are good (I
doubt not) who use these expressions: yet it is not safe to use them, without
an explanation of their sense. Without question great help comes by prayer, yet
the help depends not upon what we do, but upon God that gives to will and to
do. It is our duty to pray, and the praise and glory of the success and issue
coming of prayer, we must ascribe wholly unto the Lord, that hears prayers.

Now what helps prayer affords, may be represented in these following
particular Instances.

1. Prayer is an Universal help. It Is Solomon's (...): 1. Prayer is an
universal help.
when rain is wanting, when enemies get the victory, when there is death,
famine, and pestilence, then is a special time to pray, and God promises
audience, 1 Chronicles. 7. 13, 14. If I shut up Heaven that there be no rain, or if
I command the Locust to devour the Land, and if I send Pestilence among my
people: If my people which are called by my name, shall humble themselves and
pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear
from Heaven, forgive their sin, and heal their Land. This is a Sovereign
medicine of Gods own appointment for all diseases: This God prescribes as the
means, and the blessing of God makes it effectual. This is the poor man's
medicine, the sick man's medicine, the oppressed man's medicine. Nay both rich
and poor, sick and healthy, honorable and dishonorable, each must go to God
and seek his face in prayer. Every one in this case is a licensed Physician.
Every man cannot contribute money, but every man must contribute prayers, and
tears for the good of Jerusalem. Every one has not strength of body, to
oppose the Churches enemies, but every one must put up sighs, and supplications
at the Throne of grace, in the behalf of the Church.

2. Prayer is an invisible help: It passes through Ambuscades, 2. Prayer is an
Invisible help.
Courts of guard, strongholds, and fortifications. There was a strong guard
set over Peter: Yet the prayer of the Church prevailed with God, to send an
Angel for his deliverance. The Angel came invisibly, and took away Peter's
chains, threw open the Iron gate, and delivered the Prisoner. So Paul and
Silas were cast into Prison, put into the inner Prison, their feet fast in the
stocks. Here Is imprisonment upon imprisonment: yet their hearts were enlarged,
though their bodies were imprisoned, Acts 16. verse. 25. At midnight Paul and
Silas prayed, and sung praises unto God: and the Prisoners heard them. The
Nightingale warbles out her most melodious notes when her breast is upon a
Thorn. I am sure amidst sore afflictions Gods people in joy sweet consolations.
So that as outward comforts abound, divine comforts superabound. God settles
the tranquillity of the inward man, amidst the sufferings of the outward man.
It is reported that Archimedes made engines whereby he vexed his enemies at a
great distance off. Prayer I am sure, millions of miles off can reach the
Church as an Isntrumental means for its defense, and an offense unto its
enemies. Upon Hezekiah's prayer Senacherib was discomfited, upon J^hoshaphats
prayer Moab and Ammon were overthrown, upon Moses his prayer Pharaoh and
Amaleck were destroyed. And yet all these enemies did not know who hurt them.
The prayers of the faithful did rout the enemies sooner, then all their
weapons of war. Hereupon Mary Queen of Scots, was afraid V. Hist. of Scotland.
of John Knox his prayers. She professed she stood more in fear of that
Ministers prayers, than an Army of men. This help of prayer is ready, when help
from earth fails: when we see no visible way to succor us, this Invisible
means from Heaven, under God, works great things for us. Of all people even
enemies themselves are most afraid of a praying people: They meet with them at
a distance and wound them, and strike invisibly and give them deadly blows,
not knowing who hurts them. Although Achitophel falls a plotting, yet David
falls a praying, and so counterplots all his plots. Hence it came to pass,
that all the counsels of Achitophel were turned into foolishness. So when a
huge Army came against Asa, he betook himself to prayer, and they were
discomfited. Prayer will frustrate the secretest cabinet Counsels of
Politicians, and disappoint them. What shall I add more? The secretest hidden
deeds of darkness, through prayer are manifested and laid naked, and blasted
even in the bud.

3. Prayer is a speedy help, Dan. 9. verse. 20, 21. Whiles I was speaking,
praying and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people 3. Prayer is a
speedy help.
Israel, and presenting my supplication before the Lord my God for the holy
Mountain of my God, yea whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel
whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly
touched me etc. Before we speak God knows our thoughts, and what we would
have: and while we are speaking he promises to answer us, Isai. 65. verse. 24.
It shall come to pass that before they call I will answer, and whiles they are
yet speaking I will hear? Before Ammunitions, money, counsels of men can come
time enough, our prayers may come at the Throne of grace, and God may give a
gracious Answer.

But then a question will be moved. If prayer be such a present help, how comes
it to pass that answers to prayers are not returned,

For answer, we must know there is no delay, no tarrying in Gods decree: though
according to the execution thereof we may apprehend Hab. 2. verse. 3. For the
vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie,
though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry.
But God fo^beares to answer, that we may cry the louder: and opens not, that we
may knock the harder. Wherefore our prayers should have more vigor and
fervency: they should be rowsing prayers as we read, Psalm. 51. 1. Have mercy
upon me, O God according to thy loving kindness, etc. Psalm. 51. 1. Hear my
cry O God, attend unto my prayer. Psalm. 64. 1. Here my voice, O God, in my
prayer. Psalm. 80. 1. Give ear O shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph
like a flock, and that dwell between the Cherubims, shine forth. Not but
that God always hears: For his ear is never weary that it cannot hear, but
that God loves the earnest and importunate supplications of his Children.

4. Prayer is a prevalent help, Ex. 33. 10. Let me alone that my wrath may wax
hot against them, etc. And Moses besought the Lord 4. Prayer is a prevalent
help.
his God, and said why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people? etc. What
says the Apostle? Read James 5. 17. Elias was a man subject to like passions
as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not
on the earth by the space of three years and six months, etc. We are to
understand that there is no merit in our prayers, neither may we understand it:
as if any humane strength, or ability were in the least to be preferred before
the strength of God. But these words set forth the wonderful condescension of
God to his people, as if it were to suffer himself to be overcome by the
fervency and faithfulness of their spirits. Thus Jacob prevailed by prayer. He
wrestled with the Angel and prevailed, Genesis 32. 25, 28. He wrestled with God,
and God said, thy name shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel, for as a
Prince have thou power with God, and with men, and have prevailed. Compare this
with Hos: 12. verse. 4. Yea he had power over the Angel and prevailed: he wept
and made supplication unto him, he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with
us. So Hannah poured out her Heart with all fervency, and went away with
comfort, and received Samuel a Son of prayers. Devout prayer never goes away
with a repulse: As Saul (in his most sober thoughts) said of David. So say I of
prayer, it shall do great things and also shall prevail.

3. A third reason shall be drawn from Jerusalem, and that upon R. 3. Drawn
from Jerusalem.
a double ground, because Jerusalem needs our prayers, and likewise deserves
our prayers.

1. Jerusalem the type of the Church needs our prayers: It is 1. Jerusalem
needs our prayers.
militant on earth. It resembles Noah's Ark on the surface of the waters tossed
up and down, it is like to that smoking furnace showed to Abraham, Gen: 15. 17.
The Church is like the bush that Moses saw burning, but not consumed. It
stands among the Myrtle Trees in the bottom, Zech: 1. 11. The Church may
take up that self same complaint, Psalm: 129. 1, 2. Many a time have they
afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say, many a time have they afflicted
me from my youth, yet they have not prevailed against me. It is necessarily
then an incumbent duty upon us all, to remember Zion, and pray for the
prosperity of Jerusalem. However Papists lay down Prosperity to be a mark of
the true Church: yet all the Saints and Martyrs from generation to generation
by their sufferings and persecutions have abundantly confuted the groundlesness
of their opinion. The Church of God meets with various dispensations suitable to
that prophecy, Zech: 6. 6, 7. Where were white, black, grisled, and bay horses:
And for the most part Gods dearest Children drink deepest of the cup of
afflictions, and have a full cup of the waters of Marah wrung out to them. The
title of the 22. Psalm: is Aijeleth Shahar, the hind of the morning, intimating
the continual hunting, and persecuting of the People of God. However it shall
go well with the righteous, it shall go well with them that fear the Lord. God
has founded Zion, the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: Christ is
ever present with them, and though the Dragon cast out floods against the woman
yet she shall escape. And though there are Horns to push the Church, yet God
sends Carpenters to cut them off. In the mean Zech. 1. 21.
time how should we unite and pray for Zion, that it may be delivered and
established in glory. This means of prayer God expects, God blesses and
makes successful. Gebal, Ammon, Amaleck, and Philistines, all the enemies
that Hell can raise, are confederate against Jerusalem. The seed of the Serpent
is at continual enmity, even deadly feud with the seed of the woman. We read
of their consultation, Psalm. 83. 3, 4. They have taken crafty counsel against
thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. They have said, come, let us
cut them off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in
remembrance. We read of their associations, Isaiah 8. 10. Associate your
selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your selves and ye
shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel together and it shall come to naught:
speak the word, and it shall not stand: For God is with us. Of what necessity
then are assiduous prayers, and importunate Applications unto God in the
behalf of Zion.

2. The Church of God deserves our prayers. What high Epi^hites are ascribed
unto it: It is called the City of God, Heb. 12. 2. Jerusalem deserves our
prayers.
22. The house of God, 1 Timothy 3. 15. The delight of God, Isa. 62. 4. The love,
the dove, the spouse, the undefiled, Cant. 5. 2. A crown of glory, and a royal
Diadem in the hand of God, Isa. 62. 3. The body of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 23. And does
it not in all these respects deserve our prayers? Should not we honor where
God honors.

I shall add no more for confirmation. I now proceed to Application, Use 1.
For Reprehension.
and shall insist only upon four uses.

1. For Reprehension.

2. Exhortation.

3. Direction.

And 4. Consolation.

1. For Reproof. This Doctrine in the first place, breaths terror unto all
the enemies of the Church of God. If God put such an high honor, and estimate
upon his Church, as to engage his people to pray with all earnestness for it,
what shall we say of such as are so far from praying for the Church as they
oppose it, and set themselves in battle array against it. They mourn when it
goes well, and rejoice when it goes ill with Jerusalem. And thus they tread
Antipodes to divine Providence. Multitudes there are of Samballats and Tobiah's
temper, who have a spirit of contradiction, against the ways of Reformation.
Many hate the power of Godliness, and cannot abide circumspect walking but
reproach it, like the spies that brought an evil report of the promised Land
They calumniate and revile those who walk most closely with God.

Now the Churches Enemies will appear especially in times of Trial, when it
comes to suffering, losses, disgrace, poverty etc. Then all the Enemies to
religion will make that wicked choice to choose sin rather than affliction, as
Job speaks. Job. 36. 21.


But a second sort are to be reproved who are negligent, careless,
Indifferents, of Gallioes temper, they care for none of these things, They are
secure, settled upon their lee's, at ease in Zion, and are no whit affected with
the afflictions of Joseph. How many are there that never in good earnest, put
up a prayer for the Church of God in all their lives. They look upon these
things as not concerning them. They plainly show themselves to be a body
without the spirit to animate it: a carcass only, painted men, not living
members of Jesus Christ: For in Christ's body, when one member suffers the other
does Sympathize: They are (...), and confer subsidiary forces for the mutual
succor of each other: but where there is no Sympathy, and no fellow-feeling of
each others afflicted condition, This is a sign that the members of that body
are rotten, dead, like withered branches cut off from the Vine.

3. A third sort to be reproved, are all such who pray but faintly and
slightly, and do not put forth their utmost strength for Jerusalem. Some pray
now and then, when the humor takes them, but they flagge and hold not out: they
are not wrastlers with God as Jacob, they are not such Remembrancers as will
give him no rest, that will never leave of praying. Now it is an usuallsaying
Q^i^timide rogat, docet negare. Cold prayer, dead prayer, and drousy prayer are
no better than Gehazi'es touching of the Shunamites child. He went on in a
careless negligent manner, and laid his staff on the Child, but it was not
awakened, whereas when Elisha in good earnest with all his might laid out
himself, and put his mouth upon the child's mouth, and his hands upon the
child's hands, and his eyes upon the child's eyes, then the Child revived: so you
may read the History, 2 King. 4. 34. We read 1 Chronicles. 10. 14. That Saul
enquired not of the Lord: yet we read 1 Samuel 28. verse. 6. That Saul enquired of
the Lord. These places may thus be reconciled, Though Saul did after a manner
enquire: yet not in truth and faith, his enquiring was after a slight manner,
after an hypocritical formal way, like that of Balaam, Numb. 23. 10. Let me
dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like unto his: and like
unto Isreal's howling, Hos. 7. 14. And they have not cried to me with their
hearts, when they howled upon their beds, they assembled themselves for corn
and wine, etc. Wherefore then should we give God a slight service. He requires
the Male, the best of the flocks and there is a dreadful Curse, Mal. 1. 14.
Cursed be the deceiver which has in his flock a Male, and voweth and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing.

But in the second place here is a word of exhortation that we Use 2. For
Exhortation.
would all unite our forces for the Church in general, even the whole body of
Christ, however dispersed and distressed throughout the world. How many of
Christ's body suffer hard things? Some are imprisoned we must pray for the
prisoners enlargement. Some are under Antichristian Tyranny, and Christ has a
Church even where Satan dwells, we must pray that they may hold fast their
profession without wavering. Great things God has granted to a praying people,
and he is the same God, still as good and as gracious as ever. The Army called
(...), prayed and rain was poured down in abundance, to refresh the Pagan Army
of the Emperor, Insomuch ex ore adversariorum, it was confessed great was the
God of the Christians. Constantine that excellent Eccl. Hist. Eusebius.
Prince and Patron of Christians, would not after the example of his
Predecessors, suffer his picture to be drawn standing in a stately posture but
kneeling, for he ascribed his victories to the answer of prayers. Let us
remember likewise all the distressed Churches beyond the Seas, such as are in
misery, where their enemies are the chief, we should give them the Charity of
our prayers, counsels, compassions, purses, and our Bowels should be opened
wide toward their release. Polonia and other places cry out in the language of
Job, to his friends, Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for
the hand of God has touched me. To such as are afflicted pity Job. 19. 21.
should be showed: We should all imitate the Apostle being alike affected with
our Brethren, rejoicing with them that rejoice etc. We should make their cases
our own, of this excellent temper was the Apostle. Who is weak and I am not
weak? who is offended and I 2 Cor. 11. 29
burn not? as if all the burdens of the Saints, were laid upon his shoulders,
he was willing to bear them all. Jerome writing a commentary upon Ezekiel, and
hearing of the sacking of Rome, a place where he formerly lived, was so
affected that a long time he could think of nothing else: He laid to heart so
much the suffering of Gods people there, as he imagined himself to be in their
stead.

Furthermore in a more particular manner, let us remember in our prayers the
Land of our Nativity, the Church of England, Scotland and Ireland. We expect
shortly a Parliament, and we hope in the multitude of Councillors, there may
be safety. Formerly we have been frustrated of our expectations: High-raised
hopes have been disappointed. That of the Prophet may truly be applied to this
purpose: Have thou utterly rejected Judah? has thy Jer. 14. 19.
soul loathed Zion, why have thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us?
We looked for peace, and there is no good, and for the time of healing, and
behold trouble. We have been justly crossed in our hopes, because we have
Idolized men, and relied too much upon an arm of flesh. We are to call upon
the great counsel as the man of Macedonia did, Come and help us, and they
likewise call upon us, help us with your prayers. We may hope to speed the
better, if we pray the more. Let us pray as one man, that the Lord would
instruct the Counselllours after his own will, and teach the Senators wisdom.

What farther I shall speak in this use, shall come under these two heads.

1. What special things we must pray for, that our Jerusalem, our Church of
England may be established a praise in the earth.

2. What moving inducements may be assigned, to encourage us in the duty of
prayer.

For the first, Above all we must pray for the advancement of Religion, for the
establishing the power of Godliness. It is Religion that beautifies and adorns
a Nation: the Kings daughter, Gods Church and People are glorious within, their
decking is of pure gold. Grace ennobles and puts a glorious luster upon a
people. To name a few particulars.

1. Let us in an especial manner, pray for the increase of Godly 1. Pray for
Magist^ates.
Magistrates, Reprovers in the gate, such as will do judgment and justice.
There is a great promise made in those Gospel days, Isaiah 49. 23. Kings
shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Q^eens thy nursing Mothers, they shall
bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick the dust of thy
feet, etc. Our duty is to pray for them, so runs the Apostles command, 1 Timothy
2. 1. I exhort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made For all men, for Kings etc. Godly
Rulers are a blessing to a Nation, Jer. 5. 1. Run ye to and fro thorough the
streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places
thereof, if ye can find a man if there be any that executes judgment, that
seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. So Amos 5. 15. Hate the evil and love
the good, and establish judgment in the gate: it may be that the Lord God of
hoasts will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph. Where such Magistrates are,
we must pray for their continuance, and for a supply of their mortality, that
the Lord would send continually such as may dispense justice impartially, and
may be a terror unto evil doers, and a praise to them that do well.

2. Pray for faithful soul-saving Ministers. Many such in mercy 2. Pray for
Ministers.
the Lord has given us. We must pray that the Lord would increase the number
of them. But the Prophets live not for ever, wherefore we must pray for a Godly
succession of Ministers, that such may be encouraged, who are workmen that
needs not to be ashamed, and such may be removed as unsavory salt, who make
the sacrifice of God to be abhorred. There are yet left a faithful remnant,
sound in the faith, and holy in life (who are as far from Antichristianisme,
as their false accusers are from Charity) who labor in season, and out of
season, and are willing to spend, and be spent for the salvation of souls.
These in an especial manner must be encouraged by our prayers, that the Lord
would give them The seal of their Apostleship, and make their Ministry
isntrumental to convert and build up souls unto Jesus Christ. And we must
likewise be (...) Advocates and Patrons of their maintenance. It was the saying
of an eminent Gentleman in Sr. Benjamin Rudiard.
the long Parliament, that a scandalous maintenance would cause a scandalous
Ministry. It Is to be observed that Dioclesian did not do so much mischief to
the Ministry it self as Julian did. Dioclesian put many to death, which was an
horrid wickedness. But the Devil put another design into Julians head, to
take away all the maintenance of Ministers, and put down Schools of Learning,
and Ecclesiastical Histories will inform us, that by consequent, Julian did
the greater mischief. For though some particular persons were took out of the
way through Dioclesian's persecution, yet there arose up others in their stead.
But the taking away of all their lands, and revenues, did hinder a succession
of Ministers. And the robbing of Schools of learning, discouraged many from
the study of learned Arts and Sciences.

3. Let us all pray for the continuance of Gospel Ordinances 3. Pray for the
Continuance of the Gospel.
in their Liberty and purity. This is that which made Israel praiseworthy in
the eyes of the Nations: Deuteronomy. 46. 7. Keep therefore and do them for this is
your wisdom, and your understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall
hear all these statutes and say, surely this great Nation is a wise, and
understanding people. For what Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh
unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things, that we call upon him for? ^he
Gospel of Christ, the Word and Sacraments administered in their purity, the
Sabbath kept strictly, all these will be the praise and glory of our Nation.

4. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, both for Civil and Ecclesiastical peace.
Pray for Civil peace: It Is to me a great wonder that 4. Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem.
amidst all the concussions, and revolutions of these times, we in joy peace,
that we ^it under our own Vines, and Fig Trees, that meum and tuum are in some
measure preserved, that public Courts of Justice are opened, and that the
sword is not put to the decision of all controversies. We should pray that
peace may be continued, that all our Officers may be peace and exactors
righteousness I know none that has his eyes in his head, or grace in his
heart that is willing to imbroyl Isai. 60. 17.
the Nation in another civil war. We know by sad experi^n^e the Calamities of
War, how thankful ought we to be for the peace we yet in joy, and how ought we
to pray for the continuance of it, that Peace may be extended as a river, and
righteousness like a mighty stream. For Ecclesiastical peace we must pray:
there are two great Prophecies, Zeph. 3. 9. Then will I turn to the people, a
pure language that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him
with one consent. And Zach. 13. 9. I will bring the third part through the
fire, Isai. 66. 12.
and will r^f^ne them as Sylver is refined, and try them as Gold is tried,
they shall call upon my name, and I will hear them, I will say it is my
people, and they shall say the Lord is my God. There is an Unity of the spirit,
which we must endeavor to keep, and there are seven Ones mentioned, Ephesians. 4.
4, 5, 6. One body, one spirit, one hope, one God, one faith, one baptism, one
God and Father of all, etc. I remember a patheticall speech, which Luther uses
to the Pastors of the Church of Strusburg, Vobis oro perswadeatis etc. (i. e.)
I pray you (sath he) be persuaded that I shall always be as desirous to
embrace unity, and concord, as I am desirous to have the Lord Jesus to be
propitious to me: Martin Bucer writes to a Godly Minister Quis non vita etiam
sua redimat submorum isthuc infinitum dissidii scandalum? Bucer.
very high expressions. Who would not says he purchase with his life, the
removing of that infinite scandal that comes by dissension? Wherefore let us
study the things that make for peace and edification. Let dividing names be
laid aside amongst sound Christian: Quirites once named, Cesars soldiers were
pacified. O that Christian being named, union and reconciliation might be
obtained!

Let us all labor to approve our selves members of the Church of Jesus Christ,
as living stones in that building. The Apostle blames the Corinthians for
siding, and making parties, 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12. It has been declared to me of
you, my brethren, by them which are of the House of Cloe, that there are
contentions among you. Now this I say, that every one of you says, I am of
Paul, and I am of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. The name of
Christian should swallow up names of division.

Now for Motives, the second thing propounded, here I shall 1 Motive God will
make Jerusalem a praise.
add two only.

1. That God will make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

For first, Believe it God will not fail one tittle of his word. All the
promises made unto Jerusalem, shall every one be fulfilled 1. Because he
promises.
in their season: Psalm. 48. 1, 2. Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised
in the City of our God, in the mountain of his Holiness, beautiful for
situation, the joy of the whole earth is Mount Zion, on the sides of the North,
the City of the great King. And Psalm. 50. 2. Out of Sion, the perfection of
beauty, God has shined. For Instance: Greater shall be the light of knowledge
of the Church in the Gospel. Isai. 11. 9. The earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, Isai. 60. 1, 19. Arise,
shine for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.
Verse. 19. The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness
shall the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an
everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. These great Promises refer unto the
Gospel.

2. The Church shall be enlarged: Isai. 51. 1, 2, 3. Hearken unto me ye that
follow after righteousness, ye that seek the Lord, look to the rocks whence
ye are hewn etc. Look unto Abraham your Father, and Sarah that bare you, for I
called him alone and blessed and increased him. For the Lord will comfort Zion,
he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of God,
etc.

3. Holiness shall be improved: Deuteronomy. 26. 18, 19. The Lord has avouched thee
this day to be his peculiar people, etc. To make thee high above all Nations,
which he has made in praise, in name and in honor, that thou may be an
holy people unto the Lord thy God as he has spoken.

2. Consider those that pray most for Jerusalem, shall reap 2. Mot. Those that
pray for Jerusalem shall reap the greatest comfort.
the greatest comfort in Jerusalem's establishment. They that have ventured
most in the flock, shall receive most in the return. In Jerusalem's peace we
shall have peace: Our fraught is imbark^ in this ship. As we have sown, so
shall we reap. We have had a wet seed time, and have wept and fasted for the
Church, but we shall have a joyful harvest. Wherefore confirm the weak knees,
and strengthen the feeble hands.

But I proceed to a third use for Direction. How must we give Use 3. For
Direction.
God no rest? After what manner, Must we thus present our supplications to the
Throne of grace?

Amongst many I shall fix only on three properties of such a prayer, as
consists in giving God no rest according to the Text, and they are Faith,
Fervency, and perseverance.

1. We must pray in faith. The promise is that what we ask believing 1. We must
pray in faith.
we shall receive. No prayer unless coming from a Principle of faith, can
obtain acceptance, Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is impossible to please God:
And whatsoever is not of faith is sin. All prayers must be put up in faith,
believing in Christ and expecting from him only help and comfort. In all our
approaches to the Father let us come in the name of Christ, believing, and
relying only on his merits. Christ is the Bridegroom, and the Church his
spouse. Christ is the Head, the Church his body. Faith is an Instrument of
Union to unite the members unto the Head.

2. We must pray with fervency as Jacob wrastled, Hannah 2. We should pray with
fervency.
poured out her Heart. We must imitate the Importunate widow, Luke 18. 1.
Christ spoke a Parable to this end, that men ought always to pray and not to
faint. The woman of Canaan, who would have no nay: And so Luke 11. 8. Though he
will not rise and give him because he is his friend: yet because of his
Importunity he will rise etc. (...). We must besiege Heaven, and offer an holy
Violence to the Throne of grace. The violent take it by force, and the
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much, James 5. 16. (...),
an inward working, or an inwrought prayer. Those that were (...), did great
things.

3. We must pray with perseverance. We must pray and not faint 3. We must pray
with perseverance.
(...), Luke 18. 1. The Word (as Eustathius observes) is derived (...), a
cedendo, from shrinking back as some cowardly Soldiers do in time of danger.
Our duty is to pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5. 19. Job makes it the mark of an
Hypocrite that he will not pray always, he will not always call upon God.

The fourth and last Use, is a word of Consolation to praying Use 4. For
Consolation.
Christians. Such as are much in Prayer, who tugg hard at the Throne of grace,
and in joy frequent Communion with God in this Ordinance: They use prayer not
only as a duty commanded, but as a means to obtain a blessing. Their Hearts
are heated, their affections warmed, and prayer is their Privilege, as well as
service: For they have access unto the Throne of grace, they cry Abba Father,
they pray from a spirit of Adoption, they come to God as Children to a Father,
and such have strong hopes to speed. The Lords secret is with the Righteous,
they are his jewels, and his peculiar treasure. Now the Prayers of the
righteous avail much for themselves, and for the public: wherefore O
Christians hold on praying, lift up your Hearts with your Hands to God in the
Heavens, continue to be Jerusalems Advocates, and what ever things you see
coming as the Answers of Prayers, those will be most highly valued. Go on then,
pray for Jerusalem, fast and weep for Jerusalem, and in Gods good time you
shall see Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

THE CRUCIFIED CHRISTIAN, REPRESENTED.
From Gal: 5. verse. 24. And they that are Christ's, have Crucified the flesh,
with the affections and lusts.
UPON a review of the precedent verses, you will Sermon 5. Preached at St.
Marye's Oxon. Feb. 13. 1658.
observe a double Catalogue, one of the deeds of the flesh, verse. 19, 20, 21.
Another of the fruits of the spirit, verse. 22. Concerning these the Apostle
determines, that against such there is no law (i. e.)

1. There is no law to Condemn them.

2. There is no law to compel them. Because they as freely obey God, as if
there were no law. Their freedom obliges more to obedience, not in the least
to disobedience.

Now the scope of my Text is to prove, what was immediately delivered before,
that there is no law against spiritual men: and the Text gives a double
reason, one is because spiritual men are Christ's therefore there is no law
against them: the other is because that is crucified in spiritual men, which
the law condemns: namely, the flesh with the affections and lusts: therefore
there is no law to condemn the spiritual man.

The words then in their d^ift and Latitude contain a description, or a
Character of true believers, and the scope of the Words lies obviously before
us in these fundamental Doctrines.

1. That there are a peculiar people that are Christ's, and have special
interest in him.

2. All those that are Christ's and have special interest in him, are such as
have crucified the flesh with it is affections and lusts; These two points
contain the full scope and substance of the words, and what needs explication
in the Text, shall be given in upon the prosecution of the Doctrines as I go a
long.

I resume the first, That there are a p^culiar people etc. This I Method
propounded.
shall endeavor to clear from several distinguishing names, the nature,
grounds, and benefits of those that are Christ's, and have interest in him: and
after this manner I shall handle the Doctrinall part of my Text, which done, I
shall inquire how all this may concern us, as reducible unto point of
practice, this shall constitute the particular Use and Application of all.

1. To prove my Assertion. It Is plain if we inquire into Scripture 1. The
Doctrine proved.
Testimony, what special distinguishing names and Titles are appropriated unto
those who are Christ's, and have special interest in him. Sometimes Christ
calls them his friends, Joh. 15. 14, 15. Sometimes he calls them disciples,
Joh. 13. 35. Children, Matthew. 17. 26. They are a chosen Generation, a royal
Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2. 9. They are Kings and
Priests unto God, Rev. 1. 6. They are a peculiar treasure unto God, Exodus 19.
5. A Crown of Glory, a Royal Diadem in the hand of God, Isai. 62. 3. The
dearly beloved of Gods Soul, Isai. 12. 7. The Sons of God, Hos. 1. 10. They
are called Gods Jewels, Mal. 3. 15. Christ calls them his sheep, Joh. 10. 27.
They are his Church, his Spouse, his adopted Children, Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven, the Family of the First borne. Accordingly the Holy Ghost
gives names and titles unto those, and those only that have interest in Jesus
Christ.

2. In the second place, lets make inquiry into the nature of this 2. What it
is to have Interest in Christ.
interest in Christ, what is it to be Christ's?

Ans. It consists in two things viz: having Union and Communion with him.

1. True believers are Christ's by virtue of Union with him, 1. True believers
have union with Christ.
Christ is the Vine they are the branches, Christ is the head of his body the
Church, Ephesians. 5. 23. True believers are in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Christ prayed
for them that they may be one, Joh. 17. 21. Faith knits us to Christ as an
Instrument, the spirit of God is the efficient cause of this Union.

2. True believers are Christ's by virtue of Communion with 2. True believers
have communion with Christ.
him, He is the head and has influence upon his members, they participate of
the sap and nourishment of the root, a communication of water from the
fountain to the stream, 1 John 1. 3. Truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.

But 3ly, What grounds may be given why, and how it comes to 3. The Reasons.
pass, that there are such a people who are Christ's, and have interest in him?

1. The first ground shall be drawn from the promises, because R. 1. Drawn from
the Premises.
there are a peculiar people who only have right unto the Gospel promises, and
they only who have interest in Christ, have right unto the promises: The
promises of Eternal life belong only to true Believers, Joh. 3. 16, 36. These
are they that come unto Christ, and he has promised that he will not cast
away, Joh. 6. 35, 37.

2. Another ground shall be drawn from the Donation of God R. 2. From the
Fathers donation.
the Father: They have a Kingdom, Luke 12. 32.

3. From Christ's Redemption, For ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.
Christ has purchased his Church with his R. 3. From Christ's Redemption.
blood, Act. 20. 28. Zipporah said to Moses a bloody husband have thou been to
me, She spoke concerning the circumcision: much more may Christ say to his
Church, A bloody Spouse have thou been unto me, for thou have cost me my blood.

4. From the Sanctification of the spirit, the Saints are a people R. 4. From
the sanctification of the Spirit.
loved and washed, even washed with the lover of regeneration, and renewed by
the Holy Ghost, Tit. 2. 5. And these have the image of Christ stamped on them,
which after the image of God is created in righteousness and holiness. Ephesians.
4. 24.


In he 4th place. What are the benefits which those receive that have interest
in Christ.

The 1. Is Justification, and this is free, as free as the freest gift, Romans 3.
24.

2. It consists in Remission of sins, Psalm. 32. 1.

3. In the Imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us, and imputing our
sins unto Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21. And Justification is the mother grace,
from whence such a rare issue proceeds, as peace, joy, access unto the Throne
of Grace, hope, patience, Romans 5. 1, 2. etc.

2. Those that have interest in Christ, have the benefits of Christ's
intercession, at the right hand of God, he interceeds for all his Children,
Heb. 7. 25. Romans 8. 34. For them Christ prays, and for them exclusively, I
pray for them, I pray not for the world, Joh. 17. 9.

3. They have the benefit of special providence, the Guardianship of Angels,
Psalm. 34. 7. Heb. 1. ult.

4. They have a Sanctified use of all the creatures of God, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22.
All are yours, and ye are Christ's etc. They in joy Christ in the creature, and
with the creature have Christ's love tokens, Romans 8. 32. With him they have all
things.

5. They shall hereafter reap the benefit of glorification, so runs the Climax,
Whom he did predestinate them he also called, and whom he called them he also
justified, and whom he justified them he also glorified, Romans 8. 30.

5. Now in the last place, what does all this concern us?

Ans. Much every way, as will appear by the particular Application Applicat.
of all.

1. Here Is an Use of Consolation to those that are Christ's. Art Use 1. For
Consolation.
thou in a doubt, he is thy Counselor, Isai. 9. 6. Art thou in distresses, he
is thy comforter: Art thou tempted? Christ was tempted, and is able to succor
those that are tempted. Art thou full of infirmities? Christ himself had
infirmities, which were not sinful, and Christ is a compassionate high Priest,
touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. Art thou reviled,
censured, nay condemned? O go to Jesus Christ, get assurance of thy interest in
him, and then claim for thy comfort, Romans 8. 31. If God be for us, who can be
against us.

2. For Exhortation. Art thou Christ's, let thy life give a proof Use 2. For
Exhortation.
hereof, give up thy self unto Christ, let him be thy King and Lord to rule
and govern thee, set up Christ Commander in chief in thy soul. As the
Centurion professed of the ready obedience of his servants, so do thou, go when
Christ bids thee go, come when Christ bids thee come, give thy self wholly to
be disposed, counseled, and governed by Jesus Christ, As then we have received
the Lord Jesus Christ, so let us walk in him.

3. Here Is an Use of Trial, whether we are Christ's or no. Use 3. For Trial.


1. One Character is the new creature as we have it, 2 Cor. 5. 17.

2. Another we have Joh. 15. 5. Bringing forth much fruit.

3. Another we have 2 Timothy 2. 19. To depart from iniquity.

4. Another we have 1 John 3. 3. To be borne again.

5. Another we have in my Text, viz: Crucifixion of the flesh, which brings in
the second Doctrine, wherein I purpose to stay longer: Thus it was propounded
--

2. That those that have Interest in Christ have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts.

For the unfolding of this point of Doctrine, I shall inquire, Method.


1. What Is meant by flesh?

2. What Is meant by affections and lusts of the flesh?

3. What Is meant by crucifying the flesh, with its affections and lusts?

4. I shall then give in the proof of Doctrine?

And 5. and lastly conclude with particular Application.

1. By flesh we are to understand the corruption of the whole Q. 1. What Is meant
by flesh. Perkins in Loc.
nature: for the right apprehending hereof, I shall distinguish with Judicious
Mr. Perkins of three things.

1. The nature of Man.

2. The faculties of Nature.

3. And corruption of both.

Now this distinction must be without separation of nature from faculties, or
of corruption from either, so as we may say truly, that the nature and powers
of the soul are corrupted. Now this corruption consists.

1. In the depravation of Gods image, man was created after Gods image, but by
reason of sin he has defaced the same.

2. In a pronenesse to all wickedness, so that the nature of man is evil
continually, and the seeds of all rebellion are sown in the corrupt nature of
mankind, wherefore the Lord threatens That Genesis 6. 3.
his spirit should no longer strive with man, for that he is but flesh, (i. e.)
he is become corrupted, he has fallen from his Creator, and become fleshly and
sinful: what this flesh is the Apostle tells, Romans 7. 18. Gal. 6. 8. Ephesians. 2. 3.

2. In the next place we are to inquire, what is meant by affections Q 2. What Is
meant by Affections and lusts.
and lust's.

Ans. By affections we are to understand inordinate affections, which bear
sway in carnal men, their affections are out of order, irregular, immoderate,
and they are set upon the wrong object, they love where they should hate, and
hate where they should love. Anger is sometimes an inordinate affection, and it
bared sway in Cain against Abell. Envy is sometime an inordinate affection, and
it prevailed in Saul against David. Sorrow is sometimes immoderate and
inordinate in Ahab, when he could not get Naboths Vineyard, he was heavy, and
displeased, 1 King. 21. 4. Love was an inordinate affection in the men of the
last times: Lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3. 4.

2. By Lusts we are to understand, inordinate and insatiable desires after the
things of the world, as Riches, Honors, Pleasures, of this sort of inordinate
affections are coveteousnesse, pride, gluttony, etc.

3. In the third place, what is meant by crucifying the flesh, with Q. 3. What Is
meant by crucifying the flesh etc.
its affections and lusts?

Ans. For answer hereunto, we are to distinguish of crucifying, either as the
action of Christ; or as the action of a Christian.

1. Lets consider Crucifixion as the action of Christ, and this 1. Crucifixion
as the Action of Christ.
consists in three particulars.

1. Upon the Cross, Christ stood in our Room, and bared the burden of our
sins, and made an expiation for them: in this respect we are said to be
crucified with him, Gal. 2. 20.

2. The second is in us, when Christ conveyes the virtue of his death in us, to
cause the death of sin: when Christ gives us his spirit to mortify the deeds
of the body, Romans 8. 13.

3. The third is in Baptism, whereby Christ sealed the two former to them that
believe, Romans 6. 3, 6.

2. Lets consider crucifixon as the Action of a Christian, and 2. Crucifixion
as the Action of a Christian.
this consists in the imitation of Christ crucified, after this manner, Christ
was attached, apprehended, and brought into the presence of Pilate, so must we
bring our selves into the presence of God, Christ was arraigned at the
Tribunal of Pilate, so must we arraigne our selves at the bar of Christ's
judgment seat: Christ was indicted and accused, so must we indite and accuse
our selves: Christ was condemned, so must we condemn and judge our selves,
after sentence past there followed execution, Christ was crucified: so must we
proceed to the execution of our sins, and corruptions. We must labor to be
the death of every sin, to give every lust a mortifying blow: we must not
spare any Ruling sin, that was Saul's sin in sparing Agag: but we must
destroy all, both great and small: we must not only mourn for sin, but hate
it: not only hate it, but endeavor the destruction of it. But the further
Enlargement of these things, I shall leave to the use of Examination.

4. In the fourth place, it remains that I prove the assertion, 4. The
Doctrine proved.
that those that are Christ's, are such crucified persons; St Paul thus
professes of himself, That he was crucified with Christ. But I will prove the
point by reason.

1. Because the flesh is enmity against God, Romans 8. 7. (...), R. 1. The
fleshly mind is enmity against God.
and natural men are (...), Romans 5. 10. Now flesh and blood, corrupt nature,
unregeneracy, the old man cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, To be carnally
minded is death, Romans 8. 6. and such cann^t please God, Romans 8. 8. now we may
not spare Gods enemies: The Children of Babylon were to be dashed in pieces:
Amaleck was to be utterly overthrown, these were Gods enemies: Likewise the
affections and lusts of the flesh, are Gods enemies: these must be slain,
these must be crucified.

2. Because Christians ought to be conformable unto Christ's R. 2. Christians
ought to be conformable unto Christ's death.
death, Phil. 2. 10. Romans 6. 5, 6. As Christ died for our sins, so we must be
a mortifying of sin, sin must not be suffered to live: we are in this world
in a dying condition, we must never give over fighting, till we return away
conquerors: though we sin as long as we be in this world, and have flesh as
well as spirit, yet we must never give over striving for mastery over the flesh.

3. God will have us exercised in a continual warfare, and R. 3. God will have
us exercised in continual warfare.
combat against the flesh: it is an inbred enemy, and it has many lurking
holes, many Apologies, many pretenses, we must be continually resisting the
flesh, even unto blood striving against sin, Heb. 12. 4. Here only a deadly
Feud is lawful; This must be transmitted from Generation, to Generation, sin
must be crucified, Romans 6. 6. Sin must be subdued, Mich. 7. 18, 19. And above
all sins we had need fight most violently against fleshly lusts, they being
grand enemies unto the soul, 1 Pet. 2. 11. It Is true the Canaanite will be in
the Land, sin will be in our mortal bodies, whilst we be in this world: but
we must never let it reign, never suffer it to have any peace, never give it
quarter, but be continually resisting of and fighting against it.

Now to apply what has been said particularly to every ones Applicat.
Conscience, here are six Uses to be made.

1. Information. 2. Reprehension. 3. Exhortation. 4. Examination. 5. Direction.
And 6. Consolation.
1. For Information, and that in two particulars. Use 1. For Information.


First, Hereby we are informed what a carnal man is: namely, one that is
carried away with some inordinate affections; or some inordinate lust. Herod
did many good things (as the Text says) he heard John Baptist (...) sweetly,
yet he was but a carnal man, Joh. 6. 20.
for he was possessed with an inordinate love of his Brother Philips wife. Saul
slew many of the Amalekites, but he was but a carnal man, he obeyed the
commandment of God too halves: He was partial in his obedience. Judas was a
disciple of Christ, yet but a carnal man, he was carried away with an
inordinate lust of covetousness, he was a Thief and carried the bag. Joh.
12. 6.


2. Hereby we are informed what a spiritual man is, he is one that crucifieth
his lusts, he is a man crucified unto the world, and the world unto him: he is
a wrastler, and a warrior against flesh and blood, even against corruptions: he
makes it his business to give a deadly blow to them all.

2. The second Use is for Reproof of several sorts of persons. Use 2. For
Reproof.


1. It Reproves those common sort of Protestants, who would be accounted
Christians, and Protestants: but there is no change at all wrought in their
hearts, nor in their lives: they profess themselves Christians, but they live
without Christ: they know not what Regeneration, Adoption, the new Creature
means: The old sent still remains in them, they are covetous, worldly minded,
Sabbath Breakers, swearers, etc. And yet these would go under the name of
Christians, but where is the crucifying of the flesh? where is the mortifying of
their lusts: the want whereof evidently proves them to be only nominall, not
real Christians.

2. This Doctrine reproves such, in whom there is some beginning of a change:
but it is but partial, it is not a thorough change: some sins they leave which
are most cross to their profit, and reputation: but others they hug, and
foster: some sweet sin, some ancient pleasant customary sin, they will not
forgo: a beloved bosom sin, they will not crucify: they would have a
dispensation in this, with Naaman, and would be feign pardoned in that: but
these fosterings of a darling sin, show the heart to be rotten: David professed
his uprightness, by keeping himself from his own iniquity, Psalm. 18. 23.
Right eyes ought to be plucked out and right hands cut off.

3. This reproves those that love not to hear their sins reproved, if a
preacher touch them to the quick, and tell them of co^senage in the trade,
double dealing, equivocation etc. and show them the evil of their worldly
mindedness, pride, and vain glory, etc. They cannot abide such plain
dealing, but account of such a plain dealing Preacher, as Ahab accounted of
Michaiah a great enemy, and as the Apostle Paul himself was accounted an enemy
because he told them the truth.

3. The third Use is for Exhortation, to press home the duties Use 3. For
Exhortation.
of the Text, to set upon this great work of crucifying the flesh, let the
proud man labor to crucify his pride, the voluptuous man his pleasures, the
worldly man his covetousness, the choleric man his anger: here is a great work
indeed, it cannot be done easily: There Is required sweat and blood, there is
much diligence; A Christian must be in fastings, and watchings often: often
tugging hard at the oar, often in prayer, and wrestling with God. It Is a
greater victory for a man to conquer his pride, anger, earthly mindedness,
etc, Then to take a City by storm, Prove. 16. 32. I will cast in further two or
three Considerations, to move us to this duty impartially.

1. Consider execution of justice upon Gods enemies is acceptable Consid. 1.
Execution of justice is acceptable unto God.
unto him, after Achan was stoned, the valley of Achor was a door of hope, Hos.
2. 14. The works of the flesh are enemies to God, and must be destroyed
impartially.

2. If we be not the death of sin, it will be the death of us, Consid. 2. If
we kill not sin, it will kill us.
it will bring eternal death: shall not we rather kill then be killed, rather
slay sin and destroy it, then let it slay and destroy us? Every sin is
destructive to the soul, there is a pit of destruction whereinto sinners fall,
Psalm. 55. 23.

3. Of all sins those that are most pleasing to flesh and blood, Consid. 3.
etc.
delightful sins those are most pernicious and destructive to the soul:
Immoderate mirth and jollity at Ammons Feast, were the harbingers of his ruin:
when his heart was merry with wine, then was he slain. Lets then every one
beware of the Siren songs of the flesh, let us not hearken to them least we be
enchanted therewith to our utter destruction.

But I proceed to a fourth Use for Examination. Here Is the Use 4. For Examinat.
grand Question to be put home unto us all, whether we are such persons, that
have Crucified the flesh with its affections and lusts?

Ans. For Answer hereunto, by way of Character, I Will set down the Properties of
a crucified person.

1. A crucified person has his affections crucified to the deeds 1.
Crucifixion of the affections.
of the flesh, he is none of those of whom the Apostle speaks, Romans 8. 5. who
mind the things of the flesh: The word is (...). Now a crucified person does
not relish nor savor fleshly things, his love, desires, hopes, Joys are not
fixed upon carnal, sensual pleasures: what a wonderful change is here
wrought? when as in the state of unregeneracy, carnal lusts, sensual
pleasures, took up a man's joy, desire, and delight, his discourses, heart,
pleasure and all. These were carried down with this stream, but after God had
broke in upon the heart, and renewed the mind, and sanctified the affections,
the man becomes another manner of man, what he formerly loved now he hates:
what he formerly most rejoiced in, are now his greatest burdens and causes of
sorrow: and what is the reason! Because he is a mortified person, he has
mortified his members (as the Apostle speaks) Col. 3. 5. and not only
particular members, but the whole body likewise, even the deeds of the body,
Romans 8. 13.

2. A crucified person has a quickening virtue from Christ, 2. There Is
quickening virtue from Christ.
to bring forth the fruits of the spirit, as love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, etc. Gal. 5. 22. A crucified person is dead, and alive,
(i. e.) dead to the works of the flesh, and alive to the fruits of the spirit.
By virtue of Christ's death sin is mortified, and by virtue of his
resurrection, we are raised up to newness of life.

3. A crucified person is weary of the world. The world is a 3. A crucified man
is weary of the world.
burden to him, and what is the Reason, but because the love of the world is
enmity against God. A man upon the cross, O what pains does he endure! his
heart hankers not after honors, pleasures, pomp and vanities: hereupon the
Apostle glories upon the cross of Christ: By whom (says he) the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world, Gal. 6. 14. But with a caution you
must understand this. A man may not be so weary of the world, as to be
impatient of life, and unwilling to live against the will of God, with Job, we
must wait our appointed time till our change come, Job. 13. 14. Much less may
any hasten their own death, and be their own executioner, this is self
murder. It was said of Cleombrotus that when he had read over Plato's book of
the Immortality of the Soul, he threw himself down a steep Rock to be made
partaker of immortality, this was a desperate act of wickedness. But my
meaning is this, we being crucified unto the world, dare not set up our rest,
our hearts, our affections upon the world: we cannot be satisfied with worldly
accommodations, and pleasures: the soul can take no acquiescency in earthly
things, O how many are there that are acquainted with God, of the Apostles
mind, Phil. 1. 23. Who have a desire to depart, and to be with Christ.

4. All crucified person live another life, then the men of the Charact. 4. A
crucified person lives another life then the men of the world do.
world do, they live a life that the world is not acquainted with all, and that
is a life of faith, Gal. 2. 20. This life gives them a sacred acquaintance with
God, a sight of him that is invisible, (as was said of the Patriarchs) Heb. 11.
21. Hereupon it comes to pass that they mind heavenly things, have their
conversation in heaven, and set their affections on things above, and not on
things below. This life of faith is a heavenly life, it causes a Christian to
find a heaven upon earth, it is the sweetest of all lives, none like thereunto.

5. I proceed to a fifth Use for Direction, and this use I shall cast Use 5.
For Direction.
into two heads.

1. What we are to crucify.

2. What duties are especially requisite for the crucifixion of them. Q. 1.
What we are to crucify? 1. All inordinate affections.


1. What we are to crucify? For Answer, its said in the Text affections, and
lusts, more particularly.

1. All inordinate affections ought to be crucified as immoderate love of any
earthly thing, Rachel was so importunate for children, as she said in a great
passion, Give me children or else I dye, and so for joy, the Rich man in the
Gospel did sing a Requiem unto himself, and said to his soul eat, drink,
and be merry. Thus voluptuous men desire pleasures, and Ambitious men desire
honors, and rich men hope in their riches, and say to the wedge of Gold thou
art our confidence.

2. All Ruling lusts are to be crucified, Pride, Passion, Envy, 2. Ruling
corr^ptions must be crucified.
these are to be crucified, those three are to be crucified especially, viz.
the Lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life. And there is
great reason why Ruling lusts should be crucified.

1. Because Ruling lusts are the fountain of all mischief, Jam. 4. 1.

2. They are the souls enemies, 1 Pet. 2. 11.

3. They allure and entice the soul to evil, 2 Pet. 2. 18.

Now these impediments being thus removed, the duties that are to be put in
practice are these.

1. To inquire after, and get a knowledge of the evil and great Dut. 1.
Inquire into the evil of sin.
mischief, which the ways of sin, and the pursuits of carnal Lusts bring
unto the soul, they are deceitful, Ephesians. 4. 22. We expect this and the other
satisfaction from them, and they beguile and deceive our expectations, they are
called foolish and hurtful lusts, 1 Timothy 6. 9. Destructive, worldly lusts,
Tit. 2. 12. Dut. 2. Be acquainted with the pleasures of Godliness. Dut. 3.
Study the beauty and riches of Christ.


2. Be well acquainted with the pleasure, and profit in the ways of
Godliness: for pleasure, Prove. 3. 17. for profit, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

3. Study the Beauty, Riches, and all the excellencies that are in Christ,
Christ is beauty it self, he is the fairest of ten thousands, for riches he
has all treasures, for wisdom he is the wisdom of the Father. Had men their
senses exercised, and their understandings inlightend, they would not be such
fools as to pursue brutish pleasures and vain delights, and in the mean time
neglect their precious souls. Had men their eyes in their heads, they would
not make merchandise of trifles, and neglect the pearl of price: but
multitudes there are now a days, who bestow more pains to satisfy a lust,
then to get Jesus Christ, and with less pains they might get Christ, then get
a lust satisfied.

4. Give not the least liberty to the flesh to sin. Christians Dut. 4. Give
not liberty to the flesh to sin.
have great liberty by Christ, but no liberty to sin, no allowance in any
lust, not for a Cloak of Malitiousnesse, 1 Pet. 2. 16. Saints are not the
Servants of Corruption, 2 Pet. 2. 19.

5. Labor to keep thy body undefiled, Know ye not that your Dut. 5. Keep thy
body undefiled.
body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. Shall I prostitu^e my body
to Mammon? etc. Shall a lust be entertained in Gods Temple, shall a base lust
be where Gods Temple should be? Christ will not dwell in a polluted body, in a
cage of unclean birds. Dut. 6. Be a fighting against every corruption.


6. Be a fighting, wrestling, and struggling against every corruption, never lay
down thy arms, but hold up thy weapons fighting against every corruption.
Labor to destroy the flesh by the sword of the spirit, take the whole armor
of God as you are exhorted, Ephesians. 6. 13.

7. And lastly, apply Christ crucified home unto your own Dut. 7. Apply Christ
crucified unto the soul.
souls, and believe that Christ is not only crucified for us, but that we are
crucified with him. Where this faith is, sin shall have no dominion over you.
Believe that Christ is able to subdue thy lusts, and mortify thy corruptions,
and therefore go to him for strength to conquer thy lusts, and beg that he
would beat down Satan under thy feet, believe that help is laid on Christ who
is mighty, and that he is able to save to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. Do thou
thy duty in striving against sin, and apply Christ by faith, and believe that
there is virtue in his blood, to cure thee of all diseases: His blood is the
blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things then the blood of Abel: His
blood is mortifying blood, cleansing, healing, meritorious blood. Go then to
Christ for victory against sin, Christ is the great Physician only able to
heal thee. He is a Counselor for wisdom, a Rock for strength, a Treasure
for riches, a Fountain opened: There Is fullness in him, Col. 1. 19. compare
this with Joh. 1. 16. And of his fullness, we have received grace for grace.

6. The sixth Use is for Consolation unto Gods Children, who Use 6. For
Consolation.
have been thus employed, in striving to crucify sin, and in some good
measure they have obtained victory: this is an excellent employment, to be
wrestling against corruption, beating down the body, bringing it into
subjection.

But it will be objected, That sin is in the best of Gods children,

Ans. 1. You must know, that in this life there are imperfections

2. Sin though it is, yet it Reigns not in the Regenerate, Romans 6. 12. verse.
14.

3. The Regenerate make not a trade of sin, 1 John 3. 9. They are said (...)
but not (...).

4. Sin is the grief, disease, burden of Regenerate men, wherefore they
grieve that they sin, and would feign be in that condition where they may
sin no more, hereupon they cry out for a deliverer, Romans 7. 24.

5. It Is the endeavor of Regenerate persons to conquer every sin, they allow
not themselves in sin, they strive to destroy bosom sins, Ps. 18. 23.

6. God accepts of Evangelicall Perfection. (i. e.) sincere Intentions, and
endeavo^rs, for action; the will for the deed. Wherefore then though flesh
remains as well as spirit, yet the spirit at length will prevail, and return
conqueror, and herein consists the great conquest of Christians, to conquer the
flesh, to subdue all inordinate affections, and insatiable desires: and this is
that which I have pressed from my Text, To crucify the flesh with its affections
and lusts.

GODS LOVE IN CHRIST, DISCOVERED.
From Rom: 5. verse. 8. But God commends his love toward us, in that whilst
we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
THE Apostle having disputed at large, the Doctrine Sermon 6. Preached at St.
Marye's Oxon. March 20. 1658.
of Justification by faith; concludes by way of inference, that singular
privileges, graces and benefits are the peculiar portion of a justified
person. Justification is the root, and the following graces are the fruit:
Justification the mother grace, they the issue or Daughters: viz. Peace of
conscience, verse. 1. Access to the Throne of Grace, verse. 2. Joy in
tribulation, verse. 2. Patience, verse. 3. Experience, verse. 4. Hope, verse. 4.
And the ground of this hope, is the love of God, verse. 5. Not that love whereby
we love him, but whereby he loves us: It Is said (...). We have a sensible
feeling of this love, and this is not a delusion of our own fancy, but it is
the effectual working of the Holy Ghost. A singular Instance of this love
appears by the death of Christ; wherein we have,

1. The season, (...) according to the due time and fittest 1. The season.
season, this is the accepted time, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold now is the accepted
time, behold now is the day of salvation. The most conveninient time, even now
when the fullness of time was come, Gal. 4. 4. But when the fullness of time
was come, God sent forth his son made of a woman, made under the law, etc.

2. The condition of the persons, for whom it is expressed by two 2. The
Condition of the Persons.
words; (...) infirm impotent persons, unable altogether to help and deliver
themselves: And (...) ungodly, such as left Gods true worship, and defiled
themselves with Idolatry: Now the love of Christ is further amplified by a
comparison, verse. 7. let us compare Christ's love with the love of men, verse. 7.
For scarcely for a righteous man will one dye, yet per adventure for a good man
some would even dare to dye: (...). By a righteous man, we understand an
innocent, godly, inoffensive, just dealing man: By a good man here we
understand an useful, serviceable man: a public spirited man, a Patriot for
his country, one that has showed much goodness to us, Justus reddens cuique
quod suum est; Bonus qui beneficus est, ac been a multis meritus: (as some of
the Learned observe.) But what is this in comparison of the love of Christ: All
the love of creatures in comparison of Christ's love, is not so much as the
drop to the Ocean. Note the incomparable unparrelled love of Christ to sinners
in my Text. But God commends his love unto us, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. Wherein observe these Remarkable Particulars.

1. The greatness of Gods love (...), Commendat, verbum Insignem and sum
commendabilem esse ostendit. Beza.
Commendare significat, aut confirmare, (as Aretius observes:) It signifies
testatum facere, as Budaeus and Demosthenes use the word.

2. The Proof or Evidence of this love, by Christ's death, (...).

3. The condition of the persons, sinners, (...) rebellious sinners, such in
whom sin reigned, who were wholly under the power of sin, in their blood in
a loathsome filthy condition. All are sinners, they have no truth in them that
deny it, 1 John 1. 8. But here by sinners (says Qui toti vitiosi sunt, ac
peccato addicti. Calv. in Loc.
Calvin) are understood such: Who are wholly vicious and addicted unto sin.
We read that God hears not sinners, Joh. 9. 31. For these sinners Christ
died, for enemies, rebels, polluted, lyeing in their filth, these Christ loved
and washed. No fore sight of their faith, and repentance moved him to pity
them, only his love. For these he died, and this is an unparrellel'd
demonstration of the love of God, and of Jesus Christ. I shall comprise the
whole of my meditations, in one fundamental Doctrine.

That the death of Christ for sinners, is an evident demonstration of the love
of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.

This I shall ((...)) unfold by Explication, Confirmation, and particular
Application.

1. For Explication. I propound these Queries.

Query 1. Wherein consists this love of God the Father?

Ans. In sending of his Son, his beloved Son, his only Son, the Son of his
bosom. God might have empowered an Angel and sent him, but the mission of his
Son: sets forth love inexpressible. There Is (...), Joh. 3. 16. He so loved the
world that he gave his only begotten son: that whosoever believ^^^ in him,
shall not perish, but have everlasting life. And further we read, 1 John 4. 9.
In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his
only begotten son into the world, that we might live through him. God left
the fallen Angels without a Savior, but took pity on lost man, God would
never be reconciled to the fallen Angels, but from eternity he contrived a way
to reconcile man unto himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. To wit, that God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them,
and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. This is love beyond
compare. The duty that belongs unto us is,

1. To admire at this great infinite love, to get our hearts raised up in the
high contemplation of this love.

2. Lets be thankful; we can never be thankful enough. Eternity will be too
little, to praise God, and bless him for so great love.

3. Let love beget love, love must be reciprocal, 1 John 4. 19. We love him,
because he first loved us.

4. Let this love of God cause us to love one another, 1 John 4. 11. Beloved if
God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

5. Let this engage us to obedience, and holiness in our conversations, Joh.
14. 15. If ye love me keep my Commandments.

Query 2. Wherein consists this love of Christ?

Ans. In dyeing for us: The greatness of Christ's love in dyeing for us may be
inhanced in these singularities.

1. In that he died voluntarily.

2. If we consider the greatness of his sufferings.

3. If we consider the persons for whom.

1. Christ died voluntarily, I gave my back to the smiter, and 1. Christ died
voluntarily.
my cheeks to those that plucked of the hair. I hid not my face from shame and
spitting, Isai. 50. 6. And Joh. 10. 17, 18. Therefore does my Father love me,
because I lay down my life, that I may take it again. No man takes it from
me, but I ^ay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and power to
take it again: This commandment have I received of my Father. Christ if he
pleased, could have defended himself from his enemies, he could have had
legions of Angels in his defense: but in obedience to his Father to fulfill
the scripture, in love to his own, he freely, and voluntarily resigned
himself to his Fathers pleasure, and drunk that cup which his Father gave him.
And question less this was great love for Christ freely and willingly to lay
down his life. 2. Consider the greatness of Christ's sufferings.


2. Consider the greatness of Christ's sufferings. He endured contempt,
reproach, spitting, buffetting, reviling, they called him Samaritan, Impostor,
Devil, they scourged him, crowned him with thorns, wagged their heads at him,
Insulted over him, and at last they put him to suffer that most shameful,
painful, cursed death of the Cross. This Crucifixion was a Roman punishment.
That Is evident from Joh. 18. 31, 32. Then said Pilate unto them, take ye him,
and judge him according to your law. The Jews therefore said unto him, it is
not lawful for us to put any man to death, that the saying of Jesus might be
fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying what death he should dye. And to set
forth the humiliation of Christ, you may read, Phil. 2. 8. And being found in
fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross. Implying this was the greatest of Punishments, Quid dicam
in crucem tollere? (says Cicero.) In this punishment of Crucifixion, we are to
consider these Aggravations. 1. Shame.


1. The Shame; they were crucified (usually) stark naked: Most writers say
Christ was so crucified. Believe not your painters who put a cloth before him,
they are teachers of lies. The common custom was, that they who were
cruci^ied, were stripped naked as they came into the world: and so they suffered
ignominy. And a further shame and disgrace appears in this: that Christ was
crucified without the walls, as unworthy to be within the walls. Barabbas a
theife and murderer was released, and Christ was crucified between two
theives, as if he had been their Captain: this Circumstance sets forth the
ignominy and disgrace put upon Jesus Christ.

2. In this punishment of Crucifixion we are to consider a curse, 2. A Curse.
Deuteronomy. 21. 23. His body shall not remain all night upon the tree, but thou
shall in any wise bury him that day: for he that is hanged is accursed of God:
that thy land be not defiled which the Lord thy God gives thee for an
inheritance. There was a legal curse, put upon this death, Gal. 3. 13. Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it
is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. Now for the Son of God,
the fountain of all blessings, in whom all Nations of the earth should be
blessed, to stand upon the Cross like an accursed man, the Sun was ashamed,
and withdrew his light, and the earth trembled.

3. In this punishment consider pain, extremity of pain, a lingering 3. Pain.
death: This was a terrible and dolorous pain. His body was extended,
stretched out, like stretching out upon a Rack.

Of the Passion of Christ we are to understand, Psalm. 22. 14, 16. I am poured
out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is like wax, its
melted in the midst of my bowels. For dogs have compassed me, the assembly of
the wicked have enclosed me, they peirced my hands and my feet. Where the
sinews met in the palms of his hands, and in the feet, where the pain was
most acute, there they peirced him. It was not with Christ, as with many, who
are stupefied, and in whom extremity of pain blunteth the sense thereof, but
Christ was in perfect sense all the while: And six hours in extremity of pain
he hung upon the Cross: and was sensible as much at the last as at the first.
Never was any sorrow, like unto his sorrow: He sweat drops of blood, was in an
agony, was despised, rejected, reproached, and at last was crucified: All these
Considerations inhance the greatness of Christ's sufferings, and his love
toward us.

3. Consider for whom Christ died, not for friends but enemies, 3. For whom
Christ died.
Verse. 10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death
of his Son: much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life: Not for
righteous, and good men: but for sinners, and bad men: not for strong, but
weak: not for faithful subjects, but rebels Christ died. Now this love is
beyond all compare: Now the consideration of Gods love and our unworthiness,
should engage us to love and thankfulness, as Tantae dilectionis Dei, and
indignitatis nostrae consideratione demittamus Cristas in Dei judicio, ac toto
cord eum redamemus ut non totos in ^ivam gratitudinis hostiam vicissim
consecremus, Pareus in Loc.
Pareus observes on the place. To lay down his life for his friends, had been
great love, Joh. 15. 13. greater love has no man then this, that a man lay
down his life for his friend: But to lay down his life, for enemies, for
sinners, unworthy persons, this love is a none such.

Christ died for the ungodly. He said live when they were in their blood, Ezekiel.
16. 6. And when I passed by, thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood: I
said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live: yea, I said unto thee, when
thou wast in thy blood, live. He found none at all godly, lovely, holy, but
made them so. How many of those that imbrued their hands in Christ's blood,
were converted by one of Peter's sermons; Christ prayed upon the Cross for his
enemies; Luke 23. 34. Then said Jesus Father, forgive them: for they know not,
what they do. The Duties we ought to learn from the consideration of this
great love of Christ, in laying down his life for sinners; are

First, That in Zach. 12. 10. And I will pour upon the house of Dut. 1. To
mourn over Christ.
David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and
supplication, and they shall look upon me, whom they have peirced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in
bitnernesse for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first borne.

Seconly, To crucify sin, which crucified Christ: Thus the Dut. 2. To crucify
sin.
Apostle professes, Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I
live: yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.

Thirdly, Set an inestimable price upon the means of our redemption: Dut. 3.
Set a high value upon the price of our redemption.
that price of blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. For as much as ye know that ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation received by tradition from your Fathers: But with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.

Fourthly, Look for no salvation else where, Act. 4. 12. Neither Dut. 4. Look
for salvation through Christ only.
is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven
given among men, whereby we must be saved. 1 Timothy 2. 5. For there is one God,
and one Mediator between God and men, that man Christ Jesus. Joh. 17. 3. And
this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent.

Fifthly, Let us live unto Christ, which died for us, 2 Cor. 5. Dut. 5. Live
unto Christ.
15. And that he died for all, that they which live, should not hence forth
live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again.

Sixthly, Let our hearts be warmed, with love to Christ. 2 Cor. Dut. 6. Be
warmed with love to Christ.
5. 14. For the love of Christ constraines us, because we thus judge: that if
one died for all, then were all dead. The apprehension of Christ's great love
unto us, should engage us to love him again.

Q^ry 3. Is this so great a matter for Christ to dye, and to lay down his life
for public good? Did not many others lay down their lives for the public, as
Codrus for the Athenians, Meneceus for the Thebans: Curtius threw himself into
a gulf, to preserve Rome from pestilence. Nisus would have died for Eury^lus,
Pilades for Orestes etc. Where then lies the difference.

Ans. 1. Heathens that laid down their lives, were not innocent persons, they
were sinners: Christ was innocent, no sinner: a Lamb without blemish, no g^ile
was found in his mouth.

2. Heathens laid down their lives, out of principles of praise, and vain
glory: Christ laid his life in love to his Father, love to the elect.

3. Heathens gave their lives, at the instigation of Satan, having no thought
to please God: but Christ gave himself in obedience to his Father, to do his
will.

4. Heathens died, that their deaths might be esteemed glorious, and
honorable: but Christ offered himself to the ignominious death of the Cross.

5. They died for to obtain some temporal deliverance, but by Christ we
obtain eternal deliverance.

6. They died for their Country and friends, but Christ died for his enemies.
These things being premised by way of Explication. I come now to the
Confirmation of the point: To which purpose I shall lay down these
Propositions, and they are Aeternae verita^is.

1. God the Father from all Eternity, contrived this admirable Proposit. 1. God
from all eternity contrived the way of Redemption by Jesus Christ.
way of redemption by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 19. To wi^, that God was in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them, and has committed unto us, the word of reconciliation. Rev. 13. 8. And
all that dwell upon the face of the earth shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the book of life of the Lamb, slain from the foundation of the
world. This transaction was not of yesterday, but decreed, and contrived, and
intended from all eternity. God reprobated the fallen Angels, and left them
without a Savior, for Christ shed not a drop of blood for them. They before
the foundation of the world, were decreed to eternal punishments: But for lost
man, a Savior was decreed; and this was God's intendment before all time.
Questionless this is exceeding great love, and an evident Character of the
love of God the Father.

2. Christ was an innocent holy person, without the least sin: Proposit. 2.
Christ was an innocent Person.
There was no deceit in his mouth. Isai. 53. 9. And he made his grave with the
wicked, and with the rich in his death: Because he had done no violence,
neither was any deceit in his mouth. He was most holy, harmless, undefiled. 1
Pet. 1. 19. We were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
without blemish and without spot. Christ was the beloved Son of God, in whom
the Father was well pleased. Matthew. 3. 17. And ^^e, a voice from heaven,
saying, this is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. Christ was the
only Son, and beloved Son: now for God the Father to send his Son, his only
Son, his beloved Son, not to reign, but to serve: not to live a life of
honor, and glory in the world, but to be despised, rejected, wounded, and
endure the shameful, painful, and cursed death of the Cross, Never was any
love like unto this: Of this we read, Joh. 3. 16. For God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever believes on him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. And likewise, 1 John 4. 10. Herein is love,
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins.

3. Christ who was sent, was God: God-man in one person? Proposit. 3. Christ is
God-man in one Person.
The divine person assumed an humane nature. Christ was the Word, and the Word
was God, and Christ that substantial Word was made flesh, Joh. 1. 14. And the
Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory, the glory as
of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and truth. And this is the
great mystery of Godliness mentioned: 1 Timothy 3. 16. And without controversy,
great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in
the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, received up into glory. Christ was God from all Eternity: Joh. 8. 58.
Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am.
There he speaks of his Godhead: A further proof we have, Phil. 2. 6. Who being
in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God. Compare this
with Zech. 13. 7. Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man
that is my fellow, says the Lord of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the sheep
shall be scattered, and I will turn mine hand upon the little ones. This is
love unparrelleld, unexpressible.

4. Christ himself, voluntarily undertook this great work of Proposit. 4.
Christ voluntarily undertook the work of our Redemption.
our redemption, he laid down his own life freely: And because the Godhead
could not suffer death, he united our nature unto himself; and took flesh upon
him. There are two words setting forth his humiliation, Phil. 2. 7. (...); he
made himself of no reputation etc. Joh. 1. 14. (...), and he dwelt among us,
etc. He took the man hood, as if he should unite a clodde of dust unto
himself, who was God from all Eternity. As if the Ancient of days should
become the infant of days, the Eternal God become a Child. As if he, that the
heaven of heavens could not contain, should be enclosed nine months in the
womb of a Virgin. Thus it was in respect of his humane nature, he was born of
Virgin, wrapped in swaddling clothes, laid in a manger. He who had heaven and
earth at his command, was laid in a manger. Herein appears the singular love
of Christ, in condescending to take man's nature, to take a body, that he might
accomplish the great work of our redemption, by suffering upon the cross. Heb.
10. 5, 6, 7. Wherefore, when he comes into the world, he says: sacrifice, and
offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me: In burnt
offerings and sacrifice for sin, thou have had no pleasure: Then said I, lo,
I come (in the volumne of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God.

5. Christ by his active and passive obedience made full, complete, Proposit.
5. Christ by his obedience has made full satisfaction.
and absolute satisfaction to his Fathers Justice: for all those that were
given him by the Father, Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins, that are past through the forbearance of God. To the same
effect the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2. 13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye, who
sometimes were far off; are made nigh by the blood of Christ, Col. 1. 20. And
(having made peace through the blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all
things unto himself, by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or in
heaven. Christ gave himself a sacrifice, to expiate for sin; He trod the
winepresse of his Fathers sury. By his stripes we are healed, who his own
self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we 1 Pet. 2. 24.
being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes we are
healed. He is the reconciler, Col. 1. 20. The price of our redemption (...), 1
Cor. 6. 20. For ye are bought with a price, Matthew. 20. 28. Even as the Son of
man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister and to give his life a
ransom for many. See Christ's great end of coming into the world, (...), to
give his life a ransom for many; Christ is the high Priest, that entered into
the holy of holiest, and offered up himself a sacrifice: Thereby as a surety,
he paid our debt; satisfied his Fathers justice to the utmost, Isai. 53. 5, 11.
But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
He shall see of the travel of his soul, and be satisfied; by his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their iniquities.
And this is a thorough satisfaction, 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he has made him to be
sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him. Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity; and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. Hereby we are justified, Romans 5. 9. Much more being now justified by
his blood, we shall be saved from wrath, through him, Hereby we are sanctified,
Rev. 1. 5. And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first
begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth: unto him that
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. Fear not, we are
now made nigh, Ephesians. 2. 13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye, who were far of, are
made nigh by the blood of Christ. By him we are reconciled, Col. 1. 20. And
(having made peace through the blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all
things unto himself: by him I say, whether they be things in earth, or in
heaven. By Christ we are blessed, Gal. 3. 13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from
the Curse of the law, being made a Curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is
every one that hangs on a tree; that the blessing of Abraham might come upon
us. And that Christ does fully satisfy, is evident, because he continually
interceds for his people, and pleads the virtue and benefit of his perfect
satisfactionion, Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
utmost, that come unto God through him, seeing he ever lives, make
intercession for them. And what was the motive, that moved him to do all this
for his people, to be incarnate, to live on earth amongst sinners, to suffer
reproaches, contempts, and infamies? what moved him to drink that bitter Cup,
to pour his blood out of his side, and become obedient unto the death of the
Cross? Nothing moved him, but his love, his good will: his compassion moved
him to heal bodily diseases; and his compassion, love, and mercy, moved him to
heal soul diseases.

6. This love of Christ is a distinguishing, special love, for a peculiar
Proposit. 6. The Love of Christ is a distinguishing Love.
sort of people. He sweat drops of blood in the garden, he was afflicted,
smitten, wounded; but all this he endured for the transgression of his own
people; Isai. 53. 8. He was taken from prison, and from judgment: and who shall
declare his generation? for he was cut off, out of the land of the living: for
the transgression of my people was he stricken. He has a peculiar seed, Isai.
53. 10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief: when
thou shall make his soul, an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he
shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord, shall prosper in his
hands. He is the Savior of his body, Ephesians. 5. 28. For the husband is the head
of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church: and he is the Savior of
the body. He lays down his life, only for his sheep, Joh. 10. 15. As the
Father knows me, even so I know the Father: and I lay down my life for the
sheep. Now hence those false doctrines of General redemption are discarded
altogether. Christ does not pray for all, Joh. 17. 9, 10. I pray for them, I
pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are
thine: And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them.
And we read, Joh. 13. 11. He knew who should betray him, therefore said he, ye
are not all clean. He does not call all, justify all, nor elect all, for only
few are chosen: and therefore all are not partakers of this distinguishing
love. Yet notwithstanding these fundamental truths, there are many Objections,
which I would Answer, before I make particular application of this doctrine.

Its objected, that it is unjust for the innocent to be punished

We are to distinguish of sin and guilt inherent, and sin and was sin and
guilt imputed; For Christ was made sin for us, and took our nature upon him,
and was our surety: And it is no injustice to make a surety pay the debt,
whereunto he voluntarily engaged. Christ freely, and voluntarily undertook the
great work of reconciliation for lost man, and he willingly laid down his life
for his sheep. No man took away his life from him.

But 2. Its Objected, how can Christ's blood, which was shed above

This we are to believe, that though Christ suffered once, yet The blood of
sprinkling which speaks better things, then the blood of Abel. The Church is
the purchase of his blood. Act. 20. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves,
and to all the flocks which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers: to feed
the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. This is
redeeming blood, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. It is peacemaking
blood, Col. 1. 20. And having made peace through the blood of his Cross) by
him to reconcile all things unto himself: by him I say, whether they be things
in earth or in heaven. We are made white in the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7. 14.
And I said unto him, Sir thou know: And he said to me, these are they which
come out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb. We are washed from our sins in his blood, Rev. 1.
5. And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten
of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth: unto him that loved us,
and washed us from our sins in his blood. So then Christ's blood is a
fountain, that can never be drained dry, it witnesses our regeneration. 1 John 5. 8. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, the
water, and the blood: and these three agree in one.

But 3. It will be Objected, if Christ died for sinners, then all

1. There Is a sufficiency of Merit in Christ; the Medicine is of infinite

2. But 2. this medicine is only applied effectually unto some peculiar
persons. Neither does this derogate a whit from Christ's merits, in that his
redemption is not equally extended unto all. But the riches of his mercy are
the more inhanced, in that they are effectual to some.

3. It was not the intention of God the Father, nor of Christ, that all should
be redeemed. Christ's Redemption only is appropriated to believers. Joh. 3. 16.
For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

4. Only those have redemption by Christ's blood, who are redeemed from their
vain conversation, and those are Gods children, 1 Pet. 1. 18. Forasmuch, as
ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and
Gold, from your vain conversations received by tradition of your Fathers. But
these are not the whole world, for the whole world lies in wickedness.

I shall now come unto Application, And I shall make four Applicat.
Uses of the Doctrine.

1. For Information.

2. For Examination.

3. For Exhortation. Use 1. For Information.


4. For Consolation.

The first Use is for Information, and that in several particulars.

1. Be informed of the greatness of the love of God, Ephesians. 2. 4. 1. This is
great love.
But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith he has loved us.
1 John 3. 1. Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that
we should be called the sons of God.

2. Be informed that this love is unparrelleld, let there be made 2. This love
is unparralleld.
locus a comparatis. The love between Jonathan and David, is not to be compared
to the love of Christ unto his Church, Ephesians. 5. 25. Husbands love your wives,
even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it. The love of a
tender Mother, is not to be compared to the love of God, Isai. 49. 15. Can a
woman forget her sucking child, that she should have compassion on the son of
her womb? yea, they may forget yet will not I forget thee.

3. This love is free, undeserved by any Creature, Ezekiel. 16. 6. 3. This love is
undeserved.
And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said
unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live: yea, I said unto thee, when thou
wast in thy blood, live. There is no fides praevisa, to move God: The Apostle
determines, Romans 9. 11, 12, 13. For the Children being not yet borne, neither
having done any good, or evil, that the purpose of God according to election
might stand; not of works, but of him that calls.) It was said unto her, the
elder shall serve the younger, as it is written. Jacob have I loved, but Esau
have I hated.

4. This love is incomprehensible, inexpressible, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. 4. This love
is incomprehensible.
That ye may be able to comprehend, with all Saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height: and to know the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.

5. It is an eternal love, Joh. 13. 1. Now before the feast of the 5. This
love is eternal.
passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come, that he should depart out
of this world unto the Father, (having loved his own, which were in the world,
he loved them unto the end.) Jer. 31. 3. The Lord has appeared of old, unto
me, saying: Yea I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with
loving kindness have I drawn thee.

The second Use is for Examination, whether we are of that Use 4. For
Examination.
number, which has interest in this love. We are to distinguish of several
sorts of love. There Is Amor benevolentiae and Complacentiae. For that there is
Amor benevolentiae, hence appears munificentia and (...). God does good to
all, makes the Sun to shine on the just, and unjust. That which we are to
inquire of, is that which is called Amor complacentiae, appropriated only unto
Gods children,

What evidences may be given, that we have interest in this distinguishing love?

The 1. Sign is Sanctification, it is God's order and we may Sign 1.
Sanctification.
not break it, Rev. 1. 5. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins
in his blood. If thou can prove that thy nature is changed by the sanctifying
virtue of God's spirit, thou may conclude that thou art one, that has
interest in the special love of God.

2. Those that have interest in this special love of God, feel a Sign 2.
Constraining love of Christ.
constraining power in this love, to engage them to obedience to Gods commands,
2 Cor. 5. 14. For the love of Christ constraines us, because we thus judge:
that if one died for all, then we are all dead.

3. By the sincerity of our love to God, we may conclude his Sign 3. Sincerity
of love to God.
love toward us, 1 John 4. 19. We love him, because he first loved us. Gods
love to us, is the ground of our Assurance: our love to him, is the ground of
our Evidence. Let Gods children (as Bradford that precious man of God used to
advise) lay this down for a foundation; That God loves them, and where this
love is, it will shed abroad love in their hearts, even love to God, love to
the brethren, love to the Ordinances, love and longing for the appearance of
Christ.

4. Christ manifests his love to his people, Joh. 14. 21. He that Sign 4.
Christ manifests his Love to his people.
has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me: and he that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest
my self to him. Though he may hide himself for a time, yet he will embrace
them with everlasting kindness Isai. 54 8. In a little wrath I hid my face
from them for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on
thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.

5. Those whom God loves, with a special, distinguishing love, Sign 5. Christ
is Lord and King.
have Christ their redeemer, their Lord, King and Ruler, their Prophet to
instruct them, their Priest to make satisfaction, and intercession for them.
This is the greatest evidence of Gods love, in giving thee his son, as in the
place forecited, Joh. 3. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son: that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Which is plainly applied to believers, and takes not in all
universally, but a peculiar select company, even such only as believe. And Romans
8. 32. He that spares not his own son, but delivered him up for us all: how
shall he not with him also freely give us all things.

6. Those who have interest in this great special love, have Sign 6. Gods
spirit dwells in them.
Gods spirit, and this dwells in them. Romans 8. 9. But ye are not in the flesh,
but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell in you: Now if any man
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his: Christ's spirit dwells as an
Inhabitant, and Ruler, and this is a witness, Romans 8. 16. The spirit it self,
bears witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God: And this
seals, and gives earnest, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has also sealed us, and given
us the earnest of the spirit in our hearts: and where this dwells, it may be
known by the fruits which it brings forth, Gal. 5. 22, 23. But the fruit of
the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance.

The third Use is for Exhortation, and your duty I shall branch Use 2. For
Exhortat.
into these following particulars.

1. Stand admiring, and contemplating this great love of God the 1. Admire Gods
love.
Father to give thee Christ; and that Christ should becomeman, be made sin, a
curse, whilst that greater and nobler, richer and learneder then thy self
should be past by: and God should give Christ for thee, that he should love
thee, and wash thee, and make thee a King, and a Priest unto God: thou can
never admire enough this unparralleld love of God. Eternity would even be too
little, to set forth this wonderful love of God. As there is a depth of
wisdom, so there is a depth of mercy in God, which cannot be fathomed.

2. Let thy heart be filled with the praises of the Lord. Lift up, 2. Be filled
with the praises of God.
advance what in thee lies, the honor of God, the love of God the Father, and
of the Lord Jesus Christ. God gives his Son, Christ's merits are (...), a price
meritorious, and the Holy Spirit makes application. How then ought we for ever
to abound in praises to the Lord? The Samaritan returned back, and gave God
thanks for his cleansing. So should we bless God, that he has made a
difference by his grace, between us, and the very vilest of men what ever. Thus
did Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 12. And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has enabled me,
for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry: Now unto the
King Eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for
ever, and ever Amen.

3. Love should beget reciprocal love, even Love unto God the 3. Love should
beget love to God.
Father, and Christ. If there be any spark of love, it will inkindle into a
flame of Serapicall affections, David professes, Psalm. 18. 1. I will love thee
O Lord, my strength.

4. This should beget love to the Brethren, Joh. 13. 35. By 4. Gods love to us
should cause us to love our brethren.
this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another. 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the
brethren, 1 John 4. 21. And this commandment have we from him, that he who
loves God, loves his brother also.

5. We should place our love, where God places his: and our 5. love where God
loves.
hatred, where he places his hatred. God loves holiness, holy people, holy
Ordinances, so should we: God hates every sin, so should we: Psalm. 97. 10.
Ye that love the Lord, hate evil.

6. We should be often inquiring, whether we be of the number 6. Enquire
whether thou have interest in Christ's special love. Use 4. For Consolation.
of those, that have Interest in Christ's special love, for whom he died. This
we should frequently and seriously examine our hearts about! as I gave some
evidences before, unto which I refer you.

The fourth and last Use is for comfort unto all those, who have interest in
this special love. Their special Benefits are these.

1. They are admitted to the Throne of Grace through Christ, Benefit 1. They
are admitted unto the throne of grace.
Ephesians. 2. 18. For through him we have both an access by one spirit unto the
Father, They are his favorites, friends, Jewels, a Crown and Diadem of Glory:
and therefore they are exhorted to draw near with full assurance of faith,
Heb. 4. 16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need: It Is said (...), with
freedom, boldness, or confidence.

2. All things work together for their good, Romans 8. 28. And Benefit 2. All
things work together for their good.
we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them
who are called according to his purpose. They love God, and God loves them,
and nothing shall be able to hinder God's love. Their crosses, hardships,
reproaches, all, shall conduce unto their good.

3. They shall feel the benefit of this love, unto all Eternity. Heb. Benefit
3. They shall feel Christ's love unto all Eternity.
7. 25. Christ ever lives to make Intercession for them. Though Satan roar,
and men condemn, yet the love of Christ will comfort thee against all, Romans 8.
33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect, it is God that
Justifies: Thy sins and corruption administer continual matter of
Humiliation, and these will cost thee dear, whilst thou art in the valley of
Bacha: but the time will come when there will be no more sighing for sin:
Sorrow and sighing will fly away: For there shall be no sorrow in heaven.

4. This may Arm us with courage, against fear of death, Ben 4. Gods love
arms us with courage against fear of death.
Christ has died and took away the sting. Christ has perfumed the grave, He
has conquered sin, and Satan: lead captivity captive. Therefore in doubts,
fears, troubles, inward and outward, have recourse to this love of God in
Christ, and this will be a Cordial, a Salve for every sore. The consideration
of Gods love unto thy Soul, will make thee undergo hardships cheerfully:
kiss the Rod that beats thee. Gods love manifested in Christ, will make thee
willing to live, and willing to dye: so that God may be glorified in thee, and
by thee: For thou that have Interest in this distinguishing love of God,
reconciled in Christ: know to thy comfort, that whether thou live, or whether
thou dyest, Jesus Christ will be unto thee in life, and in death advantage.

THE REAL PROFESSOR OF CHRISTIANITY, DISTINGUISED FROM THE NOMINALL.
2 Timothy: 2. verse. 19. And let every one that names the name of Christ depart
from Iniquity.
THE Apostle in the precedent words, gives advertisement Sermon 7. Preached at
St. Marye's Oxon. July 24. 1659.
concerning some notorious Heretics, such whose words eat as a canker or
Gangren. Their names are upon record to their eternal infamy, V. 17. Their
words will eat as does a canker, of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus. And their
Heresy likewise has a brand upon it, V. 18. Who concerning the truth have
erred, saying that the resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of
some. Allegoricam nescio quam resurrectionem fingendo. Calv. in loc.
Calvin understands, that they feigned an Allegorical resurrection. Estius and
Gorr^n concur in the same judgment; and Non suo tempore defuisse, qu^
^esurrectionem ^ortuorum manifest ann^^tiatam in imag^^ariam resurrectionem
distorquerent. Tertull. de Resurrectione carnis cap. 19.
Tertullian is cited in his Book de resurrectione carnis, cap. 19. In whose
time there were not wanting some, who did openly say that the Resurrection of
the dead was imaginary. The names of the men are Hymeneus and Philetus.
Anuptiarum ^eo.
Hymeneus from the God of marriage. Nomen quasi Optatum Desideratum. Hugo. Grot.
Philetus, that is a name as it were desirable: (as some of the Learned
observe.) Their doctrine and their mischievous consequences follow.

First, For their doctrine; an erroneous and heretical tenet is there laid
down: viz. That the resurrection is past already, (i. e.) as Gorran, and
Estius produce the opinions of those times, that the resurrection was
completed by Regeneration. And Completam ex mente istorum interpretantur
resurrectionem in quotidiana animarum renovatione. Aug Ep. 119 ad Januarium.
Augustine himself in Epist. 119. unto Januarius, fastens the same opinion
upon them. Or else they might incline to the opinion of Marcion, that Notorious
Heretic: That there was no resurrection of the body, but of the soul only.

2. Secondly, Let Us consider the great mischief of this opinion. The Apostle
t^ll^ us that their words eat as does a Gangren. The Gangren some assimilate
to a Canker, or a wolf, which spreads further, and further, to the
consumption of the whole body. The Original (as Hesichius observes) is (...)
depascor. Gangraenam medici de carnosa part inflammationis and emortua
intelligunt. Scultet.
Scultetus says, that by Gangren, Physicians understand a fleshy, and dead
part of inflammation. What further I shall say is this, that as a Gangren frets
the flesh, runs thorough the blood, and creeps further and further, till it
infect the whole body: so Heresies infect the whole man speedily, mortally, and
uncurably. Wherefore let not any make a slight matter of Error and Heresy, and
plead that every one should have liberty of judgment, and that a Toleration of
all sorts of opinions is very convenient, and not hurtful. Let us observe the
Apostles censure: They are Gangrens, destructive to many precious souls and
therefore may not be tolerated, and connived at. Observe how the Apostle brands
them for erring from the truth. The Original is more emphaticall (...). In
Significat Apostolus eos a scopo Christianae veritatis ad quam collimare
debebant, aberrasse. Estius.
Estius his commentaries on the place, I find he follows both Ambrose and
Austine, and renders his own sense accordingly. The Apostle does signify that
they erred from that mark of Christian truth, at which they ought to aim. And
Qui a veritatis scopo aberrarunt. Gerrh.
Gerrhard concurres in his judgment, (i. e.) they have swerved, or missed the
mark. It Is Non quodvis Erratum significatur, sed quod est ejusmodi ut
fundamentum non retineatur. Reza.
Beza's observation on the place, that the Apostle used this word (...), thrice
in this Epistle, which is mentioned to show, That not every error in Religion
is signified, but an error of that Kind that destroys the foundation.

3. Thirdly, The Apostle declares the issue, and mischievous success of these
Seducers, that they gain Proselites, and followers, in the verse preceding my
Text: They overthrew the faith of some. Some hereby conceive that they
destroyed not the grace, but the profession of their faith: For by this heresy
in denying of the resurrection, making it imaginary or spiritual, they subvert
the Orthodox faith.

However here is our strong hold, that Gods foundation is firm: Men's wickedness
cannot shake that firm foundation which God has laid. Here Is a nevertheless
to support us against the Apostacies of men of corrupt minds. Although they
relinquish their old Principles and turn Heretics: yet we have a firm Ground
of Encouragement, for the foundation of God stands sure, against all the
underminings of Apostates, and Heretics. The decree of Gods election stands
sure, notwithstanding the malice of the vilest men, who have a spirit of
contradiction.

In this Proposition of eternal truth, That Gods foundation stands sure. Here
are five things remarkable, and they carry a great deal of weight in them,
requiring our most deliberate consideration.

1. Here is a foundation.

2. A firm and sure foundation.

3. It is the foundation of the great God unchangeable.

4. It has a seal put to it. Things sealed are more sure and authentic.

5. Here is the omniscience of God engaged, He knows who are his. All true
believers have their names wrote in the book of life. They are all known unto
God: But as in sealing there uses to be a Counterpart when both parties seal:
so God seals, and man seals. Gods eternal decree is his seal, sure and
unalterable. Man's seal is his holy life and conversation. Because God knows
who are his, and his foundation is sure and certain: therefore a stronger
engagement lies upon us all, to look to our lives and conversations. From the
doctrine of the unchangeable decree of God, my Text inferres this practical
Use, And (which has a connection with what went before) Let every one that
names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. Wherein you have considerable
Divis.
the Name, and the Thing, or the Profession and Practice of Christianity.

1. You have the name or Profession specified in these words, 1. The name
(...), every one that names, (i. e.) whoever would be reputed a Christian,
who takes upon him the name of Christ, and calls Qui invocat Christi n^men in
eo sese Christianum ^ppellat. Beza. Isa^. 4. 1. Genesis 48. 18.
himself after the name of Christ, Christian. So we read In that day seven
women shall take hold of one man, saying we will eat our own bread, and wear
our own apparel, only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach.
And Jacob gave in charge this name should be named upon Ephraim and
Manasseth, (i. e.) that they should be called the Children of Israel. Such then
as take upon them the Profession of Christianity, are said to name the name of
Christ.

2. Here Is the thing it self, or practice required, for an evidence 2. Here is
the thing it self. Jewels Apology.
of the truth of the profession: (...), let him depart from iniquity. This is a
well-grounded Apostasy, to be an Apostate from ^inne and Satan. Learned Jewel
tells us in his Apology, that Papists accuse the Protestants of Apo^tacy: and
says he, It Is true, we are Apostates: but such Apostates, who are godly
Apostates even from Rome, from Errors, Heresies, and Idolatries. And this
Apostasy and Secession from them, is our glory, and honor. And although this
is mentioned Negatively only: yet the Positive acts are necessarily included.
We must abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good. We must
cast off the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light: So Non solum
nomine crederet quoque ab iniquitate, de clinat a malo and faciat bonum. Arias
Montanus.
Arias Montanus expounds the place. And judicious Quisquis ergo Deum invocat,
hoc est, se ex populo Dei esse profitetur, ac censeri vult, ab omni impietate
procul absit. Calv. Doct.
Mr Calvin thus interprets the place, Whosoever therefore calls upon God, (i.
e.) professes himself to be of the people of God, and would be so thought to
be, let him depart from all Iniquity. The sum and substance of the Words
amount to this issue: It is not sufficient to be Christians in name, unless we
be so in deed, and in truth. Notwithstanding the foundation is firm; Gods
eternal decree, like himself is ununchangeable: yet upon presumption of our
interest in the Decree of God, we may not let loose the reins to
licentiousness: but we must walk in all holy Conversation and Godliness: we
must (as we are exhorted) depart from iniquity.

The Words thus explained contain this obvious and fundamental Doctrine.

That wheresoever there is the profession of Christianity, there ought to be a
Godly life, and Conversation every way suitable and correspondent therewith. Or,
Whoever professes thename of Christ, ought by a thorough practice to answer
his profession, and prove the sincerity thereof by an answerable walking
thereunto.

For the unfolding of this needful and great Point, I shall select Method
propounded.
some choice Testimonies of Scripture, and then confirm the Assertion by
strength of reason, and hope so to conclude in a practical Application, as
(through the grace of God) I may leave such deep impressions upon your hearts,
as to engage you to reduce the Doctrine of the Text into practice throughout
your whole lives and conversations. To resume the Enlargement of these 1
Scripture Testimonies. Phil. 1. 27. (...). Tit. 2. 11, 12. 1 John 3. 3. Gal. 5.
24. Jam. 3. 13. Col. 2. 6.
Heads of discourse according to the Method propounded.

1. For Scripture Testimony we have many parrellel places: Let your
conversation be, a^^ecometh the Gospel of Christ. The grace of God that
brings Salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should be soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world. There are three choice Adverbs, (...). He that has this
hope in him purifieth himself as God is pure. They that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Who is a wise man, and
endued with knowledge amongst you? Let him show out of a good Conversation his
works with meekness of wisdom. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the
Lord, so walk ye in him. Two things says learned Ambulare in Christo duo de
notat. perseverare and progredi in doctrina and fide Christi, vitam agere,
ju^ta hanc fidem. Davenant. in Col. 2. R. 1. A holy Conversation is an Evidence
of election. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Romans 12. 9.
Davenant, are employed in that Exhortation, viz: Perseverance in the doctrine
of faith, and a life regulated accordingly.

2. In the second place, for confirmation: amongst many Reasons that might be
mentioned, I shall insist only on four.

1. A holy Conversation is an Evidence of election. Wherefore the rather
brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure. There Is great
care and diligence required in the work. We need not ascend into heaven, and
curiously enquire after the Decree of God: but our duty is to descend and make
strict Inquisition into our own hearts, whether we be sanctified, and renewed
in the spirits of our minds; whether we depart from iniquity, whether as the
Apostle exhorts, We abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is
good. We must be assured in this grand Truth, That God, who 2 These. 2. 13.
has ordained to the end, has ordained unto the means. We are bound (says
the Apostle) to give thanks always to God for you, because he has from the
beginning chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the spirit and
belief of the truth.

2. When the profession and practice of Christianity meet together, R. 2. This
shows the sincerity of our Profession: 2 Cor. 1. 12.
here is an infallible evidence of the truth, and sincerity of our profession:
For our rejoicing is this, the testimony for our Conscience that in simplicity
and godly ^incerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have
had our conversation in the world. Multitudes plead an interest in Christ's
redemption: But here is the Critical note, To be redeemed from their vain
conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. To be new creatures, 2 Cor. 5. 17. To be renewed in
the spirit of their minds, Ephesians. 4. 23. To be made partakers the of divine
Nature, 2 Pe. 1. 4. These are the (...), the Marks and Characters of those,
that have interest in Christ. And whoever make a profession, and practiceth not
what they profeffe, they are strangers from the life of Christ, and no
otherwise to be accounted of, then such who by Mapps, and reading of Authors,
discourse of far countries, where they have never been themselves, but only
they receive things by an implicit faith upon others reports, and not by an
experimental knowledge. But hereby we have evidence of the truth of our
profession, when Words and Actions, Profession and Conversation concur
together in a sweet harmony and mutual equipage. R. 3. Here the Gospel is
adorned.


3. When Profession and Conversation meet together, there the Gospel is
adorned. The Gospel gives not a Writ to licentiousness, it opens no gapp to
carnal liberty. It ought to be our study, and endeavor to adorn a holy
Profession, by a holy Conversation Tit. 2. 10.
Exhort servants (says the Apostle) to be obedient etc. not purloyning, but
showing all fidelity, that they may adorn the doctrine of our Savior in all
things. The great design of Christians ought to be, to keep up the reputation
of the Gospel. It is adorned, when people walk according to the Apostles
charge: See that ye Ephesians. 5. 15. (...), etc.
walk circumspectly: not as fools, but as wise. The Word (...) in the
Original: we should be likewise (...) without spot and blameless. Holiness
only adornes our profession; and they are most beautiful, who are adorned with
the graces of Gods spirit. 2 Pet. 3. 14.
The Kings daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought Psalm.
45. 13.
Gold. And we read of broidered works, badgers, skins, brac^lets, chains,
jewels, gold, earrings, Ezekiel. 16. Hence it eminently appears, that only the
graces of the spirit can adorn a soul. Now when what we profess in our
mouths, we make good by our practice, When we name the name of Christ, and
depart from iniquity: When we profess holiness and live accordingly, then we
adorn the Gospel. For the Gospel requires holiness, righteousness,
circumspect walking, and the more holy, righteous, and circumspect a man is,
the more he adornes the Gospel.

4. And lastly, Hereby we bring the greater glory to God. For R. 4. Here we
bring the greater glory to God. Joh. 15. 8.
God is g^orified by the fruitfulness of his servants: Herein is my Father
glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit. What is this fruit, but such as is
meet for Repentance? Mat. 3. 8. Fruit unto holiness, Romans 6. 22. Fruits of
Righteousness, Jam. 3. 18. And this is the fruit the Apostle prays might
abound in the Philippians, chap. 4. 17. That fruit might abound to their
account.

Now put all these Reasons together, I conceive there is strength of Argument
to persuade us to the duty of the Text, viz. To depart from iniquity, (i. e.)
to make our Profession, and Practice meet in one as lines in their proper
center: considering that hereby we prove our election sure, and our profession
to be sincere, and that we adorn our profession, and bring greater glory to
God.

To these four Reasons, I Will add only four Uses, which are to be handled in
the particular application (as I promised) and so I shall put a Period to my
discourse.

1. Here Is matter of Information, that a name or form of a Profession, Use 1.
For Information.
an outward title or claim to Christ are altogether insufficient to Salvation.
What Is the form without the power of Godliness? what is the name without the
thing? No better then the body without the spirit, or the carcass without the
soul to animate it. Concerning Formalists we have a Caution, Having a 2 Timothy
3, 5.
form of Godliness: but denying the power thereof; from such turn aside. I
know thy works, (says Christ unto the Angels of the Rev. 3. 1.
Church of Sardis) that thou have a name that thou live: yet art dead. How
many are there that rest contented, with an external profession; because they
are baptized Christians, borne in the bosom of the Church, where Christ is
known, descended of Christian Par^nts: and yet notwithstanding are ignorant of
the life of Christ, of the Laver of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost? Some cry up their Baptism too much (though Infant Baptism in my
judgment, without question is Gods Ordinance) as the Jews did the Temple,
Templum Domini, Templum Domini: And yet were altogether unacquainted with the
God of the Temple. Let such remember, He is not a Jew, which is one outwardly;
Romans 2. 28, 29.
neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh: But he is a Jew,
who is inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit and not
in the letter. But there are others who go yet higher in their own conceits,
and because they are admitted into Church Fellowship and called Saints: and
reputed Church Members, therefore they think alls well with them, and their
condition is very safe. But who knows not that there are many Nominall
Saints, which are far from being Real Saints. Many there are that think it
religion enough to join in such or such a Society, under such or such a
Teacher, who is a leading Popular man: and yet many of them are acted by no
other Principle but selfe-interest, Compliance with men, for carnal
advantages. Many Matthew. 7. 20.
shall say (says Christ) in that day, Lord, we have prophesied in thy name,
and in thy name cast out Devils, and in thy name done Luke 13. 26.
wonderful works. We have eat and drunk in thy presence, and thou have
taught in our streets: but he shall say, I tell you I know not whence you are.
How many Protestants have we at large, who are contented with the bare name of
Christians, yet in their lives are Antichristians? To bid such deny their
Baptism, renounce Christ, they will tell you, they would spit in your faces:
and yet their lives declare them no better then Turks, Jews, Atheists,
without God in the world. It Is a sad thing to consider that the Profession of
religion, has amongst many Ti^ular Professors justled out the practice; and a
bare form, and an outside profession many think sufficient: just like one of
Machivells principles, Take the profession, that will do no harm: but not the
practice of Religion. Psalm. 51. 6.
But be not deceived God, is not, God will not be mocked. The Lord requires
truth in the inward parts, God will be worshipped in spirit Joh. 4. 24.
and in truth. All the painted glosses, fair outsides, formal pretenses will
be accounted no better than chafe, straw, or stubble, at the great day of
account. I am fully persuaded that since Adams Creation, there were never so
many false conversions as now a days. Many think they are converted, when only
they are of such or such an opinion. Some are turned from Brownists to
Semi-Brownists, and from Brownists to Anabaptists, from them to Familists, and
afterward to Quakers, Ranters, etc. And all these boast themselves to be
Saints, and to be of the Church of Christ; though many (I censure not all) are
of the Synagogue of Satan. Some poor souls are seduced by false teachers, and
run like Absoloms followers in their simplicity, knowing nothing. Such God may
in mercy bring home by a thorough change, and reformation: and make them
sensible of their evil ways, and backslidings, and in due time deliver them
out of Satan's snare. But multitudes there are which call themselves Saints and
Christians, and have nothing but the bare name, witness their lives, far
from Saintship and Christianity. How greedy are some of filthy lucre,
ambitious, proud, boasters, idle drones, sleepy sluggards, eating the bread of
idleness: when they were in a poorer condition, they were industrious and
labored abundantly in their callings, now being advanced, they grow lazy.
Some in their younger years preached often: but now they are elder, they are
more lazy, neither preaching frequently themselves, nor hearing frequently
others that do: and yet none of these, but will take it ill, if you call them
not Christians and Saints too. But where is any thing of the life of Christ?
Christ watched, prayed, went about doing good. Can they count themselves
Disciples, who are so unsuitable to their Master? Is it lawful to take a Writ
of ease, and to rest from our labors before we be dead?

But leaving them, hopeing better things of you, I proceed to a second Use viz.
Examination.

2. For Examination. The question is, wherein consists that Use 2. For
Examination.
conversa^ion which is answerable unto our profession? I shall give an Answer
in these distinguishing Characters.

1. This Conversation must be a holy Conversation. As he that Char. 1. This
Conversation must be holy. 1 Pet. 1. 15. Mat. 5. 8. Heb. 12. 14. Char. 2. This
Conversation must be s^n^^ere. 2 Cor. 1. 12.
has called you is holy: So be ye holy in all manner of Conversation. Gods
people are an holy people: Heaven is an holy place. The Society there an holy
Society, the employment an holy employment, and only holy persons shall see the
blessed vision. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. Follow
peace and ^olinesse without the which no man shall see God.

2. This Conversation must be sincere. This is our rejoicing, even the
testimony of a good Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have
had our Conversation in the world. It Is called there (...). I shall not
overcuriously stand upon Criticismes, whether sincerus, sine cera, or (...).
But yet I cannot let pass the word (...) from (...) sol and (...) judicio, an
Allusion to the custom of Eagles, who held their young ones before the Sun, if
they could not look up unto the Sun, then were they accounted spurious. Surely
if our actions cannot endure the test, and trial of the Sun of righteousness,
they are to be accounted spurious and illegitimate altogether. Sincerity is the
constitutive difference of a Child of God, and a divisive difference which
distingui^^eth one that fears God, from him that fears him not. This is
that which will comfort a man in life and in death. So it did Enoch, whose
commendation it was that he walked with God, and Genesis 5. 24. Genesis 6. 9.
was not for God took him. It was Noah's comfort, that he was a just man and
perfect in his generation. And it will comfort us in death, if we can sincerely
profess with Hezekiah, Remember, O Lord, 2 King. 20. 3.
how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. Wherefore it
especially concerns us all to labor after sincerity, even truth in the inward
parts, that so we may approve our hearts unto God: and make it our daily
exercise to keep Consciences void of offense, both toward God and toward men.

3. This Conversation must be pruden^: For every wise man Char. 3. this
Conversation must be prudent.
must order his affairs with discretion. We usually say Ignis in foco is good:
but not in tecto. Many have a good cause, but through indiscretion spoil it in
the carriage. There is required as well the wisdom of the Serpent, as the
innocence of the Dove. Every wise woman, (says Solomon) builds her house;
but the foolish pulls Prove. 14. 1.
it down with her hands. Now by wisdom. I mean not the wisdom of the times,
(we see too much of that) Machiavilian wisdom, which is a turning and
returning, and complying with all times and humors be they never so bad, for
personal interest. This wisdom has no portion in this business: But I
understand spiritual wisdom, that which comes from above, such as the
Apostle mentions with distinguishing qualifications, which is pure,
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good Jam. 3. 17.
fruits, without partiality and without hypocrisy. Neither would I be mistaken:
I count not that wisdom which always joins with the winning side at a
venture, nor that which suites with the fashion of ancient Persians now adays
revived, to worship the rising sun. Too many we have of that temper in these
times, whom we account wise, though indeed they be errand fools: and their
wisdom like Achitophels may in time be turned into foolishness. But that I
account wisdom which has a spirit of discerning, to understand the things
that differ, to understand what is the right rule and to walk accordingly. And
to add no more i will rest in the determination of Job, The fear of the Lord
that is wisdom, and to Job 28. 28.
depart from evil is understanding.

4. And lastly. This Conversation that consists in the departing Char 4 this
Conversation consi^ts in departing from iniquity.
from iniquity, and accords with a holy profession, is Universal,
thorough-paced and every way complete. There Is a threefold Universality: of
Subject, Object, and Time.

1. For the Subject. The whole man is engaged to Obedience, all the members of
the body and faculties of the soul, With my whole heart have I sought thee
(says David) O let me not wander Psalm. 119. 10.
from thy Commandments.

2. There must be Universality of the Object. Then shall I not Psalm. 119. 6.
be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy Commandments.

3. Universality of Time. Being delivered out of the hands of Luke 1. 74.
our enemies We must serve him without fear, in holiness und righteousness
before him all the days of our lives.

3. I proceed to a third Use for Exhortation, to press home Use 2. For
Exhortation.
unto us all the duty of the Text: To depart from Iniquity. If we be Christians
let us evidence it by our Conversations, let us walk as becomes Christians.
What will Heathens, Turks, and Jews say when Christians walk loosely and
carelessly? they will bless themselves in their own erroneous ways, and thus
by our loose walking we give advantage unto the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme. Amongst others take two or three motives to persuade you to your
duty.

1. Consider the eye of God, his omniscience and omnipresence. Mot. 1. Consider
Gods Omniscience. Job. 10. 14, 15.
His eyelids try the Children of men. The eyes of the Lord are every where
beholding the evil, and the good. This was a monitor to Joseph, to David, to
Job: If I sin, then thou markest me, etc. The Lord knows all hearts, sees
the inmost recesse and diverticles of thy spirit. All things are naked unto him
with whom thou have to deal.

2. Consider the eyes of men. Good men observe our carriages, Mot. 2. Consider
the eyes of men.
professors are much observed how they walk. They are Beacons set upon a hill
top, multitudes behold them. Good men observe that they may gain some
spiritual advantage. They expect the performance of our duty (...), to stir
up and exuscitate graces, to quicken or inliven them; and (...) is expected, to
edify and build them up in their holy faith. Now if we are not what we pretend,
if we be no more but formal professors, if our practice accord not with our
profession, we sadden the hearts of the righteous. And likewise bad men's eyes
are upon us, they watch for our haltings as Benhadads servants, they lie at the
catch. Now if we do not (...) walk with a straight foot, if we are loose in our
lives, and careless in ordering our footsteps, notwithstanding our profession
be never* so strict, we strengthen the hands of the wicked. A bad life is a
confutation of a good profession. Although the Profession it self is not the
worse, because there are some hypocritical professors: yet ignorant and
malicious men endeavor to wound the profession it self, and asperse it by
reason of scandalous professors.

3. Integrity and uprightness of heart and life will comfort us, Mot. 3.
Integrity of life will comfort u^, when pretenses cannot help us. 2 Cor. 1. 12.
when all pretenses, forms, outside professions will no whit avail us. This
was the ground of the Saints rejoicing, O^r rejoicing is this, the Te^timony of
a good Conscience. This was the Apostles exercise (...). Duties of both Tables
must be regarded respectively. To pretend to the duties of the first, and
neglect righteousness and equity to thy Brother, (as the second table
injoynes,) this discovers thee to be an hypocrite. To pretend just dealing
according to the second table, and neglect keeping the sabbath Act. 24. 12.
and other duties of the first, this shows thee to be only a Formalist.

But in the last place. The fourth Use is for direction in two Use 4. For
Direction.
particulars.

1. How we ought to depart from iniquity. Q. 1. How we must depart from
iniquity? 1. We must depart speedily. Ezekiel. 47. 3, 4, 5.


2. What means may be of special Use conducing thereunto.

1. For the first particular, how we ought to depart from iniquity.

1. We must depart speedily. We must not excuse sin and say, at such a time I
hope to leave it. Give not quarter to Benhadad: sin reprived resembles
Ezekie'ls waters, first up to the ankles, then to the knees, then up to the
loins, and afterward a River not to be passed over. If thou delayest to depart
from sin to day, it gains ground; and gets more and more advantage against
thee, to morrow.

2. Depart willingly. Do not leave a sin as Phaltiel was forced 2. We must
depart willingly.
to leave Michal, and afterward followed her weeping that he could not enjoy
her. Some are restrained against their wills, who for fear of the law dare not
swear, in some companies neither dare be drunk: and yet their hearts are as
bad as ever. 3. We must depart from sin thoroughly. Ps. 119. 110. 4. We must
depart constantly. 2 Pet. 2. 22.


3. We must depart from sin thoroughly, and impartially. I have (says David)
refrained my feet from every evil way: Do not chop and change. Some exchange
their sins, having been young Prodigalls, they now are become old covetous
muck-wormes.

4. Depart constantly. Do not return unto thy old courses: That Is a doggish
and swinish quality. The Dog returns to his own vomit, and the Sow that is
washed to her wallowing in the mire.

Then secondly for means to be used. Q 2. What means must be used.


1. Pray much, that the Lord would subdue thy corruptions. Who is a God (says
the Prophet) like unto thee, who pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of thy heritage? 1. Pray. Mica. 7. 18, 19.
He will turn again, he will have compassion on us, he will subdue our
iniquities. Pray not only for mercy to pardon, but for grace to purge and renew
thee. This is a petition suitable to Gods will, to pray for a new heart. This
God promises: I will sprinkle clean Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26.
water upon you, and ye shall be clean: A new heart also will I give you, and
a new spirit will I put within you: And I will take away the stony heart out of
your flesh, and will give you an heart of flesh. Verse. 37.
But he expects our prayers: I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of
Israel.

2. Keep a strict watch over thine heart. Above all keeping we 2. Keep a strict
watch over thine heart.
had need keep our hearts. The Devil lies in ambush: wherefore we ought to be
sober and vigilant. The flesh inticeth, as Deliah did Sampson, and afterward
betrays us to destruction. The world is a Pattern of all wickedness: It
offers pleasures, honors, promotion and riches. We had need look to our
hearts: That Is the fort Royal in a Christian; If that be conquered, all is lost.

3. Resist the first motions and temptations to sin. Be they 3. Resist the
first motion to sin.
motus primo primi, (as the Schoolmen speak:) yet they are polluted and ought
to be resisted. Take heed of the least sin: A little leake may sink a ship;
A little penknife may destroy thee. A little theife let in at a window, may
open the doors to a multitude of Robbers. I remember what Hanno in Livy said of
Hannibal, * Parvus hic ignis incendium ingens exuscitat. Live. Dec. 2. Jer. 4.
14.
This little spark may cause a great flame. The embers of an evil thought,
may set the whole man in combustion. Wherefore let us look to our thoughts: O
Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedn^sse, that thou may be saved: how
long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee?

4. Frequently and seriously exercise thy self in the examination 4. Examine
thy heart. Jer. 8. 6.
of thy heart, and life. It Is an excellent duty to commune with our own hearts.
I hearkened and heard, (says the Lord) but they spoke not a right, no man
repented of his wickedness: saying, what have I done? Now therefore thus says
the Lord of hoasts, consider Hag. 1. 5. 5. Behold thy face in the glass of Gods
Law.
your ways.

5. Behold thy face in the glass of the Law of God, how odious and abominable
sin is in God's account, and how the law of God denounces vengeance upon
ungodly persons.

6. Sixthly and lastly: Make it thy business to mortify and crucify 6. Mortify
thy Corruptions.
thy corruptions. This is the grand employment here on earth to be fighting
against sin, resisting to blood. And in all we do we must act in the strength
of Jesus Christ: Help is laid upon him, who is mighty. He is the Redeemer, who
turns away iniquity from Jacob. It Is the voice of Christ that says, Be of
Good Comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. Such a Word, if the Lord Christ
should speak to any one of us this day, it would be the joyfullest word that
ever we heard, and the happiest day that ever our eyes beheld.

THE GRAND SIN, AND MISCHIEF OF INFIDELITY, SET FORTH FROM
Joh: 8. verse. 24. For if ye believe not, that I am he, ye shall dye in your
sins.
THAT part of this Chapter which relates to my Sermon 8. Preached at St.
Marye's Oxon. Nov. 27. 1659.
Text, consists of several Dialogues between Christ and the Jews: And they
begin viz, and conclude with the Chapter. My Text is a good Reply to a bad
Answer. Christ foretold, Verse. 21. Whither I go, ye cannot come. Upon these
Words the Pharisees framed a most malicious construction, and suggested nothing
less then selfe-murther: Verse. 22. Then said the Jews, will he kill himself?
because he says, whither I go, ye cannot come. Christ now rejoynes an Answer,
wherein he puts them in mind of that vast difference there was between them,
and him: even as great as between earth and heaven, Verse. 23. And he said unto
them, ye are from beneath, I am from above: ye are of this world, I am not of
this world. Christ came from the Father, and was to go again to the Father.
This grand mystery transcended the capacity of Scribes and Pharisees: Their
wisdom was earthly, and their affections were earthly. But this wisdom of the
Gospel is heavenly and mysterious: This only a spiritual man can understand.
This wisdom can none learn unless such in whom the spirit forms it, as
Nemo idoneus erit Christi Discip^lus, nisi quem spiritus formaverit. Hinc fit,
ut tam rarasit in mundo fides. Calv. in loc.
Calvin observes: 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15.
and afterward, he draws an Inference very pertinent: Hence (says he) it
comes to pass, that faith is so rare a thing, because naturally all mankind
is estranged and averse from Christ. They only believe, who are effectually
wrought upon by the spirit of God. No marvel then, that the Pharisees past
such a false judgment on Christ, considering that they were carnal: Christ was
spiritual, they were from the earth, Christ from above. Christ was above the
world, a conqueror of the world, they were swallowed up with the love of the
world.

Wherefore my Text ingeminates what was before delivered, viz. That they should
dye in their sins. The difference lies only in this, there it is said (...),
in the Singular number: here, (...), in the Plural number: So then the words
contain a Grand sin, and a grand judgment.

1. For the sin: It Is said (...), If ye believe not. 1. A grand sin.
This great sin of unbelief, is the meritorious Cause of the greatest of
Judgments. As if the Lord Christ should speak to this effect: You may lay the
blame at your own doors, every one may cast the first stone upon himself,
considering that I have been at so great pains with you: Although I have been
a long time preaching the Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
Gospel unto you, yet you will not believe that I am the Prophet promised,
Genesis 49. 10.
Shiloh, a star coming out of Jacob, the Messiah, the Savior of the world,
the Redeemer, unto whom all the Prophets bear witness: because you believe
not that I am he, but despise the Dan. 9. 25.
great Salvation which I tender unto you: You shall dye in your sins, (i. e.)
in your impenitency and Infidelity: This I said before and I will repeat now,
I said therefore unto you that ye shall dye in your sins, for if ye believe
not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins.

From the words thus divided and expounded, I shall lay down one only point of
Doctrine, for the Foundation of my ensueing Meditations.

That of all sins, Infidelity especially is a grand-damning sin against the
Gospel.

For the Inlargment of this Doctrine my method shall be, Method.


1. To show what Infidelity is.

2. To produce Scripture Testimony for proof of the Doctrine.

3. To Confirm the same by Demonstrative Arguments.

4. To infer some practical uses and apply them particularly.

My first inquiry is, what Infidelity is, or wherein it chiefly consists? 1.
What Infidelity is.
For Answer by way of Character I shall endeavor to represent the nature of
Infidelity in these Particulars.

1. Infidelity consists in not knowing of, nor believing that there 1.
Infidelity is the not knowing of a Christ.
is a Christ: This is a Negative ignorance, which is called Ignorantia purae
negationis. By beholding of the Sun, Moon, and stars, even by this natural
light, or book of nature, they may be convinced that there is one God, Creator
and Governor of all things, that this God is the absolute Being, Firfi cause,
Being of Beings: But without the Book of Scriptures, we cannot know, nor
believe that there is a Christ. This mystery of Christ incarnate, Christ
crucified, Christ's merits, Christ's purchases is only revealed in the Gospel,
which is hidden unto Infidells, a book sealed unto them, above the ken,
apprehension, and faith of the most learned Heathens. Wherefore all such
opinions that hold, that the Sun, Moon, and Stars are sufficient to teach
them Christ, and faith in him are abominable and cursed opinions. We must
fetch our faith out of the Book of Scripture; Faith in Christ is a mystery,
it is of a spiritual cognizance, beyond the capacity of a natural man, 1 Cor.
2. 14. And notwithstanding the negative ignorance, and unbelief of Heathens,
they are not excusable. It Is true that those that sin against knowledge, shall
have a hotter Hell, but all ignorant persons are under a dreadful curse, Jer.
10. 25.

2. Infidelity consists, (and this is the height of it) in not believing Jesus
to be the Christ; the Turks account Christ as a great 2. Infidelity consists
in not believing Jesus to be the Christ.
Prophet, and will not suffer him to be reviled, and blasphemed, but they
account him not a Jesus, a Christ: for they prefer Mahomet that grand
Impostor before Christ: The Jews believe that a Messiah shall come; that then
shall come that Prophet Moses prophesied of, that Shilo that Messiah, that
Jacob, and Daniel foretold, but as for Christ that they crucified at Jerusalem
they reject him altogether, and account him no better then a deceiver and the
veyle to this day is yet upon their hearts, and their eyes are blinded, and God
has given them the spirit of slumber: Some Atheistical scepticks we have now
adays, that fancy to themselves a Platonic Christ, a Chim^^ra of their own
addle brains, these are better skilled in the books of Plato, then in the
Books of holy Scripture, this is but what Christ long ago foretold, that
there should arise false Christ's, Mat. 24. 24. Insomuch (that if it were
possible they should deceive the very elect) But there is a comfortable
Parenthesis. My soul trembles to think of the blasphemies, heresies, and all
sorts of abominations that springs from this cursed fountain of Platonic
scepticisme. I shall remind you of these special Scriptures, which if the Lord
set home upon your hearts, will abundantly throw down the Devils great strong
holds of new devised whinsicall opinions, hammerd upon the Anvill of an
Atheistical spirit, Read them deliberately, Act. 2. 39. Act. 4. 12. Joh. 17.
3. 1 Timothy 2. 5. And this is the very scope of this Text. Where it is said if
ye believe not that I am he ye shall dye in your sins. Is videlicet quem
esse me dico verus ille vobis promissus Liberator. So Beza on the place (i. e.)
the same I say I Beza.
am the promised Redeemer. Quaecunque scriptura Messiae tribuit, and ab ipso
sperare jubet, so Calvin. Regula fidei est ut non modo credamus Calvin.
esse Christum, sed eum quem scriptura docet verum sc: (...), Gualter.
so Gualter. We must not only believe that there is a Christ, but that he is
the true Christ God and man, which the scripture teaches and expresses to be
the only Physician, Savior, Fountain of living water, bread of life, our
great high Priest, the Messiah, the anointed of God. Piscator gives one
Piscator.
short, but pithy note; Eum sc. quem dico me esse videlicet Christum. Now the
not believing this Christ here teaching in my Text, (who was afterward
crucified at Jerusalem) to be the only Christ, the only Mediator, the only
price of our redemption is a grand damning sin against the Gospel.

3. Infidelity consists in not believing of the Word of God, Joh. 3. Infidelity
consists in not believing Gods word.
5. 38. Psalm. 106. 24. Neither believed they his wondrous works, Ps. 78. 22. A
strange unbelieving people who neither for the Word, nor for the works of God,
would yet believe, Every threatening and commination in the Word must be
believed, yet notwithstanding how many bless themselves as Deuteronomy. 29. 19. That
they shall have peace etc. Every promise must be believed, but what a great
questioning of, and what disputing against promises by unbelievers? Many
profess that Jesus is the Christ, yet when it comes to particulars, they walk
not answerably to their profession; For instance do they believe that they must
be redeemed from their vain conversation, that they must be in Christ, and be
new creatures, and be pertakers of the divine nature, they must be borne
again, if ever they expect to come to heaven? These things they believe not,
these are hard sayings say they who can hear them, yet the Word of God is
resolute and peremptory, and not the least tittle thereof shall fall unto the
ground: Is this Scripture believed, Isa. 3. 10. Say ye to the righteous it
shall be well with him, and Verse. 11. Woe unto the wicked, for it shall be ill
with him. Did men believe the Word and cleave to it? Did men believe that the
Judgments against the wicked, and the promises made to the godly should be
fulfilled, they would not lead such lives as they do, living without God in the
world? As one said either this is not Gospel, (holding up the Bible in his
hands) or you are not Christians: But this is Gospel, that if we believe not,
we shall dye in our sins: therefore we that live in our unbelief are not
Christians.

4. Infidelity consists in this, when we live by sense and not by 4. Infidelity
is a living by sense.
faith, we believe no more then what we see: if our sense and our reason
fails, our faith fails; as in the case of Thomas, Joh. 20. 27. But we ought
to live by faith and not by sense. Many will believe nothing but what they can
give a reason for, though the ways of God are most reasonable, and religion is
a reasonable (...). Romans 12. 1.
profession; and a reasonable service is commanded: yet its above reason, and
transcendeth the capacity of a natural man. That person must have his senses
exercised, and a spiritual eye that will discern the mysteries of God, see
how the Apostle describes faith, Heb. 11. 1. To be the substance of things not
seen. And the Patriarchs saw the promises a far off, Heb. 11. 13. What then
though sense fail, and reason is nonplussed, yet the promises of God never
fail: This sometimes is the fault of Gods own children under desertions, who
conclude awry, and say they have no faith because they want feeling: whereas
feeling is an after thing, Ephesians. 1. 13. And faith may be in the Root alive,
though the fruit appear not presently to the sense; There is truth of faith,
where there may be want of sense and apprehension: In so much as faith and
doubting may go together as appears, Mark. 9. 24. Lord I believe, help my
unbelief. This living by sense more then faith, is a great piece of
Infidelity, hence it came to pass that Abraham, and Isaac both denied their
wifes, in them there was sense, and fear joined together. Sarah laughed at the
promise, there was sense, as appears by her answer, Ge. 18. 12. Sense acted in
David and not faith; when he said in his heart that he should one day perish by
the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1. Wherefore he betook himself immediately unto
the Philistines, 1 Samuel 27. 1, 2. Here Is the Trial, Sense says no, Faith says
yea: Sense says its impossible, Faith says all things are possible to the
believer; Sense says its incredible, and unreasonable: Faith says I believe
though incredible and unreasonable: Sense says, and reason pleads we can
dispute and argue no longer, Faith says leave of disputing and learn to
believe; Thus did Abraham, and he acted upon a principle of faith, To. 4. 19,
20.

5. Infidelity consists in the Non-application of promises upon 5. Infidelity
consi^ts in the Non application of promises. Gal. 2. 20.
the terms of the Gospel: for to belive Christ is a Savior, and not my
Savior, what comfort can I take in it? To believe Christ dyed for sinners* and
to exclude my self from any benefit by his death; this is a dreadful
condition, Paul applied Christ to himself, Gal. 2. 20. Who loved me and gave
himself for me. And so did Thomas my Lord and my God. Now hears a great
difference between presumptuous sinners, and poor weak believers; Presumptuous
sinners are too hasty to apply too much, and poor weak Christians are too
backward, and apply too little; Every presumptuous sinner would be blessed, and
happy, and will say Christ dyed for him, but he is a stranger, and grossly
ignorant who they are to whom appertains blessedness: It Is appropriated
Matthew. 5.
to the poor in spirit, to the pure in heart, to those that hunger and thirst
after righteousness: but poor weak believers are afraid to lay hold on
promises, and question their interest in them; Now to speak to weak Christians,
whose faith is true though but little, let them know that their little faith is
(...) like precious 2 Pet. 1. 1.
faith, they would feign have more faith, they pray for more, and they strive
for more, it is their grief, and cause of heaviness that they have no more: do
you not then whatever you are stand in your own light, O therefore taste and see
that God is good, stay upon his promises, and apply your selves unto Christ,
the poorer you are in your own spirit, and the more sensible of your
unworthiness, the more fit you are to receive Jesus Christ, and if you dare
not apply Christ's promises unto you, be sure that you apply your selves unto
Christ, and his promises, rely, stay and lean upon them let them not go.
Faith is both a hand, and an eye, you must lay hold on Christ, and look unto
him, as they did on the brazen Serpent in the wilderness: This faith acts.

Q. O but I am afraid, I tremble, I dare not lay hold on Christ, I dare not
make this application to my self.

Ans. To answer hereunto, 1. Know a Paralitick trembling hand may receive a
precious pearl.

2. Christ invites thirsty, hungry, poor, naked, indigent, lost creatures,
such as are undone in themselves to come unto him. Art thou sensible of thy
poverty, nakedness, undone condition? thou art invited: why then do thou not
make have unto Jesus Christ?

3. Those that come are accepted, such I mean who come in faith so Christ
declares, Joh. 6. 35, 37. And the not coming unto Christ damnes multitudes of
souls, Joh. 5. 40.

But I proceed to the second head propounded, the proof of 2. Unbelief has
several Aggravations.
the doctrine from Scripture, that this sin of unbelief is such a
Grand-damning sin, and this will evidently appear from those several
Aggravations mentioned in the Word of God.

1. Unbelief makes the Word of God unprofitable unto us, Heb. 4. 2. The word
profited not, because not mixed with faith. We thrive not under Ordinances
because of unbelief: If in our estates we find out, that there is some wastfull,
licentious course of living, that hinders us from thriving, and causes us to
grow behind hand, we should carefully avoid that; Infidelity hinders our
souls from thriving; hence comes a leanness in our souls, notwithstanding a
fatness of Ordinances, and great barrenness, and unfruitfulnesse because we
believe not the word.

2. This sin causes Apostasy, Heb. 3. 12. Psalm. 78. 57.

3. It scapes not unpunished in Gods own Children, Luke 1. 20. Zachary was
struck with dumbness, for not believing the Angel.

4. Unbelievers are joined with the most abominable sinners, Rev. 21. 8.

5. The Scripture pronounces damnation to be the portion of unbelievers, in
the future tense its said, Mark. 16. 16. and Joh. 3. 36. He that believes not
shall be damned: but in the present tense, Joh. 3. 18. They are as sure to be
damned, as though the were already in hell: It Is said (...), which has the
signification of the present tense, as if the unbeliever were actually damned,
or in a damnable condition.

6. This sin labors to cut of the whole Gospel by denying of Christ his
Word, falsifying his promises, accounting him an unsufficient Savior
undervaluing the price of his blood, and contemning that great salvation
tendered in the Gospel, but this particular will fall in amongst the Reasons of
the Doctrine, which follow now in the next place to be handled, for the further
confirmation of the point, we have strong reasons drawn from Scripture,
contributing further evidence to the Doctrine, amongst many, I Will reduce them
unto these demonstrative Arguments.

1. Because unbelief refuses Gods remedy offered to heal Arg. 1. Unbelief
refuses Gods remedy.
and rejects a pardon tendered by despising Jesus Christ the only mediator,
the only Savior, and price paid for our redemption. God offers the pearl of
price the Lord Jesus, an unbeliever cares not for it, and bids God take again
his commodity Exodus 5. 2.
unto himself. Pharaoh said Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice? so
an unbeliever says, who is Christ that we should believe in him, these are
those Gadarenish Mammonists, who all petitioned that Christ might depart out of
their coasts, they preferred Mar. 5. 17.
their swine before Christ: There were three predominant sins in those
Gadarenes, viz: Ignorance, covetousness, and Infidelity, these are they that
will not have Christ to reign over them, see their doom, Luke 19. 27. These
are they that despise Christ, and in despising of Christ, they despise God the
Father, Luke 10. 16. God would heal them and they would not be healed, Jer.
15. 18. Christ invites them, they all with one consent make excuses, Luke 14.
18. Christ would gather them as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings
but they would not, Luke 13. 34. Christ sends Ambassadors to entreat them to
be reconciled but they will not, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Christ tenders a great salvation
to them but they neglect it, Heb. 2. 3. And how shall such escape? their
perdition is from themselves, Hos. 13. 9. Their condemnation is Just, they are
their own murderers. The riches of Gods mercy is Jesus Christ, unbelievers
despise the riches of Gods mercy, the blood of Christ is the only sovereign
plaster, and healing Remedy, unbelievers throw away this plaster, trample
under feet this medicine, and thus they judge themselves unworthy of eternal
life.

2. Unbelievers accuse God and his Word of falsehood, wherefore Arg. 2.
Unbelievers accuse God and his word of falsehood.
the sin of Infidelity must needs be a grand God-provoking sin. To give a
man the lie is accounted a great reproach and indignity; what is it then to put
the lie upon the God of eternal truth? And so unbelievers endeavor to do, 1 John 5. 10. An unbeliever makes the Gospel a Fable (what in him lies) and
Christ an Impostor: The comminations, and Judgments against sinners are looked
on by unbelievers, but as so many scarre-crowes, they bless themselves, and
promise to themselves peace notwithstanding all their rebellions, and as for
the promises they look upon them but as flattering and deceitful, they believe
no further then sense guides them. As for a reward to come, a resurrection, a
day of Judgment, they are in their hearts Sadduces either absolutely denying
the thing, or else wishing in their hearts, and hoping that there shall be no
such thing.

3. Unbelief after a sort may be said to bind the hands of Arg. 3. Unbelief
binds the hands of God.
God: God will have his word believed, and he works faith in those whom he
makes objects of mercy, though the fore sight of faith does not move him to set
his heart on them, that's his (...) alone which moves him to set his heart on
any: yet those whom he loves, he washes, and whom he elects unto happiness,
and eternal salvation, he elects unto faith and repentance, and perseverance
in them both. Now Infidelity damnes up the stream, bars and bolts the door,
and hinders mercyes and puts them in an incapacity of receiving any mercyes;
Christ would do no mighty works at Nazareth, because of their unbelief.
Christ Mat. 13. 58.
would not suffer Pearls to be trampled under feet, he would not loose the
glory of a Miracle, and cast away great works upon an unbelieving people. The
unbelieving Jews entered not into rest because of unbelief. Unbelief barred
multitudes out of Heb. 4. 6.
temporal Canaan, and it bars multitudes out of the eternal Canaan.

4. Unbelief makes the Ordinances unfruitful, and ineffectuall: Arg. 4.
Unbelief makes Ordinances unfruitful. Jam. 1. 6. Jam. 5. 15.
For instance it makes the Word, Heb. 4. 2. Prayer unfruitful, Mat. 21. 22.
Jam. 1. 6. Jam. 5. 15. To pray formally in a rode, as a lip-labor only without
faith and fervency, so far an Unbeliever may go and reap no fruit from such
formal services. Unbelievers hinder the working of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; for indeed that is a distinguishing Ordinance, and appertains not to
unbelievers, It is childrens bread; Its a holy Sacrament, and holy things
belong to holy persons, (as in the Primitive time they were wont to speak with
a loud voice, before the receiving of the Sacrament,) But what do Unbelievers
get by this Ordinance, 2 Cor. 11. 29. (...).
if they will thrust in, and participate thereof, it prooves but common bread,
common wine to them: and further they eat and drink Judgment to themselves.

5. And lastly, Unbelief causes dreadful Judgments, Temporal, and Eternal,
to the profane Prince, 2 Kings 7. 2. verse. ult. To the Israelites how many of
their Carcasses perished in the wilderness, Moses himself was shut out of
Canaan, Psalm. 106. 33. Comp. with Numb. 20. 10. which words hear now ye
rebels, betrayed some distrust of God, and eternal Judgments are the portion
of all unbelievers, Luke 12. 40.

More I shall not add to the Doctrinall part, but through Christ that
strengthens me, I intend to make six Uses of this Doctrine.

1. For Reproof.

2. For Caution.

3. For Exhortation.

4. For Examination.

5. For Direction.

And 6. For Consolation.

1. For Reproof and Terror unto all unbelievers, how dreadful Use 1. For
Reproof.
is their condition, and they are not sensible of it, nor a whit affected with
it, their Doom is terrible in the Text; they shall dye in their sins; Their
sin of Infidelity is enough of it self to damn them, but this is never
alone, it has a fraternity of sins and abominations joined with it, as
Pride, unthankfulness, earthly-mindednesse, Atheism, and many such like
fruits issuing out of the womb of Infidelity. What sin is there that has not
some spice, some tincture of Infidelity? As for instance, the sin of lying in
Abraham and Isaac, was mixed with Infidelity, Abraham denied Sarah, and Isaac
denied Rebeccah to be their wives, they were afraid of their lives, and that
fear exposed their wives to sad temptations. Did not God tell Abraham that in
him should all the families of the earth be blessed, and that in Isaac his seed
should be called, and yet he forgetful of the promise betook himself to a
broken refuge of lying and equivocation. It was likewise another piece of
Infidelity which caused Rebeccah and Jacob to use such indirect means to get
the blessing, God was faithful that has promised, and he needed not their
lies to bring his work to pass, yet Rebeccah gave Jacob Counsel, and he
fained himself to be his brother Esau, but Jacob smarted full sore by his
Exile, and through Labans rigorous dealing: It was Infid^lity in David to say
in his heart that he should one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1.
Wherefore he betook himself to Achish King of Gath, and there he met with
difficulties upon difficulties, as one wave of the Sea following another, and
varieties of dangers, verifying our common English proverb, leaping out of the
frying pan into the fire. Infidelity was in Zechary, and therefore Luke 1. 20.
he was smitten with dumbness. Thomas he must see before he believe. This
sin is incident to the generation of the just, but for this sin Gods
dearest children escape not unpunished. But what shall we say of all speculative
Atheists, such as in their Judgments and opinions deny God, Christ, the Holy
Ghost, providence and Gods government in the world? And what shall we say of
those practical Atheists; who live without God in the world, running into all
sins, and all manner of wickedness, these believe not the truth of the Word
of God, against swearers, Zech. 5. 3. Nor do they believe that a flying Roll is
against them to cut them off, nor against drunkards, Isa. 28. 1. Read what
Judgments the Scriptures pronounces against them that believe not, Joh. 3. 18.
2 These. 2. 12. Heb. 3. 18. Jud. 5.

I proceed to a second Use which is for Caution; O beware of Use. 2. For
Caution.
unbelief its a grievous grand-damning sin, other sins damn as well as
this, yet this throws away the remedy and bolts the door, bars access,
stops the current of mercy. Now multitudes flatter themselves with a false
faith, and so cheat themselves unto all eternity, therefore there is great
need to lay down some previous Cautions which are these following.

1. Beware of a fond vain persuasion and presumptuous confidence: Caution 1.
Beware of a fond vain persuasion.
many say alls well with them, and they believe as their Ancestors did before
them, and thus they flatter themselves into a fools Paradise, these vain
confident men never want woe, to be confident upon Gospel promises is a sure
bottom to stay upon: but multitudes are confiddent by reason of outward
riches, honors, pleasures, prosperity, etc. because they have abundance of
outward blessings, hence they conclude that all shall be well with them unto
eternity; But this is a false consequence, a plain Non sequitur: I am happy in
this world, therefore I shall be happy unto all eternity; For a man may be
eternally miserable, though he enjoy abundance of outward things, and he may be
eternally happy, though he may want them all: By outward things no man can
pass a certain Judgment, you read how the Idolatrous Jews blessed themselves
in their condition, Jer. 44. 17. That they had plenty of victuals, when they
burnt incense unto the Qeen of heaven. But see their doom, Verse. 23. Thus many
think alls well with them, (though they run their own courses, and follow
the devises of their own heart) by reason of the affluence of outward things,
but they deceive themselves.

2. Beware of a Temporary faith, Temporary believers may be Caution 2. Beware
of a Tomporary faith. Mr Bolton.
compared to the seed sown on stony ground, Matthew. 13. 5, 6. Which for want of
root withered, Its an instance of a Reverend Divine, suppose (says ^he) there
be a Serving man following two Gentlemen, when they part it will be known to
whom that Servant belongs, and whose Master he serves: So when it comes to
parting and loosing, lossesse, afflictions, persecutions, it will soon be known
whose servants we are, whether we serve God or Mammon, whether we serve our
selves or our lusts: A Temporary Believer will pretend much, in Halcyon times
of peace and tranquillity: but when it comes to trial of suffering, bearing
slander, ignominies, or loss of riches for Christ, then he is scandalized he
will relinquish his profession, and will not embrace Christ to his worldly
disadvantages.

3. Beware of distrusting Gods Word, though it may seem long 3. Beware of
di^trusting Gods Word.
in fulfilling what it promises, Hab. 2. 3, 4. Though the vision tarry, wait
for it. Believers must wait Gods leisure: And he that believes makes not
have. The Lord promised that in Abraham's seed all the earth should be blessed,
this promise was long in fulfilling, and Sarah according to the course of
nature was unlikely to bear a child, yet God accomplished what he promised to
a tittle. Gods works seems to run cross to his word, as you may see by
comparing Genesis 17. 19. with Genesis 22. 1, 2. But our duty is to stay upon Gods
Word, though his works may seem 4. Weak Chri^tians must beware of curious
Questions.
strange and unlikely to bring his word to pass.

4. Let weak Christians especially beware of too high or curious Questions,
nice and doubtful disputation^; some loose themselves and dispute themselves
into Atheism and infidelity; As for instance concerning themisteries of the
Trinity, Christ's incarnation, the procession of the Holy Ghost, these are
matters of our faith, and not of our reasoning and disputing, we must believe
where sense and reason fails; and because God says it, we must believe and
obey, not dispute his words and his commands.

These four Cautions premised, now in the third place I shall Use 3. For
Exhortation.
proceed to an Use of Exhortation: Is unbelief such a special damning sin,
O labor for faith, There is no pleasing God without faith, O! do not sleep in
a state of unbelief. The best of Gods servants have unbelief in them, but
they complain against it. Bradford a rare mortified man complained much of his
unbelief, so we must complain of our Infidelity, we must search narrowly,
make hue and cry after our unbelief, and labor to find it out, and having
found it, arraigne, condemn, and crucify it. Two Motives I shall urge.

First, I Will draw some from the benefit of Faith.

Secondly, From the mischief of unbelief.

1. Lets consider the benefit of Faith. First, It gives title and interest
Motive 1. From the benefit of Faith.
to the promises, all the promises are made unto believers, Joh. 3. 16, 36.
Temporal promises are the portion of believers, their basket and store is
blessed, Deuteronomy. 28. Lev. 26. Spiritual promises are the portion of believers,
and those promises of giving a new heart, circumcising the heart etc. are their
portion; Eternal promises are their portion, for eternal life is their
inheritance, Joh. 10. 28.

Secondly, Faith is a hand to lay hold on Christ: But not a working hand, as
that hand of a labourer that earnes his living, upon his desert and for his
work receives his wages: But faith is a receiving hand of a poor man that
lays hold on a pearl and receives all of mercy and favor from God: Hence
faith is expressed by receiving, Joh. 1. 12.

Thirdly, Faith gives insight into heaven, and communion with God, Heb. 11. 27.

Fourthly, From Justification by faith flows all our comforts, and
privileges, Romans 5. 1.

2. But if the Consideration of the benefit of Faith take no Motive 2. From the
mischief of unbelief.
place, on the contrary take notice of the mischief of Insidelity. You heard
before the reasons of the Doctrine (after another sort) how Infidelity bound
Gods hands, refused the remedy, I will add other great mischiefs, which
spring from the fountain of unbelief, viz. these following.

1. Unbelief makes all our prayers unavailable: To pray and not in faith is
sin, for whatever is not of faith is sin.

2. Unbelief causes diffidence of, and staggering at promises Romans 4. 20.

3. It hinders and deprives men of Communion with believers, 2 Cor. 6. 15.

4. Every thing is unclean, and desiled to unbelivers, Tit. 1. 15. Their
spiritual uncleanness makes every thing unclean unto them. The distinction
of clean and unclean meats is disanulled by the Gospel, the use of them is
pure to them who are cleansed by Christ's blood, and sanctified by his spirit;
but of unbelievers it is said Their mind and Conscience is defiled.

5. Unbelievers are given up to damnable delusions, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. That
they all might be damned who believed not the truth.

The fourth Use is for Examination, and Trial of Faith, and Use 4. For
Examination.
Infidelity: Every one is ready to say he believes but the number of believers
is very small. But where there is true faith it has these singular
Qualifications to inlighten the understanding, to purify the heart, to sanctify
the life and Conversation, to trust God with all, to live by faith, (for that
is the life of a Christian,) To enlarge a little these Qualifications.

First, True faith inlightens the understanding, Paul when of Qualific. 1. True
faith inlightens the understanding.
an unbeliever he became a believer, it is said And immediately there fell from
his eyes as it had been scales, Act. 9. 18. Where God works faith he
illuminates the understanding, Act. 26. 18. Joh. 2. 20.

Secondly faith purifieth the heart, it is a purifying grace, Act. Qualific. 2.
Faith purifieth the heart.
15. 9. The heart is purged and cleansed from malice, this God calls for,
Jam. 4. 8. Jer. 4. 14.

Thirdly, Faith reformes the life, hence faith is called a holy faith Jude 20.
An unfeigned faith, the Faith of Gods elect, a Precious Qualific. 3. Reformes
the life.
Faith. For a true believer is a man of another Conversation; As it was said of
Caleb, Number. 14. 24. He had another spirit with in him: So true believers are of
another spirit (i. e.) of a gracious spirit far different from what they were
in the State of unregeneracy, and far different from the men of the world.
Qualific. 4. Faith trusts God with all. Qualific. 5. the ju^t lives by faith.


Fourthly, Faith trusts God with all, David calls God his Rock, Fortress,
Bulwark, etc. Psalm. 18. 2. Psalm. 27. 1. A Believers heart is fixed and settled
in unsettled times, Psalm. 112. 7.

Fifthly, Faith is that whereby the just lives, Hab. 2. 4. Gal. 2. 20. A
believer in a storm gets himself upon a Rock, he hides himself in the clefts
of a Rock, Christ is the Rock of Ages, A believer climbes up thither, and there
rests: In dangers he goes to God, he is his Refuge, strong Tower, and Bulwark
of defense; In doubts God is his Counselor, in distress God is his comforter.

Now lets inquire after some signs and symptoms of an unbeliever.

The first (which is to be reckoned in the fore front) is partial Sign 1.
Partial obedience.
obedience, an unbeliever (whatever he pretends) is but obedient to halves, so
was Saul in sparing Agag etc. So was Ananias and Saphira in keeping back part
of the price. Agrippa would be a Christian (...), Act. 26. 28. We have many
such al-most Christians, half baked cakes like Ephraim, a cake not turned,
Hos. 7. 18.

The second sign of Unbelief is murmuring, and impatience: Sign 2. Murmuring.
The Lord complains often of the murmuring of the Children of Israel, Psalm.
106. 25. verse. 29. And this is forbidden, 1 Cor. 10. 10. See their impatience,
Number. 14. 44, 45. Murmuring and impatience go together: when God answers not at
our time, we begin to murmur, and wax exceeding impatient, so did they Psalm.
78. 19. Can God furnish a Table in the wilderness?

Thirdly, Unbelief appears evidently by that refuge which Sign 3. Broken
Refuge.
men betake themselves unto in streights, and difficulties. Saul went to a
witch, Judas and Achitophel to a halter, Ahaziah sent to Baalzebub the god of
Ekron: The Fool in the Gospel comforts himself, with his riches, voluptuous
men betake themselves to their pleasures, Ambitious men to their titles of
honor, but all these are broken and deceitful refuges, and will fail in the
greatest difficulties, like cloth that shrinks in the wetting.

The fifth Use is for Direction, And this I shall branch into a Use 5. For
Direction.
few Duties.

First be sure to act faith upon the promises, have a word for Dir. 1. Act
Faith upon promises.
your warrant, I trust in this word (says David) I hoped in this word. Study
promises, and apply them, live upon them, we read Joh. 3. 36. He that believes
has eternal life. But I am a believer etc. make good this Assumption, and
thou may conclude that thou shall be saved.

Secondly, Content not your selves with those seize and Dir. 2. Content
not thy self with former seize.
measures of faith you have already got, but pray with the Apostles, Lord
increase our faith, we read of some thing lacking in the faith of the
Thessalonians, 1 These. 3. 10. Labor to get thy faith strengthened, and thy
heart established upon God, Its no easy matter to believe: when the Son of man
comes, shall he find faith in the earth? Dir. 3. Be Conscientious in the use of
Ordinances. Dir. 4. Often search thy heart. Use 6. For Consolation.


Thirdly, Be diligent and conscientious in the Use of Ordinances, as hearing
Gods Word, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10. 17.
And add praying and receiving the Sacraments.

Fourthly, Often search thy heart for fear least a Temporary Faith lurk
there. Much unbelief lurketh in thy heart, therefore watch and pray against
it; labor to get it rooted out.

The last Use is for Consolation unto Gods Children, they are true believers,
and must needs be such as to whom comfort appertains; for they have great
privileges.

As first, Access unto the Throne of Grace, Romans 5. 2. By whom also we have
access by says.

Secondly, They have Interest in all the promises, 2 Cor. 1. 20. For all the
Promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen.

Thirdly, They have Interest in special providence distinguishing mercies,
viz.

1. For their provision, Psalm. 34. 9, 10. They shall want no good thing.

2. For their Protection, Heb. 1. ult. The Angels are their Guardians.

3. For their direction, Christ is a Counselor, and he directs them.

4. For their Consolation he comforts them, Joh. 14. 18, 26, 27

5. They have all sanctified what ever they enjoy: The Creatures are sanctified
unto them.

Fourthly, Christ is theirs, 1 Cor. 3. 20, 21. Romans 8. 32. And with Christ they
have all things.

Fifthly, They shall enjoy the presence of God and be made pertakers of the
blessed vision, Mat. 5. 8. 1 John 3. 2. Here they enjoy God in his Ordinances,
they have Communion with him, and feel spiritual Illapses upon their souls,
but this Ebbes, and flows, they have many Interruptions and Intermissions but
hereafter they shall enjoy an uninterrupted Communion with God to all Eternity.

Yet notwithstanding what has been said, there are many doubts and scruples
raised, for there are three sorts of persons who make objections viz.

1. Unbelievers.

2. Misbelievers.

3. Weak-believers.

1. I begin with Unbelievers, and these are to be considered, under a double
capacity, Either such as are Heathens, to whom the Gospel has not been
preached, in whose land the voice of the Turtle has not been heard, (i. e.) no
public preaching of the Gospel: or else such as live under the sound of the
Gospel, who have heard of Christ and his Gospel preached, and yet they
remain in a state of unbelief.

Obj. Concerning the first sort of unbelievers it is objected that

Ans. I answer God is a most free agent, he is bound to none. Romans 11. 32. The
Phrase is (...), shut them up, hampered them, And the God of this world has
blinded their minds, 2 Cor. 4. 4. See what their Conversation is, Ephesians. 4. 17,
18, 19. And see their doom, Jer. 10. 25. Ignorance excuses not, nor exempeth
from Judgment, though Ignorance may sometimes extenuate and make a sin less
comparatively, yet it is a damnable sin: For a sin of Ignorance there was
an offering to be offered unto God, Lev. 4. 27. And a blind mind is both a
sin and a dreadful judgment, Act. 28. 25, 26, 27. Let none therefore lavish
charity upon Heathens: If ever they be saved they cease to be Heathens, and
become Christians: For assuredly there is no salvation but by Christ, Act. 4.
12. And no coming to Christ but by faith, Joh. 5. 40. Let God be true and every
man a liar, God is Just in all his ways and proceedings. Shall not the Judge
of all the world do right?

Concerning the second sort of Believers who live under the means, it is
commonly objected: It is not in our own power we

For Answer hereunto, Those who thus argue do not say, they

To give a full Answer I Will lay down these Propositions. Prop. 1. Man cannot by
his own power turn himself to God. Prop. 2. Conversion and all the fruits
thereof are the Graces of Gods spirit Prop. 3. Good inclinations come from God.
Prop. 4. We may not neglect our duty. Prop. 5. There is no Injustice in God to
command things impossible.


1. It is not in the power of man to turn himself unto God, O Lord, I know,
that the way of man is not in himself etc. Jer. 10. 23.

2. Conversion and all the fruits thereof, even all the Graces of the Spirit
are the gift of God, so is faith and love: Every good and perfect gift comes
from above.

3. Our wills and inclinations to any good, all come from God, He gives to
will and to do Phil. 2. 13.

4. Yet we are called upon to do our duty, to thirst, come to the waters, buy
and eat, Isa. 55. 1. We are called upon to believe and repent, Mat. 4. 17. We
must use the means that God has appointed, we must do all we can, and put
forth our endeavors to the utmost and yet expect no salvation from what we can
do, but when we have done all we can, we must confess we are unprofitable
servants; some complain I cannot profit by a Sermon. Will this be a sufficient
excuse, to say I can not profit? thou must go to God and pray him to reach thee
to profit, do thou pray and meditate, and call thy self to an account, and
examination of what thou hear, let me ask such as complain that they have
no power to believe, would you believe and do you study Scripture? Do you read
the promises? Are you swift to hear? Do you use the means to get faith? If
you neglect Gods means, and Gods ways, your destruction will be from your
selves altogether, Hos. 13. 9.

5. It Is no injustice in God to command things which are impossible to flesh
and blood to perform, and that I will evince by these Arguments.

1. God is not bound to give and keep a stock both, he gave us power and
liberty of will in Adam, we lost it and therefore its our duty to be made
sensible of that great loss, and to be thoroughly humbled for it.

2. God hereby shows us our duty what we ought to do.

3. Hereby we are put in mind to use the right remedy (i. e.) going to Jesus
Christ for strength of assistance; For through his strength we can do our
duties, and without him we can do nothing. Let none therefore plead that they
are not able to believe, nor repent, but though they are not able of
themselves, they ought to go to Christ for strength, for God has laid help on
one that is mighty, Christ is mighty to save, he it is that gives grace and
glory. Let men examine their wills, are they not unwilling to come unto Christ,
though life and salvation is tendered, yet they will not come unto Christ: they
frame multitudes of excuses, which their carnal hearts plead and reason
against God. Christ offered to gather them, they will not: Christ's offers to be
their King, they will not be his subjects, they will not have him to reign
over them, unbelief and disobedience are men's own faults questionless.

In the next place concerning Misbelievers, there are many objections made by
Jews and Mahumetans, they would be accounted Believers, because they believe
one God Creator and Governor: but these reject Jesus Christ, they believe not
in him. The Mahumetans prefer Mahomet before Christ. The Jews believe him
not to be come, now questionless there is no true faith but that which has
Christ for its object, as we read Joh. 17. 3. The Papists go further, they
believe in God the Father, and they profess they believe in Christ, but they
join their own works with Christ's Merits, for they join with Christ
Mediation the Mediation of Saints, and Angels, and so they in a high degree
derogate from Christ's intercession, For he is an All-sufficient Savior, and the
only Mediator, Heb. 7. 25. 1 Timothy 2. 5. But whatever Jews, Turks, and Papists
may object; they will one day find all their devised worships, and misbeliefe
to be abominable in the sight of God. Likewise there are multitudes of loose
Protestants, and formal professors, they ask what need all this ado? what
need so much faith? We persuade our selves to be in a good condition already,
because we believe the Scriptures, thus many persuade themselves to be in a
good condition, and think their condtion to be happy, and yet follow those very
ways that lead down unto the Chambers of death. If all those that have a good
persuasion of themselves had been true believers, then the foolish virgins
Matt. 25. 10.
had not been excluded. Many say Lord, Lord, and Christ will say he knows them
not. Many will glory, and say that they have heard Christ preach in their
streets, that they have been in his presence when he was upon earth, and yet
Christ will not own them. Farther yet, multitudes rest contented with a
temporary faith, an Historical, and Dogmaticall faith, and yet all this while
they arrive not beyond the faith of Devils, and Reprobates.

In the last place, there are weak believers and these make many objections,
and because their Consciences are tender, they ought to be dealt more tenderly
with all.

First, They object that they have no faith at all, because it is

We must know. 1. That faith admits degrees: There are some Mat. 12. 20. A
bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till
he send forth judgment unto victory. There are Christians of the highest, of
the middle, and of the lowest form. The man in the Gospel had faith and
doubting together, Mark. 9. 24. Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief. The
disciples had a little faith, and yet this was true and accepted.

2. A weak faith, if true, is like precious, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Simon Peter a
Servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ to them that have obtained like precious
faith with us: grace and peace be multiplied unto you.

3. It has the like precious object, Jesus Cdrist; and he has lambs as well
as sheep in his fold, Isai. 40. 11. He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd; he
shall gather his lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall
gently lead those that are with young.

4. Weak believers have Interest ^in the like precious promises, Joh. 6. 37.
Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out: And Joh. 6. 35. He that
comes to me shall never hunger, etc.

2. Weak believers object that they have no faith, because they want feeling.

But we must know that faith may be where feeling may be Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom ye
also trusted after that ye heard the word, the Gospel of your Salvation; in
whom also after ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise.
Who knows how the bones of a child grow in the womb? shall we conclude that
they grow not, because they are not discerned? But for avoiding mistakes, it
will be needful to interpret a few Cautions.

1. We must not measure faith by our sense and apprehension, Caut. 1. We may
not measure faith by sense.
Psalm. 88. 14. David complains of God's hiding his face, and so he does
frequently complain else where, and yet a believer; Lord why castest thou off
my Soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? And Gods hiding his face was a
trouble unto him, Psalm. 30. 7. Thou did hide thy face and I was troubled.
Caut. 2. A weak Christian may not content himself with a weak faith.


2. A weak Christian may not content himself with a weak faith: but he must
labor for a strong faith: There are many things lacking in their faith, 1
These. 3. 10. Night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and
might perfect that which is lacking in your faith.

3. A weak believer must not neglect the Application of the Caut. 3. A weak
Believer may not neglect the Application of Promises.
promises, but search them and bring them home unto their own souls. Thou have
a weak faith: but the word is a strengthening, and establishing word. Wait
believingly on God, and thou shall have renewed strength, so runs the Tenor of
that choice word of Promise, Isai. 40. 29, 30, 31. He gives power unto the
saint, and to them that have no might he increases strength. Even the youths
shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fail: but they that
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings
as Eagles; they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint.

4. Neglect not observation of experiences of former dealings Caut. 4. Neglect
not experiences.
of God toward thee; how he has delivered thee out of six and seven troubles.
He has counseled and comforted thee, and he is as wise and able as ever to
help and relieve his people.

Lastly, Some object against themselves and conclude their faith

For Answer hereunto and to conclude, This is not a safe way Abraham, therefore
I have no faith at all. Should Zacheus because he was not so high as Saul,
conclude that he was no man at all? Look chiefly to the Quality, that this
faith may be of a right kind, a genuine faith; such as purifieth the
Conscience, works by love, and labor for more accession of it, and God will
accept the quality for the quantity, pence for pounds, the will for the deed.
We read Heb. 11. 17. By faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac. The
faithful intentions of Abraham was accepted in the account of God, as a real
performance: Let Us all labor to be sincere, and upright hearted, and this
perfection of parts (i. e.) sincerity will be accepted instead of perfection of
degrees, which is an absolute perfection without spot or wrinkle, which cannot
be attained on earth by Militant Saints who are Viatores, but only by such who
are Comprehensores glorified Saints in Heaven.

JOY IN THE LORD, AS A STRONG GROUND OF COMFORT AGAINST ALL DISCOMFORTS.
Unfolded from Hab. 3. 18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the
God of my salvation.
MY Text is an apposite close of a devout Prophets Sermon 9. Preached at St.
Marye's Oxon. Jan: 8. 1659 60.
Prayer, composed of two excellent ingredients, faith and fervency for in the
time of Jacobs troubles, when sad tidings were renewed every moment, and each
relation like Jobs disconsolate messengers aggravated the miseries, and made
them exceeding miserable, then my Prophet Habakkuk could discern a Sun of
righteousness with healing wings, dissipating all Mal. 4. 2.
the clouds of sorrows and miseries, I say amidst all these diastrous
occurrences, this spiritual man by the eye of faith, could see a Believer and
apprehend his Jesus the God of his salvation; this is an evidence of the
strength of faith, and where faith is, it sets the affections a working, it is
never idle, but always operative, as soon as faith gives thee an insight into
the beauty and excellency of thy God, how sweet and amiable will he be unto thy
soul, thy affections will be transported with my Prophet, I will rejoice, I
will joy: his expressions were too short, they cannot reach his heart, and
therefore he iterates his resolution; he is a true lover indeed, who delights
to discourse of his beloved odject, and make frequent repetitions of his love,
this is an argument of his fervency.

So then you see, (as I before intimated) that faith and fervency are the
essential parts of this accurate prayer. The words read are promissory, and by
way of covenant, or you may call them a comfortable conclusion, drawn from sad
and doleful premissesse. Upon perusal of the precedent words, you will find
matter of terror and astonishment enough to make you quake and tremble; Before
him went the Pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet, verse. 5. The
earth is measured, and the Nations are drove a sunder, and the everlasting
mountains were scattered, and the perpetual hills did bow, verse. 6. Unheard
of miracles, earthquakes against the course of nature, the mountains tremble,
there is a great inundation of waters, the Sun and the Moon cease from their
motion, verse. 10. 11. And as before there went out pestilence and burning
coals, or burning diseases, so now to add a complement to the judgment here
are arrows by day, which wound as much as the other in the night: the spears
glitters, and the Lord marches on in his indignation, the heathen feel the
sore brunt of it, verse. 12. Thou did thresh the heathen in anger; Yet out of
all these bitter herbs Gods people can suck sweetness: For God is good to his
Israel, Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, verse. 13. It Is
worthy of your notice, that amidst greatest extremities God extends his
special eye of care and providence unto his own people, he never fails to be
their Protector. It follows, Thou woundest the head of the house of the
wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck, (i. e.) God will pluck
these up by the roots, that they shall never grow again. By this Me^aphor of a
foundation, (according to Intelligit quicquid erat stabilitatis in ipsis
hostibus, hoc fuisse evulsumusque ad collum Calv. in loc.
Calvin's interpretation) I understand, Whatsoever strength and stability they
seemed to have, was quite overthrown from the top to the bottom. The weapons
God uses are described, verse. 4. Thou did strike through with his staves;
(i. e.) God gives them over to themselves, and they prove their own
executioners, and every man's hand was against his fellow; Their particular
sins are mentioned, They came out as a whirlewind to scatter me, their
rejoicing was to devour ^he poor secretly: Behold their insolent rage, and
precipitant fury; Their motions are too violent to hold, their rage was against
God like unto Senacherib, but their tumult came up unto his ears, and they
fare alike, I will (says the Lord) put a bridle in thy lips, and a hook in
thy nostrills, Isa. 37. 29. And thus God abaseth the sons of pride: but yet
their malice cease not, their doggish nature discovers it self, they rejoice
and devour the poor, and that secretly, one way or other they are a working,
if not by open hostility, yet by secret plots, and underminings: so as they may
contrive their ruin; But view further Gods power and method which he uses,
for the preservation of his people, Thou did walk through the sea with thine
horses, through the heaps of great waters: this is an Allusion to that
wonderful passage over the red sea; Hence learn that in the greatest dangers
God makes away for his servants escape. And now lets see, how all these wonders
affect the Prophet, you may guess at his disease by these symptoms, trembling
in his belly, quivering in his lips, rottenness in his bones, here is a man of
the right stamp, you may discern of what current metal he is by his
sympathy, and fellow feeling of the afflictions of others. It Is the duty of a
good man to be alike affected with others calamities, and miseries, as if they
were his own.

To draw down the Context unto the Text, my Prophet is no idle Spectator, but
he with Mary keeps all these things and ponders them in his heart, he makes a
soveraingne Compound of bitter Ingredients, and with the Laborious Be, he
suckes sweetness out of the sowrest herbs, and with Sampson finds a honey
comb in a Lions mouth: I mean he makes a dungeon a paradise, an abounding
misery, a superabundant comfort by a wise and spiritual application, for come
what will come his resolution is inviolably fixed upon a principle of faith,
that although the figg tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the
Vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no
meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in
the stalles, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation. Here is an enumeration of the choysest comforts, such as are of
highest estimation amongst men; The Fig Tree has much sweetness, and brings
forth good fruit, the fruit of the Vine makes the heart of a man glad, and oil
makes him have a cheerful countenance, and the field is so precious, as
Solomon tells us, Eccles. 5. 9. The King himself is served by the field.
Moreover flocks in the fold, and herds in the stalls are of continual use and
service unto man: weigh them together, and they will prove too light, they
will frustrate thy hope, and renew thy fears and griefs. Let me instruct thee
in this truth, that Gods own people may be brought unto such great streights
and miseries, as all creature comforts may fail them. Now it is the time of
their trial, for the time of misery tries the truth and sincerity of their
faith, when they are almost ready to sink and to be overwhelmed with sorrows,
then most opportunely the Lord reaches out a Cable to draw them out. In the
most tempestuous weather, hope remains the Anchor of their souls, be their
hearts never so much over-clowded with sorrow, they are revived by the joy of
Gods reconciled countenance: It Is God alone who is the supporter of the sinking
soul, they feel sweetness in God, surpassing the sweetness of the figtree,
they feel refreshings in him incomparably more delightful then those which
the Vine and Olive affords, and they feed on food which the world knows not
of, even the bread of life, which yields more nutritive and real sustenance
then all the flocks, and herds in the universe. The Lord is the Godly man's
food, comfort, rejoicing, his only joy; God is all in all, nay better then all,
unto him, He Is a Portion, Treasure, Rock, what not to his Children. Whereupon
out of the strength of faith, he breaks forth with my Prophet into this
heroical resolution yet I will rejoice etc.

My Text is the Triumph of a Christian, or the sanctuary of an Divis.
afflicted soul, in the very (...) or highest pitch of afflictions.

The first word in my Text is a redditive particle; tamen, yet, this resembles
a prop and a supporter to a house, which holds it up against blustering winds
and stormess.

Secondly, Here Is the person I (i. e.) the Prophet Habakkuk.

Thirdly, His resolution expressing strength of affection, I will rejoice, I
will joy, the Septuagint renders them by two words, (...): The joy is more then
ordinary, for here is an exaltation he leapes for joy, and takes much delight and
comfort in it.

Fourthly, The object which is described by his names topfull of power,
comfort, and mercy, a Lord, a God, and a God of salvation: Each Title is a
several forcible argument to excite and elevate the affection.

Fifthly, and lastly here is the Propriety, he is mine: The pronoune possessive
mine, appropriates the divine goodness unto a man's self in particular, and
this makes Application of this most comfortable doctrine. The version of the
septuagint is most Emphaticall, (...): Each name has an Article prefixed, to
make the Emphasis greater. The sum and scope of all comes to this effect, the
prophet was very sensible of the ^violls of Gods wrath powered down upon the
Nations: the whole world was in a combustion, one misery fell upon the neck of
another, as one billow in a tempestuous sea followed another, how could he
think himself secure? why might not instruments of death be prepared against
him, and he have his share in these common calamities? but this prudent man
has a remedy to apply to these sores: amidst these storms, he can find a
hiding place for shelter, though sorrows come thick and threefold, yet heel'e
have recourse unto his God, and fetch down joy and consolation from him in
abundance.

From hence observe this experimental truth of Doctrine which shall constitute
the subject of my ensuing meditations.

That when all creature comforts fail us, and render our outward condition
disconsolate, then there appears sure mercies and comforts superabundant
matter of Consolation, of joy and rejoicing in the Lord our God: Or take the
point more briefly thus: Amidst all sorrows, losses and crosses, joys,
supplies, and comforts, are to be found in the Lord our God: Yet (says my
Prophet) I will rejoice in the Lord. The verse immediately following, set's out
the exuberance of joy, pressed by strength of Argument, The Lord God is my
strength; Look for no strength elsewhere, in him it is most eminent, Admit thou
art exceeding weak, yet God is strong, and his strength will be manifested in
thy weakness. The consideration of the divine supportation that it is
sufficient for thee, should animate thee, to trust thy God with all thy
comforts: he goes on, and he will make thy feet like hinds feet, and he will
make me, to walk upon mine high places (i. e.) he will give me strength and
agility to break through all oppositions; and therefore the last breath he puts
out is Eucharisticall, To the chief singer on my stringed instruments.

You see it clear in my Text, the Prophet David professed out of universal
experience, that Gods rod and his staff, did comfort him, and in the multitude
of his sorrows Gods comforts refresht his soul; He had fainted, but for the
goodness of the Lord. This holy man, was a man of sorrows, and yet a man of
comforts, the wrath of Saul was inkindled against him, and The wrath of a King
(says Solomon) is like the roaring of a Lion; He pursued him like a Partridge
on the mountains, and when he was at the brinke of danger, then appears a
method of deliverances, when he was hemmed in and compassed round about, then
the divine providence contrived a way to escape, then there came a messenger
unto Saul saying, Have thee and come, for the Philistines have invaded the
land, wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David and went against the
Phylistines: In this straight an unexpected providence procures his
preservation. Indeed if we had leisure to inquire into the passages of the
divine disposing hand concerning this one man, we should conclude them to be as
so many continued Acts of the Finger of God. When Ziglag was burnt, and the
people wept till they could weep no more, even then in that lamentable
condition, David encouraged himself 1 Samuel 30. 6.
in the Lord his God; His God refresht his drooping spirit, he was more
precious, more sweet unto his soul, then a goodly habitation, the wife of his
bosom, a numerous posterity: The least glimpse of comfort from the blessed
Trinity makes amends for all. Not to pass by poor Hagar: when her bottle was
spent, and she cast under a shrub her child, expecting ever and anon his death,
and in the bitterness of her soul she lift up her voice and wept, then God
opened her eyes, and she saw a w^ll of water, and over and above God promises
to make him a great nation, Genesis 21. 18, 19. Here Is sorrow turned into joy, and
God himself becomes the comforter. The three children had the presence of God
for their preservation in the flames; Daniel had the Angel of the Lord to shut
the Lions mouth, Job saw a redeemer comforting him in the dunghill, Peter had
an Angel to deliver him: God will have the prisoner, the shackles fall off,
the doors fly open, the Iron gate opens of it is own accord. Herod (though he
thought that he had made all sure work,) must be disappointed. It Is true Peter
was a sleep, he might dream of no such thing: Gods people, who have peace with
God and their Consciences can enjoy quiet rest and repose in a prison: Thus you
see how God performs his promise to his people, in giving unto them the oil
of joy for mourning, beauty for ashes, the garment of praises for the spirit of
heaviness; God is always at hand to support his servants to bring them out of
the greatest streights. O that thou would in the greatest fears and dangers
expostulate on this wise with the Kingly Prophet David, Psalm. 42. 11. Why art
cast down O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me; hope thou in God
for I shall yet praise him who is the health of my countenance and my God, and
with the blessed Apostle thou may argue; What Romans 3. 31.
shall we say then to these things? if God be for us, who can be against us.
Let the world, the flesh, and the Devil, the three grand enemies of thy soul
muster up all their forces against thee, yet raise up thy spirit, be of good
courage, and fear not, if the Lord be on thy side, thou have more with thee
then against thee.

For the further confirmation of this truth, I find four Arguments 4. Argum.
drawn from the Text.
to my hand in my Text, I say in the most piercing sorrows, there is still left
matter of rejoicing in God.

1. Because he is styled Lord. 2. He is styled a God. 3. A God of Salvation. 4.
A God of our Salvation.
1. He is the Lord: Jehovah and (...) are promiscuously used 1. Lord.
in the Septuagint, this is a name of Dominion, Sovereignty, and Majesty: he is
(...) of himself Lord of all. David picked much comfort out of this name: the
Lord was his shepherd, refuge, buckler, rock of defense, and therefore the
close of, Psalm. 144. 15. is full of comfort, Happy is that people that is in
such a case, yea happy is that people whose God is the Lord. O do not stand in
thy own light, and inhance thy grief, by refusing comfort with Rachell. Art
thou in a tottering condition ready to sink under thy burden? Consider the
promise, Psalm. 37. 17. The Lord upholdeth the righteous, and verse. 24. The Lord
upholdeth him with his hand: Art thou as weak as water, and thy heart fails
thee like water spilt upon the ground? Yet could thou believe with David, The
Psalm. 29. 11.
Lord will give strength unto his people, and the Lord will bless his people
with peace, then thy life would be more comfortable, thou would go on
courageously in the strength of the Lord, and be confident in the power of his
might; Although no comfort appears in thy Horrizon, yet could thou but wait
upon the Lord, and by patience possess thy soul, so many thoughts of
Infidelity would not arise in thy soul: did thou but delight thy self in the
Lord, thou would soon discern all thy desires satisfied. This name of Lord,
as it is a name of Power and Majesty, so of joy and Consolation, and hence we
are instructed in a submissive deportment, fixing our resolutions upon this
argument with old Elie, 1 Sa. 3. 18. It is the Lord let him do what seems him
good; and with Hezekiah, when he received heavy tidings, Good is the word of
the Lord, which thou have spoken. The consideration hereof makes a dutiful
child kiss the rod, because the Lord sends it, it holds up a man's heart, and
makes a man cheerful under the pressure of a smarting cross, because the
soul can discern the hand of the Lord. Thus you see what is the fuel to
inkindle thy joy, what matter of rejoicing this comfortable name of Lord
administers unto thy soul, and therefore this should be a prevailing argument
with thee, to rejoice because it is in the Lord.

2. From the glorious name of God, abundant matter of joy 2 God.
is derived upon thy soul, I stand not upon usual Etymologies (...): For it
is undoubtedly true that God fills all places, and knows all things.
Omnipresence and Omniscience are his peculiar Attributes. Men are circumscribed
to a place, and when they are present with us are unable to afford the least
help and succor unto us: but the Lord is every where, and has a store house
of comforts for the supplying of our necessities, David professes, that God is
our refuge and strength, a Psalm. 46. 1.
very present help in time of trouble. God is good to Israel, even to such as
are of a clean heart. Let God arise and let his enemies be scattered, Psalm.
73. 1.
and let those that hate him fly before him. When God goes Psalm. 68. 1.
forth with an Army, one shall be able to chase a thousand, and two to put ten
thousand to fleight. When a man has a lingering sickness, and he is become a
very Skeleton, let him know that unto God belongs the issues from death. When
the church is under hatches, and a furious enemy makes havoc of it, yet
there is a God in heaven which judges the Nations, who will wound the hairy
Scalpe of the wicked: his heir will not be his safeguard: God can bring light
out of darkness, and now in the times of afflictions, he brings out the most
precious Cordialls unto his people: when friends, the dearest and nearest
forsake thee, thou art no looser when thy God takes care for thee; when thy
heart is overwhelmed with sorrow, if God let down some spiritual
refreshments, then thou can hold up thy head with comfort; If where ever thou
go, bonds, imprisonments and afflictions, and all the calumnies and
Nicknames (which the malice of man or Devil can invent) continually attend
thee, yet all these shall cooperate for thy good, they shall do no more harm,
then the Arrow did Christ, which Julian the Apostate threw into the air, or
the dogs unto the Moon, notwithstanding their daily barking. It was the sweet
saying of a devout Martyr, Who would have thought that in a prison, I should
have found a Palace, in an infernal dungeon a Paradise of pleasure? Where God
is, sweetness may be extracted from the most bitter pill of affliction. This
is a second Argument of Comfort drawn from the sacred name of God.

But if these names are not effectual to set thy affections a working, 3. God
of Salvation.
here is an unparalled expression in the third Argument, the sweet name of a
Jesus, he is a God of Salvation, and therefore (says a Father) Exultabo in
Deo, Jesu meo. Salvation belongs to the Lord, Psalm. 3. 8. And from hence the
Psalmist draws a practical inference, Psalm. 9. 4. I will rejoice in thy
Salvation. Hereupon the Kingly Prophet in a hard time, when God frowned upon
him, (as they say skillful Chemists can extract oil out of a flint) found
Serenity in this meditation, Behold God is my Salvation, I will trust and not
be afraid, for the Lord Jehovah is my strength, and my Song, he also is become
my Salvation. Therefore (says the Prophet) With joy ye shall draw water out
of the wells Isai. 12. 3, 4.
of Salvation. In the Prophesy of Obadiah, where direful menaces are threatened
against the Edomites: and indeed the whole Prophesy may resemble that Scrole of
Ezekiel full fraught with mourning, Lamentation, and woe, but the day cleares
up, and the Catastrophe is most pleasant, verse. 21. And Saviors shall come
upon mount Zion, to judge the mount of Esau, and the Kingdom shall be the
Lords. You cannot imagine how welcome redemption is to a Turkish gally slave,
and in a dangerous skirmish, a Rescuer is grateful. Lets then pawse a while,
and consider former gracious passages of Gods dealings toward us, when we were
at our wits end, our contrivances were nonplus'd, and we knew not which way to
turn us, and we were ready to perish then the Lord breaks in and discovers
ways and means for our preservation: Let your particular experiences suggest
instances in this particular. When there were but a heyre's breadth between us
and death, then the same God that brought us to the grave raised us up. When
men and Devils banded themselves in opposition against us, when the Pope and
his Cardinals contrived the Spanish invasion, and when that miscarried there
followed a conspiracy in the Vault, a deed of Romish darkness, then appeared a
God of Salvation, to blow and scatter their Ships, and afterward to bring
deliverance between the match and the powder, Maugre all the plots and
projects of all Achitophells, and underminers of Zion, blessed be God we are
here alive, as you see this day to Celebrate the Praises of the God of our
Salvation.

4. And so I am fallen upon my fourth and last Argument in my 4. My.
Text, drawn from that propriety (My) I speak not of a good by hear say, in
which others have the sole interest, but it is our own, The God of my Salvation,
the pronoune Possessive (My) reduces the comfort unto my self, and intitles
me unto it, by a particular application. The use and virtue of medicines is
known when they are applied, and the most comfortable promises of God, and
doctrines of Salvation, then prove effectual unto my soul when I make use of
them in my life, and Conversation; How frequently does David call God the God
of our Salvation? Moses having a large testimony hereof by the overthrow of
Pharaoh and his host, breaks forth into this triumphant Song, Exodus 15. 2. The
Lord is my strength and my song, he is become my Salvation, he is my God, and I
will prepare him an habitation, my Fathers God and I will exalt him: Certainly,
(my brethren) Christians would lead more comfortable life's, ever find a heaven
upon earth, if they could make a profitable Observation of Gods former dealings
each one with himself in particular. Men are apt to sink under the sense of
any present evil, that presses them, because they reflect not upon Gods
former ways of mercies toward them. It were an excellent course todraw home
such Experimental Arguments as these, I have known a famine and felt a
pinching season, when scarce I could get bread from hand to mouth, I outlived
that time, the divine providence cared for me, and carried me through that
plunge, and distress, I have felt a sore disease, and have been in the mouth
of the grave, and yet I live to praise Gods power, I have drunk deep of the
cup of affliction, I have been even drencht in my own sorrows, and yet out of
them all the Lord has delivered me, and let his countenance shine upon me, I
have known fears, and troubles, dangers and distractions both in Church and
state, yet the Lord became the Reconciler and brought all to a blessed
conclusion, and still there is the same God, as full of bowels of compassion to
commiserate our calamities, as full of power to effect, of wisdom to contrive,
as full of fidelity to perform his own promises as before, and therefore my
resolution stands firm, and unmovable, that I will wait upon God in the ways
of his own mercy, and rest in the constancy immutability, and indeficiency of
that God with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of change. Had men such
spiritual prudence, as to uphold their hearts by their experiences, and review
often Gods former proceedings, they might with more stablisht and quiet
affections, expect the salvation of the Lord again.

I have resumed these Arguments as you find them laid down in my Text; A Lord
and willing, A God and able, A Savior and my Savior, each word severally
abounds in comfort, and now when they are all united, how much do they concur
to the complement, and perfection of our joy. I told you before to this effect,
that no condition was ever so disconsolate, but still some matter of joy and
rejoicing was to be found in God. Me thinks I could dwell upon this sweet
Theme, and say as Peter said at Christ's transfiguration, It Is good being here.

For the further discovery of this most excellent and necessary truth, be
pleased to weigh and seriously consider with me these five clear and evident
demonstrations.

1. All joy and comforts are treasured up in God. 5. Demonstrations.
2. There Is no real solid joy to be found elsewhere. 3. Amidst the greatest
crossesse, streights, and extremities, then is Gods opportunity to send
comforts, causing them to appear and show themselves. 4. The least of Gods
comforts will make a super abundant recompense for all the discomforts in the
world. 5. And lastly all the ways and proceedings of God are ways and
proceedings of joy and comfort.
For the further Inlargment of these particulars. 1. I say all 1. All comforts
are treasured up in God.
comforts are treasured up in God. There must needs be water at the well head,
there must needs be drops in the Ocean. God is the Fountain and Original of
all our Consolations, The earth (says the Psalmist) is full of thy riches, so
is this great and wide Psalm. 104. 24, 25.
sea, where in are things creeping, innumerable both small and great beafis.
What can thou want; if thou have made God thy portion, thou may say with
Jacob, I have enough I have all, In Christ all fullness dwells, Col. 1. 19. In
Christo est quicquid requiritur ad Davenant in Loc.
con^tituendum perfectum Redemptorem. There Is in Christ fullness of wisdom to
direct, fullness of power to defend, fullness of merit to satisfy, and effect
man's salvation, fullness of righteousness to justify, fullness of holiness to
sanctify, fullness of mercy to pardon. He Is styled in Scripture, a Rock for
his strength, to support us, a Counselor for his wisdom to guide us, a
fountain opened Isa. 9. 6. Zech. 13. 1. Romans 27. 2.
for his readiness, and preparedness to wash away our uncleanness, a Tree of
life bearing twelve sorts of fruits every month, for the plenty and perpetuity
of joy and gladness, and other fruits of the spirit which he ministers unto
true believers. Hence is he compared in the Revelations, to a pure River of
living water Rev. 22. 1.
as clear as Crystal, for that inestimable purity, perfection, comfort, and
satisfaction which Christ minister unto the souls of his children; Likewise to
a precious pearl, for his superlative worth, Matthew. 13. 45, 46.
and value, and to a storehouse for his fullness of all spiritual treasures:
Omnia habemus in Christo, and omnia in nobis Christus, says Jerome.
Jerome, and the same Father proposes particular Instances; Si a vulnere
curari desideras, medicus est etc. If thou desire to be cured of thy wounds,
Chist is thy Physician, if thou burn with fevers, he is a fountain, if thou
art burthe^ed with iniquity: he is righteousness, if thou want help he is
strength, if thou fear death he is life, if thou flyest from darkness he is
light, if thou desire heaven, he is the way: Therefore make thy wants known
to God, though he knows them all already, yet he will have them known unto
thy self better, and God loves to hear from his children the expressions of
his own spirit. When out of a sense and apprehension of thy own vileness thou
unbarest thy sores, and confessest thy sins, then God in mercy may remit
them. A poor soul complains of its ignorance, and folly: so foolish was I
and ignorant, (says David) even as a beast before thee: O make have unto
Christ, In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. When the
depth says it is not in me, and the sea it is not in me, when all the lamps of
Philosophers can give no light, when all their penetrating brains cannot sound
these mysteries: Job instructs thee where thou must go to school, Job. 28. 23.
God understands the way thereof, and he knows the place thereof, from God
comes wisdom, and from the Lord comes understanding: Another is of a
sorrowful spirit, and goes mourning all the day long: The remembrance of their
sins is exceedingly afflictive unto their souls, still it presents unto them
gall and wormwood, terrors and fears, which almost drives them unto
desperation, these would prize one glimpse of Gods reconciled countenance,
beyond the Empire of the world: but alas they can apprehend no comfort as
appertaining unto them; mark then what seasonable counsel the Prophet gives in
this kind, Isa. 50. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys
the voice of his servants, that walks in darkness and has no light, let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. A child of light for a
time may walk in darkness, he may possess his soul in bitterness, he may
be wonderfully tossed and troubled in a tempestuous sea of sorrow, ever and anon
ready to perish, yet when Christ comes and rebukes the winds, and the seas
there will be a great calm. One of his love tokens, and spiritual illapses
will wipe away their tears, and make them go away full of comfort with Hannah,
and be no more sad. A poor doubting Christian must not be his own Judge he
can easilier discern, what makes against him, then what makes for him: O then
hearken what God says unto thee, what comfort his messengers proclaim unto
thee: wait upon God in his Ordinances, stand upon thy watch, act faith upon
Promises, and in Gods due time comfort may come, like Noah's Dove with an Olive
branch in her mouth, in token that the waters of Marah are abated. When God
has fitted thee for a mercy, then he will give unto it a quick dispatch, and
send unto thy soul tidings of peace; thus I have made it good unto you, that
all comforts are to be found in God.

2. There Is no real comfort to be found elsewhere; If you will 2. Demonst.
there is no real comfort to be found elsewhere.
not believe this truth, but hunt after the creature, as if that can comfort
you, to your peril be it, you may go further and speed worse: what said Saul
to the Benjamites, will the son of Jesse give you fields and vine-yards, and
make you all Captains of Thousands, and Captains of Hundreds? So let me
expostulate, can the Creature give you any real satisfaction and contentment,
in that you so hug your selves in the fruition of it? If these be your
humors, I know not better how to resemble you, then to the men of Shechem, in
Jothams parable, Judge. 9. verse. 9. Who leaving the Vine, Olive, and Fig Tree,
addressed themselves unto the bramble for shelter and security, and since they
put their trust in it is shadow, (which can Minister no safety nor defense,)
what can be expected, but that fire should come out of the bramble and devour
the Cedars of Lebanon. I mean since they expect so much from the Creature, by
woeful experience they will find it to be the greatest scourge and plague unto
them. Creature comforts carry a brave port, and come with Agag delicately, but
they are not aware of their approaching ruins. Pleasures of the world make
fair promises, presenting unto us, as Jaell did Sisera butter and milk in a
lordly dish, but there is a hammer and a nail, instruments of death are prepared
against us, (i. e.) sour sauce for sweet meat. What Is all the mirth of the
wicked but madness? For their hearts are full of gravel, and the terrors of
God affright them, amidst their Carrowsing and jollity. Saul could not be merry
without a Musician; Whereas Plato told the musicians, that Philosophers knew
how to dine and sup without them. Do thou think to recreate thy self by
learning a lascivious scurrilous Ballads, by healthing it in Alehouses and
Tavernes, and revelling it ^in Balls and such like Idolized vanities, will the
remembrance of these sinful jollities make thee hold up thy head with comfort,
when God lets loose the lord of thy conscience against thee? Then thou will
curse the day that ever thou cast in thy lot amongst them, to be a companion of
fools, and by woeful experience thou will find, that thou have all this while
sought the living amongst the dead: Ahab could not be merry without Naboths
Vineyard, and when he had unrighteously took possession of it, his sorrows
were renewed abundantly. Haman could not comfortably enjoy himself because he
wanted Mordecais bended knee; suppose he had obtained it, yet his restless
ambitious humor could not be satisfied: For it is not within the sphaere of
any sublunary thing, any created power, to afford comfort and satisfaction unto
the soul of man. As the King of Israel said to the woman, that cried out in an
extreme famine help my Lord o King, if the Lord (says he) do not help thee,
whence shall I help thee out of the barn flore, or out of the wine press? So
say I if the Lord be not thy comforter, in vain may thou expect any comfort
from the Creatures. What is the vintage of Abiezer to the gleanings of Ephraim?
What are the onions and garlic of Egypt to the grapes of Canaan? Abana and
Pharphar rivers of Damascus, to Jordan and the rest of the waters of Israel:
The waters that flow from the Cisternes of the Creatures, are like the waters
of Tema which soon vanish away: hence is it that the Lord complains of the
peoples grand folly and backsliding, Jer. 2. 13. For my people have committed
two evils, they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed
them out Cisternes, broken Cisternes that can hold no water: A miserable
choice, worse then that of Glaucus. Diogenes taxed the folly of men of his
time, quod res pretiosas minimo emerent venderentque vilissimas plurimo,
because they Diogenes.
would buy precious things at an under rate, and overvalue base things: so may
I condemn the folly of those, who overvalue worldly comforts, and in the mean
time have a cheap esteem of those things which are above; Perhaps God has
given thee a beautiful Child, and thou make an Idol of it, he straight way
takes it from thee; God has given thee riches, thou make the wedge of Gold
thy confidence, God therefore blows upon them. Fire or water or perfidious
servants are made scourges unto thee: Thou art in prosperity, and thou have the
world at will, and gloriest in thy condition, God sends an affliction to make
thee know thy self, and rowse thee from thy security; carry it then home with
thee for a truth, write it with the point of a Diamond, that however thou
may flatter thy self, yet casting the best with the worse, thou will find
all things here below to be but vanity, and vexatiof spirit, and that there is
no sollid joy and contentment under the sun; For that's joy (as the Philosopher
define it) in quo quiescit animus, wherein the heart takes up it is rest, and
this cannot be found but in God alone.

3. Amidst greatest crossesse, straights and extremities, then is 3. Demonst.
God helps amidst greatest Cross^ss.
Gods opportunity to open his storehouse, and let down comforts in abundance.
In the midst of streights and difficulties, when humane policy gives up the
bucklers, then it is Gods accustomed manner to manifest himself to his servants
comfort. When Abraham was enjoined the hardest service, to be his own sons
executioner, he went in obedience to Gods command; he came to the place, made
the Altar ready, lifted up his hand to give the deaths blow; then an unexpected
second message comes of deliverance, Genesis 22. 12. Abraham, Abraham hold thy
hand. The execution is hindered, and the intention of his obedience received a
gracious entertainment. Now Abraham for this unexpected providence would
willingly offer some sacrifice of thanksgiving, and speedy provision might be
as improbable as was his sons preservation, yet then in such a great necessity,
behold behind him a Ram caught in a thicket by the horns, a burnt offering
of Gods own providing: So that the saying is no more common then true, Man's
extremity is Gods opportunity. The example of St Paul is instar omnium very fit
for my present purpose, the whole story is worthy of perusal, that which I
shall make use of is described, Act. 21. 30, 31, 32. And all the City was
moved, and the people ran together and they took Paul and drew him out of the
temple, and forthwith the doors were shut, and as they went about to kill him,
tidings came to the chief Captain of the band that all Jerusalem was in an
uprore, who immediately took Soldiers and Centurions, and ran down unto them,
and when they saw the chief Captain and Soldiers, they left beating of Paul.
Each passage is of special observation.

1. A general insurrection, all the City. 2. Their violent opposition they
drew him out. 3. Their bloody intention, it was to kill Paul. 4. The entrance
upon execution, they were beating him to beat out his life!
Now in this straight here is matter for God (and none else) to show himself:
Now the divine hand so disposes that tidings of deliverance come, let him
alone, he has more work to do: Satan and his instruments are chained by God,
and can go no further then he will permit them. In this extremity the divine
power was clearly manifested. Out of the deep David made his supplication:
Abyssus ahyssum vocat, a depth of misery, calls for a depth of mercy; Daniel
prayed in the Lions Den, Jeremiah in the Dungeon, Jonah in the Whales belly,
the Apostles in prison. These are Gods times of audience. When we are involved
in miseries, and know not how to wind our selves out, then God leads us by the
hand. God has several ways to refresh his people, as he did Peter when he
was a sinking, then Christ takes him by the hand. God carries his people
through thick and thin, amidst their greatest sufferings, God has ways to
deliver them. God has a way in the sea, to preserve thee in a Shipwreck, God
has a way in persecution to stablish his people in the faith, and make them of
an undaunted courage; God has away in any difference, to compose it, and cause
men to live at peace in one family, in one corporation, in one Church, in one
Commonwealth. The reason many times why, we see not quickly the appearance of
a mercy is, because matters are not yet brought to such a straight and
exigency, as all plea of glorying may be took from man, and the more praise and
glory may redound unto the God of our salvation. God saved the Israelites by a
few, and by improbable means as by rammes-hornes, empty pitchers etc: that so
they might not vaunt, but attribute the victory unto the Lord. Now then in a
pinch of need, when thou art driven upon pressing exigencies, look beyond Hills
and Mountains unto the Lord only, whence comes thy help; Cast thy care upon
the Lord, and he will sustain thee; God made the Ravens to be Eliahs purveyors
in a great famine, there is still the same God as good, as able as ever: although
(...), (as the Septuagint renders it) the labor of the Olive shall lie, yet
consider God is a God of truth, he has said it, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. When all creature comforts fail thee, yet thou have
abundant matter in God to comfort thee, who will never fail them that seek
him: In the mount, in thy greatest straights, God will be seen to make a
provision of comforts for thee, and therefore let the Lord be the joy of thy
soul.

4. The least of Gods comforts will make a superabundant recompense 4. Demonst.
The least of Gods comforts will make amends for all discomforts.
compense for all the discomforts in the world. A cup of cold water shall not
loose its reward, and you know there is a vast disproportion, between a cup of
cold water and the Kingdom of Heaven. God takes notice of every tear that the
Saints shed, and and he exhales them into his bottle, and when the time of
refreshing shall come from his presence he will wipe away all tears from their
eyes. Admit a man has endured a scoff, or a taunt, an approbrious nickname
for Christ, or admit, that he has resisted unto blood, fried at a stake for
the Gospel of Christ, could a man I say dye ten thousand kinds of death, yet
all these sufferings are not worthy to be compared, with the joy that shall be
revealed, for one moment in heaven will make amends for all; With this
meditation Christ cheared up his disciples, Matthew. 19. 29. Every one that has
forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or Lands for my names sake shall receive an hundred fold, and shall
inherit everlasting life. When Peter told Christ that they had forsaken all,
and what was that? A poor all, a few rotten poles, and fishers nets, or some
such like thing, our Savior acquaints them of their thriving bargain, of
their happy exchange which they had made, by the loss of earth to gain
heaven, O do not inhance thy grief saying that no man's sorrow is like thine,
there cannot be a more Emphaticall Antithesis, then in 2 Cor. 4. 17. (...). Our
Translation cannot reach these sublime expressions: Our light affliction which
is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight
of glory. Suppose thou art afflicted with outward crossesse, and in the mean
time God settles the tranquillity of thy soul, in liev of outward, God
vouchsafes unto thee inward comforts, how art thou a looser by this? Suppose
thou have run in a greedy pursuit of some desiderable object, thou have pursued
thy pleasure, with as much violence as Rachell did her children, Give me (says
she) children or else I dye: Now God in wisdom crosses thee, he knows what is
better for thee then thou do for thy self, God opens thy eyes, and then thou
discernest what a singular mercy it is, that God disappointed thee of thy
desire. We must not carve out ways of comfort to our selves, if we be our own
chusers we shall dearly smart for it. When the children of Israel lusted for
meat, God sent them Quails, but they had better have been without them, for
whilst the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of the Lord came upon them. The
Israelites would have no nay, but must have a King; The Lord gave them a King
in his anger, and took him away in his wrath, Hos. 13. 11. It Is far better to
have a cross in mercy, and so sanctified, as we may discern the opened
bowels of God, then the greatest confluence of riches, and revenues when they
are sent in judgment, and in Gods displeasure. John Ardley a blessed Martyr
grieved that he had but one life to lay down for Christ, if I had (says he)
as many life's as there are heirs of my head, they should all go for Christ.
It was the strength of faith that made Gordius another Godly Martyr believe,
that all the threats of his enemies were but as seeds, from which he should
reap immortality, and eternal joys. Here Is the comfort, that those which sow
in tears shall reap in joy: Let not us shrink then at any difficult service,
which Christ puts us upon: For all the troubles and hard-ships, which befall us
in this vale of misery, (provided we suffer for Christ's sake) will augment our
future joys in the kingdom of heaven. When thou come thither, it will never
repent thee in the least, that thou ever suffer any thing for the name of
Christ. Thy sufferings and sorrows here are but finite, and limited, but the
joys of Gods kingdom are infinite and incomprehensible: wherefore the Apostle
describes them by way of negation, neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things that God
has prepared for them that love him.

5. And lastly, all the ways of God are comfortable, and abouud 5. Demonst.
All the ways of God, are ways of joy and comfort.
in joy: The ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace, Prove. 3. 17. O what ravishing delight and pleasure is there in the law
of God: O how I love thy law (says David) the law of thy mouth is better unto
me then thousands of Gold and Silver, Psalm. 119. 127. I love (says he) thy
commandments above Gold, yea above fine Gold. They were sweeter unto him then
honey and the honey comb; Oh! what a sweet thing is it to hear God speaking
unto us in his word, and for us to speak unto him by our prayers, herein
consists the life of a Christians life. Oh! what a sweet thing is it to be fed
with spiritual viands, when we are admitted unto the Lords Table, Oh! what
sweetness is to be extracted out of the Communion of Saints, There be many
(says the Psalmist) that say who will show us any good, Lord lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon us, thou have put gladness in our heart, more
then in the time that their corn and wine increased, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. One beam
of Gods reconciled countenance, more cheares up a Godly man's spirit, then
barnes full of corn, and coffers crammed with Gold. Oh! that I could persuade
you in the fear of God, to the belief of this truth, that all the paths of
God are full of joy and comfort. It Is an horrid aspersion cast upon the ways
of Godliness, that religion makes men of melancholy and dumpish spirits, the
joy whereof they are pertakers is inconceivable: Spe gaudent they rejoice in
hope says St Paul: (...), They that hope, rejoice (says Aristotle,) Seneca
tells us what joy he would have, Seneca.
Volo illam laetitiam tibi domi. I would have thy joy to be at home. The joy of
the Godly is abundant in their own breast and in their own soul, and
conscience; The spirit witnesses to their spirits that thy are reconeiled to
God: The apprehension whereof fills their hearts with joy and peace which
passes all understanding. They have here the first fruits, and earnest of
those in expressible joys of heaven, this makes them to be a calling for their
Robes, and Crowns which Christ purchased for them by effusion of his precious
blood. Therefore trust God with thy joys and pleasures: without God the
sweetest thing is bitter: As Abner said to Joab, so say I of all thy sinful
lusts and pleasures, will there not be bitterness in the end? but where God is
the most bitter pill of affliction is sweet and pleasant. St Bernard has a
special Bernard Orat. de bonis deserendis.
observation in a declamation, de bonis deserendis, non Isaac sed aries
morietur etc. If you be willing to sacrifice your Isaac, which signifies
laughter (i. e.) your pleasure, your Isaac, your pleasure shall not dye, it is
the Ram, the stubbornness of spirit which shall dye, but your Isaac shall
live, you shall have pleasure still. Wherefore cast down all your joys,
comforts, and pleasures at Gods feet, in an humble submission saying, Lord here
they are, do with me and them, what seems good in thine eyes. When the heart
is thus took of the world it is in a fit temper, and is best qualified for the
comforts of God, and over and above when thy spirit is in this frame of
resignation of all unto God, he in mercy may vouchsafe unto thee the
comfortable fruition of them.

Thus you have heard what Demonstrations I have propounded, for the evincing of
this precious Doctrine, that all joy and comfort amidst the greatest
discomforts is to be found in God.

Now that I may press what has been said home unto your Applicat.
practice.

1. I shall infer something by way of comfort unto those that make the Lord
the joy of their souls. 2. In the next place, I shall exhort you unto so
excellent and necessary duty. 3. In the last place I shall lay down some
Directions, how this sacred duty of rejoicing in God ought to be exexercised:
within these limits I shall confine my ensueing Application.
In the first place this discovers unto us the comfortable condition Use 1. For
Comfort.
of the Children of God. O blessed men whose hope and comfort the Lord is!
comfort ye, comfort ye, my people (says the Lord) to these comfort
appertains, as their peculiar right and interest, let them amidst greatest
calamities, lift up their heads, for their redemption draws nigh. All the
sufferings of Christ, his sweating of drops of blood were for them, Christ wept
that they might rejoice, he drunk a cup of gall and vinegar, that they might
drink a cup of new wine in the Kingdom of Heaven, and he wore a Crown of
Thorns, that they might wear a Crown of Glory, Oh! be not dismayed at any
evil tidings, and mourn not as men with out hope, notwithstanding the
confusion and troubles of the Land of our Nativity: Let faith, hope, and
patience be exercised. Hope is the propp of the righteous, that stays the
soul from falling, were it not for hope the heart would break, in these
conflicting days of sin, where there are such sad thoughts of heart, for the
afflictions of Joseph, and for the divisions of Reuben. We know not what to do,
we have no strength of our selves, but let me tell you as Nehemiah did the
Jews, Neh. 8. 10. The joy of the Lord is your strength; He Is a fountain
inexhausted, though the Cisternes of the Creatures are drawn dry, he continues
a God of strength, though all sublunary things are as weak as water when
Parents forsake a man, then the Lord takes pity upon him, when riches make
themselves wings and fly away as an Eagle toward heaven, God becomes thy
riches, and inricheth thee with grace, and so thou gainest by thy lossesse. As
Joseph told Pharaoh, God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace, so say I, God
shall answer thy doubts, and let in peace and tranquillity into thy soul.
Melchior Adamus records this observeable passage in Melchior Adamus In vita
Oecolampadii.
the life of Oecolampadius when some of his friends asked him, whether the light
did not offend him, Tangens pectus (inquit) abunde lucis est, he clapped his
hands upon his breast and said, here is light enough. When the light of God
shines in thy bosom, and thou discernest Gods reconciled countenance in Christ
thou have enough. Strive therefore to exterminate all thoughts of doubtting and
diffidence, fear not, stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord.
However things go with thee, though clouds hang over thee, and they resolve and
melt thy heart into abundance of tears, and sorrows, yet let my Prophets
resolution set thy affections a working, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will
joy in the God of my salvation.

2. In the second place suffer I beseech you my brethren the Use 2. For
Exhortation
word of Exhortation, Oh! that I could persuade you to your duty, I shall
branch it out into three particulars.

1. To make God your joy. 2. To account him your treasure. 3. To have recourse
to him as your refuge.
1. Make God your joy. There Is no man but has some principle Dut. 1. Make God
your joy.
of joy, or inward working motion within his own bosom, and according to the
variety of fancies and humors, the joys and comforts are bottomed upon a
various and different ground.

1. One man fixes his joy upon his riches. A 2. Upon his honor and
reputation. A 3. Upon his delights and pleasures.
But the Godly man's honors, riches, pleasures are wholly terminated upon the
Lord his God. When the man in the Gospel had bought the field, wherein he
found the pearl of price, he was ravished with joy, beyond expression and
apprehension. The grace of God revealed to the soul of man, is this Gemme of
superlative estimation; thou must part with all thy riches, pleasures, and
comforts, nay with all the world for this, and thou hereby make the wisest
bargain that ever was made: For by the loss of earth, thou gainest heaven:
what joy possessed the spirit of the Eunuch, after Phillip had baptized him, and
brought Christ home unto him? the Text says he went away rejoicing. Such is
the joy of a spiritualliz'd man, whose God is his joy and Consolation, though
troubles and miseries come thick and threefold, yet his heart is fixed upon
Mount Zion that it cannot be removed, nay upon the God of Zion: There Is some
inward working principle, that will swallow up all discomforts whatsoever: This
spiritual joy dasheth all carnal joys; This is the only true sollid joy
arising from Gods reconciled countenance in Christ, which makes a man rejoice
in the Holy Ghost with joy unspeakable and full of glory. It Is said in Judges
that the young Levites heart was glad, when the children of Dan proffered
promotion to him; much more joy resides in the spiritual man's soul and
conscience, when he thinks of his Crowns, and of the joys of Heaven, and of
the sweet uninterrupted Communion with Jesus Christ unto all eternity: Oh! then
make God thy joy; The serenity of his countenance will dissipate all these
clouds, the refreshings and those soul ravishing comforts of Christ will
infinitely exceed the greatest discomforts in the Universe; The joy of the
world may be took from thee by the men of the world: There are many
Anabaptisticall, Antiministeriall spirits who muster their forces to make our
comforts Ichabod, but this joy (says Christ) no man takes from you, men
cannot give it, nor bereave us of it. Therefore bid adue to all thy carnal
joys: but lay fast hold of, and let not go the joys of Gods spirit, this is
the first duty I press upon you, to make God your joy.

2. Make God your treasure. How sollicitous is a man to get Dut. 2. Make God
your treasure.
precious treasures, how does he compass sea and land to get them, and when he
has them in his possession, how careful is he to keep them. A man of
understanding leaves not his Jewels at random, but locks them up safe in a
Cabinet, now if God be our treasure, we will seek him in his Ordinances, God is
the treasurer and the treasure both, this is the only treasure we must seek
after, if we find not God in one Ordinance, lets go to another, if we find him
not in the word, lets go to the Sacrament, and if we find him not in the
Sacrament, lets repair to our prayers, and fall upon our knees, if yet we find
him not, lets with the spowse make inquiry after him, lets ask the Ministers
of Christ, nay lets put all these together and never give of seeking till we
have found him whom our soul loves. Now when once we have got him, lets
labor to keep him: Will a wise man cast dirt upon a precious Jewel? every
sinner endeavors to cast dirt upon God. Sin is of a besmearing, and fullying
quality: If then thou would preserve thy spiritual treasure, and keep the
grace of God in thy soul, take heed of that which fowls and staynes it, and
that is sin: Oh! Christian be instructed to set upon the work of
purification, labor to cleanse thy self from all pollution of the flesh, and
of the spirit, so that thy soul and body may become a glorious Temple, wherein
the spirit of God will set up his habitation. God is our treasure: our faith
hope and very life it self, are reposited in his custody, and therefore the
Lord Christ should be more precious unto our souls, then thousands of Gold and
Silver. Oh! how precious is Christ unto that soul, which has seen and tasted
how good the Lord is.

3. Make God your refuge. What would a man give in such Dut. 3. Make God your
Resuge.
times as these for an Asylum a (...), or sanctuary whereunto he may fly and be
secure. Men promise themselves security, some in one place, and some in
another, and they set their hearts upon them: But alas the comforts wherein
they trust prooves often times a Jonahs gourd, which in one night had it is
original, and it is period, or an Egyptian reed, which will either pierce them,
or give them the slipp in their greatest extremity. But o blessed man who makes
his God his refuge, and seeks a hiding place in a divine promise: so that he is
not afraid of evil tidings, he is not discouraged by the direful imprecations
of blasphemous Rabshekahs of John of Leydens faction: Let the extremity be
never so bitter, yet a true Believer can draw down comfort from a promise,
which preserves his soul from sinking, he knows how to look beyond men, unto
his God. In such times as these (which are sad and perilous times) when men
are set upon mischief, and wounder that men run not with them into the same
excess of riot, a man that has a spiritual eye can bring home the promise,
that the Rod of the wicked, will not lie long upon the lot righteous, when God
has done with the rod, he will cast it into the fire: but he will provide
Scorpions for their enemies. David was persuaded, that it would be better for
him notwithstanding Shimeis execrations: so I am persuaded that for bitter and
implacable spirits opposite to Magistrates and Ministers now a days, Gods
people shall fare the better; Let God alone, and do not anticipate him in his
own work, for all the malice that men and Devils can invent, shall work
together for the good of the people of God. David had fainted, had he not seen
the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living; and Hezekiah had fainted
by reason of the huge host of Senacherib, but that he believed that God would
be their deliverer. We have the same God still as good and as gracious as ever,
he will put a bridle into the lips, and a hook into the nostrills of
unreasonable men, God can help with means or without means, he can help us,
and that right early. When a man out of the strength of Faith can make God his
refuge and shelter, and hide himself under the covert of his wings, this man
amidst multitude of sorrows, is a man of singular comforts, beyond expression
and apprehension. Now then amidst multitudes of fears and sufferings, labor
to have recourse unto a divine promise, that though friends, means, hopes, and
comforts may fail thee, yet the Lord will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.
He never fails them that put their trust in him. The promise runs, unto you
that fear my name, will the son of righteousness arise with healing under his
wings, Mal. 4. 2. If you can thus apply the promise, and labor to live by
Faith, you are fixed upon Mount Zion, and shall not be removed, Psalm. 125. 1.

3. And lastly, I shall close up all with a word of Direction, that Use 3. For
Direction.
amongst the greatest crossesse and miseries, you may still find matter of joy
and comfort in God

1. I shall direct you to remoove some impediments. 2. To do some duties.
1. Remove these four Impediments.

The first, or which I set in the fore front is earthly mindedness, 1. Imped.
Earthly mindedness.
this is a choke Pear unto the grace of God, this, and spiritual joy are
(...) incompatible terms. A man that is glued unto the world cannot rejoice in
God, heel'e say of his riches, as Mica said of his Idols, they have taken away
my Gods and what have I more? Jacob spoke of Benjamin, his soul was bound up
in the life of the Lad; so may I say, the life of a worldly minded man is bound
up in his riches, his riches and joy live and dye together. Now discourse unto
such a man concerning the riches of Christ, you talk of Riddles, he asks what
is thy beloved more then another beloved? he wants a spiritual in-sight into
Christ. The earth is an opacous body interposed between the organ and the
object, so that he cannot discern the beauty and excellency that is in Christ,
a worldly man cannot rejoice in God.

2. Remoove Infidelity when men exercise their sense, more 2. Imped. Infidelity.
than their faith, and will with Thomas not believe unless they see, Oh! what
enemies are they unto their own comfort. Though the Lord should make windows
in heaven, could these things be, so said the unbelieving Prince: so we are apt
to say, Things aregone so far as a Recovery is desperate. To settle affairs
in peace and tranquillity upon firme-covenant Foundations, is a work
impossible: what? Is any thing impossible with God? and all things are possible
to the believer. O let not go thy faith, it is thy life: what will thou
distrust thy God? Infidelity is the giving of God the lie, remoove then this
stumbling block out of the way, if thou remoovest not Infidelity, thou can
not rejoice in God.

3. Remoove impatience, and murmuring; Fret not thy self because of the
ungodly, neither be thou envious at the evil doers (as the Psalmist exhorts)
Psalm. 37. 1. Repining and grudging are the cankers of the soul, they eat out
all it is peace and tranquillity. An impatient man is the worst enemy to
himself, he adds weight to his burden, and makes it insupportable, take heed
of impatience and murmuring, when Gods hand lies heavy on thee. Many there are
who with Mary cannot see Christ for tears in their eyes, and being overwhel'd
with sorrows, they can discern no comforts approaching.

4. Remoove remissness, and negligence in duties: Their condition 4. Imped.
Remissness and negligence in duties.
is Lamentable, who when things suite not with their humors say it is in vain,
to serve the Lord; Hence they give to themselves the Reins, and slacken the
pace of their duties: whereas on the contrary had men their eyes in their
heads, they would see more need of Duties, that they ought to add more oil to
the flame, when things go worst with them. Job makes it the character of a
wicked man not to pray always. Remissness and negligence in Duty is an
Argument of a rotten heart; Though there be no appearance of comfort, yet we
must not slacken our duties. Spiritual duties are pabula animae the food and
nutriment of the Soul. Prayer meditation and divine conference are vehicula
animae, and elevate the soul, and revive thy drooping spirit, they add a
miraculous rigor and alacrity, amidst all the crossesse, and discomforts in
the world: If then thou would retain thy joy, take heed of remissness, and
negligence in duties. Now having remooved these impediments, I shall exhort you
to set upon some Duties: I shall set down three only, which I shall but name
them, and so conclude.

1. You must labor to live by faith. Had we more experience Dut. 1. Live by
faith,
of this sweet and precious life of faith, our hearts would be established, we
should cast our selves upon the divine providence, and stay upon his covenant,
and resolve with (holy Job) though the Lord should kill us, yet we would trust
in him. What ever crossesse Job. 13. 15.
came upon us, yet we should never let go our faith. We should believe against
belief, and hope against hope, and now when sense and reason fails us, we
must leave of disputing, and learn to believe. Oh! then support thy spirit
upon a promise: Believe that all things shall work together for the best, to
them that love God. Faith Romans 8. 28.
made Stephen see Christ, even through a shower of stones, and faith made Job,
see a redeemer upon the Dunghill: Faith makes any condition comfortable; It is
the sweetest life in all the world, to live by the faith, of the Son of God.

2. Labor for a sacred communion, and intimacy with Jesus Dut. 2. Labor for a
sacred communion with Christ.
Christ. One moment of communion with Christ, will transport thee with joy
unspeakable, which a stranger intermeddles not with all. None can reveal these
joys, but those that feel them: These are the white stones, the hidden
Mannah, the new Name; which no man can read but him that has it. Oh! what
ravishing love tokens are those, which Christ vouchsafes unto his children! one
of these spiritual illapses into the soul is to be preferred before the
Empire of the world.

3. And lastly be much exercised in meditation and prayer. By Dut. 3. Be much
exercised in Meditation and Prayer.
prayer, thou confer'st with him that is invisible: and meditation is the wing
of the soul to carry up its services, as a sweet smelling sacrifice into the
Almighties nostrills. If we would pray more, and spend our time as Isaac did in
meditation, if we would wrestle with God by prayer and supplication, if we
would imitate Hezekiah, and spread the letrer before the Lord, and daily pour
out our spirits before him, Oh! what comfortable lives should we lead, even a
heaven upon earth: And such a heavenly life would be as a Bulwark of defense
to ward of the Batteries of the worst of enemies. Could we get such a sacred
acquaintance with God, and have our Conversation in heaven, we would not fear
what men and Devils could do against us. We should not fear the Combinations
of such who are professed Adversaries to the Universities and Ministry: For God
will say unto these most desperate Adversaries, destroy not those Clusters for
there is a blessing in them.

REAL CONVERSION DISCOVERED,
from Romans 12. 2. But be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind.
THE Apostle having dehorted the Romans from Sermon 10. Preached at St. Marye's
Oxon. Feb: 5. 1659 60.
all conformity to, and Compliance with the garbes, fashions, and evil
practices of the men of the world, presses home by way of exhortation the
maine fundamental duty, To be transformed in the renewing of their mind.

Which words (though few) are a full Character, and an essential definition of
a truly Converted Person, viz: He is one that Divis.
is transformed in the renovation of his mind.

More particularly we may observe, 1. A duty Be ye transformed. 2. The subject
the mind. 3. The Qualification of that subject By the renewing. What Is needful
for explication of these Particulars, I shall endeavor to make good by the
Enlargement of this fundamental Doctrine -- That -- Every Person who is really
Converted, is transformed and changed in the renovation of his mind. Method
propounded.




For the Methodicall unfolding of this point of Doctrine, I shall thus proceed.

1. By inquiring what is to be understood by transformation. 2. What by
renovation of the mind? which premised, then 3. I shall endeavor to make good
the Proof of the Assertion. 4. And lastly, make particular improvement of all
by some useful Application.
1. We are to make Inquiry, What it is to be transformed? For 1. What it is to
be transformed.
a Resolution thereunto, we are first to take notice of the Quid nominis, (i.
e.) the name them the Quid rei (i. e.) the thing it self.

First, Let Us consider the Notation of the name: The word is (...); Which in a
proper sense is to lay aside one form, and assume another. The Radix is (...),
and according to the Judgment of the Suidas.
Learned Masters of that language (...), are used as Synonimous Terms: yet in
a strict acceptance Suidas makes some difference; And Chrysostom makes Forma
de animat is, species de Inanimat is dicitur. Suidas.
a greater difference between (...): I shall not be overcurious in Critical
Punctilloes: For if the Rule amongst Lawyers hold good, Vbi lex non distinguit,
distinguendum non est: Much more does the Rule hold good amongst Divines, Vbi
Scriptura (...) etc. Chrysostom. in Loc.
non distinguit, non est distinguendum: Now I find the words used in one, and
the same sense: As for Instance, Matih. 17. 2. It Is said (...): And was
transfigured: And Phil. 3. 21. (...), Who shall change or transfigure etc.

Secondly, From the Notation of the name, I should come to the thing it self,
but that I must first prepare my way by a distinction, (having in my eye the
Rule observed amongst Logitians, Distinguendum est, priusquam definiendum) Now
we are to consider of a two fold Metamorphosis or Transformation, one is in
substance, from one substance to another: so Lots wife was changed into a
Pillar of salt. We read of many fabulous and ridiculous stories in Ovids
Metamorphosis, not worth the nameing (in such a place as this especially) But
of such a kind of transformation we are not to speak, as no way concerning our
business in hand. But there is another Transformation, and that is of
Faculties, and Qualities, as when men are changed from darkness to light, from
ways of sin and wickedness to ways of holiness. When bad men prove good,
and profane men become holy, when Formalists become sincere, halfe-Nominall
Professors become whole Real Professors, when from a form there follows the
power of Godliness, this kind of change is that Transformation mentioned and
enjoined in the Text. Hence learned Homo est formatus per Creationem,
deformatus per culpam, Reformatus per gratiam, Conformatus per assimilationem,
transformatus per contemplationem, Reformatus per gloriam. Goran. in Loc.
Gorran gives an observation: That a man was formed by Creation, deformed by
sin, reformed by grace, conformed by assimilation unto Christ, transformed by
Contemplation, and to be further reformed in the state of glory. So that in the
Text, Regeneration and transformation (which are an effectual change wrought
by the spirit of God) are all one. And this (as Learned Est mutatio sui a
veteri condition in novam. Roll.
Rolloc observes) is a change of a man's self from an old condition into a new.
And this change is of absolute indispensible necessity. Of this change
notwithstanding (how far our progress is) we have need as Semper in hac vita
quatumcunque etiam profecerimus hac transformatione, de reformatione opus est.
Est. in Loc.
E^ius observes. It Is sufficiently known that amongst Philosophers there are
reckoned six species of Motion, and accordingly there are so many mutations. As
for Instance there is a change in Generation and Corruption, and these are
reduced to the Predicament of substance: Yet the same man whether alive or
dead, has the same integrall parts of legs, arms, and thighs etc. The
carcass of a man (although the spirit be gone was infinite) has those
integrall parts, they are yet remaining. Another change is in Augmentation and
Diminution. Now to change from less sins to greater is most abominable, and
to change from greater to lesser is but a partiall-halfechange, altogether
rejected by God. Another change is in place, when a person removes from one
place to another, yet he is one and the same man notwithstanding; In case of
bodily sickness, and diseases, we know by experience that change of air,
remooving from Town to Town, from one bed to another, does not a whit remoove
the disease. Likewise in case of soul diseases, (which are most dangerous)
change of place does not produce amendment of life and conversation. As for
such (although their pretenses be specious) who betake themselves to Cells,
Cloisters, Wildernesses, and relinquish humane society, yet let them go where
they will, to the uttermost parts of the earth, still they carry with them a
body of sin, a corrupt nature, in which are sown all the seeds of rebellion
against God. Such as pretend out of conscience to separate from the company of
the wicked, yet they keep company with one wicked man (i. e.) every one with
himself. Basil an Eminent Greek Father being much troubled with the incursions
of daily corruptions which brake in upon him, resolved to remoove from all
company, and to live holily and retiredly in the wilderness: But upon second
thoughts he acknowledged, Alas (says he) I carried with me my wilderness
sins, and there I was haunted with my own hearts corruptions. The last change
I shall mention (which only is to my purpose) is in Quality and affections and
dispositions. When sin and wickedness are abominated, and the way of
holiness is embraced; when there is a new frame upon the heart, and it is
altered from bad to good, from sin to grace: this is that Transformation
which alone concerns our present discourse.

This distinction being previously explained, the Definition which results from
the Premises is this -- Definition of Conversion.
That a true Converted man is one truly changed in Qualities, endowed with new
dispositions and affections, and thoroughly renewed in his mind.



2. In the second place in order, I am to inquire what is meant 2. What Is meant
by the renewing of the mind?
by the renovation of the mind? The Original is (...). Chrysostom expresses
this renewing by a Similitude, drawn from an old house, where although the
same rooms remain still, yet they are adorned, beautified and repaired: so
although the same man and the same faculties remain, yet they are rectified,
reformed, and altered for the better: when the old Adam is mortified, and the
new Adam quickened day by day. The nature of man is a Fountain poisoned, but as
soon as Christ comes with his grace, he heales that fountain. Now by the mind
we understand the will and understanding, both which are repaired, renewed, and
altered for the better. This is properly an after wit, which is an Individual
companion of true conversion: (...) a fore-wit was wanting, wherefore (...) an
after-wit is required (...). Proprie significat post factum sapere, and de
errore admisso ita dolere ut corrigas. Bez. Matthew. 3. 2.
especially. The Understanding is as it were a Queen Regent in the soul, the
Commander of an Army, as a Pilot to a ship: It Is called by Philosophers, (...),
for guiding, ordering, and directing all our affairs. But if this
understanding be blinded, If (as our Savior says) the light that is in thee,
be darkness (...); How great is that darkness? The Apostle (although he
mentions the mind only) yet by a Synecdoche totius comprehends the whole man,
so that the understanding, will, affections, and heart, all must be renewed,
changed, and regenerated. The reason which judicious Mr Calvin gives, is very
apposite Calv. in loc.
to our purpose. Quandoquidem and mente and cord alieni sumus a Dei Justitia.
Estius gives a good Note, Studeto quotidianae renovationis Estius in loc.
mentis vestrae per mortificationem malorum affectum and cupiditatum. To him
I Will only add the exposition of Oecumenius Oecumenius, in loc.
on the place, Q^ia homo cum quispiam est, non potest non peccare ideo semper
renova te ipsum (inquit) per poenitentiam. The result of all is this, that in
transformation and renovation no new substance is added to the regenerate man,
but only new spiritual Qualities are infused into him: The Faculties, of heart
and life are all put into a new frame. I acquiesce in the Apostles exposition,
being instar omnium: 1 These. 5. 23. And the very God of peace, sanctify you
wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

3. I proceed in the third place to make good the proof of the 3. The Doctrine
prooved.
Doctrine. That every really converted person is transformed and changed in the
renovation of his mind.

This I shall endeavor to prove by Scripture and Reason.

1. For Scripture proof the Apostles Exhortation is, Ephesians. 4. 23. 1. Prooved by
Scripture.
And be renewed in the spirit of your mind. The same Apostle professes, 2 Cor.
4. 16. Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.
This is the Laver of Regeneration mentioned, Tit. 2. 5. It is the washing of
the Ethiopian, and the cleansing of the Leopards spots; Of this the Apostle
James speaks, Jam. 4. 8. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts
ye double minded. And what their happy change is, the Apostle mentions, 1 Cor.
6. 11. And such were some of you; But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our
God. 2. Prooved and confirmed by Scripture. Reas. 1. This change is wrought
only by the Power of God.


2. For fuller Proof and Confirmation by Evidence of Reason; Amongst others,
some Reasons may be these Especially.

1. Every Converted person is changed and renewed in his mind by virtue of the
power and irresistible operation of the spirit of God, which blows where and
when it lists; and when it works, none can hinder. It was Gods spirit that
breathed upon those dry bones mentioned by the Prophet Ezekiel chap. 37. That
had sinews, flesh and life given them: So in our Regeneration it is Gods spirit
that breaths life into us and quickens us, Who were dead in trespasses and
sins: So says the Apostle, You has he quickened who were dead in trespasses
and sins. And Romans 8. 13. Ephesians. 1. 2.
If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye; but if ye through the spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live: This the Apostle further
expresses, 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the spirit of our God.

2. The Word of God is an Isntrumental means to work Reas. 2. The Word is an
Isntrumental means of Renovation.
this Change. It Is an immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1. 18. It Is the arm of the Lord,
Isai. 53. 1. The power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1. 16.

3. Without this Renovation and change there can be no Salvation. For whoever
has Interest in Christ is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Whoever comes to
Heaven must be borne again, R. 3. Without Renovation there can be no Salvation.
Joh. 3. 3. (...) etc. He must be borne from above: whoever is saved has put
off the old Adam and put on the new; he is cut off the old stock (i. e.) the
old Adam, and implanted in the new Adam.

But before I come to Application I Will lay down a few Cautions.

1. We must know that every by Nature is blind and ignorant Caut. 1. We must
know that every man is blind by nature.
of God: Ephesians. 4. 8. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the
life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness
of their heart. Even the mind, the noblest part is depraved with ignorance,
vanity, unbelief, doubtings and errors: 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them: because they are spiritually discerned. Col. 1.
21. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked
works: yet now has he reconciled. The state of unregeneracy Ephesians. 5. 8.
is a state of darkness, even darkness in the abstract. Cau. 2. This work of
Illumination is not attained by man's Industry.


2. That this great work of Illumination, the opening of the eyes is not
attained by the studies and endeavors of man's industry. This is the work of
the great God to bring a soul from darkness to light, from the power of Satan
unto God, Phil. 2. 13. For it is God which works in you both to will and to
do of his good pleasure. Caut. 3. The best of believers are but sanctified, and
renewed in part.


3. The best of Believers are but sanctified and renewed in part; still there
is some blindness, some ignorance in the best. This imperfection Paul himself
(although the chiefest of the Apostles) acknowledges Phil. 3. 12. Not as
though I had already attained, either were already perfect, but I follow after,
if I may apprehend that for which I also am apprehended of Christ Jesus: 1 Cor.
13. 9. For we know in part, and we prophecy in part.

These Cautions premised, I proceed to particular Application of all.

For Application I shall fix on four Uses. Applicat.


1. For Information. 2. For Examination. 3. For Exhortation. And 4. For
Consolation.
1. For Information. Be informed of the miserable condition Use 1. For
Information.
of all unconverted Persons, and they are such as are not transformed in the
Renovation of their mind. Some there are that lie in darkness, even are
darkness it self, as Ephesians. 5. 8. For ye were sometimes darkness: but now are
ye light in the Lord, walk as children of light. These neither perceive nor
receive the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives not the
things of the spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Now let none think that
Ignorance will excuse them. The wise man tells us, without knowledge the heart
is not good. Others there are who are partially changed. Perhaps they now
swear not as formerly, bloody oaths; but they swear petty oaths. Perhaps they
will not as formerly be drunk in the streets, but they will sit along time
tippling with vain company, telling idle vain stories. Others there are who in
some few particulars may seem to be better: They perhaps formerly would stay
at home in time of public Administration of Ordinances, now they will stay out
a Sermon, and (as their Phrase is) keep their Church diligently, but when they
come home, they speak nothing of what they have heard; they neither call
themselves, nor those under them to an account. All this while the heart of
these men, the inward frame, disposition and vergency of their spirits and
affections are not cast into a new mold. Many more there are of this branne, on
whom no real work of grace is wrought, no effectual Change.

But I shall add no more to this Use. This comes to be inquired after more
strictly in the second Use which is for Examination.

2. We must all as in the presence of God put our selves upon Use 2. For
Examination.
this Apostolical Character and note of trial, whether we are transformed in
the Renovation of our minds. To this purpose that I may endeavor to
distinguish the Precious from the vile, my business shall be to represent
those many false glasses, wherein multitudes behold their faces, and deceive
themselves with false representations, which done I shall discover the true
glass of the Word of God, which makes a true representation of our condition
and accordingly it concerns us to put our selves upon Examination.

In the first place. The first glass wherein many behold themselves 1. False
glass is Civil Honesty.
is civil Honesty and Morality, when men deal justly, pay every one their
own, wrong not, nor oppress their neighbors; they think all is well with them,
and that their condition is very safe. I know that morality may be a good stock
to graft grace upon: and many civil honest men, even just dealing Heathens as
Aristides, Fabritius, etc. will rise up in judgment against many careless
Professors: yet all the moral Principles of Philosophers, all the splendid
actions of civil Justitiaries cannot bring any to the third Heaven. To deal
justly with men, to live honestly in the world and unblameably is very
commendable; but Christians must arise higher than Principles of Nature and
Morality. There Is a new birth required, Joh. 3. 5. Unless a man be borne
again of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. There Is holiness required, 1 Pet. 1. 15. But as he which has called
you is holy: so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation. Truth in the inward
parts, Psalm. 51. 6. Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts, and in the
hidden part thou shall make me to know wisdom. Holiness and Righteousness
are conjoined, Luke 1. 74, 75. That he would grant unto us that we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our lives. However
others may differ from me in judgment, I conceive that it is easier for an open
profane man to be converted, then for a mere civil honest man, who prides
himself and blesses himself in his morality and there rests satisfied: I
ground my assertion on Matthew. 21. 31. Whether of them twain did the will of
his Father? they say unto him, the first. Jesus says unto them verily I say
unto you, that the Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before
you. And what were those Pharisees but mere Formalists and Jus^itiaryes: This
is that which civil men boast off, they live peaceably and pay every one his
due. I answer it is well to live peaceably with men; but do not thou live at
peace with thy corruptions? do not thou let thy sins lie quietly and
harbor them in thy bosom, unmortified, uncrucified?

2. Thou do well in paying men their dues, I would all would do so, and such
especially as make greatest profession of religion, would they were more
exemplary in their practice even in this particular, and laying aside all
delays, evasions and collusions, I heartily wish these would deal justly with
every one, knowing that no unrighteous man shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
But let me ask thee, do thou pay God his due, his due of prayer, hearing,
reading, meditation, sanctifying his sabboths? Here is a shibboleth that a
mere Civil Moral man knows not how to accent ari^ht. If he be a dishonest
man who deals unjustly with his neigh^ours in robbing and defrauding and going
beyond him; much more may he b^ accounted dishonest, who defrauds and robs God
of his worship, sabboths, services and duties to be performed unto him.

A second false glass is that of great parts, gifts and endowments, 2. False
Glass great parts and abilities.
whether natural or acquired. Many mistake parts for grace. Such as are of
excellent gifts and expressions, men of voluble tongues are cried up for Godly
men, who notwithstanding for all their gifts may be as mere strangers to
Regeneration as Nicodemus was. It Is sad to consider how many now adays have
abused their parts, and have bent their wits to coin new opinions, and have
borrowed from Gypsies a canting kind of language, uncougth and unscripturall
phrases more befitting Poets, Stages, Players, Juglers then Preachers. And
these are cried up amongst many for eminent Saints and converted persons,
whereas they never were acquainted with the great work of Mortification, known
and practiced by such as are Saints indeed. Let me tell you plainly, (for I
affect plainness of speech) A man may be as great a Scholar as ever Aristotle
and Plato were: and yet be a mere stranger from the life of God, a mere
Ignoramus in the School of Jesus Christ. Where ever parts are we may not envy
the owners of them, neither may we Idolize them. It Is hard to taste much honey
and not surfeit, and harder to have great parts and not to be proud of them.
Indeed good parts are great advantages, and when sanctified do abundance of
good, but the greatest learning, gifts, nanaturall abilities and accomplished
parts may be in them that perish. Wherefore gifts and abilities are no
infallible Characters of saving Conversion. The more parts any have, the more
lies upon their account, and the greater is their sin, not to improove them
to Gods glory; And the greatest blindness it is, to be inwardly blind. And
when men pride themselves in the quickness of their understanding, volubility
of speech, etc. When as in the mean time they favor not the things of God,
the mysteries of their salvation, what will become of all their parts? Perhaps
God may take them away, or continue them as aggravations of their greater sin
and judgment: because they have a price put into their hands to get wisdom,
and are such fools as want hearts to improove them.

3. A third false glass is, when men compare themselves with 3. False glass
when men compare themselves with themselves.
themselves. This some take to be Conversion, Gal. 6. 3. If a man think
himself to be something when he is nothing he deceives himself. Oh! says
one; I was a neglecter of Sermons, but now I hear them. Thou do well to
hear Sermons; and it is thy duty to wait upon these Bethesdaes. But let me ask
thee, does not fear, form, compliance with men and Interests moove thee?
What Is that spring, that primum mobile which mooves thee to these things? Does
not self set thee a work? does not vain glory, reputation etc: moove thee?
Oh! says another, I am now much amended, I do not drink and swill and game as
formerly. It Is well, if this be so in truth and sincerity: But does not the
frame of thy spirit remain one and the same? does not old age, want of money,
want of opportunities, etc: make thee leave these things? does not thy sin
rather leave thee, then thou leave thy sin? We are then to distinguish, there
may be a change of many particular actions, where is no change of the Nature.
There may be a mortification of some particular members, where is no
mortification of the whole body of sin. Per mentem totum hominem Per mentem
totum hominem intelligit. Peter Martyr in Loc.
intelligit, Peter Martyr says, The whole man by the mind is comprehended.
It Is required (as learned Jerome observes) ut corporis actus novi fiant. So
then I conclude that the acts, nature, whole man must be changed, or else there
is not a change to purpose. How will some old men complain against their
Prodigality in their youth? but let them catechize their own hearts, are not
they now grown more covetous in their old age? And give the Devil his option,
he would as live have a covetous man as a Prodigal, to drive his designs:
Wherefore let no men compare themselves with themselves upon half
reformations, half turns and partial amendments. Men may be better then
formerly and yet be stark naught still. Their reformation may be to halfes;
their heart may be divided, Hos. 10. 2. Their heart is divided, now shall they
be found faulty: He shall break down their Altars, he shall spoil their
Images: His turn may be but partial as Ephraims was, Hos. 7. 8. Ephraim, he
has mixed himself among the people, Ephraim is a cake not turned.

4. Another false glass is, when men compare themselves with 4. False glass
when men compare themselves with others.
other men. Oh! say they such a one is a froward, deceitful, an ill-tongu'd
clamorous man; he cousens, and cheats, and complies with all sorts for
advantage; But I am not such a one.

1. I Answer, Though perhaps thou may not act some of those things whereof
thou accusest others: yet it may be because thou art not put upon those
temptations, as it was said of one Casta est quia nemo rogavit: Opportunity
has not offered another choice.

2. Thou may be as bad in other kinds. Some men's sins go before, others
follow after. Some men's Genius and constitution inclines more to one sin then
another; though every wicked man is dispositione and praeparatione animi
inclined to any sin. Perhaps another man may show his anger more openly, and
thou may entertain heart burnings and inward anger. And it is an observation
of Seneca, Ira, quae tegitur, nocet. Perhaps another may work at his secular
Trade on the Sabbath day (which is a very great and abominable Profanation)
and thou in the mean time may be idle at home, hearing and speaking vain
idle discourses, and this is likewise abominable. Wherefore let no man think
himself good because he ap^eares not so bad as another. Another badnesse is
no Argument to conclude me good. For instance, was the Pharise the better for
overvaluing himself, and undervaluing the Publican? Luke 18. 10, 11. The
Parise stood and prayed thus with himself, God I thank thee that I am not as
other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, nor even as this Publican. And
are any a whit the better, because they speak against others, and in the mean
time amend not themselves?

5. A fifth false glass is others reports and commendation. Oh! 5. False
glass others reports and commendations.
how proud are many of some great persons acquaintance, who set them out to the
skies and flatter them. They boast they lived under such Preachers, and have
been acquainted with such and such eminent persons, and these have an
honorable esteem of them. What a false glass is this, no better then that of
the Papists, who believe by an implicit faith, and see through their Priests
spectacles, and pin their religion on other folks sleeves. It Is observeable
that seldom an Hipocrite dies undiscovered; but it'ts possible he may: Some
may tell such fair plausible stories and narratives of their Conversion, as
they may deceive men: yet they cannot deceive God, who knows and searches
the hearts and reins. This is all the religion some look after, to insinuate
themselves into the favor of some persons of note, and be cried up by them,
and carried up on high by their wings. In the mean time they search not their
own hearts, and descend not to selfe-Inquisition how they may approove
themselves to God. They examine not what is the inward frame of their spirit,
whether their hearts be washed from wickedness, and whether they be renewed in
the spirit of their minds? It Is not he that commends himself: 2 Cor. 10. 23.
but whom the Lord commends is accepted, Neither is it he, whom others
magnify and extol in praises: but he, whose heart is right with God that
obtaines acceptance with him.

6. The sixth and last false glass I shall mention is a formal, 2. False
Glass is a formal outside profession.
outside profession of Religion. This is become even a fashion now adays to
take up a profession. And many take it up ignorantly, not understanding what it
is: and many take it up upon Politic Principles, to make a good market of it:
both these are abominable unto God. There Is a form without the power, there is
(...). Multitudes mistake Conversion now adays, and think if they be of such
an opinion, whether it be of Familists, Quakers, Anabaptists, Brownists,
Semibrownists, etc: then they are converted. If they be rebaptized, then they
question not, but that they are really converted, when as many of these never
knew what belongs to the pangs of the new birth, fightings against strong holds
of Satan, and crucifying of lusts. Others make no question of their Conversion;
because they are admitted into Church fellowship. But was not Ananias and
Sapphira admitted into Church fellowship? And was not Judas himself one of the
Apostles, and yet far from true Conversion? In the purest and best reformed
Churches there may be Hypocrites, tares will be among the best Wheat. There Is
no Church without spot or wrinkle, till we come to Heaven. Indeed to separate
from Heathens and from Idolaters we are commanded, and this is a warrantable
separation. But to separate from a true Church must needs cause multitudes See
Dr Harris his judgment in his life, lately set forth by E. D. p. 100, 101, 102.
of Scismes, and Divisions (as daiely experience witnesses) and we have no
warrant in the Word of God for such a separation. Let all professors know that
they are not therefore converted, because they take upon them the bare name and
form: For some there are (as the Apostle mentions) 2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a
form, but denying the power: And such as are only Nominall Christians, and
content themselves with the bare name are really Atheists. It Is the easiest
matter in all the world to take upon one a bare profession. Machiavel himself
would allow an outward profession: But to have the Profession adorned with a
Holy life, and Conversation; to be a Christian in name and in truth, this is
the great thing required: To name the name of Christ and depart from Iniquity,
to purify ones self as God is pure, this is the great work indeed.

Now having discovered these false glasses, I Will set before you one true
glass, wherein we must behold our selves, and that is the Word of God. This
discovers our Pollutions, this shows us the way of cleansing, Psalm. 119. 11.
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy Word. This discovers our Maladies and Remedies: Now where
there is a real Change, and a thorough transformation, it will be known by
three Characters.

1. By Universality. 2. By Sincerity. And 3. By Perpetuity.
First, For Universality, and that looks at five Subjects. Char. 1.
Universality.


1. At the understanding, Ephesians. 4. 23. And be renewed in the spirit of your mind.

2. At the will, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be a willing people in the day
of thy power.

3. At the affections, Col. 3. 2. Set your affections on things above, and not
on things on the earth.

4. The heart, Ezekiel. 36. 25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you and ye
shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols, will I
cleanse you; a new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart, and give you an heart of
flesh.

5. The life, Newness of life is required: For so it is required, that we
should walk in newness of life, Romans 6. 4.

Secondly, Sincerity. The aims must be single and sincere; Char. 2. Sincerity.
no change for self ends, Interests, Preferments, etc. The glory of God must
be in thy eye, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
Conscience, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom;
but by the grace of God we had our Conversation in the world, and more
abundantly to you^ wards.

Thirdly, Perpetuity, Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto death, Char. 3.
Perpetuity.
and I will give thee a Crown of life, he that endures unto the end shall be
saved.

3. The third Use is for Exhortation. Let Us all labor to be Use 3. For
Exhortation. Mot. 1. From the equity of the duty. Mot. 2. from the necessity of
the duty.
thus transformed. By way of Motive.

1. It is but equity that there should be a thorough change. The whole man is
defiled by sin, and the whole man should be transformed and changed.

2. There Is a necessity: necessitas precepti and medii. 1. How often are we called
upon to make us new hearts, to turn unto the Lord, to amend our ways?

2. This change is an isntrumental means to pacify Gods wrath, 2 Chronicles. 7.
1^. If my people which are cal^ed by my name, shall humble themselves, and
pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear
from Heaven, and will forgive their sins, and heal their land. So Joel 2.
12. Therefore thus says the Lord; turn unto m^ with all your heart, with
fasting, weeping, and mourning; rent your hearts and not your garments, and
turn unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger
and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.

3. Consider the Utility, God will however have his glory, and Mot. 3. from the
Vtility.
yet we are the gainers by this change: By having changed hearts, we can do
more acceptable service unto God, and are more in abled toperforme the will of
God, which is a good, acceptable, and perfect will.

4. Now I Will in the last place conclude with a word of comfort, Use 4. For
Comfort.
unto those upon whom God has wrought this gracious change, (i. e.) Blessed
are their eyes, for they see. They were before this change as bad as others: but
now they are washed and cleansed. Great is their comfort, whose eyes are
opened, and they are brought from darkness unto light, from the power of Satan
unto God. By being converted, and so becoming sons and daughters of God by
grace and Adoption, they obtain these singular Privileges.

1. They have Union and Communion with Jesus Christ. They Privil. 1. Union and
Communion with Jesus Christ.
are one with him mystically. He is their Head, they his body: they enjoy
Communion with him in the exercise of graces, in their approaches unto him in
worship, 1 John 1. 3. That which we have seen and heard, that declare we unto
you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is
with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.

2. They have Interest in all the Promises, 2 Cor. 1. 20. For all Pri. 2. They
have Interest in all the Promises.
the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by
us.

3. They have Interest in all Christ's purchases of Justification,
Sanctification, and Glorification. What can I add more but the Pri. 3. They
have Interest in all Christ's Purchases.
complement of all, from Rev. 1. 5, 6. And from Jesus Christ, who is the
faithful witness, and first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings
of the earth, unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood. And has made us Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father: to him be
glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. And such honor have all his
Saints, even all such as are converted, and borne again, upon whom this real
change and renovation is past. These are here militant saints on earth, and
shall be triumphant Saints in the highest Heavens.

Dr VVilkinsons 3. DECADS of SERMONS.


