To The supreme Authority the PARLIAMENT of the COMMONWEALTH of ENGLAND.
A Remonstrance humbly presented by THOMAS WILKES, on behalf of all the old
distressed Officers, Soldiers, and other Creditors upon the Public Faith,
with this Nation, for satisfaction of all their Just Debts due before 1647.
Showing the several lamentable Conditions of many of them for want of the
same, with a visible way for their Satisfaction and Relief. July.19.1652

FOrasmuch, as there are Thousands in these first Wars, Did freely engage in
the Service of the PARLIAMENT, many of them with their Horses and Arms, upon
their own Costs and Charges. And loosing all they had by plunder of the Enemy,
many lost their Lives, many their Limbs, and many their Children, Parents,
Husbands, and near Friends in the said Service, but the Heirs, and Executors
of the slain and deceased, or those Persons who remain alive, have yet
received very little satisfaction for their said Service, or loss of Estates
or Lives. And others freely lent their Moneys, and other things for the said
Service upon the Public Faith (for all which foresaid Debts due before 1647.)
there has been very little or no satisfaction or Security provided by the
STATE unto this day (unless it be by doubling the like Sums) which by reason
of their great Poverty they are not able to do) many having sold their Estates
and Inheritance to pay their debts which they came into only by the said
Service; others being in Prison for debt, some have been starved to death, and
many to preserve them from the like miseries, have been enforced to sell their
Bills and Debenters at - 5.s. 4.s. 3.s. 2.s. and 1.s. 6.d. the pound, and many
at lower rates, (and all for want of their just Debts and Arreares the price of
their Bloods) (to have relieved and preserved them.) The Rich thereby making a
prey and increasing their riches, by purchasing themselves large possessions
with the just Debts (even the destruction and blood of the Poor) but yet the
same has not bin laid to heart by many of our Governors and Magistrates, so
much as to relieve them with their own just Debts so long since due, and dearly
earned (in this their lamentable sufferings.) Although it is yet hoped by many
who desire to fear the Lord, that many of our Honorable Rulers do pity their
sad Condition, and desire their relief, and satisfaction of their said old just
Debts.

But by reason of the necessities of the Armies by land, and the Fleets by Sea,
daily calling for supplies (so that in regard of the numerousnesse of
unnecessary Offices and Places (with their several Officers to supply them)
and large Saleries allowed unto them) the State do want money to satisfy
their present necessities as aforesaid, (and therefore cannot satisfy the
foresaid Creditors.)

ALL WHICH, having been considered by many faithful well affected persons to
the COMMONWEALTH. They have endeavored to find out Just ways and means to
satisfy the said old Debts, and to take off the Cries and Clamors of the said
poor People against the PARLIAMENT, by reason of their great want of what is
due unto them.

And for that said purpose, they have propounded diverse things unto the
Committee for matters of great Importance who were ordered by the House to
receive the same, which may be effectual Security and full satisfaction unto
all the said poor Creditors.

And to that end, Collonell PRIDE, with Eleven more honest, able, and
sufficient men (out of their Love and care to the Honor of the Parliament, and
pity unto the said poor Creditors) have engaged and subscribed their Names
thereunto, before the said Committee, to manage and carry on the said whole
Work at their own costs and charges, without putting the COMMONWEALTH to any
Expenses) And to satisfy the said old Debts, out of all such real and
personal Estates of the late Kings, etc. and Bishops, etc. which are unjustly
concealed and withheld from the Commonwealth, (and do of right belong to the
State;) And out of all Moneys unjustly concealed, or withheld in the hands of
all Treasurers, or Collectors, or any other entrusted by the State, being not
yet accounted for or paid in. And out of the states of notorious Delinquents,
which are not remitted in the Act of general Pardon, (and not yet discovered
or disposed on, by any Act or Order of PARLIAMENT:) And by the demolishment of
all the Cathedrals (in regard they are decaying) so that they will cost great
and vast sums of Money to repair and keep them up; and they being of no use
for the true worship of God, or benefit unto the Commonwealth. And where
necessity is, of a House of meeting in the stead of any of them) that there may
be convenient Houses built, with a part of the Money raised from them, wherein
twice so many may hear to understand the Words of him that speaks, more then
can in any of those high built Places, by reason the vastness of them drownes
the understanding of the words with the sounding of the voice. And I hope none
who do own God will deny, but that Hearing is the only outward means to
increase knowledge of God, and JESUS CHRIST, with what he has done for poor
Sinners, and Love to him, and Faith in him (without all which) it is impossible
to please him, or glorify him.

All which said Proposals (with a Bill for making them Practicable) has been
reported from the said Committee unto the House (by Col. MARTIN) and upon
debate thereof, it was referred back to the same Committee, to consider and
bring in a Bill for the Cathedrals; And another Bill for making the Lands in
Ireland practicable for payment of the Public Faith (to those that will
accept thereof.) And also the Bill for Concealements, as aforesaid.

And the House ordered the said Committee to meet on Tuesday the 13.th of July
last, 1652. But as yet they have done nothing, or very little in the Premises.

The Premises therefore seriously considered (viz.)

First, the justness of satisfying the foresaid poor Creditors their just
Debts so long since due unto them. Secondly, the great distress and want which
thousands of the said Creditors are in (for want of their said Debts.) Thirdly,
that the Rich (of whom) most are disaffected enemies unto the State, do
increase their riches and purchase themselves large Possessions (by buying the
said just Debts of the Poor and well-affected friends) at such inconsiderable
rates as aforesaid (unto the utter undoing of many of them.) Fourthly, that
there is Moneys and other Estates unjustly concealed and withheld from the
State (which will) with the Cathedrals (and the Land in Ireland, Ordered by the
House to pay those who will accept of it:) undoubtedly pay and satisfy all the
said Debts of the Commonwealth. Fifthly, the equity in calling all such
Persons unto an account. Sixthly, that such honest and able Men, having
undertaken to manage and carry on the said Work for payment of the said Debts
(upon the foresaid Proposals at their own charges) in regard the State do
want Money to satisfy the same. And -- Seaventhly, the daily Cries and Clamors
of so many poor People against the Parliament, for want of their said just
Debts so long since due unto them; So that in consideration of the Premises, it
is hoped by all Godly, honest and well-affected persons unto this
Commonwealth, that this Work which is so just, charitable, conscientious, of
such necessity, and so agreeable unto the word of God, and tends so much to
his glory, the Honor of the Parliament, the good, benefit and satisfaction of
the said poor Creditors, and of the Commonwealth in general, (will not be
any longer neglected.) But that the said Bills depending in the House, will now
be speedily taken into Consideration, and be passed for satisfaction of the
said Debts, which will be most acceptable unto the said poor Creditors and all
honest and well-affected friends of this Commonwealth, and will for ever
engage their hearts and affections most firmly unto the Parliament; and will
remove all the cries and clamors of the said poor Creditors, and will not be
excepted against or offensive unto any. (But such who are either ignorant, or
wicked Men; or such who do Conceal or withold such Moneys or other Estates
as aforesaid from the Commonwealth, or else the disaffected Enemies thereof.)
And we hope and earnestly desire; That all our Honorable Governors, will
seriously weight and consider of all the foresaid Premises (and in love unto)
and Zeal for (the glory of God) and tender pity and bowels of Compassion unto
the poor and distressed Creditors, and for the good of all Gods people; over
whom he has in mercy placed You to be Governors, under his own dear Son
JESUS CHRIST (our King) that You will not neglect to afford Relief unto the
said poor Creditors, by passing of the said Bills for their satisfaction and
relief.

And so we humbly leave all the Premises unto the serious consideration of the
Honorable house; earnestly praying (You may proceed therein and in all other
the great and weighty affairs of the COMMONWEALTH) According to the rule of
the good Word and Will of our GOD, (and no otherwise) (which that You may do)
with all Zeal, courage all holy Resolution; The Lord fill You will his holy
Spirit of truth, which may Guide and lead you into all Truth, and direct You in
all your great Affairs (only to seek the glory of God, and exalting of his
Son our Lord and King) and the spreading abroad of his glorious Gospel, to the
Converting poor sinners, and opening their Eyes, to turn them from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto GOD, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and an Inheritance amongst those which are sanctified
by Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; and for the Good and Relief, Preservation,
and Comfort of all his People.

Subscribed the 19.th of July, 1652, in behalf of all the poor distressed
Creditors in the COMMONWEALTH (both Soldiers and others) for satisfaction of
their Debts due from the STATE, before 1647. By me, THOMAS WILKES.

These BOOKS written by the same Author, are to be sold at the Gilded Acorn in
Paul's Churchyard. Viz.

GODS EYE on his Israel, or a Passage of Balaam, out of Numb. 23.21. expounded
and cleared from Antinomian-abuse. The Decease of LAZARUS Christ's friend, A
Funeral Sermon, on John 11. v. 11. The Christian-mans Care. A SERMON on Mat.
6.33. with a short Catechism. De Causa Meritoria nostri coram Deo
Justificationis. De Dipthongis sive Bivocalibus.

