TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
I Have been long ashamed to see the Egyptian loacusts, the emissaries of
Apollyon, and the sons of perdition, under the name of Christ, so much to
abuse His sacred truth, as to send forth so impudently, and most ignorantly,
such lying Pamphlets, so stuffed with Treason, to animate Rebellion, and to
poison the dutiful affections, and the obliged loyalty of your Majesty's
seduced Subjects, and seeing we ought not to be sleeping when the Traitors are
betraying our Master, I have been not a little grieved to see so many able men,
the faithful servants of Christ, In publicos hosts, quilibet homo miles.
and most loyal to Your Majesty, either overawed with fear, or distempered
with their calamities, or I know not for what else, to be so long silent from
publishing the necessity of obedience, and the abomination of Rebellion in this
time of need; when the tongue and pen of the Divine should as well strengthen
the weak hands of faithful subjects, as the sword and musket of the soldier
should weaken the strength of faithless Rebels: therefore, not presuming of
mine ability to eqalize my brethren, but as conscious of my fidelity both to
God and to your Majesty, as in my younger years I fearlesly published The
resolution of Pilate, Non sine meo magno malo.
so in my latter age, though as much perplexed and persecuted as any man,
driven out of all my fortunes in Ireland, hunted out of my house and poor
family in England; and ( after I had been causelessly imprisoned, and most
barbarously handled ( then threatened beyond measure; yet I resolvedly set forth
this Tract of The Grand Rebellion: and though it be plain, without curiosity
-- Qualem decet exulis esse: Yet I do it in all truth and sincerity, without
any sinister aspect; for my witness is in Heaven, I had rather have all the
estate I have plundered and pillaged, my wife and children left desolate, and
destitute of all relief, and my self deprived of liberty and life by the
Rebels, for speaking truth; in defense of whom myconscience knows to be in
the right, then to have all the praise and preferment that either people,
Parliament or Pope, can heap upon me, for sowing pillows under their elbows;
and with idle distinctions, false interpretations and wicked applications of
holy Writ, hypocritically to flatter, and most sediriously to instigate the
discontented and seduced spirits, and others of most desperate fortunes, to
rebel against the Lords annionted. I presume to present the same into your
sacred hands. God Almighty, which delivers your Majesty from the
contradiction of sinners, and subdueth your people that are under You, bless,
protect, and prosper You in all Your ways, Your royal Queen and all Your
Royal progeny. Thus prays

Your Majesty's most loyal devored subject, and most faithfully obliged
servant, GR. OSSORY.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, being here at Dublin, attending the affairs of the
Kingdom, and seeing the manifold miseries and almost insupportable calamities
of us the poor Protestants of this Kingdom, and the not much less misfortuns
that are fallen or falling upon the Rebels, and perhaps upon many innocents of
the Popish Natives; I much deplored this most lamentable estate, and sad face
of things; and weighing with my self the causes of these distresses, (which I
find to be the Rebellion of some proud, some simple, and some discontented
Peers and Gentlemen, fomented by those Jesuiticall and parasiticall
trencher-Priests, the Seminaries of all wickedness, that are amongst our
people, as thick as the Anti-Episcopall and Anabaptisticall non conformist of
England or Caterpillars in the Land of Egypt) I lighted upon some few notes,
that about 25. years agone I had collected upon the Rebellion of Corah, which
I see now, and never till now, risen and revived out of the pit, wherein those
grand Rebels were swallowed; and having some leisure, I thought good, though I
had not my books about me, (which perhaps may show me the less exact in some
quotations) to reduce them into some order; and among them I have transferred
not in a little out of D. O. his Anti-Paraeus; yet with such explanations,
abreviations and translocations of them, as might best fit mine own method and
matter. I aim at no body in thesi, but only as a Divine I set down the truth
in hipothesi: if any man be aggrieved, let him blame himself, not me; for in
all this, I speak the truth in Christ Jesus and lie not; and as I have lived,
so I will dye in this truth, and will daily expect that death, if God should
deliver my life in to the Rebels hands, and not rather preserve me from their
merciless cruelty. And therefore my prayer shall ever be for all, that our
good God would bless us, and give us obedience while we live, and patience
whenever we shall be brought to suffer death; and so both in life and death,
I rest

Thy faithful and affectionate brother, GR. OSSORY.

The Contents of the several Chapters in this TREATISE.
CHAP. I. Shows who these Rebels were, how much they were obliged to their
Governors, and yet how ungratefully they rebelled against them. Page 1. CHAP.
II. Shows against whom these men rebelled: that God is the giver of our
Governors: the several offices of Kings and Priests; how they should assist
each other; and how the people labors to destroy them both. Page 8 CHAP.
III. Shows the assured testimonies of a good and lawful Governor, their
qualifications, our duties to them; and wherein our obedience to them
consists Page 14 CHAP. IV. Shows the objection of the Rebels to justify
their Rebellion: the first part of it answered, that neither our compulsion to
Idolatry, nor any other injury or tyranny, should move us to rebel. Page 19
CHAP. V. Shows by Scripture the doctrine of the Ckurch, human reason, and
the welfare of the weal public, that we ought by no means to rebel. A
threefold power of every Tyrant. Three kinds of tyrannies. The doubtful and
dangerous events of War. Why many men rebel. Jehu's example not to be
followed. Page 29 CHAP. VI. Shows, that neither private men, nor the
subordinate Magistrates, nor the greatest Peers of the Kingdom may take arms,
and make War against their King. Buchanans mistake discovered, and the
Anti-Cavalier confuted. Page 39 CHAP. VII. Shows the reasons and the examples
that are alleged to justify Rebellion, and a full answer to each of them:
God the immediate author of Monarchy: inferior Magistrates have no power but
what is derived from the superior; and the ill success of all rebellious
resisting of our Kings. Page 51 CHAP. VIII. Shows, that our Parliament has
no power to make War against our King: Two maine Objections answered: The
original of Parliaments: The power of the King to call a Parliament, to deny
what he will, and to dissolve it when he will. Why our King suffers? Page 62
CHAP. IX. Shows the unanimous consent and testimonies of many famous learned
men and Martyrs, both ancient and modern, that have confirmed and justified
the truth of the former Doctrine. Page 70 CHAP. X. Shows the impudency of the
Anti-Cavalier: How the Rebels deny they war against the King: An unanswerable
Argument to press obedience: A furthur discussion, whether for our Liberty,
Religion, or Laws, we may resist our Kings; and a patheticall disswasion from
Rebellion Page 78. CHAP. XI. Shows what these Rebels did: How by ten several
steps and degrees (1. Pride. 2. Discontent. 3. Envy 4. Murmuring. 5.
Hypocrisy. 6. Lying. 7. Slandering. 8. Railing. 9. Disobedience. 10.
Resistance.) they ascended to the height of their Rebellion; and how these are
the sieps and the ways to all Rebellion, and the reasons which move them to
rebeil. Page 88 CHAP. XII. Shows where the Rebels do hatch their Rebellion:
The heavy and just deserved punishment of Rebels: The application and
conclusion of the whole. Page 99
THE GRAND REBELLION.
PSALM. 106.16. Aemulati sunt Mosen in castris, Aaron sanctum Domini.


CHAP. I. Shows who these Rebels were, how much they were obliged to their
Governors, and yet how ungratefully they rebelled against them.
I Am here in this Treatise to show unto you a Monster, more hideous and
monstrous then any of those that are described either by the Greek or Latin
Poets; and more noisome and destructive to humane kind, then any of those that
the hottest regions of Africa have ever bred, though this be now most
frequently produced in these colder Clymates: The name of it is Rebellion, an
ugly beast of many heads, of loathsome aspect, of great antiquity, and as great
vivacity; for the whole world could not subdue it to this very day. And this
Rebellion (the like whereof was never seen from the creation of the world to
this very time, and I hope shall never be seen hereafter to the day of
judgment) is fully set down in the 16. The greatness of this sin of
rebellion, is seen 2 ways. 1 From the text. 2. From their punishment. 1. Of
the text.
of Numbers; and it is briefly repeated in the words of the Psalmist, Psalm.
106.16. how great a sin it is, and how odious unto God, will appear, if we
examine 1. The particulars of the Text in the 16 verse, and but view 2. The
greatness of their punishment in the next verse.


1. The Text contains four special parts: 1. Qui fuere, who the Rebels were
that did this: 2. Contra quos, against whom they rebelled: 3. Quid fecerunt,
what they did: 4. Vbi fecerunt, where they did it.
And in each of these I will endeavor brevity; for as the Poet says, Horat.
Cito dicta percipiunt docilet animi, retinentque fideles; few words do best
hold memory, and a short taste does breed the mor eager appetite; therefore as
all the precepts of Christ were 1. 3. Properties of Christ's precepts.
Brevia, 2. Levia, 3. Vtilia.
so my desire shall be to do herein.

1. 1. Part, who the Rebels were.
Then Aemulati sunt, they angered; and who were they? the Prophet answers,
verse 7. Patres nostri in Aegypto, our Fathers regarded not thy wonders in
Egypt. And therefore they were,

1. Their own Contrymen, the Israelites.

2. Described by four motions
Of their own Tribe, as was Corah and his companions; and of the nobility of
Israel, as were Dathan and Abiram, and their adherents.

3. Of their own Religion, such as had received the Oracles of God, and did
profess to serve the same true and everliving God, as the others did.

4. Such as had obtained multa and magna, many great favors and benefits; yea,
Beneficia nimis copiosa: and I may say, very precious benesits from them. For
when God sent Moses his servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen, these delivered
them from bondage and brought them forth with silver and gold, and there was
not one feeble person among their Tribes, says the Prophet: and yet these were
the men that rebelled.

1. They were their own Countrymen, 1. Of the same Country.
of their own Tribe, the seed of Abraham, and pertakers of the same fortunes;
And therefore they should love and not hate, they should further and not
hinder, rejoice and not envy at one another happiness; for though wicked men
of desperate fortunes care for none but for themselves, Sibi nati, sibi vivunt,
sibi moriuntur, sibi damnantur; yet not only the heathen Philosophy of Natures
Scholars, but also the divine verity of Gods elected servants does teach us,
that Partem patria, partem parents vendicant; the love of our Country, and to
our Countrymen should be such, as rather to spend our selves to relieve them,
then by lewd practices to destroy them; when by our dissolute debauchment we
have destroyed our selves.

2. These Rebels were of their own Tribe, 2. Of the same tribe.
of the Tribe of Levi, and so knit together indissolubili vinculo, with the
indisloluble bond of blood and fraternity; and therefore they should have
remembered the saying of Abraham their father, unto his Nephew Lot, Let there be
no dissension betwixt thee and me, for we be brethren: a good Uncle that would
never drive his Nephew out of his house at home.

And we read, that affinity among the heathens could not only keep away the
force, and suppress the malice of deadly foes, but also retain pignora juncti
sanguinis, as Julia did Caesar and Pompey; and as the Poet says, Vt generos
soceris mediae junxere Sabinae. Lucan Pharsa. ^. ^.
And therefore why should not consanguinity, and the bond of slesh and blood
suppress the envy of friends, and retain the love of brethren?

But these prove true the old saying, that Fratrum irae inter se inimicissimae,
the wrath of brethren is most deadly; as it appeared, not only in Cain against
Abel, Romulus against Remus, and all his brethren against Joseph; but
especially in Caracalla, that slew his brother Geta in his mothers arms: and
therefore Solomon says, Prove. 18.19
A brother offended is harder to win then a strong City, and their
contentions are like the bar of a Palace, not easily broken. Nam ut aqua
calefacta, cum ad frigiditatem reducitur frigidissima est; For as water that
has been hot, being cold again, is colder then ever it was before; and as the
Adamant, if it be once broken, is shivered into a thousand pieces; so love,
being turned into hatred, and the bond of friendship being once dissolved,
there accreweth nothing but a swift increase of deadly hatred: So it happened
now in the Camp of Israel, that the saying of Saint Bernard is found true,
Bern in Cant. Sermon. 33.
Omnes amici, and omnes inimici, all of a house, and yet none at peace; all of
a kindred, and yet all in mortal hatred.

And as Corah and his companions were so nearly allied unto Moses, of the tribe
of Levi; so Dathan and Abiram were men famous in the Congregation, noble Peers
and very popular men, heads of their families of the Tribe of Reuben. A subtle
practice of that pestiferous Serpent, to join Simeon and Levi, Clergy and Laity
in this wicked faction of Rebellion; the one under color of dissembled
sanctity, the other with their power and usurped authority, to seduce the more,
to make the greater breach of obedience. And so it has been always, that we
scarce read of any Rebellion, but some base Priests the Chaplains of the
Devil have begot it; and then the Nobles of the people, arripientes ansam,
taking hold of this their desired opportunity do foster that which they would
have willingly fathered; as besides this Rebellion of Corah, that of Jacke
Cade, in the reign of Henry the sixth; and that of Perkin Warbeck, in the time
of Henry the seventh, and many more that you may find at home in the lives of
our own Kings, may make this point plain enough. But they should have thought
on what our Savior tells us, that Every Kingdom divided against it self is
brought to desolatiou; and every City or House divided against it self, (...)
shall not stand. What a mischief then was it for these men to make such a
division among their own Tribe, and in their own Camp? Nondum tibi defuit
hostiis: had they not the Egyptians, and the Canaanites, and the Amalckites,
and enough besides to fight against, but they must raise a civil discord in
their own house? could not their thoughts be as devout as the heathen Poets,
which says, Lucan. Pharsal. lib. 1.
-- Omnibus hosts
Reddite nos populis, civil avertite bellum.
And therefore this makes the sin of homebred Rebels the more intolerable,
because they bring such an Ilias malorum, so many sorts of unusual calamities,
and grievous miquities upon their own brethren.

3. These Rebels were of their own Religion, 3. Of the same Religion.
professing the same faith that the others did: Et religio dicitur a religando
(says Lactantius;) and therefore this bond should have tied them together
firmer then the former; for if equal manners do most of all bind affections;
Es similitudo morum parit amiciciam, as the Orator teaches: then hoc magnum
est, hoc mirum, that men should not love those of the same Religion. And if the
profession of the same trades and actions is so forcible, not only to
maintain peace, but also to increase love, and amity, JACOB REX, in Ep. to all
Christian Monarchs.
as we see in all Societies and corporations of any mechanic craft or
handiwork, they do inviolably observe that maxim of the Civil Law, to give
an interest unto those qui fovent consimilem causam: so that as birds of the
same feather, they will cluster all in one, and be zealous for the preservation
of them that are of the same craft or society: why then should not the
profession of the same Religion, if not increase affection, yet at least
detain men from dissension?

For, though diversities of Religion, non been convenient, can seldom contain
themselves for any while in the same Kingdom without civil distractions,
especially if each party be of a near equal power, which should move all
Governors to do herein, as Haniball did with his army, that was a mixture of
all Nations, to keep the most suspected under, and rank them so, that they
durst not kick against his Carthaginians: or is Henry the fourth did with the
Britains to make such laws that they were never able to rebel so should the
discreet Magistrate, not root out a people, that they be no more a Nation, but
so subordinate the furthest from truth to the best professors that they shall
never be able any ways to endanger the true Religion; yet where the same
Religion is universally professed, excepting small differences in adiaphorall
things; Quae non diversificant species, as the Schools speak; it is more then
unnatural for any one to make a Schism, and much more transcendently heinous
to rebel against his Governors. But indeed no sin is so unnatural, no
offense so heinous, but that swelling pride, and discontented natures will soon
perpetrate; no bonds nor bounds can keep them in. And therefore Corah must
rebel; and ever since in all Societies, even among the Levites, and among the
Priests, the disordered spirits have rebelled against their Governors, and
fecerunt unitatem contra unitatem; and erecting Altars against Altars (as the
Fathers speak) they have made confederacies and conspiracies against the truth,
and thereby they have at all times drawn after them many multitudes of
ignorant souls unto perdition: This is no new thing, but a true saying; and
therefore our Savior bids us to Take heed of false Prophets, and of
rebellious spirits; that as Saint John says, went from us, but were not of us,
but are indeed the poison and incendiaries both of Church and Commonwealth.

4 These Rebels had received many favors and great benefits from their
Governors: 4 Much obliged for many favors that Governor.
for they were delivered e lutulentis manuum operibus, as St. Augustine
speaks; and as the Prophet says, They had eased their shoulders from their
burdens, and their hands from making of pots: they had broken the Rod of their
oppressors, and as Moses tells them, they had separated them from the rest of
the multitude of Israel, Numb. 16.9
and set them near to God himself, to do the service of the Tabernacle of the
Lord: and therefore the light of nature tells us, that they were most
ungrateful, and as inhumane as the brood of Serpents that would sting him to
death, which to preserve his life, would bring him home in his bosom.

And it seems this was the transcendencie of Judas his sin, and that which
grieved our Savior most of al, that he whom he had called to be one of the 12.
Apostles, whom he had made his Steward and Treasurer of all his wealth, and for
whom he had done more then for thousands of others should betray him into the
hands of sinners; for if it had been another (says the Psalmist) that had done
me this dishonor, I could well have bornc it, but seeing it was thou my
familiar friend, which did eat and drink at my table, it must needs trouble
me: for though in others it might be pardonable, yet in thee it is intolerable;
and therefore of all others he says of Judas, vae illi homini, woe be unto
that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed, it had been better for him he
had never been borne, as if his sin were greater then the sins of Ananias,
Caiphas, of Pilate.

But the old saying is most true, Improbus a nullo flectitur obsequio, no
service can satisfy a froward soul, no favor, no benefit, no preferment can
appease the rebellious thoughts of discontented spirits. And therefore
notwithstanding Moses had done all this for Corah, yet Corah must rebel
against Moses: So many times, though Kings have given great honors unto their
subjects, made them their Peers, their Chamberlaines, their Treasurers, and
their servants of nearest place, and greatest trust. And though Aaron the High
Priest, or Bishop does impose his hands on others, and admit them into sacred
Orders above their brethren, to be near the Lord, and bestow all the
preferment they can upon them: yet with Corah these unquiet and ungrateful
spirits must rebel against their governors: For, I think I may well demand,
which of all of them, that now rebel against their King have not had, either
their Grandfathers, Fathers, or themselves promoted to all or most of their
fortunes and honors, from that crown which now they would trample under their
feet? Who more against their King, then those that received most from their
King? Just like Judas, or here, like Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, I could
instance the particulars, but I pass.

So you see who were the Rebels, most ungrateful, most unworthy men.

CHAP. II. Shows against whom these men rebelled, that God is the giver of
our Covernours; the several Offices of Kings and Priests; how they should
assist each other, and how the people labor to destroy them both.
SEcondly, 2. Part, against whom they rebelled.
we are to consider, against whom they rebelled; and the Text says, Against
Moses and Aaron: and therefore. we must discuss 1. 2. Points discussed.
Qui fuere, who they were in regard of their places. 2. Quales fuere, what they
were in regard of their qualities.


1. In regard of their places, we find that these men were 1. The chief
Governors of Gods people. 2. Governors both in temporal and in spiritual
things. 3. Agreeing and consenting together in all their Government.


1. They were the prime Governors of the people: Moses the King or Prince to
rule the people: and Aaron the High Priest to instruct and offer sacrifice to
make atonement unto God for the sins of the people; and these have their
authority from God: for though it sometimes happens, that potens, Hos. 8.4.
the ruler is not of God, as the Prophet says, They have reigned, and not by
me; and likewise modus assumendi, the manner of getting authority is not always
of God, but sometimes by usurpation, cruelty, subtilty, or some other sinful
means: yet potestas, the power it self, whosoever has it, is ever from God:
Aristot. Polit. lib 1. c. 1. Ambros. Ser. 7.
for the Philosopher says, Magistratus originem esse a natura ipsa. And Saint
Ambrose says, Datus a Deo Magistratus, non modo malorum coercendorum causa,
sedetiam bonorum fovendorum in vera animi pietate and honestate, gratia. And
others say, the Sun is not more necessary in heaven, then the Magistrate is
on earth; for alas, how is it possible for any Society to live on earth, cum
vivitur exrapto, when men live by rapine, and shall say, Let our strength be to
us the law of justice; therefore God is the giver of our Governors, and he
professes, Per me regnant Reges: And Daniel told Nebuchadnezzar, That the most
high rules in the Kingdom of men, and he gives it to whomsoever he will.
Dan. 4.25. Vide etiam c. 2. v. 37.


2. These two men were Governors, both in all temporal and in all spiritual
things; as Moses in the things that pertained to the Commonwealth, and Aaron
in things pertaining unto God.

And these two sorts of Government are in some sort subordinate each to other,
and yet each one entire in it self, so that the one may not usurp the office
of the other; for

1. The spiritual Priest is to instruct the Magistrates, 2. Governors both in
temporal and spiritual things.
and to reprove them too, if they do amiss, as they are members of their
charge, and the sheep of their sheepfold: And so we have the examples of
David, reproved by Nathan, Achab by Elias, Herod by John Baptist; and in the
Primitive Church, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 34. Sozomen lib. 7.
of Philip the Emperor, repenting at the persuasion of Fabian; and Theodosius
senior, by the writings of St Ambrose.

2. The temporal Magistrate is to commend, and if they offend, to correct and
condemn the Priests, as they are members of their Commonwealth; for Saint
Paul says; Romans 13. Bernard. ad Archiepis. Senevensem.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: and if every soul, then the
soul of the Priest, as well as the souls of the People; or otherwise, Quis
eum excepit ab universitate? as Saint Bernard; and so Theodoret, Theophylact,
and Oecumenius, are of the same mind: and the examples of Abiathar, deposed by
Solomon; and a greater then Solomon, Christ himself, not refusing the censure
of Pilate, though for no fault; Saint Paul appealing unto Caesar, Caecilian
judged by the Delegates of Constantine; Flavianus by Theodosius, and all the
Martyrs and godly Bishops never pl^^^^^ (...) from their persecuters, do make
this point (...)

(...) Governors were not only consanguinei, 3. Governors well agreeing in
their government.
two (...) so were Cain and Abel, to whom totus non suffi^^ (...) were also
consentanei, like the soul and body of man, of the same sympathy and
affection for the performance of every action; for the Church and Commonwealth
are like Hippocrates twyns, so linked together, as the Ivy intwisteth it self
about the Oak, that the one cannot happily subsist without the other; but as
the Secretary of nature well observes, That the Marygold opens with the Sun,
and shuts with the shade; even so, when the Sunne-beames of peace and
prosperity shine upon the Commonwealth, then by the reflection of those
beams, the Church dilates and spreads if self the better; as you may see in
Act. 9.31. and on the other side, when any Kingdom groaneth under civil
dissension, the Church of Christ must nee is suffer persecution. And therefore
to the end, that the Prince and Priest might, as the two feet of a man, help
each other to support the weight of the whole body, and to bear the burden of
so great a charge; God at the first severing of these offices, (which before
were united in one person, as the Poet says of Anius, -- Rex idem hominum,
Phoebique Sacerdos. And the Apostle says of Melchisedech, that he was both a
King and the Priest of the most high God,) did choose two natural brethren to
be the Governors of his people; and that, quod non caret mysterio: Aanon was
the eldest, and yet Moses was the chiefest; to signify, as I take it, that
they should rather help and further each other, then any ways rule and
domineere one over the other; because that although Aaron was the eldest
brother and chief Priest, yet Moses was the chief Magistrate, and his
brothers God, as God himself does style him; and therefore this should
terrorem incutere, and teach him how to behave himself toward his brother;
and though Moses was the chief Magistrate, yet Aaron was the chief Priest,
and his eldest brother, which had not lost (like Reuben) the prerogative of his
birthright; and this should reverentiam inducere, work in Moses a respect
unto his brothers age and place.

And truly there is great reason why these two should do their best, to
support and protect each other; for the government of the people, is, as we may
now see, a very difficult and a miraculous thing, no less then the appeasing
of the Surges of the raging Seas; as the Prophet shows, when he says, That
God rules the rage of the Sea, and the noise of his waves, and the madness of
his people: And the Rod of government is a miracolous Rod, as well that of
Aaron as that of Moses; for as Moses rod turned into a Serpent, and the Serpent
into a rod again; so the rod of Aaron, of a dry stick, did blossom and bear
ripe Almonds: to show how strange and wonderful a thing it is, either for
Prince or Priest, to rule an unruly multirude, too much for any one of them to
do; and therefore God does always join both of them together, as the
Psalmist shows, Thou leadest thy people like sheep, by the hand of Moses and
Aaron.

And besides, if these two do not assist and protect each other, they shall be
soon suppressed one after another, of their own people; for if the Prince,
which is to be our nursing rather, be once subdued, then presently the Priest
shall be destroyed; and when he has lost his power, our power shall never be
able to do any good: and if the Priest which prays, and preaches to direct
the King, be trampled under foot, As soon as men have overthrown their
Priests, they will presently labor to destroy their King.
it has been found most certain, that after they have thrown away the Miter,
they have not long retained the Scepter: And therefore King James of ever
blessed memory, of a sharp conception and sound judgment, was wont to say, No
Bishop, no King, unless you mean such a King as Christ was, when the Jews
crowned him with Thorns, and bowing their knees, said, Hayle King of the
Jews; that is, Rex sine Regno, a King without power; like a man of straw, that
is only made to fright away the birds: For the people are always prone to
pull out their neeks from the yoke of their obedience, and would soon rebel,
if the Priest did not continually preach, that Every soul should be subject to
the higher powers; as we see now by experience, how apt they are to rebel
when factious Preachers give them the least encouragement. And therefore as
this rebellion of Corah, so every other, though they begin with one, yet they
aim at both, and strive to overthrow as well the one as the other: for my Text
says, They angered Moses in their Tents, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord. And
therefore these two should be as Hippocrates twyns, or indeed like man and
wife, indissolubly coupled and coherent together, without distraction; and
cursed be they that strive to make the division: for whom God has thus united
together, no man should put asunder.

And here you may observe the method of their Rebellion, The method of their
rebellion.
the Text says, Moses and Aaron; yet Moses shows, they began with Aaron: for
when their Rebellion was first discovered, Moses does not say, What have I done
against you? but What is Aaron that you should murmr against him? to show
unto us, that although Moses was the first they aimed at in their intention,
yet he was the last they purposed to overthrow in the execution: Quia
progrediendum a facilioribus, as the Devil began with the woman the weaker
vessel, that he might the easier overthrow the strougen; so the enemies of God
and his Church do always seek, first to overthrow the Priest, and then
presently they will set upon the Prince.

And therefore as Moses here, so all Magistrates every where should remember,
Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 2.
that, Jam tua res agitur, through our sides they may smart, and our wounds may
prove dangerous unto them: because you shall never read they began to shake
us, but they fully intended to root out them; for if the fear of God, and the
honor of the King must go together, as St Peter shows, it must needs follow
that they will but dishonor and disobey their King, that have cast away the
fear of God; and it is most certain, that when they drive God out of their
hearts, as the Gergezites drove Christ out of their coasts, Little fear of God
in them that expel their Priests out of their societies.
when they expel Aaron the chief Priest or Bishop out of their Assemblies,
there is but little fear of God before their eyes: for if Seneca, that was but
Natures Scholar, could tell us, that when we go about any wicked act, a grave
Cato or severe Aristides standing by us, would make us blush and stop the doing
thereof, then certainly the Christian that has any grace, will be ashamed of
his evil intent, and be afraid to offend God, when he sees a man of God so
near him; who does often times ponere obicem, make a stop to stay the
proceedings of the wicked, that would not seldom be far worse, and do more
unjustice, if it were not for the company and persuasions of the Priest and
Preacher.

And therefore the former ages that feared God more then we, and were wiser to
use this means, The wisdom of the former age.
that they might fear him, desired, that in their greatest Assemblies of
greatest affairs, as Sessions, Councels, Parliaments, and the like, the
Bishops and Preachers might be as the chief members of their consultations, as
well to witness the uprightness of their actions, and to direct them in cases
of conscience, what is most agreeable to the divine constitution.

And wheresoever you see the expulsion of these men, The expulsion of Bishops,
the cause of many subsequent mischiefs.
and the rejection of these helps and furtherances unto godliness, you shall
find no good success, nor better fruit of their greatest Councels, then
Sedition, Oppression, Confusion, and Rebellion: For it is not the least part of
the Bishops office, and the duty of all Preachers, not only in the Pulpit,
where what they say is of many men soon forgotten, but also in all other
meotings and assemblies, and in the very instances when occasions shall be
offered; to do as Christ and his Apostles did, persuade peace, righteousness,
and obedience unto the people; and the want of their association has been the
opening of many gaps to let in much injustice and impiety in many places,
because their present persuasion may do as much, if not more good with men,
when they are in action, then their preaching can do when they come to
contemplation.

And therefore if any assembly has (like Corah) rebelled against Aaron, and
cast their Bishops and Preachers out of doors, I would advise them to follow
the Council of S. Ambrose in the like case, Quod inconsulto fecerunt
consultius revocetur, what they have inconsiderately done, to throw them out,
let them more advisedly revoke and call them in again; and they whose breeding
has been in knowledge, and their calling is to do justice and to teach
truth, will help and not hinder them to understand the truth, and to proceed
in righteousness.

And so you see, who these men were in regard of their places.

CHAP. III. Shows the assured testimonies of a good and lawful Governor,
their qualifications, or duties to them; and wherein our obedience to them
consists.
SEcondly, 2. How these Governors were qualified for their places.
we are to consider, Quales fuere, how these men were qualified for their
places; touching which, these two points are to be handled: 1. Modus assumendi,
the manner of obtaining it. 2. 2. Points discussed.
Facultas exequendi, the ability and fidelity of discharging it.


1. 1. How they obtained their places.
I told you before, that many do obtain their places by sinful means, as
many of the Popes and Roman Emperors, by poisoning and murdering their
Predecessors, have unlawfully stepped into the Thrones of Majesty; and so did
Henry the fourth by the unjust deposition of Richard the second, Many usurp
then places.
and Richard the third by the cruel and secret murdering of his poor
innocent Nephews, attain unto the Crown of England. And in such manner of
assuming government there is just cause of resisting, and a fair color of
rebelling against them, if you call it a Rebellion, when men discharge their
duties in defense of justice, to oppose usurpation: But neither Moses nor Aaron
came so to the places of their government. For

1. 1. Moses had a twofold testimony to justify his calling.
Moses had a double testimony to approve his calling to be from God.

The first was Internum, to assure himself: And the second was Externum, to
confirm the same unto the people. For

1. 1. Inward.
When Moses said unto God, Who am I that I should go unto Pharaoh; the Lord
answered, I will be with thee, [ad protegendum and dirigendum] says the
gloss: and this shall be a token unto thee that I have sent thee, After that
you have brought the people out of Egypt, you shall serve God upon this
Mountain; and that may assure thee that I have sent thee, and will bring thy
people unto Canaan, as I have brought them into this wilderness.

2. 2. Outward, which was a threefold sign. 1. Of his Rod.
That the people might be assured he was lawfully called, God gave unto him a
threefold sign.

1. Of his Rod, that being cast to the ground was turned to a Serpent; but
taken by the tail, it turned to a Rod again: to show, that when the rod of
goverument is thrown out of the Magistrates hand, the people are like the
brood of Serpents, People without government like Serpents.
a malicious and a viperous generation; but being taken into the hand of
government, they prove a royal and a glorious Nation.

2. The hand thrust into his bosom and taken out, 2. Of his Hand.
was leaprous; but thrust again and taken out, was made whold: to signify,
that a good Magistrate out of the bosom of the Law, must put out the hand of
justice, both to wound and to heal, to kill and to make alive, as the Poet
says; Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos. To defend the innocent, and
to punish the wrong doer.

3. 3. Of the Water.
The water taken out of the river and cast upon the dry ground should be
turned into blood, to imitate unto them, that the blood which was spilt by
Pharaoh, when their children were murdered and drowned in the rivers, should
be required and revenged upon the Egyptians; when by the government of Moses,
the carcasses of those outrageous oppressors, should be cast out of the Red
Sea, and laid upon the dry ground. Thus Moses showed that he was lawfully
called.

2. For Aaron, 2. Aarons calling Justified. Heb. 5.
the Apostle makes him the pattern of all lawful entrance into this calling,
when he says, that No man takes this honor upon him, but he that is called
as Aaron was, and Moses manifested the lawfulness of his calling unto all
Israel; when according to the number of their 12. Tribes, he caused 12. Rods to
be put in the Tabernacle of witness; and of all them the Rod of Aaron only,
which was for the Tribe of Levy, Numb. 17.8.
was budded and brought forth buds and bloomed blossoms, and yielded Almondes.
And so it was apparent to all Israel, that these men came lawfully to their
government.

2. For their ability and fidelity to discharge their places, 2. Their
qualifications for their places.
the malice of their adversaries could not charge them with any omission; they
do not say they have governed amiss, but they would feign govern with them.
And to make this more apparent,

1. 1. Of the abilities of Moses.
The Spirit of God testifies of Moses, that He was faithful in all Gods
house; and in that respect called the man of God, the servant of God, whose
whole care was for his Master: and for the sweetness of his disposition he is
said to be a very meek man, above all the men that were upon the earth: for
his love to his people, Tertul. de fuga in Pe secut.
Tertullian makes him the figure of Christ, Cum adhuc Christo non revelato, in
se figurato, ait, si perdis hunc populum and me pariter cum eo disperde; for
his zeal of Gods honor he was most fervent, and therefore severe in punishing
the worshippers of the golden Calfe: and for his justice and uprightness, he
wronged no man; for his intellectuals he was exceeding wise, and learned in all
the learning of the Egyptians.

2. 2. Of the abilities of Aarun.
For Aaron, how fit he was to be a Priest, will appear, if you consider those
two virtues that are the most requisite for the Priesthood, as Moses shows
when he prays, Let thine Vrim and thy Tummin be upon the man of thy mercy,
that is, omitting all other interpretatious.

1. 1. His ability to teach.
Ability to teach. For, 2. Sanctity of life. For,
1. Malach. 5 Tim. 3.2.
The Priests lips must preserve knowledge; he must be apt to teach, and si
Sacerdos est, sciat legem Dei; si ignorant legem, ipse se arguit non esse
Sacerdotem Domini: Hieron in Haggai 2. and Aug. de doctr. Christ. l. 4. c. 16.
But God himself says, that he knew Aaron was an eloquent man, and could
speak well, and he promised unto Moses that He would be with his mouth, to
teach him what he would say: and therefore I know not who can say any thing
against him herein, when God says he can do it so well, and ingageth himself
that he will help him.

2, 2. His uprightness of life.
For the Integrity of his life, I need not go further then my Text, when as
the Prophet calls him, The Saint of the Lord; that is, not only
Sanctificatum ad Sacerdotium; but also a holy, just, and godly man, in respect
of the innocence of his life.

And so you have seen the persons described, against whom these Rebels have
rebelled: They were the prime Governors of Gods people, and such Governors as
the like, for all kind of goodness and excellencies, could not be found on
earth.

Therefore these Rebels ought to have obeyed them, though for nothing else, but
because they were their Governors; for the Apostle tells us plainly, that
necesse est subjici, we must needs be subject; not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake: wherein you see a double necessity of obeying. 1.
External, Propter iram, for fear of wrath: 2. Internal, Propter
conscientiam, for conscience sake: A double necessity of obedience.

therefore we must needs obey. And our obedience consists chiefly in these
two things: Our obedience consists in two things.
1. To do nothing against them. 2. To do all that we can for them.
For,

1. 1. In doing nothing against our Governors. 1. In Thought Eccles. 10.20. 2.
In Word. Exodus 28.28. 3. In Deed. Romans 13.2.
We are forbidden to think an ill thought of them with our hearts; Speak not
evil of the King (says Solomon) no not in thy thought; for a bird of the air
shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter.

2. We are charged not to revile them with our tongues, for Thou shall not
revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of the people.

3. We are restrained from resisting them with our hands; for, Whosoever
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God; and they that resist
receive unto themselves damnation.

And therefore the Lord says unto all, Nolite tangere Christos meos; where he
does not say non occides, or ne perdas, the worst that can be, but ne tangas,
the least that may be, touch not tactu noxio, with any hurtful touch.

And many times we are touched secretly, we know not how, Many kinds of touches.
nor when, nor by whom, but cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly,
and all the people shall say Amen: and therefore much more cursed be he that
smites his Prince, his Priest, his Governor.

And sometimes we are touched with violent hands, when with hostile force and
open arms our power and authority are withstood: but

Most frequently we are touched with virulent tongues, as they say in Jeremy,
Venite, percutiamus eum lingua; Ierem. 18.18.
and this touch, though it breaks no bones, yet does it wound and kill the
very heart.

But the Lord says in general, touch not at all; therefore no kind is
limited, 2. In doing all that we can do for our Governors. 1. To honor them.
no way permitted to touch them.

2. As we are forbidden to do any thing against them, so we are commanded to
do all we can for them: for,

Saint Peter says, Fear God, and honor the King; therefore he cannot be said
to fear God that does not honor his King: And Solomon says, Fear God, my
son, and the King; therefore he cannot be the son of Wisdom, the son of
Solomon, that does not fear the King; that is, fear to wrong him, fear to
offend him, Romans 13. Vide Josh. 1.16. Wherein we ought to obey, and disobey.
fear to anger him. And when the Magistrates command us any thing, Saint Paul
bids us to obey them; but if they command any thing against God, then indeed
their authority comes too short, Quia melius est obedire Deo, quam hominibus.
Yet in these things wherein we may not obey, we must not resist; but as Julians
Soldiers would not sacrifice at his command, Sed timendo potestatem,
contemnebant potestatem, in fearing the power of God, regarded not the power of
man; yet when he led them against his enemies, Subditi erant propter Dominum
aeternum, Aug. in Psalm. 124.
etiam domino temporali; so should we truly distinguish of the things they do
command, and take heed we be not blind Judges herein, and too partial to
satisfy our own passionate affections. 2. To impart our goods to them.


And besides, we are to impart our goods to supply their necessities, and for
the supportance of their dignities; for our Savior bids us, Give unto Caesar
what belongs unto Caesar: and Saint Paul expresses the same to be Tribute,
that is, Imposts, Subsidies, Gifts, or the like, call it by what name you will;
we are commanded by God, to the uttermost of our abilities, to supply their
occasions and necessities, even as the children are bound to relieve their
parents in their extremities.

And if we see our Moses, 3. To hazard our lives for them.
our King or chief Governor, any ways impugned, or like to be oppressed,
either by foreign Egyptians, or domestic Israelites, though they should with
Dathan and Abiram, the most prime and popular men in the Congregation, that
could draw thousands after them, yet we are bound to the hazard of our lives,
to preserve the Life, Crown, and Dignity of our Prince; as the Subjects of
King David hazarded themselves to save him harmless: 2 Samuel 18.3.
And if we will not do this, then as Mordecai in the like case said to Hester,
Hester 4.14.
If thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall there
enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place, but thou and
thy fathers house shall be destroyed. So I say with King David, the Lord will
help his Anointed, and deliver him from the striving of his people: and it we
still be silent and do nothing, yet, the Stars in their order shall fight
against Sisera, Et coniurati venient ad classica venti: and as the Angel of
the Lord said of the Merozites, curse ye Meroz, The punishment of them that
will not not assist their Governors.
curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help
Barack against the Canaanites: so let them fear the bitter curse, and a curse
from God, that will not help their Prince against his enemies, especially such
enemies as have least reason to be enemies unto him.

So you see what obedience we owe unto our Governors, and therefore their
rebellion was the more intolerable, that thus spurned against their Magistrates.

CHAP. IV. Shows the objection of the Rebels to justify their Rebellion: the
first part of it answered, that neither our compulsion to Idolatry, nor any
other injury or tyranny should move us to Rebel.
But we must not condemn them before their cause be heard; and therefore Corah
shall have his Counsel to object what he can for himself: And I find but one
objection of any moment, though the same consists of many branches. As,

What if Moses, the King, or chief Governor, The objection of the Rebels,
being so much affected and addicted unto Aaron the chief Priest or Bishop,
and to others his prime Council, should be led by evil advice to set up
Idolatry, and to play the Tyrant; to take a way the goods, destroy the lives,
and bring most of his people to most miserable conditions: may neither private
men, nor the subordinate Magistrates, nor the prime Nobility of the people, nor
any other Court or Assembly of men restrain his fury, or remove this mischief
from Gods inheritance, from the Church and Commonwealth? this is that Gordian
knot which is so hard to be untied.

But if I might in the School of Divinity have leave to resolve this question,
Steven was, with stony arguments, 2 Parts of their objection.
I would soon answer, that 1. In neither of these cases: 2. Neither of these
men may do it: and I could make this good by very good authority; for, Si
Magistratus est bonus, nutritor est tuus; If our Governor be good, he is our
nursing father, and we should receive our nourishment with thanks; and no
thanks to us for our obedience to such a one. And if our Governor be evil,
he is so for our transgression, and we should receive our punishment with
patience; and therefore no resistance: but either obey the good willingly, or
endure the evil patiently.

But to proceed to break this Gordian knot in pieces, and to answer each part
of this objection:

1. 1 Part of their objection answered. No to rebel for any cause. 1. Not for
our compulsion to Idolatry.
I say, that many wicked Kings, and cruel Emperors have set up Idolatry and
blasphemy against God, and yet I do not find that any of Gods servants did
ever rebel against them; for you know Jeroboam the son of Nebat that made
Israel to sin, did set up golden Calves to be worshipped. Nebuchadnezzar King
of Babylon made an Image of gold, and commanded all his people to fall down to
worship it. And what shall I say of those Idolatrous Kings, Achab, Manasses,
Julian, and abundance more, that most impiously compelled their subjects unto
Idolatry? and yet you shall not find that either the faithful Jews under
Jeroboam, nor the Prophet Daniel in Babylon, nor Elias the man of God in the
time of Achab, nor any of all the good Christians that were under Julian, did
either themselves, or persuade others of the servants of God, at any time to
rebel against those Idolatrous Kings: for they considered how far the Law of
God that prohibiteth Idolatry, and instigateth us against the allurers and
perswaders of us to Idolatry and blasphemy, extends; and that is, If thy
brother, Deuteronomy. 13.6. How far the Law of God extends to resist Idolaters.
the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom,
or thy friend which is as thine own soul, shall entice thee to Idolatry, and
to serve strange gods, thine eye shall not spare him, neither shall thou have
any pity upon him; but for the son to rise up against the father, the wife
against her husband, the servant against his Lord, the subject against his
King, here is not a word; and therefore by this Law they are not obliged, but
rather forbidden to do it, for though the son is not expressly prohibited to
accuse his father, nor the wife her husband, nor the servant his Lord, nor the
subject his King: Yet, because Gods Law is absolute and perfect, to which we
must neither add nor detract, nor construe it as we please; the Divines
conceive those things forbidden which are not expressed, especially in penal
precepts, which are to be restrained, and not extended any further then they
are set down, Tostatus in Deuteronomy. 13. q. 3.
as Tostatus does most truly conclude: And what the son may not do against
his father, nor the wife against her husband, nor the servant against his Lord;
that certainly no man may do against his King, which is the father of his
Country, the husband of the Commonwealth, and the supreme Lord over all his
subjects.

And therefore Christ himself that came to fulfill the Law, and knew best how
far it reached, living under the Empire of Tiberius, the Principality of
Herod, and the Government of Pilate, that were all wicked and idolatrous, did
notwithstanding submit himself in all things (which the Law of God forbad him
not) unto them; and though for strength, policy, and power, he might easily
have resisted them, The obedience of all his Apostles and prime Christians to
idolatrous Governors.
yet did he not only perform all the offices of subjection unto these wicked
Magistrates, and idolatrous Governors, but also commanded all his followers to
do the like; and so we see they did. for the Christians which were at
Jerusalem when James was martyred, were more in number, and greater in power,
then were the persecuters of that Apostle; and yet for the reverence they bare
to the Law of God, and the example of their Master Christ, interimi se a
paucioribus, quam interimere patiebantur; they rather suffered themselves to
be killed, then they would kill their Persecuters, Clement. recognit. l. 1. f.
9.
says S. Clement. And so the other Apostles, under Caligula, Claudius, Nero,
Domitian, that were bloody Tyrants, cruel Persecuters, and most wicked
Idolaters: and those holy Fathers of the Church, Liberius, Hosius, Athanasius,
Nazianzen, Hilary, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom, and the rest,
Cyprian. ad Demetrian. Tertull. in Apolog. He that would see more plenty of
proof, let him read the Treatise, A persuasion to loyalty. Where the Author
brings the Fathers of all ages to confirm this point.
for a thousand years together followed the example of Patience, without
resistance; yea, Quamvis nimius and copiosus noster sit numerous; though their
power was great, and their number greater then their adversaries, yet none of
them strugled when he was apprehended, says S. Cyprian; and the reason is
rendered by Tertullian, because among the Christians, Occidi licet, occidere
non licet, It was lawful for them to suffer themselves to be killed, but not
to kill; for our Savior had pronounced them blessed that would suffer for
righteousness sake: and what more righteous, then to suffer death for not
being an Idolater, to die rather then to deny their God? therefore they are not
to be blessed which refuse to suffer, because that in not suffering, but in
rising up and rebelling against their Persecuters, they are (as the Apostle
says) convinced of sin, and in sinning they acquire unto themselves
damnation, Romans 13.

Besides, if it were lawful to maintain this Doctrine, then the Papists that
believe our Religion to be false, and that we persuading men unto it, do
seduce them from the true service of God, may lawfully rebel against their
Prince, and justify all their most traiterous plots: and every heretical Sect
that believes we are Idolaters, (as they do all which oppose the cross in
Baptism) may, without offense, fall into rebellion against all those
Magistrates that maintain that Idol, as they term it. And this false pretext
might be a dissembled cloak for all Rebels, to say, they do it in defense of
their Religion, because they are afraid to be compelled unto Idolatry: And
therefore the truth is, if any Tyrant like Julian should endeavor to compel
men unto the Idols Temple, or to worship my true God with false service, I will
rather die then do it; but I may not resist when I am compelled by any means:
for so I sinde, that Shadrac, Meshac and Abednego, Elias, the Prophets, and the
Apostles, and all the Christians of the Primitive Church, did use to do in the
like case.

And I had rather imitate the obedience of those good Saints to those wicked
Kings, that would have compelled them to Idolatry; then the insolency of those
proud Rebels, that under these false pretenses will rebel against their
lawful Princes.

2. 2. Not for any injury that is done unto us.
If we may not rebel when we are compelled to Idolatry, much less may we do
it for any other injury: for what injury can be greater then to be enforced to
Idolatry, when as to be robbed of my faith and religion, is more intolerable
then to be spoiled of all my goods and possessions? And therefore, No injury
greater then compulsion to Idolatry.
when Christ suffered as great an injury as could be offered unto his person,
when the Soldiers came with Swords and Staves to take him, as if he had been a
thief and a murderer; and Saint Peter then like a hotheaded Puritan, was
very desirous to revenge this indignity, our Savior reprehended his rashness,
because he knew what the other as yet knew not: that he ought not to resist
when the Magistrate does send to apprehend; and so the Christians of the
Primitive Church were extremely injured by their Persecuters: And the
Catholic faith it self suffered no small oppression under Constantius the
Arian Emperor, and yet that purer age, wherein the better Christians lived,
did not so much as once think of any revenge or resistance, says Baronius:
When and who did first resist, and what moved them. Baron. ad annum Christi 350.
But about the year of Christ 350. then first (says he) alas the Christian
Soldiers being swelled with pride, and taken up with a cruel desire of
bearing rule, have conspired against the Christian Emperors; when as before,
Ne gregarius quidem miles inveniri quidem posset, qui adversus Imperatores,
licet Ethnicos, and Christianorum quoque persecutores, a partibus aliquando
steterit insurgentium tyrannicorum; not a Christian could be found that stood
up against the Heathen Emperors, that were the persecuters of the Christians.

But to make it yet more plain, that no grievance should move good Christians
to make resistance, no injury should cause them to rebel against their
Magistrates, our Savior says, and authoritative, with authority enough, I say
unto you, that ye resist not evil; Matthew. 5.39.
but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
also: and if by our Saviors rule we may not resist any one, what think you
that we may resist our King, our Priest, or any other Magistrate that
corrects or reproves us? 2 Pet. 2.19.
And Saint Peter says, This is thanke-worthy, if a man for conscience toward
God endure grief, suffering wrongfully; for what glory is it if when ye
suffer for your faults, ye take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and
suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God; where you see
still the rule of piety is none other but suffering, though it be never so
unjustly.

And therefore the Fathers are most plentiful in the explanation and
confirmation of this point; How patherically the Fathers persuade us to suffer,
and not to resist.
for Tertullian, that was no babe in the School of Divinity, nor any coward in
the Army of Christ, speaking of those faithful Christians, that suffered no
small measure of miseries in his time, says, that one short night with a few
little torches might have wrought their deliverance, and revenged all their
wrongs, if it had been lawful for them to blot out or expel evil with
evil; but God forbid (says he) Vr aut igne humano vindicetur divina secta,
Tertull, in Apologet.
aut doleat pati in quo probatur; that either the divine sect, that is, the
Christian Region, should be revenged with humane fire; or that it should grieve
us to suffer, wherein we are commended for suffering.

Nazianzen, that for his soundness of judgment, and profoundnesse of
knowledge, was (...), termed Theologus, the Divine; Nazian. Orat. 1.
says, that the tury of Julian that great Apostata, was repressed only with
the tears of the Christians, which many of them did most plentifully power
forth to God, when they had no other remedy against their Persecuter, Mark
that they say, it is unlawful to resist.
because they knew it unlawful for them to use any other means th^n
sufferance; or else they might (having so much strength as they had) have
repelled their wrongs with violence.

Saint Ambrose says as much; Ambros. op. 33.
and Prosper in like manner says, the present evils should be suffered until
the promised happiness does come; the Infidels should be permitted among the
faithful, and the plucking of the tares should be deferred, and let the wicked
rage against the godly as much as they will, yet the case of the righteous is
far better; because that Quanto acrius impetuntur, tanto gloriosius
coronantur; Prosper in sen 99.
by how much the more sharply they are tormented, by so much the more
gloriously they shall be crowned.

And Saint Bernard says, if all the world should conspire against me, and
conjure me, Bernard. Ep. 170.
that I should plot any thing against the royal majesty, yet I would fear
God, and would not dare to offend the King that is appointed of him over me,
because I am not ignorant of the place where I read, Whosoever resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God.

And yet he speaks this of King Lodovicus, that offered a monstrous wrong to
all the Clergy, when he robbed them, and took away all their goods without
cause; and which is worse, would hear of no persuasions to make restitution, or
to give them any satisfaction: as Gaguinus testifies. Gaguin. li. 6.


Thus the Fathers (whereof I could heap many more) do testify of this truth;
The Schoolmen of the same judgment.
and the Schoolmen tread in the same steps, and differ not a nails breadth from
them herein: For,

Alexander Hales says, wicked and evil men ought to suffer for the fault of
their irrationability, and good men ought to suffer, Propter debitum divinae
ordinationis, for the duty that they owe to the divine ordinance, Ambrosius in
Romans 13.
and the benefit of their own purgation: Whereupon Saint Ambrose says, if the
Prince be good, he does not punish the well-doer, but loves him because he
does well; but if the Prince be evil, Alex. Hales. p. 3. q 48. memb. 2. art.
1. de offic. subd. erga Prine.
and punishes the welldoer, he hurts him not, but purges him; and therefore
he is not a terror to him that does well: but the wicked ought to sear,
because Princes are appointed that they should punish evil.

Aquinas says, the faith of Christ is the beginning and the eause of
righteousness, and therefore by the faith of Christ, the order of Justice is
not taken away, but rather settled and strengthened; because (as our Savior
says) It became him to fulfill all righteousness. But the order of justice
does require, that all inferiors should obey their superiors; otherwise the
estate of humane affairs could no ways be preserved: Thom. secunda secundae,
q. 104. art. 6.
and therefore by the faith of Christ, the godly and the faithful Christians
are neither exempted nor excused; but that they are tied, and bound by the Law
of Christ, to obey their secular Princes. Where you see the Christian faith
does not submit the superior to the inferior, contrary to the rule of
justice; neither does it any ways for any cause permit the power of the sword
to any subject to be used against his Prince, because this inordinate power
would turn to the ruin of mankind, and the destruction of all humane
affairs; which can no otherwise be preserved, but through the preservation of
the order of justice.

Indeed many times there may happen some just causes, Wherein we may disobey,
and how.
for which we are not bound to obey the commands of our Magistrates, as when
they command any thing contrary to the commandments of God; and yet then there
can be no cause why we should withstand him that executes the unjust sentence
of our condemnation, or requires the punishment that an unjust malicious
Magistrate, under the color of his power and authority, has most unjustly
laid upon us; because he has (as our Savior says unto Pilate) this ordinary
power from God, which if he does abuse, he is to be refrained, not by the
preparation of arms, and the insurrection of his subjects to make impressions
upon their Sovereign, but by those lawful means which are appointed for
them; that is Petitions unto him, and prayers and tears unto God for him,
because nothing else remains to him that is guilty, or condemned as guilty
for any fault, but to commit his cause to the knowledge of the omnipotent God,
and to expect the judgment of him which is the King of Kings, and the Judge of
all Judges; and will undoubtedly chastise and correct the iniquity of any
unjust sentence, with the severitie of eternal justice, Barcl. l. 3. c. 10.
as Barclay says.

These testimonies are clear enough: and yet to all these I will add this one
memorable example, Berthetus in explicat. contro ver. Gallicanae, cap. 7.
which you may read in Berchetus, and Joh. Servinus, which tell us, that in
France, after the great Massacre at Paris, when the reformed Religion did seem
as it were forsaken, and almost extinguished, a certain King, powerful in
strength, rich in wealth, and terrible for his Ships and navall Force, which
was at enmity and hatred with the King of France, dispatched a solemn
Embassy and Message unto Henry King of Navarre, and other Protestant Lords,
and commanded his Ambassadors to do their best to set the Protestants against
the Papists, and to arm Henry the Prince of Navarre, which then lived at
Bearne, under the Dominion of the most Christian King, against his Sovereign,
the French King, which thing the Ambassadors endeavored to do with all their
art and skill, but all in vain; An er ample o a faithful, and excellent
Subject.
for Henry being a good subject, as it were another David, to become a most
excellent King, would not prevent the day of his Lord; yet the Ambassadors
offered him many ample, fair, and magnificent conditions, among the rest
abundance of money, the sum of three hundred thousand, Aureorum scutatorum,
French Crowns, which were ready to be told for the preparation of the war;
and for the continuation of the same, there should be paid every month so much
as was necessary; but Henry being a faithful Christian, a good Prince, a
widower; and though he was displaced from the public government of the
Commonwealth; and for his sake, for the dislike the King bare toward him, the
King had banished many Protestants from his Country, and had killed many
faithful Pastors; yet would not he for all this lift up his hand against the
Lords anointed; Joh. Servinus pro libertat. Ecclesiae, and statu Regni, tom. 3.
Monarchiae. Romans p. 202.
but refused their gold, rejected their conditions, and dismissed the
Ambassadors, as witnesses of his faith to God, his fidelity and allegiance to
his King, and peaceable mind toward his Country.

Where you see this prudent and good Prince had rather patiently suffer these
intolerable injuries that were offered, both to himself, to the inferior
Magistrates, and to many other good Christians for his sake, then any ways
undutifully resist the ordinance of God. And surely this example is most
acceptable unto God, most wholesome for any Commonwealth, and most honorable
for any subordinate Prince, for I am certain this is the faith of Christ, and
the religion of the true Protestants, not to offer, but to suffer all kind of
injuries, and to render good for evil; and rather with patience, love, and
obedience, to study to gain the favor of their Persecuters, then any ways
with force and arms to withstand those that God has placed in authority,
which must needs be not only offensive unto God, whose ordinance they do
resist; but also destructive to the Commonwealth, which can never receive any
benefit by any insurrection against the Prince.

3. 3. Not for any tyranny that shall be offered unto us.
Though the King should prove to be Nerone Neronior, worse then Phalaris, and
degenerating from all humanity, should prove a Tyrant to all his people; yet
his subjects may not rebel against him upon this pretense; for if any cause
should be admitted for which subjects might rebel, that cause would be always
alleged by the Rebels, whenever they did rebel; and whom I and many others
should deem a good Prince and most pious, the Rebels would proclaim him
tyrannical and idolatrous.

And therefore in such a case, The difference betwixt King and people, to be
determined only by God.
when some men think their King most gracious, and others think him vicious;
some believe him to be good, others believe him to be evil; shall we think it
fit that the disaffected party shall presently with arms decide the
controversy, and not rather have the accused, the accuser, and the witnesses
before a competent Judge, to determine the truth of this question? Surely this
seems more reasonable, and more agreeable unto the rules of justice, when as
The Law condemns no man (much less the King) before his cause be heard.

And seeing such a competent Judge, as can justly determine this controversy
betwixt the King and his People, or rather betwixt one part of his people and
the other, cannot be found under Heaven; therefore, to avoid civil wars, and
the effusion of humane and Christian blood, and the prevention of abundance of
other mischiefs; That we ought not by any means to resist our Kings. Proved.
both the Scripture teaches, and the Church believes, and Reason it self
shows, and the public safety requires, that we should transmit this
question to be decided only by him, which is the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; and will, when he sees good, bind evil Kings in fetters, and their
Nobles with links of iron,

CHAP. V. Shows by Scripture, the Doctrine of the Church, humane reason, and
the welfare of the weal public, that we ought by no means to rebel. A
threefold power of every Tyrant. Three kinds of tyraunies. The doubtful and
dangerous events of War. Why many men rebel. Jehu's example not to be
followed.
1. THe Scripture says, 1. By the Scriptures.
I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment, and that in regard of the oath
of God; that is, the oath whereby thou have sworn before God, and by God to
obey him; Be not hasty to go out of his sight, that is, not out of his
presence, but out of his rule and government, and stand not in an evil thing;
that is, in opposition or rebellion against thy King, which must needs be
evil, and the worst of all evils to thy King, for He does whatsoever pleases
him; that is, Ecclesiast. 8.2, 3, 4.
he has power and authority to do what he pleases. Where the Word of a King
is, there is power; and who may say unto him, What do thou? or, Why do
thou so? And Solomon says, A Greyhound, an Hee-Goat, and a King, Prove. 30.31.
against whom there is no rising up; there ought not to be indeed. I will not
set down what Samuel says, but desire you to read the place, 1. Sam. 8.11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. where you shall see what the King will do, and what
remedy the Prophet prescribes against him, not to rebel and take up arms,
but to cry unto the Lord that he would help them. And Saint Paul says,
Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, Romans 13.2.
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. And Saint Peter
says, that they which despise government, 2. Pet. 2.10.12.
and are not afraid to spoake evil of dignities, are presumptuous, and do
walk after the flesh in the lusts of uncleanness, and as natural bruit
beasts, that are made to be taken and destroyed, they speak evil of the
things they understand not, and therefore they shall utterly perish in their
own corruption. And Saint Jude in like manner calls those that despise
Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, (the very phrase of Saint Peter) filthy
dreamers, Jude 8.10, 11.
that defile the flesh; and therefore shall perish in the gainsaying of Corah.
This is the doctrine of God, therefore Saint Paul exhorts us not to rebel,
nor to speak evil of our Kings, 1 Timothy 2.2.
be they what they will; but first of all, or before all things, to make
prayers and supplications for our Kings, and for all that are in authority.
And I wonder what spirit, except it were the spirit of hell it self, durst
ever presume to answer and evade such plain and pregnant places of Scripture,
to countenance disobedience, and to justify their rebellion: And therefore,

2. 2. By the Doctrine of the Church.
The Church of Christ believes this Doctrine to be the truth of God; for no
man (says Saint Cyril) without punishment, resists the Laws of Kings, but
Kings themselves, in whom the fault of prevarication has no place; because it
is wisely said, it is impiety (therefore against the will of God) to say unto
the King, Cyril. in Johan. l. 12. c. 56.
Inique agis, thou do amiss; for, as God is the supreme Lord of all, which
judges all, and is judged of none; so the Kings and Princes of the earth,
which do correct and judge others, are to be corrected and judged of none, but
only of God, to whose power and authority they are only subject; and therefore
King David, understanding his own station well enough, when he was both an
adulterer and a murderer, and prays to God for mercy, says, Against thee
only have I sinned; because I acknowledge none other my superior on earth
besides thee alone; and I have no judge besides thee which can call me to
examination, or inflict any punishment on me for my transgression: And so the
Poet says, Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis.


But you will object against Saint Cyril, impiety to say unto the King, Thou
do amiss; how shall we excuse Samuel that told King Saul, he did foolishly;
and Nathan that reproved King David, and Elias that said to King Ahab, it was
he and his fathers house that made Israel to sin; and John Baptist that told
Herod, It was not lawful for him to have his brothers wife.

I answer, 1. mouth of these men God himself reproved them; because these men
were no private persons, What the Priest or Prophet may do, private men may not
do.
but extraordinarily inspired with the Spirit of God, to perform the
extraordinary messages of God.

2. I say as I said before, that as Moses may correct and punish Aaron if he
does amiss, so Aaron the Priest inregard of his calling, may reprove and
admonish Moses the chief Magistrate when he does offend; but so, that he do it
wisely, and with that love and reverence which he owes unto Moses, as to his
God; not publicly to disgrace and vilify his Prince unto his people, but
modestly and privately to amend his fault, and reconcile him to God: and this
is the work of his office which he ought to do as he is a Priest, and not of
his person, which ought not to do it, as he is his subject.

3. Reason it self confirms this truth, 3. By humane reason.
because the King is the head of the body politic; and the members can
neither judge the head, because they are subject unto it; nor cut it off,
because then they kill themselves, and cease to be the members of that head:
and therefore the subjects with no reason can either judge or depose their King.

4. 4. From the welware of every Commonwealth. The event of every war is
doubtful.
The public safety and welfare of any Commonwealth requires that the
Subjects should never rebel against their King. 1. Because the event of a
rebellious war is both dubious and dangerous; for who can divine in whose
ruin it shall end? or which party can assure themselves of victory? It is
true, that the justest cause has best reason to be most confident; yet it
succeeds not always: when God for secret causes best known unto himself,
suffers many times, especially for a time, (as in the case of the Tribe of
Benjamin) the Rebels to prevail against the true Subjects. And as the event is
doubtful, so it must needs be mournful, what side soever proves victor; for
who can express the sorrows and sadness of those faithful subjects, that
shall see the light of their sun any ways eclipsed? the lamp of Israel, and
the breath of their nostrils to be darkened or extinguished? and also to see the
learned Clergy, and the grave Fathers of the Church discountenanced and
destroyed? On the other side, it will not be much less mournful to see so
many of our illustrious Nobles, ancient Gentry, and others of the ablest
Commonalty brought to ruin; and to pay for their folly not only their dearest
lives, but also the desolation of their houses, and decay of their posterities.
Quis talia fando temperet a lachrymis? When the Kings victory shall be but like
that of David, after the death of Absolon, Bella geri placuit nullos babitura
triumphos, Luca. l. 1.
and the Nobles victory but as the two victories of the Benjamites over their
own brethren the Israelites; and the best triumph that can succeed on either
side, shall be but as the espousall of a virgin on the day of her parents
funeral, or as the laying of the foundation of the second Temple, when the
shout of joy could not be discerned from the noise of weeping.

And therefore a learned Preacher of Gods Word says most truly, Mr. Warmstry
in Ramo Olivae, p. 23.
that it is a hard matter to find out a mischief of so destructive a nature,
that we would exchange it for this civil war; for Tyranny, Slavery, Penury,
or any thing almost, may be better born with peace and unity, then a civil war
with the greatest liberty and plenty; seeing the comfort of such associates
would quickly be swallowed up, like Pharaohs fat kine, by such a monster
feeding with them.

Had we a Tyrant like Rehoboam, that would whip us with Scorpions, (which the
Devil dares not be so impudent as to allege we have) yet better it were to be
under one Tyrant then many, which we are sure to have in civil broils, when
every wicked man becomes a Tyrant, when he sees the reins of government cut
in pieces. Were we under the yoke of an Egyptian slavery, to make bricks
without straw, yet better it were for us to be in bondage, then that fury and
violence should be set free, and malice suffered to have her will; because
there is more safety in being shut up from a Tiger, then to be let loose before
him to be chased by him: or were we wasted and oppressed in our states, yet the
wisest of men tells us, that Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, Pro.
15.16, 17.
then great treasure and trouble therewith.

And therefore seeing civil war is (...), an affliction full of calamity,
and one of the greatest punishments that God uses to send upon a Nation: it is
apparent that the welfare of any State calls upon every subject to be
obedient unto his King: yea, though he were never so vile an Idolater, or so
cruel a Tyrant: for though a King could be proved, and should be condemned to
be cruel and Tyrannous, unjust and impious toward God and men, yet hereby
that King will not yield what he does hold from God, but though the
confederate conspirators should have a thousand times more men and strength
then he; yet he will call his servants and friends, his Kinsmen, Allies, and
other circumjacent Kings and Princes unto his aid, and he would hire mercenary
Soldiers, to revenge the injury offered unto him, and to suppress the Rebels
both with fire and sword: and if he should happen to have the worse, and to
loose both his Crown and Kingdom, and his Life and all, yet all this would be
but a miserable comfort, and a lamentable victory to a ruined Common Wealth,
whose winnings can no ways countervaile her losses: The miseries that follow;
the disturbance or deposing of any King, are unspeakable.
For we never read of any King that either was disturbed, expelled, or killed,
but there succeeded infinite losses to that Kingdom; and therefore Writers
say, that the death of Caesar was no benefit unto the Romans, because it
brought upon them far greater calamities then ever they felt before, as you
may find in Appian, those infinite miseries that succeeded in several fields
and battles, which could never end until the overthrow of Anthony by Augustus
Caesar; and when Nero perished, it fell out with no good success, but the next
year that followed after his death, felt more Oppression, and spilt more Blood
then was spilt in all those His first Quinquennium was good.
nine years wherein he had so Tyrannically reigned: So when the Athenians had
expelled one Tyrant, they brought in Thirty; and when the Romans had abandoned
their Kings, they did not put away the tyranny, but changed the Tyrants; for
wicked Kings they chose more wicked Consuls, which is nothing else, but (as the
Proverb goes) Antigononum effodere, to go out of Gods blessing into the warm
Sun, or rather to change a bad Master for a worse: And this is contrary to
the judgment of that ulcerated wretch in the fable, A fable worth the
observing.
who, when the traveller saw him full of flies, swarming in his sores, and
pitying his miseries, would have swept them off, prayed him to let them alone,
for that these being now well filled, would suck the less, but if these were
gone, more hungry flies would come, which would most miserably suck his blood.

And so Histories tell us of many other Kings that by Heathens, and rebellious
subjects, were for their injustice, cruelty, and tyranny, either expelled, or
murdered; but very seldom or never with any public benefit, when the
chiefest plotters of any rebellion do most chiefly aim at their own private
revenge, or profit. Why do many times rebel, and why.
Yea, many times those very Parasiticall Lords, that have most persuaded the
King, to do things which he knew not to be illegal, and made benefit of those
Monopolies and exactions to their own advantage, to fill their own purses; and
then upon either discontent with the King, or to content the people, and to
escape their own due deserved punishment, will be the chiefest upbraiders of
their King, the greatest sticklers of rebellion, and the head leaders of all
the disloyal Faction. What fools then are the people, upon the false pretense
of public good, to take up arms to destroy themselves; when this name of
public good is nothing else but a vain shadow to hide their private ends?

Or were it granted, that it might happen for the public good, yet it is not
good to do it, because it can never stand with a good conscience, because it is
contrary to the Commandment of God; A threefold power in every Tyrant.
for in every Tyrant there is a threefold power and authority that does
concur. 1. Paternall. 2 Conjugall. 3 Herile: and you know the law of God does
not permit the children to renounce their father, nor which is less, to laugh
at their fathers nakedness; nor does it suffer the wife to forsake her
husband; nor the servant to chastise his Lord and Master; and therefore much
less may the Subjects deprive their King from his Dominion, and take from him
what God has given him; or any ways chastise him for his ill government,
whereof he is accomptable to God, and not to them: or if they might depose him,
or reduce him by their correction, when he does degenerate into a Tyrant; yet
seeing there are many kinds of Tyrannies, I demand if the same reason shall
serve to proceed against all kinds of tyranny, Punishment should be
proportionable to the fault.
to the like condemnation of all tyrannous Kings? and this every Sophister will
deny; for where the punishment is not preportionable to the fault, the sentence
is most unjust, and the suppressours of the Tyrant do show the signs of a
worse tyranny; and if there must be an adaequation of the punishment to the
sin, I would know how they would distinguish to impose the just measure that
is due to each kind of tyranny.

But to leave the Rebels in this Labyrinth, till they be better able to evade;
I say, 3. Kinds or tyrannies.
that there are three special kinds of tyrannies:

1. 1. Kind.
Is against all humane right for his own private commodity to the public
loss and damage of his Subjects, as was the tyranny of Achab, when he took
away Naboths vineyard; 1 Samuel 8.
and of those Kings which Samuel does describe.

2. Violateth the divine Law, 2. Kind.
to the contumely of the Creator, as was the tyranny of Nebuchadnezzar, when
he would have forced the three children to adore his golden Image; and of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin, because he compelled
them to go to Dan and Bethel to adore his Calves; and hindered them to go to
Jerusalem for to worship the true God.

3. 3. Kind.
Treads and trampleth under-foot both the divine and humane right, to the
utter overthrow of all piety and justice, as was the tyranny of Manasses,
Julian, and others, that regarded neither the worship of God, nor the good of
men.

And I do confidently affirm, that each one of these tyrannies apart, or all
of them coupled in one tyrant; as well that which offers violence unto God,
as that which brings calamity and cruelty unto man, ought to be suffered and
not abolished, antill he does abrogate the same, which alone loses the belts
of Kings, and girdeth about their loins, as Job speaks; for you know the
forenamed Tyrants, and many more as bad or worse then they, as Solomon
himself, that by his Oppression, Polygamie, and Idolatry, had most grievously
sinned both against God and man, and yet all of them went on without either the
diminution of their glory, or the loss of their dominions: These should be our
patterns, uulesse we have some new Revelations.
And Achab did most tyrannically kill Naboth, and took away his Inheritance
without Law, (as David did before kill Vrias, a most innocent man, and took
away his Wife, contrary to all Law, which was death by their law to any other
man;) and he exiled the Prophets, and was the death of many of them, and he
trampled down the true Religion under his feet, and by public authority
established the Idolatrous worship of Baal in every place; and yet neither the
inferior Magistrates, nor the greatest Peers, nor the consent of all the
people, durst presume, contrary to the ordinance of God, to depose or suppress
any of these tyrannous men.

If you allege Jehu, Joram, 2 Reg. 9.
his own Lord and Master.

But how did he this? extraordinarily given him from Heaven, as you may see in
the 6. and 7. verses of that Chapter, when the same was not permitted him by
any laws, as Iezabell her self could tell him; Had Zimripeace which slew his
Master? To whom he might have answered; He breaks no Law that obeys the
Commands of the Lawmakers, no more then the Israelites could be accused of
Theft, when they did rob the Egyptians, or Abraham of Murder, if he had
killed Isaac; but without this special command he could not have done this
extraordinary work without sin; and therefore that which He could not do
then, without the warrant of the heavenly Oracle, cannot be done now by any
other, without the contempt of the Deity, Jebu's example not to be imitated.
the reproach of Majesty, and abundance of damage to the Commonwealth. And
so not only I, but also Peter Martyr commenteth upon the place; where he
says, God stirred up and armed one only Jehu against his Lord; which fact, as
it is peculiar and singular, so it is not to be drawn for any example: for
certainly, if it might be Lawsull for the people upon any pretense, to expel
their Kings and Governors, though never so wicked and unjust, from their
Kingdoms and government, no Kings or Princes could be safe in any place;
Pettus Martyr loc. com. class. 4. loc. 20.
for though they should reign never so justly and holily, yet they should
never satisfy the people, but they would still accuse them of injustice and
impiety, that they might depose them.

And Bodinus in his Policy differs not at all from this Divinity, for he
says, If the Prince be an absolute Sovereign, as are the Kings of France,
Spain, England, Scotland, Ethiopia, Turkey, Persia, Muscovie, and the like,
true Monarchs, whose authority cannot be doubted, and their chiese rule and
government cannot be imparted with their Subjects; in this case it is not
lawful for any one apart, nor for all together, to conspire and attempt any
thing, either of fact, or under the color of right, against the life or the
honor of his Prince or Monarch; yea, though his Prince should commit all kind
of impiety and cruelty, which the tongue of any man could express. For, as
concerning the order of right, the Subject has no kind of jurisdiction
against his Prince, from whom depends and proceeds all the power and
authority of commanding, (as they that rise against their King, do
notwithstanding send out their warrants and commands in the Kings name) and who
not only can recall all the faculty of judging and governing from his
inferior Magistrates whenever he please; Johan Bodinus de repub. l. 2. c. 5
but also being present, all the power and jurisdiction of all his under
Magistrates, Corporations, Colleges, Orders, and Societies do cease, and are
even then reduced into him, from whom before they were derived.

But we find it many times, that not the fault of the Prince, The true causes
that move many men to disturb the State, and to rebel.
nor the good of the Commonwealth, but either the hiding of their own shame,
or the hope of some private gain induces many men to kindle and blow up the
flames of civil discord; for as Paterculus says, Itase res habet ut republica
ruina quisque malit, quam sua proteri: It so falls out, that men of desperate
conditions, that with Catiline, have out-runne their fortunes, and quite spent
their estates, had rather perish in a common calamstie, which may hide the
blemish of their sinking, then to be exposed to the shame of a private misery:
and we know, that many men are of such base behavior, that they care not what
loss or calamity befalls others, so they may enrich themselves; Paterculus in
Histor. Roman.
so it was in the civil wars of Rome, Bella non causis inita, sed prout
merce; little fuit; they undertook the same not upon the goodness of the
cause, but upon the hope of prey: and so it is in most wars, that avarice and
desire of gain makes way for all kind of cruelty and oppression, and then it
is as it was among the Romans, a fault enough to be wealthy; and they shall be
plundered, that is, in plain English robbed of their goods and possessions,
without any show of legal proceedings.

But they that build their own houses out of the ruin of the State, and make
themselves rich by the impoverishing of their neighbors, are like to have but
small profit, and less comfort in such rapine; because there is a hidden curse
that lurketh in it, and their account shall be great, which they must render
for it.

Therefore I conclude this point: that for no cause, and upon no pretext, it is
lawful for any Subject to rebel against his Sovereign Governor; for Moses
had a cause of justice, and a seeming equity to desend and revenge his brother
upon the Egyptian: And Saint Peter had the zeal of true Religion, and as a
man might think, as great a reason as could be, to defend his Master that was
most innocent, from most vile and base indignities, and to free him from the
hands of his most cruel persecutors; August. contra Faustum Man. l. 22. c. 70.
and yet (as S. Augustine says) Vterque justitiae regulam excessit; and ille
fraterno, iste Dominico amore peccavit; both of them exceeded the rule of
justice: and Moses out of his love to his brother, and Saint Peter out of his
respect to his Master, have transgressed the commandment of God.

And therefore I hope all men will yield, that what Moses could not do for his
brother, nor Saint Peter for his Master, and the Religion of his Master Christ,
that is, to strike any one without lawful authority, ought not to be done by
any other man, for what cause or religion soever it be; especially to make
insurrection against his King, contrary to all divine authority. for the true
Religion has been always humble, patient, and the preserver of peace and
quietness; Pro temporali salute non pugnavit, sed potius ut obtineret aeternam
non repugnavit. Aug. de Civit. l. 22. c. 6.
and as (S. Augustine says) the City of God, though it wandered never so much
on earth, and had many troops of mighty people, yet for their temporal safety
they would not fight against their impious persecuters, but rather suffered
without resistance, that they might attain unto eternal health.

And so I end this first part of the objection, with that Decree of the
Council of Eliberis, if any man shall break the Idols to pieces, and shall be
there killed for the doing of it, because it is not written in the Gospel,
Council. Eliber. Can. 60.
and the like fact is not found to be done at any time by the Apostles, it
pleased the Council that he shall not be received into the number of Martyrs;
because (contrary to the practice of our days, when every base mechanic runs
to the Church to break down, not Heathen Idols, but the Pictures of the blessed
Saints out of the windows) they conceived it unlawful for any man to pull down
Idolatry, except he had a lawful authority.

CHAP. VI. Shows, that neither private men, nor the subordinate Magistrates,
2. Part of the objection answered. No kind of men ought to rebel. 1. Not
private men. Calv Inst. l. 4, c. 20. Sect. 31. Beza Confess. c. 5. p. 171. I.
Brutus q 3. pa. 203. Dan. de Polit. Christ. l. 6. c. 3. Bucan. loc. com. 49.
Sect. 76.
nor the greatest Peers of the Kingdom may take arms, and make War against
their King. Buchanans mistake discovered, and the Anti-Cavalier confuted.
2. AS it is not lawful for any cause, so no more is it lawful for any one,
or for any degree, calling, or kind of men, to rebel against their lawful
Governors: For,

1. Touching private men, we find that Calvin, Beza, Junius Brutus, Danaeus,
Buchanus, and most others yield, that mere private men ought not to rebel at
any hand; and no wonder, for the Scriptures forbid it flatly: as Exodus 22.28.
Revile not the Gods, curse not the Ruler. 1 Chronicles. 16.22. Touch not mine
anointed. Proverb. 30.31. Rise not up against the King, that is, to resist him.
Eccles. 8.3. Let no man say to the King, Why do thou so? Eccles. 10.17.
Curse not the King in thy thought. The examples of obedience to Kings.
And the examples of obedience in this kind are innumerable, and most
remarkable; for David when he had Saul, a wicked King, guilty of all impiety
and cruelty, in his own hand, yet would he not lay his hand upon the Lords
anointed, but was troubled in conscience when he did but cut the lap of his
garment: Elias could call for fire from Heaven to burn the two Captains and
their men, a hundred in number, only for desiring him to come down unto the
King; as you may see, 2. Reg. 1.10.12. and yet he would not resist Achab his
King that sought his life, and was an enemy to all Religion; but he rather fled
then desired any revenge, or persuaded any man to rebel against him. Esayas
was sawed in pieces by Manasses, Jeremy was cast into the Dungeon, Daniel
exposed to the Lions, the Three Children thrown into the Fiery Furnace, Amos
thrust through the temples, Zacharias slain in the porch of the Temple, James
killed with the sword, Peter fastened to the Cross with his head downward,
Bartholomew beaten to death with Clubs, Matthew beheaded, Paul slain with the
Sword, and all the glorious company of the Martyrs, which have ennobled the
Church with their innocent life, and enlarged the same by their precious death,
never resisted any of their Persecuters, never persuaded any man to rebel
against them, never cursed the Tyrants, never implored the aid of the
inferionr Magistrates, or superior Nobility, either by force to escape their
hands, Why the holy Saints obeyed the unjust Tyrants.
or by violence to resist their Power; for they thought it more Honor unto
God, and far better to themselves, that the just should unjustly suffer for
righteousness sake, then under the color of justice undutifully to resist, and
unjustly to rebel against these unjust Persecuters.

And yet some men are not ashamed to aver, A strange Position.
that mere private men and inferior Subjects, if their King as a Tyrant
should invade them like a Robber or Ravisher, may defend themselves and oppose
the Tyrant, as well and as violently as they may resist a private Thief, or a
highway Robber.

But how untruely they do avouch this thing will plainly appear, if you
consider how disjunctive these things are, and how unjustly they are aleadged
for this purpose; Confuted.
for a Surgeon launceth a man, and draws his blood, and so does the thief
or a robber; but he deserves a reward, this a rope: The Tyrant has a just
power, though he uses the same unjustly; so has not the thief nor the robber.
So, the Prince sometimes does in some sort the same thing, and it may be after
the like manner as a thief or a robber does, as often as with a strong hand he
takes the goods of his subjects, and forces the rebellious unto obedience.
But will you say that both of them do it by the same right? I hope not: for
God gave the power and the sword unto the Prince, and he, as the Judge of our
actions, uses the same advindictam, for the punishment of our offense; but the
thief or the robber usurpeth the sword, and abuses the same ad rapinam, to
our destruction: and therefore whosoever says, that a subject has the same
reason to rise against his Prince that punishes him, as a traveller has
against a robber that steals from him, may well be ashamed of such doctrine,
that carries so little show of any truth.

But you will say, Tyrant punishes for no fault, without any just cause, nay,
although unjustly, and against all truth; as Saul persecuted David, and put to
death the harmless Priests: and David did the like to Vrias, Achab to Naboth,
Ioash to Zachary, Manasses to Esaias, Pilate to Christ, Nero to Peter, and
perhaps Theodosius to the Thessalonivns; may they not resist insuch a case,
when they are thus punished and persecuted without cause?

I answer, that under Saul, David, Achab, and Manasses, there lived many
faithful Priests and Prophets, How the Saints at all times suffered, and never
resisted their Kings.
that were both upright for life, and excellent for knowledge; and in the days
of Christ, Zaccheus, Nicodemus, and Gamaliel, were inferior Magistrates, and
were also pious men, and skillful in the understanding as well of Politic as
of Divine affairs; and we are sure that no age brought forth either more
learned Bishops or holy Saints, then the Apostles and Disciples of Christ that
lived under Nero, and those excellent Fathers that were in the time of
Theodosius; and yet never any of these, not one of them all showed us this
resisting way to escape the force of tyranny; but it has been always the
doctrine of Christ and his Church, that Kings and Princes offending the laws
and transcending the bounds of their duties, have only God for their revenger,
and ought not to be resisted by any man, or any kind of men, though they
should never so much abuse that power which they have received from God.

And therefore Christ himself and all his Saints, Christ and his Apostles
perswede all men obediently to suffer.
not only suffered their greatest rage, but also exhibited all honor, and
showed all reverence unto their most cruel Persecuters: and they persuaded all
others, both by their precepts and examples, to do the like, and that not
only for fear of wrath, but also for conscience sake, because the King is
Gods Steward, which Christ has set over his whole family: and if the Steward,
like the evil servant in the Gospel, shall begin to despise his master,
neglect his duty, smite his fellows, and dissolutely go on to eat and
drink, and to be drunken: yet not all the whole family, not the Priests, nor
the Nobles, nor the Commons, nor yet all together have any power or right to
displace that Steward which the Lord has appointed over them; but they with
patience must expect and wait for the coming of their master, which only has
authority to call him to his account, and to displace him, and dispose of him
at his pleasure.

Besides, 3. Degrees of men.
we know that among men every one is either superior inferior, or equal.
And, 1. The superior is no way subject to his inferior. 2. The inferior is
every way subject to his superior. But, 3. An equal has no power nor
authority against his equal.
As for example, Exodus 18.21.
in the Commonwealth of Israel, there were Rulers of thousands, and Rulers of
hundreds, Rulers of fifties, and Rulers of tens: Tostatus in Number. 25.9.
and those of tens were over the people, those of fifties were over the tens,
those of hundreds over the fifties, those of thousands over the hundreds, the
70. Elders over them, and Moses (as the King) over all: and he was subject
neither to any of them apart, nor to all of them together, but only unto God
himself: Ambros. in Ps. 50.
and therefore (as S. Ambrose says) he was obliged by no Laws, because Kings
are free from the bonds of offenses, and cannot be called to their punishment
by any Statute, Tuti imperii potestate, being safe from men by the power of
their Dominion.

But then you will object: Tyrant may thus do what he will without resistance,
then he may destroy the whole Society of men, and especially the Church of
Christ, when the worse part, that is, the Tyrant and his Flatterers, shall take
and root away the better; that is, the true servants of God.

I answer, that the society of men and the communion of Saints, Church of
Christ and the Commonwealth, are continued and preserved, not by any humane
policy, but by the divine providence, which uses the power and policy of men
to do it; and yet, contrary to their power, and beyond all their policies, God
preserves his Church.
suffers not the same to be destroyed by the subtilty or cruelty of any
Tyrant, whom he can bridle when he will; and either put a hook in his
nostrills, or cut him off at his pleasure; and though this our God, when he
will, and as long as he will, suffers wicked Kings and Tyrants to reign and
rage over his people, and disposes the Ministry of those evil Governors for
the punishment of ungodliness, or the trial of our faith; yet he is no less
merciful and good unto us, when either for the proof of our sidelity, or the
scourging of our sins by cruel Tyrants, for the healing of our dying and
perishing souls, he punishes us; then when he heapeth his blessings upon us,
by most meek and clement Princes, for the comfort and consolation of this
present life. Neither may we think, that by this sufferance of God, the worse
part can take away the better, or that the Devil by this means shall be able
to overthrow the Church of Christ; against which the gates of hell shall never
be able to prevail; because he does not cast his vessel into the furnace of
tribulation, Vtfrangatur, sed ut conquatur; and, as the Goldsmith does not cast
his gold into the fire to consume it, but to purge it, so God never did, Why
God punishes his servants.
nor ever will in the greatest persecutions deliver up his inheritance as a
prey unto the Tyrants teeth, nor submit his people unto the hands of their
adversaries, that they might be oppressed to destruction; but only that they
might be pressed and reduced to amendment, or delivered from their miseries to
salvation.

And therefore, when the Saints of God lie under the hands of a cruel Tyrant,
The best means to escape our punishments.
Christ has prescribed them far better means, both for his glory and their
own comfort, to escape his tyranny, then by resisting his power. And these
means I find to be, amendment to life, tears for our sins, prayers to God,
Theodor. Orat. 7. de Providentia.
flight from them, and patience to suffer when we cannot escape: For so
Theodoret says, as often as Tyrants fit at the stern of the Commonwealth, or
cruel masters do rule over us, the wrath of God is to be pacified, and the
mitigation of these miseries is to be sought for by earnest prayers, and
serious amendment of our lives. And Christ, when he was sought to be murdered by
Herod fled into Egypt.; and he advises us, When we are persecuted in one
City, to flee into another, and when by flight we cannot escape, then as the
Martyrs and godly Confessors did, so must we do; either mollify the Tyrants
by our humble prayers, Ambrusius in Orat. contra Auxent. tom. 5. and Ep. 32.
similia habet.
or offer up our souls to God by true pattence: For so Saint Ambrose says, I
have not learnrd to resist, but I can grieve, and weep, and sigh; and against
the weapons of the Soldiers and the Goths, my tears and my prayers are my
weapons; otherwise, neither ought I, neither can I resist. Basilius ut est apud
Lonicerum in Theatro Historico, page 154.
And Saint Basil says, I will not betray my faith for fear of the loss of my
goods, or of banishment, or of death it self; for I have no wealth besides a
torn garment, and a few books. I remain on earth as one that is always going
away, and my feeble body shall overcome all sense of pain and torments, Vna
accepta plaga, when I shall receive but one stroke. And Saint Chrysostrme,
Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Cyriacum.
when he was driven from Constantinople, said unto himself, if the Empress
will banish me, let her banish me; for the earth is the Lords, and the fullness
of it: If she cut me in pieces, let her cut me; Esayas suffered the same
punishment: If she will have me thrown into the Sea, I will remember Jonas: If
she will throw me into the siery furnace, the three Children suffered the like
doom: If she will cast me to wild beasts, let her do it; I shall call to
mind how Daniel was cast into the Lions den: If she will stone me to death,
let her stone me; I have Steven the Protomartyr my companion: If she will take
away my head, let her take it; I have John Baptist for my fellow: If she will
take away my goods and substance, let her take it; for, I came naked out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I return again. Bernard Epist. 221.
And Saint Bernard says, whatsoever it pleases you to do, concerning your
Kingdom, your Crown, and your Soul, we that are the children of the Church
cannot any ways dissemble the injuries and contempt of our mother; and
therefore truly we will stand and fight unto death (if needs be) for our
mother, but with those weapons wherewith we may lawfully do; not with swords
spears, and shields, but with our prayers and tears to God. And it would be
too tedious for me to set down all that I might collect of this kind, most
excellent sayings of those worthy men, which never hoped for any glory in the
Kingdom of Heaven, but by suffering patiently in the Kingdom of the Earth; and
when they could, did faithfully discharge the duties of their places; and when
they could not, did willingly undergo the bitterness of death, and were
always faithful both to their good God, and their evil Kings; to God rather
by suffering Martyrdom, then offend his Majesty; and to their Kings, not in
committing that evil which they commanded, but in suffering that punishment
which they inflicted upon them.

2. As no private men, 2. Not the Nobility or Peers. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c.
20. 31. Beza in confess. c. 5. p. 171. Author vindic. q. 3. page 203. Althus de
poli. c. 14. page 142. and 161. Danaeus depolit. Christiana, l. 6. c. 3. p.
413. 1. Reason, (...).
of what rank or condition soever they be, so neither Magistratus populares,
the peoples Magistrates, as some term them; nor Iunius Brutus his Optimates
regni, the prime Noblemen of the Kingdom: nor Althusius his Ephori, the Kings
assistants in the government of the people; nor his great Council of Estate,
nor any other kind, calling, or degree of men, may any ways resist, or at any
time rebel for any cause or color whatsoever, against their lawful Kings and
supreme Governors.

1. Because they are not, as Althusius does most falsely suggest, Magistratu
summo superiores, but they are inferiors to the supreme and chief
Magistrate; otherwise, how can he be Summus, if he be not Supremus? or how can
Saint Peter call the King supereminent, 1 Pet. 2.23. if the inferior
Magistrates be superiors unto him? and it is Contra ordinem justitiae,
contrary to the rules of justice, as I told you before out of Aquinas: that the
inferiors should rise up against the superior, which has the rule and
command over them, as the husband has over the wife, The inferior should
never rise against his superior. Optat. de schis. Donat. l. 3. p. 85
the father over the son, the Lord over his servants, and the King over his
subjects: and therefore Iezabel might truly say, Had Zimri peace which slew
his Master? And I may as truly say of these men, as Optatus says of the
Donatists, when as none is above the King or the Emperor, but only God which
made him Emperor, while the inferior Magistrates do extol themselves above
him: they have now exceeded the bounds of men, that they might esteem
themselves as God: Non verendo eum, qui post Deum ab hominibus timebatur, in
not fearing him which men ought to fear next to God.

But the words of Saint Peter are plain enough. Submit your selves unto every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.
whether it be unto the King as supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that
are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well. Wherein you may see not only the subordination which God has
placed betwixt the King and his Subjects, but also that different station which
is betwixt the supreme and the inferior powers: for the words sent of him,
do most clearly conclude, that the inferior Magistrates have no power to
command, but by the virtue, power, and force which they receive from the
supreme: and that the inferior Magistrates opposed to the supreme power, are
but as private men: and therefore, that as they are rulers of the people, so,
being but instruments unto the King, they are subjects unto him, to be moved
and ruled by him, which is inferior to none but God: and their authority,
which they have received from him, Inferior Magistrates in respect of the
King, are but private men.
can have no power upon him, or to manage the sword without him, and
especially against him upon any pretense whatsoever: how then can any, or all
these Magistrates make a just war against their King, when as none of them
can make any just war without him?

2. Bodinus says most truly, the best and greatest, not only of the inferior
Magistrates, but also of all these Peers, Nobles, Counselors, or what you
please to call them, have neither honor, power, nor authority, but what they
have given them from him, which is the King or supreme Magistrate; as you see,
God made Moses the chief Governor, and Moses made whom he pleased his Peers,
and his inferior Magistrates: and as they have all their power derived from
him that is the chief, so he that is the King or chief can draw it away from
them that are his inferiors, when he pleases: and as he made them, so he can
unmake them when he will, and none can unmake him but he that made him, that
is, God himself; and therefore David, that was Ex optimatibus regni, the
greatest Peer in Israel, being powerful in war, famous in peace, the Kings
son in law, and divinely destinated unto the Kingdom, yet would he not lay
his hand upon his King, when he was delivered into his hands. And this Buchanan
cannot deny, but confesses, that the Kings of the Jews were not to be punished
or resisted by their Subjects, because that from the beginning they were not
created by the people, but given to them by God; Buchanans absurdity.
and therefore (says he) jureoptimo, qui fuit honoris author, idem fuit
poenarum exactor, it is great reason, that he which gives the honor, should
impose the punishment.

But for the Kings of Scotland, Buchan. de jure Regni apud Scotos.
they were (says Buchanan) not given them of God, but created by the people,
which gave them all the right that they can challenge; Ideoque jus idem habere
in reges multitudinem, quod illi in singulos e multitudine habent; which is
most false: for Moses tells us, that immediately after the deluge, God, the
Creator of all the world, ordained the revenging sword of bloodshed, and the
slavish servitude of paternall derision, wherein all the parts of civil
jurisdiction and regal power, are Synecdochically set down: and Job says,
that there is one God, which looseneth the bond of Kings, Job 12.18.
and girdeth about their reins: which must be understood of the Gentile Kings,
because that in his time the Commonwealth of Israel was not in being; and God
himself universally says, By me Kings do reign, that is, all Kings; not
only of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles: and Christ does positively
affirm, that the power of Pilate was given him from Heaven. And Saint Paul
says, There is no power but what is appointed of God. And Tertullian says,
Inde and Imperator, unde and homo, inde illi potestas unde and spiritus; he
that made him a man made him Emperor, and he that gave him his spirit gave him
his power. That God is the ordainer of all Kings.
And Ireneus says, God ordained earthly Kingdoms for the benefit of the
Gentiles, Et cujus jussu homines nascuntur, illius jussu Reges constituuntur;
and by whose command men are borne, by his command Kings are made. And S.
Augustine more plainly and more fully says, Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 4. c. 33.
God alone is the giver of all earthly Kingdoms, which he gives both to the
good and to the bad; neither does he the same rashly, and as it were by chance,
because he is God, but as he sees good, Pro rerum ordine ac tempore, in
respect of the order of things and times, which are hid from us, but best
known unto himself: and whosoever looks back to the original of all
Governments, God the immediate author of Monarchy.
he shall find that God was the immediate Author of the Regal power, and but
the allower and confirmer of the Aristocraeticall, and all other forms of
Government; which the people erected, and the Lord permitted, lest the
execution of judgment should become a transgression of justice: for as Homer
says, (...). Homer. odyss. a
And Aristotle tells us, Arist. Pol. l. 1. c. 8.
that the Regal power belonged to the father of the family, who, in the
infancy of the world was so grandevous and long-lived, that he begat such a
numerous posterity, as might well people a whole Nation, as Cain for his own
Colonie built a City, and was as well the King as the father of all the
Inhabitants; and therefore Justin says very well, that Principio rerum gentium
nationumque imperium penes reges erat, Justin. l. 1.
the rule of all Nations was in the hands of Kings from the beginning; and the
Kingly right pertaining to the father of the family, the people had no more
possibility in right to choose their Kings, then to choose their Fathers: and
to make it appear unto all Nations, that not only the Kings of Israel, but
all other Heathen Kings are acknowledged by God himself to be of divine
institution, Jer. 43.10. Esaias 45.1.
he calls Nebuchadnezzar his servant, and Cyrus his anointed.

And therefore though I do not wonder that ignorant fellows should be so
impudent, Jo. Good win in his Pamphlet of Anti-Cavalierisme, p. 5.
as to affirm The King or kingly Government to be the ordinance or creation,
or creature of man; and to say, that the Apostle supposes the same, because he
says, Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether
it be unto the King, etc. whereas he might well understand, that the same act
is oftentimes ascribed as well to the mediate as to the immediate agent, as
Samuels anointing of Saul and David Kings, denies not but that God was the
immediate giver of their Kingdoms, and the Author of that Regal power; for
God anointing Saul Captain over his inheritance, 1 Samuel 10.
and by the mouth of Nathan he tells David, 2 Samuel 12.
that he anointed him King over Israel: and Solomon acknowledges, 1 Reg. 2.
that the Lord had set him on the seat of his father David: 1 Reg. 11.
and Abija in the person of God says unto Jeroboam, I will give the Kingdom
unto thee: and yet it is said, that all the people went to Gilgal, 1 Samuel 11.15.
and made Saul King before the Lord, and the men of Judah anointed David King
of Judah: 2 Samuel 5.
and Zadok the Priest and Nathan the Prophet anointed Solomon King: that is,
God anointed them as Master of the substance, and gave unto them Regal power,
in whom is all power primario and perse; and the Prophets anointing them as
Masters of the Ceremony, and declared that God had given them that power.
Constituere regem est facere, ut regiam potestatem exerceret. Pineda de reb.
Solom. c. 2.
And therefore the power and authority of Kings is originally and primarily (as
S. Paul says) the ordinance of God; and secondarily or demonstratively, it is
as S. Peter calls it, the ordinance of man: when the people, whose power is
only derivatively, makes them Kings, not by giving unto them the right of
their Kingdoms, but by receiving them into the possession of their right, and
admitting them to exercise their royal authority over them, which is given
them of God, and therefore ought not to be withstood by any man.

And this Anti-Cavalier might further see, that Saint Peter means not, that
the King is the creature of man, or his office of man's Creation; but that the
Laws and commands of Kings, though they be but the commands and ordinances of
man, yet are we to obey the same for the Lords sake, because the Lord
commands, that Every soul should be subject to the higher powers: Or if this
will not satisfy him, because the Greek word is not so plain for this, as
the English, yet let him look into Pareus that was no friend to Monarchy,
Pareus in Romans c. 13. p. 1327.
and he shall find that he does by seven special reasons prove, that the
authority of Kings is primarily the ordinance of God; and he quoteth these
places of Scripture to confirm it: Prove. 8.15. 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Psalm. 81.6. Ioh.
10.34. Genesis 9.6. 1 Samuel 15. 1 Kings 12. 2 King. 9. Dan. 2.21. Job 34.30.
Eccles. 10.8. and to this very objection he answers, that the Apostle calls
the Magistrate (...), an humane ordination or creation; not causally, because
it is invented by man, and brought up only by the will of men; but
subjectively, because it is borne and executed by men: and objectively, because
it is used about the government of humane society: and (...) in respect of the
end, because it is ordained of God for the good and conservation of humane
kind: and he says further, that (...) appellatio, the Greek word (...), ad
Deum primum autorem nos revocat, shows plainly, that God is the first Author
of it: for though the Magistrate, in some sense as I showed, may be said to be
created, that is, ordained by men, yet God alone is the first Creator of them:
as Aaron, though he was ordained the high Priest by Moses, yet the Apostle tells
us, None takes this office upon him, but he that is called of God, as Aaron
was.

Yet I do admire, that Buchanan, or any other man of learning, to satisfy the
people, or his own peevish opinion, will so absurdly deny so divine, and so
well known verity, and say, that any Kings have their Kingdoms, and not from
God: so flatly contrary to all Scripture.

CHAP. VII. Shows the reasons and the examples that are alleged to justify
Rebellion, and a full answer to each of them: God the immediate Author of
Monarchy: inferior Magistrates have no power but what is derived from the
superior; and the ill success of all rebellious resisting of our Kings.
BUt to prove their absurdities, they still allege, The allegation to justify
Rebellion.
That the inferior Magistrates, as the Peers and Counselors of Kings, and
the chief heads of all the people, which are flos and medulla regni, 1. By
reason.
are therefore added unto the superior Magistrate, both to be his helpers in
the Government, and also to refrain his licentiousness, and to hinder his
impieties, if he degenerate to be an Idolater, or a Tyrant.

And to confirm this tenet, 2. By examples
they produce many examples both out of the Sacred and Profane Histories, as
the Judges that that rose up against their neighbor Tyrants, Ezechias against
the King of Assyria, the people withstanding Saul that he should not slay
Jonathan, Ahikam defending the Prophet Jeremy against King Iehoiakim, Jer.
26.24.
the revolting of the ten Tribes in the time of Rehoboam, the Priests and
Princes of Judah taking away Athalia, the Macchabees arming themselves against
Antiochus, and others of the Macedonian Tyrants: Thrasibulus driving the thirty
Tyrants out of Athens, the Romans expelling their flagitious Kings, Consuls,
and other Tyrants that behaved themselves most wickedly, out of Rome: and so
many Peers and Potentates of other Kingdoms, that in the like cases did the
like. To all which I answer,

1. That it is most false that any Peer, 1. Their reasons answered.
is appointed by God to be the Associate of the King, or supreme Governor for
the government of the people: for as God, and not the people, appointed Moses,
Joshua, Gideon, and the other supreme Judges of Israel: so Moses, and not God,
immediately as he did the others, appointed the Rulers of tens, To what end
Kings do choose their inferior Magistrates.
fifties, hundreds, and thousands, which always acknowledged themselves his
subjects, and not his associates in the government of the people. And so other
Kings and Princes have always chosen whom they pleased to be their Peers,
Counselors, and inferior Magistrates, as well to bear some part of their
burden (as Iethro says unto Moses) and to lessen their care, as also to
afford them their best assistance and counsel in the discussion and
determination of great and difficult affairs; but not for them to prescribe
and set down laws, orders, and ordinances, that should either moderate their
royal liberty, or bridle and revenge what they conceive to be Idolatry or
Tyranny. I am sure no King that did intend to be a Tyrant, would choose
Counselors, or make Magistrates to that end; but they make choice of them (as
I said) to further them, and not to hinder them to effect those things which
they conceive to be most fit and just; for the Magistrates that are over the
people are under the King, and do all, as you see, in the name of the King,
All the inferior Magistrates must do all in the name of the superior.
from whom they derive all the power that they have; whereby it follows, that
neither the people can resist the Magistrates whom the King appoints, nor
those Magistrates resist their King, without apparent sacrilege against God;
because the greater can never be judged nor condemned by the lesser; but, as
the Apostle says of Abraham and Melchisedech, Heb. 7.7.
that without contradiction, the less is blessed of the better; so I say, that
without all controversy, the inferior must be always judged of the
superior: and therefore if these Peers, Nobles, or inferior Magistrates,
have any ways any power or authority over their Kings, we must conclude
against S. Peter, that these are above the King, and so they and not the King,
are the supereminent power.

But we find no such power nor commandment that they have frow God to
refrain Kings, in all the holy Scriptures: Et si mandatum non est presumptio
est, and ad poenam proficiet, non ad praemium: and if there be no commandment
for it, it is presumption to do it, which deserves punishment and not praise:
because it is to the reproach of the Creator, that contemning the Lord, we
should worship the Servant: and neglecting the Emperor, we should adore or
magnify his Peers; as Saint Augustine says.

And therefore both the learned and religious Fathers, And the Homily of the
Church of England, against wilful rebellion.
and the best of our later Writers, are flat against this Doctrine, that any
sort of men have any power over Kings, but he that is the King of Kings, as you
may see: what would be too tedious for me to set down, in Johan. Bodinus Apol.
pro Regibus, c. 27. and de Repub. l. 2. c. 5. Barclaius contra Monarchom. l. 3.
c. 6. Berchetus in explicat. controvers. Gallicar. c. 2. Saravia de imperator.
autorit. l. 2. c. 36. Sigon. de repub. Hebraeor. l. 7 c. 3. Bilson. de perpet.
Eccles. gubernat. c. 7. Pet. Gregor. Tholos. de republ. l. 5. c. 3. number. 14,
15, 16. and many more.

2. 2. Their examples answered.
For the examples that are produced to countenance Rebels against their Kings,
I answer, that they are unlike, or of some peculiar fact, or unjust, and
therefore no warrant for any other to do the like: when as we are to live by
the laws and precept of God, and not by the examples of men: which many times,
contrary to equity, do induce us to transgress the divine verity: but to run
over the particulars of their examples as brief as I can.

1. I say, 1. Example answered.
that to conclude an ordinary rule from the doings of the Judges, which were
extraordinarily commanded by God to be done, is no more lawful for us to do,
then it is for us to rob our neighbors, because the Israelite robbed the
Egyptians: August. in Jud c. 20.
as Saint Augustine shows.

And therefore Aquinas (if Aquinas be the Author of that book, De Regimine
Princip.) says excellent well: Quibusdam visum est, it seems to some men,
that it pertains to the honor of valiant and heroical men, to take away a
Tyrant, and to expose themselves to the peril and danger of death, for the
liberty and freedom of the multitude: whereof they have an example in the Old
Testament, where Ehud killed Eglon: Judge. 3.21.
But this agrees not with the Apostolical Doctrine, for Saint Peter teaches
us to be subject, not only to the good, but also to the froward, because this
is thank worthy with God, if for conscience sake we patiently suffer wrongs:
therefore when many of the Roman Emperors did most tyrannically persecute the
faith of Christ, Thom. de Regiminae Princip. la. 1. c. 6.
and a great and mighty multitude both of the Nobility, Gentry and Commons,
were converted unto Christianity; they are praised not for resisting, but for
suffering death. A great deal of disterence betwixt a lawful King, and an
Usurper.
Besides Eglon was not the lawful King of Israel, but an alien, an usurper,
and a scourge to punish them for their sin; and therefore no pattern for
others to rebel against their lawful King.

2. 2. Example answered.
For the example of Ezechias, rebelling against the King of Assyria; it is most
impertinently alleged, for Ezechias was the lawful King of Judah, and the
King of Assyria had no right at all in his Dominions; An impertinent example.
but being greedily desirous to enlarge his territories, he incroached upon the
others right, and for his injustice, was overcome by the sword in a just
battle: and therefore to conclude from hence, that because the King of Judah
trefused to obey the King of Assyria, therefore the inferior Magistrates or
Peers of any Kingdom may resist and remove their lawful Prince for his
tyranny or impiety; surely this deserves rather Fustibus tutundi quam
rationibus refellt; to be beaten with rods, then confuted with reasons: as
Saint Bernard speaks of the like Argument.

And whereas they reply that it skilleth not whether the Tyrant be foreign, as
Eglon, and the King of Assyria wero; or domestique, Saul, Achab, and Manasses
were, because the domestique is worse then the foreign, The absurdity of
their replication.
and there fore the rather to be suppressed. I will show you the validity of
this argument by the like; the seditious Preachers are the generation of
vipers, nay, far worse then vipers, because they hurt but the body only, and
these are pernicious both to body and soul: therefore as a man may lawfully
kill a viper, so he may more lawfully kill a seditious Preacher.

But to omit their absurdity let us look into the comparison betwixt
domestique and extranean Tyrants, Quia dare absurdam, non est solvere
argumentum.
and we shall find that domestique Tyrants are lawfully placed over us by God,
who commands us to obey them, and forbids us to refist them in every
place, for the Scripture makes no distinction betwixt a good Prince and a
Tyrant, in respect of the honor, reverence, and obediecce, that we owe unto
our superiors, as you see the Lord does not say, touch not a good King, and
obey righteous Princes; but as God says, Honor thy father and thy mother, be
they good or bad: so he says, Touch not the King, resist not your Governors,
speak not evil of the Rulers, be they good, or be they bad; and therefore
Saint Paul, when he was strictly charged for reviling the wicked high Priest,
answered wisely, I wist not, brethren, that he was Gods high Priest; for if I
had known him to be the true high Priest, I would not have spoken what I did,
because I know the Law of God obliges me to be obedient to him that God has
placed over me, be he good or bad: for it is Gods institution, Bad Kings to be
obeyed, as well as the good.
and not the Governors condition that tyeth me to mine obedience: so you see
the mind of the Apostle, he knew the Priesthood was abolished, and that he was
not the lawful high Priest, therefore he says, God shall smite thee thou
whited wall: But if he had known and believed him to be the true and lawful
high Priest which God had placed over him, he would never have said so, had the
Priest been never so wicked: because the Law says, Thou shall not revile thy
Ruler: but for private robbers, or foreign Tyrants, God has not placed them
over us, nor commanded us to obey them, neither have they any right by any law,
but the law of strength to exact any thing from us, and therefore we are
obliged by no law to yield obedience unto them, neither are we hindered by any
necessity, either of rule or subjection, but that we may lawfully repel all
the injuries that they offer unto us.

3. 3. Example answered.
For the peoples hindering of King Saul to put his son Jonathan to death: I
say, that they freed him from his fathers vow, non armis, sed precibus, not
with their weapons but by their prayers, Saul was contented to be persuaded to
spare his son
when they appealed unto himself and his own conscience before the living God,
and persuaded him, that setting aside his rash vow, he would have regnard unto
justice, and consider whether it was right, that he should suffer the least
damage, who, following God, had wrought so great a deliverance unto the
people, as Tremelius and Iunius in their Annotations do observe. And Saint
Gregory says, Gregor. in 1 Reg. 4.
The people freed Jonathan that he should not die, when the King, overcome by
the instance of the people, spared his life: which no doubt he was not very
earnest to take away from so good a son.

4. 4. Example answered.
Touching Ahikam, that was a prime Magistrate under King Iehoiakim, I say that
he defended the Prophet, not from the tyranny of the King, but from the fury
of the people; for so the Text says, Jer. 26.4.
The hand of Ahikam, that is, (says Tremelius) the authority and the help of
Ahikam was with Jeremy, that They, that is, his enemies, should not give him
into the hands of the people which sought his life, to put him to death:
because Ahikam had been a long while Counselor unto the King, and was
therefore very powerful in credit and authority with him: The act of Ahikam no
color for Rebellion.
And you know there is a great deal of difference betwixt the refraining of a
tumultuous people by the authority of the King, and a tumultuous insurrection
against the King; that was the part of a good man and a faithful Magistrate,
as Ahikam did; this of an enemy and a false Traitor, as the opposers of Kings
use to do.

5. 5. Example answered.
For the defection and revolting of the ten Tribes from Rehoboam their own
natural lawful King, unto a fugitive and a man of servile condition; and for
the Edomites, Libnites, and others, 2 Chronicles. 21.
that revolted against King Ioram, and that conspiracy which was made in
Jerusalem against Amazia; 2 Reg. 14.19.
I answer briefly, that the Scriptures do herein (as they do in many other
places) set down, Rei geste veritatem, non facti aequitatem, the truth of
things how they were done, not the equity of things that they were rightly
done: Actions commanded to be done, are not to be imitated by us, unless we
be sure of the like commandment.
and therefore, Non ideo quia factum legimus faciendum credamus, ne violemus
praeceptam dum sectamur exemplum: we must not believe it ought to be done,
because we read that it was done, lest we violate the commandment of God, by
following the example of men, as Saint Augustine speaks: for though Joseph
swear by the life of Pharaoh, the Midwives lied unto the King, and the
Israelites robbed the Egyptians, and sinned not therein, yet we have no warrant
without sin to follow their examples. Besides, God himself had foretold the
defection of the ten Tribes for the sin of Solomon, and he being Lord
proprietary of all, his donation transferreth a full right to him, on whom he
bestows it; and this made Shemaiah the man of God, God is the right owner of
all things, and therefore may justly dispose any Kingdom.
to warn Rehoboam not to fight against his brethren: for as when God commanded
Abraham to kill his son, it was a laudable obedience, and no murder to have
done it; and when he commanded the Israelites to rob the Egyptians, it was no
breach of the eight Commandment: so this revolt of these Tribes, if done in
obedience unto God, could be no offense against the law of God; but because
they regarded not so much the fulfilling of Gods will, as their not being eased
of their grievances, and the fear of the weight of Rohoboams finger, which
moved them to this rebellion, I can no ways justify their action: and though
God by this rent did most justly revenge the sin of Solomon, and paid for the
folly of Rehoboam; yet this does no ways excuse them from this rebellion,
because they revolted not with any right aspect; and therefore it is worth our
observation, that the consequences which attended this defection was a present
falling a way from the true God into Idolatry, and not long after to be led
into an endless captivity; which is a fearful example, to see how suddenly
men do fall away from God, and from their true Religion, after they have
rebelled against their lawful King, and how to avoid imaginary grievance, they
do often fall into a real bondage, and so leap out of the frying pan into the
fire. And for the Edomites, they were not Israelites that led their lives by
the law of God; neither can any man excuse the conspirators against Amazia from
the tranlgression of the law of God.

6. For Vzziah, that was taken with a grievous sickness, 6. Example answered.
so that he could not be present at the public affairs of the Kingdom; I
say, that according to the law, by reason of the contagion of his disease, he
was rightly removed from the Court and concourse of people, and his son in the
mean time placed in his fathers stead, to administer and dispose the
Commonwealth: but he in all that while, like a good son, did neither affect the
name, nor assume the title of a King.

7. For the deposing of Athalia, 7. Example answered.
I see nothing contrary to equity; because she was not the right Prince, but an
unjust Usurper of the Crown: and therefore Jehoida the chief Priest, having
gathered together the principal Peers of the Kingdom, and the Centurions, and
the rest of the people, showed them the Kings son, whom for six years space he
had preserved alive from the rage and fury of Athalia, which had slain all the
rest of the Kings seed; and when they saw him, they did all acknowledge him for
the Kings son, they crowned him King, and he being crowned, they joyfully
cried, God save the King: and then by the authority of the new crowned king
that was the right heir unto the Kingdom, they put to death the cruel Queen,
that had so tyrannically slain the Kings children, and so unjustly usurped the
Crown all that while. And therefore to allege this example so justly done, to
justify an insurrection contrary to justice, does carry but a little show of
reason. And I say the like of the Macchabees and Antiochus, that neither he nor
any other Macedonian Tyrant had any right over them, but they were unjust
usurpers that held the Jews under them in ore gladii, with the edge of their
swords, and were not their lawful Kings whom they ought to obey; and therefore
no reason, but that they might justly free themselves with their swords, that
were kept in bondage by no other right then the strength of the sword.

8. 8. Example answered.
For the example of Thrasibulus, Junius Brutus, and other Romans, or whosoever,
that for their faults have deposed their Kings; Examples not to be imitated.
I answer with Saint Augustine, that Exemplo paucorum not sunt trahenda in
legem universorum; we have no warrant to imitate these examples: for though
these things were done, yet we say, they were done by Heathens that knew not
God, and unjustly done contrary to the law of God; and therefore with no
blessing from God, with no good success unto themselves, and with less
happiness unto others; but it happened to them as to all others that do the
like, to expelle mischief, and to admit a greater; as besides what I have
showed you before, this one most memorable example out of our own Histories
does make it plain.

In the time of Richard the second, the Nobility and Gentry murmured much
against his government, in brief, they deposed him, The ill success of
resisting our superiors.
and set the Crown upon the head of the Duke of Lancasher, whom they created
King, Henry the fourth. The good Bishop of Carlisle made a bold and excellent
speech, to prove, that they could not by any law of God or man, depose or
dispossess their lawful King: or if they deposed him, that they had no right
to make the Duke of Lancaster to succeed him; but he, good man, for his pains,
was served as S. Paul and others were many times for speaking the truth,
committed to prison, and there was an end of him, but not an end of the story;
for the many battles and bloodshed the miseries and mischiefs that this one
unjust and unfaithful act produced, had never any period, never an end, till
that well nigh an hundred thousand English men were slain in civil wars;
Trussel in his supplement to Damels History.
whereof 2 were Kings, 1 Prince, 10 Dukes, 2 Marquesses, 21 Earls, 27 Lords, 2
Viscounts, 1 Lord Prior, 1 Judge, 139 Knights, 421 Esquires, and Gentlemen of
great and ancient Families, a far greater number; a just revenge for an unjust
extrusion of their lawful King, whose greatest misery came from his great
mildness.

And therefore these things being well weighed in the the balance of the
Sanctuary, in the scales of true wisdom, it had been better for them, as it
will be for us, and all others, patiently to suffer the cross that shall be
laid upon us, until that by our prayers we can prevail with God, that for our
sins, has sent it, in mercy to remove it, then for our selves to pluck our
necks out of the collar: and in a froward disobedience, to pull the house (as
Sampson did) upon our own heads; and like impatient fishes, to leap out of the
drying pan into the fire, All the pressures that we have suffered since the
first year of our King, are not comparable to the miseries that this one
years civil war has brought upon us.
from hard usage that we impatiently conceived, to most base and cruel bondage
that we have deservedly merited; or at the best, to bring many men to many
miseries, before we can attain unto any happiness: and so as the Poet says in
this very case among the Romans, when for their liberty and privileges, as
they termed it, in Pompeyes time, Excessit medicina modum, the remedy that they
procured, has proved far worse then the disease they suffered; and I doubt
not, but ere long the Rebels in this Kingdom will feelingly confess this to
be too true, when they shall more deeply taste of the like miseries, as they
have brought as well upon many of their own friends, as others.

If you allege the time of Richard the third, how soon he was removed, and
how happily it came to pass that Henry the seventh succeeded: I answer
briefly, that Richard the third was not only a cruel bloody Tyrant, but he was
also an unjust Usurper of the crown, and not the right King of England: and
that there is a great deal of difference betwixt rebelling against our lawful
Kings which God has justly placed over us, and expelling an usurping tyrant,
which has unjustly intruded himself into the royal throne: This God often
has blessed, as in the case of Eglon, Athalia, Henry the seventh, and many
more, which you may obviously find both in the Greek and Roman stories; and
the other he always cursed, and will plague it whenever it is attempted.

After I had answered these objections, I lighted upon one more, which is taken
out of 2 King. 6.32. where the Objector says, when Ahab sent a Cavalier, a man
of blood, to take away the Prophet Elisha's head, as he sat in his house among
the Elders, did Elisha open his door for him, and sit still til he took off
his head in obedience to the King? No, he bestirred himself for the safeguard
of his life, and called upon others to stand by him to assist him: and a little
after he says, surely he that went thus far for the safety of his life when
he was but in danger to be assaulted, would have gone further if occasion had
been; and in case the Kings Butcher had got into him, before the door had been
shut, if he had been able, and had had no other means to have saved his own
head, but by taking away the others; there is little question to be made, but
he would rather have taken then given a head in this case.

I answer, Goodwin is, I know not; I could wish he were none of the Tribe of
Levi: The Ministers of Chist should not be incendiaries of wait.
1. Because I find him such an incendiary of war, and an enemy unto peace;
whereas the messengers of Christ have this Elogie given them, Quam speciosi
pedes Evangelizantium pacem? And the Scripture says, Blessed are the
Peacemakers: and we continually pray, Give peace in our days, O Lords and
therefore I can hardly believe these incendiaries of war to be the sons of
the God of peace. 2. Because his objection is full of falsehoods and false
grounds: as,

1. He says, that Ahab sent to take Elisha's head, The first mistake in the
front of his speech.
when as Ahab was dead long before: it was his ghost therefore, and not he: but
it was his son and what then? what did the Prophet? he shut the door, and
desired the Elders to handle the Messenger roughly, or hold him fast at the
door: Thus says the text, 2 Kings 6 32.
and the Prophet in my judgment does herein but little more then what God and
nature allows every man to do, If any thing more.
not to lay down his life, if he can lawfully preserve it; but as the Prophet
did, to shut the door; or as our Savior says, When we are persecuted in one
City, to fly into another, to save our lives as long as we can, and in all
this I find no violent resistance. But 2. the Objector tells us, Surely if
the messenger had got in, Elisha had taken off his head, rather then given his
own. I demand, what inspiration he has from God to be sure of this: for I am
sure John Baptish would not do so, nor S. Paul, nor any other of Gods Saints,
that I have read of: but these men are sure of every thing, even of Gods secret
counsel, and that is more then the thoughts of men's hearts; or if this be
sure, which I am not sure of, I answer, that Elisha was a great Prophet, that
had the spirit of Eliah doubled upon him; and those actions which he did, or
might have done through the inspiration of Gods spirit; this man may not do,
except he be sure of the like inspiration: for God, who is justice it self,
can command by word, as he did to Abraham to kill his son; or by inspiration,
as he did to Elias, to call fire from heaven, and it is a sin to disobey it:
whereas without this, it were an horrible sin to do it. And we must
distinguish betwixt rare and extraordinary cases that were managed by special
commission from God; and those paternes that are confirmed by known and
general rules, which pass through the whole, course of Scripture, and take
heed that we make not obscure commentaries of humane wisdom upon the clear
Text of holy Writ; Quia maledicta glossa quae corrumpit textum.

But indeed the place is plain, that Elisha made no other resistance, but what
every man may lawfully do, to keep the messenger out of doors so long as he
could: and yet this man would infer hence, that we may lawfully, with a strong
hand, and open war, resist the authority of our lawful Kings; a Doctrine, I
am sure, that was never taught in the School of Christ.

He makes some other objections, which I have already answered in this
treatise; and then he spends almost two leaves in six several answers, that he
makes to an objection against the examining the equity or iniquity of the
Kings commands, but to no purpose; because we never deny, but that in some
cases, though not in all, (for there must be Arcana imperii, and there must be
privy Counselors; and every Peasant must not examine all the Edicts of his
Prince:) The commands of Kings may not only be examined, but also disobeyed, as
the three children did the commands of Nebuchadnezzar, and the Apostles the
commands of the high Priests: but though we may examine their commands, and
disobey them too, when they are contrary to the commands of God; yet I would
fain know where we have leave to resist them, and to take arms against them? I
would he understood, there is a great deal of difference betwixt examining
their commands, and resisting their authority; the one, in some cases we may;
the other, by no means we may do.

CHAP. VIII. Shows that our Parliament has no power to make war against
our King: Two maine Objections answered: The original of Parliaments: The
power of the King to call a Parliament to deny what he will, and to dissolve it
when he will. Why our King suffers.
BUt when all that has been spoken, cannot satisfy their indignation against
true obedience, and allay the heat of their rebellious spirits, they come to
their ultimum resugium, best strength and strongest fort; that although all
others should want sufficient right to cross the commands, and resist the
violence of an unjust and tyrannical Prince; yet the Parliament that is the
representative body of all his Kingdom, and are entrusted with the goods,
estates, and lives of all his people, may lawfully resist, and when necessity
requires, take arms and subdue their most lawful King; and this they labor
to confirm by many arguments.

I answer, that for the Parliament of England it is beyond my sphere, and I
being a transmarine member of this Parliament of Ireland, And whatsoever I
speak of Parliament in all this Discourse, I mean of Parliaments disjoined from
their King, and understand only the prev^lent fact^^n that ingrosseth and
captivateth the Votes of many of the plain honest minded party, which has been
often seen both in general counsels, and the greatest Parliaments.
I will only direct my speech to that whereof I am a Peer; and I hope I may the
more boldly speak my mind to them, whereof I am a member; and I dare maintain
it, that it shall be a benefit, and no prejudice, both to King and Kingdom,
that the spiritual Lords have Votes in this our Parliament.

For besides the equity of our sitting in Parliament, and our indubitable right
to vote therein: (and his Majesty, (as I conceive, under favor be it spoken)
is obliged by the very first act in Magna Charta, to preserve that right unto
us) when as in the Summons of Ed. 1. it is inserted in the writ, Claus. 7. m.
3. dort.
that Quod omnes tangit ab omnibus approbari, or tractari debet, whatsoever
affair is of public concernment, ought to receive public approbation; and
therefore with what equity can so considerable a party of this Kingdom, as are
the Clergy, (who certainly cannot deserve to forfeit the privilege of the
meanest subjects, and of common men, because they are more immediately the
servants of the living God) be denied the benefit of that, which in all men's
judgment is so reasonable a law, and they only be excluded from that interest
which is common unto al, I cannot see: yet I say, that besides this our right
while we sit in Parliament this fruit shall always follow, that our knowledge
and conscience shall never suffer us to vote such things against the truth, as
to allow that power or privilege to our Parliament, as to make orders and
ordinanees without the consent, and contrary to the will of our King, much
less to leavy moneys and raise arms against our King: for I conceive the
Privileges of Parliament to be Privatae leges Parliamenti, Privileges of
Parliament, what they are.
a proceeding according to certain rules, and private customs and laws of
Parliament, which no member of the Houses ought to transcend; whereas the other
is privatio legum, a proceeding without Law, contrary to all rules, as if our
Parliament had an omnipotent power, and were more infallible then the Pope, to
make all their Votes just, and their sayings truth.

I, but to make this assertion good, that the Parliament in some cases may
justly take arms, and make war upon their justest King, if they conceive him
to be unjust: it is alleged, that although the King be Singulis major, greater
then any one yet he is Vniversis minor, less then all; therefore all may
oppose him, if he refuse to consent unto them.

I answer, that the weakness of this argument is singularly well showed in the
Answer to the Observations upon some of his Majesty's late answers and
expresses; Page 11. and 38, 39, 40.
and I will briefly contract the answer, to say, the King is better then any
one, does not prove him to be better then two; and if his Supremacy be no more,
then many others may challenge as much: for the Prince is Singulis major, a
Lord above all Knights, and a Knight above all Esquires; he is singulis major,
though universis minor; and if the King be universis minor, then the people
have placed a King not over, 1 Pet. 2.23.
but under them: And Saint Peter does much mistake in calling the King Supreme;
and they do ill to petition, when they might command: and I am confident, that
no records (except of such Parliaments as have most unjustly deposed their
Kings) can show us one example, As Ed. Carnarvon, and Richard the second.
that the Parliament should have a power, which must of necessity overruled the
King, or make their Votes Law, without and against the will of the King; for if
their Votes be Law, without his consent, what need they seek and solicit his
consent?

But the clause in the Law made 2. Hen. 5. cited by his Majesty, that it is of
the Kings regality to grant or deny such of their Petitions as pleases
himself, That the King is universe major, greater then all: proved.
and the power which the Law gives the King to dissolve the Parliament; and
especially the words in the Preface of cap. 12. Vices to Hen. 8. where the
Kings Supremacy not over single persons, but over all the body politic is
clearly delivered, God having given, and the people having yielded their power
to their King: they can never challenge any power but what they have derived
from their King.
does sufficiently show the simplicity of this Sophistry, and prove that the
King being invested with all the power of the people which is due to him as
their King, he is the only fountain of all power and justice; so that now
they can justly claim no power, but what is derived from him; and therefore it
is the more intolerable, that any man should usurp the power of the King, to
destroy the King.

2. They will say, that Salus populi est suprema lex, the good of the people is
the chiefest thing that is aimed at in all government; representative body of
all the people; therefore if any thing be intended contrary to the good of the
people, they may and ought lawfully to resist the same.

I answer and confess, wise King but will carefully provide for the safety of
his people, because his honor is included therein, and his ruin is involved
in their destruction; but it is certain, that this principle has been used as
one of our Irish mantles to hide the rebellion of many Traitors, and so abused,
to the confusion of many Nations; for there is not scarce any thing more
facile, 2 Samuel 15.4.
then to persuade a people that they are not well governed; as you may see in
the example of Absolon, who by abusing this very axiom, How easy it is to
persuade the people to rebel.
has stolen away the hearts of many of his fathers subjects: for as Lipsius
says, Proprium est aegri nihil diu pati, it is incident to sick men, and so to
distempered minds, to endure nothing long, but foolishly to think every change
to be a remedy; therefore the people that are soon persuaded to believe the
lightest burden to be too heavy, are easily led away by every seducing
Absolon, who promise them deliverance from all their evils, so they may have
their assistance to effect their ends; and then the people swelled up with
hopes, cry up those men as the reformers of the State; and so the craft and
subtilty of the one, prevailing over the weakness and simplicity of the other,
every Peer and Officer that they like not, must with Teramines be condemned,
and themselves must have all preferments, or the King and Kingdom must be
liable to be ruined.

But you will say, whole Parliament cannot be thought to be thus envious
against the officers of State; or thus careless of the common good, as for any
sinister end, to destroy the happiness of the whole.

I answer, unerring spirit, but as General Councels, so whole Parliaments have
been repealed and declared null by succeeding Parliaments, How a faction many
times prevails to sway whole Councels and Parliaments.
as 21 Rich. 2. c. 12. all the Statutes made 11 Rich. 2. are disanulled: and
this in the 21 Rich. 2. is totally repealed in 1. Hen. 4. c. 3. and 39. Hen. 6.
we find a total repeal of a Parliament held at Coventry the year before, and
the like: and the reason is, because many times by the hypocritical craft of
some faction working upon the weakness of some, and the discontent of others;
the worse part procuring most unto their party prevails against the better.

Besides all this, The original of Parliaments why they were at first ordained.
I conceive the original of Parliaments was, as it is expressed in the Kings
Writ, to consult with the King, De quibusdam arduis, and urgentibus negotiis
regni; they being collected from all the parts of the Kingdom, can best
inform His Majesty, what grievances are sprung, and what reparations may be
made, and what other things may be concluded for the good of his Subjects in
every part: And his Majesty to inform them of his occasions and necessities,
which by their free and voluntary Subsidies, they are to supply both for his
honor and their own defense. In all this they have no power to command their
King, So Io. Bodin. de repub. l. 1. c. 8. page 95. in English, and the place is
worth the noting.
no power to make Laws without their King, no right to meet without his Writ
no liberty to stay any longer then he gives leave; how then can you meet as you
do now, in my Episcopal See at Kilkenny, and continue your Parliament there,
to make war against your lawful King? What color of reason have you to do
the same? you cannot pretend to be above your King; you have with lies and
falsehoods most wickedly seduced the whole Kingdom, and involved the same in a
most unnatural civil war: you are the actives, the King is passive; you
make the offensive. He the defensive war; for you began, and when he like a
gracious King still cried for peace, you still made ready for battle.

And I doubt not but your selves know all this to be true, for you know, that
all Parliament men must have their elections warranted by the Kings especial
Writ; you will say, The letter sent from a Gentleman to his friend.
that so you were; well, and you were chosen but by subjects, and entrusted by
them to represent the affections, and to act the duties of subjects; and
subjects cannot impose a rule upon their Sovereign, nor make any ordinance
against their King; and therefore, if the representative body of subjects
transcend the limits of their trust; and do in the name of the Subjects, that
which all subjects cannot do; That men entrusted should not go beyond their
trust.
and assume that power which the subjects neither have, nor can confer upon
them, I see no reason that any subject in the world should any ways approve of
their actions: for how can your privilege of being Parliament men, privilege
you from being Murderers, Thieves, or Traitors, if you do those things that
the Law adjudgeth to be murders, thefts, and treasons? Your elections cannot
quit you, and your places cannot excuse you; because he that is entrusted
cannot do more then all they that do entrust him; and therefore all subjects
should desert them, that exceed the conditions, and falsify the trust which
their fellow subjects have reposed in them.

Besides, The King must needs be a part of every Parliament.
you know the King must needs be reputed part of every Parliament, when as the
selected company of Knights and Burgesses, together with the Spiritual and
Temporal Peers, are the representative body, and the King is the real head
of the whole Kingdom; and therefore if the body separates it self from the
head, it can be but an useless trunk, that can produce no act, which
pertains to the good of the body: because the spirits that give life and
motion to the whole body, are all derived from the head, as the Philosopher
teaches.

And further, you do all know, The power of dissolving the Parliament, greater
then the power of denying any thing.
that as the King has a power to call, so he has a power to dissolve all
Parliaments; and having a power of dissolving it when he will, he must needs
have a power of denying what he pleases; because the other is far greater
then this. And therefore, all these premises well considered, it is apparent
that your sitting in Kilkenny without your King (or his Lieutenant, which is to
the same purpose;) and your Votes without his assent, are all invalid to exact
obedience from any subject; and for my part, I deem them fools that will obey
them, and rebels that will take arms against their King at your commands; and
if you persist in this your rebellious obstinacy, I wish your judgments may
light only upon your own heads: and that those, which like the followers of
Absolon, are simply led by you, may have the mist taken from their eyes, that
they may be able to discern the duty they owe unto their King, that they be
not involved, and so perish in your sin.

For, though you be never so many, and think that all the Kingdom, Towns,
and Cities be for you; yet take heed lest you imagine such a mischievous device
which you are not able to perform; Psalm. 21.11.
for the involving of well-mearing men into your bad businesses, 1. Reg. 22.29.
as Jehoshaphat was misled to war against Ramoth Gilead, does not only bring
a punishment upon them that are seduced, but a far greater plague upon you
that do seduce them: and God, who has at all times so exceeding graciously
defended His Majesty; and contrary to your hopes and expectation, from almost
nothing in the beginning of this rebellion, has increased his power, to I hope
an invincible Army, will be a rock of defense unto his anointed; For what
causes the King suffers.
because it is well known to all the world, that whatsoever this good King has
suffered at the hands of his subjects, it is for the preservation of the true
Protestant Religion, of the established Laws of his Kingdoms, and of those
Reverend Bishops, Grave Doctors, and all the rest of the Learned and Religious
Clergy, that have ever maintained, and will to the spilling of the last drop of
their blood, defend this truth against all Papists, and other Anabaptisticall
Brownists and Sectaries whatsoever.

And therefore if you that are his Parliament, What a shame it is to use the
power we have received against him that gave it us.
should, like unthankefull vapors, that cloud the Sun which raised them; or
like the Moon in her interposition, that obscures the glorious 'lampe which
enlightens her, in the least manner employ that strength, which you have
received from His Majesty when he called you together, against His Majesty, it
will be an ugly spot and a foul blemish, both for your selves and all your
posterities; and if not suddenly prevented, you may raise such spirits that
your selves cannot lay down; and sow such deeds of discord and discontent
betwixt the King and his people, as may derive through the whole Race of all
succeeding Kings, such a disaffection to Parliaments, as may prove a plague and
poison to the whole Kingdom. For if the King out of his favor and grace call
you together, and entrust you with a power either of continuing, concluding, or
enacting such things, as may be for the good of the Commonwealth; and you abuse
that power against him that gave it you: I must needs confess that I am of his
mind, who says, That it is lawful to recall a power given, when it is abused.
that the King were freed before God and man from all blame, though he should
use all possible lawful means to withdraw that power into his own hands;
which being but lent them, has bin so misapplyed against him: for if my
servant desires to hold my sword, and when I entrust him with it, he seeks to
thrust the same into my breast, will not every man judge it lawful for me to
gain my sword if it be possible out of his hand, and with that sword to cut
off his head that would have thrust it into my heart? or, as one says, if I
convey my estate in trust to any friend, to the use of me and mine, and the
person entrusted falsify the faith reposed in him by conveying the profits of
my estate to other ends, to the prejudice of me and mine, no man will think it
unlawful for me to annihilate (if I can possibly do it) such a deed of trust.

And therefore Noble Peers and Gentlemen of this ancient Kingdom of Ireland,
that your Parliament may prove successful to the benefit of the
Commonwealth; let me, that have some interest and charge over all the
Inhabitants and Sojourners of Kilkenny, persuade you to think your selves no
Parliament without your King; and that your Votes and Ordinances, carrying with
them the power, though not the name of Acts of Parliament, to oblige both King
and Subjects to obey them, are the most absolute subversion of our fundamental
Laws, the destructive invasion of our rightful Liberties: and that by an
usurped power of an arbitrary rule, to dispose of our estates, or any part
thereof as you please to make us Delinquents when you will, and to punish us as
Malignants at your pleasure; and through your discontent to dispossess your
rightful King, though it were to set the Crown upon the head of your greatest
Oneale, is such a privilege, that never any Parliament has yet claimed. Or if
you still go on for the enlargement of your own usurped power under the title
of the privilege of Parliament, to Vote the diminution of the Kings just
prerogative, that your Progenitors never denied to any of his Ancestors, to
exclude us Bishops out of your Assemblies, without whom your determinations can
never be so well concluded in the fear of God, and to invade the Liberties of
your fellow subjects, under the pretenses of religion, and the public good: I
will say no more, but turn my self to God, and put it in my Lyturgy, From
Parasites, Puritans, Popes, and such Parliaments, Good Lord deliver us.

CHAP. IX. Shows the unanimous consent and testimonies of many famous learned
men and Martyrs, both ancient and modern, that have confirmed and justified
the truth of the former Doctrine.
ANd so you see, that as for no cause, so for no kind or degree of men, be they
what you will; Peers, Magistrates, Heads of Families, Darlings of the people,
or any other Patriots, whom the Commons shall elect, it is lawful to rebel
against, or any ways to resist our chief Princes and sovereign Governors.
This point is as clear as the Sun; and yet to make it still more clear unto
them, that will not believe that truth which they like not; but, as Tertullian
says, Credunt Scripturis, ut credant adversus Scripturas, do allege
Scriptures to justify their own wilful opinions, against all Scripture; I
will here add a few testimonies of most famous men to confirm the same.
Testimonies of famous men.


Henry de Bracton, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, under Hen. 3. says,
as he is quoted by the Lord Elismer, L. Elismer in orat. habita in Camera
Fiscali. anno 1609. page 108.
that under the King there are free men and servants, and every man is under
him, and he is under none but only God: if any thing be demanded of the King,
(seeing no Writ can issue forth against the King) there is a place for
Petition, that he would correct and amend his fact; and if he shall refuse to
do it, he shall have punishment enough, when the Lord shall come to be his
revenger; for otherwise, touching the Charters and deeds of Kings, neither
private persons, nor Iusticiaries ought to dispute; this was the Law of that
time: what new Laws our young Lawyers have found since, I know not; I am not
so good a Lawyer.

The Civil Lawyers do far surpass the Common Law herein; for, Corsetus
Siculus says, Rex in suo regno potest omnia, Corsetus Sic. tract. de potestat.
reg. part. 5. number. 66.
imo de plenitudine potestatis. And Marginista says, Qui disputat de potestate
Principis, utrum been fecerit est infamis. Hostiensis says. Princeps solutus
est legibus, [ id est, quoad vim coactivam, Marginista in Angelum Perusinum. c.
l. 9. tit. 29. De crimine sacrilegii, l. 2. Hostiens. sum. l. 1. rubr. 32. de
offic. ligati.
non quoad vim directivam: Thom. 1. 2 ae. q. 96. ar. 5. ad 3.] quia nulli
subest, nec ab aliis judicatur. And to omit all the rest, Gulielmus Barclaius
out of Bartolus, Baldus, Castrensis, Romanus, Alexander, Felinus, Albericus,
and others, does infer, Principem ex certa scientia, supra jus, extrajus, and
contrajus omnia posse; Principem solum legem constituere universalem. Princeps
soli Deo rationem debet. Princeps solutus est legibus, and temerarium est
velle, Majestatem Regiam ullis terminis limitare: Barclaius contra
Monarchomach. l. 3. c. 14.
which things if I should English, seditious heads would think my head not
sufficient to pay for this, but I only repeat their words, and not justify
their sayings: and therefore to proceed to more familiar things.

Pasquerius writes, Pasquer. de Antiquit. Gallican. l. 1.
that Lewis the 11th did urge his Senators and Counselors to set forth a
certain edict, which they refused to do, because it seemed to them very
unjust; Sicut olim Lacedaemonii, victoribus responderum: si duriora morte
imperetis, potius moriemur,
and the King being very angry, threatened death unto them all: whereupon
Vacarius, President of the Council, and all the Senate in their purple robes
came unto the King; and the King astonished therewith, damanded whence they
came, and what they would have: Vacarius answered for all, we come to undergo
that death which you have threatened unto us; for you must know (O King) that we
will rather suffer death, then do any thing against our conscience toward God,
or our duty toward you: Wherein we see the Nobility of this King, like Noble
Christians, do more willingly offer to lay down their lives at the command of
their Liege Lord, then unchristian-like rebel and take Arms against their
delinquent Sovereign. And so Colmannus a godly Bishop did hinder the Scottish
Nobility to rise against Fercardus, that was their most wicked King.

Tertullian writing unto Scapula the President of Carthage, Tertull. ad Scapul.
says, we are defamed when the Christian is found to be the enemy of no man,
no not of the Emperor; whom because he knows him to be appointed by God, he
must needs love and reverence, and wish him safe with all the Roman Empire;
for we honor and worship the Emperor as a man second from God, Et solo Deo
minorem, and inferior only to God: And in his Apologetico, Tertull. in
Apologet.
he says; Deus est solus in cujus solius potestate sunt reges, a quo sunt
secundi, post quem primi, super omnes homines, ante omnes Deos; it is God
alone, in whose power Kings are kept, which are second from him, first after
him, above all men, and before all Gods; that is, all other Magistrates that
are called Gods.

Athanasius says, Athanasius de summo regum imperio, q. 55.
that as God is the King and Emperor in all the world, that does exercise his
power and authority over all things that are in Heaven and in Earth; so the
Prince and King is appointed by God over all earthly things: Et ille libera sua
voluntate facit quod vult, sicut ipse Deus; and the King by His own free will
does whatsoever he pleases, even as God himself: and the Civilians could say
but little more.

Saint Augustine says, Simulachrum a similitudine dictum. Isidot.
Videtis simulachrorum templa, you see the temples of our Images, partly fallen
for want of reparation, partly destroyed, partly shut up, partly changed to
some other uses; ipsaque simulachra, and those Images either broken to pieces,
or burned and destroyed; and those Powers and Potentates of this world, which
sometimes persecuted the Christians, Aug. ad frat. Maduar. ^p. 42.
pro istis simulachris, for those Images to be overcome and tamed; non a
repugnantibus, sed a morientibus Christianis, not of resisting but of dying
Christians; See the duty of Subjects: or a persuasion (...) Loyalty, which is a
full collection of the Fathers to this purpose.
and the rest of the Fathers are most plentiful in this theme: and therefore
to the later Writers.

Cardinal Alan says, (but herein most untruly) that the Protestants are
desperate men, and most factious; for as long as they have their Princes and
Laws indulgent to their own wills, they know well enough how to use the
prosperous blasts of fortune; but if the Princes should withstand their
desires, Card. Alan. in rep. ad Iustit. Britannicam. c. 4.
or the Laws should be contrary to their minds, then presently they break
asunder the bonds of their fidelity, they despise Majesty, and with fire and
sword, slaughters and destructions, they rage in every place, and do run
headlong into the contempt of all divine and humane things: which accusation,
if it were true, then I confess the Pretestants were to be blamed more then
all the people of the World; but, howsoever some factious, seditious,
Anabaptisticall, and rebellious spirits amongst us, not deserving the name of
Protestants, may be justly taxed for this intolerable vice: yet, to let you see
how falsely he does accuse us, that are true Protestants, and how fully we do
agree with the Scriptures and the Fathers of the purest age of the Church, in
the Doctrine of our obedience to our Kings and Princes; I will only give you a
taste of what we teach; and to begin with the first reformer.

Luther says, no man which stirs up the multitude to any tumult can be
excused from his fault, though he should have never so just a cause; but he
must go to the Magistrate, and attempt nothing privately; Sleidan. Commentar.
l. 5.
because all sedition and insurrection is against the Commandment of God,
which forbids and detesteth the same.

Philip Melancthon says, though it be the Law of Nature to expel force with
force, yet it is no ways lawful for us to withstand the wrong done us by the
Magistrate with any force; yea, Melanctgon apud Luther to. 1, p. 463.
though we seem to promise our obedience upon this condition, if the
Magistrate should command lawful things; yet it is not therefore lawful for
us to withstand his unjust force with force: for though their Empires should be
gotten and possessed by wicked men, yet the work of their government is from
God, and it is the good creature of God; and therefore, whatsoever the
Magistrate does, no force ought to be taken up against the Magistrate.

Brentius says, The rule of a Prince may be evil two ways.
that the rule and government of a Prince may be evil two ways.

1. against the faith of Christ; as, to deny our God, to worship Idols, and the
like: and herein we must give place to the saying of the Apostle, It is better
to obey God then men; but in this case the subject must in no way rage or rise
against his Magistrate, but he should rather patiently suffer any evil, then
any way strike again; and rather endure any inconveniences and discommodities,
then any ways obey those ungodly commands.

2. evil, when he does, or commands any thing against the public Justice;
of which kind are the exaction of our goods, or the vexation of our bodies;
Brentius in re spon-ad artie. rusticorum.
and in these kinds of injuries, the subject ought rather then in the former,
to be obedient to his Magistrate; for if he steps forth to arms, God has
pronounced of such men, He that smites with the sword shall perish with the
sword.

Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, together with the rest of the bishops, and
most famous Divines of this Kingdom, says, if Princes shall do any thing
contrary to their duties, God has not appointed any superior Judge over them
in this world, but they are to render their account to God, which has reserved
their judgment to himself alone; and therefore it is not lawful for any
subjects, how wicked soever their Princes shall be, to take arms, or raise
sedition against them, but they are to power forth their prayers to God,
Cranmer in lib. de Christiani hominis institut.
in whose hand Kings hearts are, that he would inlighten them with his spirit;
whereby they might rightly, to the glory of God, use that sword which he has
delivered unto them.

Gulielmus Tindall, a godly Martyr of Christ, when Cardinal Lanio's son did
lead the Lambs of Christ by troops unto the slaughter, does then describe
the duty of subjects according to the straight rule of the Gospel; saying
David spared Saul, and if he had killed him, he had sinned against God; for in
every Kingdom the King, which has no superior, judges of all things; and
therefore he that endeavors or intends any mischief or calamity against
the Prince that is a Tyrant, or a Persecuter; or whosoever with a froward hand
does but touch the Lords anointed, he is a rebel against God, and resists
the ordinance of God: as often as a private man sins, he is held obnoxious
to his King, that can punish him for his offense; but when the King offends,
he ought to be reserved to the divine examination and vengeance of God: and as
it is not lawful upon any pretense to resist the King, Tindall. l. de
Christiani bominis obedient.
so it is not lawful to rise up against the Kings Officer, or Magistrate, that
is sent by the King for the execution of those things which are commanded by
the King: for, as our Savior says, He that hears you hears me, and he
that despises you despises me, and he that despises me despises him that
sent me; And as he said unto Saul when he persecuted the servants of Christ,
Act. 9.4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? when as he was then in Heaven, far
above the reach of Saul; yet, because there is such a mystical union betwixt
Christ and his Church, the head and members, as is betwixt man and wife; no man
can be said to injure the one, but he must wrong the other: so whosoever
resists the Kings Lieutenant, Deputy, or any other Magistrate, or Officer
that he sends, with Commission to execute his commands, resists the King
himself; and all the indignities that are offered to the Kings Ambassador, or
servant, that he thus sends, 2 Samuel 10.
are deemed as indignities offered to the King himself; as we see the base
usage of David's servants by King Hanun, David revenged as an abuse offered unto
himself; because the Kings person cannot be in all places, where justice and
judgment, Whatsoever is done to any Messenger, is deemed as don't to him that
sent him.
and many other offices and actions are necessarily to be done throughout the
latitude of his Dominions; but his power and his authority, deputed to those
his servants and officers that he sends, are as the lively representatives of
the King, in every part of his Kingdom; and whatsoever favor, payment,
neglect, or abuse, is showed unto any of them; the same, in all Nations is
accounted, and therefore punished or rewarded, as a service done unto the King
himself; as our Savior, when but the Tole-gatherer came for the Tribute
money, says, Give unto Caesar what belongs unto Caesar.

And therefore it is but an idle, simple, and most foolish, frivolous
distinction of men to deceive children and fools; to say they love and honor
their King, and they fight not against their King, but against such and such,
whom notwithstanding they know to be the Kings chiefest officers, and to be
sent with the Kings Power, Commission, and Authority, to do those things that
they do; this is such a foppery, that I know not what to say, to undeceive
those that are so desirous to be deceived, when the Devil, S. Paul says, God
sends them strong delusions. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. But what God sends justly as
the punisher of their sin, the Devil sends maliciously, as the guider of
them to Hell.
which knows how near their destruction hangs over their heads, sends them
strong delusions, that they should so easily and so sillyly believe such
palpable lies, as to make them think, they love him dearly whom they murder
most barbarously.

Barnesius, Barnesius in tract. de humanis constitut.
a very godly and learned man, treating of the same Argument, says in a manner
the same thing; that the servants of Christ, rather then either commit any
evil, or resist any Magistrate, ought patiently to suffer the loss of their
goods, and the tearing of their members; nay, the Christian after the example
of his Master Christ, ought to suffer the bitterest death for truth and
righteousness sake; and therefore (says he) whosoever shall rebel under
pretense of Religion, aeternae damnationis reus erit; he shall be found guilty
of eternal damnation.

Master Dod says, Master Dod upon the Commandments.
that where the Prince commands a lawful act, the subjects must obey; and if
he injoynes unlawful commands, we must not rebel, but we must be content to
bear any punishment that shall be laid upon us, even unto death it self; and
we should suffer our punishment without grudging, even in heart: and this he
presses by the example of the Three Children, and of Daniel that was a mighty
man, and of very great power in Babylon, yet never went about to gather any
power against his King, though it were in his own defense.

Master Byfield expounding the words of S. Peter, Master Byfield upon 1 Pet. 2.
(...), as to the Supreme, says, this should confirm every good subject, to
acknowledge and maintain the Kings supremacy, and willingly to bind himself
thereto by oath; for the oath of supremacy is the bond of this subjection; and
this oath men must take without equivocation, mental evasion, or secret
reservation: yea it should bind in them the same resolution that was in Saint
Bernard, who says, if all the world should conspire against me, to make me
complot any thing against the Kings Majesty, yet I would fear God, and not
dare to offend the King ordained of God.

I might fill a volume, if I would collect the testimonies of our best Writers;
I will add but one, of a most excellent King, our late King James of ever
blessed memory; for he says, The improbity or fault of the governor ought not
to subject the King to them, over whom he is appointed Judge by God;
Serenissimus Rex Jacobus, de vera lege liberae Monarchiae.
for if it be not lawful for a private man to prosecute the injury that is
offered unto him against his private adversary, when God has committed the
sword of vengeance only to the Magistrate, how much less lawful is it,
think you, either for all the people, or for some of them to usurp the sword,
whereof they have no right, against the public Magistrate, to whom alone it is
committed by God?

This has been the Doctrine of all the Learned, of all the Saints of God, of
all the Martyrs of Jesus Christ; The obedient example of the Martyrs in the
time of Queen Mary.
and therefore not only they that suffered in the first Persecutions under
Heathen Tyrants, but also they that now of late lived under Queen Mary, and
were compelled to undergo most exquisite torments, without Number, and beyond
Measure; yet none of them either in his former life, or when he was brought to
his execution, did either despise her cruel Majesty, or yet curse this Tyrant
Queen, that made such havoc of the Church of Christ, and causelessly spilt so
much innocent blood; but being true Saints, they feared God, and honored her:
and in all obedience to her authority, they yielded their estates and goods to
he spoiled, their liberties to be infringed, and their bodies to be imprisoned,
abused, and burned, as oblations unto God, rather then contrary to the command
of their Master Christ, they would give so much allowance unto their
consciences; as for the preservation of their lives, to make any show of
resistance against their most bloody Persecuters, whom they knew to have their
authority from that bloody, yet their lawful Queen.

And therefore I hope it is apparent unto all men that have their eyes open,
Numb. 24.15. Genesis 19.11.
and will not with Baalam most wilfully deceive themselves; or with the
Sodomites, grope for the wall at noone day; that, by the Law of God, by the
example of all Saints, by the rule of honesty, and by all other equitable
considerations, it is not lawful for any man, or any degree or sort of men,
Magistrates Peers, The Conclusion of the whole.
Parliaments, Popes, or whatsoever you please to call them, to give so much
liberty unto their misguided consciences, and so far to follow the desires of
their unruly affections, as for any cause, or under any pretense to withstand
Gods Vicegerent, and with violence to make war against their lawful King;
or indeed, in the least degree and lowest manner, to offer any indignity either
in thought, word, or deed; either to Moses our King, or to Aaron our High
Priest, that has the care and charge of our souls; or to any other of those
subordinate callings, that are lawfully sent by them to discharge those offices
wherewith they are entrusted: This is the truth of God, and so acknowledged by
all good men, And what Preachers teach the contrary, I dare boldly affirm it,
in the name of God, that they are the incendiaries of Hell, and deserve rather
with Corah to be consumed with fire from Heaven, then to be believed by any man
on Earth.

CHAP. X. Shows the impudency of the Anti-Cavalier: How the Rebels deny they
war against the King: An unanswerable Argument to press obedience: A further
discussion, whether for our Liberty Religion, or Laws, we may resist our
Kings; and a patheticall disswasion from Rebellion.
I Could insert here abundant more, both of the Ancient and Modern Writers,
that do with invincible Arguments confirm this truth: Anti-Cavalier, p.
17.18, etc.
but the Anti-Cavalier would persuade the world, that all those learned
Fathers, and those constant Martyrs, that spent their purest blood to preserve
the purity of religion unto us, did either belie their own strength, Yet
Tertul. Cypr. (whom I quoted before) and Ruffin. hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 1. and
S. August. in Psalm. 124. and others avouch, the Christians were far stronger
then their enemies, and the greatest part of Iulians army were Christians.
or befoole themselves with the undue desire of overvalued Martyrdom; but now
they are instructed by a better spirit, they have clearer illuminations to
inform them to resist (if they have strength) the best and most lawful
authority that shall either oppose or not consent unto them: thus they throw
dirt in the Fathers face, and dishonor that glorious company, and noble army
of Martyrs, which our Church confesses, prayseth God; and therefore no wonder
that they will war against Gods anointed here on Earth, when they dare thus
dishonor and abuse his Saints that reign in Heaven: but I hope the world will
believe, that those holy Saints were as honest men, and those worthy Martyrs,
that so willingly sacrificed their lives in defense of truth, could as well
testify the truth, and be as well informed of the truth, as these seditious
spirits that spend all their breath to raise arms against their Prince, and to
spill so much blood of the most faithful Subjects.

But though the authority of the best authors is of no authority with them,
that will believe none but themselves; yet I would wish all other men to read
that Homily of the Church of England, where it is said, that God did never
long prosper rebellious subjects against their Prince, were they never so great
in authority, or so many in number: yea, were they never so noble, so many, so
stout, so witty and politic. but allwaies they came by the overthrow, and to
a shameful end. Yea though they pretend the redress of the Commonwealth,
(which rebellion of all other mischiefs does most destroy; (or reformation of
religion. (whereas rebellion is most against all true religion) yet the speedy
overthrow of all Rebels shows, The Homily against rebellion. p. 300, and 301.
that God allows neither the dignity of any person, nor the multitude of any
people, nor the weight of any cause, as sufficient, for the which the subjects
may move rebellion against their Princes: and I would to God that every subject
would read over all the six parts of the Homily against wilful rebellion;
for there are many excellent passages in it; which, being diligently read, and
seriously weighed, would work upon every honest heart, never to rebel against
their lawful Prince.

And therefore the Laws of all Lands being so plain to pronounce them
Traitors, that take arms against their Kings, (as you may see in the Statutes
of England, 25. Edw. 3. c. 2. And as you know, it was one of the greatest
Articles for which the Earl of Strafford was beheaded, that he had actually
leavied war against the King:) The Nobles and Gentry, Lords and Commons of
both Houses of Parliament, in all Kingdoms, being convicted in their
consciences with the truth of this Doctrine, do in all their Votes and
Declarations conlude and protest, (and I must believe them) that all the
leavies, moneys, and other provision of Horse and Men, that they raise and arm,
are for the safety of the Kings person, and for the maintenance of his Crown
and Dignity.

Nay, more then this, the very Rebels in this our Kingdom of Ireland, knowing
how odious it is before God and man, for subjects to rebel and take arms
against their lawful King, do protest, if you will believe them, that they are
the Kings Soldiers, and do fight and suffer for their King, and in the
defense of his Prerogatives.

But you know the old saying. Tuta frequensque via est sub amici fallere nomen,
the Devil deceives us soonest when he comes like an Angel of light; and you
shall ever know the true subjects best by their actions, far better then by
their Votes, Declarations, or Protestations; for, Quid audiam verba, cum videam
contraria facta? When men do come in sheep clothing, and inwardly are
ravening wolves, when they come with honey in their mouths, and gall in their
hearts, and like Joab, with peace in their tongue, and a sword in their hand, a
petition to entreat, and a weapon to compel; I am told by my Savior, that I
shall know them by their works, not their words.

And therefore, as our Savior says, Not he that says, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which
is in Heaven: So I say, not he that cries peace, peace, is the son of peace,
but he that does obey his Prince, and does most willingly whatsoever he
commands; or suffers most patiently for refusing to do what he commands
amiss: This is the true Subject.

Well, to draw toward the end of this point, That is, when the Commonalty
guide the Nobility, and the Subjects rule their King.
of our obedience to our Sovereign Governor, I desire you to remember a
double story; the one of Plutarch, which tells us how the tail of the Serpent
rebelled against the head, because that did guide the whole body, and drew the
tail after it whithersoever it would, therefore the head yielded that the
tail should rule; and then, it being small and wanting eyes, drew the whole
body, head and all, through such narrow crevises, clefts, and thickets, that it
soon brought the Serpent to confusion. The other is of Titus Livius, who tells
us, Titus Livius. Decad. 1. l. 2.
that when the people of Rome made a factious combination to rebel against
their Governors, Menenius Agrippa went unto them, and said, that on a time all
the members conspired against the stomach, and alleged, that she devoured
with ease and pleasure, what they had purchased with great labor and pain;
therefore the feet would walk no more, the hands would work no more, the
tongue would plead no more for it; and so within a while, the long fast of the
stomach made weak knees, feeble hands, dim eyes, a faltering tongue, and a
heavy heart; and then presently, seeing their former folly, they were glad to
be reconciled to the stomach again: and this reconciled the people unto their
Governors.

I need not make any other application, but to wish, and to advise us all with
the people of Rome, to submit our selves unto our heads, that are our
Governors, lest, if we be guided by the tail, we shall bring our selves,
with the Serpent, unto destruction.

And to remember that excellent speech of S. Basil, the people through
ambition, are fallen into grievous Anarchy, whence it happens, that all the
exhortations of their rulers do no good: no man has any list to obey, but
every man would reign; being swelled up with pride, that springs out of his
ignorance: and a little after he says, that some sit no less implacable and
bitter examiners of things amiss, then unjust and malevolent Judges of things
well done, Basilius de Spiritu Sancto c. ult. scil. 30.
so that we are more brutish then the very beasts; because they are quiet
among themselves, but we wage cruel and bloody war against each other.

And let us never forget that the Lord says, Honor thy father and thy mother;
An argument of obedience drawn from the 5. commandment.
and I must tell you that by father in this precept, you must not only
understand your natural father, but also the King who is your political
father, and the father of all his subjects and the Priest your spiritual
father, and those likewise that in loco patris, 1 Chronicles. 2.24.
do breed and bring you up: and though natural affection produces more love
and honor unto those fathers that begat us; yet reason and religion oblige us
more unto the King, that is the common father of all, and to the Priest, that
begat us unto Christ, then unto him that begat us into the world; for that
without our new birth, which is ordinarily done by the office of the Priest, we
were no Christians; and as good unborne as unchristened, What we are and
should be without King or Priest.
that is, unregenerated: and without the King, that is, Custos utriusque
tabulae, the preserver both of public justice, and of the pure religion, our
fathers can neither bring us up in peace, nor teach us in the faith of Christ:
and therefore if my father should plot any treason against the King, or prove a
Rebel against him, I am bound in all duty and conscience, to prefer the
public before the private, and if I cannot otherwise avert the same, to
reveal the plot to preserve the King, though it were to the loss of my
fathers life; and therefore certainly they that curse, that is, speak evil
of their King, are cursed; and they that rebel against him shall never have
their days long in the land, but shall through their own rebellion, be soon
cut off from the land of the living.

For mine own part, Whether for the liberty of Subjects we can be warranted to
rebel. In the discourse of the differences betwixt King and Parliament,
I have often admired, why the subjects of King CHARLES should raise any civil
war, and especially turn their spleen against him; if any say, it is for
their liberties; I answer, that I am confident his Majesty never thought to
bring any (the meanest of his subjects) into bondage; nor by an arbitrary
government, to reduce them into the like condition, as the Peasants of France,
or the Boores of Germany, or the Pickroes of Spain, as some do most falsely
suggest: but that they should continue, as they have been in the days of his
Father, of blessed memory, and of all others his most noble Progenitors, the
freest subjects under Heaven. And I hope they desire not to be such libertines
as those in the Primitive Church, The libertines of the Primitive Church, what
they thought.
who (because Christian liberty freed us from all Jewish Ceremonies, and all
typical Rites, which were such a burden that neither we nor our fathers could
undergo; and also from the curse and malediction of the moral law) would,
under this pretense of Christian liberty, be freed from the obligation of all
laws, and give themselves the freedoms to do what they pleased; for this
would prove to be, not the liberty, but the bondage and the base slavery of a
people, that are not governed by laws, but suffered to do what they please;
because, that neither God nor good laws confine us, but for our own good: and
he that forbids us to obey impious commands, bids us to obey all righteous
laws; and rather to suffer then to resist the most unrighteous Governors. But
I fear, that under the name of the liberty of the subjects, the
licentiousness of the flesh is aimed at; What is often aimed at under the name
of the liberty of the subjects.
because you may see by what is already come to pass, our civil dissension
has procured to many men such a liberty, that few men are sure either of their
life or estate: and God bless me from such a liberty, and send me rather to
be the slave of Christ, then such a libertine of the World.

And if religion be the cause that moves you hereunto, Whether for the
preservation of our redigion, we can be warranted to rebel.
I confess this should be dearer to us then our lives; but this title is like
a velvet mask, that is often used to cover a deformed face, and decipimur
specie recti: for as that worthy and learned Knight Sir John Cheek, that was
Tutor to King Edward the sixth, says, if you were offered Persecution for
Religion, you ought to fly, and yet you intend to fight; if you would stand in
the truth, ye ought to suffer like Martyrs, and you would slay like Tyrants.
Thus for religion you keep no religion, and neither will follow the counsel
of Christ, nor the constancy of Martyrs. And a little after, he demands why the
people should not like that Religion which Gods Word established, the Primitive
Church has authorized, the greatest learned men of this Realm, and the whole
consent of the Parliament have confirmed, and the Kings Majesty has set forth,
is it not truly set out? Sir John Check in the true subject to the rebel. p.
4. and 6.
Dare you Commons take upon you more learning then the chosen Bishops and
Clerks of this Realm have? this was the judgment of that judicious man: and I
must tell you that Religion never taught Rebellion; neither was it the will of
Christ, that faith should be compelled by fighting, but persuaded by
preaching; for the Lord sharply reproves them that built up Sion with blood,
Micah 3.10.
and Jerusalem with iniquity: and the practice of Christ and his Apostles was
to reform the Church by prayers and preaching, and not with fire and sword;
and they press obedience unto our Governors, yea, though they were impious,
infidels, True religion never rebelleth.
and idolatrous, with arguments fetched from Gods ordinance, from man's
conscience, from wrath and vengeance, and from the terrible sentence of
damnation, and this truth is so solid, that it has the clear testimony of
holy Writ, the perpetual practice of all the Primitive Saints and Martyrs; and
I dare boldly say it, the unanimous consent of all the Orthodox Bishops and
Catholic Writers, both in England and Ireland, and in all the World, that
Christian Religion teaches us never with any violence to resist, or with arms
to withstand the authority of our lawful Kings.

If you say the Laws of our Land, Whether the Laws of our Land do warrant us
to rebel.
and the Constitutions of this our Kingdom, do give us leave to stand upon
our liberty, and to withstand all tyranny that shall be offered unto us,
especially when our estates, lives, and religion, are in danger to be
destroyed.

To this I say with Laelius, Laelius de privileg. Eccl. 112.
that, Nulla lex valeat contra jus divinam, man's laws can exact no further
obedience then may stand with the observance of the divine precepts; and
therefore we must not so prefer them, or rely upon them so much, as to
prejudice the other: and for our fear of the loss of estate, life, or
religion. I wish it may not be settled upon groundless suspicions; for I know,
and all the World may believe, that our King is a most clement and religious
Prince, that never did give cause unto any of his subjects to foster such
fears and jealousies within his breast, and you know what the Psalmist says
of many men, They were afraid where no fear was. And Job tells you, whom
terrors shall make afraid on every side, Job 18.11, 12
and shall drive him to his feet; (that is, to run away, as you see the
Rebels do from the Kings Army in every place) and in whose Tabernacle shall
dwell the King of fear: for, though the ungodly flees when no man pursues
him, yet they that trust in God are confident as Lions, without fear; they
know that the heart of the King is not in his own hand, but in the hand of the
Lord, Prove. 21.1.
as the rivers of waters, and he turns it whithersoever it pleases him;
either to save them, or destroy them, even as it pleases God: he orders the
King how to rule the people. Bonav. ad secundam, did. 35. art. 2. q. 1.


And therefore in the name of God, and for Christ Jesus sake, let me persuade
you to put away all causles fears and groundless jealousies, and trust your
King; if not, trust your God; and let your will, which is so unhappy in it
self, become right and equal, by receiving direction from the will of God;
and remember what Vlpian the great Civilian says, that rebellion and
disobedience unto your King is proximum sacrilegio crimen, and that it is in
Samuels judgment as the sin of witchcraft, The remembrance of his oath should
be a terror to the conscience of every rebel.
whereby men forsake God, and cleave unto the Devil: and above all, remember
the oath that many of you have taken, to be true and faithful unto your King,
and to reveal whatsoever evils or plots that you shall know or hear to be
contrived against his Person, Crown, or Dignity, and defend him from them, Pro
posse tuo, to the uttermost of your power, So help you God. Which oath, how
they that are any ways assistant in a war against their King, can dispense
with, I cannot with all my wit and learning understand: and therefore return,
O Shulamite, return, lay down thine arms, submit thy self unto thy
Sovereign, and know, that as the Kings of Israel were merciful Kings, so is
the King of England; 1 King. 20.32.
thou shall find grace in the time of need: but delay not this duty, lest, as
Demades says, the Athenians never sat upon treaties of peace, but in mourning
weeds, when by the loss of their nearest friends they had paid too dear for
their quarrels, so thou be driven to do the like: for (except the sins of
the people require no less satisfaction then the ruin of the Kingdom.) I am
confident, and am ready to hazard life and fortunes in this confidence, that
the goodness of our King, The Authors confidence of the Kings victory.
the justness of his cause, and the prayers of all honest and faithful
Ministers for him and our Church, will in the end give him the victory over all
those his rebellious enemies, that with lies, slanders, and false imputations,
have seduced the Kings subjects, to strengthen themselves against their
Sovereign: and all the World shall see, that as Christ, so in Sensu
modificato, this Vicegerent of Christ, shall rule in the midst of these his
enemies, and shall reign until he puts them all under his feet.

And because we never read of any rebellion (not this of Corah here, A
rebellion, that the like was never seen.
which of above six hundred thousand men had not many more then 250. Rebels:
nor that of Absolon against David, who had all the Priests and Levites, and the
best Counselors, and a mighty Army with him, such as was able to overthrow
Absolon and twenty thousand men in the plain field; nor Israel against
Rehoboam, because they did but revolt from him, and not with any hostile Arms
invade him; nor the Senate of Rome against Caesar, though he was the first
that entrenched upon their liberty, and intended to exchange their
Aristodemocracy into a Monarchy, nor any other that I can remember, except that
Council which condemned Christ to death) that was grown to that height to be
so absolute and so perfect a rebellion in all respects, as that a whole
Parliament in a manner, and the major part of the Plebeians of a whole
Kingdom, should make a Covenant with Hell it self, yea, and which is most
considerable, that (as I understand the beginning of this rebellion in this
Kingdom of Ireland was) the Commenalty therein should so fascinate the
Nobility, as to allure them so long to confirm their Votes, till at last they
must be compelled in all thhings to adhere unto their conclusions; that they,
whose power was formerly most absolute without them, must now be subordinate
unto them, that the strength of the people may defend the weakness of the
Nobility from that desert, which they merited by their simplicity, to be
seduced to join with them to rebel against their King. Therefore, if any
faction in any Parliament should thus combine against the Lord, and against his
anointed, there is no question, but their reducement to obedience, will make
that Majesty, which shall effect it, more glorious to posterity, then were any
of all his Predecessors.

And therefore I say again, Return, O Shulamite, return, and remember I pray
thee, remember, lest my words shall accuse thy conscience in the day of
judgment, that we are often commanded in many places of the Scriptures, to
obey our Kings, but in no place bidden, nor permitted to rise up and assist any
Parliament against our King: if thou say thou do not do it against thy
King, but against such and such that do abuse the King; I told you before,
that whosoever resists him that has the Kings authority, resists the King;
and therefore the whole World of intelligible men laugheth at this gullery, and
he that dwells in the Heavens shall laugh it to scorn; when with such
aequivocation men shall think to justify their rebellion; and I hope the
people will not still remain so simple, as to think that all the Canon and
the Musket shot which the enemies of a King should make at him, must be
understood to be for the safety of his person.

And as neither private men, nor any Senate, nor Magistrate, That the Pope has
no power to license any man to make war against the King.
nor Peers, nor Parliament, can lawfully resist and take arms against their
King; so neither Synod, nor Counsel, nor Pope, have any power to depose,
excommunicate, or abdicate; or to give immunities to Clergy, or absolution to
subjects, thereby to free them from their duty and due allegiance, and to give
them any color of allowance to rebel and make war against their lawful
King. And this point I should the more largely prosecute, because the natives
of this Kingdom are more addicted to the Pope and his Decrees, then any others
of all the Kings Dominion; Pareus in Romans 13. Johan. Bid. in the right and
prerogatives of Kings: and the Treatise entitled God and the King.
but the bulk of this Treatise is already too much swelled, and I hope I may
have hereafter a fitter opportunity to enlarge this Chapter: and therefore till
then, I will only refer my Reader unto Pareus, John Bid, and abundance
more, that have most plentifully written of this Argumenh.

And so much for the persons against whom they rebelled, Mosec their King, and
Aaron their High Priest, or chief Bishop; and both these the prime Governors
of Gods people, whom they ought by all laws to have obeyed, and for no cause
to have rebelled against them.

CHAP. XI. Shows what these Rebels did: How by tenue several steps and
degrees (1. Pride. 2. Discontent. 3. Envy. 4. Murmuring 5. Hypocrisy. 6.
Lying. 7. Slandering. 8. Railing. 9. Disobedience. 10. Resistance.) they
ascended to the height of their Rebellion; and how these are the steps and the
ways to all Rebellions, and the reason which moved men to Rebel.
We are to consider Quid fecerunt, 3. Part. What these Rebels did.
what these Rebels did. Cajetan says, Zelati sunt. Tirinus says,
Irritaverunt. The vulgar Latin says, Aemulati sunt. Our vulgar English says,
They angered Moses: and our last English says, They envyed Moses. And indeed
the large extent of the Original word, and the diversity of the Translation of
it shows the greatness of their iniquity, and the multi-formity or
multiplicity of their sin: And therefore that you may truly understand it,
you must look into the History Numb. 16.
, and there you shall see the whole matter; the conception, birth, strength,
and progress of their sin: for,

1. This sin was begotten by the seed of Pride; they conceived an opinion of
their own excellency; excellency, that bewitched men to rebel, thinking that
they are inferior to none, equal to the best, if not superior unto all; and
therefore they disdained to be governed, and aspired to the government of Gods
people: Pride the beginning of rebellion.
And then Pride, as the father, begat Coffeehouse as his eldest Son; they
liked not their own station, but would feign be promoted to higher dignity;
and because Moses and Aaron were settled in the government before them, and they
knew not how either to be adjoined with them, or advanced above them; therefore
discontent begat Envy, and they began to pine away at their felicity; and so
our last English reads it, They envied Moses.

2. Private meetings do often produce mischiefs.
This sin being thus conceived in the womb of the heart, at last it comes
forth to birth at the mouth; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks: and they begin to murmr and mutter among themselves, and as Rebels
use to have, they have many private meetings and conventicles among themselves,
where they say, we are all good, 2 Samuel 15.3, 4.
we are all holy, and they are no better than we; and as Absalon depraved his
fathers government, and promised justice and judgment, and golden mountains
unto the people, if he were King: so do they traduce the present government
with all scandalous imputations, and profess such a reformation, as would make
all people happy, if they were but in Moses place; or made over him, or with
him, the Guardians and Protectors of the Commonwealth.

And so now you see this ugly monster the son of Pride and Coffeehouse, is
borne into the world, and spreads it self from the inward thought to open
words. Then Moses hears the voice of this infant, which was not like the voice
of Jacob, but of the Serpent, which spitteth fire and poison out of his mouth.

And therefore lest this fire should consume them, and these mutterers prove
their murderers, Moses now begins to look unto himself, and to answer for his
brother; he calls these rebels, and he tells them, that neither he nor his
brother had ambitiously usurped, but were lawfully called into those places;
and to make this apparent to all Israel, he bade these Rebels come out of their
Castles to some other place, where he might safely treat and confer with
them; and that was to the Tabernacle of the Lord: that is, to the place where
wisdom and truth resided, and was from thence published and spread to all the
people, and there the Lord should show them whom he had chosen.

And here I do observe the care and wisdom of the Prophet, that at the first
appearance of their design, The wisdom of Moses.
would presently begin to protect his brother, before their rebellion had
increased to any strength; for had he then delivered Aaron into their hands,
his hands had been so weakened, that he had never been able afterward to
defend himself; to teach all Kings to beware, that they yield not their
Bishops and Priests unto the desires of the people, which is the forerunner of
rebellion against themselves: for as King Philip told the Athenians, that he
had no dislike to them, but would admit them into his protection, so they would
deliver to him their Orators, which were the fomentors of all mischief, and
the people were mad to do it, The witty tale of Demosthenes to save the
Orators, and to assureal Kings that if Aarons tongue, and the Prophets pen
persuade not the conscience to yield obedience, Moses power and Ioshuas sword
may subdue the people to subjection, but never retain them long without
rebellion.
till Demosthenes told them, how the Wolf made the same proposition unto the
Sheep to become their friends and protectors, so they would deliver their
Dogs, which were the cause of all discontent betwixt them, and the Sheep being
already weary of their Dogs, delivered them all unto the Wolves, and then
immediately the Wolves spared neither Sheep nor Lamb, but tore them in pieces
without resistance: even so, when any King yields his Bishops unto the poples
Votes, he may fear ere long to feel the smart of this great mastake.

Therefore Moses wisely delivers not his brother, but stoutly defends him,
who he knew had no ways offended them, and offered, if they came to a
convenient place, to make this plain to all the people.

But as evil weeds grow apace, and lewd sons will not be kept under, so the
more Moses sought to suppress this sin, the faster it grew, and spread it
self to many branches; from secret muttering, to open railing, from inward
discontent, to outward disobedience, they tell them plainly to their faces,
they will not come, Evil mengrow worse, and wors. Verse. 12.
e Castris, from their strong holds: they accuse them falsely, that Moses their
Prince aimed at nothing but their destruction, and to that end, had brought
them out of a good land to be killed in the wilderness, Verse. 13. Moses is in
a strait.
and contemning them most scornefully in the face of all the people, whatsoever
Moses bids them do, they resolve to do the contrary.

So now Moses might well say with the Poet, Quocunque aspicio nihil est nisi
pontus, Fluctibus hic enmidus, nubibus ille minax.
and ether. And therefore it was high time this evil weed should be rooted
out, or else the good corn shall be choked; these Rebels must be destroyed,
or they will destroy the Governors of Gods people; and Moses now must wax
angry, Nam debet amor laesus irasci, otherwise his meekness had been
stupidnesse, and his mercy had proved little better then cruelty; when as to
spare the Wolf is to spoil the Sheep: and because these great Rebels had
with Absolon, by their falfe accusations of their Governors, and their subtle
insinuations into the affections of the people, stole away the hearts of many
men; therefore Moses must call for aid from Heaven, and say, Exurgat Deus; and
let him that has sent me now defend me: So God must be the decider of this
dissension as you may see he was in the next verse.

And by this you find, Quid fecerunt, what these Rebels did; and how their
sin was not Simplex peccatum, but Morbus cumulatus, a very Chaos, and an
heap of confused iniquity: for here is, 1. Pride. 2. Discontent. 3. Envy. 4.
Murmuring. 5. Hypocrisy. 6. Lying. 7. Slandring. The tenfold sin of rebels.
8. Railing. 9. Disobedience. 10. Rebellion.
A monster indeed, that is, a ten headed, or ten horned beast.

1. Pride, 1 Pride.
which bred the distraction in the Primitive Church, and will be the
destruction of any Church, of any Commonwealth, was the first seed of their
rebellion; for the humble man will easily be governed, but the proud heart,
like a sturdy oak, will rather break then bend.

2. Discontent was the second step, 2. Discontent.
and that is a most vexatious vice; for though contentation is a rare blessing,
because it arises either from a fruition of all comforts, as it is in the
glorious in Heaven; The poison of discontent.
or a not desiring of that which they have not as it is in the Saints on earth;
yet discontent is that which annointeth all our joys with Aloes: for though
life be naturally sweet, yet a little discontent makes us weary of our lives,
as the Israelites, that loved their lives as well as any, yet for want of a
little water, say, O that we had dyed in Egypt. And Haman tells his wife; Hester
5.1^.
that all the honor which the King and Queen showed unto him, avails him
nothing, so long as Mordecai refused to bow unto him.

And discontent may as well invade the highest as the lowest; for as none is so
bare but he has some benefits, so none is so The common condition of man to be
ever wanting something.
full but he wants something; as the Israelites had Manna, but they wanted
water; and when they had water they wanted flesh, and this want made them
discontented; so these Rebels had the dignity to the Levites, and to be Peers,
of high places, and heads of all their families, which was more than they
deserved; but they wanted the honor to be Priests, and to be Kings, the chief
Governors of Gods people, which they desired; and therefore were discontented,
because their conceit was unsatiable, and their desires unsatisfied.

3. 3. Envy,
As Pride makes men disconted to be inferior unto any, so Discontent makes
them always to envy their superiors: and therefore Envy is the third head of
this monster, and the third step unto rebellion; How monstrous a sin is Envy.
a most hateful vice before God and man, that I should pine away with grief,
because God is gracious unto another: and I must be angry with God, because he
will not be guided by me in the disposing of his favors: and therefore Saint
Augustine calls this a devilish vice, Genesis 4.8. Act. 7.9.
which caused Cain to kill Abell; the Patriarchs to sell Joseph; the Medes to
molest Daniel; and the Nobility of Jury to persecute good King David, Cyprian
in Sermon. de Livore.
and to crucify the son of David, Christ himself; Et ideo periere, quia
maluerunt Christo invidere, quam credere.

And yet herein I must commend Envy, that as the Poet says -- Sit licet
injustus livor: though it be unjust to others, yet it is very just, to destroy
them first that would destroy others; as the envy of these rebels did
Sampson-like, pull down the house upon their own heads; and will most likely
bring destruction unto those that follow them in rebellion.

4. 4. Murmuring.
Murmuring is a secret discontented muttering one to another of things that we
dislike, or persons that we distaste; and the very word in all languages seems
as harsh unto our ears, as the sin is hateful unto our souls: for in
Greek it is called (...); in Latin, Murmurare; in English, to Murmr; in
British, Grwgnach; a sad word and a sour sin: therefore the wise man says,
Beware of murmuring, Exodus c. 15. c. 16. c. 17.
which is nothing worth; and yet this sin was frequent among the Israelites,
(three times in three Chapters) that they could never leave it, till as Saint
Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.
They were destroyed of the destroyer.

5. Hypocrisy is when a man seems to be what he is not, 5. Hypocrisy.
for as Saint Hierome says, Qui intus Cato, foris Nero, hypocrita est; he that
talks of peace, and prepares for war; that protests loyalty, and yet
hates his King; that in his words will advance the Church, but in his actions
will overthrow the Churchmen; that commends all piety, but commits all
iniquity; that will not swear for a Kingdom, but deceive for a penny; that
pretends the safety of the Kings Person, but purloineth away all his power;
that will bend his knee, and say, Hayle King, but will spit in his face, and
crown him with thorns, he is an hypocrite: So these rebels say, they are all
holy, they love all their brethren, they hate usurpation, and cannot endure the
tyranny of these Governors, but indeed, though they cried, Templum Domini,
Templum Domini, all for the King, and all for the Church; all for Moses, and
all for Aaron; yet notwithstanding this voice of Jacob, they had the hands of
Esau, and they would have brought Moses and Aaron to confusion, as they brought
themselves to destruction,

This is the property of an Hypocrite, and therefore Job speaking of an
hypocrite, says, (and it is exceedingly well worth the observing) Though his
excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clounds, yet
he shall perish for ever like his own dung; they which have seen him, (that
is, they which came out to see his pomp and his greatness, and have admired
at the greatness of his glory) shall say, where is be? or, how chance he does
not ride on with his honor? Job answers, The eye which saw him shall see him
no more, that is, Job 20.6, 7, 8, 9.
in the like majesty, neither shall his place any more behold him: for, He
shall flee away as a dream, and shall not be found; yea, he shall be chased
away as a vision in the night. And our Savior knowing as well the cruelty, as
the subtilty of hypocrites, bids us to beware of hypocrites: Mat. 7.15.
as the Poet says, Hypocritas fugito, sicut atri limina ditis. Shun hypocrites
as the gates of Hell, Hypocrisy, how odions it is.
and believe their actions rather then their protestations: for as in the Old
Testament Sodom and Gomorrah are the patterns of all beastliness, so in the
New Testament the greatest sinners are threatened to have their portion with the
hypocrites.

6. 6. Lying.
Lying must follow Hypocrisy at the heels, for were it not for the heaps of
lies that kypocrites spread abroad, the world could not possibly be so easily
seduced by their hypocrisy; and I read it in a Sermon of a learned Divine,
that now adays some phanatique Sectaries of desperate opinions and dispicable
fortunes, Master Griffith in his patheticall persuasion to peace, p. 28.
(whom the Church and State find to be a malignant party) having little else
to do, make it their trade to lie both by whole sale and retayle; they invent
lies, and vent lies; they tell lies, and write lies, and print lies; yea, I may
add, and more palpable lies, and more abominable, then either Bourne or Butter
ever published of the affairs of Germany; and this they do as confidently and
impudently, as if they were informed by that lying spirit, which entered as a
Voluntier into Ahabs Prophets; and by lying and raising false rumors, they
beget jelousies and fears in the people, and by blowing the coals which
themselves kindled, and enlarging the difference betwixt King and Parliament,
they set all in a cumbustion, and bring all into confusion: and that which
grieves me most, he says, that they are Preachers, which in the exuberancie of
their misgrounded and misguided zeal do both preach and pray against public
peace, as inconsistent with the independencie, or rather Anarchie that they
aim at.

7. 7. Slandering.
Slandering may be coupled unto their lying, because we can slander none with
that which is truth, therefore these Rebels say, All the Congregation is holy,
and that is a lie, when there can be no holiness in the Rebels; and the Lord
is among them, which is another lie, for he will forfake all those that forsake
him: then they say Moses and Aaron take too much upon them, which is an
apparent slander; and they add, that they lifted up themselves above the
Congregation of the Lord, which is another slander, as false as the fathers of
lies could lay upon them; for I showed unto you before, how truly they were
called, and how justly they behaved themselves in their places, but as Absolon
knew well enough, that to traduce his fathers Government, was the readiest way
to insinuate, and to wind himself into a good opinion among the people, and
to make the King odius unto his subjects, so these and all other Rebels will
be sure to lay load enough of lies and slanders upon their Governors, Goodwin
in his Anti. Caval. Buroughs in his Sermon upon the glorious name of the Lord
of Hosts.
and so the namelesse Author of the Sovereign Antidote, Goodwin, Borroughes,
and abundance more, such scandalous, impudent, lying libels, have not blushed,
(which a man would think the brazen face of Satan could not choose but do) so
maliciously and reproachfully, to lay to His Majesty's charge the things which
(as the Prophet says) he never knew, and which all they that know the King,
do know to be apparent lies, and most abominable slanders against the Lords
Vicegerent: but, Quid domini facient, audeant cum talia fures? You know the
meaning of the Poet, and you may know the reason why these grand liars, these
impudent slanderers, do so impudently belie so good a King, so pious and so
gracious a Majesty, for lay on enough, Et aliquid adbaerebit, and throw dust
enough in their faces; and let the Governors be never so good, the King as
mild and as unreproveable as Moses, and the Bishops like Aaron, the Saints of
the Lord, yet some thing will slicke in the opinion of the simple, that are not
able to discern the subtilty of those distractors.

And as they diminish and undermine the credit and reputation of the best
Governors, by no other engine then a lying tongue and a false pen, so with the
same instruments they do magnify their own repute, and further their unjust
proceedings, by deceiving the most simple with such equivacall lies, Astrange
equivocation.
as any sensible man might well wonder, that they should be so insensibly
swallowed down; as, when they say, they fight for him whom they shoot at; and
they are for the King, when with all their might and maine they strive to take
away his power, to pull the sword out of his hand, and to throw his Crown down
to the dust; which is so strange a kind of equivocation, as might well move
men with Pilate, to ask what is truth; which we can never understand, if any
of these things can be true: which (as one says most truly) is one of the
absurdest gulleries that ever was put upon any Nation; The tale of an
Anabaptist.
much like that Anabaptist which I knew, that beat his wife almost to death;
and said, he beat not her, but that evil spirit that was in her.

Therefore the Lord hates this abominable sin, because it is unpossible the
people should be so soon drawn into rebellion, if they did not credit these
defamations: But the wise man tells us, that Stultus credit omni verbo;
therefore no wise man will believe those false and wicked slanders, that such
malicius Rebels do spread abroad against their King, Prince, or Priest, or any
other Governor of Gods people.

8. After they had thus slandered these good men, they fell to open railing
against them, 8 Railing.
as you may see, Numb. 16.13, 14. for now they had eaten shame, and drunk
after it; and therefore they cared not what they said; and so now we find how
the Rebels deal with our King, and with our Bishops too; with our Moses, and
with our Aaron, for here in Ireland they rebel against their Sovereign,
because he is no Papist, and will not countenance the Papists as they desire:
And in England, they rail at him, and rebel against him, because they say,
he is a Papist, and does connive at Popery, and has a design to bring in
Popery into the Kingdom, which is as slat a lie as the father of lies has
ever invented. So the Bishops here are driven out of all, (as my self am
expelled, aedibus and sedibus, and left destitute of all relief) because we
are no Papists, but do both preach add write against their errors, as much as
any, and more learnedly then many others. And in England we are persecuted, and
driven to fly from place to place, or to take our place in a hard prison, (as
my self have been often forced to fly, and to wander in the cold and dark
long nights) because we are Papists, and so Popishly given: good God, what
shall we do, whither shall we go, or what shall we say? for, Nusquam tutae
fides, -- nec hospes ab hospite tutus. We cannot confide in the confiders, to
whom we are become malignant enemies for speaking truth, noither dare we trust
in the followers of the public faith, nor in the professors of the Catholic
faith, whereof men maliciously rejecting their godly Bishops, rebelliously
fighting against their lawful King, and wortally wounding their own souls,
have made a shipwreck. But, If they called the Master of the house Beelzebub,
if they said he was a glutton and a drunkard, what wonder if they say these
things of us? and if Christ the King of Kings was crucified betwixt two
Thieves, what marvel if this servant of Christ, our King be thus pressed,
opposed, and abused betwixt two rebellious factions? and when we see our
Savior and our King thus handled, it is less strange to find the Bishops and
the Priests persecuted and crucified betwixt two heretical and tyrannical
parties. Well: Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets and stonest them
that are sent unto thee, take heed lest the King of peace shall say unto thee,
Verily, thou shall see me no more, till thou say, Blessed is he that comes
in the name of the Lord.

9. When they were grown thus impudent, 9. Disobedience.
from bad to worse, both over shoes and over boots, then disobedience must
needs follow; and therefore now putting on their brazen foreheads, they tell
Moses plainly, We will not come to thee; we will do nothing that thou
willest, but will cross thee in all that thou intendest: this is our most
peremtory resolution.

And so we see, that Nemo repent fit pessimus, but the wicked grow worse and
worse: first you must lend, then you must give, if not, we will take; or if you
deny your goods, we will have your bodies: so at first, what soever we do, it
is for the King; and, because this is so palpable a mockery, that as every man
knows, that they fight against the Earl of Essex and his Army, do war
against the Parliament; so they that fight against the Kings Army, do as
certainly war against the King) then we grow so impudent, as to justify any
rebellion against our King; as in England, Goodwin, and that seditious
Pamphleter, in opening the glorious name of the Lord of Host, do but a little
less: for which application of Gods glorious name, and abusing the holy
Scriptures, to such abominable transgression of Gods holy Precepts, to
instigate the subjects to war against their Sovereign, and to involue a
whole Kingdom into a detestable distraction: I do much admire that they are
not apprehended, and transferred to the Kings Bench Bar to be there
arraigned, and condemned to be punished according to their deserts.

10. 10. Rebellion. See the place. Joshua 1.16, 17, 18.
When these Rebels had proceeded thus far, then contrary to the loyal
obedience which they owed unto their Prince, and which the people promise unto
Joshua: They ascended to the height of odious rebellion, which may not unfitly
be called Monstrum, borendum, inform, ingens, cui lumen ademptum, and is (as
Thucydides says) all kind of evil; Et qui facit, pecatum non facit, sed ipse
totus est peccatum: and therefore Samuel says, that Rebellion is as the sin
of Witchcraft, when men do confederate to give their souls unto the Devell;
for now these Rebels are ready to take arms against Moses, and they had
reduced all civil order to confused paritie, deposed and destroyed their
Governors, if the Governor of all the world, by whom Kings do reign, and
who has promised to defend them, had not prevented the same from Heaven.

And the reason why they did all this, The reason of their rebellion
and proceeded thus far against Moses and Aaron, is intimated in the words of
my Text, AEmulati sunt because they would emulate or imulate Moses, that is, to
play the Moses, or play the Kings, and play the part of the chief Priest
themselves; for this is certain, that none will envy murmr at, slander, and
disobey his King so far as to make any open rebellion against him, but they
that in some sort would rule and be Kings themselves; especially when they
shall seek so far to debilitate their Prince, as that he shall be no ways
able to make resistance; for they think, if Treason prosper, it is no Treason;
what is the reason? if it prosper, who dares call it Treason? and none would
disobey their Bishops or chief Priests, but they that would and cannot be
Bishops themselves; because pride and ambition are the two sides of that
bellows, which blows up disobedienee and rebellion.

But they that are ill servants will prove worse masters; they that will not
learn how to obey, can never tell how to rule; and if Moses were, as these
Rebels suggested, a Tyrant; yet the Philosopher tells us, we had better endure
one Tyrant, then, as they were, 250 Tyrants. And the Humilie of the Church tells
us, that contrary to their hopes. God never suffers the greatest treasons or
rebellion for any long time to prosper.

Therefore, when under loyal pretenses we see nothing but studied mischiefs,
and most crafty endeavors to innovate our government, or to imbroyle the
Kingdom in a civil war that so they may fish in a troubled water; let us
never be so stupid as to secure them in these actions, to produce our discredit
for our simplicity, and destruction for our disloyalty; but rather let us leave
them as Delinquents, to the justice of our Laws, and the mercy of the King;
and this will be the rediest way to effect peace and happiness to our Nation.

CHAP. XII. Shows where the Rebels do hatch their Rebellion: The heavy and
just deserved punishments of Rebels: The application and conclusion of the
whole.
4. WE are to consider, Vbi facerunt, 4. Part. Where they did all this.
where they did all this; in castris, non in templis; that is, in their own
houses, not in the house of God: for in Gods house we teach obedience to our
Kings, and beat down rebellion in every Kingdom; this is the Doctrine of the
Church. But in our houses, in our cabines and corners, in private conventicles,
they teach rebellion, which is the Doctrine of those Schoolcs. Our houses are
our castles
And these Schools are called Castra, Tents, or Castles; because indeed every
man's house is his castle, or his fort, where he thinks himself sure enough;
so did those rebels, and they would not come out of them: neither Moses the
King could compel them, nor Aaron the Priest could persuade them to come out
of their castles, and forsake their strong holds, which their guilty
consciences would not permit them to do: and so all other rebels will never be
persuaded to forsake their places of strength, until God pulls them, as he
did these Rebels, out of their holes: for were it not for these Castra, the
Cities and Castles that they possede they could not so (like subtle Foxes)
run out and in, to nullisie the property, and to captivate the liberty of the
Kings faithful subjects as they do; for, though they do all this under those
fair pretenses, for the defense of the true religion, the maintenance of our
liberties and the property of our estates: yet for our religion, it is now
amongst us as it was in the days of S. Basil, Basilius de Spiritus Sancto, c.
ult.
(...), every one is a Divine; and then (...), etc. all the bounds of our
forefathers are transgressed, the foundation of doctrine and fortification of
discipline was rooted up; and the innovators which never had any other
imposition of hands, but what they laid upon themselves, have matter enough to
set forward their sedition; and for the other pretenses, I dare proclaim it to
all the world, that mine own experience believes the liberty of the subjects,
and the property of our goods, and the true Procestant Religion could not
possibly be more abused, then it has been by them that came in the name and
for the service of the Parliament: and therefore I would to God, that all the
oppressions, injustice, and imprisonments, that have been made since the
beginning of this Parliament, were collected and recorded in a book of
remembrance, that all the world might see and read the justice and equity of
our Parliament, and the iniquity, oppression, and rapine of them, that to
enrich themseves, deprive us of our estates and liberties, How the Paliament
Rebels have enriched themselves in Ireland.
and that under the Parliaments name; for I hear, that as many have been
impoverished, so many both of the Lords and Commons in this Kingdom of
Ireland; that, before the Conjunction of these malevolent martial Planets,
were very low at an ebb, and their names very deep in many Citizens books,
have now wiped off all scores, paid all their debts, and clad themselves in
Silks and Scarlet, but with the extorted moneys, and the plundered goods of
the loyal subjects: I hope it is not so in England.

Yet as Platina tells us, Platinas story of the Guelphes and Gibilines.
that when the Guelphes and the Gibilines, in the City of Papia, were at
civil discord; and the Gibilines promised to one Fecinus Caius all the goods
of the Guelphes, if he assisted them to get the victory, which he did; and
after he had subdued the Guelphes, he seized upon the goods of both; and when
the Gibilines complained that he brake his Covenant, to pillage their goods,
Catus answered, that themselves were Gibilines, but their goods were Guelphs,
and so belonged unto him: So both in England and Ireland. I see the Parliament
Forces and the Kebels, (I hope contrary to the will of the Parliament) make
little difference betwixt Papist and Protestant, the well affected and
disaffected; for they cannot judge of their affections, but they can discern
their estates, and that is the thing which they thirst after; Haud ignota cano.

But you will say, these are miseries unavoidable, accidents common to all
war, when neither side can excuse all their followers.

I answer, Woe be to them therefore that were the first suggesters and
procurers of this war, and cursed be they that are still the incendiaries,
and blow the coals, for the continuance of these miserable distractions. I am
sure his Majesty was neither the cause, nor does he desire the prolonging
thereof for the least moment; but as his royal father was a most peaceable
Prince, so has he showed himself in all his life, to follow him passibus
aequis, and to be a Prince of peace: though, as the God of peace is likewise a
man of war, and the Lord of Hosts; so this peaceable Prince, when his
patience is too much provoked, can (as you see) change his pen for a sword, and
turn the mildness of a Lamb into the stoutnesse of a Lion; and you know
what Solomon says, that The wrath of a King is the messenger of death,
especially when he is so justly moved to wrath. And so much for the particulars
of this Text.

2 Having fully seen the ugliness of this sin, 2. The punishment of these
rebels.
you may a little view the greatness of the punishment: for,

Although I must confess, we should be slow to anger, slow to wrath, yet when
the Magistrate is disobeyed, the Minister despised, and God himself
disclaimed, it makes our hearts to bleed, and our spirits angry within us: yea,
though the King were as gentle and as meek as Moses, the meekest man on earth
and the Bishops as holy as Aaron, the Saint of the Lord; yet such disobedience
and rebellion would anger Saints; Tirinus in h. psalm.
for so Tirinus says, Irritaverunt, they angered Moses in their Tents, and
Aaron the Saint of the Lord: Nay more then this, they angered God himself, so
far that fire was kindled in his wrath, and it burned to the bottom of hell.
And as these rebels were Lords and Levites, Clergy and Laity, so God did
proportion their punishments according to their sins: for the Levites, that
were to kindle fire upon Gods Altar, and should have been more heavenly, and
those 250 men which userped the Office of the Priests; He sent fire from heaven
to devour them: and the Nobility that were Lay Lords, the Prophet tells you, the
earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the Congregation of Abiram. A
most fearful example of a just judgment; for to have seen them de ad upon the
earth, as the Egiptians upon the shore, had been very lamentable; but to see
the earth opening and the graves devouring them quick, was most lamertable, and
so strange that we never read of such revenge taken of Israel; Basiil. hom 9.
never any better deserved, and which is more, S. Basil says quod descenderunt
in infernum damnatorum: they fell into the very pit of the damned; which
doleful judgment, though they well deserved it, yet I will leave that
undetermined.

And if these rebels proceeding not so far, whatsover they intended to offer
violence, and to make an open war against Moses, were so heavily plagued for
the Embrio of their rebellion, what tongue shall be able to express the
detestation of that sin, and the deserts of those rebels, that by their
subtilty and cruelty would bring a greater persecution upon the Church then any
that we read since the time of Christ, and by a desperate disobedience to a
most Gracious King, would utterly overthrow a most flourishing State? a
rebellion and persecution, the one against the King: the other against the
Church, that in all respects can scarce be paralleled from the beginning of the
world to this very day.

And therefore except they do speedily repent with that measure of repentance,
as shall be in some sort proportionable to the measure of their transgression,
I fear God in justice will deal with them as he did with the Jews, 2. Chron.
36.17.
deliver them into the hand of their Enemies, that will have no compassion upon
young man, or maiden, old man, or him that stoopeth for age; or rather, as he
did with Pharaoh King of Egypt, deliver them up to a reprobate sense and harden
their hearts, that they cannot repent, but in their folly and obstinacy still
to fight against Heaven, until the God of heaven shall overthrow them with a
most fearful destruction; the which I pray God, they may foresee in time, and
repent, that they may prevent it, that God may be still merciful unto us as he
uses to be to those that love his Name.

And so much for the words of this Text.

Now to Apply all in brief: if God shall say to any Nation, The application of
all.
I will send them a King in my wrath, and give them Laws not good: let them
take heed they say not we will take him away by our strength: for we have read,
that he has authority to give us a King in his displeasure: but you shall
never read that we have authority to disobey him at our pleasure, and to say,
Nolumus hunc regnare super nos: or if any do, let them know that he which set
him up, and settled him over them, is able to protect him against them; and they
that struggle against him, do but strive against God: and therefore they have
no better remedy, then to pray to God, which has the hearts of Kings in his
hand, that he would, as the Psalmist says, Give the King his judgments, and
his righteousness unto the Kings Son that he would either guide his heart to
right, and direct his feet to the way of peace: or as he has sent him in his
fury, so he would take him away in his mercy. But for our selves of these
Islands we have a King and I speak it here in the sight of God and as I shall
answer for what I say at the dreadful judgment, not to flatter him that
hears me not, but to inform those of you that know him not so well as I,
that had the happiness to live with my ever honored Lord, the Noble Earl of
Pembroke and Montgomery, 16. or 17. years in the Kings house, and of them 6.
or 7. years in the Kings service. He is a most just, pious, and gracious King;
and I believe the best Protestant King that ever England or Ireland saw,
neither Popishly affected, nor Scismatically led to disaffect, but most
constantly resolved to be a true Defender of that true Protestant Faith, which
is established by Law in the Church of England, and he is such a King; of so
unblameable life, so spotless in all his actions, so clement, and so meek
toward all men, and so merciful toward his very enemies, that the mouth of
Envy cannot truly tax him, nor malice it self disprove him in any thing. Yet
we know that as Moses the meekest among men, and David the best of Kings, were
sore afflicted, slandered, and persecuted, not a little, by many of their own
obliged subjects; yea, and the best Kings have had the greatest troubles; so
this good King has had for his trial a great part of the like usage. I know
not by whom, neither do I indend here to accuse others, but to instruct you,
and by what I showed out of this text to teach you above all, to take heed of
disobedience and Rebellion toward your King: and to let you understand that
what privileges in the New Test. are acknowledged to be due to Heathen
Princes, and what prerogatives the spirit of God has in the Old Testament,
warranted unto the Jewish Kings, and what the universal Law of Nature, has
established upon all the supreme Governors, do all of them appertain by
unquestionable right unto his most sacred Majesty; and yet his Majesty out of
His incomparable goodness insisteth not to challenge all these, but
vouchsafes to accept of these rights and prerogatives, which are undoubtedly
afforded him by the Laws of His own Lands: and these come far short, scarce
the moity of the other; because we know, if our Historians have not deceived
me, how many of them were obtained, by little better then by force and
violence, compelling Kings to consent unto them; whereas Laws should be of a
freer nature.

And therefore of all the Nations round about us, besides that God has
entrusted Him with us all, we have most reason to entrust him, and to give
credit unto His Majesty's many protestations (too high to be forgotten by him,
or misdoubted by us) for His resolution, to maintain the Liberty of his
Subjects, the just Privileges of Parliaments, and the true established
Religion in the Kingdom of England: and likewise to rule over us according to
our Laws, in this Realm of Ireland. And we have least reason to rebel and
take arms against him; and therefore let us not be persuaded by any means by
any man to do it, because God will preserve his anointed, and will, as you
see, plague the Rebels; but let us pray for our King, and praise God night and
day, that he which might have given us a bramble, not only to tear our flesh,
but also to set us all on fire, has given us such a Cedar, such a gracious and
a pious King; and if either foreign foes, or domestique Rebels, do press
him so, that he has need of us, let us add our help, and hazard our lives to
defend and protect Him that protecteth us; and suffers all for the protection
of Gods service, as it was established in the purest time of Reformation, and
for the preservation of our Laws from any corrupt interpretation, or arbitrary
invasion upon them, by those factious men, that under fair, yet false
pretenses, have, with wondrous subtilty, and with most subtle hypocrisy,
seduced so many simple men, to partake with them not only to overthrow the
true Religion, to imbase the Church of Christ, that hitherto has continued
glorious in this Nation, and by trampling the most learned under feet, to
reduce Popery into this Kingdom, and to bring in Atheism or Barbarism into
our Pulpits, when they make their Coach-men and Tradesmen like Jeroboams
Priests, the basest of the people, to become their trencher Chaplains and the
teachers of those poor sheep, for whom the Son of God has shed his precious
blood, but also to change the well-setled government, and to subvert the whole
fabric of this famous Commonwealth, either by their tyranny, or bringing all
into an Anarchie; for if we have any regard of any of these things, either true
Religion, or ancient Government; a gracious King, and a learned Clergy; a
glorious Church, and a flourishing Kingdom; we ought not to spare our goods,
or be niggards in our contributions to help his Majesty: yea, as Debora
says, To help the Lord against the mighty. Or, if we be cold and careless
herein, pinurious and tenacious of our worldly pelf, preferring our gold
before our God; or fearing graceless Rebels more then we love our gracious
King, It may fall out, as Saint Augustine says, Quod non capit Christus vapit
fiscus; or as it did with the Carthaginians, who because they would not assist
Hanniball with some reasonable proportion of their estates, they lost all unto
the Romans and with the Constantinopolitans that for denying a little to
Paleologus, lost all unto the Turks; so we may be robbed and pillaged of all,
because we would not part with some; and I had rather the King should have all
I have, then that the Rebels should have any part thereof. Therefore I hope I
shall persuade all good men to honor God with their riches, and to assist His
Majesty to the uttermost of their powers, even to the hazard, and to the loss
both of liberty and life And doing this, our God which is the King of Kings,
will bless us, and defend us from all evil, and make us Kings and Priests to
live with him for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom with
the Father and the Holy Spirit, be all praise and glory, and dominion, from
henceforth for evermore, Amen. Amen.

Hester 4.16. If I perish, I perish. Yet Esdras 4.41. The truth is great, and
will prevail.
Iehovae liberatori.
FINIS.
O Eternal and Almighty God, thou Lord of Hoasts, that give victory unto
Kings, and deliverest David thy Servant from the peril of the sword, save and
defend our King from all dangers, strengthen him that he may vanquish and
overcome all his enemies; and be with us O Lord that are thy faithful
servants, and for thy sake his Loyal Subjects, to preserve us from the
gathering together of the froward, and from the insurrection of the wicked
doers, (that are confederate against thee, and against thine Anointed) for
Jesus Christ his sake, in whom we have ever trusted, through whom we shall
never be confounded, and to whom be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.


