TWO TREATISES CONCERNING I. GOD's All Sufficiency, AND II. CHRIST's
Preciousness.

BEING The Substance of some SERMONS long since Preached in the University of
Oxford.

By Henry Wilkinson, D. D. Then Principal of Magdalen-Hall, Oxon.

ECCLES. ix. ver. x. Whatsoever thy Hand finds to do, do it with thy might;
for there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave,
whither thou go. 2 COR. v. ver. xiv. The Love of Christ Constrains us.
Domine Jesu, Te plus diligo, quam mea, meos, Me. Bern. LONDON Printed by Thomas
Milbourn, for John Kidgel, at the Atlas in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange,
1681.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, HIS MUCH Honored Friend, John Clarke, OF St.
Edmund-Bury, Esquire.
Sir,
THat I may not Live and Dye Ungrateful, I presume to prefix Your Name to these
Ensuing Treatises, as a Testimony of my Grateful Acknowledgment of those many
Signal Favors, which you have conferred upon Me.

The First Treatise opens and applies the Doctrine of God's All Sufficiency.
The deliberate Meditation and Application thereof, amidst various
Dispensations, and Vicissitudes of Providence, will be a Divine Cordial to
Relieve a fainting Spirit; and will swallow up, and overcome all Outward
Troubles, as Aaron's Rod swallowed up all the Rods of the Egyptian Magicians.

That Pious Aphorism, which the Noble, and truly religious Lady Vere, chose
for her Motto, namely, GOD WILL PROVIDE, does the Faith of every true Believer
fully assent unto; by which he is enabled to Rely upon the All Sufficiency of a
Faithful God, both for a Supply of whatever he wants, and for a Sanctified
Improvement of all that he enjoys.

The other Treatise endeavors to unfold the Precious Excellency of Christ,
in order to the rendering of him the most Desirable Object to the Believers
Faith.

As all Light at God's Command, in the First Creation, did fix, and terminate
in the Body of the Sun; so it has pleased the Father, that there Col. 1. 19.
should be a Perfect and Complete Fullness of all Divine and Heavenly Graces,
dwelling in the Person, as well as in the Doctrine of the Blessed Jesus; and He
it is, in whom all Excellencies do Concenter: In Him, there is a Fullness of
Merit to Justify and Save us, a Fullness of Grace to Sanctify and Cleanse us, a
Fullness of Wisdom to Guide and Direct us, a Fullness of Power to Sustain and
Uphold us; and, in a word, a Fullness of Mercy, Pity, and Compassion to Relieve
and Succor us. How truly then did the Spouse call her Beloved, The Chiefest
among Cant. 5. 10.
Ten Thousand?

I have taken Liberty to become Your Remembrancer of these Things, though You
know them already, and have been fully Instructed in them.

My daily Prayer to God for You is, and shall be, That Your Last Days may be
Your Best Days; Your Last Fruit, Your Fullest and Fairest Fruit: That, as a
Plant of Righteousness in God's Garden, (which has no Withered Trees,
Overgrown, and Psalm. 92. 13. 4.
past Bearing) You may bring forth more Fruit in Old Age; and, like the
Almond-Tree, Tree, be even Blossoming, and always Flourishing. So prays,

Cornard-Magna, near Sudbury in Suffolk, Nov. 2. 1680. Honored Sir, Your most
Obliged, and Humble Servant, Henry Wilkinson.

GOD's All Sufficiency Plainly Opened, and practically Applied, in a Treatise
upon
2 CHRONICLES. Cap. XXV. Ver. ix. And Amaziah said to the Man of God, Treatise 1. of
God's All Sufficiency.
But, What shall we do for the Hundred Talents, which I have given to the Army
of Israel? And the Man of God answered, The Lord is able to give thee much more
than this.
CHAP. I.
Containing the Coherence, Exposition, and Division of the Word^; with the
Deduction of a Doctrine insisted on, as the Foundation of the whole Discourse.

WHich Words contain a Question, The Cohaerence.
and an Answer. The Person propounding the Question, is, Amaziah King of Judah:
The Person returning the Answer, is, A Man of God. i. e. a Prophet Inspired by
God; and sent on a great and weighty Errand to the King, as afterward will
appear.

It will be worth our while, First, to make inquiry concerning Amaziah, and
then concerning the Man of God, both mentioned in the Text, that so my Passage
may be made more clear.

First, for Amaziah, we Read how he verse. 1. and what his Conversation was,
verse. 2. compare this with 2 King. 14. 3. and one Text will 2 King. 14. 3.
give more Light to the other; There it is said of Amaziah, that He did that
which was Right in the Sight of the Lord, yet not like David his Father: he did
according to all things, as Joash his Father did. Joash began well, and
afterward Apostatized: So did Amaziah Tread in his Fathers Steps; and to
Evidence, what Amaziah did, was not Sincere; it is said, verse. 2. He did that
which was Right in the Sight of the Lord, (i. e.) What for the Substance or
Matter of the Action was approved of God: But not with a perfect Heart. This
But, makes a wide difference between a Hollow, Formal, Hypocritical, and a
Sincere Professor.

Amaziah was defective in his Walkings, and a Back-slider like his Father: (...)
As his Father was, so was he; Good at first, Naught at last. Grotius gives an
Observation on 2 King. 15. 3. -- Egregiam Grotius in 2 Kin. 15. 3.
laudem fine turpi macularet. -- It Is true, that Amaziah restored the True
Worship of God, much decayed in his Fathers time, after the Death of Jehojada;
yet what Amaziah did, was but a Partial, not a Total Reformation: All he did,
was but to halves; and how could it be otherwise, as long as there was a
naughty Principle, a rotten Core, and Heart rotten at the bottom? The (...).
70. in v. 2.
Version of the Seventy Runs, Not with a full Heart: He went not thorough with
his Work, but to Halves only. For 2 King. 14. 4. It Is there said, Quod etsi
dictum sit etiam antea de aliis tamen iterum atque iterum repetitur, nimirum ut
quanta quamque pestifera S^perstitionis vis sit, observemus Haec enim ubi in
animis hominum radices al^ius egerit, agree velles potest. W^lphius in loc.
Howbeit the High Places were not taken away; as yet, the People did Sacrifice,
and Burnt Incense on the High Places. Those High Places, What were they, but
devised Ways, humane inventions, superstitions, no better than additional
Will-Worships, and such are Hominum inventa in Dei cultu impurae sunt
corruptelae, Calv. Instit. L. 4. c. 10.
Corruptions of Worship. People would not be tied to one place of Gods
Appointment; but according to their own Fancies and Humors; they would add,
and set up others of their own Divising: Against which, there is an express
Prohibition, Deuteronomy. 12. 4, 5. 6. And further to set forth the insincerity, and
rotten heartedness of Amaziah, the 14. verse. of this Chapter gives a full
Evidence. For it is said, Now it came to pass, after that Amaziah ver. 14.
was come from the Slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the Gods of the
Children of Seir, and set them up to be his Gods, and bowed down himself before
them, and burned Incense unto them. And such cursed Fruit, does a rotten heart
Bear. A Heart that is Deceitful and Hypocritical, marrs all our Services, Quod
cor non Facit, non fit. All Is as undone, and quite lost; if the Heart be not
the Doer thereof. If the Heart be Good, all is Good; if the Heart be Naught,
all is Naught. The Priest under the Law, in all Sacrifices, chiefly looked at the
Heart of the Beast, that was to be Offered, Amongst the Heathen Augurs, there
was special Notice took of the Heart of the Sacrifice. If the Heart was Tainted
and Corrupted, that Beast was rejected, and not to be made a Sacrifice. Now
that, which God principally required ( i. e. a perfect Heart) was wanting in
Amaziah. An imperfect, partial, hollow Heart, was odious and abominable unto
God; and for a full determination let us have recourse to the Judgment of
Solomon, Prove. 10. 20. The Tongue of the Prove. 10. 20. 15. 8.
Just, is as choice Silver; the Heart of the Wicked is little worth: and Prove.
15. 8. The Sacrifice of the Wicked, is an abomination to the Lord; but the
Prayer of the Upright is His Delight. These Scriptures gives a full and evident
Satisfaction.

Yet notwithstanding the great Evil in Amaziah, we may not pass by in Silence
somewhat in him, which was both very Remarkable, and highly Commendable; and
that was his Execution of Justice upon those who were his Fathers Murderers,
ver. 3. How his Father was Murdered, is upon Record, 2 Chronicles. 24. 25. Although
(as they thought) a fair Pretense might be pleaded, as if what they did, was
only to Revenge one Murder with another; yet their Treason was Abominable, and
their Murder Execrable; wherefore the Hand of Justice overtook those horrid
Regicides: yet Justice, and Mercy contend together; this to spare the guiltless
Children, the other Ezekiel. 18. 20.
to slay the guilty Father, ver. 3, 4. A Scripture Rule is the Kings Warrant,
Deuteronomy. 24. 16. The Fathers shall not be put to Death for the Children, neither
shall the Children be put to Death for the Fathers; every Man shall be put to
Death for his own Sin. To come nearer to my Text, let us consider Amaziah as a
Warrior, and his Military Preparations, ver. 5. 6.
ver. 5, 6. Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together, and made them Captains
over Thousands, and Captains over Hundreds, according to the Houses of their
Fathers, throughout all Judah and Benjamin, and-he Numbered them from Twenty
Years Old and above, and found them Three Hundred Thousand choice Men, able to
go forth to War, that could handle Spear and Shield. He hired also, an Hundred
Thousand mighty Men of Valor out of Israel, for an Hundred Talents of Silver.
And thus far of Amaziah.

In the Second place, let us take Notice of the Man of God. What his Name was,
and what was his Place, whence he came, are not mentioned. But his Message is
Recorded to be a strict Prohibition, ver. 7. There came a Man of An Amos Pater
Isaiae ut sentiunt Hebraej? Grot.
God to him, Saying, O King, Let not the Army of Israel go with Thee, for the
Lord is not with Israel, to wit, with all the Children of Ephraim. By Ephraim,
is to be understood the Ten Tribes; Penes familiam illam Principatus Erat.
Pisc. Ephraim est totum regnum Israelis. Plus quam viginti vicibus ita
accipitur Tarnor, in Hos. 4. 17.
Ephraim was the chiefest of them. In Jacobs Blessing, Ephraim had made over to
him the Privilege of Primogeniture, Genesis 48. 19. So that (...) Ephraim alone
passes in the name of all the Tribes of. Israel, Isa. 17. 3. Isa. 28. 1. Now
Ephraim were Apostates from God, and incorrigible Idolaters, Hos. 4. 17.
However, if Amaziah would not hearken to Coun^el, but take that Army with him,
he should surely fall before the Enemy: It Is an Ironical Speech, which
vertually contains a vehement Check and Inhibition, ver. 8. But if thou will
^^, do it, be Strong for the Battle; God shall make thee fall before the Enemy,
for God has Power to help, and to cast down.

And having praemised thus much as a necessary Introduction* I shall now
consider the Words of the Text, which fall into a Question, and an Answer.

First. For the Question (which is full The Text divided 1. Quest. of King
Amaziah.
of Trouble, Perplexity, Diffidence, and Self-Interest.) What shall we do for
the Hundred Talents, which I have given to the Army of Israel? As if I should
say, It Is difficult and no way probable, to get any Restitution of an Hundred
Talents, from an Army of an Hundred Thousand Men, whom if we Cashier, we shall
so enrage them, as there will be no hope at all left of recovering our Money
out of their Hands. To attempt this Enterprise, would be as Successless, as to
venture, to pluck the Prey out of the Mouths of so many Lions. And on the other
side, if we should sit down by so great a Loss, as are an Hundred Talents, it
would be very sad and irksome, not quickly to be recovered, and made up again.
Here Is a Dilemma, which on either side perplexeth the King. He is not willing
to run the hazard of Fighting, with those Hundred Thousand valiant Soldiers,
for the Restitution of the Money; And no likelihood there was of getting that
Money from them without Blows: Neither was he willing to let them go away with
the Money. To this Question full of doubts and perplexity, the Prophet Answers.

You have in the Second place, the 2 The Man of God's Answer.
Man of God's Answer abundantly satisfactory, and every ways sufficient to
quiet, content, and satisfy the King. And the Man of God Answered. The Lord is
able to give thee much more than this. As if he should say, God has much more
to give thee, and what Losses thou Sustainest, He can abundantly make up unto
thee: If thou trustest and dependest on God, thou need'st not fear Supplies
from Him. God is both able, and willing to supply, sustain, and provide for all
those who Trust and Rely upon Him. The Seventy render the Words, (...) And
Junius renders them accordingly, Est Jehovae dare tibi amplius eo (i. e.) It is
in the power of God to give thee much more. The Vulgar Latin renders it, Habet
Dominus unde dare possit tibi multo his plura (i. e.) God has enough to supply
thee, and give thee much more than thou have Lost. Est in potestate Jehovae
dare tibi vatab.
Vatablus renders them according to the same Sense. Hugo Grotius observes from
hence, Satis dives est qui Dei causa, pauperatur. He is Rich enough, who is
made Hugo Grotius in loc.
Poor for the Cause of God. This holy Prophet was courageous in the Cause of
God, and delivered his Message with all courage and fidelity: And a convincing
Argument he presses from God's All Sufficiency. The Lord (says he to the
King) is able to give thee much more than this. And this Answer obtains that
success which was desired, ver. 10. Then Amaziah separated them, to wit, the
Army that was come to him out of Ephraim, to go Home again: Wherefore, their
Anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they returned Home in great Anger.
But observe what might be soon feared came to pass, from the incensed eashiered
Soldiers, ver. 13. But the Soldiers of the Army which Amaziah sent back, that
they should not go with him to Battle; fell upon the Cities of Judah from
Samaria, even unto Beth-horon, and smote Three Thousand of them, and took much
Spoil. However such mischievous Consequen^es might easily be foreseen; yet
Amaziah Disputes no farther, makes no more Questions nor Demurrs, but obeys the
Command of God, from the Mouth of His Prophet.

The Answer of the Man of God, is Prove. 25. 11.
a Word fitly Spoken, which is (in Solomon's Estimation) Like Apples of Gold, in
Pictures of Silver.

The Text, is a Word of singular Support and Encouragement: It Is Tabula post
naufragium; An Anchor of Hope, A strong Prop to uphold a tottering Building, A
high Rock, strong and impregnable, When Troubles come thick and threefold, and
Losses, Crosses, Imprisonments, Persecutions, and Exile follow one upon
another: here is Matter of Support, and Ground of Encouragement, to be drawn
from God's All Sufficiency.

This is a shadow from the Heat, and a Isa. 25. 4.
shelter from the Storm, when the blast of the Terrible one, is as a Storm
against the Wall. Here Is the Rock, Fortress, Buckler, Psalm. 18. 2.
Deliverer, Horn of Salvation, and high-Tower, etc. If amidst our greatest His
variis Ephithetis ostendit David Deum non uno Modo servare suos sed sicut sunt
varia genera periculorum and difficultatum quibus obijciuntur ita Deum varia
virtute preditum esse ad salvandum suos. Molleri. in loc. Romans 12. 2.
Pressures, Sufferings, Straits, and Exigencies; we can stay, acquiesce, and
quietly rely upon God's All Sufficiency, and cast our selves upon his Wisdom,
and wait for his Salvation. O! What sweet and comfortable Lives should we lead!
If amidst all Losses, we could believe assuredly this great Truth; That the
Lord is able to give as much more than this; we should be Gainers by our
Losses, and Rejoice in our Tribulations, and in every thing, submissively, and
patiently resign our wills, to the Will of God, which is a good, acceptable,
and perfect will.

From the Words thus Expounded, I shall Collect one Fundamental point of
Doctrine, or choice Lesson, for our Instruction, viz.

That the serious, and deliberate consideration of God's All Sufficiency,
should God, to stay and depend upon His All Sufficiency, even then, when the
greatest Losses, and Afflictions are incomben^on us.

CHAP. II.
Contains the Method of Proceeding, and ^ therein the first Argument drawn from
God's Attributes.

FOr Enlargement of this needful, and Method propounded.
excellent Point, I shall fix on Four Heads of Meditation. (1.) To give in a
plain Proof of my Assertion, That God is All-Sufficient; wherein I shall
propound some convincing Arguments. (2.) I shall demonstrate the Truth, That
this Consideration, That God is All-Sufficient, should engage us quietly and
silently, to submit unto God, and stay, and depend upon his All Sufficiency
amidst our greatest Losses and Afflictions. (3.) I shall endeavor to Resolve
Two or Three Cases emergent from the premises. (4thly. and lastly) I shall
Conclude with some particular, and useful Application.

I resume these Heads according to my propounded Order. The Doctrine proved by
Four Arguments.


1. I am to prove That God is All-Sufficient: Though the Doctrine be most
undoubtedly true, and God's Children have abundantly experimented the Truth
thereof; yet, I shall endeavor to give you more abundant proof, even good
Measure full pressed, and running over, which I shall propound in these Four
ensuing convincing Arguments.

The First, whereof is drawn from Gods drawn from Gods Attributes.
Attributes. Now although we diversely Apprehend them, as one way we understand
God's Justice, another way his Mercy, etc. Yet all these are but one in God. He
is one pure uncompounded simple Act: And he manifests himself by his Attributes
of Omnipotency, Power, Mercy, Goodness, Wisdom, and Truth; that he is able to
Relieve, Support, Supply, and Extricate us out of all our Straits,
Difficulties, and Exigencies whatsoever. Let Us more particularly; for the
clearing of the Truth, produce Instances in five Attributes ( viz.) God's
Wisdom, Power, Mercy, Truth, and Unchangeableness, from all which will
Evidently appear, the Truth of the first Branch of the Doctrine. That God is
All-Sufficient.

First, Let Us consider the Wisdom of 1. The Atribute of Wisdom.
God. As God in the Beginning, by Wisdom, made Heaven and Earth: So by Wisdom,
He Orders, Guides, and Governs all the Things therein contained; This
Wisdom is infinite. God understands all things, and knows Psalm. 147. 5.
the Reason of them: He cannot be deceived in any thing. And who can or dare
reprove him in any thing He does, or question why he has so done? But as for
worldly Wisdom, God will Destroy 1 Cor. 1. 19. 20.
it, and make Foolish the Wisdom of the World: The Foolishness of God (as the 1
Cor. 1. 25.
Apostle says) is Wiser than Men. (i. e.) That which the Men of the World
count Foolishness, has more Wisdom in it, Nemini obscurum est, quam improprie
stultitia, vel infirmitas Deo adscribatur sed necesse fuit talibus Ironiis
insanam carnis arrogantiam refutare, qua Deum omni sua gloria spoliare non
dubitat. Calv. in loc.
than all their Worldly Wisdom. Folly or Weakness (says judicious Calvin) is
improperly ascribed to God: But it was necessary by such Ironies, to confute
the mad Arrogance of the Flesh, which would rob God of his Glory.

God can infatuate the Wisdom of the Wise, and turn the Counsels of Achitophel
into Foolishness. Be Men as great Politicians, as Machiavel was reputed to be,
yet God can Blast all their Counsels* He takes the Wise in their own
craftiness Job 5. 13.
(i. e.) such as think Qui sibi sapientes videbantur Eo* ipso quod astute
cogitarant cap^antur and irretiantur. Merc. in loc.
themselves Wise: in that self-same thing, which they craftily contrived, they
are taken, and entangled (as Learned Mercer observes on the place) Saint Paul
seems to have Quoted this Scripture out of 1 Cor. 3. 19. There Is an Emphatical
Word in the Original (...) veteratoria versutia, (i. e.) a juggling craft; A
proclivity, and readiness to all Cheating Tricks whatsoever. However (as Beza
notes) Though they be Subtle Vt cunque sunt vafri, Eos tamen D^minus capiet,
cum eorum arts reipsa declarabit, illud ipsum esse quo sese in volve rint.
Beza in Loc.
and Crafty, yet God will catch them, and discover them, to be what they are.

Now from this instance of the Wisdom of God, we may give an abundant proof of
his All Sufficiency: For when we are Entangled, and be wildred with worldly
Cares and Fears, and know not how to get out; when we are involved in Mazes,
Perplexities, and Labyrinths, and know not how to extricate our selves, and we
are at our Wits end; then Wisdom from heaven makes a Way, for our Evasion, and
sets us at Liberty. When Isaac was bound on the Altar, and Abraham Stretched
forth his Hand to give the Deaths Stroke, all the Wisdom of the wisest Men on
Earth, would have been Non-plust, not knowing how to contrive a Deliverance:
But the Wisdom of God exerteth it self, and interposeth in that needful
instant, between the lifting up the Hand, and the Striking of the Blow, and a
Voice speaks from Heaven, Lay not thine Hand upon Genesis 22. 12.
the Lad. However, Isaac was unexpectedly delivered; yet, Abraham would gladly
Offer^ a Sacrifice, and he knew not where, upon such a sudden to make
Provision: Behold further, How the Wisdom of God contrives, and provides a Ram
for a Burnt Offering. What then verse. 13.
must we do in all our doubts and difficulties, but make our Addresses and
Supplications unto God? God is a God Jam. 1. 5.
of Wisdom, of Him, we must ask Wisdom. Christ is the great Counselor, The
Wisdom of God, He has the Spirit Isa. 9. 6.
of Wisdom and Understanding. When 1 Cor. 1. 24. Isa. 11. 2.
Troubles befall us, we wander up and down like Noah's Dove, finding no rest for
the Sole of her Foot, till Noah took her into the Ark. We in our Afflictions
use to go from Creature to Creature, and Consult with Flesh and Blood; like
Squirrils, we leap from Bough to Bough, or like curious Palates, Taste of all
Waters, and try all manner of Projects; hence it comes to pass, that we
miscarry by many sad Disapointments and Frustrations. How dreadful a Woe is
threatened against them, who take not Counsel of God, Isa. 30. 1. Woe to the
Rebellious Children (says the Lord) that take Counsel, but not of Me, and that
cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add Sin to Sin.
There Is a grand Curse also threatened in Ezekiel, That the Law shall Perish from
the Priest, Ezekiel. 7. 26.
and Counsel from the Ancients. Here then consists our great Duty, amidst
Troubles and Sufferings, to learn to deny our own Wisdom, our own Reason and
Counsel, and whatsoever is selfish in us, neither any more to sacrifice to our
own Net and Drag; but to rely, depend, and wholly lean, and stay our selves
upon the Wisdom of God. Solomon fully Prove. 3. 5. 6, 7, 8.
prescribes our Duty in several choice, and excellent Lessons: Trust in the
Lord with all thine Heart, and lean not unto thine own Understanding: In all
thy ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy Paths: Ne in tua teipsum
sapientia contemplari velis. Eam elige disciplinam in quam cum inspicias non
ta^ teipsum quam Deum ipsum intuearis.
Be not Wise in thine own Eyes: Fear the Lord, and depart from Evil. It shall
be Health to thy Navel, and Marrow to thy Bones.

I proceed to another Instance, drawn from the Power of God. The Power and
Omnipotency of God, abundantly prove His All Sufficiency. This Attribute of
Power, and Omnipotency is the Stronghold of all Gods Children: This is their 2.
Attribute, viz. The Power of God.
Shield, Buckler, Deliverer, what not! It Is all in all: And the Power, and
Omnipotency of God, is a Terror to the Wicked, to crush them to pieces, and to
destroy them utterly. God is the Universal, Omnipotent Sovereign Lord, and
Commander over the whole World. Bildad speaks a great Deal in so short Job 25.
2.
a Chapter. Dominion and Fear are with him, etc. God has all Power in his
Hand, and can put it forth, more or less, when, and where he pleases. All the
Granaries, Treasures, Magazines, and Fortifications; All the Cattle on a
Thousand Mountains, are at the sole command, and disposing of the Sovereign
Lord, and Governor of Heaven and Earth. God gives one Creature, a Commission
to help another; God knows such an one to be in sore distress; and he says, go
Creature, Relieve, Refresh, and Comfort such a One; he is my Servant. Another
is in great danger, of being Robbed, Murdered, or Drowned, as he is a
Traveling: God sends his Angel to preserve him: Ingens Bonitas Dei and cura
paterna erga Ecclesiam describitur, quod tales nobis Presides adjungit Molles.
Angeli sunt Domestici Dei caeli cives. Bern.
And how much we ought to give God thanks for the Ministry of Angels; how few
of us are sensible! Likewise the Hearts of all Men are at Gods Command, even
the Hearts of the greatest Kings are at Gods Command: Prove. 21. 1.
As the Rivers of Water, he turns them whithersoever he will. The Hearts of
inveterate and implacable Enemies, are new Molded, and Wrought on effectually
by the Power of God. Amongst others, that is a pregnant instance in Esau, in
whose Heart lodged an old grudg of Twenty Years standing, against his Brother
Jacob. And it seems very probable, that when he came to meet Jacob with Four
Hundred Men, that he had in his Heart Rancor and Malice; and his Intentions
were as Mischiveous, as Jacob feared, to destroy The Mother and Genesis 32. 11.
the Children. Yet God, who has the Hearts of the worst of Enemies in his
Hand, affected the Heart of Esau, and melted it into Tears; we Read Genesis 33. 4.
And Esau ran to meet Him, and embraced Him, and fell on his Neck, and kissed
Him, and they Wept. Hence that Proverb of Solomon is an Experimental Truth,
that, When a Man's ways please Prove. 16. 7.
the Lord, he makes even his Enemies to be at Peace with him. The best way to
obtain Friendship with Men, is first to make God our Friend. The Duty mainly
incumbent on us all, is to believe Gods Omnipotency, and stay, and depend
thereupon. Thus let us argue from what has been done by the Almighty Genesis 1. 3,
4.
Power of God. In the Creation, God brought Light out of Darkness, Order out of
a Chaos of Confusion. God made Exodus 14. 22.
the Red Sea to become Dry-land, and passable for the Israelites, but the Sea
returned to his strength, and overthrew the Egyptians in the midst thereof. God
ver. 27*
caused the Flinty-Rock, to become a Springing-Well, to quench the Thirst of
the Israelites. God fed them by a Numb. 20. 11. Exodus 16. 13, 14. Deuteronomy. 25. 9.
Judge. 15. 19. Josh. 10. 13. 2 King. 20. 11. 2 King. 7. 16.
Miracle, with Quails and Manna: God Clothed them by a Miracle, in that the
same Clothes lasted Forty Years together. God caused the Jaw Bone of an Ass to
pour out Water, to quench the Thirst of Samson. God caused the Sun to stand
still at Joshuas prayer, and return back upon Hezekiahs Prayer. God caused
plenty in Samaria (beyond all expectation of Man) after a sore and grievous
Famine. From all these Instances Potens Deus est causam suam libenter servare,
lapsam erigere: si nos digni non erimus, fiat per alios. Melct. Adam in vita
Luther.
we may certainly conclude, that the same Omnipotent Lord God Reigns. His
power is no whit diminished; he has helped, and is able to help. This Instance
of the Power of God abundantly proves his All Sufficiency, and should be a
ground 3 Attribute of Mercy.
of singular Support, and Comfort unto all the Children of God.

I proceed to a Third Instance drawn from the Attribute of Mercy. God is
abundant in Goodness and Mercy: He is Merciful, Gracious, Long-Suffering. Mercy
Micah 7. 18. Psalm. 25. 10. ^* sal. 103. 8. Ephesians. 2. 4. Psalm. 145. 9. Isa. 16.
11. Psalm. 68. 5. Psalm. 103. 13. Isa. 63. 9.
is Gods Delight. All his Paths are Mercy. He is slow to Anger, and plenteous
in Mercy. His Mercies are rich Mercies, tender Mercies, they are over all his
Works. They are so many as they exceed all Number for Multitude: They are so
great, as they exceed all Dimensions for Magnitude. The Lord by an (...)
declares the Sounding of his Bowels; His Fatherly pity and compassion, and a
sympathy, and fellow-feeling with us in our Afflictions, Isa. 63. 9. In all
their Afflictions, he was Afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them:
in his Love, and in his Pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried
them all the Days of Old. And who this was, see ver. 1. O! How did the Bowels
of Christ Yearn over those that were in Affliction! He had Compassion toward a
fainting Multitude, and Fed them. He had Compassion on the Diseased Joh. 11.
35. Luke 19. 41. Heb. 4. 15.
People, he Healed them. He Wept for Lazarus; he Wept over Jerusalem; And now
he is in Heaven, he is Touched with the feeling of our infirmities. From what
has been mentioned, we may conclude, That Gods Mercy moves him to afford
seasonable Helps, Supplies, and Succors, unto his People, when they are
involved in the greatest Straits and Difficulties: God is a Present Psalm. 46.
1. Genesis 22. 14.
help in the needful time of Trouble. In the Mount the Lord will be seen: The
Proverb is no more common than true, That Man's Extremity is Gods Opportunity.
When Hagars Bottle of Water was spent, and she, and her Son like Genesis 21. 19.
to have perished with Thirst; then the Lord opened her Eyes, and showed her a
Well of Water. When Egypts Flower Josh. 5. 12.
was spent, and when Manna ceased, then the Children of Israel did Eat of the
Fruit of the Land of Canaan. When the Widow of Zaraphath had left only for her
self and Son, to keep them a little while alive, a handful of Meal in a Barrel,
and a little Oil in a Cruse; then the Lord sent the Prophet Elijah with a
comfortable Message, 1 King. 17. 14, 15, 16. Thus says the Lord God of Israel,
The Barrel of Meal shall not wast, neither shall the Cruse of Oil fail, until
the Day that the Lord sends Rain upon the Earth. And she went, and did
according to the saying of Elijah; and* she, and he, and her House did Eat many
Days. And the Barrel of Meal wasted not, neither did the Cruse of Oil fail,
according to the Word of the Lord, which he spoke by Elijah. When Gods People
have been in such great Straits, as not knowing where to turn, or how to help
themselves out of them; then some signal Mercy has appeared for their
Deliverance. In Deuteronomy. 32. 36. there is a gracious Promise, and there is a real
performance thereof, 2 King. 14. 26, 27. For the Lord saw the Affliction of
Israel, that it was very Bitter: for there was not any shut up, nor any left,
nor any helper for Israel. And the Lord said, not that he would blot out the
Name of Israel from under Heaven: But he Saved them by the Hand of Jereboam the
Son of Joash. Add hereunto another promise, suitable to the former, Isa. 33. 9,
10. The Earth Mourns and Languisheth: Lebanon is ashamed, and hewn down:
Sharon is ^ike a Wilderness, and Bashan, and Carmel shake off their Fruits. Now
will I rise says the Lord; now will I be exalted; now will I lift up my self.
And David experimentally acknowledges the truth of God's Promises, Psalm. 136.
23. Ista ob id commemoravit admoneamur quam non obliviscatur suorum Deus, qui
tribulationibus o^primuntur, sed ubi tempestivum est e, manibus illos
inimicorum suor^m afferat and eripiat. Musc. in loc.
who remembered us in our low Estate. For his Mercy endures for Ever.

Let Us then stand admiring, and adoring the riches of Mercy, the multitude of
tender Mercies, the Bowels wide opened of a gracious and compassionate Father.
God stands by his People in their Swooning Fits, and gives them his sweet
Cordials and Restoratives. He is with them in Prison, and gives them
enlargement of Spirit. Sanctorum pr^ces caelum and terram concutiunt Beza. Hinc
colligimus quam constanter animati fuerint ad crucem ferendam Calv. in Loc.
Dan. 3. 25.
The Apostles, Act. 16. 25.
Paul and Silas Prayed, and sang Praises in a Prison. Communion with God,
revived and raised their Spirits, even when their Feet were made fast in the
Stocks. God was with the Three Children in the hot fiery Furnace; Three were
only cast into the Furnace, but the King saw Four, and he acknowledged that the
Form of the Fourth, was like the Son of God. Daniel had an Angel in the Lions
Den for his Companion; and he was sent from God, to shut the Lions Mouth. What
shall I add further? We live upon Mercies every Moment, and have fresh
experiences of renewed loving Kindnesses. Each Step we Tread, whether at home
or abroad* each Work we go about, each bit of Bread we Eat, each Bed we Lie on,
each Journey we Travel: All these cry aloud, and proclaim the Mercies of God.
And so wonderful is the Mercy of God, as he condescends to our Infirmities, and
applies himself with all gentleness to our respective Conditions: Two places I
shall only mention as a full proof thereof; one is Isa. 40. 11. He shall Feed
his Flock like a Shepherd; he shall gather the Lambs with his Arm, and carry
the^^ in his Bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with Young. The other
is Mat. 12. 20. Donec rectam and veram Evangelii doctrinam docuerit ad
vincendum hosts, ut expugnet eos-Vatabl. 4. Attribute of Truth
A bruised Reed shall he not break, and smoking Flax shall he not quench, till
he send forth Judgment unto Victory. By what has been said of the Mercy of
God; we should be persuaded to rely, and depend on God's All Sufficiency.

A Fourth Instance I shall produce, is the Attribute of God's Truth, and this
is engaged for the Assistance of his Servants, and for the Destruction of his,
and their Adversaries. Although nothing is impossible to God, and he can do all
things; yet it no whit detracts 1 Tit. 2. 2. Tim. 2. 13.
from Gods Omnipotency, to say, He cannot Lie, he cannot deny himself. God
never was, and never will be one tittle worse than his Word; not an (...) of
his Word shall fail. God Gloryeth in Exodus 34. 6. Psalm. 146. 6. Psalm. 111. 5.
Heb. 10. 23.
this, that he is Abundant in Goodness and Truth, that he keeps Truth for
ever; that he will be ever mindful of his Covenant: And that he is faithful
that has Promised. Balaam, though a mercenary Prophet, gives herein a faithful
Testimony, Numb. 23. 19. God is not a Man that he should Lie, neither the Son
of Man, that he should Repent; has he said, and shall he not do it; or has he
^poken, and shall he not make it Good? After Nebuchadnezzer was restored to his
understanding, and former dignity, he of his own accord made this Confession,
Dan. 4. 37.
That all the Works of God are Truth. Here then consists our great Duty, to
rely and stay upon the Truth of God. Has not God said in his holy Isa. 3. 10.
11.
Word, Say ye to the Righteous, that it shall be well with him; for they shall
Eat the Fruit of their Doings. Woe to the Wicked, it shall be ill with him, for
the reward of his Hands shall be given him. Is it not likewise a part of the
same Truth of God, Recorded by the Wise Man? Though (says he) a Sinner do Evil
an Eccles. 8. 12. 13.
Hundred times, and his Days be prolonged; yet surely, I know it shall be well
with them that fear God, which fear before him. But it shall not be well with
the Wicked, neither shall he prolong his Days, which are as a Shadow; because
he fears not before God. Add hereunto, that which is mentioned by the last
(but not the least) of the Prophets Malachi. For behold the Mal. 4. 1, 2, 3.
Day comes, that shall Burn as an Oven, and all the Proud; yea, and all that
do Wickedly shall be Stubble, and the Day that comes shall burn them up, says
the Lord of Hosts, It shall leave them neither Root nor Branch. But unto you
that fear my Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with Healing in his
Wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as Significat proprie multiplicari,
augeri. L. de. Dieu. (...) verterunt 70.
Calves of the Stall. And ye shall Tread down the Wicked; for they shall be
Ashes under the Soles of your Feet, in the Day that I shall do this, says the
Lord of Hosts. The God of Truth, even God who is Truth it self, has said it;
wherefore we must not be curiously inquisitive after the precise time when, no^
Dispute how these things shall be Accomplished. Without question, all these
things shall be punctually fulfulled in their Season: Wherefore let us Believe,
Rely, and Acquiesce upon the word of a faithful Covenant keeping God. He will
bring his own work to pass in his own Way, and Time, to his own Glory.

A Fifth (and the last Attribute I shall 5. Attribute of Unchange ableness.
Instance in) is the Unchangeableness of God. It Is Evident that Men change,
Times and Customs change: There Is a Vicissitude, and Revolution of all
Sublunary Quis no^ diversa prese^tibus, contrariaque expectatis aut speret aut
timeat. Vell. Paterz.
things: Most true is that of Solomon, One Generation passes away, Eccles. 1.
4. Omnis subita Mutatio rerum non sine quodam quasi fluctu contingit animorum.
Boeth. l. de consol. Phil. l.
and another Generation comes. Archimedes, that great Mathematician gloried
that he would move the whole Earth, if he might have a place assigned him,
where he might fix his Engine. His saying was (...) Give me where I may stand.
Where some Men now a days will go, and how far (whose Principle is
Self-interest) when, and where they will fix and stand, neither can we, nor
they themselves Determine. They ring Changes, and comply with all times and
humors; Yet notwithstanding, all (...). Damasc. Psalm. 102. 27. Mal. 3. 6. Heb.
13. 8. Heb. 9. 4. James 1. 4. (...).
the changes of Creatures have no influence upon the Creator, as to change him
with their Changes. Damascene observes that Whatsoever is Created, is subject
to Changes; But the uncreated, Eternal God is Unchangeable. He is the same, and
his Years shall have no end. He changes not, Christ is unchangeable, and the
Holy Ghost is unchangeable. Therefore, amongst the changeable fluctuating
conditions of the present World; We should found our Comfort upon this
Principle, That we serve an unchangeable God, with whom there is no Metaphora
est a Sole qui est variis nubium obumbrationibus obnoxious, Nihil hujus in Deo
est. Pareus.
variableness, nor shadow of turning. Heavenly Bodies have Parallaxes, but
there is no such thing ^^ God. Friends, such in whom we have put great Job. 6.
15.
confidence, prove perfidious, and are like that deceitful Brook, mentioned by
Job. Riches, they fail, and are on the Prove. 23. 5.
Wing, as swift as an Eagle: And no Man of Understanding, will reckon upon his
great Riches, because he sees so many Eagles flying in the Air. There Is a
Story which I have Read in Aelian: Aelian var. hist.
That there was a Fool in Athens, who laughed, and expressed great Joy, when
any Ship came into the Harbor, because he was possessed with a Fancy, that every
Ship that Arrived there, was his own. Is it not as great folly and madness, for
a Man to account himself the Richer, because he sees the Landing of many Ships
richly Laden with variety of Merchandise, when as he has no Share nor Interest
in any one of them? Riches are things which are not, and to set ones Heart upon
nothing, even that, which often times proves worse than nothing, by reason of
many frustrations and vexations, must needs be an exceeding great madness and
folly. Riches are not in our power to get them. It Is Gods Blessing that makes
Rich, neither is it in our power (when they are got) to keep them. Quid sunt
res humanae? Cinis, pulvis, fumus, umbra, folia cadent^a, flos, Somnium,
fabula, ventus, aer, penna mobilis, ^^da de^urrens, and fi quid istis inferius.
Chrisost. Hom. 9. ad Heb.
No Man can hold the T^^e when it comes, nor stop an Arrow shot out of a Bow;
nor hinder the Motion of the Sun; no more can any Man hold fast these sublunary
things: None can keep Riches sure and stable, and make them last to Eternity:
For under the Sun is nothing of a durable Substance: If we desire that which is
durable, and never fading, we must seek for it in Heaven; it is not to be had
here below.

Further to instance in honors, promotions, and the preferments of the World:
They that have most of them, are often times by the revolutious of times made
sensible that they possess a very slippery standing; So that Nunquid in honor
sine dolor, in praelatione sine turbatione, in Sublimitate sine vanitate quis
esse potest. Bern. in Test. Nicholai. Sermon.
Honors are often times burdens, and objects of envy and malice, and many are
the machinations, for supplanting, and undermining the possessours of them.
Have we not frequently seen many great Personages degraded, and divested of
their Robes? have not their Honors lain in the dust? Haman in sacred Story, is
a signal example of Honors uncertainty. And foreign Historys of Andronicus,
Bajazet, Bellizarius, our own English History of Wolsey and others, give
abundant testimony of this Truth, That Honors are transient fading uncertain
things. And what are promotions and high places, (though many are so eager, and
greedy in the pursuit after them, and often times for the attaining of them,
make Shipwreck of Faith, and a good Conscience) What are they better (I say)
than a Ficta omnia celeriter decidunt, nec Simulatum potest quicquam ess^
diuturnum. Cic. L. 2. Off. vid. Bp. Morton of Ezekiels Wheels.
Mushrome, or a Jonah's Gourd, which in one Night had its Original, and Period?
Sesostris Wheels turning that spoke lowermost, which was erst while uppermost,
are an emblem of the frequent revolutions of all things in the Universe. I
shall conclude this particular with that infallible Testimony of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 75. 6, 7, 8. For promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the
West, nor from the South. But God is the Judge, he puts down one, and setteh
up another. For in the Hand of the Lord is a Cup, and the Wine is Red, it is
full of Mixture, and he pours out of the same: but the Dregs thereof, all the
Wicked of the Earth shall wring them out, and drink them. And to secure,
support, and preserve us safe, amidst the worst of Changes, I shall mention two
or three establishing Scriptures: one is Psalm. 73. 26. My Flesh, and my Heart,
fails; but God is the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever: Another
is Psalm. 89. 43. I will not suffer my Faithfulness to fail. A third, is Heb.
13. 5. (...).
I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Here then we may be preserved from
danger, by relying on these promises: And if Five negatives which more
vehemently deny. Fieri non potest ut te abjiciam plane, aut etiam ad tempus
deseram Grot.
any danger come, then here is a Shield to ward of Blows, Here Is a cordial, a
stay, and a staff, a restorative and supporter; when we seriously consider,
that notwithstanding changes, failings, disappointments, and treacheries, which
we meet with from Creatures, yet our Creator is unchangeable: And his
immutability is a Fort-Royal, an invincible Bulwark, and a Rock impregnable,
unto all true Believers.

CHAP. III.
Containing a Second Argument drawn from God's Promises.

I Proceed to a Second Argument drawn drawn from God's promises. Isa. 12. 3.
Isa. 66. 11. Judge. 16. 17.
from God's Promises; And they are as so many Wells of Salvation, and Breasts
of Consolation. Divine Promises are the Magna Charta, or Title and Interest,
whereby the Saints make a claim to Heaven. It was said of Samson, that his
great Strength, lay in his Hair; So a believers great strength lies in the
divine Promises. All the Promises attest the truth of the Doctrine, That God is
All-Sufficient. And if we make a survey of particular Promises, we shall by an
Induction of particular cases, and particular promises suitably applied, clear
our assertion, or point of Doctrine.

For Instance, one Man is in great want and necessity, hunger-bit, and by
reason of extreme poverty, afflicted with great cares and troubles, and is
still a carking and projecting, and contriving, which way to go about; what
means to use for supply of his pressing wants and exigencies. Let such study
the Promises, and they will speak to them abundance of Encouragement, viz.
Psalm. 34. 9, 10. Psalm. 37. 19. Psalm. 84. 11. (...).
Phil. 4. 19. It Is said there, My God shall supply all your need (i. e.) shall
fill up all your necessities; we have a Promise for supply of necessities, not
for superfluities. Deus cui servio abunde sufficient, quicquid vobis opus erit.
Calv. in loc.
Calvin observes on the place, That God whom I serve, will abundantly suffice
you, what ever you have need of.

Another is much perplexed with variety of Fears, as of loss of Life,
Livelihood, Liberty, etc. He Is oftentimes afraid of the fury of malicious and
violent Adversaries: To such the Promise speaks Comfort and Counsel, Isa. 8.
13. But it will be further replied, that the ^ondition is dangerous, and the
hazards are apparent. To such replies, I Will rejoyn, Isa. 43, 1, 2. Yet further,
some will complain. O! We are a despised, a shiftless, and helpless People,
weak, distressed, impotent, and apt to be trod down, and trampled upon, by
every Foot. Let such Read, Isa. 44. 10, 14. 15. Isa. 51. 12. Mat. 10. 28. What
shall I add further? Read also, Isa. 33. 23. Jer. 37. 10. Nay, more than all
this, even Dry Bones shall become an Army of Men, Haec visio prophetica imago
quodam modo fuit futur Resurrectionis, licet ad literam, restitutio Israelis in
ierram suam per eam signifi^^tur. Cl^rius inter critic. sacr.
Ezekiel. 37. 3, 10. Some understand this, concerning the deliverance from
Babylon. Others hence allude to the conversion of the Jews, in the days of the
Gospel. The Church may be in a dying condition; yet it shall revive, Isa. 26.
19. There will be a Resurrection of the Church, a Resurrection of the Names,
and Reputations of the People of God, however blasted and defamed. There will
be a Resurrection of the Cause of the Church, against Antichrist that Man of
Sin. And although the Witnesses, and Professors thereof, may be Dead for a
time, yet they shall Rise again; and their Resurrection will be Glorious and
Astonishing, even in the sight of their Persecutors. These things shall
certainly be fulfilled in their Season, although the punctual instant* when
this shall be, is not within our cognizance to Determine: We can resolve no
otherwise than according to Psalm. 74. 9. We see not our Signs, there is no more
any Prophet, neither is there among us, any that knows how long. Eligat
opportunitatem, qui libere dat misericordiam. Aug.
However, it is a grand Duty incumbent on us, to be earnest in Prayers and
Supplications, in the behalf of the Church, as Psalm. 14. v. ult. Psalm. 126. 4.
Isa. 62. 1, 7, 8.

Some others there are, who are inwardly Wounded, and that Wound must needs be
more full of dolor and Prove. 18. 14.
anguish. A wounded Spirit, Who can bear? God withdraws Deus unus animum
fractum and quassatum erigere and restaurare potest, idque verbo suo, ^u^
innitentes e naufragio emergemus, and caput attollemus. Carthw.
the Light of his gracious. Countenance from them; and this is their greatest
affliction. They complain frequently of their Troubles, by reason of Gods
hiding his Face from them: The Terrors of the Almighty affright them, and
Sorrow drinks up their Spirits. To such are many suitable Promises to be
applied; and the Application of them, to themselves in particular, is matter of
singular Consolation. Particularly, let them Read, and Meditate on what they
Read, viz. Psalm. 94. 11. Psalm. 112. 5. Isa. 50. 10. He that Wounds, can only
Heal, Hos. 6. 1. Una eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit. Whether the Wound be
outward on the Body, or Estate, or inward on the Soul and Spirit, we must make
our Adresses, and Applications to that one only Healer, the great God of Heaven
and Earth, Exodus 15. 26. For I am the Lord that heals thee. And our Duty is,
to make use of Gods healing Medicines, Jer. 8. 22. What then is our great Duty,
but to hearken what God speaks in his Word, and beware of Relapses? Corporal
Relapses are dangerous* but Spiritual much more, Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear what
God the Lord will Speak: For he will Speak Peace unto his People, and to his
Saints: But let them not turn again to Folly.

CHAP. IV.
Contains a Third Argument drawn from God's Providence.

A Third Argument shall be drawn from divine Providence.
from divine Providence. God's Providence fulfill his Promises. As God
promises help, supplies, and succors unto his People: so by his good Hand of
Providence, he performs what he has Promised. God Promised great things to
Abraham, Genesis 17. 1, 2. And when Abraham was Ninety Years Old and Nine; the
Lord appeared to Abraham, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God, Walk before
Me, and be thou Perfect. And I will make my Covenant between me and thee, and
will Multiply thee exceedingly. And God made his Word good to a tittle to him:
For God gave him Riches in abundance, and a numerous Posterity, and in him were
all the Families of the Earth blessed. At God's Command, Abraham Heb. 11. 8.
left the Land of his Nativity; he disputed Valde commendat Abrahamum
credulitas promissionis, quoniam immediate credidit Deo, relinquendo presentia
dulci^ and chara; ut obediret Deo propter absentia quae non videbat. Tena.
not the Command, but yielded Obedience thereunto. And where ever he went, he
had abundant experience of God's gracious Providence. He and his Wife, though
exposed to great Temptations, were safely preserved in the Court of Abimelech.
As soon as he went Genesis 12. 10.
into Canaan, there was a Famine in the Land; yet God made Provision for him,
and Preserved him, whither ever he went, and he obtained Favor, both in the
Eyes of God and Man.

Not to multiply many more Instances. In Joseph, there was a Concatenation of
several signal Acts of Providence. Although he was envyed by his Brethren, cast
into the Pit, sold to the Ishmaelites, and by them to Potiphar; Yet God was
with him. And when Act. 7. 9.
through the false accusations of his Mistress, he was cast into Prison; yet
God Genesis 39. 29.
was with him in Prison, and gave him favor in the Eyes of the Keeper of the
Prison. It Is very probable, that there were several Prisons in Egypt; but
Joseph was cast into that very Prison, where the King's Servants, the chief
Butler, and Baker were Prisoners. And it came to pass, that each of the King's
Servants Dreamed; and Joseph Interpreted their Dreams, and the Interpretation
accordingly was Fulfilled; for the chief Butler was restored unto his Place,
and the Genesis 40. 21, 22.
chief Baker was Hanged. Joseph might hope, that he had now purchased a good
Friend at Court; he reckoned upon the chief Butlers Friendship; but he, as soon
as restored to his Place, forgot Joseph: Genesis 40. 23.
He ungratefully past an act of oblivion of his Engagements to Joseph. But
God's time is not yet come, for Joseph's Deliverance: Wherefore Pharaoh himself
Dreams, and then the chief Butler remembers his faults, and becomes a
Remembrancer of Joseph's Skill in Interpreting Dreams. Hereupon Joseph is sent
for, and Interprets Pharaoh's Dreams, and for his great Wisdom and
Understanding, is preferred by Pharaoh to be Ruler over all the Land of Egypt.
And here is a further Remark of Providence, that Joseph has a Price put into
his Hand, to be not only (under God) a Savior of all Egypt; but likewise of
his Father and Brethren: For when the Famine was in Egypt, Cannan, and other
Places, Joseph supplied their Wants, and through God's Blessing upon his wife
and provident care, preserved multitudes of Families from Perishing. Joseph
himself acknowledged Act. 7. 9. Non es^ sine ex^mplo, quod Deus benefacit iis,
quibus vos nocetis maxim. Grot.
God's Hand in all things. And St. Stephen making an Historical Narration, of
the several signal Providence exercised toward Joseph, ascribes all to the
Hand of God remarkable in Joseph's Preservation, notwithstanding the envy,
hatred, and malice of his Brethren.

To this History of Joseph, we may add a series of divine Providence fastened
together, concerning the deliverance of the Jews from the bloody Designs of
Haman. Although Haman was highly advanced by Ahassuerus, and obtained the
King's Seal, and Pur was cast, even a day designed by Lot, for a barbarous
Massacre; yet Esther, by a wonderful Providence (though she was a Jew) was
advanced to be Queen instead of Vasthi. She certified the King of Mordecai's
faithfulness, in discovering a Treason, and Mordecai's Loyalty was Chronicled
In perpetuam rei memoriam. Esther Invited the King to a Banquet, and Haman was
Invited likewise: She then interceded for the People of the Jews, and Haman's
intended Mischief was seasonably prevented, and his horrid Designed Wickedness
fell upon his own Pate. The Table proved a snare, and the Banquet a forerunner
of Hamans Destruction. Mordecai was a Loyal, and true hearted Subject to the
King; but Haman hated him, for not doing Non solum consuetudo, sed etiam lex
domestica Iudaeorum diserte vetat honorem deo debitum, ulli mortalium exhibere.
Drus. in Est. 3. 2.
that reverence, which he expected from him. Some are of Opinion, that Haman
expected more then civil Reverence: Others think, that Haman being a Persian,
had the Sun pictured on his Breast, and therefore Mordecai would not bow the
Knee (because the Persians Worshipped the rising Sun.) Others (and I conceive
their Opinion is most probable) suppose, that Mordecai would not do Reverence
to Haman, because he was an Agagite (i. e.) of the Family of Agag King of the
Amalekites, and the Lord had a Controversy with that wicked Nation, Exodus 17.
14. And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a Book, and
Rehearse it in the Ears of Joshua: I will utterly put out the Remembrance of
Amalek from under Heaven. However Mordecai would neither bow, nor bend to
profane proud Haman, an inveterate, and a cursed Enemy; Yet notwithstanding,
there is a signal Testimony upon Record of the Loyalty of Mordecai Esth. 2. 22,
23. And the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the Queen; and
Esther certified the King thereof, in Mordecai's name. And when Inquisition was
made of the Matter, it was found out; therefore they were both Hanged on a
Tree: and it was Written in the Book of the Chronicles before the King. But
Haman was resolved to leave no means unattempted, to Revenge himself on
Mordecai; wherefore he built a Gallows, and went on purpose to Petition for the
King's Consent, to Hang Mordecai thereon.

But observe Est. 6. 1. On that Night could not the King sleep, and he
commanded to bring the Book of Records of the Chronicles; and they were Read
before the King. Even that self-same Night before Haman came to beg Mordecai
for the Gallows, the King could not Sleep: And upon inquisition made after
Mordecai's fidelity, the King put exceeding great Honor upon Mordecai, and
employed Haman, his implacable Adversary, to see all that Grandeur done. And
Lex non est justo ulla. ^ Quam necis artifices art perire sua. Esth. 7. 10.
Mat. 7. 2. Prover ^ium est apud Hebr^os: Mensura pro mensur^, and apud lati^^s:
par pari refer. Beza.
what became of Haman at last, but that he was Punished, by way of Retaliation,
and caught in the same Pit, which he made for another; for he was Hanged on the
same Gallows, which he had prepared for Mordecai: He was paid in his own Coin,
and served as Adonibezek was, even Punished by way of Retaliation, Judge. 1. 6.
I cannot pass by Two or Three more Instances of a special Remark and
Observation. When the Prophet Elijah, was preserved from the bloody Intentions
of Jezabel, and constrained to fly for his Life; he had Angels for his
Purveyors, a Brook to quench his Thrist, Ravens to bring him Flesh, a Widow
Woman in a Famine, to make him Cakes: When by reason of Jezabels Persecution,
many Prophets were put to Death: God raised Obadiah to be a Friend to those
that Survived; he hid them by Fifty in a Cave, and fed them with Bread and
Water. When Jeremy was cast into a Dungeon, and his feet stuck fast in the
Mire, then Ebedmelech the Ethiopian became the Prophets Advocate, and he spoke
a seasonable and effectual Word, for the Prophets enlargement.

And if there were any need, to light a Candle to the Sun; variety of Examples
might be produced, discovering wonderful Providence, for the Preservation of
the People of God. To mention a few instead of many. When that horrible
devilish Massacre of the Protestants in France, was acted on Bartholomew day,
being the Sabbath day, and the Lord Admiral Gasper Collinius was barbarously
Butchered (notwithstanding See Mr. Clarks Martyrology.
many fair flattering Words promised unto him) Thousands of Protestants were
Murdered, insomuch that the* Channel in the Streets ran down with Blood; yet
then some were miraculously Preserved. Dr. Peter De-Moulin that eminent Light
in the Church, was preserved from the Murderers, being hid under a Kneading
Trough. Merlin was preserved for a Week or more in a Hay-Mough, where an Hen
came every day, and laid an Egg, by the Nourishment whereof, he was kept alive.
Another for Shelter, hid himself in a Coal-House, which being without a Door,
was the more unlikely for a place of Security: But (as God ordered it for the
best,) a Spider came thither, and wove a Web over the place where he entered
in; so that, the Murderers went away, saying, there could be none there. At
the Siege of Rochel, there was a potent Enemy Fighting without, and a sharper
Enemy Conflicting within, viz. a dreadful Famine. And the City was almost
famisht when the Lord wonderfully relieved them, by causing the Tide to bring
to the Shore, abundance of Shellfish, the like whereof, never came there
before, nor since, by which means, many Thousands were preserved Alive.

To all these, let us each one in particular, take a Survey of particular
providence and make a Catalogue of Gods gracious Acts of Providence, and
acknowledge thus in particular. Such a time I knew A pinching Famine, wherein I
was in great straits and perplexities; and I knew not where to have Bread, to
put into my Mouth; then God fed me, and kept me alive. Such a time, I was in
great danger of Fire and Waters; then God preserved me from the violence of
both. Such a time, I was beset with Thieves and Robbers, then God delivered me.
Such a time, I was Sick of a long and dangerous Disease, and was even at the
brink of the Grave, ready to fall into it; yet then, the Lord raised me up, and
added more days to my Life. Such a time, Enemies made long furrows on my Back,
and bereft me of my Goods, and dispossessed me of my Freehold, and deprived me of
my visible Livelihood; yet maugre all the malice and fury of the worst of
Enemies, God has kept me alive amidst these Sufferings, and made supplies, and
daily Provisions for me. Thus then I argue, What God has done, he can do. He
is one and the same Omnipotent, and All-Sufficient Lord God. I Will therefore
hold the Conclusion unalterable, viz. That God is able to relieve me now, as
formerly: His Hand is not shortened, that it cannot help, his Ear is not heavy,
that it cannot hear; What God promises, his providence perform to the utmost.
From all these instances, we have strong ground, for conviction and confidence
in the truth of our Assertion, That God is All-Sufficient. I appeal to the
Experiences of believing and observing Christians, who when they were environed
with Troubles and Difficulties, and even almost at their Wits end, not knowing
which way to wind out themselves, being destitute, or altogether frustrated of
all outward visible Relief; yet, then they have retired themselves, shut
themselves in their Closets, and fallen upon their Knees, and have been earnest
and importunate Solicitors, at the Throne of Grace, and so have received a
gracious Answer of their Prayers.

There is a remarkable Story or two, wherewith I have been much affected, and I
should be glad to Affect others accordingly. There was a poor Scholar, in the
University of Oxford, who was very Learned, and Well-deserving; but for want of
Means, was like to have been put by his Degree; the loss whereof would have
been much prejudicial to his Preferment in that College where he Lived: Being
much perplexed, he repairs to his Study, and falls upon his Knees, praying and
begging Help from Heaven; before he had done Praying* one knocked at his
Study-Door, and told him, that the Vice Chancellor sent to speak with him: He
went to him presently, and he gave him a considerable Sum of Money, whereby his
Wants were supplied. Dr. Barnaby Potter, Provost of Queens College, and
afterward Bishop of Carlisle.
This Man, afterward became the Head of that College, and from thence, was
preferred to greater Promotion: This Story, he told to a person of good Credit,
from whom I had it; And he spoke it in a way of Thankfulness, Communicating his
Experience, for the Encouragement of others. To Dr. Prideaux Rector of
Exeter-Colledge, and Bishop of Worcester.
this I Will add another Story, concerning an Eminent Learned Professor of the
same University, who would in an humble, and thankful way, frequently make
mention of his low Condition, when he came to the University: Much I my self
have heard him speak to this purpose. And after he became Head of a College,
and Regius Professor, he would keep in his Study, his skin Breeches, which he
brought with him to the University, as a Remembrancer of his former Poverty.
One Story more I Will Dr. Chadderton Master of Emanuel-Colledge.
tell of a Learned, and Eminently Godly Doctor of the University of Cambridge:
He was Converted to be a sound Protestant in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Days; which when his Father (being a Papist) heard thereof, he sent him a
Groat, and withal a Message, that he should never have any more from him,
unless he would change his Religion. This Message did not alter his Resolution;
but he followed his Studies, and God raised him Friends; insomuch, though he
lived, after his Father so threatened him, above Eighty Years; yet he never
wanted Supplies elsewhere, though he received not a Penny from his Father. He
proved so Eminent for his Parts and Piety, that he was Chosen the first Master
of Emanuel-Colledge. When that Preferment was first offered him, he made a
modest refusal, being Conscious to himself of his own unworthiness (For the
best Men think meanliest of themselves). But the Founder had such a great
Esteem of him, insomuch as he told him, if he would be no Master, Sir Walter
Mildmay.
he would be no Founder of that College. How wonderfully did the Lord Provide
for this good Man! Hereunto, we may apply that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 27. 10.
When my Father and Mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. This
gracious Man found this truth experimentally made good to him, in particular:
It Is further reported, that he kept that very Groat, which his Father sent him,
till his dying day. He lived long, even till above an Hundred Years Old, and so
Dyed in a good Old Age; He Lived desired, and Dyed Lamented.

What shall I say further for the illustration of the Doctrine of my Text? Time
would fail me sooner than matter of History, or experimental Narratives of
God's gracious provisions for his Children. Does not God take care for Sparrows
and Ravens, and take notice how many Young Ones are in every Nest? Does not God
provide for Worms, and the meanest creeping Creatures? And will not God take
much more care for his own Children? If a Master of a Family take care for his
Horse, he will Mr. Samuel Hieron Minister of Modbury in the County of Devon.
take much more care for his Child. Mr. Hieron that excellent Divine (whose
Works praise him in the Gate): When he was Dying, he uttered these Words, God
(said he) that takes care for young Ravens, will take care for the young
Hierons. And so it came to pass, for after his Death, some noble Persons sent
for his Children, and Maintained them very comfortably. I was well acquainted
with two Precious Ministers, lately gone to Heaven: One on his death Bed, said,
Mr. John Feniby of* Thoydon-Garnon in Essex. Mr. Giffor^ of Geyton in
Northamptonshire.
He would leave to his Wife and Children, a gracious God and his Promises.
Another said concerning his Children, That he was assured that his Children, if
they feared God, they should not want, and if they did not fear God, he wished,
that they might want, till they did fear him. Luther on his death Bed, said,
That Lands and Riches he had none; but he commends his Relations to the
Providence of his gracious Father, who takes care of his Children. Suppose the
extremity be so great, as outward Provisions may be took away; yet God's
All Sufficiency, Wisdom, and Mercifulness, may not in the least be called into
question: For what said the Martyr, when she was threatened to be Famished: If
(said she) they take away my Meat, God will take away my Stomach. But all these
things must be understood with Caution. Here is not in the least a Door open to
Idleness, and Slothfulness, in the particular Callings and Stations wherein God
has placed us, whilst we live upon Earth: For any one upon presumption of
God's All Sufficiency, to lie in a Ditch, and cry God help me: For any one to
neglect his Calling, and Eat the Bread of Idleness; this is in an high manner
to tempt God, and to abuse Divine Providence. Wherefore let us be all earnestly
Exhorted, to be faithful and industrious in the particular callings and
capacities, wherein God has set us in this present World. The Labourer, not
the Loyterer is worthy of his Hire. The Hand of the Diligent Prove. 10. 4.
makes Rich. The diligent and industrious Man is most capable, and deserving
of Preferment, Prove. 22. 29. See thou a Man diligent in his Business? He
shall stand before Kings he shall not stand before mean Men. There are two
Rocks like those of Scylla and Charybdis, which must be carefully avoided; One
is a distrustful, carking, immoderate care; The other is a Supine carelessness
and slothfulness of Spirit: There Is a middle way to Sail safely betwixt these
two Rocks, and so to escape Splitting, Medio tutissimus ibis. It Is true, we
ought not to be careless, nor immoderately careful; We must use these outward
things with moderation, and so regard them, as they may be subservient, and
subordinate unto Heavenly. The Body must be a servant to the Soul: it should be
a helper and furtherer, not a hinderer. The things of this World must be made
use of in Subordination, to those great things of Eternity; Wherefore Christ's
Order must be observed, Mat. 6. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and
his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. An (...) is
abominable. Let Us then bottom all our Strength, Supports, and Comforts, upon
God's All Sufficiency; let us continue watching and praying, relying on God's
Word, and staying our Hearts upon his Promises; let us be diligent and
conscientious in the discharge of the duties of our calling, and questionless,
God will provide, and supply, and sustain us, by his gracious Providence; let us
do our duty, and leave all successes unto God.

CHAP. V.
Containing a Fourth Argument from the Saints Experiences.

THe Fourth and last Argument shall from Saints Experiences.
be drawn from the Saints particular Experiences. Their Experiences are grounds
of singular consolation and encouragement. So Hezekiah, after a signal
deliverance from a great Sickness, makes a grateful acknowledgment, Isa. 38.
16. O Lord, by these things Men live, and in all these things is the Life of my
Spirit, so will thou recover me, and make me to Live. The Seventy render the
words (...). Per promissa tua and facta, So Grotius. Men live by promises and
providence. The experience of these things keeps the Children of God alive and
revives their Spirits in the midst of their sorest Afflictions. Now Hezekiah
had singular experience of God*s Faithfulness, in recovering him from Sickness
(which was, as is thought the Cum ficus a medicis etiam nostris adhibeantur ad
pestem maturandam, fieri potest ut dominus medici^am promissione adjuvaret.
Calv. in Is. 38. 21.
Pestilence) and granting him a Lease of Fifteen Years for his Life, he makes a
Poem of Gratitude, and communicates his experience to Posterity. * It Is Quia
celebris etiam erit futurae atati and semper vigebit in omnium memoria. Calv.
a strong Reason which Calvin gives on the Place. Because this History will be
Famous to future Ages, and be kept fresh upon Record. And as Hezekiah, so David
draws grounds of support and comfort from former Experiences. When David was to
Encounter with Goliath Saul looked for one as much Higher than himself, as he was
Taller than the rest, he expected some austere Face and brawny Arm; young rudly
David is so far below his thoughts, that he receives rather contempt than
thanks. B. Hall's Contemplat.
( Impar congressus, a most unequal Encounter in humane Conjecture) yet David
has recourse to Faith and Experience, which were Armor of Proof: He had given
his probatum est, as you may Read, how strongly he urges an Argument from 1 Samuel 17. 34, 35, 36. And David said unto Saul, thy Servant kept his Fathers
Sheep, and there came a Lion and a Bear, etc. After David had escaped out of
Abimelech's Court (that was his appellative name) or Achish King of Gath, you
Read, what good use David made of this Experimental deliverance Psalm. 34. 6.
This poor Man cried and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his
Troubles. David himself, was that poor distressed Man, that received such a
signal Deliverance, whereupon he calls others to join with him in Praising of
God, v. 3, 4. By this Example Exemplo suo persuadere conatur reliquis,
pollicens illis si properent ad Dominum certe fore exaudiendos.
he persuades others, Promising them, that if they make have to God, certainly
they shall be heard. So Musculus on the place. And as this Holy Man tells his
own Experiences, and how Graciously God dealt with himself; so he Musters up
admirable Experiences of God's Dealings with others, as so many Incentives, for
his faith and recumbency upon God. There Is an eminent Instance, which I shall
mention, of great Consequence, as the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 74. 13.
Thou did divide the Sea by thy Strengh, thou brakest the Heads of the Dragons
in the Waters. How the Sea was divided, is mentioned, Exodus 14. 21, 22. God
caused the Sea to go back* by a strong East Wind all that Night, and made the
Sea Dry Land, and the Waters were Divided. And the Children of Israel went into
the midst of the Sea, upon the Dry Ground; and the Waters were a Wall unto
them, on their Right Hand, and on their Left. Here Is one great Experience, that
the Sea was dried up, and became passable for the Israelites; Another is, that
the Heads of the Dragons were Nominat Principes and proceres exercitus
pharaonis Dracones, hosque ita a truculentia, and saevitia quam exercuerunt in
^sraelitas, appellat. Moll.
broken in the Waters. What were these Dragons? Answ. They were Princes* and
Captains in Pharaohs Army, who for their fierceness, and cruelty against
Israel, were like Dragons. What became of these Dragons, and furious Enemies?
See Exodus 15. 4. These were Pharaohs chosen Captains, that were Drowned in the
Sea. The Psalmist goes on in the same Psalm, 74. 14. Thou brakest the Heads of
Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be Meat to the People, Inhabiting the
Wilderness. Hence arise Three Questions. (1.) What Is meant by this Leviathan?
(2.) How his Heads were broken in pieces? (3.) How he came to be Meat to the
People, Inhabiting the Wilderness?

Quest. What Is meant by this Leviathan?

Answ. By Leviathan, we understand Pharaoh. Calvin observes upon the Place,
Leviathan non abs re vocatur Pharao, propter commoditates maris, quia illic
regnum suum quasi Balaena exerceat.

Quest. 2. What Is meant by breaking of the Heads of Leviathan?

Answ. The Forces, Strength, and Power of Pharaoh, were all broken to pieces;
not one of the Egyptians Escaped, Exodus 14. 28. Exodus 15. 19. Now that the
great, Proud Leviathan Pharaoh was Destroyed, and his Captains, Horsemen, and
all his Host; these were great Deliverances.

Quest. But 3ly. How did this Leviathan become Meat to the People, Inhabiting
the Wilderness?

Answ. Some understand it of the Spoils, and Prey which these Israelites got
from the Dead Bodies, and that these Dead Bodies were Meat to Wild Beasts and
Fowls. But I conceive there is yet a further meaning of these Words: God gave
the Leviathan to be Meat to the Israelites, for their Faith, Security, and
Dependence, and in the exercise of their experience and recumbence upon God; to
this purpose, Calvin gives the Sense of the Words, Victuals were then laid in
Annon^ fuit tunc reposita, qu^ vesceretur populus; quia extinctis hostibus,
securitas non aliter ac cibus vitam protraxit. Calv.
for their Food, because when the Enemies were Destroyed, Security as well as
Food protracted their Life.

A few parallel Instances I shall Select. St. Peter was delivered from the Fury
of Herod, Act. 12. 11. And hence he took a ground of Encouragement, to go on
resolvedly in the Work of the Ministry. St. Paul makes a Catalogue of his
Sufferings, 2 Cor. 11. How often was he delivered from perils of Robbers,
perils of Waters, perils among false Brethren? He was delivered out of the
Mouth of the Lion, i. e. Nero, that cruel Man. And by all deliverances he was a
Gainer, and lays down his Experience, 2 Cor. 1. 4, 5. Who comfort us in all
our Tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any Trouble,
by the Comfort wherewith we our selves are Comforted of God. For as the
Sufferings of Christ abound in us; so our Consolation also abounds by Christ.
It would be a large Work (though it may be worth the while) to reckon up the
comfortable Experiences of the Children of God. I shall only Instance in some
choice Servants of God, who Experimentally reaped much benefit by Afflictions.
David joins the Rod and Staff together, for his Comfort, Psalm. 23. 1. and Psalm.
119. 67. he confesses, Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have
kept thy Word. Luther professed, that Afflictions taught him to understand the
Scriptures. How many have been brought home by Afflictions, who in their
Prosperity went astray? Isiodor. says, Adversa corporis, remedia sunt animae.
Aegritudo carnem vulnerat, mentem curat, i. e. Corporal Adversities are
Spiritual Remedies; Sickness wounds the Flesh, but heals the Mind. Beza,
one of the most pious, learned, and orthodox Critics (that I know of) speaks
of a great Sickness, wherewith he was Visited, Morbus iste (inquit) verae fuit
sanitatis principium, i. e. That Sickness was the beginning of true Spiritual
Health. It is not Dr. Arrowsmith chains of Principles. vid. melch. Adam in vit.
Exterorum.
(as a reverend Divine observes) more usual for Children to shoot up in length,
than with Christians to wax taller in Grace, in, or after Sickness. Rolloc said
upon his Death Bed, I am not ashamed to profess, that I never reached to so
high a pitch of the Knowledge of God, as I have attained in this Sickness.
Olevian said upon his Death Bed, In this Disease, I have learned to know aright
what Sin is, and what the Majesty of God is. I shall mention Id in vit. German.
but one Example more, and that is of Learned Rivet, who said upon his Death
Bed, In the space of Ten Days, Dauber. 9. in orat. funeb.
since I kept my Bed, I have learned more, and made greater progress in
Divinity, than in the whole course of my Life before. What further enlargement
may be required, I leave to the Saints particular Experiences, and shall add no
more concerning this particular Head.

CHAP. VI.
For Demonstration of the Doctrine by Reasons, and first from necessity of
Precept.

HAving dispatched the First Head of Head 2. for Demonstr. by Reason.
my Discourse, wherein I have proved the Doctrine, That God is, All-Sufficient,
by Four convincing, and weighty Arguments; I come now in the Second place, to
demonstrate this Truth inferred from the Doctrine, viz. That this Consideration,
that God is All-Sufficient, should engage us silently and quietly to submit
unto God, and stay, and depend upon his All Sufficiency, amidst our greatest
Losses and Afflictions.

The Truth of the Doctrine, I shall endeavor to demonstrate by a Fourfold
Reason drawn from the necessity, excellency and utility of the Duty, in quietly
submitting to God's Hand, and lastly from the mischievous Consequences of
repining, murmuring, and struggling against God.

The First Reason drawn from the from necessity of precept.
Necessity of this Duty; and that is to be considered, as Necessitas praecepti
vel medii. 1. For the Necessity of Precept. We are frequently commanded in the
Word of God, to Exercise these great Duties of Waiting, Believing, and
Submitting unto the Will of God. David's Faith was an Excellent Cordial to keep
him from Fainting. Psalm. 27. 13. I had Fainted, unless I had believed to see
the Goodness of the Lord, in the Land of the Living. And, What Is the Duty,
which he prescribes? see Verse. 14. Wait on the Lord, be of good Courage, and he
shall strengthen thine Heart: Wait I say, on the Lord. He was much troubled
about t^^ Prosperity of Wicked M^n: He prescribes the same Duty of waiting on
the Lord. Psalm. 37. 34. Wait on the Lord, and keep his Way, and he shall Exalt
thee to Inherit the Land: When the Wicked are cut off, thou shall see it. When
he was troubled with treacherous, hypocritical, false-hearted Men, he
prescribed a Remedy, Psalm. 55. 22. Cast thy Burden upon the Lord, and he shall
sustain thee. And his Resolution is fixed, Verse. 23. But I will Trust in thee.
David charge this Duty of Waiting, upon his own Soul, Psalm. 62. 5. My Soul,
wait thou only upon God; for my Expectation is from him. And this Duty of
Trusting, he frequently presses upon himself and others, Psalm. 37. 3. 5. And
he lays down strong Encouragements to trust in God; for there is Security in
the Practice of this Duty. Psalm 18. 30. He is a Buckler to all Psalm. 18. 30.
those that trust in him. Psalm. 37. 5. Commit thy Way unto the Lord; trust also
in him, and he shall bring it to pass. Prove. 29. 25. The Fear of Man brings a
Snare; Isa. 7. 9.
but who so puts his Trust in the Lord, shall be safe. And there is Stability
in Trusting in God. Psalm. 125. 1. They that trust in the Lord, shall be as
Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever. There Is happiness,
Prove. 16. 20. Who so Trusts in the Lord, Happy is he. A Blessing is their
Portion, that Trust in God, Psalm. 34. 8. Blessed is the Man that Trusts in
him. And what can be desired more? Read further, Isa. 26. 9. Isa. 40. 31. And I
need name no more Scriptures for Comfirmation of so clear a Truth.

But if Men will be so Mad, as to venture elsewhere, they shall smart for it;
If Men will forsake a Fountian, and betake themselves to Cisterns: If Men will
forsake God, and try Creatures, and put their Confidence in them, they shall
pay dear for their Madness and Folly, and they shall never find what they
expect from the Creatures. They put Trust in them, but they shall find them
Deceitful, as Jacob found Laban, Genesis 31. David's familiar Friends dealt
Perfidiously with him, Psalm. 41. 9. wherefore he Communicates his Experience,
not to Trust the great Ones of the Earth, Psalm. 146. 3. And injoyns us to put
our Trust in God, Psalm. 118. 8, 9. It is better to Trust in the Lord, than to
put Confidence in Man. It is better to Trust in the Lord, than to put
Confidence in Princes.

Quest. But some will complain of their own Weakness, and their Enemies
Strength, and Combinations. For

Answ. We must have recourse to that strengthening Promise, Isa. 41. 14, 15,
16. Fear not thou Worm Jacob, and ye Men of Israel, I will help thee, says the
Lord and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel. Behold I will make thee a new
sharp Threshing-Instrument having Teeth: thou shall Thresh the Mountains, and
beat them Small, and shall make the Hills as Chaff. Thou shall Fan them, and
the Wind shall carry them away, and the Whirlwind shall Scatter them: and
thou shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall Glory in the Holy One of Israel. And
against all Associations, and Combinations of Adversaries, we have abundantly
enough to Arm, and Encourage us against them, from Isa. 8. 12. 13. 14. Say ye
not a Confederacy, to all them, to whom this People shall say a Confederacy:
neither fear ye their Fear, nor be afraid. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself,
and let him be your Fear, and let him be your Dread. And he shall be for a
Sanctuary, etc.

Others will complain of heavy Burdens, and the insupportable Pressures, Cares
and Troubles inevitable; and they are so puzzled and perplexed, as they know not
how to get Rid of them: It Is usual with such Malcontents to know more, what
makes against them, than what makes for them. Wherefore let them be advised to
take Counsel from the Word of God. Particularly we are Commanded To cast our
Burden upon the Lord; to be careful in nothing, but Psalm. 55. 22. Phil. 4. 6.
1 Pet. 5. 7.
to make our Requests known with Prayers and Supplications; and to cast our
Care upon him, for he cares for us. If God makes us drink the Wine of
Astonishment, and Eat the Bread of Affliction; If we drink Water and Gall, and
have a bitter Cup of Affliction mingled for us; let us not revile Instruments,
let us not murmur against second Causes; but let us imitate Job, who neither
railed against the Sabeans, nor the Chaldeans, nor at Satan; but he
acknowledged God in all, and quietly submitted unto him, Job 1. 21. The Lord
gave, and the Lord has taken away, (...). verse. 70. Isa. 30. ^5.
Blessed be the Name of the Lord. In times of great Affliction, we are
Exhorted, to a silent and quiet Behavior, Jer. 8. 14. Let us be Silent, for
the Lord God has put us to Silence. And Zach. 2. 13. Be Silent, O all Flesh
before the Lord: for he is raised up out of his Holy Habitation. And Amos 5.
13. Therefore the Prudent shall keep Silence in that time for it is an Evil
time. That time was a time of Persecution, for we Read in the 12. v. They
afflict the Just, and they turn aside the Poor in the Gate from their Right.
What Is the Duty incumbent now, but to be Silent ( i. e.) Taciti perferent
injurias quicunque laesi fuerint and ^orabunt intus suos gemitus, quia non
audebu^^ conquaeri. Calv.
not to murmur, rage, and fret, and fume against Evil Instruments. And it is a
great Point of Prudence, to exercise such a quiet Behavior, in such Evil
times. The meaning of that place, is not, that Men should be Tongue-ty'd in
God's Cause; but that they should forbear all callumniations, and reproaches,
which are usually belcht forth, by way of personal Revenge. Christ, in a
special manner Commends the Practice of Patience, Luke 21. 19. In your
Patience, Possess ye your Souls. It Is the more Remarkable, that this Charge was
given by Christ, by way of a Preparative, to fit and prepare them, for those
great Calamities, which should befall Jerusalem. Christ foretold Jerusalems*
Destruction, and he Commends this excellent Grace of Patience, which, at such a
time, will be of singular use and benefit. Thus you see Evidently, that there
is a necessity of Precept.

CHAP. VII.
Proving the Doctrine from the necessity of Means in Four Particulars.

NOw Secondly Consider, there is Necessitas 2. From necessity of Means
Medii. For a quiet, contented, submissive Spirit, which patiently yields, and
resigns all to God, is either a means to remove the Trouble, or else, to
Alleviate and Mitigate it, or 3dly. To have it Sanctified, and made Profitable,
or 4thly. To make Compensation for all Losses. Let Us warily understand all
these Particulars, not as if they were efficient or meritorious Causes; but
only as instrumental Means, Subservient, and Subordinate to God's Assistance:
And so understanding them, we will enlarge them particularly, as follows.

First, I say a submissive, quiet, yielding A Submissive Spirit is a Means to
remove the Burden.
Spirit, oftentimes gets the Burden and Trouble removed. Thus it fared with
Jehoshaphat, 2 Cron. 20. 12. We know not what to do, but our Eyes are upon
Thee. And see the Blessed Success, verse. 22, 23. And Hanani the Seer tells Asa,
2 Chronicles. 16. 8. Were not the Aethiopians and Lubims an huge Host, with many
Chariots and Horsemen? Yet because thou did rely on the Lord, he delivered
Tantum in nobis fidei sta^bilitate Dominus esse desiderat, ut certius esse,
quod credimus, quam quod patimur judicemus, and verius habeamus sperando, quam
sensibiliter. Hieron.
them into thine Hand. When we can Believe, and cast our selves upon God, and
wait with Patience, then are we in a capacity of receiving Mercy. Faith
establishes and quieteth the Heart, and prepares it for reception of Mercies.

Secondly, If the Trouble yet remain, 2. A submissive Spirit, is a meaus to
ease the Burden.
and still grieve us; however, if the Heart can trust in God, and quietly
submit unto him, the Burden is alleviated and facilitated, and the smart much
Mitigated. It was a hard Trial for Aaron to submit so quietly, when two of his
Children were struck Dead before his Eyes; yet questionless his Grief was much
abated, and his Affliction lessened, by his silent and patient Deportment,
under that heavy Stroke of God, Lev. 10. 3. Then Moses said unto Aaron, this is
that which the Lord spoke, saying, I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh
Silet audita voluntate Dei, Cajetan.
me, and before all the People I will be Glorified: And Aaron held his peace.

It was an unwelcome, and an astonishing Message, which Samuel told Eli from
the Lord, of the Destruction of his Sons, and utter Extirpation of his Family:
Yet Eli discovered such an excellent temper of Spirit, in resigning his Will to
Gods Will, as thereby his Burden was made far Lighter, 1 Samuel 3. 18. And Eli
said, it is the Lord, let him do what seems him Good. How dreadful was that
Prophecy of Isaiah to Hezekiah, that all his Treasures should be carried to
Babylon, and that his Children should be Eunuchs in the Palace at Babylon! Yet
Hezekiah acknowledged all Good, that came from God, 2 King. 20. 19. Good is the
Word of the Lord, which thou have Spoken. In all Job's Sufferings, he
acknowledged that the Hand of God had Touched him, Job 19. 21. He received
message after message of sad Tidings, and each Messenger worse than the former.
One brings the News of Job. 1.
the Sabeans carrying away his Oxen and Asses. Another tells him of the Burning
of his Sheep and Servants: A Third tells him of the Chaldeans taking away his
Camels, and Slaying his Servants: A Fourth brings the Saddest News of all, that
the House fell upon his Children, and Slew them. The Messengers of Afflictions
were so swift in running to meet with Job, as if the Second Messenger made have
to Tread upon the Heels of the First, and the Third upon the Second, and the
Fourth upon the Third: Velut unda superve^^^ undae.
All these came upon Job, like Tempestuous Waves of the Sea, dashing one upon
another, with renewed Violence* Now though Job could not remove these heavy
Afflictions; yet he found the Sense of them much abated, and his Spirit much
quieted, by Praising God for all, and acknowledging the Hand of God in all, as
appears, Job 1. 21.

Third, However though Afflictions 3. Afflictions are Sanctified.
continue very great and painful, and neither removeable, nor sense of
Mitigation appears at present, yet the worst of Afflictions are (through Mercy)
Sanctified to the Children of God. Affliction in it self is not Bonum, yet it is
turned in Bonum, to the Good of all true Believers.

The Good Figgs were carried away Captive for their Good, Jer. 24. 5. The Tribe
of Judah resembled by those Good Figgs, was carried away Captive into Babylon;
but God wrought Good for them, out of their Captivity. Men would be apt to pass
Censures, because of the Sufferings of Judah in their Captivity: but the Lord
Corrects their Censures, in promising that all shall be for their Good. Quasi
diceret, prepostere fieri judicium de calamitate paucorum annorum, sed
expectandum esse finem. Calvin in Jer. 24. 5. Luther in Genesis 6.
As if he should say, That a Judgment of the Calamity of a few Years, is made
preposterously, but the End must be expected, (as Calvin observes on the place
fore-quoted, Jer. 24. 5.) The Lord Professes that he humbled, and proved his
People, and his end was to do them Good in the latter End, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. We are
Corrected for our Profit, Heb. 12. 10.

Luther used to say, Schola crucis, est Schola lucis, and non est Christanus
qui non est crucianus. It Is a common saying, (...); Corrections are
Instructions; so they should be; and they are happy, where Correction and
Instruction meet together, as the Psalmist Cum vibices dorso meo imprimeres,
precepta tua cordi meo insculpsisti. Rivet. in Psalm.
expresses, Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the Man, whom thou chastneth O Lord, and
teach him out of thy Law. Joseph's Brethren, when they were in distress in
Egypt, reflected upon their Sin, and were perplexed for it, which was committed
many Years before, and looked upon their present Suffering, as a just Punishment
for that Sin, Genesis 42. 21. And they said one to another, we are verily Prius
quam urgeret eos afflictio tor pebant, nunc ingredi coguntur in suas
conscientias. Calvin in Genesis 42. 21.
Guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the Anguish of his Soul when he
besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this Distress come upon us.
They are good Observations, Oculos, quos culpa claudit, poena aperit, vexatio
Qui tribulantur, Sacras Scripturas melius intelligunt, Secundi and prosperi eas
legu^^ sicut Ovi^ii carmen, Luther.
dat intellectum. The Fiery Furnace did not hurt the Three Children. Only Three
were cast into the Furnace, but there appeared a Fourth, even the Angel of God
for their Deliverance: The nature of Fire was changed, insomuch, as it had no
power, so much as to Singe an Hair of their Heads.

The Mouths of the Lions were stopped, and could not hurt Daniel; Daniel was Dan.
7. 22.
cast alone into the Den, but he was not alone there, for he had the company of
an Angel of God, who was sent to shut the Lions Mouths.

The Deluge of Water, which Drowned the whole World, did not drown Noah's Ark.
but bare it up; so Afflictions, when Sanctified, are so far from hurting God's
Children, as they help them, and lift them up nigher to Heaven. Afflictions are
as a vantage ground, to raise them higher, to see a great deal further; or like
so many Looking-Glasses, to represent to the Children of God, their Stains and
Deformities. I shall apply a saying of St. Ambrose, Quod pateris, unde plangis,
Medicina est tibi non poena, castigatio, non damnatio; noli repellere flagellum
Domini, nisi vis repelli ab haereditate. Tribu^atio est aqua salsa quae Scabiem
purgat and abstergit. Guil. Paris. de morib. 9.
It Is reported that salt Marshes cure disseased Sheep; I am sure, Salt
preserves Meat from Putrefaction. Scullions scour away Rust from Vessels. The
Fan separates the Wheat from the Chaff: much more do Afflictions when
Sanctified, advantage God's Children: But we must know, that it was not the
moving Veniet tribulatio mea, veniet and purgatio mea. August. Psalm* 61. Joh.
5. 4.
of the Waters of the pool of Bethesda, that made them Healing; but it was the
coming of the Angel at a certain Season, who troubled the Waters, and
afterward, who ever stepped in first was Healed. It was not the Mantle of Elijah
that divided the Waters, but the God of Elijah: neither will Troubles, Losses,
Sufferings, merely considered as in themselves, do us any good, unless the Lord
Sanctify them to us, and by them, Purge, Purify, Refine, and Cleanse us, and
make us partakers of his Holiness: Wherefore our Duty is, with a calm and
sedate Spirit, to submit unto God's Correcting Hand, and act Faith on Promises,
and exercise Patience, and Pray Job 36. 10.
that God would open our Ears to receive Discipline, and Purge out our Dross
and Tin; so that by Afflictions and Corrections, our Sins and Corruptions, may
be wrought out, and Graces wrought into our Hearts. If Afflictions produce such
good Effects, we shall be exceeding great Gainers by our Losses; and after a
deliberate reflecting upon all our Sufferrings, we shall Experimentally
conclude* with David, every one of us in particular, as Psalm. 119. 67. Before I
was Afflicted I went astray; but now I have kept thy Words, Comp. with verse.
17. It is good for me, that I have been Afflicted, that I might learn thy
Statutes. What great benefit God's People get by their Sufferings, is evidently
Represented, Psalm. 68. 13. Though ye have lain among the Pots, yet shall ye be
as the Wings of a Dove, covered with Silver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold.
Etiam jacueritis inter vasa plena fuliginis i. e. oppressi fueritis magna
calamitate candidi laetique reddemini ob liberationem Vatab.
This (as good Authors observe) sets forth the happy Issue of Afflictions, and
the great Benefit which the People of God get by them; but of this more largely
in the next particular.

Fourthly and lastly, though Afflictions 4thly. Vnde sequitur non semper
jucunda serenitate frui Ecclesiam; sed ex tenebris erutam splendorem
recuperare, ac si ab omni malo intacta foret. Calv.
may be heavy for a time, yet the exceeding great Compensation, and Profit
acruing in the close, will make amends for all: So it was with Job, Jam. 5. 11.
Ye have heard of the Patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord. And
what that was, we have Recorded, Job. 42 10. Scriptura monet ipsi duplo
facultates amissas fuisse redditas benedictione sc. Domini, quae abunde ditat.
Merc.
The Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before. Christ makes a large
Promise, consisting of many particulars (which according to the Rule of an
Induction, concludes Universally) Mat. 19. 29. And every one that has forsaken
Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife or Children, or
Lands for my Names Sake, shall receive an Hundred Fold, and shall Inherit
Everlasting Life. The meaning is not, that a Man should receive an Hundred
Fathers or Mothers, etc. but that he should receive Christ, who is infinitely
Ipse unus Christus erit tibi omnia, quia in ipso uno bono bona s^nt om^^a*
August. Exo^ 12. 36.
more worth then all. Sometimes God makes up the Losses of his Suffering
Servants in kind. God gave the Israelites Favor in the Eyes of the Egyptians,
so that at parting from them, They Spoiled them. And God took away the
Substance of Laban, and gave it unto Jacob, in Recompense of his rigorous
Servitude; however, if God does not make up worldly Losses, with the Riches of
the World, yet he makes them up to his Children with Spiritual Riches; which
are as much better, as Heaven is better than Earth. David lost his Wives, his
House, even all that he had of the World, at the sacking of Ziglag; but he had
that which was infinitely better, than all that he had Lost; for he had
Consolations from Heaven, and Supportation from God, 1 Samuel 30. 6. But David
encouraged himself in the Lord his God. It Is a saying commonly observed, Virtus
repulsae nescia Sordidae. I have Read, that when Alexander was in a great
Strait, and was put upon an hard Service, he said, En periculum par animo
Alexandri; here is a Danger fit for the Mind of an Alexander to Encounter
withal: So David* in his great Straits at Ziglag, discovered heroical
Magnanimity; he sunk not under those heavy Pressures, but made use of the Right
and only Support, and Strength in Trouble, as the Text Specifies. But ( i. e.)
notwithstanding the Burning of Ziglag, the carrying away his Wives, and many
People Captive, and the Mutiny of the discontented Soldiers, who threatened to
Stone him; David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. Manasseh gained more
good by a Prison, than by a Palace, and was a greater gainer for his Soul, by
an Iron Chain, than by a Chain of Gold; when the Prodigal fed on Husks, he
understood himself better, than when he fed delicately at his Fathers Table.
Zeno could say after he Jam didici Philosophari Zeno.
had suffered Shipwreck, Now I have learned to be a Philosopher. And should not
a Christian say Experimentally; By Sufferings, Losses, and Crosses, I have
Learned to value all things under the Sun at a lower rate than ever, and
Christ, and his Graces, and Heaven at an higher rate. It was a frequent saying
of Aquinas, that great School-Doctor, Mallem bonam conscientiam, quam plenum
marsupium. Aquinas.
I had rather have a good Conscience, than a full Purse. But instar omnium the
Apostles Determination takes place, Phil. 3. 8. who counted all things but Loss
and Dung, in comparison of Christ. The Original words are Emphatical (...),
Loss and Garbidge. Put Christ and his Riches in one Scale, and the World with
all its Pomp, and Bravery in another Scale, and these are less, than the Dust
of the Balance, in comparison of Christ and his Riches; for these will
infinitely preponderate. Wherefore let us make sure of Eternal, and never
fading Riches. It was a choice saying of Lewis of Bavoyer, Emperor of Germany,
Hujusmodi comparandae sunt opes quae cum naufragio simul enatent, i. e. Such
Riches are to be got, as when a Shipwreck comes, they will Swim out with us.
And these are only the Riches of Christ.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing a Second Reason, drawn from the excellency of a quiet, and
submissive Frame of Spirit.

I now Proceed to a Second Reason, 2. Reason drawn from the excellency of this
submissive Spirit.
drawn from the excellency of this submissive Frame of Spirit, which yields to
God, and Resignes all to his Disposal. Solomon tells us, Prove. 12. 26. The
Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor, and Prove. 17. 27. A Man of
Understanding is of an excellent Spirit. Now wherein does the excellency of
this Wise Man Shine, but by the luster of his Graces? Grace is the Beauty of
the Soul, and no Ornament like those of Divine Graces, to Adorn a Christian.

Now a Man of a Wise composed Spirit, who depends on God for his Portion, and
stays upon his All Sufficiency, and makes it his Study to resign himself, and
to submit to God's Will, in all Estates and Conditions whatsoever; such a Man
does in a Conspicuous and Eminent manner, exert, and exercise six choice
Graces, viz, Wisdom, Faith, Hope, Patience, Self-Denial, and Holy Courage;
Every one of these is an expedient, and help for the right Management of a
Christian, excellent Spirit, amidst varieties of Hardships, and Sufferings
incumbent on us.

First For Wisdom. As it is a sign of 1. Wisdom. Prove. 22. 3. Mich. 6. 9.
Prudence to Foresee Evil; so it is a Character of a Man of Wisdom, To hear the
Rod, and who has appointed it. He is a Wise Man, that deliberately observes
the handy Works of God, and acknowledges his Wisdom, Power, and Sovereignty in
ordering all Affairs. It Is a doggish Quality to snarl at the Stone, and not to
take notice of the Hand that Threw it. To make a strict enquiry into Second
Causes, to find out such and such an Evil Instrument, and to quarrel wlth them
by reviling words, and revengeful deeds: Oh! How unsuitable is this to a
Christian Spirit! That eminent Servant of Jesus Christ; Mr. Dod, was a signal
example of Meekness, and Compassion toward his Enemies. In the beginning of
the late, sad, and lamentable Wars, a Soldier who had Plundered his House, and
gave him reproachful and threatening Language, a few days after, that Soldier
being Sript in the Battle at Edgehill, Fled for his Life, and came again to
Mr. Dods House in a forlorn Condition, ready to be Starved for want of
Clothing; which when that good Man Mr. Dod heard of, h^* sent Clothes unto
him, to cover his Nakedness. Here Is the Wisdom of a Christian Spirit, to
understand the great Duty mentioned by the Apostle; Not to Romans 12. 21.
be overcome of Evil, but to overcome Evil with Good.

When the Psalmist tells of the Afflictions of God's Children, Psalm. 107. 39.
and of their Deliverance, ver. 40, 41, 42. he Concludes, ver. 43. Who so is
Wise, and will observe those things, even they shall understand the Kindness of
the Lord. Quid de paenarum acerbita te qnecimur? unus quisque nostrum se punit.
Slav. lib. 3.


A Wise Man under Afflictions will inquire into the Cause, and reflect upon
himself, as the Church did, Lam. 1. 18. The Lord is Righteous, for I Rebelled
against his Commandment.

A Wise Man will inquire into the end of all God's Chastisements, and Labor to
answer God's End, and that is A Deo putimur, sed ipsi facimus ut puniamur. Id.
lib. 8. Isa. 9. 12. 13.
to Repent, and Turn unto God. For this very Reason, The Anger of God, is not
turned away, but his Hand is Stretched out still; For the People turns not to
him that Smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. Here then lies
the great Wisdom to understand God's Meaning, and end in Chastising, and that
is to reform, purify, and new mold us, and to bring us forth out of the
Furnace, purified Seven times. Every Good and Wise Man, should ponder in his
Heart, and practice accordingly, that excellent Speech of Elihu, Job. 34. 31,
32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born Chastisement, I will not
offend any more. That which I see not, Teach thou me, If I have done Iniquity,
I will do no more. This is the right use of Wisdom under the Rod of Correction.

Second, The excellency of this Spirit, ^. Faith.
Shines in a strong, vigorously acting Faith. The Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 5.
7. We Walk by Faith, not by Sight. Sense failed in the time of a dark Vision,
but Faith failed not, Heb. 2. 4. The just shall Live by his Faith. Estates,
Contrivances, Friendship, and Favor of Men, Projects, and Expectations, all
these may Fail: A Believer cannot Live by any o^ these; but the Life of Faith
is such an excellent Life, as we may compare it to Goliahs Sword, and say of
the Life of Faith, as David said of that Sword, 1 Samuel 21. 9.
Give me that, there is none like it.

What Wonders Faith did, the 11. Chap. to the Hebrews gives an ample Catalogue.
Sense failed Job on the Dunghill, he saw no visible means of Restoration to
his former Enjoyments; yet* how strenuously did his Faith act, Job 13. 15.
Though he Slay me, yet will I Trust in him. And on his Dunghill, he saw Job 19.
25.
his Redeemer. Reason was non-plust, concerning Sarahs bringing forth a Son
against the Course of Nature: But Abraham against Hope, believed in Hope, that
he might become the Father of many Nations, etc. See Romans 4. 18, 19, 20, 21.
Stephen, when the Stones were clattering about his Ears, saw Christ standing
Acts 7. 56.
on the Right Hand of God. We often Read in Scripture of Christ sitting in
Majesty and Glory; but when Stephen was a Stoning, Christ was said to be a
Standing, a ready posture to vindicate the Credere impossibilia rationi,
Sperare dilata, amare deum, cum se praebeat inimicum. Luther.
Quarrel of his Suffering Servant. Luther gives Three grand Properties of
Faith, viz. (1.) To believe things impossible to Reason. (2.) To hope for
things deferred. (3.) To love God when he shows himself an Enemy.

There are also two great Properties of Faith; One is Prophetic, to foresee
Deliverance, Answers of Prayers, Removal of Judgments, and such like: Another
is Magnetic, to have an attractive Virtue to draw things near, that may seem
to be afar off. Faith will Approximate a Promise, and by a patient waiting
Spirit, acquiesce in the same, not doubting the performance thereof, in the
appointed Season. Faith will trust God upon his Word.

Third, Hope acts vigorously in a disconsolate 3. Hope.
Condition. Ezra Comforts the People thus: Yet now there is Hope Ezra 10. 2.
in Israel concerning this thing. Hope is like a Prop or Pillar, to support,
and stay a Building from falling; It Is an Anchor cast out in a Storm to stay
the Ship. The Church quietly bore those sad Calamities incumbent on them, Lam.
3. 26. It is good that a Man should both hope, and quietly wait for the
Salvation of the Lord. ver. 29. He puts his Mouth in the Dust, if so be,
there may be Hope. But what is the Ground of Hope? Read ver. 21. The Lord will
not cast off for Ever. There Is Hope, that the Rod will not always be on our
Backs: And there is Two strong Grounds for our Faith. (1.) There are Multitude
of Mercies in God, ver. 32. (2.) He does not Afflict willingly. We may add
further, that God pours not out his whole Wrath; Heb. 3. 2.
but in Wrath he remembers Mercy. God has not forgoten to be Gracious, nor
shut up his loving Kindness in displeasure. Were it not for Hope, we should not
receive such Comforts, from the Scriptures as we do. But amidst all the
Troubles of God's People, they draw singular Grounds of Hope, and Consolation
from the Scriptures. And to this purpose are the Scriptures Wrote, Romans 15. 4.
The Saints rejoice in Hope, Romans 5. 2. Romans 12. 12. Although they are cast into
Prison, they learn their Duty there, Rev. 2. 10. And though they are close
Prisoners, they are Prisoners of Hope, Zach. 9. 12. Hope is the Saints Helmet,
1 These. 5. 8. In great Troubles and Perplexities, there is a Door of Hope to get
out of them. For after Achan was Stoned, it was promised, that the Valley of
Achor should be a Door of Hos. 2. 14.
Hope. Times of Jacobs Troubles, should be special times of Jacobs Trust. It
was a dismal day mentioned, Jer. 30. 5, 6, 7. But there is Comfort near
approaching. It is even the time of Jacobs Trouble, but he shall be Saved out
of it. In the Grave, though the Body moulder into Dust, there is a certain Hope
of a Resurrection, Psalm. 61. 9. comp. with Acts 2. 9. Now the same God that can
raise the Body out of the Dust, can raise up those that lie in the Dust, though
despised and trampled upon, by malicious and inveterate Enemies. Antichrist
shall fall, and never rise more: A Millstone shall be put about his Neck, and
he thrown into the Sea: But Gods People, though they may fall, they shall rise
again; though their Sufferings be Sharp, yet they shall be short; as Athanasius
said of Julians Persecution, Nubecula est cito transitura. And the greater the
Sufferings of God's People are for Righteousness sake, their Resurrection shall
be more Glorious. There Is Matter of Comfort and Duty, by them to be put in
Practice, mentioned, Micah. 7. 8, 9. Rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy; when
I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in Darkness, the Lord shall be a Light unto
me. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have Sinned against him.
Levius fit patientia, quicquid corrigere est nefas. Horat. Eccles. 7. 8.


Fourthly, There follows the Exercise of Patience. And this will make an hard
Yoke easy, and an heavy Burden light. The Patient in Spirit (as Solomon tells
us) is better than the Proud in Spirit. The Reason a Learned Author gives, is,
because Anger is Rash and Precipitate, Quia ira praec^ps est, finem nunquam
expectabit, quod faciet patiens, and ira lentus iram moderabitur, exitum
spectans. Merc.
and will never expect an End; but a Man Patient, and slow to Anger, will
moderate his Anger, expecting an End. By Faith, we possess the Head, by Love,
we possess one another; by Patience, every one possesses himself: wherefore
Christ's Charge is, to be again and again inculcated, Luke 21. 19.
In your Patience, possess ye your Souls. The Saints are Recorded for Patterns
Non potest accipi dolorum and passionum corona, nisi praecedat in dolor and
passione patientia. Cyp. de Bono patient^ae.
of Patience, Heb. 6. 12. We are here Commanded to be followers of them, Who
through Faith, and Patience inherit the Promises. The Patience of Saints is
Commended, Rev. 2. 19. Rev. 3. 10. There Is a necessity of Patience, Heb. 10.
36. Cyprian that Holy Martyr tells us, That we cannot receive the Crown of our
Sufferings, unless Patience go before. And he says likewise in the same Book,
which is De Bono patientiae, That we are Hoc ipsum quod Christiani sumus fidei
and Spei res est; ut autem spes and fides ad fructum sui possint pervenire,
patienti ^opus est. Cyp. de Bono patientiae
Christians, this is the Matter of our Faith and Hope; but that our Faith and
Hope may come to any Fruit, we have need of Patience. This Grace of Patience
shines in the Dark, and in the Night of Sufferings, puts forth it self more
Conspicuously; For Sufferings are the Trials of Patience. Hence it comes to
pass, that even in times of a dark Vision, when God clouds his Countenance, a
Spirit endowed with Patience, Waits, Believes, Hopes, Prays, and thus is
prepared for the reception of Mercy, when it comes, and for the bearing of
Sufferings whilst they continue. Lay then aside all querulous, murmuring,
revengeful Thoughts, and let it be a Christians Strength to sit still, and wait
quietly, and patiently for the Salvation of God. 5. Self-Denial.


Fifthly, Amidst Losses and Sufferings, Self-Denial Eminently appears, and
shows it self. When the World Frowns, Enemies Rage, all Cystern, and
Creature-Helps, are dried up quite, or Run very low; when Interests fail, then
to keep a Composed quiet Frame of Spirit, and to get the Heart above Envy,
Hatred, and Malice, is a rare Frame of Spirit. But it is much more an excellent
Frame of Spirit, to deny a Man's self in time of Prosperity, when one enjoys
the World (as we say) at Will, and to be in the Float of Prosperity, then to
strike Sail, and to deny Pleasures, Luxury, and Excess, this is a property of
an excellent Spirit. Of this Spirit was Moses, Heb. 11. 24. (...). 2 Samuel 11.
11.
when he lived at Court, When he came to Years (more properly rendered, when he
became Great) refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter. Thus did Uriah
in a time of War, deny himself. Godfry of Bulloyne would not wear a Crown of
Gold, where Christ was Crucified Abdicare a teipso, ne abdiceris a Christo;
^epudia te, ut recipiaris ^ Christo Salv. lib. 5.
with a Crown of Thorns. This Duty of Self-Denial is frequently Commanded in
the Gospel, as an Instrumental means to receive Christ. And it is worth our
Observation, that as we are Commanded to beg our Daily Bread, Day by Day; so we
are Commanded to Deny our selves, and to take up our Cross Day by Day. The same
Expression (...). Vt dies diem sequitur, sic crux crucem excipit Beza.
we have in Luke 9. 23. and Luke 11. 3. For an Ambitious Man to Deny his
Honors; a Rich Man, to Deny his Riches; a Voluptuous Man to Deny his
Pleasures; these are great Acts of Self-Denial.

Sixthly, and Lastly, there follows holy 6. Holy Courage.
Courage, a well tempered, and regular Zeal, which (as Luther used to say) When
it is well Tempered, it is the best gift Ira in suo loco est optimum dei donum.
Luther.
of God. Here Is a Critical Distinction of Zeal (which is of the right Stamp)
from a private Grudg, or distempered Passion, viz. By being Zealous in the
Cause of God, and by being meek in a Man's own private Cause. Of this Heroic
Spirit was Moses; when a Calf was made, and there was Dancing about it, Moses
Transported with singular Zeal, threw the Tables out of his Hand, and Broke
them, and Stamped the Calfe to Powder, and caused Exemplary Justice to be
Executed upon the Idolaters. Thus Zealous Causa redditur cur Deus injuriam
Mosis ul ciscendam crediderit, quia ipse in suis injuriis ferendis erat
lenissimus. Grotius.
was he for the Cause of God: But in his own Cause, none more Meek; for when
Aaron, and Miriam chode with him concerning the Ethiopian Woman; the Text
gives an ample Testimony of his Meekness, leaving it upon Record, Numb. 12. 13.
Now this Man Moses was very Meek, above all the Men which were upon the Face of
the Earth. Luther used to say, in the Cause of God, Hic gero In aliis mansuetus
ero, in Blasphemiis in Christum non item. Zuinglius.
titulum, cedo nulli. Though Zuinglius was of a comparative Moderation; yet in
case of Blasphemies, he was a Man of Courage. The Courage of Martyrs, is
renowned in Ecclesiastical Histories. Amongst variety that might be named, I Will
relate only this following, viz. The Si Patibulum crucis (inquit Martyr)
Expavescerem, gloriam crucis non predicarem Bern. in vigilias Andreae. Coutzen.
Aulae speculum. p. 47.
History of Surgius and Bacchus, two great Courtiers, who being accused for
Christians, and commanded to Offer unto Idols, refused to go to the Temple, and
gave this answer to the Emperor. Nos Imperator sola terrrena militia tibi
obstricti sumus. In animas nullum tibi jus est; Illarum Dominus est solus Deus.
There are two Apostolical Characters of Zeal, which if observed, we may go on
Courageously, and Prosper. One is, Zeal must be in a good Matter, Gal. 4. 18.
Readiness Zeal before his Conversion, was Predicare Evangelium est derivare in se
furoremtoti^us Inferni and Satanae. Luth. Loc. Com.
stark naught. And the other is, it must be according to Knowledge, Romans 10. 2.
Luther used to say, That to Preach the Gospel, was to bring all the Devils in
Hell about his Ears; yet he was resolved, That if every Tile on the Houses was
a Devil, he would go to Worms, and Preach the Gospel.

CHAP. IX.
Containing a Third Reason drawn from the Utility and Benefit, accruing from
this yielding Submissive Spirit.

A Third Reason shall be drawn from from the Benefit of a submissive Spirit.
the Utility and Benefit, accruing from this yielding Submissive Spirit. The
Benefit is exceeding great, because hereby the whole Man is set in a right
Frame and Order. When we can cheerfully rely upon God, and depend upon his
All Sufficiency, then our Thoughts, Words, Affections, and Actions, even our
whole Life and Conversation, are all Ordered aright, and we are exceeding great
gainers thereby. Now to Prosecute these Four Particulars.

First, Our Thoughts are rightly Ordered. 1. Hereby our Thoughts are Rightly
ordered.
The Thoughts may be compared to the Reubens of our Souls; They are the
beginning of our Strength; but they are as Reuben was, Unstable as Water. How
many vain Thoughts seize on us; But though they come violently upon us, we must
not willingly give them any Harbor or Lodging. How long shall thy vain
Thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4. 14.
Thoughts are the Womb to conceive Vanity; wherefore the Physicians Rule is,
Obsta Principiis. Our care must be to crush the Cockatrice in the Egg, and to
stifle bad Thoughts in the first Conception: As Streams flow from the Fountain,
and as the Fruit grows on the Tree; so Thoughts flow from, and grow out of the
Heart. Out of the Heart proceed both good and evil Thoughts. And it may be
Marked, that what Sin a Man is most prone to, his Thoughs run most that way.
Let Us beware of allowing our selves in any Evil Thoughts, least those Thoughts
bring forth Evil Words, and those Words end in abominable Deeds. Because
Thoughts come not within the compass of Man's Cognizance, and so are not liable
to Man's Punishment; God himself will Punish them most Severely. For God
Threatens, Jer. 6. 19. Hear O Earth! Behold I will bring Evil upon this
People, even the Fruit of their Thoughts. Thoughts are not free (however some
presume) from the Judgments of God. A good Remedy to Cure evil Thoughts is
prescribed, Prove. 16. 3. Commit thy Works unto the Lord, and thy Thoughts shall
be Established. And likewise we should bear in our Mind, Heb. 4. 12. That God's
(...). Quia cogitationes compaginatas secernit q. d. Hic filius Dei ad haec
omnia efficax est, nihilque illum latere potest. Tena in loc.
Word is a discerner of our Thoughts. Let Us then abandon vain ungodly Thoughts,
distrustful, carking, and vexatious Thoughts, and labor to get our Thoughts
quieted, and settled, and established upon the Word of God.

Second, If we believe God's Omnipotency 2. Our Tougues will be rightly ordered.
and Omniscience, his care and providence in Governing of the World, then our
Tongues will be bound to their good Behavior; they will be set in such an
excellent order, as all querulous reviling Language will be avoided. The (...).
Rotam nativitatis nostrae. Qui calumniatur, non satis est quod vapulet in
corpore suo, sed propter eum vapulet mundus. Drusius.
Apostle has a great Expression, concerning the ill Government of the Tongue,
Jam. 3. 6. That he sets on Fire the Course of Nature. If then (O Christian)
thou would learn the right Art of the Government of the Tongue; thou must
begin at thy Heart first, and reform that: For the disorders of the Tongue,
usually proceed from the disorders of the Heart. A rotten Heart, vents it self
by a rotten Language.

Hence the Apostle cites Menander (a (...).
Warrant, that Heathen Authors upon a good occasion may be quoted) 1 Cor. 15.
33. Evil words corrupt good Manners, and it follows in the same Author, If
thou conversest with Evil Men, thou thy self will be Evil. Luther, was falsely
reported (for it was his Enemies custom to raise Slanders on him) to be a
Trumpet Tuba Rebellionis.
of Rebellion. But our Tongues ought to be the Trumpeters of our Creators
Praise and Glory. We are exhorted, Celebrabo te Jehova, quia mihi iratus,
redieris tamen statim in gratiam. Calv.
Psalm. 100. 4. To be thankful unto God, and bless his Name. A great, and signal
Act of Thankfulness is mentioned, Isa. 12. 1. O Lord I will Praise thee, though
thou was Angry with me. To Praise God for Chastisements, and to acknowledge
with Thankfulness the benefit of Afflictions, is so high a pitch, as few can
attain unto it. How have many learned to bridle their Tongues, and to set a
Watch before the Door of their Mouths, after they have felt the smart of
Afflictions? Some given to rash Censuring and Murmuring, have learned to be of
a more calm and charitable Frame of Spirit. Some given to frothy Discourse, and
vain Jesting, after they have been under the Rod of Correction, have proved
more serious and sober in their Discourses. The Apostles charge is, Ephesians. 4. 29.
Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth, but that which is Good,
to the use of Edifiing, that it may Minister Grace to the Hearers. The (...).
Putrefacio, translatio ab arboribus quidam praetulerunt, spurcus, obscaenus, ac
corruptus. Drus.
word rendered Corrupt comes from a Verb, that signifies to Putrify: Rotten
Words, and Putrefying Speeches become not Christians. Neither does customary
jesting become us; though a facetious, affable Behavior kept within due bounds
is commendable; yet a jesting and frothy Spirit, is much unbeseeming a
Christian, (...), though it be reputed for a Virtue in Aristotle, yet it is
reckoned by Saint Paul amongst Ephesians. 5. 4.
those things which Are not convenient. Cicero himself sets bounds to jesting;
and Non generati sumus a natura, ut ad ludum, and jocum facti esse videamur;
sed ad severitatem potius, and ad quaedam studia graviora atque Majora. Cic.
offic. lib. 1.
tells us, that we are not Born for sport and jesting. And it is a Verse not
more common than true.

Non patitur ludum, fama, fides, oculus.

But what shall we say of some who jest at Sin, and when they hear or see
Sensus est Simplicissimus, Stultos Sermon ornare delictum and offensum. Mercer.
notorious Debaucheries, laugh and jest at them, Solomon gives them a Brand of
Infamy, Prove. 14. 9. Fools make a mock at Sin. And those especially are to be
reproved, who vent their frothy Fancies in a Pulpit, having no reverend
Thoughts of the dreadful Presence of God; to them I may apply those sayings.
Qui ludunt in Cathedra, lugebunt in Gehenna. Non est tutum ludere cum sacris.

Third, Our Affections will be set right. 3. Our Affections must be set in
Order.
We are apt to misplace our Love, Loving where we should Hate, and Hating where
we should Love. Our Joy, Hope, Fear, etc. are out of Order, and placed upon
wrong Objects. It Is almost as difficult, to hold the Wind in ones Fist, or to
turn the Tide, as to bound the Affections. To Conquer an inordinate Te vince,
and mundus tibi victus est. Prove. 25. 28.
Affection, is a great Victory. But for a Man to have no Rule over his own
Spirit, is (as Solomon says) Like a City that is broken down, and without
Walls. A Man that has no Government over his Passions, exposes himself in all
Companies, to variety of Mischiefs. He resembles Samson, who was amidst the
Philistines, after his Locks were Shaven. Affections, we may compare to Fire
and Water, which are good Servants, but bad Masters. Fire, we say is good upon
the Hearth, but mischievous in the Thatch. If Water Keeps within its Banks, we
are Secure; but when it breaks through, and makes an inundation, it may Drown a
whole Country. For Instance, in the Affections of Love, Joy, and Anger; to use
these with Moderation, may be useful: A Stoical Apathy is hurtful, and when
Passions are immoderate, then they become exceeding Prejudicial. To Mourn for
the loss of a dear Relation, argues a Sympathizing tender Heart; but to Mourn
as without Hope, is not beseeming a Christian, and to Mourn so, as to become
the Elegy, and the Hearse, to be thus immoderate in our Sorrow, becomes Sinful.
When Reason rules a Man, he is his own Master; but when Passion rules him, he
is his own Slave. Wherefore the best (as I suppose) of Heathen Curcendum est ut
appetiture rationi obedientem praebeamus. Cic. 1. lib. Off.
Orators advises, That we make our Appetite obedient unto Reason. To be like
Hercules Furens, or like the Lunatic in the Gospel, rending and tearing
himself, or like a Door plucked off the Hinges. So is a Man, who cannot Govern
himself, and has no command of his Passions. Fortior est qui se, quam qui
fortissima Magnus est Dominus, qui sibi imperat.
vincit -- Maenia.

Wherefore, as when a River breaks all Banks and Bounds, Men cut a Passage
elsewhere to turn the Stream; so let the Stream of our Affections be turned,
and then all will be well; And to this the Apostle exhorts, Coll. 3. 2. Set
your affections on things above, and not on things on the Earth. To turn the
Fear of Man, into the Fear of God, to turn Worldly into Heavenly Joy, Carnal
Love, into Spiritual Love, Earthly Desires, into Heavenly; to cease from rash
Anger against our Brethren, and to be Angry against Sin. O! What a Blessed
Alteration is this, and a change every way for the better!

Fourth, Our Actions, and our whole 4. Our Actions must be set in Order.
Conversation must be rightly Ordered. What are all fair Speeches, unless
Actions keep pace with them? To speak, and to do. To name the Name of Christ,
and to Non habitu Sapientiam, sed mente praeferimus; non eloquimur magna, sed
vivimus. Minuc. Fell.
depart from Iniquity; to Hear and Practice; herein consists the Vitals of
Religion. Therefore the Profession, and Conversation ought to go together in a
Mutual Equipage. It Is a good Advice, Speak that I may see thee, for Words
Loquere ut te videam; dicta enim factis deficientibus erubescunt.
without Deeds cause Shame. When we have been put into a Furnace, we should
come forth as Gold. When we have been emptied from Vessel to Vessel, our old
Scent should be took away. Our Conversation should be Holy: We 1 Pet. 1. 15.
Ephesians. 5. 15.
should walk Circumspectly. Do we profess Submission, and Resignation of all
that is dearest, and nearest unto God. If so, the Holiness of our Lives will
Testify the Truth of our Profession. When we meet with straits and
difficulties, and hard measure, from unreasonable Men; we dare not take
irregular Courses; we dare not practice any excentrique Motions. The Primitive
Christians in Tertullians time, professed, Oramus, non pugnamus, q. d. We
Entreat, we Volens locum mihi commissum non deseram, coactus repugnare non
novi, Arma enim nostra praeces sunt and lachrymae. Amb. Hom. de Basil. tradend.
Fight not. Ambrose in his time, mentions an excellent Professor, that said,
Willingly I will not desert my Place wherewith I am Entrusted; being compelled,
I know not how to resist; for our Weapons are Prayers and Tears. The same good
Spirit of God guide all Suffering Christians, that they may Suffer as
Christians, by choosing Affliction rather than Sin; and not Suffer as Evil
doers, by resisting Authority, or acting beyond their Callings, in any indirect
irregular Motion. Unbelievers (in their Distress) Patienter expectemus ultionis
diem, nec ad vindictam doloris nostri querulae and invidiosa festinatione
properemus. Cyp. de Bono patient.
betake themselves unto indirect, and unlawful Means; and they pay dear for
taking of wrong Courses. But a True Believer repairs to God for Counsel. God is
his Riches, Refuge, and hiding Place: He dares not presume to take God's Office
out of his Hand, by pursuing a personal Revenge; but he leaves Revenge unto
God. In a Word, the whole Conversation of a Christian, is so Ordered, according
to the Rule of the Word of God, as he will not recede from it; but Order his
Life accordingly. And Gal. 6. 16.
as many as Walk according to this Rule, Peace be to them, and Mercy, and upon
the Israel of God.

CHAP. X.
Containing a Fourth Reason, concerning the sad and mischievous Consequences of
Striving, Struggling, and Repining against God.

A Fourth and last Reason shall be Causa from the Mischiefs of striving against
God.
a contrario, drawn from the Mischiefs of striving against God, and not relying
and depending upon him; this will appear more Evidently, by these following
Convictions.

First, Repining, Discontent, and 1. Murmuring provokes God to bring those
Evils upon us, which we Fear.
Murmuring, Justly provoke God to bring those Evils upon us, which we Fear,
with greater strength, and renewed violence. None ever Opposed God, and
Prospered. Children, by Struggling, have more Lashes inflicted on them. What
gained the Israelites by Murmuring, but dreadful Judgments, one upon the Neck
of another? They boasted of their Onyons, and Garlic, and Fleshpots in Egypt,
and Murmured for want of Food in the Wilderness; God sent them Manna and
Quails; It was sweet Meat, but there was sower Sauce added to it; For, While
the Meat was in their

Mouths, the Wrath of God came upon them, and Slew the Fattest of them, and
smote down the chosen Men of Israel, Psalm. 78. 30, 31. And what was the Ground
of Intellectui fides aditum aperit, infidelitas claudit. Aug. Ep. 3.
all, but unbelief, ver. 32. For all this, they Sinned still, and Believed not
for his wondrous Works. And what Judgments successively befell them, is set
down, ver. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, etc. And however, Men may Murmur and Repine,
they are never the nearer; for God's Will shall stand, when all is done. Men
hurt themselves, but do not in the least help themselves by Murmuring.

Second, By Murmuring, Discontent, 2. By Murmuring, Men become their own
Tormentors.
and Non-submission, Men become their own Tormentors, and Executioners. When a
Burden, I say, is imposed upon thee, and thou Frettest, and Fumest, and
Disquietest thy Self; thou make thy Burden heavier, and thy self more unfit
to bear it. Patience and Cheerfulness facilitate a Burden, whereas impatience
adds more Load thereunto. Cyprian, that excellent Martyr tells us, Omnia omnino
quae parientia operibus suis aedificat ad gloriam, impatientia destruit ad
runiam. Cypr. de Bono Patientiae.
That what Patience Builds up, Impatience Destroys. Jonah added to his
Affliction, by Fretting for the Loss of his Gourd.

Thirdly and Lastly, Hereby (when 3. Murmurers call Gods Attributes into
Question.
we give way to unbelieving, discontented Thoughts) we call the Attributes of
God in Question; we Question the Power of God, as the Murmuring Israelites did,
Psalm. 78. 19. They spoke against God: they said, can God Furnish a Table in the
Wilderness? We Question the Truth, Goodness, and Faithfulness of God; We
Traduce Divine Providence by Unbelief, and Murmuring. This is that grand
Damning Sin (though there is no Sin, but deserves Damnation) mentioned in the
Gospel, John 8. 24. If ye Believe not that I am He, ye shall Dye in your Sins.

For this Sin of Unbelief, the Lord, 2 Kin. 7. 19.
on whose Hand the King leaned, was Trod to Death in a Crowd. For this Sin,
Zachary was struck with Dumbness. Luc. 1. 20.
This Sin excluded out of the Temporal Canaan, the unbelieving Jews. And
unbelievers Heb. 3. 19.
are excluded out of the Eternal Canaan; For the unbelieving, are Rankt in the
Bed-roll of those abominable Sinners, which shall have their Rev. 21. 8.
part, in the Lake that Burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the Second
Death.

CHAP. XI.
Containing a Resolution of particular Cases.

IN the next place, I come to lay down 3. Head containing a Resolution of
particular Cases. Case 1. concerning the Prosperity of Wicke^ Men.
some particular Cases, and return Answers accordingly.

The First Case is concerning the Prosperity of Wicked Men, and the great
Confluence of outward things, which they enjoy. This Stumbled David, Psalm. 73.
2, 3, 4, 5. and ver. 12. He prefixeth a Note of Observation. Behold, these are
the ungodly that Prosper in the World, they Increase in Riches. But observe
what Course David took for Satisfaction, ver. 16. 17. When I thought to know
this, it was too Painful for me, until ^ went into the Sanctuary, then
understood I their End. And what was their End, the 18. ver. Specifies, Surely
thou did set them in slippery Places, thou castest them down into
Destruction. Who of any Understanding will envy the Risings and Promotions of
Wicked Men, when he hears of their miserable Downfall? The higher Wicked Men
are, they are more in Danger of swift and utter Destruction. Sheep, put into
the best Pastures, come soonest to the Shambles. How Quo altius extolluntur, eo
periculofiori loco constituuntur, ut citius corruant. Mollerus.
many Wicked Men are Fatted to the Day of Destruction! What will Riches avail
Zeph 1. 18.
in the Day of God's Wrath? Neither their Silver, nor their Gold, shall be able
to Deliver them in the Day of the Lord's Anger. The Prosperity of the Wicked
Stumbled, Jeremy, c. 12. 1, 2. Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with
Thee: Yet let me talk with Thee of thy Judgments; Wherefore does the way of the
Wicked Prosper? Wherefore are all they Happy, that Deal very Treacherously?
Thou Quicquid nobis temporaliter mundus arridet, magis est periculum quam
ornamentum. Aug. Sermon. 53.
have Planted them; yea, they have taken Root, etc. But observe, how the Spirit
of the Prophet is raised to Pray against them, ver. 3. Pull them out like Sheep
for Slaughter, and prepare them for the Day of Slaughter.

For a more particular Answer to the Case propounded, we are to lay down these
Four ensuing Considerations.

First, Riches, Profits, Pleasures, Promotions, 1. Riches are not
distinguishing Signs.
and Honors, and what else are the Worlds Darlings; when the Quintessence is
extracted out of them all, when they are at the best, they are neither
Divisive, nor Constitutive, i. e. They neither distinguish a good Man from a
bad; neither do they Constitute any Man Good, and Happy to Eternity. Some good
Men are Rich, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and others, who were both Rich
in Grace, and Rich in Gold and Silver.

Some good Men are Noble, as Theophilus, Genere nobilis, Sanctitate nobili or.
Hieron. de Paula.
to whom Saint Luke Dedicates his Epistle. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Not
many Noble are called: He says, Not many; he does not say, Not any. For some
are both Enobled by Nobilitate g^nerosus es and Parents tuos laudas, omnes
tam^n pari sort nascimur, sola virtute distinguimur. Minuc. Fell.
the New Birth, and by a Noble Extraction from their Parents; but Virtue is the
best Character. But for the most part it comes to pass, that good Men are Poor,
Ignoble, and Contemptible, in the Eyes of the World; and Vile, Profane Men,
are Rich and Great, and bluster in the World, like those proud swelling Giants,
who made Men to Fall; therefore, they have their Name in the (...) a verbo
n^phal qu^d significat cadere, v^l quia avero Dei cultu decederam; Vel quod
more Gigantum Deum Deique filios proterve ^ppugnarent. Piscat.
Original. Nimrod, Esau, Haman, Herod, the Rich Glutton, were Great and Rich in
the World; but we Read not of one Dram of Grace, in any one of them. We may not
conclude, because they have outward Happiness, which this World gives,
therefore they shall be Happy to Eternity. Neither may we conclude, because
others are Poor, set at Naught, and Trampled on, in this World; therefore, they
shall be hereafter Miserable. Solomon determines the Case, Eccles. 9. 1. No Man
knows either Love or Hatred by all that is before them. The Parable of the
Rich Man and Lazarus, shows a great Difference in their Worldly Estate. One
was Inop^, cui nemo o^em fert.
Clothed in Purple, the other, a Beggar full of Sores, Luke 16. 19, 20. One
Received his Good things, It Is said, (...) i. e. such things as he Esteemed so,
even the Pomp and Bravery of the World: these things the Rich Man Enjoyed, and
he Fared deliciously every Day: But the other, even Lazarus Received Sese
Exhilarabat quotidie Splendide. Bez.
Evil things, i. e. Poverty, Sores, Nakedness, Contempt, Ignominy, and Variety
of Afflictions. But there is a vaster Difference in their Eternal Estate, ver.
25. Lazarus was Comforted, and the Rich Man Tormented.

Second, Consider further, the Wicked 2. Wicked Rich Men have their Portion in
this Life. Turcicum Imperium, quantum quantum est, nihil est, nisi panis mica,
quam dives pater familias projicit canibus. Luther in Genesis 2.
Rich Men of the World, have their Portion in this Life. Seeing they place
their Happiness in Earthly things, and make the World their God, that is all the
Happiness, which they shall have: David prayed to Be delivered from Men of the
World, which have their Portion in this Life. Psalm. 17. 14. Ne magni pendamus
terrenam faelicitatem, quae malis etia^ plerunque conceditur. Aug. de Civ. Dei
lib. 2. C. 23.
Their Portion is soon wasted; Their Honors sometimes are laid in the Dust,
and they survive to See their own Degradations and Infamy; as Histories Record
variety of Examples. However, Death Levels the Noble Man with the Peasant. And
if you ask what becomes of Riches, you may as well ask, What becomes of Eagles
flying in the Air? It Is as easy to stay the Flight of so many swift Birds, as
the Flight of Riches: They are Winged Creatures; so Solomon tells us, Prove. 23.
5. Will thou set thine Eyes upon that which is not? For Riches certainly make
themselves Wings, they Fly away as an Eagle Quod miraris pompa est, ostenduntur
istoe res non possidentur, and dum placent, transeunt. Sen. Epist. 110.
toward Heaven. Seneca has a notable Passage; That (says he) which thou
admirest, is but Pomp, these things are showed, not possessed, and whilst they
please, they pass away. However, Wicked Men abuse Nulla res longa est omnisque
felicitas saeculi, dum tenetur, amittitur. Hieron. vid Sleydans Hist.
their Riches to Luxury, and Riotousness, and abuse their Greatness to Trample
on others; yet it is altogether unlawful to rob or spoil any, because they are
Wicked. The Frantic Practices committed at Munster, by John of Leyden, and his
Accomplices are Abominable in the Sight of God, and all Good Men. It Is a received
Maxim, acknowledged for Truth amongst Orthodox Divines, viz. Deminium
temporale non fundatur in gratia. Another is suitable to it, Gratia destituti
Dominio non excidunt temporali. What Charge God gives for the Posterity of Esau
(though he was a Man hated of God for his Profaneness) you may see, Deuteronomy. 2. 5.
Meddle not with them, for I will not give you of their Land, no not so much as
a Foot-breadth; because I have given Mount Seir unto Esau for a Possession. Now
then, if the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures of this present World, be all the
Heaven, which ungodly Men look after; there is not the least cause of Envying of
them. The meanest Beggar that has Interest in Christ, would not change
Conditions with such vile Persons, as Antiochus, Nimrod, and such like.
Sanctified Poverty is infinitely to be preferred before unsanctified Riches.
Afflicted Godliness, is better than Prosperous Wickedness.

Third, Put all the Greatness, Honors, 3. Riches are but the Blessings of the
Left Hand.
and Riches of ungodly Men together, in their highest Grandeur and
Accomplishments, that the World can give them; yet they are but the Blessings
of the Left Hand, such as Wicked Men may have, and yet be Miserable to all
Eternity. They are not Blessed to them; they have not Christ with them. Ofttimes
they are got by Fraud, Robbery, and Oppression; by Grinding the Faces of the
Poor, by raising a Foundation to Build upon others Ruins. Sometimes they decay
Miserably, and are Consumed, they know not how, as Job mentions, c. 20. 26. A
Fire not Blown, shall Consume him, (i. e.) he shall be Consumed insensibly, and
secretly. Etsi ab hominibus non injiciantur in eum manus, divino judicio
Consumetur. Merc.
Otherwise, they are snatched away Suddenly: So was the Rich Man (when he was
Plotting, and Projecting how to dispose of his Riches) took away Suddenly, Luke
12. 20. And when Non hoc levamen denique aerumnis datum est, videre Saltem and
nosse quo pereant mal^. Sen in Agamem.
Death Surprizeth a Man, then all his Thoughts vanish; all his Contrivances,
and Designs come to nothing. There are two dreadful Curses against Oppressors,
and Extortioners: One is, Jer. 17. 11. As the Partridge sits on Eggs, and
Hatcheth them not; so he that gets Riches, and not by Right, shall leave
them in the midst of his Days, and at his End, shall be a Fool. The other Curse
is, Hab. 2. 9. Woe to him that Coveteth an Evil Covetousness to his House, that
he may set his Nest on High, that he may be Delivered from the Power of Evil:
And Read, ver. 11. For the Stone shall Cry out of the Wall, and the Beam of the
Timber shall Answer it.

Fourthly, Wicked Men have a dreadful 4. Wicked Men have an Account to make for
the abuse of their Riches.
Account to make, for the abuse of their Riches, and outward Prosperity. Their
Rioting, Luxury, Drunkenness, and Gluttony, will bring black Bills of
Indictment against them, at the impartial Tribunal of Christ. Imprimis, So much
precious Time, and great Sums of Money, Squandered away in Drinking, Healthing,
Carrowsing, oft-times Perverting the Order of Nature, by turning Day into
Night, and Night into Day. Item, So great a Patrimony spent in Gaming, and all
sorts of Voluptuousness. Item, Great Revenues spent upon Harlots, etc. When the
general Audit comes, How Dreadful will the Condition be of great ungodly
Persons? He that could Ride many Miles in his own Land; and he that on Earth,
possessed Thousands of Gold and Silver, cannot for one Moment, Bribe Satan, nor
abate the Flames of Hell. He that Persecuted others, and made them to Fly
before him, would be glad himself to Fly into a Hole, and wish that the
Mountains, and Rocks would be so favorable, as to hide him from the Wrath of
the Lamb. Let the Living, and O! That the Living would lay to Heart, the Sacred
Irony of the Wise Man, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice Young Man, in thy Youth, and Walk
in the Ways of thy Heart, and in the Sight of thine Eyes, Qui voluptatibus
indulget and Genio, cogitet sibi reddendam esse rationem coram Deo de omnibus
tum dictis tum factis suis. Drus.
but know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee into Judgment.
This, But, Stands like the Angel in the way with a drawn Sword, Jer. 20. 4.
to Divert the presumptuous Carreer of Balaam. This But, if well Considered,
would make a Sinner like Pashur, when his Name was changed into Magormissabib,
make himself a Terror to himself. Dan. 5. 6.
This, But, is like that F^and-Writing that Loosened the Joints of Belshazar,
amidst his Cups, and made His Knees Smite one against another. The Day of
Judgment will set all Right, and then will be Pronounced an impartial Sentence;
then all false Judgments will be revoked. Saint Veniet, veniet Dies, quando
male judicata rejudicabit Deus. Bern.
Bernard says, The Day will come when God will Judge over again, all those
things that are Judged amiss. Upon all these Considerations, there is no cause
of Envying the Prosperity of great ungodly Men.

I Proceed now to a Second Case, Concerning the Adversity, Case 2. Concerning
the Adversity of the Godly.
and manifold Afflictions, and Sufferings of Godly Men; such as Infelicitatis
est, adversa nescire: miserum te judico, quod non fuisti miser. Hieron. M.
truly Fear God, are made a prey to Wicked Men, even the very Butt, whereat
they Schoot their keenest Shafts of Malice and Hatred. The best of Men,
oftentimes Drinks deep of the Cup of Affliction. Psalm. 34. 19. Acts 14. 22. 2 Timothy 3. 12. John 16. 33.
Many are the Afflictions of the Righteous. They enter into Heaven, Through
many Tribulations: All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must Suffer
Persecution.

Christ has foretold that his Children, should in the World meet with
Tribulations, The Title of Psalm 22. is, Aijeleth Shahar (i. e.) The Hind of
the Morning Hunted, and Pursued. That Psalm, is a Prophesy of Christ's
Sufferings, and upon a serious Comparing of it, with Mat. 27. we shall find
this Chapter to be a perfect Commentary upon that Psalm.

But if we ask, How comes it to pass, God, Suffer such hard things, and meet
with such great Sufferings in this World? I shall lay down an Answer in these
ensuing Particulars. The Godly have not their Portion in this Life. Mich. 2. 7.
1 Pet. 5. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 4.


First, The Godly have a Portion prepared for them in a better Life. Here is
not their Portion; here is not their Riches; Here is not their Rest. They have
a brave Reversion, i. e. the Kingdom of Heaven: That Is Christ's Purchase, and
the Saints Inheritance: This is a Crown of Glory, that Fades not away: This is
an Inheritance Incorruptible and Undefiled, and that Fades not away, Reserved
in Heaven, for all true Believers. When Anaxagoras was ask't, Have thou (...).
no Care of thy Country? Yes (says he) I have a great Care of my Country, and
he Stretched out his Hand toward Heaven, implying that Heaven was his Country.
The Godly have, as it were an Hell here in this World, by reason of
Persecution, Ignominy, Disgrace, and the Hearing, and Seeing the Abominations
of Wicked Men: The Wicked have, as it were an Heaven in this World; (for so
they Esteem their Bravery, and Jollity.) They are Described in their
Characters, Plal. 73. 5, 6, 7. They are not in Trouble as other Men: neither
are they Plagued like other Men. Therefore, Pride compasses them about, as a
Chain: Violence covers them as a Garment. Their Eyes stand out with Fatness:
Stultae little cogitationes nullis finibus possunt claudi aut coreceri. Quo enim
plura affluant, eo Majora appetunt subinde. Cupiditates hominum sunt
insatiabiles. Mollenus.
they have more than Heart can wish. Now who of Understanding, would Envy such
Men their Portion, which they Possess for a few days, and afterward become
Miserable unto all Eternity? A good Man said well (if it be well Interpreted)
Give me Heavens Misery (i. e. Afflictions, Troubles, and Sufferings, which meet
us in our Way to Heaven) And take thou Hells Happiness; i. e. the Pleasures,
Profits, and Riches of this World; which is all the Heaven that Wicked Men
shall have. Better to go with Lazarus full of Sores to Heaven, than with the
Rich Glutton in all his Mirth and Jollity to Hell. The Contemplation of Heaven,
and Meditation of the Glory that shall be Revealed, will Sweeten the most
bitter Pill of Affliction.

Second, Whatsoever Afflictions God's 2. The Afflictions of God's People are
Sanctified.
People Suffer, they are Sanctified unto them, by God's gracious Hand, and
turned unto their greater Good, as is evident from Romans 8. 28. There Is no
Exception. All things; Be they Losses, Persecutions, Imprisonments, Exiles,
even the greatest Mischief that Men and Devils can contrive against God's
Children; Yet all Shall work together Non dicit quod non accedat quicquam
periculi, caeterum ad bonum cooperetur: hoc est quod ipsis periculis utatur ad
bonorum insidias, and calamitates sustinentium probationem. Occumen.
for Good to them. By Afflictions God's Children are defecated, by being
emptied from Vessel to Vessel, they are Rinsed and Cleansed; by being cast into
the Furnace, their Dross is took away. He that ran a Sword into his Enemy, with
an intention to Kill him, let out his Imposthume, and so against his will,
saved his Life. So wicked and violent Adversaries, may, against their will, do
good to the Children of God: They may put them more and more upon searching
their own Hearts, and upon more circumspect Walking. Carthage Emulating Rome,
and Rome Emulating Carthage, both of them became mutually more Industrious;
likewise, more VVatchful, and more Valorous. But sure I am, that God so Orders
the Sufferings of his People, as to make them gainers thereby. Although their
Enemies intend nothing but Ruin, and Destruction to them, yet God brings much
Good out of the Evil Designs of the vilest, Periissem nisi periissem.
Themistocles.
inveterate Enemies; so that Experimentally, a Suffering Servant of God, can
say, I had Perished, unless I had Perished.

Third, The Afflictions, and greatest 3. The Saints Afflictions are but
Momentary.
Sufferings, are but Momentary; for at the longest, they last but while they
Live in this vale of Tears, in this present World; but the Mercies reserved for
them, last to all Eternity.

There are grand Encouragements from Three choice Scriptures; one is, Isa. 54.
7, 8. For a small Moment, have I forsaken thee; but with great Mercies will I
gather thee. In a little Wrath I hid my Face from thee, for a Moment; but with
everlasting kindness will I have Mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.
The other (...). Puto hoc ipsum esse quod Latini verbo Reor signisicant, unde
ratum dicitur quod certum ac firmum censeri debet; (...) vertimus pro c^gitare,
reputare colligere, imputare. Beza.
Scripture is, Romans 8. 18. For I reckon that the Sufferings of this present
time, is not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed in
us. A Third Scripture is, 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light Affliction, which is but
for a Moment, works for us, a far more exceeding, and Eternal weight of
Glory. That Christian, who lives upon these Scriptures, and makes particular
Application of them to his own Soul; he needs not fear the most boisterous
Storms and Tempests; Act. 27. 1^. Ejus est timere mortem, qui ad Christum nolit
ire Cypr.
no, not that Tempestuous Wind called Euroclydon. He that has Interest in
Christ, and is assured of God's Love, need not be afraid of Fiery Serpents,
Sons of Anak, and Beasts of Ephesus; for there is more for him, than can be
against him, Romans 8. 31. What shall we say then to these things? If God be for
us, who can be against us? Caesar comforted the Boat-man with this saying, Be
of good (...).
Comfort, Thou carriest Caesar: Thus in a Storm, he cheared up the Boat-man;
but how much greater ground of Encouragement is it in Afflictions, to have
Christ's Presence, and the Consolations of his Spirit; these will hold up the
Head above Water, and keep thee from Drowning, amidst all the Tossing of Waves,
one following upon the Neck of another; even then will the Believer be safe,
and secure from Danger.

A Third, and last Case, I shall mention, 3. Case, How to behave ones self in
Afflictions.
is, How should the Children of God behave themselves, as to the Wickeds
Prosperity, and as to their own Adversity?

For Answer, I shall lay down Tw^ Negatives. (1.) That those that fear God,
ought not to Envy the vilest of Men. (2.) They ought not to act any Personal
Revenge against them. After I have proved these Negatives, I shall produce, and
prove several Affirmatives, as so many Remembrances, and Frontlets, which ought
to be set before the Eyes of all good Men.

First, For the Negatives, The First 1. Propos. We ought not to envy Wicked
Men. Mat. 27. 18. Act. 7. 9. Act. 13. 45. Gal. 5. 21. Prove. 27. 4.
Proposition is, That Good Men in their greatest Sufferings, ought not to Envy
Wicked Men: Envy is frequently Forbidden in the Word of God; particularly,
Psalm. 37. 1. Prove. 23. 17. Envy caused the Jews to Crucify Christ. Envy moved
the Patriarchs to sell Joseph into Egypt. Envy caused the unbelieving Jews to
contradict Saint Paul's Doctrine. Envy is one of the Deeds of the Flesh, It
Slays the silly one; it is the cause of Confusion; who is able to stand before
it? And therefore, its Ipse Hercules, qui omni gener^ monstrorum terras
liberavit, non prius invidum debellare v^luit quam e^rebus humanis exemptum
esset. Baud Orat.
unbeseeming any Christian to Envy the Greatness, and Riches of the worst of
Men. That old Mnason, and Eminent Servant of Christ, Mr. Dod, wished thus, I
would (says he) I were the worst Minister in England; not meaning that he
himself would be worse than he was; but that all Ministers were better than he.
Saint Augustine says, Toll invidiam and quod meum est habes. Toll invidiam
and quod tuum est ego h^beo. August. in Psalm. 136.
Take away Envy, and what is mine you have; and take away Envy, and what is
yours I have. Luther says, That Envyous Men Feed upon the Dung of other Men.

They are like Flies that love to fasten upon Sores. Erasmus tells of one, who
Collected all the lame defective Verses in Homer, and passed over all those
that were Excellent. Parisiensis a learned Author, and one of the most
Ingenuity (that I know of) amongst his Party, brings in Gregory saying, That
all the Poison in the old Serpent, is in the Sin of Envy, as if it had Emptied
it self of its Poison, and Vomited it self in this Sin. Envy by some is called
Serra animae, a Saw to Cut the Heart Strings Asunder. Envy caused the first
Division, and Breach that ever was in the World; and that was between Cain and
Abel; and wherefore was Cain so Envions against Abel, as to Slay him? The
Apostle gives the Reason, 1 John 3. 12. Because his own Works were Evil, and
his Brothers Good. Let all Christians therefore be persuaded to lay aside all
Envies: Why should any Envy any Man Tormented with the Gout, although he wear a
Golden Slipper? Why should a Man Envy a Murderer, therer, upon the Gallows,
because he is Clothed with Tissue, and Hanged in a Silken Halter? I have read
a Story of a Soldier, who upon his March left his Colors, and Robbed a
Vineyard; whereupon he was Condemned to Dye, and as he was going to Execution,
he fell to Eating a bunch of Grapes; whereupon says one of his
Fellow Soldiers, Do not thou take Notice whither thou art going; and will thou now be Eating of Grapes? O, says the Condemned Person, My Friend, Envy me
not these Grapes, for they Cost me Dear! There Is no cause of Envying Wicked Men
their Pleasures, which are but Bitter-sweets. 2. Propos. That Good Men ought
not to act any personal revenge.


A Second Proposition is, That Good Men ought not to act any Personal Revenge
against those Wicked Men, who are their bitter Enemies, and such as are
Inveterate and Implacable. None may presume to Rob God of his Prerogative, nor
wring the Sword of Justice out of his Hand. God has said, Vengeance is mine, I
will Repay, says the Lord, Romans 12. 19. A place took out of Deuteronomy. 32. 35. It
was the high Commendation Nihil ob^ivisci solebat praeter injurias.
of Julius Caesar, That he was wont to forget nothing but Injuries. When a
Philosopher was railed at, by a prating malicious Fellow, he caused his Servant
to Light him Home, with a Candle and a Lanthorn. Remarkable is the Story of
Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, in forgiving Injuries, even to
Admiration of all; insomuch, as it became a Proverb. Do Bishop Cranmer an ill
Turn, and you shall have him your Friend ever after. Christians should show a
generous Spirit in passing by Injuries, and recompencing Evil with Good. This
is their Honor (as Solomon says) For a Man to cease from Strife, Prove. 20. 3.
And it is a Character of Discretion and Glory, both To defer Anger, and to pass
over a Transgression, Prove. 19. 11. To render Good for Good, that is a Common
Civility, even amongst Heathens themselves: to render Evil for Good is
Diabolical: But to render Good for Evil, is well becoming a Christian. And by
forgiving our Enemies, and doing Good to them, that do Evil to us, we Imitate
the Example of Christ; Who when 1 Pet. 2. ^^.
he was Reviled, Reviled not again; when he Suffered, he Threatened not. Christ
Prayed for his Enemies, and so did Stephen; And so ought we to do. By Meekness,
and Patience in Suffering, and by passing an Act of Oblivion for Injuries, we
Heap Coals of Fire on the Heads of our Enemies, and we shall melt, and mollify
them. For (as Bucer observes) He being ashamed by thy Kindness, will descend
into Ille beneficentia pudefactus in sese descendet, ^um enim ignis, quem ejus
Conscient^ accendisti, exuret in eo quicquid est erga te. Bucer.
his own Heart; and then the Fire which thou have Lightened in his Conscience,
will burn up all Malice against Thee, and Thou shall Save him. Yet
notwithstanding, a Christian ought to Study to forgive, and forget Injuries;
hereby he is not prohibited any Appeal to Good and wholesome Laws; for Justice,
when necessity and equity Compel thereunto; Romans 13. 4. Romans 13. 3.
For the Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain. And Rulers are not a Terror
to Good Works, but unto Evil. However, let all Christians follow the things
that make for Peace, and evidence their patient, and meek Spirits, by
overcoming the Evil of Anger, with the Goodness of Meekness, the Evil of Pride,
with the Goodness of Humility, the Badness of Revenge, with the Goodness of
Forbearance, having before their Eyes, the Charge of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 32.
And be ye kind one to another, tender Hearted, forgiving one another, as God
for Christ's Sake has forgiven you.

Thus I have showed (Negatively) that Christians ought to avoid Envy and
Revenge; now it remains, that I should, Affirmatively, set down some particular
Duties, which ought to be reduced unto point of Practice, by the Suffering,
Afflicted Servants of God.

The First Duty is, to acknowledge Duty 1. To acknowledge the righteous
dealings of God.
the Righteous Dealings of God in every thing; so did the Church, Lam. 1. 18.
The Lord is Righteous, for I have Rebelled against his Commandments. And
Micah. 7. 9. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord; because I have Sinned
against him. It Is a great Fault in many, when they have suffered Wrong, to be
over curiously, and restlesly Inquisitive, after second Causes; and when they
have found them out, to be Evil Instruments, do trouble themselves with angry
querulous Language, and Repinings against them. By this means, a Christian adds
Oil to the Flame, and increases his Vexations and Troubles. Whereas, if a
Christian could look at the Hand of God, and acknowledge his Proceedings to be
Just, and Righteous altogether; How composedly, and quietly, should he bear up
under Sufferings? Salvian has an Excellent Quis est causationis locus? Quam
liber aspera and adversa patiamur, minor a patimur quam meremur. Quod querimur,
quod dure nobiscum agat Deus? Multo nos cum Deo durius agimus, Exacerbamus
quippe Deum impuritatibus nostris, and ad puniendos nos tra^imus invitum. Salv.
saying, What Cause is there of Complaining? Although we Suffer sharp and
bitter things; yet we Suffer less than we deserve. Why do we complain that God
Deals hardly with us? We Deal much more hardly with Him, because we provoke Him
by our Impurities, and draw Him unwillingly to Punish us. David looked at the
Hand of God, when Shimei reviled him; and so did Job, upon the Report of his
great Losses: So must we under Afflictions look at the first Cause, and
acknowledge God's Righteous Dealings, and look unto the Meritorious Cause, and
acknowledge that the Evil of our Doings, which we have Committed, have justly
procured the Evil of Punishment which we Suffer. Let Us then cease from
Murmuring, and resolve the Effect into the Cause, i. e. The Evil of Punishment
which we Suffer, deservedly befalls us, for the Evil of Sin which we have
Committed.

A Second Duty is, to Endeavor to Duty 2. To get a submissive Spirit.
get a submissive, quiet, yielding Frame of Spirit; so did David, Psalm. 39. 9.
I was Dumb, I opened not my Mouth, because Thou did it. The Wicked were a
Sword to David, but he looked at that Sword, as Overruled, and Ordered by the
Hand of God. This submissive Behavior Psalm. 17. 13. Lam. 3. 29.
is, a Putting our Mouths in the Dust, and a Keeping of Silence, when we are
chastened by God, as Job was, c. 38. v. 2. Who is this that darkneth Counsel,
by words without Knowledge? We should Answer with him, c. 40. v. 5. Once have I
Spoken, but I will not Answer; yea twice, but I will Proceed no further. Job's
Heart was Wrought over into a submissive Frame; and therefore, he elsewhere
Professes, as c. 42. 6. I abhor my self, and Repent in Dust and Ashes. Let Us
then Acquiesce, and rest Satisfied with God's Dispensations, and learn to Kiss
the Rod that beats us: Where we are bid to Kiss the Son, least he be Angry,
Psalm. 2. 12. The Seventy render the Words, Kiss (...). Versio 70.
Discipline or Correction. Do not say I must Submit, for that is not enough (for
God will make thee bend, or else break thee to Pieces) but say, I will Submit
to a Wise God, whose Works are perfect, and all his Ways are Just, and
Righteous altogether. Duty 3. to practice the divine Art of contentment.


A Third Duty is, to Study, to Practice the Divine Art of Contentment. It Is a
(...).
Mystery to learn; And it is a Jewel of great Value, to him that is the
Possessor of it. The Apostle got an habit of Contentment, by the Exercise of
many Acts, Phil. 4. 11, 12. I have Learned in whatsoever State I am, therewith
to be Content. I know how to be Abased, and I know how to Abound, every where,
and in all Nunquam ergo fuit p^^per. P^^per enim, qui multa ^^p^t: (...) ^um
qui plurimis de^t^^^tur, se^ qui pluribus inhi^^ p^^pere^ censeas, Divitem vero
qui su^ sort contentus est. Lud. de Dieu.
things; I am Instructed, both to be Full, and to be Hungry, both to Abound,
and to suffer Need. This Contentment Praeclara est aequabilit^s in omni vita
and idem se^per v^lt^s, eademq^e frons. Cic* o^^. ^. 1.
is a gracious Frame of Spirit, whereby a Christian takes Vir bonus est semper
idem, and in omni ^ctu par sibi. Se^.
Complacency in God's Dispensations, in every Condition. Antisthenes desired of
the Gods A great Boon, and that was to give him the Spirit of Socrates, and
that was a composed, and contented Spirit, One, and the same in all Conditions.
It is said of Cato, that no Man saw him to be Changed, though he Lived in a
time, when there were many Changes. It Is Observable, that when David Penned
Psalm 57. he was in Adversity, he fled from Saul in the Cave; and the Title of
that Psalm is, Al-taschith, Destroy not; Yet in his Adversity, he had resolved
upon a fixed contented Spirit, ver. 7. My Heart is Fixed O God, my Heart is
Fixed. And when he was in Prosperity, he holds on the same Resolution, Psalm.
108. 1. O God, my Heart is Fixed, I will Sing, and give Praise even with my
Glory. His tongue (which was hereby meant his Glory) should be the Trumpeter of
the Creators praise. Now a contented mind can bear losses better then other
men. When God is pleased to bring down a man's condition, if then he bring the
heart down, all is well. To bring thy mind to thy condition, and to look upon
that Dimensum, or allowance given thee by God as sufficient, and to be thankful
for it, this argues a contented mind. Heathens highly extol a contented
mind. Satis divitiarum erat, nihil amplius velle. Quintil. Declam.
One says, It Is riches enough to desire no more. Another judges him an happy
man, who is Beatus est presentibus, qualiacunque sunt, contentus. Sen. de vita
beata.
content with what he has at present. A third accounts him not an happy man,
that Beatus est non qui habet quae cupit, sed qui non cupit quae non habet
Asonius.
has what he desires, but him, who desires not what he has not. Nature is
content with a little, Grace with less. It seems to be a riddle, which Hesiod
the ancient Poet propounds (...), i. e. Half is more then the whole. A learned
Commentator brings in the judgments of Plato and Aristotle interpreting that
saying, to be understood of a mean moderate estate, or mediocrity. And the same
Author concludes thus. To whom C^i parum non est satis, ^i nihil est satis, c^i
quod satis est, non est satis, ^i nihil est satis, Pe^er. in Ge^. 28. 20.
a little is not enough, to him nothing is enough; And he that has enough, and
thinks he has not enough, to him nothing is enough. The Patriarch Jacob did
not beg great matters, only bread to eat, and raiment to put on. He did not
capitulate for delicate food, nor gorgeous attire. And the Apostles commands, 1 Timothy 6. 8. Having food and raiment let us therewith be content, The expressions
are Emphatical. Three words I Will explain in the Text. 1. (...), not high
feeding but such only as may nourish us, what is enough for nourishment to keep
us alive should content us. Another word is (...) enough to cover our
nakedness; no rich and costly apparel is here meant. 3. The other word is
(...), We should be contented and count them sufficient. This excellent Spirit
of contentment will help us to bear our burdens, and to undergo hardships with
alacrity of Spirit.

4. Whatever thou fear most to lose, Duty 4. Cast all upon God.
and what thou desire most to keep, cast them upon God, and trust God with
them. What God is entrusted withal, is in the best and safest custody. Are thy
burdens great? put in practice the Psalmists counsel, Psalm. 55. 22. Cast thy
burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall never suffer the
righteous to be moved. But are not the Righteous moved, and tossed up and down,
and chased to and fro, as the Partridge on the Mountains? Yes, they are thus
moved, and they are tossed up and down with Storms and Tempests; but (as Calvin
observes on the Quia autem nihil miserius est, quam inter continuos aestus
versari, finem tandem fore promittit, quia Deus passurus non sit, ut semper
anxietatibus obnoxij sint, vel periculis and curis concutiantur; sed daturus
sit tranquillum statum. Calo. in Loc.
place) that they shall not always be thus troubled, at last they shall have a
quiet state. Are thy fears many, by reason of potent Adversaries? Jehu-like
drive furiously, to whom, he that departs from evil is made a prey. Remember
the Council of Christ, Math. 10. 28. Fear not them which kill the body but are
not able to kill the soul: But rather fear him, which is able to destroy both
Body and Soul in Hell.

The worst that men and Devils can do to the Saints is to deprive them of a
temporal life only. Eternal life is out of their reach, none are able to
deprive them of that life. Dogs may bark at the Moon, but they cannot bite it.
The most mischievous Enemies cannot hinder Christ from communicating himself to
his Children, nor them from enjoying Communion with him.

But are thy cares great, insomuch as thou art bewildered, and know not how
to wind thy self out?

Here Is Counsel and Encouragement for thee, 1 Pet. 5. 7. Casting all your care
up* on him, for he c^^eth for you. The word is (...), The same word is once
more mentioned, Omnem nostram curam conjicer^ de b^^us in ^eum, tum quia opem
nobi^ (...) potest u^ (...) Deus, tum ^uia curam nostrum gerit ut (...) Pater*
(...) in Loc.
Luke 19. 35. It Is a th^owing a man's self upon God, a committing himself unto
Gods disposing. Now when we can ^ast our selves upon Go^^ Providence, rely upon
his Wisdom^ stay and depend upon his promises, and quietly wait for his
Salvati^^, then even then amidst the most boisterous (...) and tempests, there
wi^^ be a Serenity and quietness upon our Spirits.

CHAP. XII.
Containing an Use of Reprehension to thre^ Sorts of Persons, viz. Unbelievers,
Murmurers, and rash Censurers.

NOw in the last Place, to infer the Use and Application particularly unto all
our Consciences; There are four Uses to be made of this Doctrine, (...). For
Reprehension, Exhortation, Examination, and Consolation.

The first Use is for Reprehension and Of Reprehension.
severe Redarg^^ion, unto several sorts of Persons. Three of them ^e single
out, vi^. Unbelievers, Murmurers, and rash Censurers, who in an especial
manner come under the verge of this Repoof.

1. Here Is matter of Reproof unto all 1. Unbelievers.
Unbelievers, who neither will trust God upon his threatenings, nor upon his
promises. These live by Sense, and not by Faith. They imitate those, who will
part with nothing without Money in hand. When Creature Comforts fail them,
their Faith fails with them. Hence it comes to pass, that they traduce the
Divine Providence with profane ^ King. ^. 33.
Jehoram, saying, Behold this evil is of the Lord, why should I wait for the
Lord any longer? Now what is the reason that men are to seek for help and
comfort under their greatest pressures, and know not how to get any help, but
because they trust not God, they go to King Hos. 5. 13. Idololatr^ a^xiliis
bu^a^is confidu^^, sed h^c ^ultum and Lepe eos fallunt. Nam quum Assyrius
debebat (...) ipse incipiehat vastare, and Historiae testantur, plerunque
exter^s Reges (...) advocantes (...) Ta^mou.
Jareb and to the Assyrian, i. e. They go to broken reeds, to outward means,
which will no way help nor heal them. Job was of an Excellent Spirit, who would
take a curse upon himself, If he made Gold his Hope, or the fine Gold his
Confidence, Job. 31. 24.

Not to stay in Generals. An Unbeliever (who res^^ satisfied in his Unbelief)
is no better than an Heathen, a Liar, and a Thief. Such would fly in that Man's
Face, that should call them by such Ignominious Names; and yet, so they are
branded by the Word of God. 1. An Unbeliever is an Heathen.


First, An Unbeliever is an Heathen, Mat. 6. 31, 32. Therefore take no Thought,
s^ying, What shall we Eat, or what shall we Drink? or wherewithal shall we be
Cloath^ed? For after all these things do the Gentiles Seek; for your Heavenly
Father know^th, that ye have need of all these things.

Now, shall not Christians outstrip Pagans? Heathens pore only upon the
present Life, and understand not any thing concerning a Life to come. What a
shame is it for Christians to imitate Heathens? Salvian says, It Is the Guilt
Minoris criminis reatus est, ^egem ne^cire quam spernere. Salv. lib. 4.
of a less Crime, to be ignorant of the Law than to Despise it. Heathens, who
know not Scripture, shall fare better, than knowing Christians, who abuse their
Knowledge, and confute what they know, by the practice of a contrary Life, and
Conversation.

Second, An Unbeliever is a Liar, and 2. An Unbeliever is a Liar.
puts a Lie upon God himself. To give a Man the Lie, is accounted a great
affront and indignity. But how much greater must it be, to give the Lie to the
Great GOD of Heaven and Earth? as is plain from 1 Joh^ 5. 10. He that believe^^
Quis non horr^at fidem* E^angelio derogare, in quo Deus ^nice verax and fidelis
vult haberi. Calv.
not God, has made (...) a Liar, because he bel^veth not the Record, the God
gave of his Son. An Unbelieve^ belyeth the Holy Gospel, and mal^es^ in his
account, no better than a Fable^ and Christ no better than an Impo^^^ O! How
great then must this S^ be?

Third, An Unbeliever is a Thief, and 3. An Unbeliever is a Thief.
a Robber. He (so far as in him lies) robs God of his Glory and Honor. We
must distinguish (for prevention of Mistakes) of a twofold Glory, viz.
Essential and declarative. It Is imposible to Rob God of his Essential Glory:
But an Unbeliever does his utmost to Rob God of his Declarative Glory: For he
distrusts God's Power, Wisdom, Mercy, and Truth; He calls all the Attributes of
God into Question, and this is an interpretative Blasphemy, and a transcendent
Affront, and indignity offered unto the Great GOD of Heaven and Earth. Could
Pythagoras a Heathen Philosopher, so far prevail upon his Scholars, as his
(...), what he said, was Authentic and Persuasive? And shall not the Word of
Christ, who spoke as never Man spoke, even the words of Eternal Life, shall not
these gain Credit and Obedience?

But I proceed to reprove a Second 2. Murmurers are Reproved.
Sort, who are Murmurers, complaining, and discontented Persons. They are so
far from being thankful (as they ought to be) for what they have already
Received; insomuch, that they Murmur swhich they ought not) for what they want.
These entertain hard Thoughts of God; And when they are not Satisfied, nor
answered as soon as they call, they break forth into repinings, and
discontented Language. So did the murmuring Israelites smart for their
Murmurings, and became Spectacles of dreadful Judgments. They were denied
entrance into the promised Land, Numb. 14. 29, 30. The Earth opened her Mouth
and Swallowed Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. And the Psalmist gives the Reason of
their overthrow in the Wilderness, Psalm. 106. 25.
because They Murmured in their Tents, and Hearkened not unto the Voice of the
Lord. The Mischiefs of murmuring, and discontented Spirits are exceeding great.
I shall represent them in these ensuing Aggravations.

First, There is a great deal of Unthankfulness Aggrav. 1. There is
Unthankfulness in Murmuring.
in a murmuring Spirit. It is the Lord's Mercy that we are not Consumed;
because his Compassions fail not, We are yet Living Men; That we are not struck
Dead in our Sins, is Mercy; and we have great cause of Thankfulness, that we
are Living Men; Wherefore, then ^am. 3. 39.
should the Living Man complain? Yet we are on this side Hell and Eternity; and
if we have less than Hell, it is more than we deserve. Unthankful and u^holy 2.
Tin. 3. 2.
are Ranked together. Unthankfulness, is a Wicked Effect that comes from a
murmuring Spirit. For though (...), Quibus nullum ju^ est, nec (...). Beza.
many receive Mercies heaped, and varieties of Loving Kindnesses; Yet
Murmurers, account the Mercies which they Receive, as no Mercies, or very small
things; because they have not what they would have. And thus Men lessen God's
Mercies, and lightly Esteem of them; which is a very great Evil. Thus the
Israelites accounted Manna but Light Bread. They were weary of it, and their
Murmuring, Numb. 21. 5. They counted Ainsw.
discovered their great Ingratitude. it* base, and vile in comparison with
other Meats.

Secondly, Murmuring hinders the Practice 2. Aggra. Murmuring hinders the
Practice of Duties.
of Duties. A Man Discontented, cannot set himself to pray Aright. When we
Pray, we should acknowledge God's Sovereignty over us; and resign our wills to
His disposal. But by Murmuring, we presume to Prescribe to God, and to be our
own Carvers; and so undo our Prayers. How can a discontented Man. reap Profit
by a Sermon, when his Mind is Distracted, and roving in the uttermost parts of
the Earth? How can a Man, that is daily Murmuring, and Discontented, perform (as
he ought to do) the Duties of his Relations, as a Husband, Father, Master, etc.
when as his Spirit is Perplexed, and his Mind Tortured, like one upon a Rack?
His Bread is his Gravel, his Bed, a Bed of Thorns; he has a restless, and
unquiet Spirit, which unfits him for every Duty.

Thirdly, Murmuring adds greater 3. Aggra. Murmuring adds greater weight to
Afflictions.
Weight to any Affliction. If a Marri^er in a Storm will be froward, and angry
at the Storm, and will not pull down his Sails; his discontented Humor, may
hazard the losing of the Ship: So a discontented Heart, is a froward Heart, and
frets, and fumes, and swells with Pride, and will not yield; and therefore, the
Affliction is much more Grievous, and Insupportable.

Fourthly and Lastly, A murmuring 4. Aggra* Murmuring ends in a Curse.
and discontented Spirit, terminates in a great Curse, Psalm. 59. 15. Let them
wander up and down for Meat, and Grudg if they be not Satisfied. This is an
Imprecation, and Certe justo Dei judicio ad eum mo^um pun^untur tyrannorum
satellices, ^iser^^um ^oppressores quibus bona p^^perum per injuriam ablat^
impenduntur, ut o^es per calu^^^m a^q^isitas non d^^ obtineant: deinde ad
^g^statem re^acti neminem inveniant qui ^furientium Commisereatur; digni qui
^andem inhuma^^^^, quam itsi antea exercuerunt in imm^ritos, exp^riantur.
Mu^cul. in Loc.
Curse upon wicked Men, that if they be not Satisfied, they shall Grudg. There
is likewise, a Curse upon those that are not Content with their present
Condition, Deuteronomy. 28. 67. In the Morning thou shall say, would God it were Even,
and at Even thou shall say, would God it were Morning. Neither Evening nor
Morning pleases a discontented Person. He is such as the Proverb says) Who is
neither contented, Full nor Fasting. There is a Curse likewise ( Deuteronomy. 28. 4.)
upon thos^ Who served not the Lord with Joyfulness, and with Gladness of Heart,
for the abundance of all things. God would have his People serve him with
Cheerfulness. This was the Resolution of the Church, when she was in a low
trembling Condition, Hab. 3. 17, 18. Although the Fig Tree shall not Blossom,
neither shall Fruit be in the Vine, the Labor of the Olive shall fail, and the
Fields shall yield no Meat, the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there
shall be no Herd in the Stalls: Yet will I Rejoice in the Lord, I will Joy in
the God of my Salvation. None indeed have cause Gaudi^^^ propriu^ est Piorum.
Aug.
of Joy, but God's Children. Joy (says Augustine) Is only the Portion of the
Godly. Away then with, and abandon all murmuring, discontented Speeches. Labor
Res severa est verum Gaudium. Seneca.
to be Thankful, and a thankful Heart, is a contented Heart.

A Third Sort to be reproved, are Rash Censurers, who by their uncharitable 3.
Rash Censurers are Reproved.
Censures, add more Weight to the Burdens, and more Afflictions to the Bonds of
God's Afflicted Children. Every profane Miscreant is ^pt to V^ima est adversae
fortunae sarcina, quod dum miseris aliquod crimen effi^gitur, quae perferunt
meruisse creduntur* Boeth* lib. 1. Pros. 4. de consol.
Trample on them, that are already cast down, and reproach Sufferers, and
censure them for the vilest of Men. They throw Dirt enough, hoping that some
may Stick. But Christ gives a seasonable Caution, Luke 13. 2. Suppose ye, that
these Galileans were Sinners above all the Galileans, because they Suffered
such things? and ver. 4. Or those Eighteen, upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell,
and Slew them; think ye, that they were Sinners above all Men that dwelt in
Jerusalem? Christ puts them in mind of that necessary indispensable Duty of
Repentance, ver. 5. I tell you, nay: but except ye Repent, ye shall all
likewise Perish. Si ipsi nostri simus accusatores, profic^^ nobis ad salutem;
s^ vero expectamus ut a Diabolo accusemur, accusatio illa nobis cedit ad
paenam. Origin Hom. 3. in Lev.
If Censurers of others would reflect upon themselves, and enquire into their
own Hearts, they would find work enough to busy themselves at Home, and take
more heed, least they Condemn the Generation of the Righteous. For every one to
Ex ^o ^^^squisque justus esse incipit, ex quo sui Accusator Extiterit. Bern. de
inter* Dom. c. 1.
Accuse himself, is the way to mend.

Job's Friends were mistaken Exceedingly, in Condemning him for Hypocrisy:
Whereas Hypocrisy was not the cause of his Sufferings God had a Design to prove
the Devil a Liar, Wh^ moved God against him. And likewise, God made Job a
Probationer, and proved him, and refined him by Afflictions, and left him upon
Record, as a mirror of Patience to Posterity. Had it not been for the exercise
of Patience under Afflictions, we had not enjoyed that excellent Book of Job.
But nothing more common, than to Brand the greatest Sufferers, for the greatest
Sinners, to censure them for Cast-awayes, and rejected of God. This is the
gross mistake of Multitudes. We Read in the Gospel, when they brought a Man
Born Blind to Christ, the Disciples asked him, Master, Who did Sin, this Man,
or his Parents, that he was Born Blind? Jesus Answered, Neither has this Man
Sinned, nor his Parents; but that the Works of God should be made Manifest in
him. Though he was a Sinner from the Womb, yet he did not Sin himself Blind.
God did not inflict Blindness upon him for any particular Sin. Thus God,
according to his Sovereign, and absolute Prerogative, may do what he pleases,
and none (...) Question. In Affliction (as a Learned Si iniquitatis merita
respiciat, nullum est adeo ingens s^^plicium, etc. Ferus in loc.
Author observes) God either looks at Sin, or at his own Glory: If he look at
Sin, no Affliction is so great, but we deservedly Suffer it. But oft-times, God
only looks at his own Glory, and then he Afflicts not for Sin.

Now if it be thus Sinful to pass wrong, and uncharitable Censures upon God's
Children in Affliction, How much more Sinful is it to Rejoice in their
Calamities? (...), i. e. a Rejoicing in others Sufferings, argues a brutish,
and a barbarous Spirit; even as bad as the Spirit of a Tiger, or the Bowels of
an Estrich. Thus David was troubled with Psalm. 70. ^.
such inhuman Enemies, who desired his Hurt, and Cried, Aha, Aha. They Rejoiced
in any Evil that befell him. They Insulted over him in his Afflictions, Malo meo
gaudentes dicunt de me euge, euge. Jan. in loc.
and (as Jansenius observes) showed Acclamations of Joy. Now such there are,
who (as Solomon says) Rejoice to do Evil, Prove. 21. 4. They Sleep not, except
they have done Mischief, and their Sleep is taken away, unless they cause some
to Fall. These are the Persons, who like the Devil, are most pleased, when they
have done most Mischief; and are most Joyful, when they hear of the Sorrows,
and Afflictions of God's Children. To such, I will relate a Story of Stephen
Vid. Fox Acts and Monu. Queen Mary's Days (...). 3.
Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, who had provided a great Feast to Entertain
his Acquaintance that Day, that Bishop Rid^ ^^y, and Bishop Latimer were to be
Burnt* but he would not sit down to Dinner, till a Messenger late in the
Afternoon, brought word of their Burning; then he went merrily to Dinner with
his Guests. But behold, the Hand of God was upon him at Dinner, and he was
Carried from Table; his Tongue was Swollen, and a dreadful Disease called Miserer
mei, seized on him; he Dyed of that remarkable Sickness, and in his Sickness he
Confessed, That he Denied Christ with Peter; but he did not Repent with Peter.

Let such Stories be a Warning-Piece to all such, who Rejoice in the Sufferings
of God's Children. God Professes, that he was sorely displeased, with such as
help forward his Peoples Afflictions, Zeph 1. 15. Although God chastise his
dearest Children (for they may be Sub ira, yet they are not Filii irae) yet God
will not (...) them. He chastises his own People with the Rods of Men; but the
Wicked he will Chastise with Scorpions. What the Godly Suffer, is only a
Fatherly Correction, a Judgment of Chastisement: They are Chastised in Measure
and Mercy, and for a Moment, and shall escape Eternal Punishments; But the
Corrections of the Wicked, are Judgments of Revenge, part of Payment of a
greater Sum, as an earnest Penny of the Flames of Hell Fire, which the Wicked,
and all that forget God, shall Endure, Easeless, Endless, and Remediless. Isa.
28. 22.
Wherefore, Be ye not Mockers, least your Bands be made Strong: Scorn not, Jeer
not; neither any whit undervalue any Afflicted Servants of God: of all others,
there is least hope of Reforming such Vile, and Abominable Persons, who make
God's Children their Langhing-stoch, and Subjects of Derision. The same Doom
may be Applicable to them, with those mentioned, 1 Pet. 2. 3. Whose Judgment
now of a long time Lingreth not, and their Damnation Slumbreth not.

CHAP. XIII.
Containing an Use of Exhortation, wherein are laid down moving Considerations
to depend, and rely on God's All Sufficiency.

for Exhortation.
I Come now to a Second Use, which it for Exhortation, that from the
Consideration of God's All Sufficiency, we would endeavor quietly to stay,
repose, and establish our Spirits. In pursuance of this Exhortation, some
Motives or Perswasives are to be Urged: some Impediments to be removed, and
some Duties to be Practiced.

First, For Motives or Perswasives, to this grand Duty of reposing our
Strength, and Confidence in God's All Sufficiency, take these following.

First, There Is an Insufficiency, and Mot. 1. There Is Insufficiency in all
Creatures.
utter Impotency in all the Creatures in the Universe. If you make an Extract
of the choicest, and most admired Creature Comforts; they cannot give any rea^,
and solid Satisfaction. They are in their best Estate, Vanity, and Vexati^
Eccles. 2. 11. Isa. 55. 2. Eccles. 1. 8.
on of Spirit; and no way able to satisfy an Immortal Soul. The Eye is not
satisfied with Seeing, nor the Ear filled with Hearing. The Heart of Man is
Triangular, and the World is a Circle, and it is imposible for a Circle to fill
a Triangle. Take all the Melodious Music to tickle the Ear, and all the gaudy
Pageants to please the Eye, and all the admirable Fancies, Contrivances, and
Imaginations, to affect the Heart; yet upon a serious deliberate Review,
there is Vanity, Insufficiency, and Dissatisfaction in them all. The desire is
Insatiate, crying out with the Horse-leeches Daughter, Give, give. When Men are
upon their Sick-beds, and Tormented with great Pains, What help can Riches
afford? When Men are troubled in Conscience, and the Guilt of Sin flies in the
Sinners Face, Multo difficilius est conscientean afflictum consolari quam
Mortuos texcitare. Luth. in Genesis
What can the Pomp and Riches of the World do, to quiet and settle the Spirit?
A Man may as soon hoard up the Graces of Faith, Love, Patience, and such like
in his Coffer, as satisfy his Soul with Gold and Silver. The Soul is Immaterial
and Infinite; the things of the World are Material and Finite, and between
Material and Immaterial, Finite and Infinite, there holds no Rule of Proportion.

Secondly, Confider, whatsoever is Mot. 2. All that's Good, is derivative from
God.
Good, Amiable, and Desirable in any of the best Creatures, it is derivative,
and borrowed from the Creator. Creatures are, when compared to God, not so much
as the Dust to the Balance, nor so much as a Ray to the Sun, or a Drop to the
Ocean. God is not only Eminently Good and All-Sufficient, but Exclusively; for
he admits no Competitors, nor Corrivals with him. God is a Fountain opened,
Zach. 13. 1. Jer. 2. 13.
and a Fountain of Living Waters. An inexhausted Fountain, which never fails,
nor can be drawn dry. Creatures are oftimes Pits without Water, and what Water
they have at any time, it is borrowed elsewhere. But the Spring never fails. The
Fountain of Grace and Mercy, is a Well of living Water, Springing up unto
Eternal Life.

Thirdly, God is infinitely Excellent, Mot. 3. God is infinitely Excellent.
absolutely perfect, and what he does is Complete, and every way Perfect,
Eccles. 3. 14. I know that whatsoever God does, it shall be for Ever; nothing
can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it, and God does it, that Men should
fear before him.

It Is ordinary amongst Creatures, for one Artificer to mend the Work of
another; because one Man has more Dexterity and Sagacity, in managing his
Trade, than another. Every one has not Arrived to the Skill of Bezaliel and
Aholiab, who were filled with Wisdom from God. Nothing more common, than for
one to find fault with another Work. And many Eyes may See Plus vident oculi
quam oculus.
more than one. It Is not unusual for the self-same Man to mend his own Work,
for One day may learn of another. But all Posterior dies est prioris discipu^u^.
God's Ways are absolutely Perfect. And God alone is able to persuade the
Heart, to Acquiesce, and rest satisfied in him alone. Whereas no
Creature-comfort can quiet the Heart, and remove all discontents. The want of a
bended Knee more vexed, and displeased Haman, than all his Court-Favours, and
Promotions pleased him, Omnia haec non habent pretium, valorem, dignitatem apud
me. Lud. de Dieu.
Esth. 5. 13. Yet all this avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the
Jew, sitting at the King's Gate.

Fourthly, God is an Universal Good Mot. 4. God is an Universal Good.
at all times, in all Cases, Places, and in all Conditions. Creatures at the
best, are but particular Goods, and serve for use only, in some particular
Cases, and in others, are not useful, nor helpful at all. For Instance; Fire,
and Clothes warm the Body, but cannot satisfy Hunger, nor quench the Thirst;
Friends may be willing to help, but are absent, and cannot convey help, or if
they be present, they may not be able. They cannot help a Man to Health in
Sickness, nor to Riches in Poverty, nor to Peace in a time of War. But God is
every where, by the Ubiquity of his Presence, and always able to help. All
Creatures are at God's Command. All Cattle on a Thousand Mountains are at God's
Disposal. In all Conditions, Wants and Distresses, Supplies, Helps and Relief
come from God. It has pleased the Father, that in Christ should all Fullness
dwell, Col. 1. 19.

There Is Fullness of Wisdom to Counsel, of Power to Defend, of Mercy to Pardon,
of Righteousness to Justify, of Habet omnia qui habet possidentem omnia. August.
Holiness to Sanctify, of Grace here, and of Glory hereafter. Now He has all,
who has Interest in him, who Possesses all.

Fifthly, God is an Eternal Good. His Mot. 5. God is an Eternal Good. Jer. 31.
3. Ps. 130. ^. 2 Samuel 23. 5. Inter peritura vivimus. Sen.
Love is Everlasting, his Mercy Endures for Ever, his Covenant Everlasting. No
Creature in the Universe, is of any long Continuance. Time is short, and Riches
are but for a short time. Health, Peace, Friendship, Relations, dearest and
nearest are Transient, and of short Continuance. It Is to be Observed, when
Solomon Breve est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat* Bellar. de Contemptu
mun^i.
reckons a time for several Purposes and Conditions, Eccles. 3. 1, 2, 3. etc.
He Mentions no time to Live. Orimur, morimur. From our Cradle to our Grav^,
there is one continued progressive Motion. There Is something cutting at the
Root, and hastening us each Moment to our Grave. Where then shall we Rest, and
confidently Secure our ^elves? We must Ascend from Earth to Heaven, from
Transient and Fading Creatures, to an Eternal and Unchangeable God. No rest for
Noah's Dove, till She was took into the Ark; no rest nor acquiescence for a
Christian, but In omnibus quae percurro non invenio tutum locum animae meae
nisi in te, quo colligantur sparsa mea, nec a te quicquam recedat ex me. Aug.
confess. l. 10.
in God. Wherever I go (says Augustine) I find no Safety, but in Thee. Let Us
then have continual Recourse unto God. In his Presence there is fullness of Joy,
and at his Right Hand, there are Pleasures for Evermore. Withal Holy
Greediness, and unwearied Pains, let us pursue the Ways of Wisdom: There Is a
great Encouragement, Prove. 8. 18. Riches and Honors are with me; yea, durable
Riches and Righteousness. Other Riches, which the World injoyes; if God be not
there amongst them, what are they else but Poverty. Omnis mihi copia quae Deus
meus non est, egestas est. Aug. Confess. l. 13. Col. 3. 2.
A Painter said, Pingo Aeternitati. I am sure, a Christian ought to have
Eternity in his frequent, and deliberate Thoughts, and to Labor to get his
Heart weaned, from things Transient, and fixed upon things Permanent, to Set his
Affections on things above, and not on things below.

Sixthly and Lastly, Consider, If we believe Mot. 6. We shall Speed the worse,
if we do not depend upon God's All Sufficiency.
not God's All* Sufficiency, nor depend upon his Power, and Goodness, and
Wisdom, for Provision Supplies, and Assistances, but betake our selves to any
Creature, we shall speed the worse. To our Peril be it: For to leave God's Way,
and to follow a devised Way of our own; to leave a Fountain, and to repair to a
Cystern, is the Highway that leads to our own Ruin, and utter Destruction.
Who ever Prospered by any indirect, irregular Way? For any to make haste out of
a Trouble, and through Impatience betake themselves to wrong Remedies, as by
lying, dissembling, and rendering Evil for Evil; this is a Remedy worse than the
Disease; this is to throw away the Plaster, before the So^e be Healed, and a
ready means to cause the Wound to Bleed afresh, and renew the Pain. For
Instance, Abraham and Isaac, both Sinned greatly in Denying their Wives, and
thereby they exposed themselves to great Temptations: Jacob compassed a
Blessing by indirect means; though now he obtained the Blessing, yet he met
with variety of Afflictions; he was an Exile Twenty Years, for fear of his
Brother Esau; he endured a rigorous Servitude under his Uncle Laban, and many
Domestic Crosses he met with amongst his own Children. Some in their
Straights, betake themselves to a broken Refuge of Lies; But observe the
Judgment Isa. 28. 17. The Hail shall sweep away the Refuge of Lies, and the
Waters shall overflow the hiding Place. Others in Extremity, betake themselves
to Carnal Compliance with Men; they even commit Idolatry with them, like the
Ancient Persians, who Worshipped the Rising Sun. The Charge of the Apostle, is,
1 Cor. 7. 23. Mentes ve^tras libe^ ^ma^ habete, neque eas unquam aut beris
vestris, aut ullis hominibus subijcite; sed soli Christo a quo empti estis* c^r
quum servipis, ne existimate vos hominun, sed scitote vos solius Christi* esse
servos. Lu^ de Die^.
Ye are bought with a Price, be not ye the Servants of Men. And the Apostle
Professes his Integrity, and Resolution against Men pleasing, Gal. 1. 10. Do I
seek to Please Men? For if I pleased Men, I should not be the Servant of
Christ. And such as trust in Men, are under a dreadful Curse, Jer. 17. 5. Thus
says the Lord, Cursed be the Man that trusts in Man, and makes Flesh his
Arm, and whose Heart departs from the Living God. What said Saul to the
Benjamites, Will the Son of Jesse give you Fields and Vineyards, and make you
Captains of Thousands? So say I, Will any thing under the Sun give you any real
lasting Comfort? Will any Earthly thing help you in a Day of God's Wrath, then
especially, when a Guilty Conscience flies in thy Face? Will thy Riches and
Greatness carry thee beyond this Life; and lead thee to Eternity? Upon
Experience we shall find that we are disappointed, and crossed most, when we
expect most; How was David crossed in his Beautiful Son Absalom? And how was he
crossed in his Darling Adonijah, whom he never once reproved? When Judas had most
need of a Word of Counsel and Comfort, then he was Answered by the High
Priests, after a slight and careless manner, Ad modum Caini loquuntur, vera
progenies Caini. Grot.
Mat. 27. 4. And they said, What is that to us? See thou to that. Absalom had
never so much need of his Mule, as when his Head was caught under the Thickets
of an Oak; but then his Mule went from under him, and left him Hanging between
Heaven and Earth, a ready Mark for the next Enemy that came, to thrust him
through, as Joab did. Mephibosheth had never more need of Ziba's Service, than
at that time, when David fled from Absalom (and Mephibosheth that true Hearted
Loyal Subject, had a willing mind to wait on the King; but could not for want
of Legs) yet then Ziba raised a notorious Lie against Mephibosheth, and accused
him falsely, who was a faithfuller Subject, than his Accuser. Let all these
Considerations engage us to trust God, and distrust Creatures; and to this
purpose, I shall remove some Impediments, or Obstacles, which hinder our
trusting, and depending on God.

CHAP. XIIII.
Wherein are Two grand Impediments discovered, viz. Covetousness and Hypocrisy,
which hinder us from Believing, and Depending on God's All Sufficiency.

FOr Discovering of those Impediments, which hinder us from trusting in God,
and Believing his All Sufficiency, and staying thereon, there are several Sins
which might be named, Impatience, Murmuring, Unbelief, etc. But these having
been mentioned before, I shall mention Two grand Impediments or Obstacles, viz.
Covetousness and Hypocrisy. That I name Covetousness, none will wonder; but
that I name Hypocrisy may be more Scrupled; The Reason is, because a deceitful
false Heart, is ready to trust any thing or person, sooner than God.

First, Then Covetousness is a great 1. Impediment is Covetousness.
hinderance of trusting in God: This Sin of Covetousness (as far as I observe)
is no where in Scripture charged upon any of the Saints; though many other Sins
are charged on them; yet I find not this Sin in particular, charged on them
(though none can say his Heart is clear, more or less from this Sin:) Judas
betrayed Christ for Thirty Pieces of Silver. The Covetous^ess of the Gad^rens
caused them to prefer their Swine Mark 10. 22.
before a Savior: The Young Rich Ruler preferred Treasures on Earth, before 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Treasures in Heaven. Too much Love of the World, caused Demas to turn
Apostate. Lather had a Spirit above the Hem Germana ista bestia non curat
^urum; valde protestatus sum ^e ^^lle sic satiari ab ^o. Melch. Adam in vita
Lutheri.
World; he professed that he never found his Heart inclined to Covetousness,
Insomuch as when Preferment was to be offered to him, to stop his Mouth, his
very Enemies confessed that he loved not Gold. And he professed That he would not
be put off with outward things. That Noble Italian, Marquess Galea^ius
Caracciolus left his Marquessdom, his Relations, and Honors for Christ, and
left this Heroical Speech upon Record to Posterity, worthy to be Wrote with a
Pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, viz. Cursed be that Man, that
prefers all the Gold and Silver in the World, before one days Communion with
Jesus Christ. Preferments, Riches, and Honors could not prevail with Learned
Basil, that Worthy Father; he bad offer such things to Children; such things
were beneath his Cognizance.

How frequently does the Holy Scriptures note this Sin of Covetousness, with a
Brand of Infamy. Covetousness is the Root of all Evil. It Is called there, the 1 Timothy ^. 10.
Love of Money: Two Words the Scripture uses to express Covetousness by; one is
(...), the other is (...), and both are in Name and Nature stark naught; for
Covetousness is Idolatry; Col. 3. 5.
it is a Fruit of a naughty Heart, and Mark. 7. 22.
joined with bad Company, as Theft, Malice, and what not. It Is so abominable a
Sin, as not worthy of naming.

Nothing, says a Heathen, argues Ni^^^ est tam angusti tamque parvi animi,
quam ^mare divitias. Cic.
more, a narrow and low Spirit, than Covetousness. When Men are fast Glued, and
Riverted to the World, they believe not the Omnipotency, and the
All Sufficiency of God, because they have made choice of another God, even
Mammon.

And whither will not Covetousness drive a Man, and to what will not
Covetousness tempt a Man? A Man that allows himself in this Sin, will Spin a
Thread thinner and thinner, till it and his Conscience break both together: he
will find out new coined Distinctions, Apologies, Subterfuges, Evasions, and
what not to baffle the Truth, and his own Conscience. It Is Christ's Caution,
Luke 12. 15.
Take heed, and beware of Covetousness. And Bishop Latimer, that Eminent
Martyr, would frequently Inculcate this Caution, Beware of Covetousness, For
when the Devil, and a Man's own Corruptions meet with a Heart greedy of Gain,
What Wickedness will be left Unattempted? Hence it comes to pass, that
Multitudes will not believe God, nor rely upon His All Sufficiency, because
they Love the World too well; and the Love of the World justles out the Love of
God. It was an excellent saying of an ancient Experimental Divine, Where Sin
Mr. Greenham. Cujus anima in oculis ejus est pretiosa, in ejus oculis Mundus
est parvus Buxtor. Floril.
sits light, the World sits heavy; and where the World sits light, Sin sits
heavy. Wherefore let the Apostles Charge leave deep Impressions upon our
Consciences, 1 John 2. 15. Love not the World, neither the things that are in
the World; If any Man Love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him.

A Second Impediment, is Hypocrisy; 2. Impediment Hypocrisy.
and this is a Reason, why so many distrust God, because they deal
Hypocritically, and have divided Hearts, partly for God, and partly for Mammon.
The Heart is Naught, and keeps Reserves for that Profit; the other Interest,
and Carnal Advantage. Many braid of the Strumpet, who would have the Child
divided: So they will divide in Duties and Commands. This Hypocritical,
Deceitful Spirit, keeps multitudes from Trusting and Depending on God's
All Sufficiency. Ananias and Saphira would not Trust God; they feared, that
some Poverty might befall them: And therefore, they made a Defalcation from the
Price, Act. 5. 3.
and used Hypocritical Jugglings.

No Hypocrite can trust God; for he acts all for Self-Interest, and turns like
a Weathercock with the Wind, and strives to swim with the Stream. It Is a
Sincere Heart alone, that can cast it self upon God, and can venture all upon
his Promises. He it is, who alone will trust God with all that he has; for he
knows, that God is infinitely nearer and dearer to him, than all the World
besides. This Consideration comforted Hezekiah upon his Bed of Sickness. 2
King. 20. 3. I beseech thee Lord, remember now, how I have walked before thee
in Truth, and with a perfect Heart; and have done that, which is Good in thy
Sight. A Heart divided between God, and the World, between Christ, and
Antichrist, will never stick close to God, in a Time of Adversity. A Rotten,
Hypocritial Heart, will not Suffer for Christ: A Hypocrite will not willingly
bear a Scorn, or Word of Reproach for Christ; much less, will he Fry at a
Stake. The Lord thus expostulateth the Case: Jer. 12. 5. If thou have run with
the Footmen, and they have wearyed thee; then, How can thou contend with
Horses? And if in the Land of Peace, wherein thou trustedst, they have wearyed
thee; then, How will thou do in the Swelling of Jordan?

Bilney the Martyr, made Assay first, Acts and Mon. in Q. Mar. Days, Vol. 3.
to try how he could bear the Burning of his Finger; because he expected,
(which came to pass afterward) that his whole Body should be Burned. But an
Hypocrite Timeo, ne animam perdas, qui capillum non perdes. Aug. in Psalm. 96.
will lose neither Finger nor Body, neither Life nor Limbs, for Christ. So far
he will pretend for Christ, as his Interest is concerned, for the Loaves; (as
many follow Christ) for Preferment and Promotion, in Halcyon-Dayes of Peace and
Tranquillity: But when Religion is Contemned, and the Professors are
Persecuted, a Hypocrite takes Offense; he makes the worst Choice, To Video te
post hujus pl^goe tuae horrend^m miseriam ad interitum tuum hanc impietatis
sequi velle perniciem. Hieronym in Loc.
choose Sin, Job 36. 21.
rather than Affliction; and rather to sleep in a whole Skin, than a whole
Conscience.

None more Odious to God and Man, than a Hypocrite; for God, and Good Men hate
him, because he is no better, and is not so good as he seems to be: And Wicked
Men hate him, because he pretends to any Goodness at all. Notwithstanding many
Failings* Sincerity is that which will stand us in stead, when we come to dye.
A Reverend Minister, when he came to dye, said; I have a Mr. Giles Workman, a
Minister in Glocestershire. 2 Chronicles. 15. 17.
little Sincerity, and that is all that comforts me. Asa had many Failings; yet
it is said of him; i. e. Affirmo optima conscientia, me nec corrumpere
Doctrinam, nec ^^t^te flectere ad cujusque affectus, ne^^e privat^ ulli
cupiditati servire. Melancthon in loc.
Nevertheless, the Heart of Asa was Perfect all his Days. This is the Cause of
the Saint's Rejoicing: 2 Cor. 1. 12. For our Rejoicing is this, the Testimony
of our Consciences, That in Simplicity, and Godly Sincerity, not with Fleshly
Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the World.

A Heathen could commend Plainness, and Simple-Dealing, as most agreeing ^o the
Nature of Man: So says Tully; Quod verum, simplex, sincerumque sit, id est
naturae Hominis aptissimum. Much more should a Christian embrace Sincerity, as
knowing it to be that which God requires, and so highly esteems of.

If then we desire to trust God in all Conditions, let us labor for a Sincere
and Single Heart, and abhor and hate Hypocrisy with a perfect Hatred: For a
Hypocrite will never hold out in any Duty; he will not believe, when Sense
Fails him: He will not pray always; he will not hold on in the Profession of
Religion, farther than may consist with his own Secret Designs, and
Self-Interests.

CHAP. XV.
Directing to Three special Duties to be put in Practice, viz. To Live by
Faith; and, To set the Spirit of Prayer a working; and, To get a meek and quiet
Spirit.

HAving laid down several Motives, and removed some Impediments; for a Close of
this Use, here are several Duties, as Helps to stay our Selves, and rely upon
God, necessary to be Practiced.

The First Duty is, To Live by Faith. 1. Duty, To Live by Faith.
There Is no Life like to this: All other Lives; (in Comparison of this) are no
better than sharking, shifting Lives.

Epaminonda^, that great Theban-Commander, after a great Overthrow, ask't,
Whether his Buckler was safe? A great Man of our Nation, in the Time of his
Sufferings, ask't, Whether his Honor was safe? Now, the Buckler, and Honor of
a Christian; is the Life of Faith. Faith is a Shield and a Buckler, a Stay and
a Staff in the greatest Afflictions. When Sense* and Reason fails, and Men are
even at their Wits ends, then is the Time for Faith to act on Promises; then is
the Time to live the Life of Faith; and to strive, that Faith and Patience may
hold out.

It is storyed of Cynagirus, That when Justin.
he was thrown over Shipboard, then he held by his Hands; and when one Hand
was cut off, he held by the other; and when that was likewise cut off, he held
by his Teeth; and (as the Historian says) Instar rabidae ferae, morsu navem
detinuit. Thus a true Believer will not let go his Hold; he will not be beaten
from his Strong-hold. The Promises are as so many Fort-Royals to a Believer;
wherefore, he is resolved to stand* his Ground, and lay fast hold on the
Promises. Though he be beaten off several Holds, and deprived of several Helps,
and disappointed of his Expectations; yet he Heb. 10. 35.
is resolved, not to let go his Confidence in God.

Here then consists the Life of Faith in an Eminent way; when the Oil fails in
the Cruse, and the Meal in the Barrel, then to depend upon God's
All Sufficiency, and trust God upon his Word, though Sense and Reason fail. And
such a Man, who acts Faith on Promises, applies himself to all good Means; he
Fides Maxima, and Heroi^a operatur. Lut. in Genesis 29.
will not tempt God, by Negligence and Sloathfulness; presuming of Supplies,
without the Use of lawful Means. But as the Ancients held the Plow, and Prayed;
so a Believer will be diligent in his Calling, seek God by Prayer, exercise
Faith and Patience.

This is the most excellent Life in all the World: The Apostles experimented
it; Gal. 2. 20. The Life which I live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the
Son of God. The Life of a Believer, is a Nonesuch, without a Parallel; there is
none like to it. Some live by their Lands, some by their Trades, some by their
Wits and Shifts; not one of these Lives will hold out, when a Storm comes.

Wherefore, let us labor to live that Life, which will hold out amidst the
greatest Sufferings, and support us against the sorest Burdens, either
Imminent or Incumbent upon us. This Grace of Faith is not an Herb that grows
in our Gardens: It is a Plant of our Heavenly Father's Plantation; it is the
Gift of God.

There are Three sorts of Faith; viz. Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29. (...). Fidem
ipsam nobis exigit Deus, and non invenit quod exigit, nisi dederit quod
inveniat. August.
A General Assenting-Faith; A Special Resting-Faith; and, A Particular
Applying-Faith: We must join all these together; for we have need of all. i. e.
We must trust God upon his Word, because he has said it: We must Assent unto
the Truth of his Word. Thus did David trust God upon his Psalm. 119. 42. Numb.
23. 19.
Word. Whether God threatens Judgments, or promises Mercy, we must believe his
Word to be True. Balaam himself, though a Mercenary-Prophet, gives a true
Attestation; viz. God is not a Man, that he should Lie; neither the Son of Man,
that he should Repent: Has he said it, and shall he not do it? Or, Has he
spoken, and shall he not make it good?

2. There is a Special Resting-Faith, which is called a Faith of Adherence, or
Recumbence; when we rely, and stay our selves upon God, and will not part with
any one of his Promises. The People, when Rabshakeh Railed, Rested themselves 2 Chronicles. 32. 8.
on the Words of Hezekiah. All Rabshakeh's Railing Speeches, could not batter
down Jerusalems Walls, nor drive back Hezekiah, and his People, from Trusting
and Relying on God. Thus Job did act singularly, and resolvedly: Job 13. 15.
Though he Slay me, yet will I Trust in Him.

There Is a Third sort of Faith, which is a Particular Applying-Faith. Thus did
Thomas acknowledge Christ, in particular, in those words; My Lord, and my John
20. 28.
God: And St. Paul professes; Christ has loved me, and given himself for me.
Gal. 2. 20.
A Believer will apply the Promises to himself by Faith: And though, under some
Desertion, he is afraid to apply Christ to himself; yet he applies himself to
Christ, begging his Counsel, and his Wisdom to direct, and his Consolations to
revive him.

Christ is All in All, to the true Believer: Christ is the Way, the Truth, and
the Life. Whereupon St. Bernard gives a choice Exposition: We (says he) will
Nos sequemur ^e, perte, ad te: quia tues via, veritas, and vita: via in
exemplo, veritas in promisso, vita in praemio. Bern. Sermon. 2. de Ascen. Domini.
follow Thee, by Thee, unto Thee; because Thou art the Way, the Truth, and the
Life: Thou art the Way in Example, the Truth in Promises, the Life in Reward.

A Second Duty is, To set the Spirit of Prayer Duty 2. To set* the Spirit of
Prayer a working.
a working. To pray by the Spirit, is the Property only of a Gracious Spirit:
For the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, are joined together, Zech. 12. 10.
That we may know, wherein the Spirit of Prayer consists, we have it set forth;
Romans 8. 26. With Groanings, which cannot be uttered. By the Spirit of Adoption,
crying Abba, Father, Gal. 4. 6. Romans 8. 15. 1 Samuel 1. 15.
by Pouring out the Soul, as Hannah did; by Wrestling, as Jacob did, Genesis 32.
24. And what this Wrestling was, the Prophet Hosea Hos. 12. 4.
expounds: Yea, he had Power over the Angel, and prevailed; he wept, and made
Supplication unto him.

Although God is Omnipotent, and is every way able to help his People; yet he
will (as it were) suffer himself to be commanded by the Prayers of his People;
for so we read, Isa. 45. 11. Thus says the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, and
his Maker; Ask of Me Things to come, concerning my Sons; and concerning the
Work of my Hands, command ye me. God promises great Things to his People, even
the Sprinkling clean Water upon them, the Giving them a New Heart, the Putting
of his Spirit within them, and Causing them to walk in his Fear. What high
invaluable Promises are these? Yet though God intend the full Accomplishment of
all these Promises, he will grant them in his own way; he will be sought unto
by the Prayers and Supplications of his People: Ezekiel. 36. 37. Thus says the
Lord God, I will yet be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do it for them.
We have many Promises of the Churches Deliverance; but the Church must Pray.
Turn back our Captivity, O Lord, as the Stream in Psalm. 126. 4. Psalm. 14. 7.
Psalm. 44. 17. Psalm. 25. 22.
the South. -- And, O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! --
Thou art my King, O God! Command Deliverances for Jacob. -- Redeem Israel, O
Lord, out of all his Troubles.

You read of Manasseh's Prayer, when Dulcio^es lacrymae orantium quam gaudia
Theatrorum. Aug. in Psalm. 28.
he was in the Thorns, of Jonah's Prayer in the Whales- Belly, of the Apostles
in Prison: And it is the Churches Practice; Isa. 26. 16. Lord, in trouble have
they visited thee; they poured out a Prayer, when thy Chastening was upon them.

Whatever Losses or Calamities befall us, Prayer is that (...), an Universal
Medicine, mentioned by Solomon, 2 King. chap. 7. We have a Precept, and an
Encouragement; Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the Day of Trouble; I will deliver
thee, and thou shall Glorify Me.

What could Achitophel do against David's Prayers? By them, that great
Politician was Counterplotted, and his Counsels were turned into Foolishness.
What could Herod, and the People of the Jews do against the Churches Prayers?
Though the Keeper shut the Prison Doors, yet the Church opened Heaven Doors;
and Peter, the Prisoner, was enlarged by the Angel of the Lord, and given in as
a Return of the Prayers of the Church. Mary, Queen of Scots, was afraid of the
Prayers of John Knox: She professed, That she feared his Prayers, more than an
Army of Forty Thousand Men.

But some distressed Persons complain, That they Receive no Answer of their
Prayers. The Answer to them I shall return, is:

1. To examine, whether they Pray not for Superfluities, and unlawful Things?
whether they pray not for Revenge against their Enemies? whether they allow
some secret Iniquity in their Hearts, or some Bosome-Sin unrepented of? We read
James 1. 3. Ye Ask, and Receive not, because ye Ask amiss, that you may Consume
it upon your Lusts.

2. Let us labor to mend what is amiss in our Prayers: It Is a Mercy to be
denied, when we ask for Things not according Deus qu^dam negat propitius, quae
co^cedit iratus. Aug. 1 John 5. 14.
to God's Will. We only have a Promise of Audience, when we ask according to
God's Will. God knows what is best to give, in Answer to our Prayers.

That our Prayers may speed the better, there are required Five Special Aut
Deus dabit quod petimus, aut quod* nobis noverit esse utilius. Bern*
Qualifications: As,

First, Humility. Abraham, when he Qualif. 1. Humility.
had to deal with God, acknowledged himself to be but Dust and Ashes; and so
did Job abhor himself, and Repent in Dust Cum sis Humi Limus, cur non es
humilimus. Bern. Qui sibi vilis est, Deo Cha rus est. Id. de inter. Domin.
and Ashes; and Ephraim smote upon his Thigh: He that is most vile in his own
Eyes, is dearest in God's Eyes. We cannot brook a proud Beggar: We are all
Beggars at God's Door, poor Indigent Petitioners. All, whatever we receive, is
of Favor, and nothing of Merit. Shall Beggars be puff't up with Pride? Shall
proud Dust swell against God?

Bernard propounds Christ's Humiliation Apage ut intumescat vermiculus, quum
sese exinaniverit Dominus. Bern.
for a curb of Pride. It Is (says he) abominable, that a Worm should swell,
when our Lord made himself so low.

Upon Deliberate Thoughts, when we reflect upon our own Unworthyness, we shall
with Jacob confess; I am not Worthy Genesis 32. 10.
of the least of all the Mercies, and of all the Truths, which thou have showed
unto thy Servant.

Let Us lie low, and beware of all Inflammations of Pride; when we have to deal
with God, we can never be Humble enough; we can never think too Meanly of our
Selves, nor too Highly of God. The more Holy, the more Humble: The Humblest
Christians are (...). Seeds prima vita ima.
the best of Christians. Nazianzen gives a Character of Athanasius, that He was
High in his Works, and Low in Mind. The Higher Men are, the more Humble
toward God.

Now, when we make our Addresses to God in Prayer, let us entertain serious and
high Thoughts of God's Infinite Goodness, and low Thoughts of our Selves; and
this will prepare us to Pray aright.

A Second Qualification of Prayer is Qualif. 2. is Faith.
Faith: We must Pray believingly, otherwise there is no Hopes of speeding. An
Unbeliever, so remaining, is without Hope: He cannot Pray nor trust God,
neither can any thing that he does, obtain Acceptance; because Without Faith,
Heb. 11. 6. Heb. 14. 23.
it is impossible to please God, and Whatever is not of Faith, is Sin.

Mr. Tyndal, that precious Martyr, in a Letter to Mr. Fryth, lays down Four
Expressions of Faith. 1. To give up your self. 2. To cast your self. 3. To
yield your self. 4. to commit your self wholly, and only to your Loving Father.

It Is the Prayer of Faith, which proves Effectual, Sanitatem aegroti adscribet
orationi fidei, hoc est ex fide ad Deum, profusae a Presbyteris. Ne vero in
Presbyteris vel in precum opere operato haerebit ^ger, principalem addit
causam, Dominus excitabit, etc. Pareus.
James 5. 15. The Prayer of Faith shall Save the Sick. The Promise is made to
what is Prayed for in Faith, Mat. 21. 22. And all things whatsoever ye ask in
Prayer Believing, ye shall Receive.

Let Us then believe God to be True and Faithful in all his Promises, and that
he will not fail of performing what he has Promised. Though our Sense may be
puzzled, and our Reason non-plust; we must believe against all Reasoning with
Flesh and Blood, and submit our Reasonings to the Will of God.

Tertullian says, Faith fears no Hunger. Fides non timet famem. Tertul.
And I have Read a Character of a Believer, That he neither fears, Poverty, nor
Quem neque pa peries, que Mors, nec vincula ter^nt.
Bonds, nor Death. Where Is greatest Difficulty, there is most work for Faith, to
put forth it self. A true Believer will venture his All upon God's Word. He
will say, Credo quia incredibile, I belie^^ because it is Incredible. I Will
leave off Disputing, and learn to Believe. Great and wondrous Effects have
been brought to pass, by the Faithful Prayers of the Children of God.

When the Army of the Antoninus.
Emperor was like to Perish for want of Water; the Christian Army that was
called Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 5.
(...) Prayed, and a plentiful Rain was poured down: When a Young Man at
Wittenburge, had Sealed an Indenture to the Devil; upon the Prayers of Luther,
and others joined with him, the Indenture was thrown in among Oration est Deo
Sacrificium, Diabolo flagellum and animae Solatium. Aug.
them through the Window. What will not a Prayer made of Faith (as an
Instrumental Means under God) effect? Such a Prayer is said to be a Sacrifice
to God, a Scourge to the Devil, and a Comfort to the Soul.

A Third Qualification of Prayer is Qual. 3. Prayer must be Offered in Christ's
Name.
this, that it must be Offered in Christ's Name, and his alone. No other Object
of Faith but Christ, nor any other Advocate; no other Mediator, nor
Intercessor, Joh. 16. 26. Joh. 15. 16.
but Christ alone. Christ tells us, we must Ask in his Name, and we shall have
whatsoever we Ask for, given unto us. Christ is that Altar, whereupon we must
Offer all our Sacrifices. He is that great Master of Requests, who must prefer
our Petitions to his Father: Besides his Name there is no Salvation, Acts 4.
12. Besides his Blood there is no Redemption, Ephesians. 1. 7. Wherefore Luther tells
us, Whatsoever is Prayed, Quicquid oratur, doce^ur and vivitur, Extra Christum
est Idolatria coram Deo and peccatum. Luth. Tom. 3. Edit. Genesis p. 300. Non
solum periculum sed horribile est de Deo extra Christum cogitare. Luth. in
Psalm. 28.
Taught, and Lived without Christ, is Idolatry before God and Sin. And he
likewise says, That it is not only Dangerous, but Horrible to think of God
without Christ.

Neither Heathens, nor Jews know how to Pray, neither can any Prayer they make,
obtain Favor at God's Hand, because they Pray not in the Name of Christ. And
without Christ, God is a Consuming Fire, an Inexorable Judge; but in Christ, a
Merciful and Reconciled Father. Christ is our Peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. He has Trod
the Wine Press alone, Isa. 63. 3. Wherefore we must prefer all our Prayers in
the Name of Christ.

As it is reported of the Persians, that when they had Offended their King, they
brought his Son in their Arms, hoping thereby to Reconcile themselves to the
King. So we must present Christ unto the Father, in the Arms of Faith; He is
our Reconciler, the beloved Son, in whom the Father is well pleased. If Adam,
and all his Posterity had Suffered Pains and Torments, to all Eternity, they
could not have merited God's Favor; But Christ has merited by his active, and
passive Obedience, And saves Heb. 7. 25.
to the uttermost all those that come unto God, through him, seeing he ever
Lives to make Intercession for them.

Luther has a notable Expression, I (says he) often, and willingly Inculcate
Ego saepe and libenter hoc inculco, ut extra Christum oculos, and aures
claudatis, and dicatis nullum vis Scire Deum, nisi qui fuit in gremio Mariae
and suxit ubera ejus. Luth. in Psalm. 30.
this; That without Christ, you may shut your Eyes and Ears, and say, that you
know no God but him, that was in the Lap of Mary, and Sucked her Breasts.

A Fourth Qualification of Prayer is, Qualif. 4. Prayer must be Offered up with
Fervency. Quod assiduam sona^ instantiam* Eras.
that it must be with Fervency. Hence the Apostle Exhorts, Romans 12. 12.
Continuing instant in Prayer: The Word is Emphatical (...) Fortiter
perdurantes, there is Strength and Perseverance expressed by that original word:
We must put our whole Strength to the Duty; so we are exhorted, Col. 4. 2. And
we have Encouragement from the great Success of a Fervent Prayer; James 5. 16.
The effectual Fervent Prayer of a Righteous Man, avails much. In which words
there are observable;

1. The Person qualifyed, A Righteous Man, i. e. Such a one who is made
Righteous by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness: Such a one has the
Spirit of Adoption, and the Spirit of Prayer; for they both go together, Gal.
4. 6. And as for such who have not Christ's Spirit, they have their dreadful
Doom, Romans 8. 9. They are none of his; and if none of Christ's, they are the
Devils questionless.

2. Observe the Qualification of Prayer: It Is rendered, ( Effectual fervent
Prayer) in the Original: It is (...) a word of great Weight, and choice
Signification. Those that were (...), were Inspired, and Transported in a high
manner: they could do great Things. As Saul said of David, we may say of
Prayer; Thou shall do great Things, and also shall prevail. It was said of
Luther Quasi dicas ^tuosam, i. e. arde^tem, and assiduam opponi putant
perfunctorie. Beza.
in Prayer; Tantum potuit, quantum voluit. The Prayer that God Requires and
Accepts, must be a Rowzing, Fervent, Vigorous Prayer. God requires the Male in
the Flock; and there is a Curse upon the Deceiver, that has a Male in the
Flock, and voweth ^ui timide rogat, docet ^egare. Deus differt dare, ut tu
discas or^re. Deus frequenter differt nostra postulata, ut discamus grandia
granditer desiderare. Aug.
and Sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt Thing, Mal. 1. 14. The Life, Heat,
Vigor, and Fervency of the Heart, must all be employed for God: To ask faintly,
is the ready way to be denied. If God delay ^s, it is that we may add more
Vigor, and Fervor to our Prayers. God would have us Cry louder, and Knock
harder, and Seek more diligently, and Wait more Patiently.

3. The Success follows, (...), Avails much. There Is a Blessed Success.
Prisoners have been Prayed out of Prison; Armies have been Discomfited; Plots
have been Counterplotted, by Fervent Prayers. O! What great Things have been
brought to pass by Prayer? Yet I cannot approve of those over-bold Expressions
of some, who say, That Prayer is an Omnipotent Virtue; and, Prayer is Clavis
viscerum Dei: But these may be understood, Clave non Errante; and, in a sound
Sense, admit of a fair Interpretation. We Pray, but the Spirit Bombarda
Christianorum Luth.
teaches us how to Pray. Prayer is only an Instrumental Means, as a Weapon in
God's Hand, that Moves and Guides it: So that, the Gift, Grace, and Success of
Prayer, all come from God; and to God, we must return the Praise and Glory of
all.

A Fifth and Last Qualification of Prayer Qualif. 5. of Prayer is Perseverance.
Nisi adsit in orationae perseverandi constantia, nihil o^ando agimus. Ca^v.
Iustii. l. 3. ^ 20. August. Hae. 57.
is Perseverance; so we are commanded, 1 These. 5. 17. Pray without Ceasing. The
word is, (...), without Intermission, or Continually: This is Interpreted by
the same Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 18. (...), i. e. in every Season, and Col. 1. 3.
(...) Always. He (says Austin) prays continually, who lets no Day pass
without Prayer. Though God Frown, and be Angry, we must persevere in the Duty
of Prayer. And it is a good Sign to continue Fervent in the Duty, even when God
defers us, and seems not to hear us. A Hypocrite will not hold out: He prays
only by Fits and Starts. Will he delight himself in the Almighty? Will he
always call upon God? says Job, c. 27. v. 10.

A Third and Last Duty, as a Special Duty 3. To get the Ornament of a meek and
quiet Spirit.
Help, and Direction, to depend upon God's All Sufficiency, even in Suffering
Times, is, To labor to get the Ornament of a Meek and Quiet Spirit: which (as
the Apostle Peter says) is in 1. Pet. 3. 4.
the Sight of God of great Price. A composed quiet Spirit, is put into an
excellent capacity to submit unto God, and depend on him, amidst the greatest
Straights and Difficulties. It Is Observed, that Glowormes shine brightest in
the darkest Nights; I am sure a meek and quiet Spirit, appears most
conspicuously in the Night of Afflictions. Some are naturally more Meek than
others, and have in some measure attained unto this Moral Virtue* as Socrates,
and other Heathens did: But a Christians Meekness shows it self amidst
Revilings, Buffettings, and variety of Evil Entreaties from ungodly Men. How
does he labor to moderate his Passions? and even amidst blustering Storms and
Tempests, then he endeavors to becalm his Spirit; so that though there be
Storms without, he would gladly get, and keep Serenity within. For Instance,
when God Chastises with his own Immediate Hand, by Famine, Pestilence, or
other Noxious Diseases; now is a time to exercise Meekness, and Composedness of
Spirit. When God permits Satan, and his Instruments to Persecute the Saints;
then is the time to be Silent, and avoid Murmuring, and Reviling Language, and
to prepare, to do and Suffer as becomes Christians, and quietly to wait for
God's Salvation. God's Vine Thrives most by Bleeding; and Persecutors serve
instead of Goldsmiths, to Purify, and Refine God's Children, in the Furnace of
Affliction. The Fire purifieth Gold and Silver, but consumes Stubble. Wicked
Men grow worse and worse by Afflictions; but Godly Men grow better and better,
more weaned from the World, more Heavenly minded, and more Fruitful in every
Good Word and Work. It Is observable that Oil increases the Flame, whereas
Water quenches it; Fretting and Chafing, is like Oil to the Flame; Meekness is
like Water to quench it: A Flint is sooner broken on a Pillow, than on an
Anvile. A soft Answer (says Solomon) turns away Wrath. Meekness and Calmness
of Spirit, Works much Good every way; for a Meek Man enjoys himself, and
those Possessions which God bestows on him, Psalm. 37. 11. But the Meek shall
Inherit the Earth, and shall Delight themselves in the abundance of Peace.

This Christ Promises, Mat. 5. 5. They are Blessed Persons: They shall be free
from many outward Vexations, whereunto Angry Persons expose themselves. They
shall (as Hierome Observes) Inherit Haereditabunt terram illam viventium, ^^a
mites and humiles possideb terram, hoc est vitam aeternam. Hieron. in Psalm. 37.
this Earth, and the Life to come. Meek Persons have Interest in those
Promises, whereof one is, They shall Eat and be Satisfied, Psalm. 22. 26.
Another is, That God will Guide them in Judgment, Psalm. 25. A Third is, That
God will Beautify the Meek with Salvation, Psalm. 149. 4. If then we would
profit by Afflictions, we must get a meek and quiet Spirit. Affliction
Preaches Meekness of Spirit. And some have learned more Meekness by a few
Weeks Imprisonment, than by hearing Sermons for many Years before. Affliction
is one of God's Teaching Ordinances; and when a chastising Rod, and a teaching
Word go together, there is a Mercy in such an Affliction. If we would be
followers of Christ, we must be Lowly and Meek; for he Propounds himself a
Pattern for our Imitation, Learn of Me, for I am Meek and Lowly in Heart, and
ye shall find Rest unto your Souls, Mat. 11. 29. If we would Reap any Profit by
the Word, we must Receive it with Meekness, 1 Jam. 1. 21. If we would gain a
lapsed Brother, we Gal. 6. 1. (...), aptum reddite and sanate quod Corruptum
est, quae significatio been congruit buic loco. Gr^t.
must Restore him, or set him in Joint, in the Spirit of Meekness. Wherefore
this will be our Wisdom and Glory, both to get such a composed, and quiet Frame
of Spirit, and so to behave our selves in Sufferings, with that Mildness, and
Christian Meekness, as that the worst of our Enemies may be constrained to
Confess, that God is in us undoubtedly of a Truth. How many have lost the
Honor, and Comfort of their Sufferings, by mixing their own Passions, and
Revengeful Speeches? Froward, and Reviling Speeches, detract from the Honor of
a Cause, be it never so Good. Excellent is the Counsel of Cyprian. If (says
he) Si filii Dei sumus pacifici esse debemus, cord mites, Sermon Simplices,
affectione concordes, unanimitatis nexibus cohaerentes. Cypr. de unitate
Ecclesiae.
we be the Sons of God, we ought to be peaceable, and mild in Heart, single in
our Speeches, agreeing in our Affections, and agreeing in the Bonds of
Unanimity.

Thus then if we put these Three forementioned Duties, into continual Practice,
viz. To Live by Faith, to set the Spirit of Prayer a Working, and Possess our
selves with a meek and quiet Spirit We shall Learn to Trust, and Depend upon
God's All Sufficiency, amidst the greatest Fears, Dangers, Straights, Losses,
and Difficulties, that are either Imminent or Incumbent upon us.

CHAP. XVI.
Containing a Third Use for Examination in Five Queries.

IT will now be Requisite, that I Enlarge for Examination
a Third Use, for Examination and Trial, whether we believe God to be
All-Sufficient; and whether in all times, we will stay, and depend upon him.
This nearly concerns every one of us, to put our selves upon a strict Trial and
Inquisition. In pursuance of this Use, I shall propound these ensuing Queries.

Whether we acknowledge God's absolute Whether we acknowledge God in the
Relations he has over us.
Power, Sovereignty, and Dominion? And, do we acknowledge him, in those
Relations he has over us? Do we acknowledge him our Creator? If so, we may
conclude, that a Creator will take care of his Creatures. Do we acknowledge him
our King and Governor? If so, we shall confess that a King will Defend,
Protect, and Rule his Subjects? Do we acknowledge God our Father? Then a Father
will provide for his Children. Do we acknowledge God, our Lord and Master? Then
a Master will provide for his Family. If we did consider these Relations
between God and us, How much would our Spirits be settled and established?

To Consider, That God is our Portion, Lam. Psalm. 23. 1. Genesis 15. 1.
and Shepherd, our Shield, and exceeding great Reward, a tender Father, full of
Bowels, a God of all Consolations; these things should keep us from sinking in
the greatest Storms and Tempests. If we had Faith enough to make use of our
Pronoun, My, and apply God, as My God, there is abundantly enough to Support and
Revive us, under the heavyest Pressures, that can befall us. Deus Col. 3. 11.
meus omnia, God is all in all, and with God, the most Bitter thing is Sweet,
and without God, the Sweetest thing is Bitter.

A Second Query is, Whether we have Whether we have recourse to God, as our
Counselor.
continual Recourse to God, as to our Counselor, in all Conditions, both in
Prosperity and Adversity? Do we Ask Counsel of God, and beg the Guidance and
Direction of his Spirit? Many Ask Counsel of Flesh and Blood, Corrupt
Interests, and Carnal Relations, and have no regard to the Word of God; and
they Prosper accordingly. Saul Ask Counsel of the Witch of Endor, and Ahaziah
sent to Ask Counsel of Baal-Zebub, the God of Ekron; but they paid dear for
going to such Counselors: But a true Believer makes God his Counselor; he is
sensible of his want of Wisdom, and he Asks Wisdom of God; he knows not what to
do, not how to wind himself out of intricate and perplexed Affairs; but he
falls upon his Knees, and begs Directions from Heaven.

Abraham's Servant made Applications to God by Prayer, and he was Successful in
his Journey. Jacob Prayed to be Delivered from his Brother Esau, when he came
against him with Four Hundred Men; where to Ask Counsel else, he knew not, nor
would not Ask of any, but of God alone.

It Is easy to Judge, how much a Man respects his Counselor, and how much
Confidence he reposeth in him, when forsaking all others, he advises with him
alone, in all his doubts, and applies himself to Him alone, in all his
Difficulties.

If then we repair to God by Prayer and Supplication, and beg his Direction and
Assistance, and Wisdom from him to Counsel us, and if we rely upon the Counsels
of his Word; it is Evident, that we believe him to be All-Sufficient, and put
our Trust and Confidence in him.

What a stir was there amongst Philosophers, (...).
to find out the meaning of one Word; Insomuch, as Hermolaus Barberus went to
the Devil, to know the meaning thereof, and he left him more unsatisfied, than
he found him. What a bussle do Star-Gazers, and Judicial Astrologers make, in
giving their Judgment upon Conjunction of Planets? And how false they are in
their Judgments, is notoriously Apparent. Such Chaplains of the Devil have
their Doom, as the Prophet Denounces, Isa. 47. 13. Let now the Astrologers,
the Star-Gazers, the Monthly Prognosticators stand up, and Save thee from those
things that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as Stubble, the Fire
shall Burn them, they shall not deliver themselves from the Power of the Flame,
there shall not be a Coal to warm at, nor Fire to sit before it.

Mr. Gataker.
A Reverend, and Eminently Learned Divine, Encounters these Star-Gazers, and
(though they opposed him as Jannes, and Jambres resisted Moses, yet) he
abundantly confuted them. Such Annotations of Mr. Gatakers.
(says he) as tell before hand the Occurrents of each Month, as our
Prognosticators also do, these are under the Judgment of that Text. But whither
should a People go, but to their God? He is Isa. 9. 6. Heb.
a God of Wisdom; Christ is a Counselor, and the Wisdom of the Father. To go
for Counsel elsewhere, we shall ^e sure to speed worse. What befalls those, Who
Ask Counsel at their Stocks? But to be given over to vilest Abominations, and
so left Incorrigible, Hos. 4. 12, 13, 14. What Is their Punishment, Who set at
Naught all the Counsels of God? Read Prove. 1. 26. I also will Laugh at your
Calamity; I will Mock when your Fear comes.

Wherefore let us resolve as Naomi gave Counsel to Ruth, not to be found
Gleaning in any other Field. Let Us not Consult with Carnal Interests, and
Selfish Ends and Designs; but let us be much upon our Knees, seeking God for
Direction, begging Wisdom of God, for Ordering all our Affairs. We may Ask of
Men, Counsel, and meet with Reproaching, Upbraiding Language from them; but the
Apostle tells us, Jam. 1. 5. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him Ask of God that
gives to all Men Liberally, and Upbraideth none, and it shall be given him.
The Gifts of some are (...), like the Trojan Horse, with an Ambuscado in it,
and as a Greek Author says, Timeo Danaos and dona ferentes. Virg. Aen. 2.
Isocra.
(...), They rather make a Market, than do a Courtesy: But God is a Liberal
free Donor; God gives (...), simply and singly.

A Third Query is, Whether we in all Whether in all our dangers, we have
recourse to God as our Refuge?
our Dangers, have Recourse unto God, as our Refuge? That Is a Sign of our
Affiance in God, and of our dependence on him; When in our greatest Dangers, we
make him our Refuge, and our hiding Place. Thus the Psalmist begins, Psalm. 46.
God is our Refuge and Strength, a very present Help in time of Trouble. This
Psalm comforted Luther in all his Afflictions, he would say, Come let us Sing,
Psalm. 46. And then we will not Fear.

God's Children have a place of Refuge, Prove. 14. 26. And who is this Refuge,
we Read, Isa. 25. 4. For thou have been a Strength to the Poor, a Strength to
the Needy in his Distress, a Refuge from the Storm, a Shadow from the Heat,
when the Blast of the Terrible one, is as a Storm against the Wall. Christ is
this Refuge promised, Isa. 32. 2. A Man shall be as an Hiding place from the
Wind, and a Covert from the Tempest, as Rivers of Waters in a Dry place, as a
Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land.

Who Seeks not in Danger, some Refuge or other? Even brute Creatures Seek after
a Refuge and Shelter. The Conies (says Solomon) are a feeble Folk, Prove. 30.
26.
yet make they their Houses in the Rocks. The Birds of the Air have Nests,
Foxes have Holes; the Beasts of the Field (when a Storm is a coming) make have
to Shelter themselves under the Defense of great Trees.

Amongst Men, there are variety of Refuges; For Instance, The Jews had their
Cities of Refuge. The Romans had their Asylum. And amongst variety of Men (as
their Fancy leads them) they make choice of various kinds of Refuges. The
Voluptuous Man has recourse to his Pleasures, the Ambitious to his Honors;
the Covetous Man to Job 31. 14.. Prove. 18. 10.
his Riches; the Wedg of Gold is his Confidence, and strong City. And
Malicious, and Implacable Persons comfort themselves with Hopes of Revenge;
that is their Refuge: And others betake themselves to lying, dissembling, and
equivocating: But all these are broken, deceitful, and fading Refuges, which
will fail a Man in the greatest Extremity; when he has most need of Help, then
they will Deceive, and give him the Slip: But the Child of God, applies
himself to God for Refuge: God is a Refuge, a strong Tower, Bulwark, and Rock
of Defense. God is the Believers Strong Tower from his Enemies. A strong Psalm.
61. 3.
Tower for Security, Prove. 18. 10. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower; the
Righteous runs to it, and is safe. i. e. When God's Name is called upon in
Sincerity and Truth, there is strong Quaquaversum se verterit anima, ad dolores
figitur alibi, p^aeterquam in te. Aug. Confess. l. 4. c. 10.
Ground of Security against Trouble. When People, through an inconstant, fickle
Spirit, have made trial of several Refuges, they find by Experience, that
there is no Security, but in God; no Rest for a Christian, but in Christ. God is
said to be Centrum quietativum, the Center of all Rest: no rest nor Quietness
elsewhere. All the letters in the Name Jehovah (as some Rabbis, and others
observe) are Quiescent; I am Quia f^^isti nos ad te, inquietum est cor nostrum
don^c requie^cat in te. Ang. Confeslib. 1. c. 1.
sure, there is no Acquiescency for a Christian, but in God.

I Will Conclude what I have to say of this Particular, with the Experimental
Speech of Moses, the Man of God, Deuteronomy. 32. 31. For their Rock is not our Rock,
even our Enemies themselves being

A Fourth Query is, Whether we make Whether we make God our Treasures.
God our Treasure? Where the Treasure is, the Heart will be; And if we make God
our Treasure, our Heart will be fixed upon him.

Now, to get and keep a Treasure, there is required great Diligence, high
Appretiation, and a provident Carefulness. 1. There is required Diligence.


First, There Is required great Diligence, much Labor and Industry: For getting
of Pearls, and precious Stones, Non nisi sublato reperitur gemula saxo.
many Scramble upon Rocks, and others Dive into the Indian Ocean. Some for
Treasures, Digg in the Mines, and bestow indefatigable Pains. What abundance
Impiger extrem^s currit mercat^r ad Indos.
of Pains does the Merchant take, in his Voyage to the Indies, for to compass
the Treasures there? And, if there be such Pains taken for Temporal Treasures;
O! What Pains ought to be took for Eternal Treasures? All the Treasures in the
Universe, are not to be compared to the Treasures of Wisdom.

Throughout the whole Book of Proverbs, by the Name of Wisdom, are set forth
Christ, and his Graces: What an high Commendation given of Wisdom, is upon
Record, Prove. 8. 11. Wisdom is better than Rubies; and all the things that may
be desired, are not to be compared to it. This is preferred before the Gold of
Ophir, the Onyx, and Sapphire, Coral, Pearl, the Topaz of Aethiopia, Job. 28.
16, 17, 18. etc.

What pains then, and what diligence must be employed, for the Attainment of
Divine Wisdom? There Is required Crying after Knowledge, lifting up the Voice,
Seeking and Searching: All must concur to the finding of the Knowledge of God,
Prove. 2. 5.

Then Secondly, There follows an high 2. There must be an high prizing of
God, and all his Ways.
Appreciation of God, and all his Ways. That Soul that is Diligent to make sure
his Interest in God; O! How will he prize God, and the Graces of his Spirit?
God is his Riches and Treasure; he reckons of no Riches, besides the Riches of
Christ, and the Riches of Faith; and (...) Ezekiel. 34. 29. Cant. 5. 10.
Christ is Precious, or an Honor in the Estimation of all true Believers, 1
Pet. 2. 7. Christ is a Plant of Renown, the Chiefest of Ten Thousand. A Pearl
of Superlative Estimation; which, when Mat. 13. 45.. Nimietates and excessus
debentur Deo.
the Wise Merchant found, he Sold all for the Purchase thereof. We cannot think
too vilely of Sin; we cannot think too highly of Christ.

Thirdly, There follows a Provident 3. There is a Provident Carefulness.
Carefulness: If we have been at great pains to get this Treasure, and know how
to value it; then it will follow, that we ought to Exercise all the Provident
Carefulness we can, to keep this Treasure. We throw not Treasures carelessly on
the Ground; but we lock them up in our Cabinets; Christ is our Chiefest Jewel;
we must keep Him in the Cabinet of our Hearts. God is our Treasure; we must set
at naught all other imaginary Treasures, in Competition with him, or Opposition
to him.

We must take fast hold of Wisdom, and not let it go, for it is our Life. Let
all that is dearest and nearest go for God. Let Us part with the greatest Riches,
which the Universe can afford, rather than lose our Interest in God. The
foolish young Man, Mark 10. 22. could not brook the Doctrine of Self-denial: He
would rather part with Treasures in Heaven, than Treasures on Earth. Multitudes
braid of his humor, who prefer Earthly, before Heavenly Riches; who grasp with
all Greediness, Earthly Accomodations, and Secular Interests; and in the mean
time, neglect the great Things of Eternity: These verify a Vulgar Proverb, to
be Penny-wise, and Pound-Foolish. But our Duty is, to make sure of a durable
Substance, of Riches and Treasures, which will abide unto all Eternity.

When the Trojans (as they say) lost their Palladium, all was lost: That Is a
fabulous Story of Poets. But I am sure, if we lose our Interest in God, if we
lose his Favor, we are altogether lost, and utterly undone to all Eternity.

He then, that knows the Infinite Dignity, Price, and Value of this Treasure,
Fidelis homo, cujus totus mundus divitiarum est, and quasi nihil habens omnia
possidet inhaerendo tibi cui Serviunt omnia. Aug. l. 5. Confess. c. 4.
what an high, and excellent thing it is, to make God our Portion; what a rich
Treasure it is, to be a Possessor of Divine Wisdom; what an unspeakable
happiness it is, to have the Lord for our God; to have an Interest in his
Promises, and the Consolations of the Spirit: That Man (I say) who knows the
high Valuation of these things, he would not lose them, for all the Kingdoms of
the World, and the Glory of them.

The Martyr cried out in the Flames* John Lambert.
None but Christ: So, none but Christ, can enrich, and comfort a Christian.

The Fifth and Last Query is, Whether Whether we make God our chiefest Joy.
we make God our chiefest Joy. There Is in every one, something or other, that
they most rejoice, and delight themselves in the serious Meditation thereof.
Some fancy one kind of Joy, some another; and there are many varieties of
Fancies, as Philosophers reckon upon several Apprehensions of Felicity. We Read
in Scripture, of Joy in Harvest, Joy in Espousals, and Joy in taking of Spoils;
but none Quam suave mihi subito factum est carere suavitabus nugarum, and quas
committere metus fuerat, jam dimittere gaudium erat. Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 1.
of these are lasting Joys: But a Believers Joy is in God; He never fails.

Upon a serious deliberate Consideration, there is no Joy elsewhere. What Is the
joy of debaucht Jovialists, but like the Crackling of Thorns, a blaze, and
suddenly gone? What Is the joy of Ambitious Men, such as Haman's were, but dashed
upon a sudden? When the King was Angry at him, His Face was covered, and he
immediately was carried from a Banquet, to a Gallows. What became of the Joy of
Belshazzar amidst his Dan. 5. 5.
Quaffing and Carrowsing? He was suddenly doomed to Judgment. Laughter and
Mirth, are vanity; and Joy, and Rejoicing in the World, are but that Laughter,
which is called, Risus Sardonicus; Tumultuosis varietatibus dilaniantur
cogitationes meae, intima viscera animae meae, donec in te confluam purgatus
and liquidus igne amoris tui. August. Confess. l. 11. c. 29.
which ends in Bitterness and Mourning.

Here then lies our Duty; To make God our Joy. So did Nehemiah comfort the
Jews, in a time of Heaviness, Nehem. 8. 10. The Joy of the Lord* is your
Strength.

Amidst variety of perplexing Thoughts, Comforts from God refreshed David's
Soul, Psalm. 94. 19. Amidst the great decay, and failing of Creature Comforts,
there was still matter of joy, and rejoicing in God, Hab. 3. 17, 18.

If then we can, amidst Sorrows and Troubles, make God our Joy, and Rejoicing;
if we can delight, and comfort our selves, in God's Consolations, when all
Worldly Consolations fail; this evidently proves our Trust in, and Dependence
upon God.

Joy in God (as Aaron's Rod swallowed up the Rods of the Egyptians) swall^weth
up Worldly Joys, and Worldly Sorrows. To rejoice in Wife and Children, Corn and
Wine, and Gold and Silver, are uncertain Joys: But Joy in God, is an abiding
Joy. The greatest Worldly Joys may have their Changes: Worldly Joys are fading
and deceitful, like the River Jordan, that emptieth all its Sweetness into a
stinking, and sulphurous Lake; But Heavenly Joys are lasting, and bend not to
a Declination.

Therefore it is an excellent Expression of Aug. Sol. c. 35.
an Ancient Father speaking of this Joy; O Gaudium supra Gaudium, Gaudium
vincens omne gaudium, extra Verum gaudium non desinit, nec in contrarium
vertitur. Sen. Epist. 59.
quod non est gaudium.

CHAP. XVII.
Containing the Fourth and last Use for Consolation.

THe Fourth and Last Use (for a Conclusion f^r Consolation.
of this Treatise) is, for singular Consolation unto all true Believers, who
depend on God's All Sufficiency and Faithfulness. Their Benonies, will prove
their Benjamins: Though they Sow in Tears, they shall Reap in Joy.

Amidst their greatest Losses, it is a Ground of Singular Consolation unto them;
That God is able to give them much more, etc. And if God see it good for them,
he will give them much more, and abundantly Recompense their Losses. What?
Though they be tossed up and down with Boisterous Waves; yet they have a Rock to
climb upon, which David Prayed to be led into, Psalm. 61. 2. When my Heart is
overwhelmed, lead me to the Rock, that is higher than I. Deduxisti me i. e. in
temetipso, quia es Dux meus, tu es viator meus. Quia factus es spes mea, vox
Ecclesia ad Christum q. d. Quo modo tu resurrexisti immortalis and nos sic
eredimus resurg^re. Hieron.
The Psalmist disclaimes all other Rocks: God is the only Rock; and if we climb
upon any other Rock, that is not higher than our selves, we shall non be safe.
What? Though Enemies have great Wrath, and Flourish; yet the greatest of them,
have but a short time, Rev. 12. 12. And, notwithstanding Prosperity at present;
yet inevitable Destruction, is the Portion of Prosperous wicked Men, Psalm. 92.
7. What; Though God respite the Deliverance of his People, and Answer not
speedily: It is but to prepare them for the better Reception of Mercies, to
humble them, prove and refine them. And though Offenses must of necessity come;
yet, woe be to them, by whom they come. Let all that fear God, make it their
Study to give no just Offense, neither by imprudent Words, nor imprudent
Actions. The Wisdom of the Serpent, is as needful as the Innocence of the Dove.
Neither let any Man limit the Holy One of Israel, nor prescribe Times and
Seasons to him.

Let Us rest contented, and satisfied with all God's Dispensations. If Poverty,
Prisons, Disgrace, Exile be allotted for us, let us justify God's Dealings in
all, and leave of Murmuring at and Censuring of Second Causes. What said Job in
Answer to his Wise? Job. 2. 10. Shall we receive Good at the Hand of God, and
shall not we receive Evil? Has not Christ foretold, that in The World, ye
shall have Tribulation; but he adds a singular Word of Comfort in the same
place 1 These. 3. 3.
( viz. John 16. 33.) Be of good Comfort, I have overcome the World: This is
That we are appointed unto.

Let not any of God's Children be discouraged by their Sufferings, provided
that they Suffer for Righteousness Sake; neither let them faint in the Day of
Adversity: For if thou faint in the Day of Adversity, thy Strength is small,
Prove. 24. 10.

There Is a Learned Author, who has Ascendisti in navem cum Christo, quid
expectabis s^renum? Imo ventum and procellas, and fluctus navem operientes, ut
mergi incipias; sed hoc Baptismo Baptizandus prius es: tum sequetur serenum,
Excitato and implerato Christo, qui saltem dormie^ aliquando. Melch. Adam. in
vita Hessi.
a Saying; Thou have Ascended with Christ into the Ship; What, will thou expect
a Calm? Nay, rather Winds, Storms, and Waves overwhelming the Ship, that it
may begin to be Drowned: But thou art First to be Baptized with this Baptism;
Christ being Awakened, and Prayed unto, who will sometimes Sleep.

Let not any ante-date Deliverances, nor precipitantly Carve out Ways of their
own devising, and Means according to their own Imaginations, as if at such a
Time, and in such a Way they should be delivered from their Troubles. Let Us
Patiently and Believingly wait on that Promise, 2 Pet. 2. 9. The Lord knows
how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations, and to reserve the Unjust unto the
Day of Judgment, to be Punished. But still let Christians remember Silently,
and Patiently to wait on God.

Both Primitive Martyrs, and those of See the large declaration of Bishop
Farrer, Bishop Hooper, Tailor, Philpot, Bradford, Crome, Rogers, Saunders,
Laurence; Fox. Act. and Mon. vol. 3. p. 162. Edit. 1641.
the last Century, often charged, and advised their Brethren in these Words;
Take heed ye Rebel not against Authority.

Let such as profess Religion, and desire to walk most closely with God,
Evidence the Sincerity of their Profession by their Loyalty, Meekness, and
Patience; so that Enemies, who watch for their Haltings, may either be
altogether put to Silence, or else Confess, that (as it was said of Daniel)
They can find no Dan. 6. 5.
Fault in them, except the Law of their God.

There are some special Grounds of Comfort to all true Believers, to uphold and
revive their Spirits amidst the sharpest Sufferings, which they meet withal; I
shall mention them in Particulars, and so Conclude.

First, They have Communion with 1. Communion with God.
God; of this only God's Children are Partakers, and only they know, what is
meant by Communion with God, and cannot be content without it: Carnal Men are
as mere Strangers to Communion with God, as Nicodemus was to the Mystery of
Regeneration.

Now, this Communion with God is a Sacred Acquaintance; to which Eliphaz
Exhorts Job, Chap, 22. v. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at Peace,
thereby Good shall come unto thee. This, Moses attained unto in an Eminent
manner, even unto a Sacred Familiarity; Exodus 23. 11. And the Lord spoke unto
Moses Face to Face, as a Man speaks unto his Friend. The Apostle speaks in
his own Name, and in the Name of all true Believers, 1 John 1. 3. Truly, our
Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

This Communion Bradford attained unto, in a great measure: For he often, not
only Prayed, but Studied Kneeling, and would not rise up, till he found some
Spiritual Illapses, some Divine Influences upon his Soul.

Bernard used to say; Lord, I will never Nunquum abs te absque te recedo. Bern.
Ep. 116.
depart from Thee, without Thee.

Communion with God, will make a Prison to be a Palace, a Dungeon a Paradise,
Chains of Iron to be as so many Chains of Gold.

Alice Driver, a Faithful Martyr, when Act. and Monum. Vol. 3.
she came to the Stake, and was bound with the Iron-Chain, she kis'd it, and
said; It was the best Neckerchiff, that ever she wore all the Days of her Life.

Sampson did eat Honey out of the Carcass Melior est tristitia iniqua
patientis, quam l^titia iniqua ferentis, Aug.
of a Lion; and so, those who have Interest in Christ, and enjoy Communion with
Him, suck Sweetness out of all their Sufferings, and their very Sorrows are
better than the Mirth of Wicked Men. This comforted Basil in his Banishment,
and in his Sufferings; Let (says he) the Queen cast me into the Sea, I will
remember Jonah; let her cast me into the Fiery Furnace, I will remember the
Three Children; let her Banish me, the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness
thereof.

He that has Communion with God, and comes to God, as a Child to his Father,
making his Moan and Complaints to him; he is a Man of Comfort, even in Times of
greatest Troubles. And nothing but Communion with God, will comfort and quiet
the Soul.

A Second Ground of Comfort, is God's 2 Ground of Comfort, God's Special
Protection. Matthew. 6. 34.
special Protection, and gracious Preservation. None can say, They shall be
exempted from Troubles; for each Day has its Troubles; and Sufficient for the
Day, is the Evil thereof. Yet God's People meet with Singular Protections; Job
5. 19. (...). Polych. in Catena Graecorum Patrum.
He shall deliver thee in Six Troubles; yea, in Seven, there shall no Evil
touch thee.

Sometimes, in Common Calamities, and Epidemical Diseases, both Good and Bad
smart under the Rod: Yet Josiah, though he dyed in War, was promised to dye in
Peace; for he had Peace with God, and Peace with his Conscience; and that is
Peace enough.

Sometimes, God delivers his People, as Brands, out of the Burning, and gives
them their Lives for a Prey; as Baruch and Jeremy had.

In the Last Century, when there was Persecution in England with Fire and
Faggot, in Queen Mary's Days, within the Compass of less than Four Years,
there dyed Two Hundred Seventy-Seven Persons by Fire and Faggot; Five Bishops,
One and Twenty Divines, Eight Gentlemen, Eighty-Four Artificers, One Hundred
Husbandmen, Servants and Laborers Twenty, Twenty-Six Wives, Twenty Widows,
Nine Virgins, Two Boys, and Two Infants.

In Scotland dyed Two Eminent Martyrs, viz. Mr. James Wiseheart, and Mr.
Patrick Hammelton.

In this time, there dyed none (upon the same Account) in Ireland: The Reason
Dr. Usher Archbishop of Armagh.
and Narrative, a most Eminent Light in the Church, (whose Name is Famous
throughout all the Churches of Christendom) not long before his Death, desired
that the Story might be transmitted to Posterity. Thus he told the Story, (and
many can witness it, that then heard it from his Mouth.)

There was (says he) a Commission from the Queen, sent down by a Doctor into
Ireland; who going with the Commission thither, at Chester (where he lodged in
his Travels) he boasted, that he had a Commission de Comburendis Haereticis:
One of the Servants of the Inn, being a Wellwiller to Protestants, took notice
of the Words, and got away the Commission. When the Commissioner came into
Ireland, he was Entertained with great Respect. After some time, he appeared
before the Lords of the Council in Ireland; and then opened his Box, to show
his Commission; but there was nothing in the Box, but a Pack of Cards:
Whereupon he was Committed to Prison, and threatened exceedingly; but upon
Security given, he was afterward Released, and returned into England, and
obtained a New Commission: But as soon as he came to Chester, the Report came
of Queen Mary's Death, and he stopped his farther Journey.

This Story, that Reverend and Learned Archbishop, and Lord-Primate of Ireland
aforesaid, desired that it might be divulged, and kept in remembrance; for he
said, He was sure, that the Story was true.

But, suppose this to be a more than ordinary (as it is) Preservation; however,
Wonderful are the Preservations of God's People! Let every one call to mind, in
particular, the Gracious Providence of God in his Protection, and
Preservation; hence will arise Grounds of Comfort from, and Confidence in God's
All Sufficiency.

A Third Ground of Comfort, is Experience 3 Ground of Comfort, is Experience of
Daily Provisions.
of Daily Provisions; daily Bread, wonderful Supplies; and these in Mercy
given, and Sanctified. The Men of the World enjoy outward Things, (and they are
not to be accounted Usurpers) ex Largitione, by God's general Bounty; but
Believers enjoy them ex Promisso, by Virtue of a Promise. By common Donation,
and general Providence, wicked Men enjoy their Possessions; but good Men enjoy
them by special Favor and Mercy in Christ: With Him they have all Romans 8. 32.
Things. For one to have the Good Things of this Life, as Riches and Honors,
and to have Christ with them, to have them Sanctified; this is the Mercy indeed.

And, Fourthly and Lastly, Here is the 4 Ground of Comfort, is Hope of Eternal
Glory.
greatest Ground of Comfort, even the Hope of Eternal Glory. Whatever be the
Sorrow in Seed-Time, the Harvest will make amends for all: Whatever be the
Losses, the Riches of Christ will make abundant Compensation.

The Kingdom of Heaven, the Glory to be revealed, the Eternal Sabbath, the
Beatifical Vision; these are in the Eye, Heart, and Meditation of the Saints of
God.

Wherefore, with Moses, they look unto the Recompense of Reward; with Stephen,
Heb. 11. 26.
they see Christ amidst their Sufferings; and, with Moses, see him who is Heb.
11. 27.
Invisible.

Compare the Outward Sufferings, with Inward Comforts; and especially,
Transient Sorrows, with Eternal Joys, and there will be abundant Cause of
Comfort, notwithstanding the greatest Afflictions that are on us, or may befall
us in this present World. Heaven will make amends for all; and the Consolations
of God, are sufficient for us.

Amidst Fears and Perplexities, for real or imaginary Losses, let us Comfort
our selves with the Text; and take Counsel from the Man of God, his Answer to
Amaziah; viz.

The Lord is Able to Give us much More than This. And upon this Consideration,
our Spirits will be Revived, and Supported, in the Times of Jacob's Troubles.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE First Treatise.
Chap. I. Containing the Coherence and Exposition of the Words, the Division of
them, and a Doctrine inferred from them; page 1, unto page 12. Chap. II.
Contains the Method of Proceeding, and therein the First Argument took from
God' s Attributes; page 12, unto page 32. Chap. III. Contains a Second Argument
drawn from God' s Promises; p. 32, unto p. 37. Chap. IV. A Third Argument is
took from God' s Providence; p. 37, unto p. 52. Chap. V. Contains a Fourth
Argument, took from the Saints Experiences; p. 52, unto p. 59. Chap. VI.
Contains the Demonstration of the Doctrine, by Reasons; and first, from
Necessity of Precept; p. 59, unto p. 65. Chap. VII. Proves the Doctrine, from
the Necessity of Means, in Four Particulars; p. 66, unto p. 77. Chap. VIII.
Contains a Second Reason, which is took from the Excellency of a Quiet and
Submissive Frame of Spirit; p. 77, unto p. 89. Chap. IX. Contains a Third
Reason, drawn from the Vtility and Benefit, accru^ng from this yielding,
submissive Spirit; p. 89, unto p. 99. Chap. X. Contains a Fourth Reason,
concerning the sad, and mischievous Consequences of Striving, Struggling, and
Repining against God; p. 99, unto p. 102. Chap. XI. Contains a Resolution of
Particular Cases; p. 102, unto p. 130. Chap. XII. Contains an Use of
Reprehension to Unbelievers, Murmurers, and rash Censurers; p. 130, unto p.
143. Chap. XIII. Contains an Use of Exhortation, with several Motives to depend
on God's All Sufficiency; p. 143. p. 153. Chap. XIV. Discovers Two Grand
Impediments, viz. Covetousness, and Hypocrisy; p. 153. unto p. 160. Chap. XV.
Directs to Three special Duties, viz. To live by Faith, To set the Spirit of
Prayer a working, and, To get a meek and quiet Spirit; p. 160, unto p. 180.
Chap. XVI. Containing a Third Use for Examination, in Five Queries; p. 181,
unto p. 195. Chap. XVII. Containing the Fourth and Last Use for Consolation; p.
196, unto the End, p. 207.
ERRATA In the First Treatise.
PAge 3. in the Margent, r. aegre velli potest. p. 27. Marg. r. Paterculus. p.
35. Marg. r. restaurare; and, naufragio. p. 39. Marg. r. Benefacit. p. 43. li^e
5. r. Thirst. p. 53. lin. 5. r. (...). p. 64. Marg. r. (...). p. 79. Marg. r.
Salv. and, punimur. p. 92. Marg. r. (...). p. 117. Marg. r. Exemptus. p. 127.
lin. 19. r. (...). p. 144. Marg. r. conscientiam afflictam; and, excitare. p.
167. lin. 26. r. Jam. 4. p. 170. Marg. r. profectae. p. 173. Marg. r. vos. p.
193. Marg. r. amittere. p. 197. lin. 3. r. none.
THE Second TREATISE, Concerning the PRECIOUSNESS OF CHRIST; Preached long
since for the substance thereof, (but since much enlarged) at St. MARY'S OXON.

By Henry Wilkinson. D. D. Then Principal of Magdalen-Hall.

Matthew. 13. 45, 46. Again the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant-Man
seeking goodly Pearls, who when he had found one Pearl of great Price, went and
sold all that he had, and bought it. LONDON. Printed for John Kidgel, at the
Great-Atlas in Cornhill, 1681.

TO THE Candid READER.
WHAT here (Reader) I present to thy View, (and as I hope) to thy Candid
Interpretation, I Preached many Years ago at St. Mary's in Oxford: Since I
have formed it a Treatise with Inlargements.

The Subject Discoursed on, is, The Preciousness, infinite Dignity and Value of
our Blessed Lord, and only Savior Jesus Christ. The Wise Merchant in the
Parable Sold all, and Bought this Pearl of great price. It Is Chrysostomes
Observation, Matthew. 13. 45, 46. (...). Chrysoft. in loc.
Christ is the Pearl of infinite Value, if you sell not all you cannot purchase
it.

It Is worth our best Inquiry, to ask who are they that put the highest price,
and estimation upon our Holy Lord Jesus? The Text gives a full Answer; Unto you
which believe, he is precious. Only true Believers value Christ above all
others. The Unbelieving Gadarens preferred their Swine before a Savior, and
Demas valued the World above Christ and his Apostles. It Is* Recorded in
History, that a Profane Duke of B^^^on pro^est, That he would not leave his
part in Paris for his part in Paradise. It Is no new thing for Swine and such
who (though they are in Men's shape) who have Brutish Qualities, to trample
precious Pearls under their Feet, they resemble the Dunghill Cock in the
Fable, who would rather have a Grain of Barley, than all the Jewels in the
World: But a True Believer who has Experimental Knowledge of the Superlative
worth of Christ, values him at a higher Price than all the Kingdoms of the
World, and the Glory of them. It Is evident how highly the Love-sick-Spouse,
valued Christ, C^^^t. 4. 10, 11, 12. A Holy Martyr when the Flames were about
his* Ears, Cried out* None but Christ, None but Christ. And John Lambert.
Mr. Bradford that eminently precious Martyr often poured out abundance of
Tears upon his Trencher (as he sat at Table) and being asked the reason why he
Wept? he Answered, because he could not bring his dull Heart to love Christ
more than he did. Mr. Calamy, late Pastor of Aldermanbury, an Eminent and
Faithful Minister of the Gospel, who (though Dead) speaks in choice Works, and
Exemplary Conversation) amongst many other excellent Writings of his in Print,
put forth a very ^seful Book, well worth the reading over and over again,
called, The Godly Man's Ark, in the close thereof he makes a Collection of
several distinguishing Evidences for Heaven, Mrs. Jone Moore, a Godly Woman of
his Congregation, declared and acquainted him with ^ll, I Will make mention The
Godly Man's Ark. p. 25 2. p. 25 3.
of her own Words. Now ( says she) I find nothing so hard to me, as to believe
aright to cast away my own Righteousness as Dung, in point of Justification,
and to cast away my Unrighteousness, so as that be no better to me, and to
Roll, and Cast, and Venture my Immortal Soul upon Jesus Christ, and his
Righteousness, for Life and Salvation by him alone, and to see my self complete
in him, this is Supernatural: Yet I must and will give Glory to God, and say,
Lord I believe, help thou my Unbelief: And by this I prove that this precious
workof Faith is wrought in me, because I find that Jesus Christ is to me very
precious: and I find in the Word, Unto them that Believe, he is precious. 1
Pet. 2. 7.


What I shall further add is by way of an Humble Entreaty, and a Just Apology.
Be pleased (Reader) through thy Candor to pass by, or Correct, several
mistakes of the Printers. Had I enjoyed my Health (though I live at fifty Miles
Distance from that Press, and am in the 64th Year of my Age, yet I would
willingly have undertook so long a Journey to review and Correct the Press, but
for two whole Months Space (whilst these Treatises were Printing) I was very
sick of that Feverish Distemper, which is now adays Epidemical, and likewise
(as I am Informed) one of the chief Printers was very Sick at the same time.

Whoever thou art that art pleased to read these two Treatises, and gainest any
Spiritual Advantage for thy precious soul, thou will much rejoice the Heart of
the Author (whose Cordial Desire is thy everlasting good) and ^e heartily
desires thy prayers, and remains,

From my Study in Great Cornard, near Sudbury in Suffolk, Nov. 29. 1680. Thy
Souls Servant. Henry Wilkinson.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Second TREATISE.
CHAP. 1. COntaining the Coherence, Division, and Exposition of the Text, and
the Deduction of a Doctrine, with the Method of Prosecuting the same. p. 1.
unto p. 9. CHAP. 2. Contains an Enumeration of several choice Names in
Scripture, ascribed unto Christ. p. 9. unto p. 21. CHAP. 3. Concerning the
great Mystery of the Divine, and Humane Nature of Christ; and the Hypostatical
Union that Christ is God and Man, United in one Person. p. 21. unto p. 41.
CHAP. 4. Of Christ's Sacerdotal Office, p. 41. Sect. 1. Of the Properties of
Christ's Priesthood. p. 41. unto p. 47. Sect. 2. Of the Parts of Christ's
Priestly Office, and first of his Satisfaction. p. 47. unto p. 51. Sect. 3. Of
the Forerunners of Christ's Passion* p. 51. unto p. 57. Sect. 4. Of Christ's
Passion. p. 57. unto p. 63. Sect. 5. Of the Consequents of Christ's Passion. p.
63. unto p. 73. CHAP. 5. Concerning Chris^s Prophetical Office. p. 76. Sect. 1.
Why Christ must be a Prophet. p. 76. unto p. 81. Sect. 2. How Christ differs
from other Prophets. p. 81. unto p. 85. Sect. 3. Of the Fruits and Benefits,
that accr^e unto us by Christ's Prophetical Office. p. 85. unto p. 90. CHAP. 6.
Of Christ's Kingly Office. p. 90. Sect. 1. Proving that Christ is a King. p. 90.
unto p. 94. Sect. 2. Why Christ must be a King. p. 94. unto p. 100. Sect. 3.
Concerning our Duties to Christ our King. p. 100. unto p. 103. CHAP. 7.
Representing Christ's Dignity by several Metaphors and Resemblances. p. 103.
Sect. 1. Christ is Resembled unto a Stone. p. 103. unto p. 108. Sect. 2. Christ
is Resembled to a Fountain. p. 108. unto p. 11. Sect. 3. Christ is compared to
a Tree: p. 112. unto p. 116. CHAP. 8. Concerning Christ's Purchases of
Justification, Sanctification, and Glorification, p. 116. Sect. 1. Of
Justification by Christ. p. 116. unto p. 123. Sect. 2. Of Sanctification by the
Spirit of Christ p. 123. unto p. 127. Sect. 3. Of Glorification. p. 127. unto
p. 130. CHAP. 9. Containing two Uses, viz. 1. An Use of Information. 2. An Use
of Reproo^* p. 131. Sect. 1. From Examples. p. 131. unto p. 135 Sect. 2.
Evidencing by Arguments, why Christ should be Precious in our Estimation. p.
135. unto p. 144. Sect. 3. Containing a second Head of Reasons in respect of
all True Believers. p. 144. unto p. 151. Sect. 4. Containing an Use of Reproof
to all Unbelievers. p. 151. unto p. 160. CHAP. 10. Containing an Use of
Examination. p. 160. Sect. 1. To put every one upon Trial, whether they prize
Jesus Christ. p. 160. unto p. 166. Sect. 2. Whether we prize Christ, by our
Likeness and Conformity to him? p. 168. unto p. 172. Sect. 3. Showing that
those that prize Christ, burn in Ardent Affections of Love to him. p. 172. unto
p. 185. CHAP. 11. Containing an Use of Exhortation to labor for the excellent
Grace of Faith. p. 185. Sect. 1. Containing Persuasive Arguments to get Faith.
p. 186. unto 202. Sect. 2. Containing an Use of Direction. p. 20^. unto p. 216.
CHAP. 12. Concluding with an Use of Consolation. p. 216. Sect. 1. Proving that
Believers are Precious in the account of Christ, and this is a ground of their
Consolation. p. 118. and unto p. 237. Sect. 2. Containing the Fruits of
Justification, which are a Ground of the Believers Comfort. p. 237. unto the
end. p. 247.
ERRATA in the Second Treatise.
PAge 3. Margin. r. (...). p. 6. r. (...). p. 7. marg. r. elegerunt. p. 11.
marg. r. (...). p. 15. l. 10. r. expected. p. 19. l. 7. add My. ^^. marg. r.
advocatus est. p. 71. marg. r. diceretur. p. 81. ^in. 1. r. this. p. 119. marg.
r. purioris. p. 130. lin. 13. r. Justification. p. 145. Tit. r. Believers
account Christ Pr^^ious. Id. marg. r. Magni. p. 149. marg. lin. last. r. Be^^
p. 152. lin. 11. r. Quarrels. p. 153. Party. 3. r. accom^^^ied. p. 159. lin.
10. r. Unreg^^^racy. p. 172. Sect. 3. 1. Affections. p. 197. marg. r. Tur^^cum.
p. 220. marg. r. (...) in Vin^. Id. lin. 25. r. plac^. p. 222, lin. 23. r.
Tempe(...). p. 225. lin. 14. r. quenching. p. 245. lin. 1. r. grounds. p. 2^6.
lin. 13. r. promises.

THE Pretiousness of Christ; OR, The Inestimable Dignity and Honor of Christ
unfolded: Upon
1 Pet. 2. 7. Unto you therefore which believe, he Treatise II. of the
Pretiousness of Christ.
is Precious.
CHAP. I.
Containing the Coherence, Division, and Exposition of the Text and the
Deduction of a Doctrine, with the Method of prosecuting the same.

OUR Savior Christ before his Passion gave in charge to St. Peter a Duty of
weighty concernment, viz. Luke 23. 32. ^^ si diceret sicut tu, a me specialem
misericordiam consecutus es and post lapsum erigeris, and firmaberis, sic tu,
conversus perfect misericordiam impende proximis tuis, robora, ac subleva eo^.
Stella in loc.
When thou art converted strengthen thy Brethren Likewise after his Passion he
presses three times with great Vehemence, the grand Pastoral Office, which is
says ( b) Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17.
he) ( b) to feed my Sheep and to feed my Lambs. Christ challenges a peculiar
propriety in them, because he calls them his Sheep and Lambs. Peter was not the
Lord, but the Servant of them, as Non igitur (...) Dominus, quod ipsemet Petrus
agnoscit. 1 Pet. ^. 3. neque ut (...) (Is enim est ^^icus ill^ (...) sa^^guine
suo redemptarum) sed ut fidu^ (...) Minister. Be^^ in Joh. 21. 15.
Beza appositly notes against the Popes usurpation. Questionless this charge
reiterated with such ardency of affection by Christ, made deep Impressions upon
the Heart of Peter, as may be evidenced by the whole current of his Epistle:
For the main design in them (which he drives at) is, to gain Souls unto Jesus
Christ. For instance and particular proof of what I have asserted: This holy
Apostle makes it his grand business throughout this whole Epistle, partly to
persuade the converted Videntur haec ad Judaeos propri^ scribi, quod Petrus
esset Apostolus Circumcisionis. Erasm. Hujus dispersionis caput erant Judaei
Babylonenses, quos vel ideo (...) ^^minat q^ia ^ Babylone scribebat. Drus.
dispersed Jews to whom he wrote. That the Doctrine of the Gospel is the only
true Doctrine of Eternal S^^vation, and partly to engage them to persevere in
the Profession thereof, and to live up to that Profession.

For accomplishment of these great ends the Apostle quits himself as becomes a
faithful Minister of the Gospel in endeavoring to distinguish the precious
from the vile: Such as put this great Duty into Practice, have a high Character
of Honor put upon them; Jer. 15. 19. And if thou take forth the Precious from
the Vile, thou shall be Summa est eos demum censeri coram Deo fideles Ecclesiae
Pastores, qui non moventur respectu hominum qui non flexibiles in hanc vel in
illam partem, sed rect^ judicant ex lege Dei. Calv. in loc.
as my Mouth. Now the difference is evidenced both by what they have left off,
and forsaken, and by what they have made choice of and embraced, 1. They have
lest off and laid aside, or rather rejected and re^used (as a (...)
proprie-significat aliquid repudiare in electione v^l etiam aliquem ^b officio
tanquam in^ignum re^^cere. Gerh. Harm.
Learned Author observes on the word) all Malice and all G^ile, and
Hypocrisies, and Envys, and all evil speakings. v. 1. 2. They have chosen and
embraced the blessed fruits of regeneration, which are represented by their
desires. (...). Nam (...) est evangelium. infra. v. 8. Cameron.
New food, and Spiritual growth. v. 2. As new born Babes desire the sincere
Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. Another fruit of regeneration is
a spiritual taste. v. 3. If ye have (...) non est ^eviter ^^gustare sed
experiri. Grot.
tasted that the Lord is gracious. And my Text is an infallible character
instar omnium drawn from the highest valuation of Jesus Christ. If the Question
be propounded, who are they that set the highest estimate upon Jesus Christ?
The Text gives in the Answer -- You which believe. And if we require, who are
they that believe? The Answer will be as clear, viz. Unto whom he is precious.
So then only the true Believer knows how to set the highest valuation upon
Christ, and he who so highly values Christ, is the true Believer.

The words contain, The true Believers The Text divided and opened.
evidence for his interest in Christ. In them are contained two Generals.

1. The high Dignity, Honor, and inestimable valuation of Christ.

2. The Persons in whose account Christ is so highly honored. There are two
words which require Explication.

1. Precious (as we usually read it in 1. What is meant by Precious?
the Concrete) But the word is in the abstract in the Original and signifies
(...), honor pretiosus and vel in pretio habend^s a Vobis. Vata^l. Vobis honora
est. Grot. Honorificus est credentibus in ipsum (...) enim hic apti^s pro
honor sumitur quam pro pre^io. Zegerus.
Honor it self, thereby showing that all precious Excellencys, Honors,
Dignities, Treasures, and Wisdoms, are concerned in Christ. If Zion (i. e.) the
Church be called the perfection of Beauty. Psalm. 50. 2. How much more eminently
may Christ the Head of his Church be called the perfection of all Beauties,
because whatsoever Beauty is in the Church (which is Christ's Mystical Body) is
derivative from Christ the Head. In him there is a fullness of all excellencies
and perfections. ( c) Col. ^. 19.
( c) For it has pleased the Father that in ( d) Col. 2. 9.
him should all fullness dwell. (d) For in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily (i. e.) essentially In Christo est, quicquid (...) quritur ad
constituendum perfectum Redemptorem. Daven. in Col. 1. 19.
and personally really and substantially in opposition to the Figures and
Shadows of the Old Testament. Christ is honorable in himself even honor it
self. And he is an In ipso inhabitat plenitudo divinitatis corporaliter, quia
in Templo habit averat umbraliter. August.
honor unto all his Members. None of his Servants shall be dishonored by his
Service, Moses was called Gods Servant. Moses my Servant is Dead; Joshua 1. 2.
and St. Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ. So he begins his Epistle Romans 1. 1.
Tit. 1. 1. Its a common saying, Deo Servire est Regnare. Theodosius Ecclesiae
se membrum esse magis, quam in terris regnare gaudebat. Aug. de Civit. Dei. L.
5. c. 26.
Theodosious the Emperor professed That he rather desired to be a Member of the
Church then an Emperor on the earth. None more noble then the Bereans who Act.
17. 11. (...) Quamvis (...) de (...)
received the word with all diligence, and searched the proprie dicatur tamen
cum Comparatio hic videatur instituta non generis (erant enim omnes isti
Judaei) sed virtutis ac pietatis generosiores malui interpretari quam
Nobiliores. Beza in Loc.
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. The imitation of their example
will ennoble Nobility it self. The more Holy the more Noble. If we speak of
Wisdom, Christ is a Isai. 9. 6.
Councellor, Col. 2. 3.
in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. If we speak of
Riches, the Riches of Christ are Ephesians. 3. ^.
unsearchable, If we speak of Beauty, Christ is Cant. 5. 10. (...). Verse. 70.
white and Ruddy the chiefest of ten Thousands. Christ is white for his
innocence and purity, ruddy for his Sufferings, as his bloody Sweat, Agony and
Passion upon the Cross. Now because it infinitely exceeds the capacity of Men
or Angels to represent Christ's Dignity, Honor, and excellencies, to the full
in positive expressions, therefore by way of negation we express the Price,
Dignity, Valuation of Christ to be infinite, unparrallell'd, and inestimable;
and when we have said inestimable, it is beyond the sphere of our activity (as
an ancient Nobis ad intellectum pectus angustum est, and ide^ sic Deum digne
estimamus, dum in^stimabilem dicimus. Min. Felix.
Father observes) to reach any higher in our expressions.

2. Here Is another word 2. What is meant by Believers.
to be explained; viz. Believers. Its said (...) Sola est ^des quae pretium ac,
excellentiam Christi nobis patefacit. Calv. in loc.
Unto you therefore which believe. For (as judicious Calvin observes) it is
faith alone which lays open to us the price and excellency of Christ. Such then
as believe unto Salvation are such, whose hearts are Act. 15.
purified by faith, Romans 5. 1.
and justified by Faith, and have such a faith as Gal. 5. 6.
works by love. Called Tit. 1. 1.
the faith of Gods Elect. They are chosen says the Apostle unto Salvation
through Sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth. 2 These. 2. 3.
Quia electi sunt elegerunt, non qui^ ellegerunt electi sunt, elligentium
meritum nullum esset, nisi ^os eligentis grati^ Dei preveniret. Aug.
These have their Robes washed and made white in the Blood of the Lamb. Rev. 7.
14. They are begotten again to a lively hope. 1 Pet. 1. 3. and made Partakers
of the Divine Nature* 2 Pet. 1. 4. These and these alone discern the Excellency
and Dignity of Christ, and they set the highest estimate and valuation upon
him. From the Premises thus divided and expounded, there results this Doctrinal
Conclusion. That.

Christ is of inestimable Dignity and Honor, and infinitely Precious in the
account of all true Believers.

For the Methodical inlargment of this Method propounded
Excellent Doctrine, my work in the ensuing Treatise shall be first to give in
the clear proof of the Doctrine, and afterward to infer an useful improvement
thereof. The Assertion to be proved is -- That Christ is of inestimable
Dignity. This shall constitute the Doctrinal part. That which shall be intended
by way of improvement, is -- That as Christ is thus precious and highly to be
valued as in himself, or so he ought to be by all true Believers. This shall
constitute the particular Use and Application of all. 1. That Christ is of
ines^imabl^ Dignity; Honor, and this is proved in 5 several Particulars.


In handling of the former Assertion I shall confine my self to these ensuing
Heads of discourse.

1. To reckon up several excellent Names of Honor and Dignity appropriated
unto Christ in Scripture:

2. To unfold the grand Mystery of the Divine and Humane Nature of Christ
Hypostatically united in one Person.

3. To represent the invaluable worth of those threefold Offices of Christ,
viz. Sacerdotal, Prophetical and Regal.

4. To set down several Metaphors and Resemblances in Scripture which applied
to Christ declare his singular Dignity.

5, To consider those great Purchases which Christ has made for his People,
which are Justification, Sanctification and Glorification. These Heads of
discourse I shall endeavor (through Christ that strengthens me) to enlarge in
so many distinct Chapters. Which (as I hope and desire) will abundantly
satisfy, confirm, and establish us in this Fundamental Truth -- That Christ is
precious and estimable for Dignity and Honor. Of these I shall treat in order
in the following Chapters.

CHAP. II.
Chap. 2.
Containing an enumeration of several choice, and honorable Names in Scripture
ascribed unto Christ.

AMongst variety of Names in Scripture appropriated unto Christ, I shall select
these following (not naming all that might be named) and explain them as I go
along.

The first I shall mention is Shiloh; Genesis 1. Name, Shiloh.
49. 10. Which name the whole current of Orthodox Interpreters unanimously
apply unto Christ. The name signifies, safe, happy, and blessed (as Est nomen
verbale, Salvus, beatus, faelix, unde Shiloh derivatur, Servator, felicitetor
hoc est faelices reddere. Pet. Mart. in Genesis 49. 10.
Peter Martyr observes) some render Shiloh (as learned Jerome and others) He
that is to be sent.

Quasi tranquillatorem dicas qui tranquillitatis nostrae spiritualis Auth^r sit
futurus, Scultet. Exercit. Evangel.
Scultetus after he had mentioned variety of Interpretations acquiesceth in
this. That Shiloh signifies to cease and be quiet. Ludovicus de Dieu
understands Shiloh to be the promised Seed, which was to spring from Judah. The
version of the 70 is emphatical, and plainly declares Christ to be (...). Verse.
70. Interpretum.
a Savior; That Jacob's Prophesy was fulfilled, and that the Scepter did not
depart from Judah till the coming of Christ may thus be convinced: For the
Politic state amongst the Jews was not changed, but still the Non auferetur
Sceptrum Regium, dicet regnum permansurum esse in Judausque ad Christum,
quantumvis affligeretur and propecollapsum videretur. Va^abl. in loc. ^ Name, a
Star. 1 The Star of Jacob.
Regal Dignity and Politic Government continued in Judah, Maugre all
Persecutions, and Oppositions whatsoever. Judah was the Law-giveing Tribe: And
those Laws continued till the coming of Christ. But at Christ's comeing the
Scepter departed from Judah and was translated to an Heathen King.

2. Another Name attributed to Christ is a Star. He is called the Star of
Jacob, and a bright Morning Star.

1. He is called by Balaam the Star of Jacob, Numb. 24. 17. although Balaam was
a Mercenary Prophet who (as he is branded by the Apostle) 2 Pet. 2. 15.
loved the Wages of unrighteousness. Yet he gives this true attestation. There
shall (says he) come a Star out of Jacob and a Scepter shall rise out of
Israel. This is a clear Prophecy concerning (...). Verse. 70. Surget Princeps ex
Israel. Verse. Sir. Ungetur Christus de dom^ Israel Paraphr. Chald.
Christ. Christ is that Star that lightneth and Shines, and what light we have
is borrowed, and derived from him, who is that great light Joh. 1. 9.
which lights every Man that comes into the World. Malachy calls him, Mal*
4. 2.
the Sun of righteousness, Zachary calls him Luke 1. 78.
The Day spring from on high St. Peter calls him 2 Pet. 1. 19.
The Day Star. For Christ shines gloriously in the Gospel; He inlightens,
guides and directs: He scatters Clouds, and dispels Mists and Fogs, and removes
darkness by the marvelous Sunshine of the Gospel. Our Duty is not to be led by
any other light, but to follow Dominus* non aliter nobis luceat quam dum in
ejus verbum intuemur quasi lucernam. Calv.
that light only.

2. Christ is called the Bright and Morning 2. The right and Morning Star.
Star. Rev. 22. 16. As the Morning Star excels all others, so Christ excels all
Men and Angels. And this Epithet of Bright is attributed to Christ, because of
his brightness, which is so resplendent, as to expel darkness and blindness out
of our Minds. (...). Arist. Et^. lib. 5. c. 1.
Aristotle (though an Heathen) has high thoughts of Justice, insomuch that he
prefers it before the Night-Star and Morning Star. Christ without all question
is more bright, more amiable, and desirable, and more glorious then all the
Stars. For he is said to be (...). Splendour gloriae Dei: Et quid est gloria
Dei, nisi gloriosa Dei natura inaccessa luce refulge^s. Pareus. Filius est
splendour a l^ce Paterna editus, sicut in Symbolo legitur Lum^n de Lumine.
Victor. Strigel. in Nov. Test.
the Brightness of his Fathers Glory: The expression is sublime yet it comes
far short of the Original; Christ irradiates his Children with Splendour, and
Glory, and according to their measure they participate of his brightness* But
the Glory and Splendour of Saints is thus distinguished from the Glory and
Splendour that is in Christ; In them the Glory is as a Beam, in Christ as the
Sun, in them as a drop, in Christ as the Ocean, in them as Rivulets in Christ
as the Fountain from whence they are derived. There is a fullness of a Fountain,
and a fullness of a Vessel; In Christ there is a fullness of a Fountain, in the
Saints (though glorified) there is only the fullness of a Vessel, and this
Vessel is filled by Christ, and receives all of his fullness; Joh. 1. 16. And of
his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace (i. e.) By Christ we
receive Gratiam gratia cumulatam. Dunaeus, Piscator, Davenant. Gatakerus, etc.
vid. Gatak. Miscell. cap. 26.
grace upon grace, or abundant increase of all grace; For all grace is the free
gift of Jesus Christ, although (...). Chrysostom. Probat (inquit Beza) sententiam
Chrysostomi, Cyrilli, Theophylasti, and Augustini statuentium (...) hic
significare vice, loco, and sensum esse accepimus grati^m Novi Faederis loco
gratiae veteris, vel gratiam Evangelii pro grati^ Legis. Lud. de. Dieu.
some Learned Authors understand by grace for grace the grace of the New
Testament, and the singular benefit thereof, instead of the old, yet its
undoubtedly true that whatever grace it is, it comes to us from Jesus Christ
the only Liberal Doner thereof, from whom we receive grace both in the truth,
and in the growth thereof.

A third Name of Christ is a Prophet. 3. Name, a Prophet.
The promise is recorded, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto
thee a Prophet from the midst of thy Brethren like unto me; unto him shall ye
hearken. This place is cited. Act. 3. 22. and Act. 7. 37. Christ is he, of whom
Moses and the Prophets wrote, so Philip informs Nathaniel; Joh. 1. 45. -- When
the Jews asked John who he was, they asked art thou that Prophet: Joh. 1. 21? In
asking after (...), Chrysostom. in Joh. 1. 21.
that Prophet, there is some singularity and special remark of excellency and
preheminency above all other Prophets. And so is Christ The Prophet in Dignity
above all other Prophets. But a farther enlargement I shall refer to another
place, where I shall insist more largely upon the Prophetical Office of Christ.

A fourth Name is Immanuel. Isai. 7. 14. 4. Name, Immanuel.
And you have the Interpretation of this Name. Matthew. 1. 23* God with us. This
Name represents Christ's infinite condescentionto make his Addi^ qu^que Propheta
n^men partus illus Immanuel, ad exprimandam personam ejus simul ac ^fficium,
and familiarem ejus cum hominibus conversationem quod habi^urus esset inter
homines. Joh. 1. 14. Caelo terram conjuncturus, and hominem Deo in gratia,
prout utrumque conjuncturus erit in persona. Walaeus. in Mat. 1. 21.
abode for a time and converse with Men: Nomina illa Jesus and Immanuel in eo
solum differunt quod nomen Jesus (...) principaliter designet officium,
secundario personam; Immanuel principaliter personam secundario officium.
Span^. Dub. Evang.
Immanuel is a Name of Dignity and Pre-eminence. The Divine Nature of Christ is
thereby set forth: It Is likewise a Name of singular profit and benefit to us,
because he is God with us, and thereby is set forth the humane Nature of
Christ. And as a Learned Expositor observes; Quod quaeso hoc fructu ^btabilius?
Hic virginis partus jam nobis attulit, ut humano gen^ri se Deus c^^junxerit in
Christo. Nec putandum est ^tiosam esse, and infr^gif^ram istam conjunctionem,
quae primum nos Deo recon^^li^vit in Christo. 2 Cor. 5. 19. Deinde carnem
nostram ad dextram Patris in caelis collocavit, and supra omnia exaltavit.
Tertio etiam hoc attulit, ut in omnibus adversis fi^^nt^r dicer^ liceat. Si
De^s pro nobi^ qu^^ contra ^^s Romans 8. 31. Musc. in loc.
what fruit can be more desirable then this, this fruit of the Virgin brought
this to us, that God in Christ joined himself to mankind, neither may we
conceive that this conjunction is useless and fruitless, which first has
Reconciled us to God in Christ, and afterward places our bodies at the Right
Hand of the Father, and lastly gives us boldness and confidence in all
adversity; If God be for us, who can be against us. -- But I shall enlarge no
more of this Name, because I may see cause to resume a farther exposition
thereof, when I treat of Christ's Hypostatical Union.

A fifth Name is Messiah or Messiah, Prophesyed 5 Name, Messiah.
of by Daniel. Dan. 9. 25, 26. -- But Joh. 1. 41. it is said -- We have found
the Messiah. Both Jews and Samarita^s excepted Redemption and Instruction in
all things from Christ as may appear by the Woman of Samaria's answer Joh. 4.
25. The Woman says unto him I know that Messiah comes which is called Christ,
when he is come he will tell us all things (...) ^^glish D^^i^es on Dan. 9. 25.
Antiquitus i^populo Dei, Reges, Prophetae, ^c S^cerdot^s ^^geba^t^r, unctione
significatur copia Spiritus qua ista tria hominum genera perfundu^^^r. Pet
Mart. Loc. c^^.
some understand Messiah and Christ to be of one and the same signification For
(say they) the eternal-Word is by the Angel named Messiah ( i. e.) in Greek
(...), Christ, or anointed, or written in Abstracto. Anointed in regard of
both natures, as to the Office of Reconciliation and Redemption. But anointed
in the humane nature only as to the gifts of the Holy Ghost ^^llated upon it,
and infused in^^ it. This Name Breve verb^^ sed efficacissimum fatend^ ^um s^
esse Messiam quid aliud innuit, quam s^ esset ^um q^^ vere a D^o ^nct^s sit in
Regem and sacerdotem, adeo ut ad se confugi^ntes, ne dum possit defender^ ut
Rex, sed etiam Deo reconciliare ut verus Sacerdos. Ferus. in Joh. ^. 26.
Messiah carries Royalty and high Dignity in it, because its the same with
Christ, anointed; and because the Prophet Daniel plainly sets down the Name
and Dignity of Christ conjoined in the place forecited. Dan. 9. 25. Messiah the
Prince. Thus the Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 9. 6.
calls him the Prince of Peace Isa. 32. 1.
a King that shall reign in righteousness. The Psalmist calls him a King Ps. 2.
6.
yet have I set my King upon my Holy Hill of Zion. Christ has absolute rule
and government: All Subjection must be to him, all Scepters, all Government
must yield homage unto Christ and be subordinate and subservivent unto him.
Bishop Reynolds on Psalm. 110. v. 1. p. 12. Edit. 1.
A Learned and Reverend Divine thus Expounds; Phil. 2. 10. (...) etc. At the
name of Jesus every Knee shall bow of things in Heaven and things in earth, and
things under the earth; (i. e.) unto that Holy thing, unto the Power and
Scepter of that Divine Person, which is unto us so comfortably manifested in a
Name of Salvation, every Knee should bow.

A sixth Name is A Branch. This name 6 Name, a Branch. Isai. 4. 2. Isai. 11. 1.
Jer. 33. 15.
is twice mentioned. Zec. 13. 8, 9. and c. 6. 12. In the former, God promises,
behold I will bring forth my Servant the Branch; And in the latter (as if the)
Prophecy was already accomplished) God points him out: Behold the Man, whose
Name is the Branch, and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build
the Temple of the Lord. Christ is often in Scripture called a Branch, thereby (
Est Germen propri^ quod e terra oritur. Quo Christi manifestatio in carne and
ortus ^ Virgin Mariae hand obscur^ innuitur. Drus. Sic d^signat^ Christi
Nativitas terrena, quod instar surculi e terra proditurus esset, and e trunco
velut succiso and omni ramorum, viroris, et florum gloria destitut^. Spanh^m.
dub. Evangel.
as is observed) the Humane Nature of Christ is shadowed forth. And we read
Math. 2, 23. He shall be called a Nazarene. Where to find the word* Nazarene,
in so many Syllables in the Old Testament is not probable. No particular
Prophet is cited by the Evangelist. But we frequently find the Word Netzera
Branch. And that Christ* is called a Nazarene, is an allusion to those
Prophesies which call Christ a Branch. I am not Huc r^spicientes aliqui du^
conantur hoc Testimonium ad c^^tum refer locum fu^ptum puta^t ex Is. 11. 1.
Et egredi^tur virga de radice Jesse et flos de radice ejus ascendet, Porro quod
Netzer soli 70 transt^lerunt Radicem, atque Sym. et Theod. verterunt (...) i.
e. stirpem sive truncu^^* In hanc ferme sententiam Hieronymus annotavit locum.
Erasmus. in Matt. 2. 23.
alone in my judgment. Now this Branch is both beautiful, and glorious. Isa.
42. Its a growing and a Temple building Branch Ze. 6. 12. It Is there said he
shall grow out of his place. (i. e.) He shall sprout forth of Bethlehem, where
he was born, out of the Stem* and Root of David, to whom he was promised, and
he shall build the Temple of the Lord (i. e.) by the Preaching of the Gospel he
shall build up the Church made of all true Believers. Christ shall fasten them
(as Stones in a Building) to himself the chief Cornerstone.

A seventh Name is Jesus, and why he 7. Name, Jesus. Site annotat Cassianus
liberare a peccat^s and ^opulum suum, non posse (...) convenire nisi e^ qui
uatura sit Deus. Beza.
was so called is expressed: Mat. 1. 21. And she shall bring forth a Son, and
thou shall call his Name JESUS, for he shall save his People from their Sins.
Joshua was only a Temporal Savior, but Jesus is an Eternal Savior: Joshua a
Type, Jesus the Truth; Joshua brought the Israelites into a Temporal Canaan,
Jesus Christ brings all the Israel of God (whether Jews or Gentiles) into an
Eternal Canaan, a Heavenly Jerusalem, a Mansion not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens. Now when we speak of Christ according to his Name Jesus. What can
be more said, for this is a Name above every Name? It is 1 These. 1. 10.
Jesus, which delivers us from the wrath to come. The only Name whereby Act.
4. 12.
we must be saved. Ephesians. 1. 7.
We have Redemption through his Blood the forgiveness of Sins. Ephesians. 2. 14.
He is our Peace; Mat. 20. 28.
A Ransom; 2 Cor. 5. 19.
our Reconciler; the 1 Timothy 2. 5.
only Mediator, our Intercessor, Heb. 7. 25.
for he ever lives to make Intercession for his Saints. He is likewise an Vel
Patronum; aut etiam Mediatorem, and intercessorem omnia enim haec significat
vox Graeca (...) Vatabl. 1. Joh. 2. 1. Luke 22. 44. Fuit sud^r ejus instar
sanguinis concreti descendens saper tern^in. L de Dieu. 1 John 2. 1. (...):
Quicunque adeo alteri in causa officij gratia. Pr^ces Ecclesiae Christus more
Advocati Deo commendat. Grot.
Advocate to Plead our Cause; in Person and as Mediator and Advocate both, he
Pleads for all his Children in such Language: -- This is the Man for whom I
came to be incarnate, for whom I sweated drops of Blood, clodded blood, and
congeald(...), for whose Sins I died and rose again for his Justification:
Righteous-Father since thy Justice must be satisfied impute all this persons
Sins upon my Score, and impute Righteousness unto him. And this Office of an
Advocate is of singular Benefit and Consolation unto all the Children of God,
amidst their Fears, Perplexities, Doubts, Mournings, and Weepings over their
manifold Infirmities, that they have an Advocate to Plead their Cause as
Lawyers do by Virtue of their Calling, and Interpose in their behalfs: Our
Prayers come as from us but raw, and cold very indigested, and imperfect, but
our Advocate mends and perfects them, and Pleads for them as if they were
absolutely exact and perfect; for he interposeth his own merits and pleads
satisfaction of Justice, from his own meritorious Sufferings. Hence the Apostle
grounds the Consolation o^ the Saints: 1 John 2. 12. If any Man Sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the Propitiation
of our Sins, and not for ours only, but the Sins of the whole World. In this
excellent Scripture we may observe several Singularities.

1. There is an Advocate for Sinners. An Advocate is upon the place, and
undertakes the Cause, by defending and pleading. And so does Christ as an Dum
ostendere vult quomodo redeamus cum Deo in gratiam, dicit Christ^m esse nobis
Advec^tum, n^m in hoc apparet coram facie Dei, ut sacrificii sui vim and
efficaciam erga no sexerat. Calv. in loc.
Advocate and Pleader carries on the Cause of poor Sinners, even all such as he
has loved, and washed in his Blood.

2. This Advocate is Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God, the second person in
Trinity, the Beloved Son, Matthew. 3. 17.
in whom the Father is well pleased.

3. He pleads with the Father the person offended.

4. He is Jesus Christ the righteous, without Sin, for no guile was ever found
in his Mouth, and therefore being righteous he is the only fit person to be an
Advocate. Heb. 7. 26.
He is Holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from Sinners.

5. He is the Propitiation for Sins, he offered up himself for a Propitiation,
he interposed as a surety, paid the debt and satisfied Justice to the utmost,
and not only for our Sins, but

6thly, For the Sins of the Usit atum est Hebraeis totum mundum dicere pro
certa universitate quorundam de quibus in subjecta materia agitur, ubi agitur
de fidelibus, (loquitur enim fidelis fidelibus) intelliguntur per totius mundi
peccata, omnium quot-quot sunt fidelium peccata. Lud. de dieu. in 1 John 2. 2.
whole World. Not that for every individual person Christ was a Propitiation:
But there the whole world implies all those who out of the Nations of the World
shall believe in him. Compare this with Rev. 5. 9. Thou have Re-deemed us to
God by thy blood out of every Kindred, and Tongue and People, and Nation. I
shall now come from the Names to treat of the Natures of Christ, but this shall
be the business of the next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the great Mystery of the Divine and Humane Nature of Christ; and
the Hypostatical Union, that Christ is God and Man, united in one Person.

THe Apostle declares 1 Timothy 3. 16. without Controversy great is the mystery of
godliness. The first and greatest mystery that he mentions is, that God was
made manifest Ait Apos^olus, (...). i. e. in carne carnaliter; nempe cum Deus
alioquin (...) non sit tam en Christus manifestatus est (...) occulis seu visu
vere adspectabilis, conspicuus, manifestus, visu, auditu, tactu, (...) 1 John
1. 2. idque est quod Joh. 21. 1. dicitur (...) human^ denique more and carne,
Quod sua alioquin natura Deus non est Quod diam Gentiles ag^overe. V.
Gothosredi Exercit. poster. in 1 Timothy 3. 16.
in the flesh. Of this mystery in order we are now to treat. And 1. Of the
Divine Nature of Christ; 2. Of the Humane Nature of Christ. And 3. Of the
Hypostatical Union.

For the first this Proposition shall be proved, That Christ is God from all
eternity. The Proof shall be made plain by evidence of Scripture and strength
of Reason.

1. For Scripture Evidence. Amongst 1 Proof of Christ's Deity from Scripture
Testimony.
many Testimonies I shall only select a few principal ones. David calls Christ
his Lord; Psalm. 110. v. 1. Christ urging this Scripture nonplus'd the
Pharisees. Mat. 22. 44. 46. The Prophet Isaiah calls Christ the Isai. 9. 6.
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father; Jeremy calls him, Jer. 23. 6.
The Lord our Righteousness. He is Fellow, and Fellowlike with God the Father.
Zachary calls him Gods Zech. 13. 7.
Fellow. And this Testimony the Apostle confirms that Philip 2. 6.
Christ being in the form of God, thought it no Robbery to be equal with God.
Christ is not God by Similutude or Figure, not (...) of like Substance, Though
Christ was Man, yet he was more then a bare Man. For jure nat^rae no Son is
Lord to his Father; Domination does never ascend. There must be something above
nature in him, to make him his Fathers Sovereign, Christ is the^ a Lord to his
People. He had Dominion and was the Salvation of his own Forefathers. Bishop
Reynolds in Psalm. 110. verse. ^.
but (...) of the self same substance, not Metaphorically as Judges are called
Gods, Psalm. 82. 1, 6. but properly, and really, and essentially Christ is God,
coequal, coessential, and coeternal with God the Father. We have the Testimony
of Christ himself, Joh. 8. 58. Jesus said unto them, verily, verily I say unto
you, Before Abraham was I am; Christ is the Word that was God; Joh. 1. 1. This
Christ is the essential substantial Word: And Se^sus (...) Pro(...) mihi
videtur (...) cum esset in principio, essetque apud Deum, erat quoque ipse
Deus. Nam ex hoc ipso quod erat apud Deum sequitur eum fuiss quoque una
eademque cum Deo essentia, adeoque Deum ipsum. Unde fundamentum quam firmum
habeamus nos qui credimus in Jesum Christum, nempe eum, qui Deus sit, and unum
cum Patre and Spiritu Sancto. Rolloc. in Joh. 1.
the Word was God. St. Paul declares Christ, to be God over all blessed
forever. Romans 9. 5. St. John speaking of Christ confidently affirms this is the
true God, and Eternal Life. 1 John 5. 20.

And St. Jude concludes his Epistle with this Doxology. v. 25. To the only wise
God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now and ever,
Amen.

Thus having proved the Deity of Christ by Scripture Testimony, I shall add
strength of Reason, (though I conceive there is given abundant Proof of what is
already forementioned) that so there may be more Measure pressed and running over.

Amongst many I shall instance in these 2. Proof of Christ's Deity by 3 Reasons.
Reasons only, which are drawn from the Divine Attributes ascribed to Christ,
the Divine Honor due to him, and his Divine Works; from all which, the
Conclusion inferred is of eternal truth, That Christ is God from all eternity.

1. If we consider the Divine Attributes From the Divine Attributes.
given unto Christ, thence will be drawn an infallible Proof of his Deity: For
instance we have two Attributes mentioned in one verse, viz. Power and Wisdom;
1 Cor. 1. 20. Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God. And this Wisdom
is from eternity: Solomon brings in Wisdom speaking thus. Prove. 8. 22, 23.
Possemus verbum illud ad divinam hypostasin refer per quam natura divina in
filio subsistat hoc modo fundavit me, (i. e) Pater propri ^ subsistentia me
donavit. Quod si Vulgatam lectionem ad eum sensum vocare velis sic dirigenda
est. Ab aeterno ordinata sum, (i. e.) ab aeternitate in Statione me^ locata
sum, ut in ordine trium hypostase^^ ego secunda persona sim, ita ut^inde avelli
aut loco moveri non possim. Salzar.
The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old. I
was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. To me
it is out of question, that this is spoken of Christ the Essential Wisdom of the
Father Christ was possessed and begotten of the Father in an inconceiveable and
incomprehensible manner, and it is said before his works of old, (i. e.) when
there was nothing created, nothing in being but God, and in nothing but
Eternity. And not only Power, but Omnipotency is ascribed to Christ, Joh. 5.
19. ^
for whatsoever the Father does, these also does the Son likewise. Nothing too
hard for Omnipotency, nothing too difficult for Christ to conquer Philip. 3. 21*
He is able (says the Apostle) even to subdue all things unto himself.
Likewise Notare operae pretium est jus and potestatem suscitandi mortuos, imo
quidvis suo arbitrio agendi conferri in Christi personam: Quo encomio divina
ejus Ma-Jestas splendede ornatur. Calv. in loc.
Eternity and Omnipotency both meet in Christ, I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end^ng, (says the Lord) which is, and which was, and which
is to come, the Almighty. Rev. 1. 8. Further, Om-Niscience Christ challenges
to himself; Joh. 2. 25.
For he knew what was in Man. He knew who should Betray him, and when he should
be delivered up to the Cross. He foretold his Sufferings, and all were
accomplished accordingly. Rev. 2. 23.
He searches the Heart and the Reins: Peter confessed Lord thou know all
things. Praeclarum Divinitatis Christi argumentum, Absolute citra limitationem,
divinum hoc Attributum Christ^ hic tribuitur ijsdem verbis, quibus alibi
adscribitur Jehovae, non solum quod justi judicij administrationem sed and quo
ad cordum s^rut ationem. Parens.
Hence it appears Christ is Omniscient and therefore God, for Omniscience is an
incommunicable Attribute to any created Being. Add hereunto Christ's Heb. 13.
8.
immutability. Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to day and for ever: And his
Immensity: For he it is that Joh 3. 13. Haec sententia Pharisaeo nova erat qui
ignorabat filium Dei fuisse ab initio. Quomodo and descendit and est in caelo
Respondetur descendit Filius Dei, quia and induit naturam humanam, and
humiliatur infra omn^^ captum humanum, dum fit victima pro peccatis generis
humani, and tamen est in caelo. i. e. cernit Patrem, and retinet potentiam
divinam. Melanc. in loc.
came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man which is in Heaven: Immensity and
Ubiquity of presence, is an Attribute belonging to God alone. Though Christ was
then corporally on earth, yet his Deity could not be confined to any place,
for, according to his Divine Nature, he filled Heaven and Earth: No place can
exclude his Omnipresence.

A 2d. Reason shall be drawn from the Drawn from the Divine Honor due unto
Christ.
Divine Honor due unto Christ. The Father commands the same honor to be given
unto Christ as unto himself. Joh. 5. 23. Adoration of Christ is enjoined to all
the Hoc est non tantum smili, sed aequali prors^s honor, quemadmodum omne
judicii^m non aliquo tam tantum ^jus partem dedit Pater Filio suo. Rolloc. in
loc.
Angels. Heb. 1. 6
Let all the Angels of God worship him. This Archangel even Christ is the
Angel of the Covenant, and without blame may be worshipped. The Apostle
worshipped him, and fell at his Feet, (though he was forbidden to worship another
Angel:) Rev. 1. 17.
The four Beasts and four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb. And
further Honor is exhibited unto Christ in saying, Rev. 5. 13. Reas. 3. Drawn
from the works of Christ.
Blessing and Honor and Glory and Power, be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. These high Praises and
Celebrations represent Honor due unto Rev. 5. 8.
him, a clear Proof of his Divinity.

A 3d. Reason shall be drawn from the Works of Christ. Not to multiply many
instances, only consider.

1. Christ created the World. He was Heir of all things, by whom God the
Father, Heb. 12.
made the World; Without him nothing was made.

2. Christ governs and preserves the World, Joh. 1. 3. Quamvis indefinite
loquatur, debet intelligi universaliter, quod per illum f^cit omnia saecula. i.
e. omnia creata juxta illud. Prove. 8. 30. cum eo eram cuncta componens: Ubi est
sermo da Sapientia g^nita Christi. Tena ad Hebr.
He upholds all things by the Word of his Power. Both Works of Creation and
Providence are ascribed unto Christ.

3. Christ wrought Miracles, he cured the Lame, and the Blind, the Deaf, and
the Dumb, he healed all Diseases, calmed the rageing Sea, and walked on the Sea,
raised the Dead to Life again, and by his own Power raised himself, fed 5000
with 5 Loves and two little Fishes; and which is above all these things he
forgave Sins, (which only God can do) Christ in the dispensation of his
Miracles frequently dispatched two works in one journey, by healing the Diseases
of Body and Soul both, as he did to the Paralytick Man, Mark 2. 4, 5. When John
the Baptist sent his Disciples to Christ with this Question, Luke 7. 20, 22.
Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another? Jesus answered and
said unto them, go and show John those things which ye do hear and see, The
Blind receive their Sight, and the Lame Walk, the Lepers are Cleansed, and the
Deaf Hear, and the Dead are Raised up, and the Poor have the Gospel Preached
unto them. Although the Apostles wrought Miracles afterward, yet they
acknowledged all to be Act. 4. 10. (...) i. e. virtute, potentia, and open.
Vatabl.
by the name of Jesus Christ. By virtue received from Christ they cured all
Diseases. And likewise where ever the Gospel took effect and prevailed it was
by the assistance of Christ. Ministers may faithfully and sedulously labor in
the work of the Gospel, and yet may not so succeed in their endeavors as to
convert Men to God: But the Lord Christ can give grace with his Gospel, and
infuse Holiness into their hearts to whom he Preaches his Holy Word. For he is
God, and cannot only command obedience, but give Grace and Ability to yield
Conformity unto his Command.

A 4th. Reason shall be drawn from the Drawn from the Institution of Ordinances.
Institution of Ordinances. God only is the Institutor of Ordinances. The
Sacraments are of Christ's Institution. Baptism has Christ's Authority and
Commission. Matt. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And as Christ
was the Institutor of Baptism, so was he of the Lords Supper. 1 Cor. 11. 23.
For I have received of the Lord that which I deliverd unto you, etc. The
Apostle acted by virtue of Christ's Commission. And Christ's Institution of the
Lords Supper is recorded: Matt. 26. 26. Mark 14. 22. Luke 22. 19. This
Institution the Apostle received from Christ: As for Sacraments devised by
Papists, such as are Penance, Extreme Unction, etc. they are none of Christ's
Institution, but rotten Inventions, and Mock-Sacraments. And they shall meet
with that censure: Isai. 1. 12. Who has required these things at your hands?
And with another suitable thereunto from Christ. Matt. 15. 9. But in vain they
do worship me teaching for Doctrines Satis liquet quicunque ex hominum
commentis cultum Dei. discunt, non modo plane desipere, sed etiam se conficere
exitiali labor. Calv. in Isai. 29. 13. Legitur appositiv^, Doctrinas, quae
sunt mandata hominum, non Dei. Vatabl. in Matthew. 15. 9.
the Commandments of Men. None has power to institute Sacraments but Christ:
The Apostle would deliver no Doctrine but that he received from Christ, Christ
sets up Church Officers: They are the Gifts of Christ, and the Fruits of his
Ascension: Ephesians. 4. 11. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors, and some Teachers: Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, these are extraordinary, and they are ceased; Pastors and Teachers
they are ordinary standing fixed Officers. We must not set up our Post by his
Post, and our Threshold by his Threshold, as the Lord complains; Ezekiel. 43. 8.
This is an high Indignity, and a great affront to God, to mix Hominum inventa
in Dei cultu impurae sunt corruptelae. Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 10. The
Affirmative part in the 2d. Commandment is, that our outward worship be as he
has prescribed it: We must make his Word our Pattern. The Negative, that we
mingle not our Will Worship with his Precept or Worship. Bp. Andr. 2. Com. Thou
shall not worship me with any device of thine own, contrary to my Will and
Nature: and the Affirmative is implied, thou shall in every respect worship me
according to my Will and Nature. Babington. 2 Com.
Humane Inventions with Divine Institutions. When Nadab, and Abihu presumed to
offer strange fire upon the Alter, they became a signal example, of
disobedience. Lev. 10. 2. Christ is the only Lord of our Consciences, the only
Institutor of his Word, Sacraments, Ministry, and all other Divine Ordinances.
His Institutions are every way perfect, and stand in no need of Addition or
Diminution.

That Text urged by the Apostle. 1. Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done
decently and in order. Beza Interprets of a decency: And Grotius against
confusion in the Church.
Yet the Original expressly declares ( what we render in order) (...). Beza.
(...), Partitis temporibus suo quisque ordine. Grotius.
according to order, Ordination or Appointment. And this seems to allude to
Exodus 39. 43. Where its said they had (...). Verse. 70.
done all things as the Lord commanded.

We might further prove the Deity of Christ from his Mission of the Holy Ghost,
Revelation of things to come, Conquering the World by the Power of his Eternal
Gospel, giving Eternal Life unto all his Children. But those foregoing
Arguments may suffice for confirmation of so clear and infallible a Truth. And
this Doctrine of Christ's Divinity is a Fort Royal, which will remain
impregnable notwithstanding all the violent Assaults and Batteries made against
it by Qui Christum no^ nisi hominem ^gnos^^nt, summ^ venerandum incarnationis
mysterium, ut purum putum figmentum blaspheme rident. Brochm. Syst. Theol. A
15. de Christo. c. 2.
Socinus and other Blasphemous Heretics.

In the 2d. place we come to treat of 2. Christ's Humane Nature.
Christ's Humane Nature. And this Proposition that Christ is Man, we shall clear
by express Scripture, and Evidence of Reason.

1. For Scripture Testimony, Christ 1. Scripture Testimony.
was the promised Seed ( i. e.) Genesis 3. 15. Per promissionem gratiae
vivificatus ost Adam: Est autem haec Ipsum semen conteret caput tuam. Est autem
Semen mulieris Christus and quicunque sunt in Christo. Melancton in Genesis
Advertendum est Hebraice haberi ipsum, ita ut semen mulieris (i. e.) Christus
demonstretur. Pet. Mart. Soli Christo contritio serpentini Capitis tribuitur,
sed Hujus victoriae suae per fidem nos facit participes. Gerrh.
the Seed of the Woman. And this was the first Promise which was ever made,
which was made in Paradise: Christ is that Child born, that Son given,
mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah c. 9. 6. called a Man; Mich. 5. 5. Zech. 13. 7.
1. Tim. 2. 5. The Son of Man; Mat. 8. 20. The Son of Mary; Luke 1. 31. Of the
Seed of Abraham; Hebr. 2. 16. Of the Seed of David. 2. Tim. 2. 8. Christ the
Eternal Substantial Word, was made Flesh, Joh. 1. 14. and he was manifested in
the Flesh: 1 Timothy 3. 16. There are two words which plainly express the Humane
Nature of Christ: One is, (...) Joh. 1. 14. he dwelt amongst us. And the other
is Phillip. 2. 7. (...) He made himself of no Evacuavit seipsum, dum immensam
divinae gloriae and munificentiae majestatem ad tempus o^mubilavit. Inanitio
ipsius nostri est adimpletio. Musc. in loc.
Reputation. For God to come down, and dwell with Men, as it were to disrobe
himself, and unite a Clod of dust to his Divine Person, here is an
unparalleled Condescension, and an evident proof of Christ's Humanity.

Add hereunto a threefold Reason drawn Proved by 3 Reasons that Christ is Man.
from the Birth, Life and Death of Christ, and in every one of these his
Manhood is fully proved.

1. For Christ's Birth, he was Gal. 4. 4.
born Drawn from the Birth of Christ.
of a Woman, and she was Isai. 7. 14.
a Virgin. A Mother and a Virgin, here is a great unparalleled Mystery. Luke ^.
35.
The Power of the Highest overshadowed her. The Conception was Matthew. 1. 20.
by the Holy Ghost. There was no concurrence of Man. As Christ's Name so was his
Birth and Conception wonderful. You have the History of Opus erat virtute
agente, and virtute non humana sed divina, ex immundis enim genitus, nec mundus
esse potuisset formaliter nec mundans efficienter. Unde ^andem quidem naturam
communicatam habere debebat, sed modo communicationi diverso debet esse ut
(...) secundum divinam n^turam, sic (...) secundum humanam ut plene responderet
typo Melchisidechi. Spanh. dub. Evang.
both; Matt. 1. 18, 19, 20, 21, etc. This is the mystery that the very Angels
desire to peep into. 1 Pet. 1. 12. Angels Proclaim it, Wisemen came from the
East to see it, All the Heathen Oracles ceased; Christ the Eternal God the
Ancient of days became became the Infant of days; he whom the Heaven of Heavens
could not contain, lay enclosed in the Virgins Womb, and when he was brought
forth he was laid in a Manger. That the Lord Christ the Eternal God should be
wrapped up in Swaddling Clothes, and became a Child; This is an Evident Proof of
his Humane Nature. The Quem Coelum and Terra benedicit, in praesepi angusto
collocatur, numeratur in saeculo qui est ante saecula: Christus Jesus heri and
hodie idem ipse and insaecula. Aug. S. p. 589. Edit. Frob.
Fathers rise high in expression of this high Mystery. Christus multis servis
in mundo minor esset; aetate, ipso mundo antiquior sine vetustate; Homo fieret,
qui hominem fecit; crearetur ex matre, qu^m creavit; portaretur manibus, quas
formavit; sugeret ubera quae implevit; in praesepi muta vagiret infantia, etc.
Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 21.
That Christ should be made of that Woman, who was made of him; that Christ
should be before all Ages, and yet born in time. These are Transcendent
Mysteries. We may not be over curiously inquisitive, lest with the Men of
Bethshemesh we smart for our curiosity: Let it suffice us to believe that which
we read in Scripture revealed, and let us acquiesce in that belief.

2. Christ's Humane Nature may be easily Christ's Humane Nature proved by his
Life.
proved by his Life. If we consider his actions of eating and drinking, and his
infirmities, (which were not sinful) of Hunger, Thirst, and Weariness, his
Weeping at Lazarus his Funeral, these are evident proofs of his Manhood. Now
Weeping, Thirsting, Hunger, and Weariness, are Infirmities, incident only to
Mankind. These and all such Infirmities (free from Sin) were incident unto
Christ. Indeed Lameness, Deafness, Blindness, and such like, which are only
incident to individuals and some particular persons, these Christ had not: But
those Infirmities, which are in Common to Mankind, as Weakness, Hunger, etc.
these Christ was subject unto. The Gospel gives many Instances, as Matthew. 4. 2.
Joh. 4. 7. Joh. 11. 35. Joh. 4. 6. I refer my Reader to the perusal of those
Scriptures.

3. Christ's Humane Nature appears by Christ's Humane Nature proved from his
Death and Passion.
his Death and Passion. The Godhead is impassible, and has neither Body, nor
Parts: But Christ assumed an humane Body. The Apostle, Heb. 10. 5. (which is
taken out of Psalm. 40. 6.) gives a full proof. -- Sacrifice and Burnt-offerings
thou would not, but a Body have thou prepared me. Christ had a real Body, and
therefore Marcion who held that Christ's Body was Fantastical, in Semblance and
show only, likewise Manes and his Followers who held that Christ brought his
Body from Heaven, and Valentinus who held that Christ had an aerial Body, and
assumed nothing of Mary, but only passed as Water through a Channel; these
Heretics with their Heresies have been long since exploded and Condemned, and
they are not worth reviving by any repetition, unless for a larger confutation.
Now the self same Body which was of the Flesh and Substance of the Virgin Mary,
was Buffeted, Scourged, Crowned with Thorns, Spit upon, Crucified: Christ as
the Apostle tells us, Phil. 2. 8. Became obedient unto Death, even the Death of
the Cross.

Object. But it will be Objected; Is this for Christ's Dignity and Honor to
become incarnate? My Argument I treat on is concerning Christ's Dignity. -- How
can Christ's Dignity and Incarnation stand together?

Answ. For Answer, Though it is a great Humiliation in Christ to be incarnate,
and to assume Humane Nature, yet his Divine Nature puts Glory and Honor upon
the Humane Nature, for what Quamvis nulla substantia digna est ut Deus induat,
quodcunque tamen induerit, ipse dignum facit* Tertull.
ever God assumes he makes honorable. Christ advances the Humane Nature, by
taking Flesh upon him: He sanctifies it, and afterward will bring it unto
Glory.

3. Let Us consider the Hypostatical Uninion, 3. The Hypostatical Union.
that Christ is God and Man in one Person, these two Natures of Christ, (
Paulus eximiam Christi commendationem habet, quaeduas in eo naturas diserte
co^fitetur. Humana natura indicatur his verbis: Ex Judaeis secundum Carnem. Nam
per carnem Phrasi Hebraica t^tus homo intelligitur. Divina natura apertissime
describitur his verbis -- Qui est super omnia benedictus in saecula. Pet. Mart.
in Romans 9. 5.
as Peter Martyr observes) are plainly set forth from Romans 9. 5. Of whom as
concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all God Blessed for ever. How
this may be understood I have read thus shadowed by a Similitude. One Tree may
be set into another, and it grows in the Stock thereof, and becomes one and
the same Tree, though there may remain two Natures, or Kinds of Fruits: So in
the Son of God made Man though there be two Natures, yet both being united into
one Person, there is but one Son of God.

There are four Quatuor haec adverbia (...) totidem haeresibus in Symbolo
Chalcedonensi opposite a sunt.
Adverbs, which oppose so many Heresies, and represent this Union, viz.
Inconfusedly, Inconvertibly, Undividedly, Unseparably.

1. Inconfusedly ( i. e.) The Natures and Proprieties of the Natures remain
still distinct: There is no change or confusion in them. When one propriety is
given to another, as when we read Christ purchased his Church Act. 20. 28.
Salva proprietate utriusque nature and in un^m co^unte personam suscepta est a
Majestate humilitas. E^ nature inviolabilis unita est passibili. Tertull.
contra Prax.
with his Blood, The Son of God Gal. 4. 4.
was made of a Woman, The 1 Cor. 2. 8. Per haec, qui erat Dei filius factus est
hominis filius assumptione inferioris non versione potioris; accipiendo ipse
quod non erat, non ^mittendo quod erat. Aug. de temp. Permanente integro statu
divinitatis assumpsit hominem Dei filius, nec amisit quod erat, sed sociavit
sibi quod in ipso non ante fuerat: invisibilis ergo secundum Divinitatem Dei
filius, visibilem suscepit hominem, immortalis mortalem, impassibilis
passi^ilem, and ut totum breviter comprehendam, Deus hominem. Aug. Sermon. 4. de
Tempore.
Lord of Glory was Crucified; we are to understand a Communication of Idioms;
for Blood, Birth and Crucifixion appertain to the Humane Nature.

2. Inconvertibly. There Is not a Conversion of the Godhead into the Manhood,
nor of the Manhood into the Godhead; God is not changed into a Man, nor Man
changed into God.

3. Undividedly, ( i. e.) one nature cannot be separated from the other; for
though there is a Distinction yet not a Division. There are not two Christ's,
nor two Persons, but one Christ, one and the same Person.

4. Unseparably. This Union remains to all eternity, Christ, Immanuel, (...),
God-Man in one Person, for so continues he for Quod semel assumpsit nunquam
dimisit. Damasc.
ever.

We are then to understand an Union of two Natures, not (as Nestorius affirms
an Union of two Persons, though the Union be personal, yet it is not of
Persons. To help us to conceive this better, some illustrate it by the Soul and
Body which make up one Man, and by Iron and Fire, where both remain in one, so
Basil: As the Sun and Light meet in one, so Justin Martyr and Athanasius. But
Similitudes are more for Illustration than Probation, and therefore I let them
pass and put no great stress upon them.

What is writ in an excellent Treatise Entitled Immanuel by an D. Usher A.
Bishop of Armagh Lord Primate of Ireland.
eminent Light of the Church of God will give abundant satisfaction, which I
have here transcribed -- For the nearer conceiving whereof we may call to mind,
that which the Apostle has taught us touching our Savior, Col. 2. 9. In him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, that is to say, by such a
personal and real Union, as does inseparably and everlastingly conjoyn that
infinite Godhead with his finite Manhood in the Unity of the selfsame
individual person. He in whom the fullness dwells is the Person. That fullness
which does so dwell in him is the Nature. Now there dwells in him not only
the fullness of the Godhead, but the fullness of the Manhood also: For we
believe him to be b^th perfect God, begotten of the Substance of hi^ Father
before all Worlds, and perfect Man* made of the Substance of his Mother in the
fullness of time. And therefore we must hold, that there are two distinct
Natures in him: And two so distinct, that they do not make any Compounded
Nature, but still remain Uncompounded and Unconfounded together. But he in whom
the fullness of Manhood dwells is not one, and he in whom the fullness of the
Godhead another, but he in whom the fullness of both those Natures dwells is
one and the same Immanuel, and consequently it must be believed as firmly, that
he is but one person. And here we must consider that the Divine Nature did not
assume an Humane Person, but the Divine Person did assume an Humane Nature.
Thus far that Reverend and Learned Author. Exinanivit seipsum formam servi
suscipiendo: Non quod aliud qu^m quod erat, fieret; (i. e) non ut mutaretur ab
e^ quod er at, sed ut seposito interim majestatis suae honor humanum corpus
in^ueret, quo suscepto salus gentium fieret. Ambros. lib. de fide, contra
Arrianos, cap. 8. Ips^ natura suscipienda erat quae liberanda. Aug. de vera
religione. Sic voluit ruinam fragilis vasis reformare, denique ut nec peccatum
hominis dimitteret impunitum, quia justus est, nec insanabile, quia est
misericors: potu^t aliter fieri quantum ad potentiam Medici, sed non potuit
commodius aut doctius praeparari, ut esset Medicina aegroti, and quantum ad
justitiam Dei. Aug. Sermon. 3. de Annunc. Domini.
St. Ambrose writes to the same sense very perspicuously.

Quest. -- But it will be asked why was it requisite that Christ should be Man?

Answ. The Answer is, that satisfaction might be made in the same Nature, Man
had offended, and Man must be Slain. This was Typified by the Dead Bird and
Paschal Lamb, and all those Levitical Sacrifices which were slain, without
shedding of Blood (says the Apostle) there is no remission, Heb. 9. 22. The
Godhead could not suffer Death, Christ as Man pours forth his Precious Blood
out of his Veins.

Quest. But why was he God and Man in the same Person?

Answ. For Answer, The Godhead gave strength and supportation to the Manhood.

The Manhood could suffer Death, but could not overcome Death: The Godhead
could overcome but not suffer, wherefore there was an happy conjunction of the
Godhead and Manhood: Christ is that middle Person in Trinity to deal between
God and Man, he himself being God to deal with his Father, and he being Man to
deal for the business with Men: So that notwithstanding the opposition of
Nestorians, Eutyches, Marcion, and other Heretics, the Truth is abundantly
cleared concerning the Hypostatical Union of Christ. -- I proceed to the Next
Chapter, wherein I shall discourse of the Offices of Christ, viz. Sacerdotal,
Prophetical, and Regal, and first of his Sacerdotal Office

CHAP. IV.
Of Christ's Sacerdotal Office.

SECT. I. Of the Properties of Christ's Priesthood.
THis Division of Christ's Offices, as a Priest, a Prophet, and a King, is
generally received, and may be evidently proved thus, for Christ had the
Holiness of a Priest, the Wisdom of a Prophet, and the Power of a King. In us
there is both Pollution and Guilt: Now Christ, as a Priest takes away both. In
us there is Ignorance, and Blindness: Christ as a Prophet, opens our eyes and
illuminates our Understandings. In us there is Rebe^lion and Disorder, Christ as
a King takes away Rebellion, and Disorder, by bringing us under Government and
Subjection to his Laws. Some were Priests and Prophets, so was Samuel; some
were Priests and Kings, so was Melchisedeck; some were Prophets and Kings, so
was David: But Christ alone was Priest, Prophet and King. These three all
together only met in Christ. A great Priest, a great Prophet, and a great King,
above all others, and after all others; he abides a Priest for ever, Psalm. 110.
4. a Prophet for ever, Mat. 28. 20. and a King for ever, Dan. 2. 44.

Of these Offices I shall treat severally, and first of Christ's Priestly
Office. Suidas relates a notable Story, That when one of their Priests were
dead at Jerusalem, the rest of the Priests met to choose another, and when many
were nominated, they could not agree in their choice, till at last (...).
Suidas in nomine (...).
one of them named Jesus, and by a common consent he was chosen Priest. I put
no weight upon this Story, but I shall keep my self within the limits of sacred
Scripture. And in handling Christ's Priestly Office, I shall represent some
distinguishing Properties between the Priesthood of Christ, and the Levitical
Priesthood; and then I shall make further inquiry into the parts of Christ's
Priesthood.

1. For the distinguishing Properties of 1. There are distinguishing Properties
between Christ's Priesthood, and the Levitical Priesthood.
Christ's Priesthood.

1. Christ is a real Priest, and his Priesthood 1 Christ is a real Priest.
a real Priesthood; The Levitical Priests were Typical, and their Priesthood
Typical. All their Sacrifices and Ceremonial Observations, were Types and
Shadows of Christ to come; so that at Christ's coming, the Shadows vanished.
Priests under the Law (as the Apostle observes) serve unto the Example and
Shadow of Heavenly things. The Ceremonies of the Law were significative, and
prefigured Christ, and his Graces. Now seeing Christ is already come, for any
of their own heads (as the Pope does) to introduce Levitical Ceremonies, this
is to prefer Moses before Christ. A Learned and judicious Qui Christianos
adigunt ad Ceremonias Judaicas, tyrannidem exercent in populum Dei, and quasi a
mortuis tributa exigunt. Non enim mortui magis liberi a Magistratuum imperio,
quam Christiani a lege Mosis. Davenant in Col. 2. 1.
Prelate fully declares his Heb. 8. 5.
mind, in this Corollary. They (says he) that force Christians to Judaical
Ceremonies, do exercise Tyranny upon the People of God, and do as it were
require Tribute of the Dead, for Dead Men are not more freed from the Command
of Magistrates, than Christians from the Law of Moses.

2. Christ is an Holy Priest, without 2. Christ is an Holy Priest.
Blemish; without Defilement: All the Sacrifices of the Law were to be without
Blemish, nothing polluted, nothing defective ought to be offered unto the Lord;
the Priest was to have no Corporal Blemish, all these were Types of the
Holiness of Christ. Christ was Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, separate from
Sinners. Christ was made Sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21. that was by Christus summus
peccator, non quod ipse commiserit peccata, sed quod ea a nobis susceperit in
corpus suum. Luth. loc. com. p. 35, 36. Heb. 7. 27. 3. Christ is an
unchangeable Priest.
imputation only. There was never Heb. 7. 26.
any guile found in his Mouth: None of his Enemies could ever yet convince him
of the least Sin. But as for Levitical Priests they were Sinners, and offered
first for their own Sins, then for the Sins of the People. But Christ offered
up himself for our Sins only, and not for any of his own Sins, because (though
he was not free from Infirmities, yet) he was free from all Sins whatsoever.

3. Christ is an unchangable Priest, for he was made not after the Law of a
Carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an Cum vitam aeternam vocat (...),
tacit praesentis vitae lubricitatem nobis subjicit. Est (...), in horas and
momenta dissolvitur morbis and morte, quando anim^ and Corporis nexus
abrumpitur, and corpus in terram unde sumptum fuerat resolvitur. At vita
Christi, qua tum ipse beatus fruitur in coelis, tum suos donabit in aeternum,
est (...). Pareus in loc.
endless life, Heb. 7. 16. Levitical Priests changed; Eleazar Succeeded Aaron;
although the Priesthood continued long, yet the Priests dyed, and the Office
was transferred upon others, but the Priesthood of Christ was unchangable, Heb.
7. 24.

4. Christ was chosen a Priest of the 4. Christ was chosen a Priest of the
Tribe of Judah.
Tribe of Judah and not of the Tribe of Levi. And this (as an eminently learned
Dr. Usher A. B. of Armagh's Sum and Substance of Christian Religion. p. 168.
Writer observes) was to show that he was no Successor of Aaron, but rather was
to abolish all the Ceremonial Services and Offices. The Apostle gives abundant
Testimony, Heb. 7. 14. Messiam oriturum a Juda docuerat Moses, Messiam autem
illum Sacerdotem futurum multus post Mosis obitum seculis docuit David. Cameron.
For it is evident that our Lord sprung out of Judah, of which Tribe Moses
spoke nothing concerning Priesthood.

5. Christ was made a Priest by an Oath, 5. Christ was made Priest by an Oath.
and so were not Levitical Priests. Heb. 7. 21. Those Priests were made without
an Oath, but this with an Oath. Christ was anointed a Priest and consecrated by
an Oath, to signify the unchangableness of his Priesthood.

6. Christ is the only Priest: The Law 6. Christ is the only Priest.
admitted Plurality of Priests, Christ is the only High Priest, the only
Sacrificer, the only Mediator. The Apostle makes a great difference between
Christ and the Priests under the Law, Heb. 7. 23, 24. And they truly were many
Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of Death, but
this Man because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood.

7. And Lastly, Christ is an Eternal 7. Christ is an Eternal Priest.
Priest. The Apostle repeats, Heb. 7. 21. what was long before declared, Psalm.
110. 4. The Lord swear and will not repent: Thou art a Priest for ever, after
the order of Melchisedeck. The virtue of Christ's Blood goes backward as high as
Adam. He was foreordain'd before the Foundation of the World, 2 Timothy 1. 9. It
goes downward to the end of the World: He must reign till all be put under his
feet, and he must raise up all by the power and virtue of his Victory over
Death, Joh. 5. 26, 29. Bishop Reynolds on Psalm. 110. Verse 4. Page 538. fol.
Other Priests dyed and saw Corruption: But Christ ever lives, and for ever
executes his Priestly Office. The virtue of Christ's Priesthood began with the
first Sinner, and continues to the last. Christ was the Lamb, slain from the
beginning of the World, Rev. 13. 8. and the virtue and efficacy of Christ's
Priesthood lasts to all Eternity. Christ admits of no Sucession, nor Change, as
Levitical Priests did. Hence we may conclude: That the Popish Priesthood of
Rome, so much contended for, may be easily overthrown: For they are not of the
Tribe of Judah, and so cannot be accounted our Saviors Successors, neither are
they confirmed by an Oath for perpetuity, likewise they are Mortal and dye, and
they are Unholy and Polluted, and therefore have no resemblance or similitude
unto the Priesthood of Christ.

SECT. II. Of the Parts of Christ's Priestly Office, and first of his
Satisfaction.
HAving set down these forementioned distinguishing Properties, I come now to
discourse of the Parts of Chrifts Priestly Office, and they are two, viz. His
Satisfaction and Intercession.

1. For Christ's Satisfaction, He is said 1. Christ's Satisfaction. Romans 3. 25.
Matt. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Heb. 13. 10, 12.
to be a Propitiation, a Ransom, and the price of our Redemption. He is not
only a Priest, but an* Altar and a Sacrifice. The Burnt-offering,
Trepass Offering, Sinoffering, Scapegoat, Dead Bird: all these mentioned in
the Book of Leviticus, related to Christ, who alone made satisfaction for the
Sins of his People.

Now this satisfaction is made up of two kinds of Obedience, viz. Active and
Passive.

1. For Christ's Active Obedience. He 1. Christ's Active Obedience.
fulfilled to a Tittle, all that the Law required. Christ was made under the
Law, and became obedient to the Law of Circumcision, he came not to destroy,
but to fulfill it. The Law required exact and perfect Obedience. It will not
abate a Tittle, but curses all the Transgressors of it. Now Christ by his
Perfect Obedience, performed whatever the Law required. No mere Man could ever
keep the Covenant of Works; Christ alone who was God and Man, fulfilled the
whole Law. Christ pleased the Father in every Matt. 3. 17.
thing. He is the Beloved Son in whom he is well-pleased. This the Apostle
fully clears, Romans 8. 3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak
through the Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and
for Sin, condemned Sin in the Flesh. And the Reason is added, v. 4. That the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit. The meaning is not, that the Law was weak in it
self, but through our default: The Law pointed at our disease, but could not
heal it. But Christ took Flesh upon him, and he by Offering himself a Sacrifice
expiated for Sin, and by his Death, was the Death of Sin: And thus the Law is
fulfilled, which requires perfect Righteousness and perfect Obedience; And only
they have interest in this great Privilege, who are not Carnal but Spiritual,
whose Walks are not after the Law of their own Lusts, but after the Law of the
Spirit of Life. Here Is a discriminating Note, -- Who walk not after the Flesh
but after the Spirit. A Learned Jus justitiae, Justificatio legis, in eo
consistit, ^^ per omnimodam cum lege conformitatem justi atque inculpati
habeamur coram Deo: Id obtineri non potuit, dum per legem peccat^m viveret ac
regnaret, sed damnatoin carne Christi peccato, atque ipsa lege damnationem hanc
approbante per plenariam Christi capitis nostri cum lege conformitatem, Justi
atque inculpati in eodem capite fatente lege habemur: nec hoc tant^m, sed ut
membra capiti sint conformia, ^^uat ex eo in nos spiritus Regenerationis, qui
in nobis quoque ipsis justificationem Legis perficiat. Is nos ita regenerat, ut
mente nostra, Lege Dei delectemur; Qu^dque in carne reliquum est peccati, ita
paulatim abolet, ut tandem sine macula ^ut labe ab ipsa lege simus agnoscendi.
L. de Dieu in Romans 8. 4.
Expositor writes appositely to this Sense, the Righteousness and Justification
of the Law consists in this, that by a through Conformity with the Law, we may
be accounted Righteous and Unblameable before God. That cannot be obtained
whilst Sin Lives and Reigns: but Sin being Condemned in the Flesh of Christ,
and the Law it self approving of this Condemnation, by the full Conformity of
Christ our Head with the Law; we are accounted Righteous and Unblameable in our
Head, even by the Testimony of the Law; nor in this only, but that the Members
may be conformable unto the Head, from him flows the Spirit of Regeneration,
which in us perfects the justification of the Law. The same so regenerates us,
that we take delight in the Law of God: And the Relics of Sin in the Flesh,
he does by Degrees abolish, that so at length we may be acknowledged by the Law
it self, without Blot or Spot. Thus far that Judicious Author: And thus it
evidently appears, that Christ has made satisfaction to Divine Justice, by his
Active Obedience in fulfilling the Covenant of Works, and yielding perfect
Obedience to the whole Law.

2. Let Us consider Christ's Passive Obedience 2. Christ's Passive Obedience.
in suffering the Wrath of God due to Man, upon the Cross. Many are the degrees
of Christ's Humiliation, as by taking Flesh upon him, as it were Uniting a clod
of Earth unto his Divine Nature, and by suffering Contempt, Ignominy, and
Reproach in the World, by taking upon him Humane Infirmities, of Weariness,
Thirst, Hunger, etc. But the highest degree of Christ's Humiliation, (whereunto
we purpose to speak) was the Death of the Cross, which was the Signal Obedience
of Christ, as the Apostle expresses it, Phil. 2. 8. He humbled himself and
became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. There Is a Gradation in
the Words: Christ humbled himself, that was much, and became obedient unto
Death, that was more, but to become obedient, even to the Death of the Cross,
that was most of all, even beyond all degrees of Comparison: For Christ to
yield up himself to Crucifixion, was a kind of Humiliation more than
Superlative.

For a more full Discourse of the Passive Obedience of Christ, let us consider,

1. The Forerunners of his Passion. 2. The Passion it self. 3. The Consequents
thereof.
From these Particulars the Pre-eminence and Exaltation of Christ, will most
evidently be Demonstrated.

SECT. III. Of the Forerunners of Christ's Passion.
1. FOr the Forerunners of Christ's 1. The Forerunners of Christ's Passion. 1.
Christ was Betrayed.
Passion.

1. Christ was Betrayed by Judas with an Hypocritical Kiss, Matt. 26. 49. Judas
one of the Twelve Disciples, was one that did eat at Christ's Table, and saw
his Miracles, and was Commissionated by Christ to Preach the Gospel; even Judas
a Disciple, Betrayed his Lord and Master.

2. Christ the Lord of Life was Arraigned 2. He was Arraigned.
before Pontius Pilate an Heathen Judge.

3. False Witnesses were Suborned to 3. False Witnesses Deposed.
Accuse him. Their Accusations are no less than Blasphemy and Treason; by the
one to Condemn him in the Civil Court, by the other in the Ecclesiastical
Court. The Blasphemy that they charge him with was, in that he said, that he
was Christ the Son of the Blessed, Mark, 14. 61. Jo. 19. 7. The Treason they
Accused him of, was, that he made himself a King, Joh. 19. 12.

4. His Disciples Deserted him. Peter 4. His Disciples deserted him.
himself followed asar off, and as soon as he was Assaulted he was Conquered,
by denying his Lord and Master, and adding Perjury to his denial.

5. Consider his great Sorrow, and 5. Consider his Sorrow, earnestness in
Prayer, and Sweating of Blood.
earnestness in Prayer, and Sweating of Blood, Matt. 26. 38, 39. Then says he
unto them, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto Death, tarry ye here, and
watch with me. And he went a little farther and fell on his Face, and prayed,
saying, Father if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me. Nevertheless not
as I will, but as thou will; As if he should say, Father, thou could, (if it
pleased thee) grant an absolute pardon, without any satisfaction, but this way
of satisfaction will only please thee: Thou will have my Blood shed, and
without shedding of Blood there is no Remission: I am here ready willingly to
lay down my Life, I have took a body for that purpose, that I may perform
Obedience to thy Will. The Apostle Heb. 10. v. 5, 6, 7. quotes the 40th Psalm.
v. 6, 7, 8. When he comes into the World he says, Sacrifice and Offerings
thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me: In Burnt-Offerings, and
Sacrifice for Sin thou had no pleasure, then said I, Lo, I come (in the
volume of thy Book, it is written of me) to do thy Will, O God. The rendering of
these Words compared with the Psalmist, differ especially in one Expression,
viz. Mine Ear have thou opened, or dug. It Is the Observation of a Learned
Ainsworth in Psalm 40. 6. Est observandum, quod plurali numero utens auresdicit,
non aurem. Nam servo una tantum auris perforatur subula, sibi dicit utramque
perforari, quia intelligit se obst^ingi non tantum ad externum obsequium, ut
servi in hoc populo, sed ad interiorem cultum; et quidem praestare illi
obsequia non possumus, nisi divinitus nobis aures perforentur. Mollerus in loc.
Expositor, That mine Ears have thou dug open or pierced (i. e.) Thou have
made me obedient to thy Voice, so the Chaldee explains it, thou have dug
open mine Ears to hearken unto thy Commandments, or mine Ears have thou bored
as thy Servant for ever, according to the Law, Exodus 21. 6. The Greek
Interpreters to make the Sense plainer, say, But a body have thou fitted to me:
Meaning that his body was ordained, and fitted to be a Sacrifice for the Sins
of the World, when the other Legal Sacrifice was refused, as unprofitable.

His earnestness in Prayer is set down by the Evangelist, Luke 22. 44. And
being in an Agony he Prayed more earnestly. (...). augescente dolor intendebat
vim precationis, gestu quoque id ipsum exprimens, nam ante genu flexerat, nunc
toto Corpore in terram procumbit. Grot. Instabat; incubuit; magno studio ursit.
Hinc innuitur Commotio, Perseverantia, Velocitas, Studium, Diligentia. L. de
Dieu.
The Word in the Original is Emphatical, Christ was in an Agony, which was the
difficultest of all Combats; Martyrs strove with the Terrors of Death, but
Christ strove with the Wrath of God, because he bare the Burden of our Sins.
O! How strong must that Back be, that must bear the Burden of all his Peoples
Sins! Even all those whom he Justified by his Blood, and Sanctified by his
Spirit.

Next follows his Bloody Sweat, Luke 22. 44. His (...), Magnus angor, Guttae.
Jansen. Non dicit sempliciter guttas sanguinis su^^sse, sed quasi grumos
concreti terrore sanguinis, and proptered addidit particulam (...) ad leniendum
id quod dixerat. Steph. These.
Sweat was as it were great drops of Blood, falling down to the ground.
Consider the Season of the Year, they who were within doors were glad to keep
close to the Fire, and they that were without Doors made have to get within. To
see one in an extreme cold day, sweat, was much, but to see one sweat Blood,
not little drops, but clodded, congealed Blood, which brake through his
Garments, and trickled down to the very ground: This is matter of Wonder and
Astonishment.

6. Consider the Releasing of Barabbas, 6. Consider the releasing of Barabbas.
a Notorious Thief and Murderer, and Condemning of Jesus, an Innocent Person,
to gratify the People in Releasing a Prisoner, (according to Custom, whom
they desired) Pilate acquitted a most infamous Person, and delivered Christ the
most Just and Holy one to their Will, to be Scourged and Crucified.

I have heard (and since read it Printed) a Passion Sermon Mr. William
Carthwright Student of Christ-Church Oxon. p. 10, 11.
of an Eloquent Orator, thus expressing himself. -- What Barabbas? One that
Cured your Blind, or Healed your Halt and Lame? No, one whose Violence maimed
them, and by the Frequency of his Injuries, occasionally increased the Number,
perhaps of those Miracles, which Jesus wrought. Did Barabbas purge the Temple
of Thieves? Or make it their Den? Did he cast out Devils? Or do Acts by the
Instigation of the Prince of them, etc.

Before Christ's greatest Passion on the Cross, he was in Scorn, hurried from
place to place, from Person to Person, from Annas to Caiaphas, from Caiaphas to
Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, and thence remanded with Contempt and Ignominy.
To make use of the Rhetoric of the forecited Learned Id. p. 26.
Author. Cruelty walking the Circle, and Impiety (if ever) now treading the
Ring: His Apprehending joined to his Agony, and his Accusation to his
Apprehen'ding, and his Condemnation to that: Then his Condemnation received by
Irrision, Irrision by Stripes, Stripes by Crowning with Thorns. So far he: Add
hereunto, Scourging, putting on a Purple Robe, and Reed in his hand, an Emblem
(as they supposed) of his Brittle and Feeble Government. All the Men and Devils
combined to put forth their Malice and Mischief to the height. They prepared
Spittle for his Face: Blind solding for his Eyes: Nails for his Hands and Feet,
a Whip for his Back: Thorns for his Head, and a Cross for his Shoulders. They
laid an Heavy Cross upon him to crush the Thorns into his Harrowed Head, and
crush out the bruised blood into his Furrowed Back. So that Prophecy, which His
verbis ad vivum exprimit dorso Eccles^e semper infixam fuisse Crucem, quia
long and late ipsam proscinderet Calv. Terra nisi aretur and subigatur, nihil
profert nisi sentes and spinas. Sic cor humanum extra Crucem, est securum and
indulget vitiis. Mollerus.
Calvin applies to the Church, may be applied to Christ, which the Psalmist
mentions, Psalm. 129. 3. The Plowers Plowed upon my Back: They made long their
Furrows.

But alas! What with Scourging, Buffeting, and Crowning with Thorns crushed into
his Head, (O dreadful exquisite Pain!) and what with Watching and Fasting,
Christ was not able to carry his Cross. Though he bare it a while, yet
afterward they compelled Simon a Man of Cyrene a Stranger, to bear his Cross.
The Jews out of a Superstitious Devotion, durst neither touch the Cross, nor
adventure to come into the Judgment Hall, no nor afterward to put Judas his 30
pieces which he restored back, into the Treasury: Because they would not defile
themselves, therefore they would not go into the Judgment-Hall; and because
they would not keep in their Treasury the price of Blood, they converted it to
another use: viz. To buy a Field to bury Strangers in: Which was called
Aceldama.

How desperate was their Qualis haec innocentiae Simulatio, pecuniam sanguinis
non mittere in Arcam, and ipsum sanguinem mittere in Conscientiam? Aug.
Hypocrisy, considering they made not the least Scruple at all, to embrue their
hands in the Innocent Blood of Christ?

SECT. IV. Of Christ's Passion.
NOw in the second place we come to the Passion it self, and this was the Death
of the Cross, a Punishment never used among the Jews. For we read only of four
kinds of Death, which were in use amongst them, viz. Strangling, Stoning, Fire
and Sword. None of these the Jews thought bad enough to inflict on Christ:
Therefore they have recourse unto the Gentiles their Enemies, to whom they were
now under vassallage, and they borrow from them, that horrid cruel Death of
Crucifixion. Pilate bad them judge him according to their Law. The Jews
therefore said unto him, It is not lawful Joh. 18. 31, 32.
for us, to put any Man to Death, That the Saying of Jesus, might be fulfilled,
which he spoke signifying what Death he should die. This Death was accounted
afterward so ignominious and cruel, that Christian Emperors caused it
altogether to be laid aside. Facinus est vincire civem Romanum, Scelus
verberare, prope Parricidium necare: Quid dicam? In Crucem tollere? Cice.
And Heathens likewise did utterly abhor the greatness of the Cruelty as beyond
Expression and Apprehension.

To aggravate the height of the Jews Malice, and the greatness of their
Cruelty, We are to consider in this Death of Crucifixion, three things, viz.
Shame, Pain, and a Curse.

1. For Shame: If one Death was more 1. The Shame of the Cross.
shameful than another, that was devised for Christ to suffer: He was Crucified
Naked: Even as Naked as he came into the World. I heard above 25 Years since a
most Reverend and most Learned Dr. Usher A. B. of Armagh.
Prelate thus express himself: Christ (says he) was Crucified Naked: Believe
not your Painters, they teach nothing that is good. Thus was Christ exposed to
the public view of all Beholders. And what shame he endured was long before
Prophesyed of, Isai. 50. 6. I gave my Back to the Smiters, and my Cheeks to
them that plucked off my Hair. I hid not my Face from Shame and Spitting. They
would not let Christ Suffer within their Heb. 13. 12.
Walls, but he Suffered without the Gate. But notwithstanding Contradictions,
Mockings, Revilings and a Shameful Death, Yet he despised the Shame, and is
Heb. 12. 2.
set down at the Right Hand of God.

2. Consider the Pain of Crucifixion. 2. The Pain of the Cross.
Such as have seen any stretched out upon a Rack, may in some Measure, (though
not sufficiently) conceive the great exquisite Pain of Extension to the utmost
on a Cross Beam. The 27th of Matthew, is a Commentary upon Psalm. 22. Wherein
read v. 14, 15, 16, 17. I am poured out like Water, and all my Bones are out of
joint. My Heart is like Wax, it is melted in the midst of my Bowels. My
Strength is dried up like a Potsheard, and my Tongue cleaves to my Jaws, and
thou have brought me into the Dust of Death. For Dogs have compassed me, the
Assembly of the Wicked have enclosed me, they pierced my Hands and my Feet, I
may tell all my Bones, they look and stare upon me; The 70 read ( pierced)
(...) they have dug. The Hands and Feet were fastened and nailed to the Wood.
The nails (which were great Spikes) were driven into the Palms of the hand, and
both his feet, where the Pain was sharpest and the Sense acutest.

Thus our Savior hung by his bare Body Matthew. 27. 46. Mark 15. 25.
upon the Cross, as upon a Rack, six Hours by the Clock, all the while in
extremity of Torment. It was not with Christ as with others, whose Sense the
greatness of the Torment blunteth, according to that usual Maxim, Excellens
sensibile corrumpit Sensum: But from the first to the last, Christ was in
perfect Sense: Notwithstanding the height of Rage and Fury, which the Jews put
forth to the utmost, no Man could take away his Life till he voluntarily
Resigned it. And therefore Joh. 19. 30. Christ said (...), It is finished, And
he bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost. And Matthew. 27. 50. Jesus when he had
cried again Hoc ipsum mirum, parumque ex communi hominum more, statim a magno
Clamore emori. Erasm. Palam ostendit, se mori non violenter, quasi nequiret se
ipse diutius in vita servare, sed propria voluntate. Nam qui moribundus valuit
Clamorem edere ingentem, valuit and a morte se servare. Impossibils est enim a
Clamore valido statim quis moriatur, si quidem morte lenta interfici^tur; Nam
qui subito conficiatur gladio, nihil mirum clamare simul and mori. Lucas
Brsiugen.
with a loud voice, yielded up the Ghost. This is called Strong crying, Heb. 5.
7. Others that were Crucified, could not utter a Word, or scarce express a
groan, being so grievously tormented: But Christ was as strong at last, as at
first, and never cried he stronger and louder, than when he gave up the Ghost.

Add hereunto the Suffering of Christ in every Sense. His Eyes which before
were Blind-folded, are now Opened, to see their insolent scornful Gestures of
wagging their Heads, and deriding of him. His Ears heard their Blasphemies,
Insultations, Revilings and Contumelious Speeches. His Taste was afflicted with
Gall and Vinegar. His Smelling was afflicted from the place Golgotha, a noisome
loathsome nasty Dunghill. His Feeling grievously suffers, by the Nails
extension, and the acuteness and Sharpness of the Sense. -- These are sad
Stories, but for our singular Consolation. Christ Suffered, and we reap the
benefit of his Sufferings. By Christ's Stripes, Wounds, and Sufferings we are
Healed: By his Cross we are Reconciled to the Father. In his Sorrows are our
Comforts: In his Sufferings consists our Salvation, and in his Cross our
Triumph.

3. Consider the Curse denounced against 3. The Curse of the Cross.
this kind of Death. Of all others, and above all other kinds of Death, a Legal
Curse was put upon this, as may appear by comparing Deuteronomy. 21. 23. with Gal. 3.
13. Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for
us; for it is Written, Cursed is every one that hangs upon a Tree. So that
Envy and Malice raised to the height, set the Jews a-work to cry Crucify him,
Crucify him. O Cursed Death! but the Curse they intended, produced the greatest
Blessing that ever was, (I mean the virtue of Christ's Cross) to all true
Believers; for hereby a perfect Col. 1. 20.
Reconciliation was wrought. Ephesians. 2. 15. Having abolished in his Flesh the
Enmity, even the Law of Commandments, contained in Ordinances, for to make in
himself, of twain, one new Man, so making peace, and that he might Reconcile
both unto God in one Body by the Cross, having slain the Enmity thereby. By the
Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, are Ceremonial Institutions to be
understood under the Levitical Paedagogy. Christ being made a Sacrifice,
abolished all those Sacrifices of Beasts: And this Christ accomplished on the
Cross, working a perfect Reconciliation between God and Man. And though the
Execution of the great work was performed on the Cross, yet about this
Reconciliation, there were Transactions between God the Father, and God the Son
from all Eternity (as the Apostle declares) 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. And has given
unto us, the Ministry of Reconciliation, (i. e.) the Gospel. And what is the
Substance of this Evangelical Ministry? It is set down, v. 19. to wit, That God
was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself.

This is that which administers cause of Glory and rejoicing to the Apostle,
Gal. 6. 14. God forbid, that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

SECT. V. Of the Consequents of Christ's Passion.
HAving treated of the Passion it self; let us consider some Remarkable
Particulars concerning the Consequents of his Passion: And these evidently
declare the dignity and honor of Christ. This shall be represented in these
ensuing Particulars.

1. There was darkness over the whole 1. There was an Universal Darkness over
the whole Earth.
Face of the Earth, Matthew. 27. 45. Partial Eclipses are frequent, but such an
Universal Eclipse (as that was) was never known before nor since Christ's
Passion. The Sun to show a dislike of such an horrid Act, withdrew its light. A
natural Eclipse it could not be, Annotat. of English Divines, on Matthew. 27. 45.
some think, it being so Total, so general, and the Moon being now in the full,
and so of necessity the Body of the Moon, (which uses to Eclipse the Sun, by
its interposition and being between us and the Sun) must be opposite unto, and
distant from the Sun, the Diametrical breadth of the Hemisphere, the full Moon
rising at the Sunsetting. Many were astonished at this Universal Eclipse.
Allophanes is reported to have been at this time in Heliopolis, who when he saw
(...).
this Eclipse, said, They were changes of the Divine Works. Dionysius the
Areopagite, is reported to say, Either the Deity suffers or has Sympathy
with that which suffers.

2. The Veil of the Temple was rent, 2. The Veil of the Temple was rent. Matthew.
27. 51.
and this was to show,

1. That Christ opened the way to the Holiest, Heb. 10. 20.

2. To show that the Ceremonial Law was abolished by the Death of Christ. Heb.
9. 8, 9.

3. To show that the Partition Wall was broken down, and Gentiles were
Partakers of the benefit of Christ's Blood, Ephesians. 2. 14.

4. To show that the Veil of our Sins was Cancelled, Col. 2. 13, 14.

5. To show that the Veil of Ignorance was taken away in the Law, 2 Cor. 3. 13.

A third Consequent of Christ's Passion 3. An Earthquake.
was an Earthquake. It was an Universal Earthquake.

We read of the trembling of the Earth. Psalm. 114. 7. It Is a Sign of Gods Wrath
for Sin, Psalm. 18. 7. Then the Earth shook and trembled, the Foundation also of
the Hills moved, and were shaken, because he was wroth. The Earth shaked and
trembled to bear such Vile Wretches, who embrued their hands in the Blood of
Jesus Christ. The Earthquake signified Gods incensed Verissimu^ est apud
Prophet as, terrae-motus alibi rerum Mutationem, alibi De^ Majestatem
significare, sed bic ^pertior est ea significatio, quae pariter a Judaeis, and
Gentibus al^^s (...) intelligi, irae scilicet Divinae ob hominum scelera. Grot.
in Matthew. 27. 51.
anger and great wrath against the Jews, and the displeasure of the Divine
Majesty of Christ, for an Earthquake sets forth the great Power of God, Psalm.
114. 7. Tremble thou Earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the
God of Jacob.

4. The Rocks rent: though the Hearts 4. The Rocks rent.
of the Jews were not rent, yet the Rocks did rend, and in such a manner, as
Historians have reported, as never was the like seen: Such a way were the Rocks
rent, as no Wit of Man could invent the like way of rending them.

5. The Graves were opened, and many 5. The Graves were opened.
Bodies of Saints, which slept, arose, Matthew. 27. 53. But though here is mention
made Qui e Sepulchris furgebant, resurgebant moriente Domino, ac mortis ejus
vi. Heinfius.
of the Saints Resurrection before Christ's Resurrection, yet it is evident, that
Christ rose before them. v. 53. it is said, They came out of their Graves, after
Christ's Resurrection. For by Christ's Resurrection they were raised. Christ (as
the Apostle says) is risen from the Dead, and become the first fruits of them
that slept, 1 Cor. 15. 20. He is the beginning of the firstborn from the dead,
Col. 1. 19.

6. The Centurion having observed 6. The Centurion gives a Testimony of Christ.
7. Christ raised himself by his own Power.
what was done, gives this Testimony, Truly this was the Son of God. Such
Miracles none but a God could do.

7. Christ raised himself by his own Power. Notwithstanding the strictness of
the Watch, and Sealing of the Stone of the Sepulcher, Christ the Lord of Life
would not be above three days in the Grave, but caused the Grave to open to the
Terror and Amazement of the Keepers.

A notorious Lie (as full of Contradictions as Malice could invent) was
invented after Christ was risen, Mat. 28. 13. Say ye, his Disciples came and
stole him away by Night, while we slept. -- How could Quomodo constare poterat
fides de co, quod se dormien^^ bus dic^ -- rent, evenisse? Deinde qua fiducia
ausi hoc fuissent homines and inermes, and Piscatores? Si Impostorem Christum
ipsi jam intra mentem animis sentiebant, sive pro ipso subirent periculum? Si a
Deo missumcr^dere^t, (...) religio illos impellebat ad furtum and m^nd^cium?
Grot. (...). i. e. Partus dolorem, cum mors nihil aliud videretur quam ipsorum
Cruciatuum ac dolorum quasi victoria, ac plenum imperium. Christus merito
dicitur, tum demum dolores istos lethales ac mortiferos superasse, cum mortuus
moriem vicit, ut in aeternum cum suis Deo vivat. Beza.
they tell, if they were asleep, that Christ was took away? What ridiculous,
absurd Evasions does a Malicious Heart invent! But maugre all the Watch and
Ward of Soldiers, Christ Triumphed over the Grave, as a Glorious Conqueror.
The Apostle fully expresses the Power of Christ's Resurrection, Acts 2. 24.
Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pain of Death, because it was not
possible that he should be holden of it. Some understand these words as a
Metaphor drawn from Childbearing. Notwithstanding Pains and Sorrows there is a
bringing forth: And though Christ suffered himself for a time to be under the
Power of the Grave, yet he being the Lord of Life, over came Death and the
Grave.

And 8thly and lastly, after this Glorious! 8. Christ Ascended into Heaven.
Resurrection follows a Glorious Ascension. He that was Crucified rose again,
and Ascended into Heaven, and there accompanied him the Saints that rose with
him, (as it is most probable) we never read of their returning into their
Graves again. Now after Christ's Ascension the Holy Ghost was sent: Gifts were
given in a plentiful Measure, Ephesians. 4. 8. Wherefore he says, when he ascended
up on high, he led Captivity, Captive: And gave gifts unto Men. Both Church
Officers and suitable Qualifications for their Offices are the Fruit and
Benefits of Christ's Ascension, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 12. 28.

Put all these Consequents and Wonderful E^^ects of Christ's Passion, viz.
Universal Darkness, the Renting of the Veil of the Temple, a General
Earthquake, the Renting of Rocks, the Rising of Saints out of their Graves, the
Centurions Confession, and acknowledgment, that Christ was the Son of God, and
Christ's Resurrection and Ascension, all these particularly and eminently
declare the infinite Dignity and Pre-eminence of Jesus Christ.

And thus having proved the first part of Christ's Priestly Office, by making
satisfaction to the Father, I come now to the second part of his Priestly
Office, by 2. Christ's Intercession.
making Intercession. Though the Pains he endured were only for a little time,
yet the virtue of his Pains abides unto Eternity. His Sufferings are of
infinite Efficacy, Dignity and Value: Christ on Earth in the days of his
Humiliation, was full of Bowels of Compassion: He fed a fainting Multitude,
healed the Diseased, wept a^ a Funeral, wept over Jerusalem, and on Earth he
pleaded for his People, and interceded to his Father for his own which were
given him out of the World. And now Christ is in Heaven, he is full of Bowels,
Heb. 4. 15. For we have not an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our Infirmities: But was in all points, tempted like as we are; yet
without Sin. But when we speak of Infirmities incident to Christ, we must
understand such infirmities, as appertain to Mankind in general, as Thirst,
Hunger, Weariness, and such like, and not such as are incident unto some
Individual as Lameness, Blindness, Deafness, (as intimated before, and shall
now be more briefly) much less may we understand any Infirmity, that has the
least tincture of Sin and Pollution. And to declare the Bowels of Christ
opened. He executes his Mediators Office now in Heaven, by making Intercession
for his Children. And this is an evident Demonstration, that Christ is an
absolute and perfect Savior, because he intercedes for all his Children unto
Eternity. As the Apostle fully declares, Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also
to save them to the utmost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make Intercession for them. To save to the utmost, is (...) (i. e.)
absolutissi-me, it a ut nihil ad eam salutem possit amplius des^derari. Beza.
(...), non dicit ut offerat; nam hoc semel fecit: sed superest altera
sacerdotii pars, nempe interpellatio, qua partim p^renni Sacrificii sui vigore
nobis pacem obtinet, partim nos non nisi in uno-ipso (...) mus, and exaudimur a
Patre, tantisper dum Deus sit omnia in omnibus. Beza.
every way a perfect Salvation. Nothing can be added thereunto. And this is
evidenced by Christ's Intercession. And this is an Eternal Intercession, as long
as Christ lives, and that is for ever. It Is a memorable Observation of Beza.
-- He does not say that he may offer, for this he did once; but there remains
the other part of Christ's Priesthood, viz. His Intercession, whereby partly by
the Eternal virtue of his Sacrifice, he obtains peace for us; partly we in him
please the Father, and are heard of him, so long as God is all in all. Our work
is to make inquiry, what this Intercession is, and what benefit we receive
thereby.

1. Let Us consider what this Intercession is, and that will fall under the
Answer to a double Question. viz. Quid Nominis and Quid Rei.

1. Quid Nominis. The Name is (...) 1. The Name (...).
and signifies properly to meet one and intercede in a way of Supplication.

2. For the thing or nature of Intercession, 2. The Nature of Intercession.
it is by Christ's applying his Merits, and presenting the Service of his
Children to his Father, as an Advocate and Mediator interposing for them, and
pleading their Cause. This is an (...), Conde^cending to our Capacities, and
not to be Non cogitandum est supplex flexis genibus, manibus expansis, Patrem
deprecari. Sed quia apparet ipse assidue cum morete and Resurrectione sua, quae
vice sunt aeternae intercessionis and vivae orationis efficaciam habent, ut
Patrem nobis conc^lient atque exorabilem reddant, merito dicitred intercere.
Calv. in Loc.
understood Literally, as if Christ on bended Knees and with stretched out
Hands did intercede, but only he presented his Prayers, Death and Resurrection,
as effectual means to obtain Reconciliation with the Father. And in this great
work of Intercession, Christ continually imploys himself in Heaven, in the most
prevailing Rhetoric; pleading the Cause of all True Believers. Therefore says
the Apostle, Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of Gods Elect?
It is God that justifies. The (...), Proprie significat in jus vocare, sed
^sitate capitur, pro ^^minari, per Metonymiam effecti destinati. Piscat.
Metaphor is borrowed from usual forms of Indictments in Courts, where
according to Law a Charge is drawn against the accused party, but now who shall
bring any of Christ's Members into Question? Let Satan and his Instruments do
their worst, and lay their Accusations as high as Malice can possibly Invent,
yet here is Christ justifying who makes void all Accusations whatsoever.

For a farther Inquiry Primo erat Christus oratione interpretativa sc.
exhibendo se and cicatrices suas quas in passione acceptas adhuc servat, and
patri ostentat, ac consequenter orat sua merita, suos labores, suas passi^nes
allegando divino conspectui. Secundo proprie Christus qua homo in cael^ orat
pro nobis, proinde ac in terris oravit. Est enim aeque ut hic Advocatus,
Mediator, and Pontifex noster, cujus proprium est orare pro populo. Corn. a Lap.
wherein this 1. Wherein this Intercession consists.
Intercession consists, we are to know,

1. This Intercession is made unto your Father. Christ presenting his merits,
does as it were show his Wounds, the Print of the Nails in his Side, Hands, and
Feet.

2. In putting up Prayers in his own Name, and making continual Supplication
unto the Father, as a Mediator, and as an Advocate, as an High Priest
interceeding for us at the Throne of Grace. Christ is the great Master of
Requests, who prefers the Petitions of his People unto his Father. The
High Priest when he was to make an atonement for the People, entered into the
Holy of Holies, with Blood and Incense: So Christ our High Priest in Heaven,
present^ his Blood and the sweet Incense of his Prayers, Rev. 8. 2. And I saw
the seven Angels which stood before God, and to them were given seven Trumpets.
And another came and stood at the Altar, having a Golden Censer, and much
Incense was given to him, that he should offer, etc. Heb. 9. 12, 23, 24.
Neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood he entered in
once into the Holy place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us. v. 23, 24.
It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the Heavens should be
purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better Sacrifice
than these. For Christ is not entered into the Holy places made with Hands,
which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in
the presence of God for us.

Q Let us inquire into the fruit and benefit 2. Benefits of this. Intercession.
1. We are acquitted from all our Adversaries.
of this Intercession.

1. We are acquitted from all Adversaries, even from Sin, Satan, and the Law;
having interest in the Intercession of Christ, we are freed from all
Accusations and Condemnations of the greatest Adversaries, Qualis est ista
incercessio, non oral^^ sed real^^, ex mera suipsius in cruce oblati
repraesentatione. Hinc est quod dicitur comparere cor^ Deo pro nobis. D. Tuis.
Vindic. l. 1. part 2. Sect. 23.
Romans 8. 34. Who is he that Condemns, it is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
Intercession for us. Here are four things to acquit all Believers from
Condemnation, viz. Christ's Death, Resurrection, Ascension and Intercession.
Christ died to give Life unto his People: He rose again and became the first
Fruit of them that slept: Christ Ascended on high, and gave gifts to Men, and
he interceeds at the Throne of Grace, presenting his Bloody Sufferings and the
virtue of them unto the Father for a full and complete satisfaction.

2. Christ by his Intercession teaches 2. Christ by his Intercession teaches
us to Pray.
us to pray, and to make our Intercessions and Supplications unto the Throne of
Grace. We of our selves cannot put up one Meritorious Petition, though we might
gain the whole World for so doing. For we pray coldly, rawly and indigestedly,
with much deadness, disorder, and distraction of Spirit; but these Prayers come
not so to God the Father as they are presented by us, for Christ mends them in
the carriage, and presents them in his own Name unto the Father, and for his
Romans 8. 26. Quasi dicat, cum mole tentationis oppressi nescimus orare: ipse
spir^tus qui in nobis habitat exerit se and orationem in animo excitat. Bucer
in Loc. 3. Through Christ's Intercession our duties and works obtain acceptance.
sake alone we obtain acceptance with the Father: Christ interceeds to the
Father for us, and his Spirit helps our Infirmities, and makes intercession
for us with Groanings which cannot be uttered. The Spirit of Christ does two
great works: One is to make intercession for us, and the other is to help us to
make intercession for our selves. By the assistance of the Spirit, we can Pray
and Sigh and Groan in such prevailing Rhetoric as will obtain acceptance, but
without the assistance of the Spirit, we cannot Pray nor express our selves in
any acceptable manner.

3. Through Christ's intercession our Duties and works obtain acceptance. As for
our selves and our own righteousness we have great cause to confess with the
Church, Isaiah 64. 6. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousnesses are as filthy Rags: But through Christ's Reconciliation and
acceptance, our works obtain acceptance. Though there be no worth in the work
nor in the workers, yet there is through Christ acceptance and imputation, a
worthiness accounted of in the sight of God; as Joshua was to have his filthy
Garments took from him, Semper in animum sibi revocent verbi divini precones,
impositum sibi esse cidarim mundam cui inscriptum sanctitas Jehovae: and
proinde ei studeant ipsi, ut and ali^ idem faciaut hortentur sedulo ut sint
typi fidelium. Tarnovius (...) habet, quo significat spiritum singulari
contentione and studio intercedere pro sanctis. Buceru. in Loc. Una sublevat
infirmitates nostras, quasi dicatur ipse vicissim onus attollere, ex altera
part, ne sub eo fatiscamus. Ut sensus sit, sicut spiritus S. un^ cum Patre and
filio, testatur spiritui nostro nos esse filios Dei, similiter idem spiritus
cum ^sdem opitulatur infirmitatibus nostris. L. de Dieu.
Zech. 3. 4. So in the best of our duties, there is filthiness, and we stand in
continual need of the inestimable benefit of our Intercessour, who takes away
our Pollutions, and not only acquits us from the Guilt of Sin, but cleanses us
from the filth of Sin: He does purge us as well as pardon us, and sanctify us
by his Spirit, as well as justify us by his Righteousness: Hence it comes to
pass that the services of all such ^s have interest in Christ are accepted at
the Throne of Grace; and though in us there are many weaknesses and
Imperfections, yet Sincerity is accepted. And though there are manifold
failings in our Duties, yet all are made perfect through the perfect
satisfaction of Christ; for he as a surety has paid our Debt and fully
satisfied the Father by doing and suffering all that the Law required. Christ
is the Beloved Son in whom the Father is well pleased, Mat. 3. ult.

CHAP. V.
Concerning Christ's Prophetical Office.

SECT. I. Why Christ must be a Prophet.
HAving insisted largly on Christ's Sacerdotal Office, I come now to his
Prophetical and Regal Office, and I shall be more brief in the handling of
these, not intending a just volume of this Argument: only so far I may enlarge
as may afford good Measure full pressed and running over for the further
Demonstration of the Doctrine that I insist upon, viz. The inestimable Dignity
of Christ.

In the 2d. place it follows that I should 2* Of Christ's Prophetical Office.
treat of Christ's Prophetical Office, Christ is called Deuteronomy. 18. 5. Christus
dicitur Nabi Propheta: est autem Nabi usu scripturae is qui profundiora de Deo,
deque rebus divinus disserit, qui mentem divinam hominibus aperit: saepius
etiam de iis usurpatur, qui futura praedicunt. Sol. Glass. onomat.
the Prophet, he was the Doctor of all Doctors, a Doctor that nonplust the
greatest Doctors. Christ is the Lawgiver, Jam. 4. 12. The Counselor, Isa. 9.
6. The Master or Rabbi, Matt. 23. 10. He taught with Authority, and by virtue
of his Prophetical Office he teaches the Church all things appertaining to
their Salvation. Christ reveals the Will of his Father, concerning all the ways
and means of Salvation. Christ was the principal Author of Prophecy; He had the
Gift of Prophecy immediately, he exactly knew his Fathers will, but all other
Prophets had the Gift, mediately. They had their Revelations from the Power of
the Spirit of Christ, their gift was transient, and by Intervals, and there
were Intermissions amongst them: But Christ had a permanent gift of Prophecy
abiding in him, without measure and limitation.

For a farther enlargement of these Particulars, I shall endeavor to resolve
three Inquiries.

1. Why Christ must be a Prophet.

2. How he differs from all other Prophets.

3. What fruits and benefits accrue unto us by Christ's Prophetical Office.

1. Why Christ must be a Prophet. 1. Why Christ must be 2 Prophet. 1. Christ
was a Prophet to reveal the Will of God to his Church.


This I shall Answer in a few Reasons.

1. Christ was a Prophet to reveal the Will of God to his Church, and instruct
them by his Word. Christ received his Message not only from the Mouth of God*
Joh. 8. 26. but also from the In sinu esse est proximum, and infimum esse
dicitur de conjugibus inter se. Grot. 2. Christ was a Prophet to place
Ministers in his Church.
Bosom of God, Joh. 1. 18. Christ was a great Prophet, Luke 7. 16. He was the
most eminent of all Prophets, a Prophet to direct all other Prophets, and he
was the substance and main end of all their Prophecies.

2. Christ was a Prophet to place Ministers in his Church to teach his People*
Ministers are of Christ's institution, Officers Commissionated by Jesus Christ:
They are not a Calling nor an Order of Men of their own appointment running
upon their own Heads, and Fancies, (as Novatus made himself a Bishop) neither
are they of any humane appointment for politic ends and interests. It is true,
that by Humane Authority Ministers are permitted pro hic and nunc to exercise
their Ministerial function in the places where they live, yet their calling is
from Christ's Institution. And Gifts and Qualifications wherewith they are
endowed, are the fruits of Christ's Ascension. The Apostle is clear, Ephesians. 4. 11.
And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, and for the edifying of the Body of Christ. In this Text we observe
two sorts of Church Officers, viz. Extraordinary as Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Doctoris munus fuit verbum Domini fideliter explicare, and veluti
Scholam Eccles^asticam regere, ut sincera doctrina dogmatum et verae
interpretationes in Ecclesia retinerentur: At pastorum (qui and Episcopi
dicebantur 1 Pet. 2. 25.) munus long latius patebat, nimirum ut verb^ and
orationi vacarent, et ecclesiam sibi commissam modis omnibus tuerentur; ex
quibus etiam satis perspicitur haec d^o munera perpetua esse ^portere in
Ecclesia Dei. Beza.
which were changeable, and for a time only, and afterward ceased; and
ordinary, as Pastors and Teachers, which are standing Officers, and abide to
the end of the World: So that maugre all the malicious Oppositions of Men and
Devils against the Gospel Ministry, it shall continue: Though it may be laid
low, yet it shall never be overthrown, neither shall Christ's Ministers be ever
laid aside, for Christ has promised them his presence* And that promise,
Matthew. 28. 20. -- Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the World, makes
more for the Ministry of the Gospel, than all the malice and fury of
inveterate implacable Adversaries can make against them.

3. Christ was a Prophet to teach his 3. Christ teaches inwardly.
Church by the inward effectual Teachings and Inspirations of his Spirit. This
grand Prophetical work Christ undertook from the beginning of the World, 1 Pet.
3. 19. Christ by his Spirit went and preached unto the Spirits in Prison. This
is to be understood of the old World, who though they were then in Prison, ( i.
e.) Hell, when the Apostle wrote this Epistle; yet in the days of Noah they
were alive, and Christ by the Ministry of Noah and others; Preached unto them,
whilst they were in the Land of the Living. Those abominable Sinners had means
of Grace offered unto them: They had the Ministry of Noah, Enoch, Methuselah,
and other Patriarchs who warned them of a Deluge coming. And Christ by his
Spirit Preached unto them. An ancient Father and a modern Divine, both eminent
in their times, fully (as I apprehend) expound this Scripture. -- One says --
Per Spiritus in Carcere intelligit animas impiorum viventium tempore Noah
corporibus inclusas quasi carcere quodam, and his praedicasse Christum dicit,
secundum divinitatem, vel per interna^ inspirationem, vel per linguam Noae.
Aug. Epist. 99. ad Evodium. Non potest dubitari quin hoc referatur ad ea quae
sequuntur, i. e. ad illud tempus quo Spiritus per os Noae arcam constituendi
iram Dei imminent^ praedicabat. Nam cui fuerunt immorigeri? Cert^ illi qui
praedicabat. Non potest ergo pr^dicatio ista ad posterius aliquod tempus
referri. Beza.
By Spirits in Prison, he understands the Souls of wicked Men living in the
time of Noah, shut up in their Bodies, as in a certain Prison, and he says
that Christ Preached unto them according to his Divinity, or by inward
inspirations, or by the Tongue of Noah. -- So far that Learned Father. The
other says, that it cannot be doubted, why his may not refer to those things
which follow (i. e.) unto that time wherein the Spirit by the Mouth of Noah
that made the Ark, Preached the wrath of God hung over their heads. For to whom
were they disobedient? Truly to him that Preached; therefore that Preaching
cannot be referred to any after time. -- There was no Preaching to them after
they were in Hell. All Reproofs and Exhortations then are out of date, for time
is past, and the door of hope shut. But now whilst we are on this side the
Grave, the Spirit of Christ moves, wooes and entreats us to make our peace with
God. Christ sends his Ambassadors to beseech us to be reconciled unto God. Now
we are called 2 Cor. 5. 20. Is. 55. 6.
to seek the Lord whilst he may be found, now to call upon him while he is
near. And thus you have the Reasons why Christ must be a Prophet.

SECT. II. How Christ differs from other Prophets.
A Second Inquiry is, how Christ differs 2 How Christ differs from other
Prophets.
from all other Prophets?

A. We read of many Holy Prophets, high in the Favor of God, and Honorable
Persons; yet in Christ there are these three Singularities above all other
Prophets whatsoever, viz. Holiness, Gifts, and Authority. Although other
Prophets were Holy, and had Gifts and were of Authority, yet the Holiness,
Gifts and Authority of Christ infinitely exceeded them all.

1. There Is in Christ an absolute perfect 1. Christ's Holiness is absolute and
perfect.
Holiness without mixture of the least imperfection. Christ's Holiness is in
himself and from himself, but the Holiness of the Prophets was derivative, they
had it infused into them by the Spirit of Christ: And although they were Holy
Persons and Honorable Men of God, Anointed and Sanctified for the Discharge of
their grand and weighty Office, yet they were not without their sinful
Infirmities. We read that Jeremy in a great Passion cursed the day of his
Birth. Abraham a Prophet, through Infirmity, denied his Wife. And David a great
and eminent Prophet committed those scandalous Sins in the matter of Vriah, and
Jonah a Prophet Fretted and Quarrelled with God himself, and Moses a Holy
Prophet, whom God highly loved, spoke unadvisedly with his Lips at the Waters
of Meribah, and other Prophets had their failings. But Christ is a Prophet, who
never committed any thing Luke 23. 41. (...). Doctissimus Hesychius (...)
interpretatur. Walleus, (...) videntur proiisdem. Hic p^rro videtur (...) dici
quic(...) praeter officium sit, quod non male videtur indecentis nomine
exprimi. ^^za.
amiss. The Penitent Thief gives a true Testimony of Christ -- That he had done
nothing amiss (i. e.) nothing out of place or order. No guile, no deceit was
ever found in Christ's Mouth. He challenges the worst of his Adversaries, John
8. 46. Which of you convinces me of Sin? Malicous and implacable Enemies are
very Eagle-Ey'd, to espy Faults, yet none of them could lay any Sin to the
charge of Christ.

2. Christ's Gifts are transcendent above 2. Christ's Gifts are transcendent.
all other Prophets: The Gifts in them were like a Drop, in Christ, as the
Ocean; in their Gifts was only a measure, in Christ a fullness. The Prophets
were a^ointed and qualified with great Gifts for ^he discharge of their
employment: But Christ was anointed with the Oil of glad^ss above his fellows,
Heb. 1. 9. Christ did ^ot receive Gifts by measure, after such a ^int and
proportion, but it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell,
Col. ^. 19. All fullness of Wisdom, all fullness of Righteousness, all fullness of
Holiness, ^ll fullness of Grace, and all fullness of Glory are in Christ.

3. Christ's Authority is Omnipotent: 3. Christ's Authority is omnipotent.
We read of the teaching of Christ, far different from that of the Scribes,
Matthew. 7. 29. For he taught them as one having Authority, and not as the
Scribes. Other Prophets and Teachers labored all Night, and spent their
strength often in vain, yet this comfort they reaped, that their Judgment was
with the Lord, and their Work with God. Hereupon the Prophet grounds singular
comfort from Isai. 49. 5. Though Is. 49. 5. Sensus est, etiamsi Israel ad meum
monitum nolit converti, ego tamen Deo placebo, qui scit me in officio non
fuisse cessatorem. Grotius.
Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the Eyes of the Lord, and
my God shall be my strength. Here then consists a vast difference between the
Authority of Christ and all other Prophets; other Prophets reproved, exhorted
and entreated, but Christ commanded obedience, and enabled People to obey his
Commandments. The Authority of Christ was incomparable, for what he commanded
them to do, he gave them Strength and Ability to perform. Christ perfectly knew
his Fathers will, and he commanded and enabled the Hearts of People, to yield
ready obedience thereunto; and no other Prophet could attain to so great a
perfection.

SECT. III. Of the Fruits and Benefits that accrue unto us, by Christ's
Prophetical Office.
WE are now thirdly to enquire 3. The Fruits and Benefits of Christ's
Prophet^cal Office. 1. By Christ's Prophetical Office we are fully assured that
we have a sure Word of Prophecy.
concerning those choice and excellent Fruits, which we reap by Christ's
Prophetical Office. Amongst others these two principally I shall insist upon,

1. By Virtue of Christ's Prophetical Office, we are fully assured, that we
have a sure word of Prophecy to rest and rely upon; we are not left at random
to unwritten Traditions, nor to humane Inventions, and devised ways of Men; we
are not left to Apocryphal Writings, and uncertain and fallible Dictates, of
such Imposers, who magisterially command, and obtrude their own Brain-Fancies,
and (as it was applied to the Pharisees) teach for Doctrines, the Traditions of
Men. But Mat. 15. 9. His verbis aufertur omnis fiducia, quam positam habebant
in observanti^ humanarum traditionum. Nam credebant se Deum colere si illas
obser^^ssent, and qui eas docebant, praeteribant cultu^ Dei. Deus contra
per^gat se hoc pacto coli, and omnem hunc cultum respuit. Musculus in loc.
what Christ teaches us, is sure and certain, and not left to the pleasure of
Men or Angels to change. For we read, Gal. 1. 8. But though we, or an Angel
from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed. And the Apostle tells us of a sure word of
Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1. 19. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye
do well that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, until
the day dawn, and the day star arise in your Hearts. This Word of Prophecy is
the Gospel of Christ, and it is said to be more sure ( i. e.) more sure than
those Revelations which were not Foundations of Faith, or more especially in
regard of the greater credit, which the believing Jews gave to the Doctrine of
the Apostles, than that of the Prophets of old. The dark place is Vid. Diod. in
loc.
meant our Hearts, and the Day Star is Christ; who shining in our Hearts, and
illuminating us by his Spirit, scatters away Mists and Darkness.

2. By virtue of Christ's prophetical 2. By Virtue of Christ's Prophetical
Office we have a divine Uncti^^, or Spiritual ^^umination.
Office, we have a divine unction or Spiritual Illumination, whereby the eyes
of our Mind are opened, to understand the Mysteries revealed in the Gospel.
Christ not only reveals his Will, and declares his Covenant of Grace in his
Word, but he teaches us to understand, believe and obey the same. The Gospel
is a Mystery, and only he that is anointed with Eye Salve from Christ can
discern it. The Gospel is a Book sealed, to ignorant carnal Men. Take a natural
Man in his best Accomplishments of Nature, yet he neither receives nor
perceives the things of the Spirit of God, Rerum supernaturalium and mysterii
evangelici, non esse cognitionem aliquam naturalem, aut naturae viribus
acquisibilem, etc. Vid. Doctorem Reynoldum, in conc. cui tit. Animalis homo.
1 Cor. 2. 14. A Beast may as soon understand Reason, as a natural Man (whilst
he remains so) the saving things of God: Spiritual things are beyond his Ken
and beyond his Cognizance. But a Spiritual Man judges all things, v. 15. He
has his Eyes in his Head, his Senses exercised, an Unction whereby he knows
all things, 1 John 2. 20. He knows all things necessary to Salvation; for
Christ is his Teacher, Christ is that great Prophet who instructs his Church:
the great Rabbi and Master, that teaches as never any Man taught. He is a
Counselor, Isa. 6. 9. The Wisdom of the Father; Therefore we must go to Christ
for Wisdom: He teaches us that divine Wisdom that comes from above. In our
Doubts, let us go to Christ for Counsel; In our Distress, let us go to Christ
for Comfort: He is both a Counselor, and a Comforter. And by virtue of
Christ's Prophetical Office, we have light in our Understandings. This is
Christ's Gift, Ephesians. 5. 14. This was prophesied, Isa. 60. 1. Arise, shine, for
thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. This Prophecy
relates to the glorious Light breaking forth, in the days of the Gospel. And
this was the end of Christ's coming, to give light to them that sit in
darkness, Luke 1. 79. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy
people Israel, Luke 2. 32. Hence we obtain renewed Spirits, enlightened
Judgments, a Spirit of discerning, to discern between things that differ. These
are the Fruits of Christ's prophetical Office. All things necessary for
Salvation are taught in the Word of Christ, and by the Spirit of Christ. The
Word is a Lamp, and the Spirit directs us in the use thereof. The Spirit
works by the ministry of the Word. We have no warrant for inward teachings by
a Light within us (as some strangely fancy) Thus we may discern, whether that
Light which is within them (as they say) be a true or false Light, for if it be
true, it borrows its Light from the Lamp of the Sanctuary, even the written
Word of God, and accordingly walks. Otherwise that inward pretended Light,
which derives not its Light from God's Word, is an Ignis fatuus, and will lead
the Followers into bypath and dangerous Ways. Wherefore let us be exhorted to
keep close to the Word of God, which is the Gospel of Reconciliation, and the
Gospel of our Salvation; and let us be earnest Solicitors unto Christ the great
Prophet, that he would assist us by his Spirit, to understand his Will,
revealed in his Word. Let Us go to God for Wisdom and Illumination, James 1. 5.
If any of you ^ack Wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives to all Men
liberally, and upbraideth none. Here are two great encouragements.

1. God is a most liberal Donor, he (...). Isocrates.
gives liberally; though Men expect great Rewards for their Counsel, yet God
most liberally gives Counsel: Men may give good Counsel, but cannot compel
them to whom it is given, to take and follow it. But God can open the Eyes and
Heart, and direct the Feet, and order and guide the whole Man, and work
Obedience.

2. God upbraideth none. It often times falls out amongst Men, that if they do a
Kindness, they upbraid them with it who are the Receivers. But it is not so
with God, he does not exprobrate nor hit us (as we say) in the Teeth, either
with present Defects or former Failings. And if Men be constant Suitors to
great Persons, they will soon be weary of their Company. But God does not
upbraid his People, notwithstanding their frequent addresses to him. Here then
is singular encouragement to make our Applications frequent and serious, to
this great Prophet, our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would take away the Scales
of Darkness, and Veil of Ignorance, from our Understandings, and instruct us in
his Will, and guide us by his Almighty Counsel, till at length he bring us unto
his Glory.

CHAP. VI.
Of Christ's Kingly Office.

SECT. I. Proving that Christ is a King.
HAving before handled the Priestly and Prophetical Offices of Christ, I shall
now treat of his Kingly Office. And in this method I shall proceed. 1. To prove
Christ to be a King. 2. Lay down Reasons why Christ is a King. 3. To represent
our Duty to Christ as our King.

1. To prove Christ to be a King, there 1. Christ is proved to be a King by
Scripture Prophecies and the accomplishment of them. Praeficerem Regem meum
Messiam populo meo Israelitico, ut illi nomine meo imperaret. Vatablus.
are many Prophecies extant, particularly Psalm. 2. 6. Yet have I set my King
upon my holy Hill of Sion. This plainly declares Christ to be King of his
Church. The Prophet Isaiah calls him the Prince of Peace, Isa. 6. 8. And to
distinguish Christ's Government from all other Kings whatsoever, he sets forth
the perpetuity of Christ's Government, ver. 7. Of the increase of his
Government and Peace there shall be no end. Further, I Will cite the same
Evangelical Prophet, prophesying of Christ's Regal Government, and the great
Security we shall obtain thereby, Isa. 32. Quod si vere dictum fuit de Ezechia,
multo magis de Christo, quem optimum ac potius unicum refugium habemus in his
procellis, quibus nos agitari necesse est quamdiu in hoc mundo versamur:
quoties ergo torremur aestu, sub ejus umbram nos recipere discamus. Calv.
1, 2. Behold a King shall reign in Righteousness, and Princes shall Rule in
Judgment, and a Man shall be as a hiding place from the Wind, and a cover from
the Tempest, as Rivers of Water in a dry place, as the Shadow of a great Rock
in a weary Land. This King, this Man is Christ who shall judge righteous
Judgment, who shall abundantly secure, protect and preserve his people from the
violence of their malicious Adversaries. When Herod enquired of the chief
Priests and Scribes where Christ should be born, they gave their answer out of
the Prophet Micah c. 5. 2. But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little
among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that
is to be Ruler over Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from
everl^sting. Upon this Answer given from this Scripture by the chief Priests
and Scribes, Herod supposed that a King should be born to depose him; therefore
he barbarously murdered the young Children. In that Text two things are
principally observable.

1. Christ's Incarnation, out of these Words, Thou Bethlehem (i. e.) out of
thee shall Christ come; there Christ was born. Though Christ's Mother and
Joseph her espoused Husband did not live in Bethlehem; yet God by his
Providence so ordered it, that Joseph and Mary came at that time to Bethlehem,
to be taxed* and there Mary brought forth Christ. Prophecies of Christ shall
not want accomplishment, but many have been already, others shall be fulfilled
in their season.

2. Here Is evidently set forth Christ's Kingly Office -- He is called the Ruler
over Israel. The People would have made Christ a King, at that time he refused
it, and went his way, John 6. 15, 16. Christ's Kingdom was Spiritual, not of
this World. The People blessed him Joh. 18. 36. Hoc dicit Christus refellens
laesae Caesaris Majestatis and affectati Regni criminationem, R^gem se esse
prof^tens, simul ac negans, ut qui Rex quidem esset, verum ea gubernationis
ratione, quae prorsus a Regum hujus mundi imperio differat, nempe quae est
Ecclesiae suae Caput. Beza.
as a King, Luke 19. 38. Blessed be the King that comes in the Name of the
Lord, Peace in Heaven and Glory in the Highest. Christ being demanded of Pilate
whether he was a King, answers, John 18. 37. Thou say that I am a King, and
for this cause came I into the World, that I should bear Witness unto the
Truth. Insomuch as Pilate wrote a Title, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.
And notwithstanding the Chief Priests importuned Pilate to alter the Title, and
Write -- He said I am the King of the Jews; Pilate was peremptorily resolved
against all alterations, John 19. 22. What I have Written I have Written; he
would stand to what he had writ, and would not blot any thing out.

SECT. II. Why Christ must be a King.
NOw there are many Reasons to be Sect. 2. Why Christ must be a King. 1. Christ
is 2 King to appoint Laws and Statutes.
alleged why Christ must be a King. Three only I shall insist upon.

1. That Christ might appoint Laws and Statutes, which should direct his
People, and bind their Consciences to the Obedience of the same. Christ alone
is the Lord of our Consciences; what he commands is of absolute Authority, not
to be disputed, but obeyed. But as for the Popes Canons and other obtruded
Inventions against the Law of Christ, they are of no estimation; only the Law
of Christ is authentic, and all other Laws must be in Subserviency and
Subordination to the Law of Christ. Wherefore the Pope has presumptuously
invaded Christ's Kingly Office, by pretending himself to be the Head of the
Church, and Christ's Vicar, and so making Laws to bind the Conscience. But
Christ is the only Head; he is called (...), with a demonstrative Article, he
and no other is the Head, as the Apostle mentions, Col. 1. 18. And all other
Heads and Rulers must yield subjection and Homage unto Christ; they must Reign
for Christ, as they Reign by Christ; Prove. 8. 15, 16. By me Kings Reign and
Princes decree Justice; By me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of
the Earth.

2. Christ is King to Rule and Govern, 2. Christ is King to Rule and Govern and
Command Obedience to all his Laws. 1. Christ's Kingdom is Spiritual.
and Command Obedience, and keep his Subjects in Obedience to his Laws: But we
must know that the Kingdom of Christ is a Spiritual and an Eternal Kingdom.

1. Christ's Kingdom is Spiritual, he is King of his Church, and Rules and
Governs the Spirits of Men. It was a curious Question of the Apostles, Acts 1.
6. Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? They fancied a
Temporal Kingdom and Earthly Preferments; but Christ checks their curiosity in
asking, and mistake in fansying outward Dignities and Honors to themselves, by
any Temporal Government of Christ. For Christ said unto them, v. 7. It is not
for you to know the times and the seasons, which the Father has put in his own
Power. There are many that oppose Christ's Kingly Office: The Jews say, Christ
shall be an Earthly King, and bring them again into their old inheritance, the
Land of Canaan, and settle them there, and bless them with abundance of Earthly
Blessings. The Papist deny Christ's Kingly Office, for they make the Pope Head
and Supreme Judge in matters of Spiritual Cognizance. And another sort there
are who say there shall be a Personal Reign, and Christ shall destroy all
Monarchies, and live Gloriously on Earth with his Saints. But Christ himself
plainly overthrows these Opinions by his own Words, John 18. 36. Jesus
answered, My Kingdom is not of this World; If my Kingdom were of this World,
then would my Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews, but
now is my Kingdom not from hence. Christ by his Kingly Authority appointed
Church Government, 1 Cor. 12. 28.
and appointed Church Officers and Church Censures; And that dreadful Sentence
of Excommunication rightly given is an Ordinance of Christ. Christ has left
his Church destitute of nothing conducing to the Right Government thereof.

2. Christ's Kingdom is Eternal, and this 2. Christ's Kingdom is eternal.
is a Kingdom of Glory. All other Kingdoms shall have their Periods: But the
Kingdom of Christ shall never have an end. The Kingdom of Christ is an
everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion is from Generation to Generation; and
this Kingdom Dan. 4. 3. 2 Pet. 1. 11.
is called the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: By
which Scriptures (not to name any farther Proof) it evidently appears that the
Kingdom of Christ lasts to all Eternity; when all Kings shall yield up their
Scepters to Christ, and all earthly Monarchies shall fail (which I believe will
not be till the day of Judgment) Christ shall Reign (though I cannot understand
personally on Earth, yet) I believe eternally in the Heavens.

3. Christ is King to Protect, Defend 3. Christ is King to protect, defend and
preserve his Church.
and Preserve his Church from the Violence and Outrage of Enemies both
Corporal and Spiritual. Christ has promised his Presence to his Church, Matthew.
28. 20. Lo I am with you always even unto the end of the World. The perpetuity
of Christ's presence is a preservative from the fury of Enemies: Although
Enemies may make Bulworks and raise Batteries against the Church, yet they
shall not be able to prevail against her. Christ told Peter, Matthew. 16. 18.
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it. Papists hence claim an infallibility of
Peter's Chair, and that he was chief Bishop of Rome, (which none of them could
ever prove to this very day, not so much as he was ever at Rome, much less
chief Bishop there.) But Ambrose, Chrysostom and others of the Learned
Fathers, understand by the Rock, not Peter's Person, but the Profession of
Peter's Faith; It Is said, Super hanc petram, non super hunc Petrum, for Christ
built his Church upon the Faith, and not upon the Person. Learned Expositors as
Lyra, Hugo de sancto Victore, Ferus, all these, though of the Romish Party,
expound the Rock to be Bp. Morton's Appeal* L. 2. Cap. 17.
meant Christ, as a Reverend and eminently Learned Prelate declares. Let the
worst of Enemies put forth their rage to the utmost, and in their Malice and
Fury endeavor the Destruction of the Church; yet the Church shall prevail
against them. The Church is under Persecution, but like a Vine it thrives by
bleeding. What Is the reason, but because God is the Protector and Defender of
his Church, Christ is the King of it? There are many comfortable promises for
the preservation of the Church. One is Isa. 4. 5. Upon all the Glory Diligent^r
not andum est quia monemur non aliter gratiae Dei nos fore participes, quam
siejus imaginem gestemus, ac in nobis reluceat cjus gloria. Calv*
shall be a defense. -- By the Glory is meant Gods People, for they are his
Glory, and are made Partakers of his Glory: God first makes them Glorious, and
then accounts them his Glory, and upon them the Lord will be a defense or
covering. Another Promise is Isaiah 27. 2, 3. In that day sing ye unto her a
Vineyard of Red Wine, I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment lest
any hurt it, I will keep it Night and Day. There are two things especially
prejudicial to a Vineyard: The one is drought and want of Water to refresh it:
The other is a violent breaking in either of Man or Beast, to pluck off the
^rapes and destroy the Branches; against both, God promises his Gracious
Protection: God waters it and keeps it; his refreshings and defense are
abundant security. A third Promise (to name no more) Non tantum est Ignis
adversarios terrens and devorans si accesser^nt prop^^s, sed and murus qui and
undiquaque tegit.
i^ Zech. 2. 5. For I, says the Lord, will be unto her a Wall of Fire round
about, and I will be the Glory in the midst of her. Here Is a wonderful
Protector: A Wall of Fire is such an impregnable defense, as Enemies dare not
venture thorough it: And God by his presence makes his Church Glorious: And not
one of these Promises but have partly already, and shall further be
accomplished in the days of the Gospel: Witness all Ages wherein the Church
has suffered Persecution, and notwithstanding Fire and Sword, the Gospel has
flourished and the Church prevailed. Those famous Waldenses, Wicklevites,
Lollards, and others of later date bare Testimony to the Truth, maugre all the
violent oppositions of their Adversaries. Christ is King, and will go on
conquering and to conquer. Some he bends and makes them willing and obedient
Subjects to his Scepter, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy People shall be willing in the day
of thy power, or more suitable to the Original, a people of willingness. Others
Christ breaks to pieces: Psalm. 2. 9. Thou shall break them with a Rod of Iron,
thou shall dash them in pieces like a Potters Vessel. Those who yield not to
Christ's Government, but oppose it, shall be broken in pieces. Whatever
Potentate sets himself in opposition to Christ, shall surely be broken to
pieces. Christ will maintain, defend and protect his Church; though it be a
little Flock and despised by the World, yet Christ will protect them, and
preserve them from the outrage and violence both of Corporal and Spiritual
Enemies.

SECT. III. Concerning our Duties to Christ our King.
3. FArther yet to enlarge concerning 3. Our Duties to Christ as our King.
the Kingly Office of Christ. The last particular is to inquire into our
Duties. Duties are incumbent on us unto Christ as our King. Amongst many Duties
which might be named, I shall only insist on two, viz. Prayer and Obedience.

1. For Prayer, we must make our addresses 1. We must pray to Christ.
to Christ, and prefer our Supplications in his name. We have Promises to rely
on, John 16. 23. Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in
my name, he will give it you. With Christ we are promised all things, Romans 8.
32. Whatever we want, we must go to Christ for; he is a great King and able to
help us; and a High Priest full of Bowels of Compassion, touched with the
feeling of our Infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. But in an especial manner, we must
pray, that the Kingdoms of Sin, Satan, and Antichrist may be utterly
destroyed, and the Kingdom of Christ may be advanced. We must make it our grand
Petition, That Christ's Kingdom may come (i. e.) The Kingdom of Grace here and
the Kingdom of Glory hereafter; That Christ may Reign and Rule in our Hearts,
that he may be Glorified in us and by us, and that the Kingdoms of the World
may become the Kingdoms Rev. 11. 15.
of the Lord and of his Christ. Christ's Kingdom is an Holy Kingdom, and he
Rules in Righteousness; we should labor after Holiness, that we may be
conformable unto Christ's Kingdom. We must not only take Christ for a Prophet to
instruct us, and a Priest to Sacrifice for us, but for a King to Reign and Rule
in us.

And there is a second Duty incumbent 2. We must Obey Christ.
on us which is Obedience: As Loyal Subjects, we should be obedient and
submissive to the Laws of Christ: His will is a binding Law, and his command
ingageth ready and cheerful Obedience. Our Consciences are at Christ's command,
for he is the Lord and Commander of them. As it is our duty to obey Temporal
Governors (for so we are commanded in the Word of God, and the fifth
Commandment Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 17.
expressly obliges us to obey our Superiors) So we must above all yield
obedience unto Christ. Even the greatest Earthly Governors themselves must
acknowledge Christ above them: Even the greatest Powers on Earth, which will
acknowledge no Earthly Power above them, yet must acknowledge themselves
subordinate unto Jesus Christ, and yield Obedience and Subjection unto him. All
Rule and Authority must be employed for Christ and not against him. Wherefore
the Turks which set up that great Impostor Mahomet, and prefer him before
Christ, and the Pope who pretends himself to be Christ's Vicar, and takes
Christ's Office out of his Hand, in commanding and forcing the consciences of
Men, these do abominably, and highly derogate (what in them lies) from the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ: But Christ's Kingdom shall stand for ever, when
Antichrist and his Kingdom shall perish.

CHAP. VII.
Representing Christ's Dignity by several Metaphors and Resemblances.

SECT. I. Christ is resembled to a Stone. -- The 49th Chapter of Genesis and
the 24th verse, and Isa. 28. 16. are expounded.
THere are many Scripture Metaphors Christ is resembled to a Stone.
and Resemblances representing the Dignity of Christ. One Resemblance is to a
Stone, for Strength, stability and solidity. Two Scriptures I shall fix on, and
by the Exposition of them clear the Analogy. The first Scripture is Genesis 49. v.
24. Jacob giving the Blessing to his beloved Son Joseph, says -- But his Bow
abode in Sub (...) typo depicta est nobis imag^ Christi, qui antequam emergerat
Victor m^rtis and Author vitae positus (...). Calvin.
Strength, and the Arms of his Hands were made strong by the Hands of the
mighty God of Jacob, from thence is the Shepherd, the Stone of Israel. -- By
this Shepherd and Stone, Jacob endowed with a Prophetic Spirit, looked with
the Eye of Faith upon Christ; for Joseph was a Type of Christ, who is the
Shepherd of Israel, the Foundation Stone, and the Corner Stone of his Church.
Joseph as a Shepherd fed his Father and Brethren, and was a helpful Instrument
to save much People alive in the time of Famine. So Christ is the Shepherd and
Preserver of his People, to provide for them and supply them. Joseph was as a
Rock, or Stone for defense, as an hiding place in providing for his Father and
Brethren in Egypt. So Christ is a Rock and Refuge, and Shelter unto his People:
Without question, that Prophecy, of a King that shall reign in Righteousness,
is to be applied to Christ, Isa. 32. 1. Jerome one of the Learned of all the
Fathers applies this Prophecy to Christ, and the safety of God's People by
Christ mentioned ver. 2. And a Man shall be a hiding place from the Wind, and a
covert from the Tempest, as Rivers of Water in a dry place, as the Shadow of a
great Rock in a weary Land. Quicu^que sub ejus umbraculo fuerit, sic tutus ^rit
in tribulationibus and angustiis and in mundi istius tempestate, (...) qui
vent^m and turbinem fugiens, se tuto abscondit loco. Hieron. in loc.


Another Scripture (which is more clear) I shall mention out of Isa. 28. 16. --
Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold I lay in Zion for a Foundation, a
Stone, a tried Stone, a precious Corner Stone, a sure Foundation. These are
rare excellencies of a Stone, and this Stone is laid in Zion, (i. e.) the
Church of God. -- Let Us review all these excellencies of a Stone, and it will
evidently appear that they all meet in Christ in an eminent manner.

1. This Stone is laid for a Foundation. 1. A Foundation Stone.
A Foundation Stone must be strong and firm, whereon the Superstructure may
depend, for if the Foundation fail, the Building either sinks or falls down.
Now Christ is the Foundation of our Faith. He has founded and settled his
Church, and if we rely and hold fast on Christ, we cannot miscarry. The
Doctrine of the Gospel is built on Christ. Other Foundation can no Man lay,
than that that is laid which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. The Foundation
which will hold, is neither Gold nor Silver, Hay nor Stubble, no Merits, no
devised Will Worship, these are rotten Foundations, and will fail. But the
Foundation which will hold, is that of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief Corner Stone, Ephesians. 2. 20.

2. This Stone is a tried Stone. Some 2. A Tried Stone.
Stones are tried and they moulder and are unfit for a Building; but Christ is
every way tried, by Buffeting, Scourgings, Crucifixion, and by the highest
Malice that Men or Devils could put forth against him. Many try their Armor
before they venture into Battle, whether it be Shot-proof. Now Christ is Bullet
proof (as we say) and Armor of Proof, the whole Quiver of God's Arrows were
shot against him, and yet he endured it, and came off Conqueror.

3. This Stone is a precious Stone: So 3. A precious Stone.
Christ is precious in himself. He is the Pearl of Price, and Plant of Renown,
the chiefest of ten thousands. Christ is precious in the estimation of the
Father, he is the beloved Son, the brightness of the Father's Glory, the
express Image of his Heb. 1. 3.
Person. And he is precious in the account of all true Believers; they know how
to value him, they admire his Beauty, and are ravished with his Love. They have
interest in the Blood of Christ, and this is more precious than Millions of
Worlds. If the Soul be precious (as we all acknowledge) how much more must he be
precious who redeems the Soul? and Christ alone is the Redeemer of the Soul.

4. This Stone is a Corner Stone. Other 4. A Corner Stone.
Stones are knit and cemented to the Corner Stone; so all true Believers are
cemented in one Body and knit to Christ their Head: He is the Corner Stone, and
the Head of the Corner. It Is true that the Builders rejected this Stone. The
Jews reviled, persecuted and crucified Christ; yet he is the Person of whom the
Prophecy ( Psalm. 118. 22.) was fulfilled. And so the Apostle expounds that
Prophecy in his Sermon, Acts 4. 11. This is the Stone which was set at naught
of you Builders, which is become the Head of the Corner.

5. This is a sure Foundation Stone. 5. A sure Foundation.
Stones may and are oftentimes laid for a Foundation, but they are not firm and
stable, and no ways able to support the Building; but Christ is a sure, firm
and strong Foundation. To build on this Foundation, there is Strength and
Security.

I might further add, 6. That (which 6. A living Stone.
is beyond humane Sense) Christ is a living Stone: And yet it is evident from
the Word of God, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. To whom coming as unto a living Stone,
disallowed indeed of Men, but chosen of God, and precious. -- Ye also as lively
Stones are built up a Spiritual House. Now Christ is a living Stone, and he
communicates Life unto his Members, and by virtue of his Life, they live. The
Dead were raised by the Voice of Christ, and those that are dead in Trespasses
and Sins, are quickened by Christ, Ephesians. 2. 1. Dry Bones take Flesh and Sinews,
and become an Army, when the Spirit breaths Life into them; so the Ezekiel. 37.
dead, sleepy, drowsy, never so unlikely in the Eye of Man, may be quickened by
the Life of. Christ. But this comparison I need enlarge no farther.

SECT. II. Showing that Christ is resembled to a Fountain.
A Second Resemblance of Christ is to a Fountain. There are choice Words spoken
by the Church (as is conceived) resigning all the praise of Beauty and Dignity
unto Christ, who gave it to her. The Words are Cant. 4. 15. Significat populum
hunc habuisse foecunditatem and copiam donorum spiritualium. Clarius.
A Fountain of Gardens, a Well of Living Waters, and Streams from Lebanon.
Gardens that are of the greatest Note, have Fountains to water them: Standing
Pools are not valued, here is mention made of Streams and Living Waters, and
these Streams come from Lebanon. The Head of the Streams of Jordan, rises from
Lebanon, and makes the Land exceeding fruitful: So do the Rivers of Grace, and
the Wells of Salvation, which flow from Jesus Christ, make glad with her
Streams and refresh the City of God.

But the place which I shall chiefly insist upon is Zech. 13. 1. In that Day
there shall be a Fountain opened to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem, for Sin and for Uncleanness. The Exposition of this Text will
abundantly conduce to the proof of this Assertion, That Christ is a Fountain.
It Is said, In that day, (i. e.) After they had mourned, and been affected with
Godly Sorrow for Sin; This is evident from Zech. 12. 10, 11. They shall look
upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns
for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in
bitterness for his Firstborn. And to express the greatness of the Sorrow, it is
said, ver. 11. In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo. Which mourning, for the
greatness of it becomes a Proverb, and it was for the Death of that rare King
Josiah. Now observe, after that mourning, Christ is promised, and he is called
a Fountain opened. There are Multitudes, for whom Christ would not pray nor
wash. To these he may be said, to be a Spring Cant. 4. 12.
shut up, a Fountain sealed. But to the House of David and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, (i. e.) his own Children by Grace and Adoption, those whom Christ
loves and washes, to them he is a Fountain opened, and he purges them from
Sin, and from Uncleanness. -- In a Fountain are considerable,

1. That there is a confluence of Waters. Fountain^ are not drawn dry. Christ is
a Fountain of Waters, his Blood can never be drawn dry. Christ compares himself
to a Well of Water, Joh. 4. 14.
springing up to Eternal Life. In Christ is plenty of Grace, riches of Mercy,
abundant effusion of his Spirit. Now to repair to a Cistern and forsake a
Fountain, O! what madness and Folly is it? Of this the Lord complain^* Jer. 2.
13. For my People have committed two Evils: They have forsaken me, the Fountain
of Living Waters, and he^ed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that ^^n hold no
Water.

2. The Waters of a Fountain are living Waters. Waters in Ponds and Ditches are
dead Waters, noisome and muddy; Garbidge is thrown in them, and makes them
unwholsom and infectious. But a Fountain will not keep any noisome thing, but
purges it away. Christ is this Fountain of living Waters, He is the gift of
God, and his Promise is to give Living Waters. And as Living Waters run and
communicate themselves, from the Springhead to the Streams: So Christ the
Springhead, communicates Waters to the Streams. He, as the Head, has
influence upon all his Members. More I would prosecute this Comparison, but
that I have prevented my self, by handling this Argument upon Zech. 13. 1.
published in print.

SECT. III. Christ is compared to a Tree.
THe Tree of Life in Paradise was a Type of Christ. Joseph in his great
Sufferings was a Type of Christ, and he is said to be a fruitful Bough by a
Well, Genesis 49. 22. Trees grow best by the Rivers side, and so become more
fruitful. Of all Trees, these most properly resemble Christ.

1. Christ is compared to an Apple Tree, Cant. 2. 3. As the Apple Tree among
the Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons, I sat down under his
Shadow with great delight, and his Fruit was sweet to my Taste. From this
Scripture many Learned Authors infer that the Church sets forth the Excellency
of Christ by the Similitude of an Apple Tree.

1. We are to consider the benefit of the 1. Consider the Shadow of an
Apple Tree. Libens sub ejus umbra versor, in illo ab aestu persecutionis,
afflictionis, vitiorum, and omnis denique infirmitatis aut molestiae
refrigerium quaerens, ad eum confugiens, and me ut in tutissimum asylum
recipiens. Merc. in Cant. 2. 13.
Shadow of an Apple Tree. The Shadow keeps off Heat and Storms, so Christ is a
Shadow for refreshing and comforting against the heat of Persecution. Christ is
compared to the Shadow of a great Rock in Isai. 32, 2. Isai. 25. 4. Isai. 4. 6.
a weary Land, he is a Shadow from the Heat, likewise he is a Shadow for a
Tabernacle in the day time from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a
covert from Storm and Rain: So that whatever Persecutions and Sicut Tent^rii
tegmen defendebat olim Israelitas ^ S^le, Vento, and pluvia; sic nunc hos Deus
tutos praestabit. Gro^.
Troubles may befall us, let us make sure of our Interest in Christ, and we
shall be safe.

2. The Fruit of an Apple Tree is pleasant 2. The Fruit of an Apple Tree is
pleasant to the Taste. Ps. 34. 8.
to the Taste, it is a wholesome and delightsome Fruit: The Palate relisheth it
well. Much more is Christ delightful to the Spiritual Palate of a True
Believer. The Psalmist calls upon us Mon^t^^^^ verb^ g^standi, nos in hac vsta
illam bonit at em De^ exp^riri tantum ex part, non enim dicit Implemini sed
Gustate. G^stus quidem nobis praebetur in hac vita, non plena fruitio. Mollerus
in Loc.
to Taste and see that the Lord is good. Blessed is the Man that trusts in
him: To taste Christ in an Ordinance, how delightsome is this to a True
Believer!

3. The Apple affords more variety of 3. The Apple Tree affords* variety of
Frui^.
Fruit than any other Tree. No Fruit-Tree has so many kinds of Fruits as an
Apple Tree has, it is difficult for any to reckon up the several kinds of
Apples of different Taste: So Christ excels in variety of Graces which he
bestows on his Church*

2. Christ is compared to a Vine; John 2. Christ is compared to a Vine.
15. 1. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. Of all Trees none
more fruitful than a Vine: No Tree has a more succulent Root full of Sap and
Juice, communicating it to the Branches. We read of the Fruit of Canaan, which
the Spies brought by way of Trial or earnest of more to be received: One
cluster of Grapes cut down at the Brook Eshcol was a Burden Numb. 13. 23.
sufficient for two Men to carry: Between Christ and the Vine there are these
Resemblances.

1. A Vine is the Root, Foundation, and 1. A Vine is the Root, Foundation and
Support of all the Branches.
support of all the Branches, insomuch that as soon as a Branch is cut off, it
receives no more nourishment: so Christ is the Foundation and Support of his
Church: The Church cannot thrive unless it receive influence from Jesus Christ.
Christ is the Foundation of all Foundations, and if any Foundation be laid
besides Christ, it will fall and be utterly ruined.

2. A Vine is exceeding nourishing. 2. A Vine is nourishing.
Wine makes the Heart glad, and refreshes the Spirits, and comforts the Weary
and Afflicted: So Christ abundantly refreshes and comforts his Children. His
Consolations are abundantly sufficient for them.

3. The Vine communicates Juice and 3. The Vine communicates Juice and
Nourishment unto the Branches. Joh. 1. 16.
nourishment unto the Branches; so Christ communicates his virtues to his
People. In Christ there is a fullness, Col. 1. 19. and there is a Derivation
from the Root to the Branches: Of his fullness we receive Grace for Grace.

A 3d. Tree whereto Christ is compared 3. Christ is compared to a Medicinal
Tree.
is a Medicinal healing Tree, a nonesuch and unparalled for its excellent
virtues, Rev. 22. 2. It Is the Tree of Life which bears twelve manner of Fruits,
and yielded her Fruit every Month, and the leaves of the Tree were for the
healing of the Nations. Such a Tree as this was Prophesyed of, Ezekiel. 47. 12.
and the Fruit thereof shall be Meat, and the Leaf thereof for Medicine. Now who
is the Healer of Soul and Body but Jesus Christ? The Word of God is our Souls
Physic, but Jesus Christ is the Physician, who prescribes the Physic: And
Christ's Spirit accompanying his Word, makes it effectual. The twelve manner of
Fruits mentioned in the forecited place, Rev. 22. 2. shows variety of comforts,
and plenty. And as Leaves laid on Wounds, conduce to the healing of them: So in
all the Ordinances of God (when Gods Spirit sanctifies them) there is a healing
virtue; not as if they healed by their own Power, but by the Power of Christ
working effectually upon them.

I might add further comparisons, but I conceive there is no necessity to make
farther Inlargements in so clear a point.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning Christ's Purchases of Justification, Sanctification, and
Glorification.

SECT. I. Of Justification by Christ.
FUrther to represent the excellency of Sect. 1. Of Justification by Christ.
Christ, we are to consider his threefold purchase, viz. Of Justification,
Sanctification and Glorification for all true Believers.

In order we begin with the Purchase of Justification.

And herein we are to consider that we are not to treat of any legal
Justification by works, so no Man can be justified, for we have all sinned:
None but Christ (who was and is God and Man United in one Person) could keep
the Covenant of works: but we are to treat only of Evangelical Justification,
which consists in the imputation of Christ's Righteousness.

In handling of this Justification we are to consider,

Quid Nominis, and Quid Rei, (i. e.) The Name and the Thing.

1. For the Quid Nominis. The Greeks 1. For the Name of Justification.
express it by (...), and (...) and (...). The Terms are Forensical, opposite
to Condemnation. The Metaphor of Justification is taken from a Judge, who
absolves the Prisoner at the Bar, when a Pardon is brought from the King: So
though we are Condemned by the Law, at the Bar of Divine Justice, yet we are
justified and acquitted by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness. We read in
Scripture of being Justified before God, Romans 2. 13. and of being made
Righteous, Romans 5. 19. and of imputing Righteousness, Romans 4. 3. and of being
accounted Blessed, who have Righteousness imputed, and Sins remitted, Romans 4.
6, 7.

All these are Synonymous Expressions, and serve for the farther Explication of
the Doctrine of Justification. From the Quid Nominis let us come to the Quid
Rei, and inquire concerning the thing it self or nature of Justification. 2.
Consider the thing it self or nature of Justification.


The Article of Justification was so highly valued by Luther, that his thoughts
Night and Day ran upon it: This indeed is the Foundation of all our Comfort,
and all our strength lies in the Doctrine of Justification by free Grace. In
cord meo regnat iste unus Articulus, in qu^ fiuunt ref^^untque m^ae
cogitationes theologi^^* die n^cteque. Luth.


Instead of giving Definitions of Justification (because they are many) I will
make a farther Inquiry into the causes of Justification, and the Properties or
rather Singularities, which appertain there* unto.

1. Let Us consider the causes of Justification: 1. Consider the Causes of
Justification.
The Efficient cause is God, Is. 43. 25. The impulsive moving cause is the
Mercy of God, Ephesians. 2. 2. The Material cause is the effusion of Christ's Pretio^s
Blood: The formal cause is the imputation of Christ's Righteousness: The
Instrumental cause is Faith. But considering every Instrumental cause is to be
reduced to it is efficient cause, from whence it proceeds, I shall distinguish
Non (...) ut qualitas proprie aut ^otus acti^ v^l passi^ aut opus aliquod bonum
and eximii pretii, quasi ips^ sit justitia aut ejus pars, aut etiam justitiae
loco ex censu and aestimatione Dei; sed (...), n^mpe ut modus, medium and
Instrumentum ceu oculus and manus qua Christi ejusque Justitiae participes
red^^mur, adeoque relative ad objectum Jesum ipsius justitiae and pr^^^ss^^^is
gratiae. Purions Theol. Synops.
with a Learned Author, that we are not Justified by Faith primarily in a
proper sense, as a Quality, but secondarily as a means and instrument, as an
Eye to see, and as an Hand to lay hold on Christ. Lastly the final cause of
Justification is either in respect of God, and so it is his Glory, for all
things must be done to the Glory of God; or as in respect of our selves, and so
it is our Salvation.

2. Now let us consider the Properties or 2. Consider the Properties or
Singularities of Justification. 1. Justification is an Act of free Grace.
rather the Singularities of Justification.

1. Justification is an Act of free Grace. No Intuition of merits; no
concurrence of Good Works moved God to set his Heart upon any. How free this
Act of Justification is, we may read, Romans 3. 24* Being justified freely by his
Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ: The Word is (...) freely:
nothing that we can do of our best works merits any favor at the Hand of God.
For when we were in our blood in a most loathsome forlorn condition, he said
Live, that was a time of Qui docet in opera confidere, is neg^t merit^ Christi
sufficere. Aug.
Love. So then here is not the least ground to trust in our works: That were to
derogate from Christ's righteousness. Can any thing be freer than free-gift?
The Justification of a Sinner springs from free Grace, free Love, and Mercy.
Faith is the instrumental, but not efficient cause of Justification; neither
can the bare (...) Credere, the Act without the Object Justify. Christ is he
that justifies. Faith is the Hand to lay hold on Christ: Neither is Faith the
Hand of a Workman, that earns his Wages, but the Hand of a Beggar that
receives all of Favor and Mercy.

2. Justification by Faith consists in the 2. Justification consists in the
Remission of Sins.
Remission of Sins, and non-imputation of Transgressions, Ps. 31. 1, 2. Blessed
is he whose Transgression is forgiven, and whose Sin is covered; Blessed is the
Man to whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity. Likewise the Apostle declares how
the great work of Reconciliation was transacted, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Not imputing
their Trespasses unto them. It Is true, that the best of Gods Children have
their Failings: For in many things we offend all, and he that is without Sin.
let him cast the first Stone, and it will recoil upon himself that casts it:
But Gods Children are humbled for Sin, they water Psalm. 6. 6.
their Couches (as David did) with their Tears. They sigh with Ezekiel to the
Ezekiel. 2^. 6. Jer. 31. 19.
breaking of their Loins, with Ephraim they smite upon their Thighs. Sin is
their Sorrow, Grief and Burden, wherefore they are by Christ called unto
Repentance, and Christ imputes their Sins not unto themselves, but unto
himself: They indeed are the Principal Debtors, but Christ has made himself
liable to pay their Debts, and make full satisfaction, because he has become
surety for them unto the Father.

3. Justification consists in the Imputation 3. Justification consists in the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness.
of Christ's Righteousness, 2 Cor. 5. 21. We are made the Righteousness of God
in him. Of Unrighteous we are made Righteous, of Ungodly we are made Godly: And
though we are Ungodly Christ justifies us, for he does not find us good, but
he makes us so. Now this Righteousness of Christ is altogether a Righteousness
without us, not depending on any inherent Righteousness, nor any work in us:
But it is free, and Gratuitous, without any Praevision or Intuition of Grace in
the Person to be justified. St. Bernard Assignata est homi^ justitia ^lien^,
qui^ car^it su^ Justitia. Bern. Ep. 190.
fully expresses it saying, that another Righteousness is assigned to Man,
because he wants a Righteousness of his own. Hence our Works and Services
(though Failings in themselves) are accepted Righteous by imputation of
Christ's* Righteousness. How miserable would our condition be, if our Services
were no better offered to God than they come from us! But Christ mends our
Services in the carriage by offering them to the Father in his own Name and
Mediation, so that though our Duties be raw, weak, and imperfect, yet Christ
makes them perfect by the imputation of his own Righteousness, and so they
obtain acceptance with the Father.

4. Justification brings forth choice and 4. Justification brings forth choice
and excellent Fruits.
excellent Fruits, as we may read Romans 5. 1, 2, 3. All those choice Fruits grow
on that Tree of Justification. Faith is the Mother-Grace there mentioned.
Peace, and Access unto the Throne of Grace, Joy, Hope, Glorying in Tribulation
are the Daughters or the Fruit which grow on this Tree. Wherefore though Faith
only Justifies, yet Faith is not alone when it Justifies: For it is
accompanied with a Goodly Train of Graces. Though Faith Justifies the Person,
yet Works Justify the Faith, or declare the Faith to be true. Faith works by
Love and purifies the Heart; Gal. 5. 6. Act. 15. 9.
and it is the Apostles charge, Tit. 3. 8. This * Hujus fid^i charit^^ non est
forma, sed fr^ctus, and p^nit^^ti^ est justificati conditi^ non causa
justificationis: fid^s (...) qu^ justificat, non quae justificat est sine
operibus, and sola dicitur in isto munere non solitaria respectu comitatus
aliarum virtutum. (...) (...), non (...), Per, non propter fidem Justi
decla^^^r, and per (...) ^ic^t (...). Prideaux, Manuductio ad Theologia^.
is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly that
they which have Believed in God might be careful to maintain good Works. A
Learned Professor very dextrous in stating of Controversies concludes thus,
Love is not the form but the Fruit, and Repentance is the Condition of him that
is Justified, not the cause of Justification, etc. This then is the Purchase of
Christ who imputes his perfect Righteousness to his Members, and their Sins to
himself; and this Justification is active whereby Christ fulfilled the whole
Law, and passive whereby Christ became obedient unto Death even the Death of
the Cross.

SECT. II. Of Sanctification by the Spirit of Christ.
A Second Purchase of Christ is Sanctification. 2. Purchase of Christ,
Sanctification ^^ the Spirit.
For whom Christ justifies by his Grace, those he Sanctifies by his Spirit. In
order of Nature Justification may be conceived to preceed Sanctification,
because Justification is the Root or Mother Grace. The Works of Sanctification
are the Fruit proceeding from it, yet in order of time they are simultaneous.
Those who are purged from the guilt of Sin, labor to be purged from the filth
of Sin. It Is a good Character to be as solicitous and desirous for Mercy to
sanctify, renew and purify, as for Mercy to pardon us. Wherefore Sincerity is
an undoubted evidence of a justified Condition, Psalm. 32. 2. It Is an infallible
sign of Justification, In whose Spirit there is no Guile. In handling of the
Doctrine of Sanctification, we are to consider these ensuing Particulars, which
may serve as so many strong Arguments to persuade, or as so many Motives to
stir us up to the practice of Holiness.

The first Motive is drawn from Election, Motive 1. We are elected unto
Holiness.
we are elected unto Holiness, Ephesians. 1. 4. According as he has chosen us in him
before the Foundation of the World, that we should be holy and without blame
before him in love. Election does not give the least licentious Liberty, but
engages us unto Holiness. Observe the Words now cited, It is not said that we
should live as we list, Non eliguntur Paulus and qui ei similes sunt, quia
^rant sancti and immaculati, sed eliguntur and praedestina^tur, ut in sequenti
vita per ^pera atque virtutes sancti and imm^cula^i fia^t. Hieron. in ^ph. 1. 4.
but that we should be holy.

Neither is it said that we are elected for any Holiness foreseen. Election and
effectual Calling go together, and to be assured of our Election, we must make
sure of our effectual Calling, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Calling is put before Election in
the situation of the Words, and in respect of our Duty incumbent on us.
Wherefore (says the Apostle) the rather Brethren give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure. Now if we ask why does Christ purchase
Sanctification for us? The Answer is, because he loved us. His Love moved him
to wash and put such Royal Dignities upon his Children. Rev. 1. 5, 6. Unto him
that loved us and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, and has made us
Kings and Priests unto God and to his Father. This Election was before the
Foundation of the World was laid, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. God has * Primum dixit
sanctificationem spiritus, ut ^ste^deret quod nequaquam ad fidem venissemus,
nisi ipsa gratia Spiritus Sancti d^^isset. O^cum. Quomodo eos separavit Deus
sanctificando eos per Spiritum, and quomodo pervenitur ad illum Spiritum per
fidem habitam Evangeli^. Grot.
from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the Truth. Wherefore the Apostle calls the Saints Elect,
and that according to the fore-knowledg of God the Father, through
Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience. Those that are elected unto Glory
are elected unto Holiness: No Holiness, no Happiness.

A second Motive is drawn from Creation, Motive 2. We are created unto Holiness.
we are created unto Holiness. All the Members of our Bodies, and all the
Faculties of our Soul should be employed for holy uses to serve God. External
and Internal Purity are required, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from
filthiness of the Flesh and of the Spirit. The Heart must Jam. 4. ^.
be purified and the hands cleansed; the Tongue must minister Grace to the
Hearer: Holiness must sit upon the Lips, Heart, and Life. To this purpose were
we created, Ephesians. 2. 10. We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good Works, which God has before ordained that we should walk therein. Good
works are (as a Father says) The way to the Kingdom, Via ad Regnum, non causa
r^g^^^di. Bern.
not the cause of reigning there. We may not, we dare not trust to our own
Merits, and expect to be justified by our own Works, yet we must perform them
in Obedience to God's Command, in Testimony of our Duty and Thankfulness. They
are necessary necessitate praecepti, non necessitate causae. Wherefore let us
seriously reflect upon our Creation, and consider that we are engaged thereby
to Holiness of Life. The frequent remembrance of our Creation, should excite us
unto the practice of Holiness.

3. Let Us consider our Redemption, and Motive 3. We are redeemed unto Holiness.
this was purchased at the dearest rate, even the purchase of Blood, and that
not of an ordinary Blood, but of Royal Blood, and more than that, it was the
Blood of God, Acts 20. 28. (So we must understand it by a communication of
Idioms.) To this purpose has Christ redeemed us out of the Hands of our
Enemies, that we might Luke 1. 74, 75.
serve him without fear in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days
of our Life. Christ did not redeem ^^ that we might live to our selves, or as
we list, but (as the Apostle expresses it) Christ gave himself for his Church,
that he might Ephesians. 5. 26, 27.
sanctify it and cleanse it with the washing of Water by the Word, that he
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. Whosoever then
has an Interest in the Blood of Christ, is sanctified by the Spirit of Christ,
He is redeemed from his vain Conversation; 1 Pet. 1. 18. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Ephesians. 4.
23.
He is a new Creature; He is renewed in the Spirit of his Mind: The Image of
Christ is imprinted in him, and that consists in Righteousness and Holiness.
Ephesians. 4. 24.


SECT. III. Of Glorification.
SAnctification is here begun in this Sect. 3. Glorification is the Purchase of
Christ.
Life, and it must receive daily Augmentations, till it be consummated in
Glory. Now Glorification is Christ's Purchase. The Kingdom of Heaven, the Crown
of Glory, the price of our high C^lling, Abraham's Bosom, the purchased
Possession, the lot of the Saints in Life, an Inheritance immortal, undefiled,
which fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us; all these are synonymous
Expressions to set forth the State of Glory, and all these are the Purchase of
Christ. Glorification is one of the Links, even the highest of them in that
Golden Chain, Romans 8. 30. Whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and
whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also
glorified. Christ himself is in Glory, and he the Head, would have Glory put
upon all his Members. Christ is in all the Saints the Hope of Glory. The
Salvation which is Col. 1. 27. 2 Timothy 2. 10. Cum ibi erimus ubi ipse est, tum
quidem eum perfect and coram videbimus, c^m autem videbimus ^um sicut ^st, tum
plene perfecteque ^psi glorificabimur: ^am si fides nos glorificat ex part,
hoc est dum ^um quasi eminus intu^mur, profecto aspectus nos pl^^^ perfecteque
glorificabit. Rolloc.
in Christ Jesus is with eternal Glory; and this is Christ's grand Petition
unto his Father, John 17. 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have
given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have
given me: for thou lovedst me before the Foundation of the World. Christ is
gone before to prepare a place for his Children: He sits at the right hand of
the Father in Glory, and has purchased Glory for all his Members. Hence the
Apostle assuredly concludes in his own Name, and in the Name of all true
Believers, Col. 3. 4. When Christ who is our Life shall appear, then shall ye
also appear with him in Glory. And there shall not only be Glory put upon the
Bodies, but also upon the Souls of the Saints, Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change
our Here then is a notable comfort for all God's Children that not only our
Souls after this Life shall go unto God that gave them, but our Bodies likewise
in the last day shall be raised up again and made like unto Christ his glorious
Body, that our Souls and Bodies being united together: We may live for ever
with him in his Kingdom of Glory. Dr. Ayry, on Phil. 3. 21. (...), i. e.
Excellentissime gravem gloriam, Hic Hebraeo more per verbum geminans Apost^lu^
summam quandam excellentiam indicavit. Grot.
vile Bodies that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to
the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.
Whatsoever Sufferings we meet withal they are not to be compared to future
Glory. There Is a Superlative above a Superlative, mentioned beyond the capacity
of our Language to express to the full, 2 Cor. 4. 17. For our light Affliction
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory.

Thus I have endeavored to represent A brief recapitulation of the Premises.
the Excellency and Dignity of Christ, and have endeavored to make good this
Assertion, That Christ is of inestimable Dignity: This I have handled in five
Particulars.

1. By reckoning up several Names of Honor and Dignity appropriated unto
Christ.

2. By unfolding the Grand Mystery of the Divine and Human Nature of Christ,
hypostatically united in one Person.

3. By representing the unvaluable worth of those threefold Offices of Christ,
viz. Sacerdotal, Prophetical, and Regal.

4. By setting down several Metaphors applied to Christ.

5. By considering those great Purchases that Christ has made for his People,
viz. of Information, Sanctification and Glorification.

Now then follows the practical Improvement of this Doctrine which shall be in
Uses, viz. Information, Reproof, Examination, and Exhortation, Direction, and
Consolation.

CHAP. IX.
Containing two Uses, viz. 1. An Use of Information. 2. An Use of Reproof.

SECT. I. From Examples.
WE should all be exhorted and persuaded For Information*
to account Christ precious, even the chiefest of ten thousands; our Treasure,
Refuge, our Honor, our All, and infinitely more worth than all. Review
seriously those five Heads before handled, and it will evidently appear, what
strength of Reason there is to persuade us all to set upon Christ a greater
valuation than upon all the Kingdoms of the World and Glory of them. To what
has been said already, I shall add for a close some Uses, viz. for
Information, Reproof, Examination, and Exhortation, Direction, and Consolation.

I. For Information and that in two particulars.

1. That Christ is thus precious is proved by Examples of true Believers.

2. Upon what Grounds and Arguments the Truth may be evidenced.

1. That Christ is thus precious, is proved 1. That Christ is precious is
proved by Examples.
by Examples. We tread not in unbeaten Paths. Abraham accounted Christ
precious, having seen him by the Eye of Faith: Wherefore Christ tells the Jews,
your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, Joh. 8. 56. Dies Domini nihil aliud
significat quam ipsius adventum in earnem, vidi^ enim eum eminus; Abraham fidei
nimirum oculis, ut declaratur. Heb. 11. 13. B^za.
and he saw it and was glad. Abraham was dead many hundred years before, but by
the Eye of Faith he saw Christ's Incarnation and rejoiced therein. David
likewise highly valued Christ, insomuch as he penned many Psalms concerning
Christ. And in particular David calls Christ his Lord, Psalm. 110. v. 1. The
Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, till I make thy Enemies thy
Footstool. The Prophet Isaiah foretells of Christ's Sufferings, and how he was
debased, yet withal he tells us of his great Dignity, Isa. 53. 12. Therefore
will I devide him a portion with the Great, and he shall devide the spoil with
the Strong: and what a great esteem the Prophet Jeremiah had of Christ may
appear from Jer. 23. 5, 6. Behold the days come says the Lord, that I will
raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and
shall execute Justice in the Earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his Name whereby he shall be called, the
Lord our Righteousness. The Prophet speaks in his own Name, and in the Name of
the Church, that whatsoever befell him, even the greatest Losses, and Crosses,
Disapointments, and Vexations, yet his Savior was the joy and rejoicing of his
Soul, Hab, 3. 17, 18. Although the Figtree shall not blossom, neither shall
Fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olives shall fail, and the Field shall
yield no Meat, the (...). Verse. Graec. 70
Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Heard in the
Stall, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, and I will joy in the God of my
Salvation. The seventy render it, I will rejoice in the Lord in God my Savior.

I might further instance in the noble Army of Martyrs, who set such an high
price upon Christ, as they parted with their Goods joyfully, and laid down
their Lives for the Testimony of the Gospel. I shall only mention Moses and
Paul; Moses though learned and highly esteemed of in Pharaoh's Court, though it
is said, he was mighty in Words and Deeds, Acts 7. 22.
yet in the confluence of his Honors, he preferred Christ infinitely before
all, Heb. 11. 26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ, greater Riches than the
Treasures in Egypt, for he had respect unto the recompense of Reward* Moses
preferred afflicted Godliness before prosperous Wickedness, and a Crown of
Thorns with Christ before a Crown of Gold without him. To Moses I will add St.
Paul: O! how did he value Christ at a price above superlative. He though a
great Scholar more skilled in Tongues than all the Apostles, bred up at the
Feet of Gamaliel, an Hebrew of the Hebrews (that is an Hebrew both by the
Father and Mother (and circumcised the eighth day, as touching the Law a
Pharisee, yet Christ he infinitely prized above all: See his zealous
Protestation at Corinth (which was so learned a place as was by the Orator
called Oculus Graeciae the Eye of Greece, yet he upon deliberate thoughts
determines, 1 Cor. 2. 2. For I determined to know nothing amongst you, save
Jesus Excellentia cognitionis Christi in quo thesauri sunt sapientiae ac
scientiae Dei tanti erit huic Apostolo, ut non m^do Judaismum sed and quicquid
eximium est uspiam in C^l^, and in Terra propter h^nc nihil fuerit, imo d^^ni
loco duceret. Musc.
Christ and him crucified. And see how absolutely he declares his Judgment,
Phil. 3. 7, 8. But what things were gain to me, those I accounted loss for
Christ, yea doubtless and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things and do count them but Dung, that I may win Christ. So great was his zeal
for Christ, that he protested that he was not only ready to be bound, but to
dye at Jerusalem, for Act. 21. 13.
the Name of the Lord Jesus. Thus we see how the Saints accounted Christ
precious.

SECT. II. Evidencing by Arguments why Christ should Why Christ should be thus
accounted precious.
be Precious in our Estimation.
IN the next place to confirm the truth by Arguments.

The Question will be propounded what Grounds and Reasons is there, why we
should set such an infinite value on Christ.

For Answer there are two sorts of Reasons, or Arguments.

1. Drawn from Christ.

2. From true Believers.

1, If we consider that Christ is the Eternal 1. Reason* drawn from Christ.
Son of God, the Mediator of the New Covenant our Advocate, and Redeemer
there is all the reason why we should price and esteem and account him Precious
and Honorable. But I'^e instance in particulars, concerning the Beauty Riches,
Honors, and Wisdom that is in Christ.

1. For his Beauty: Though his Visage was Marred in the days of his Flesh on
Earth, 1. Christ's Beauty. Is. 53. 2.
and (as the Prophet speaks) he has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall
see him, there is no Beauty, that we should desire him: Yet notwithstanding
there is in Christ unparalleled Beauty: This is Prophesi'd of Christ, Isaiah.
4. 2. In that day shall the Branch of the Lord be Beautiful. Christ's People
shall attend willingly upon his service in the Beauties of Holiness. Psalm. 110.
Bp. Reynold's on Psalm. 110. v. 3, ^, 6, 8. Edit. ult.
3. That (as an eminently Learned Divine observes) from the Word, willing, or
of willingness, notes the Ground or Inducement of their great Devotion and
Subjection unto Christ's Kingdom that as the People came up in Troops to the
Lords House, which was the Beauty of Holiness, or as Men do flock together to
the sight of some honorable and stately Solemnity, so Christ's People by the
Beauty of his Banners, shall be allured to be gatherd unto him and fly in
Multitudes as Doves unto their Windows. How amiable was Christ in the
estimation of the Spouse, in so much that she prized him the chiefest of Ten
Thousands? And Christ prized her Cant. 5. 10, 16. Cant. 4. 12.
for the Beauty of Holiness, which he put upon her the fairest among Women.
Christ's Beauty allures and ravisheth the Spouse; In what variety of expressions
does she set it forth. Cant. 5. 11, 12. His Head is as the most fine Gold, his
Locks are bushy and black as a Raven, his Eyes are as the Eyes of Doves by the
Rivers of Waters washed with Milk and fitly set, etc. All these Expressions
declare the singular Beauty that is in Christ. And wherein confists Christ's
Beauty but in his Holiness? Holiness is a thing altogether Glorious, and
Beautiful. Christ is a Holy High Priest harmless, and Heb. 7. 26.
undefiled separate from Sinners. Christ is altogether lovely, the desire of
all Nations. Hag. 2. 7.
The Word of Christ is a Holy Word, for we are clean through the Word. The Holy
Joh. 15. 3.
Oil, with which all the Vessels of the Sanctuary were to be Consecrated, was a
Exodus 30. 23.
Type of the Spirit of Christ, which sanctifies and makes us Kings and Priests
unto God: So then this Beauty of Holiness which is in Christ should infinitely
inhance our valuation of him.

2. Consider Christ's Riches, and these 2. Christ's Riches. (...)
are unsearchable. Ephesians. 3. 8. The Unsearchable Riches of Christ: And these are
Riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 1. 7. And the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance
in the Saints. There are four Singularities in the Riches of Christ, which
cannot be appropriated to any Riches under the Sun besides.

1. The Riches of Christ are solid and 1. Solid Riches.
substantial, of great weight and worth, whereas the Riches of the World are
things that are not. They are upon the Wing: For Riches make themselves Wings,
they fly Prove. 23. 5.
away as an Eagle toward Heaven: The things of this World they are not Bread,
and the Prophet expostulates, Isai. 55. 2. Wherefore do ye spend Money, for
that which is not Bread: (i. e.) We should not anxiously and carkingly busy our
selves about earthly things, for they are not solid, but there is Vanity
pronunced upon them all by Solomon's Verdict, Eccles. 2. 11. There Is a vast
difference between Real R^s, humanae cinis; pulvis, fu^^s, umbra, folia
cadentia, flos, somnium, fabulae, ventus, aer, penna mobilis, unda decurrens,
et s^quid illis infertus. Chysost in Epist. ad Heb. Hom. 9.
Food, and Imaginary Food, between Solid Meat and Painted Meat, and as vast a
difference therein between the Riches of Christ, and the Riches of the present
World. That Is then the best sort of Riches which is conveyed by Wisdom, Prove.
8. 21. That I may cause these that love me, to inherit substance, and I will
fill their Treasures.

2. The Riches of Christ are invaluable. 2. Invaluable Riches.
We often put too high a price on earthly things, but we can never enough prize
the Riches of Christ, it is a common Proverb, Deus et Coelum non patiuntur
Hyperbolen. Wherefore all must be forgon for Christ and his Riches: All the
Treasures of the Judges, all the Riches of the greatest Potentates, may be
valued at their own rate, but the Riches of Christ can never be enough, and
sufficiently valued: Wherefore the wisest of all Merchants stands not cheapning
nor dodgeing for Abatements, but parts with all for Christ. Matthew. 13. 46.
(...), etc. Chrysostom in Loc.
Its said who when he found one Pearl of great price he went and sold all that
he had and bought it: He knew the great value of it, and thereupon ventured all
for it.

3. The Riches of Christ are satisfying 3. Satisfying Riches.
Riches: The desires of Covetous Men are never satisfacted. They are always a
craving more; Though their Bags may be filled with Gold and Silver, yet their
Hearts are never satisfied. But the Riches of Christ, his Graces, his
Consolations can satisfy the Soul. Wherefore Phillip propounds the Question.
Joh. 14. 8. Show us the Father and it suffices us, and Moses the Man of God
Prays. Ps. 90. 14. O satisfye us early with thy Mercy that we may rejoice and
be glad all our Days.

4. The Riches of Christ are Eternal 4. Eternal Riches.
Riches. Oftimes Men are deprived of their Estates in this Life, even whilst
they live, but when Death comes they are stripped of all: And those that could
ride many Miles in their own Grounds are now confind to the narrow compass of a
Grave six-foot long: But the Riches of Christ last unto all Eternity, It was an
excellent saying of Lewis of Bowyer, Emperor of Germany, such Goods (says he)
Hujusmodi comparandae sunt opes, quae cum na^fragio simul ^natent.
are worth getting and owning as will not sink nor wash away, if a Shipwreck
happen, but will wade and swim out with us. The Riches of Christ will be
preserved amidst Storms, Tempests, and Shipwracks. The Graces of the Spirit the
Purchases of Christ, viz. Of Justification, Sanctification, and Glorification
will abide for ever, and run Parallel with the longest line of Eternity: And
thus it is evidenced, how highly Christ is to be valued, and how precious he is
to all true Believers if we consider the Riches of Christ.

3. Let Us farther instance in the Honors 3. Christ's Honors. (...) in the
Text. Ezekiel. 34. 19.
of Christ: He is Honor it self in in the abstract, and a Plant of Renown; and
it is our Duty to honor him, John 5. 22, 23. The Father has Committed all
Judgment to the Son, that all Men should honor the Son, even as they Honor
the Father: He that Honors not the Son Honors not the Father, that has
sent him. Christ has Honor in himself being the Fountain of Honor and he
puts Honor upon his Children: They are Honorable and Precious in his Sight.
Isai. 43. 4. And he it is, that has made them Kings and Priests Rev. 1. 5.
unto God. And if he be Honorable, and his People are so in his account, hence
we may infer that no Honor is like unto the Honor of a True Believer, It Is
true that in this World there are distinctions of Persons, and due reverence
ought to be given toward great Personages according to their Qualities (for
all Levelling Designs are plain Breaches of the 5th. Commandment.) Yet those
are most noble whom Christ ennobles with the Graces of the Spirit, these render
Nobility Noble indeed. It Is the high Commendation of the Bereans. Act. 17. 11.
These were more Noble (...) Cum comparatio videatur instituta non Generis
(erant enim omnes isti Judaei) sed virtutis ac pietatis, generosiores malui
interpretari quam nobiliores. Beza.
than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all readiness
of Mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so.
According to the Philosopher Honor est in honorante, and so is a Man more or
less Honorable, as he is in the esteem of Jesus Christ. Now if there be Honor
in there Ceature, what is there in the Creator? If there be Water in a Rivulet,
what is there in the Fountain from whence it flows? If then we price and value
here on Earth Persons of Honor, preferring them before our selves? O! how much
more should we honor Christ, and prize his Ordinances, viz. His Word,
Sacraments, and Sabbaths: O! How should we honor the Faithful Ministers of the
Gospel, and give them that which they are worthy of (as the Apostle says) 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of double Honor,
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine.

That Christ is not only honorable but Honor it self.

4. Let Us instance in the Wisdom of Christ, and herein he appears infinitely 4.
The Wisdom of Christ.
precious: He is the Wisdom of the Father, the Treasurer of all Wisdom and
Knowledge, for (says the Apostle) In whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge. Col. 2. 3.
Christ is a Counselor, Isa. 9. 6. And such a Counselor as is beyond all
compare. Other Counselors give Counsel for their Fees being mercenary, and
according to their Reward take more or less pains for their Clients; but Christ
is a free Counselor, he gives his Counsel freely without expectation of
Reward: Other Counselors many times betray their Trust, but Christ never does;
for he is a most faithful Counselor. Other Counselors have their Errors and
err in Counsel, but Christ is infallible and never errs, and all his Counsel is
infallible. Other Counselors may give good and profitable Counsel, but they
cannot command Obedience thereunto, but Christ can command the Heart, and so
migh^ity overruled the Spirit of a Man, as to engage him to yield ready and
cheerful Obedience unto his Commands; Farther other Counselors, though perhaps
they may give their Counsel freely, and may give good Counsel and prevail with
their Clients to follow it, yet no Counselor will give himself and part with
his Life for the good of his Client: But Christ gives himself, lays down his
Life for the good of his Children, whence then must we beg Wisdom, but from
Jesus Christ the great Counselor; and O! how precious is he for his Wisdom
unto all true Believers?

SECT. III. Containing a second Head of Reasons in respect of all true
Believers.
A Second fort of Reasons and Arguments A second sort of Reasons in respect of
true Believers.
are drawn from true Believers. The Question is, How comes it to pass that they
only account Christ precious? I answer, they only have their Senses exercised,
they only have experimented how good and how excellent Christ is, More
particularly,

1. Every true Believet has a Spiritual 1. Every true Believer has a
Spiritual Eye.
Eye, and an enlightened Judgment to discern Beauties, Riches* Honors, Wisdom,
Holiness, and all other Excellencies that are in Jesus Christ. A Stranger, an
Alien from the Life of Christ discerns no Beauty in a crucified Christ; but a
true Believer, who is renewed in the Spirit of his Mind, discerns Beauty in
Christ (even when he was spit upon, and crowned with Thorns and) crucified; he
discerns the price of his Redemption, purchased by the effusion of Christ's
precious Blood. A Believer beholds excellency in all the ways of Christ, even
an exact pattern of Holiness, and he beholds excellency in all the Ordinances
of Christ. The Word is sweeter to him than the Honey and Honeycomb, and more
pleasing than his appointed Food. Christ's day even the Christian Sabbath,
called the Lord's Day, Rev. 1. 10. He accounts the Market day of his Soul, and
the desire of days. And the Lord's Supper, he receives in remembrance of
Christ, and therein testifies his Love and Thankfulness, and prepares himself
for the reception of such an Heavenly Banquet. Now then seeing the Believer
only has the Eyes of his Mind opened, and his Understanding enlightened: He
only knows how to value Jesus Christ. He has an experimental knowledge of
Christ, he has had Communion with the Father and the Son; he has been
partaker of his ravishing Consolations, and therefore values Christ before all
the Treasures of the Universe. A Pearl of great price may be brought to an
ignorant Quis Magnam emit Margaritam, nisi cui notum est pretium? Musc:
Man, but he heeds it not, and will not venture any price for it; but when the
same Pearl is brought to a skilful Jeweller, he will set a great value of it,
and give largely for it. So carnal and ignorant Men of the World undervalue
Christ, and, with the foolish Gadarens, desire his Room rather than his
Company, and wish him Mat. 8. 13.
to depart from them: But a true Believer esteems Christ's Company before all
the Company in the Universe beside. He discerns such rare Beauties and
Excellencies in Christ, as he looks upon all sublunary things as contemptible
and of no value in comparison of Christ. This is the Man that has his Eyes in
his Head, who is endowed with a Spirit of Wisdom, and Understanding. He is the
Spiritual Man who judgdeth all things and shall be judged 1 Cor. 2. 14. (...),
etc. (...). The^phyl.
of none: whereas a carnal, or natural Man, receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them
because they are spiritually discerned. O! what a great Mercy is it to have a
seeing Eye and a hearing Ear, and a believing Heart! Christ pronounced such
blessed, Math. 13. 16. Blessed are your Eyes for they see, and your Ears for
they hear* and for this the Apostle pours forth his servent Prayers and
Supplications, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of Glory may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom, and revelation in the
knowledge of him, the Eyes of your understanding being enlightened that ye may
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of his
Inheritance in the Saints.

2. A true Believer has a spiritual tas^ 2. A true Believer has a spiritual
taste. ^ ph. 1. 14.
and relish of Christ's Goodness. He has tasted that the Lord is gracious, he
has received the earnest of his Inheritance, viz The first Fruits of Glory,
even some glimpses of a beautiful and Transcendently excellent Savior. Now
having experimental knowledge of Christ's Mercy in pardoning and purging of him,
and making particular Application of Christ, as St. Paul did, Gal. 2. 20. who
loved me and gave himself for me: Upon these considerations (I say) how can it
be otherwise but Christ must be Precious to such an one? Christ has
pre-eminence in a Believers estimation, for in his doubts he has experimented
Christ to be his Counselor, and in his distress his Comforter, a Refuge in
storm, Riches in Poverty, Health in Sickness, Life in Death: Christ is all in
all to those who have experienced of his goodness. All true Believers put the
highest appretiation upon Jesus Christ, both for what they already have and
whatever they shall have.

1. They already have part of payment, 1. Believers receive in this Life part
of payment.
earnest given in this Life of his love: They have Influences from the Spirit
of Christ, They are endowed with the Graces of his Spirit: They enjoy a Sacred
Communion with him. They taste sweetness in his Ordinances by his Gracious
Presence, and by the Gracious Operations of his Spirit. For it is Christ's
presence and the effectual working of his Spirit, that makes an Ordinance
effectual to the Soul. Of this all the Adopted Sons and Daughters of God are
Partakers more or less in this Life. Now, for what they now enjoy they have
cause and accordingly endeavor to extol the Dignity and Honor of Jesus Christ.

2. For what Believers shall have hereafter they account Christ precious:
Though 2. Believers shall have Glory. Heb. 11. 26. (...). It imports a
removing of the l^ye from one Object to another. Moses turned his Eyes from the
Pleasures of Egypt, and fixed them on Heaven. Dr. Gouge. Col. 1. 27. ^ui
Christus dulcescit mundus amarescit.
they are not mercenary, yet with Moses they have an Eye unto the reward: The
Israelites in their tedious Pilgrimage had Canaan in their eye, and the
Thoughts of Canaan sweetened their present hardship and Sufferings. Observe the
order mentioned, Romans 12. 12. Rejoicing in hope, patient in Tribulation. The
hope of Glory is cause of rejoicing, and will make us more cheerful to undergo
Afflictions in this present World. Christ the hope of Glory, when he has the
pre-eminence in all things, and we account him all in all, then all things are
but loss and dung when compared with Christ. All things are accounted bitter
where Christ is sweet. Now the Crown of Glory, the purchased Possession, and
the price of the high calling, and Eternal Life all these are the gift of God
through Jesus Christ, having then these things in our deliberate and serious
Meditation, O! how infinitely shall we esteem of Jesus Christ, more then our
Hearts can conceive, or our Tongues can express.

3. A true Believer has Spiritual Affections, 3. A true Believer has
spiritual Affections.
and sets them all on work to magnify the excellency of Christ. For Instance.

1. His Love is swallowed up with the 1. The Love of a Believer is on Christ.
Love of Christ. He is with the Spouse sick of Love for Christ. The Love of
Christ constrains him (2 Cor. 5. 14.) to do and suffer what Christ would have
him.

2. His Joy is fixed on Christ: Christ is 2. His Joy is fixed on Christ.
the Believers Joy, he cannot rejoice in Corn and Wine and affluence of earthly
things, for there is Vanity and vexation in them all: But he rejoices in
Christ: He delights hearing Christ speak to him in his Word, and in his
speaking to Christ in Prayer, and Supplication. We read of the Joy of
Espousals, and of the Joy of Harvest, and Vintage, but no Joy like to the Joy
in God, and to Joy in the Holy Ghost, which is Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory, Senica would have Joy Vol^ laetitiam tibi esse Domi. Sen. Vis nunquam
esse tristis been vive. Bona vita semper Gaudium habet, conscientia rei semper
in poena est. Beza de inter. Dom.
to be at home. Inward Joy, Joy of the Heart is better than an outward flashly
Joy, and that is Joy wherein the Mind is quieted: Now Christ alone can quiet
the Mind and rejoice the Spirit; For other Joys, Men may be seemingly Merry,
and force an outward Mirth, when there is a damp upon their Spirits, and they
are inwardly sad, but the Joy of Christ causes a serious solid Mirth, so that
a Believer may be full of inward Joy, though he may seem outwardly sad, ( i.
e.) or rather serious, having a sedate and composed Spirit. Now to rejoice in
Christ, shows how much we prize him.

3. Our desire is on him. That which 3. His desire is on Christ.
we desire above all, and are most eager in pursuit of, it plainly evidenceth,
that it is in our highest estimation. It Is Christ whom the Believer desires
above all, and as Rachel cried out Give me Children, or else I dye: So a
Believer cries Give me Christ, or else I dye: So did the Martyr in J. Lambert
Fox Act. and Mon. Vol. 3.
the Flames. -- None but Christ, none but Christ; Christ is the Love, Joy,
Delight, and Desire of every true Believer. The Hunted Heart does not more
earnestly thirst after Water, then a Believer thirsts after Christ. Nothing but
Christ can satisfy his desire; Cicero's works could not please Austin, because
Christ was not mentioned Aug. Con. l. 3. c. 4. Valde protestatus sum me nolle
sic satiari ab ^o. Ad in vita Lutheri.
in them. Luther would not be put off with outward things, he looked for Christ
and his Riches; He preferred them before all Preferments: They would not
satisfy Bazil nor Caracciolus, nor other Heroic Spirited Christians: Their
Desires and Longings were after Christ, and Christ alone could satisfy their
Desires. No satisfying or quietting a Believers Heart without Christ.

SECT. IV. Containing an Use of Reproof to al^ Unbelievers.
Of Reproof.
THE second Use is for Reproof unto (...) non credentibus. Vulg. Ed.
all Unbelievers. These are called disobedient in the next words following my
Text! Christ is the Stone which the ^uilders disallowed, yet it is made the head
of the Corner. Now as Christ is to Believers Precious, and esteemed the chief
Corner Stone, so unto Unbelieves he is a Stone of Stumbling, and a Rock of
Offense, 1 Pet. 2. ^.
even to them which stumble at the Word, being disobedient. Unbelievers
undervalue Christ, and reject his Gospel, and refuse the Salvation tendered
therein. These are they that strike at the Root of Religion: For they endeavor
to make the Gospel no better then a Fable, nor Christ any whit better than an
Impostor. Unbelievers are such high presumptuous Sinners, as they
presumptuously put the Lie upon God himself. 1 John 5. 10. He that Believes
not God, has made him a Liar; because he believes not the Record, that God
gave of his Son. It Is a high affront to put the Lie upon a Man, and the giving
of the Lie has oftimes caused sad Quarrals, but how much higher an Affront and
Indignation is it to give God the Lie, and so does every one who believes not
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Farther to aggravate Aggravations of the Sin of
Unbelief. Aggrav. 1. Unbelief binds the hands of God.
the Sin of Unbelief I shall lay down these Aggravations.

1. Unbelief (that I may speak with reverence) binds the Hands of God, and
after a sort obstructs his Proceedings, for Proof whereof read Matthew. 13. 58.
And he did not many works there, because of their Unbelief, God will not cast
away his Mercy upon Unbelievers, who undervalue them. Christ immediately left
the Gadarens, as soon as they preferred an unanimous Petition for his departure:
Their Unbelief caused them to put a higher value upon their Swine than upon a
Aggrav. 2. Unbelief hinders the Efficacy of every Duty.
Jesus.

2. Unbelief obstructs and hinders the efficacy and benefit of every duty we
per* form: For Instance, In praying, we have no hopes to speed unless we pray
in Faith, though Prayer is an Ordinance of Gods own appointing, yet Prayer
obtains no acceptance unless it be put up in Faith: The Promise is made only to
Believers, Matthew. 21. 22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer,
believing, ye shall receive. And so for hearing, Unbelief is the cause of
unprofitable hearing. Heb. 4. 2. The Word Preached did not profit them not
being mixed with Faith in them that heard it. In a word nothing is accepted as
comeing from an Unbeliever. For what ever he does he spoils in the doing for
want of Faith. For whatsoever is not of Faith is Romans 14. 23. Aggrav. 2.
Infidelity is accompanied with a Fraternity of Sins. 1. A theisme is a
Companion of Unbelief.
Sin.

3. Infidelity is compared with a fraternity of Sins and Abominations. Amongst
many I shall only instance in three, viz. Atheism, Hardness of Heart, and
Apostasy.

1. For Atheism. Unbelief is the cause of it. Did Men believe the Word of God,
they durst not live without God in the World. There are two sorts of Atheists:
There are speculative Atheists, such, who deny God, and his Works of Creation
and Providence, and the Immortality of the Soul: They will believe no farther
than sense, and yet if they had their senses exercised they would believe that
their is a God by a visible demonstration of his Works of Creation and
Providence. The Book of Nature proves that there is a God, but how God is to be
Worshipped in Christ, this is taught only in the Book of Holy Scriptures. When
a Man denied a Deity, a Philosopher would bid him walk out of doors, and look
about him. For the goodly Expansum of the Heavens and the Earth hanging upon
nothing plainly prove that there is a God. Psalm. 19. 1. Job 26. 7.
A second sort of Aiheists are Practical, who live in all manner of wickedness;
they neither fear Heaven nor Hell, Death nor Judgment; they run into all excess
of Riot, adding Iniquity unto Iniquity, and so treasuring up unto themselves
wrath against the day of Wrath. Now unbelief is that Root that brings forth the
Gall and Wormwood of speculative and practical Atheism: For did Men in serious
composed thoughts consider that there is a Holy God, before whose Judgment Seat
we must all appear, and from which there is no appeal they would than abhor all
Atheism both in Opinion and Practice. What caused Pharaoh to answer so
Atheistically to Moses, but his Unbelief Exodus 5. 2. And Pharaoh said, who is
the Lord, that I should obey his Voice, to let Israel go, I know not the Lord
(thus Atheistically he spoke) Neither will I let them go. This is the Language
of desperate Unbelievers.

2. Infidelity is accompanied with hardness 2. Hardness o^ Heart is a Companion
of Unbelief.
of Heart. That eminent place mentioned. Is. 6. 9, 10. and cited in all the
four Evangelists, in the Acts of the Apostles and Epistle to the Romans shows
the heavy Judgment of a hard Heart. -- And he said, go and tell, his People,
hear ye indeed but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive Intellectui
fides aditum aperit, infidelit as claudit. Aug. ^p. 3.
not, make the heart of this People fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes, lest they see with their eyes and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and be converted and healed: These words the
Apostle cites Act. 28. 26. and applies them to the Unbelieving Jews.

3dly. Infidelity is accompanied with 3. Apostasy is the Companion of Unbelief.
Apostasy. Unbelief is the Mother and Apostasy the Daughter: And if we would
prevent Apostasy we must beware of Unbelief, Heb. 3. 12. Take heed Brethren
least there be in you a Heart of Unbelief in departing from the Living God.
Unbelief causes Multitudes of Carnal Men to leave Christ's colors; and hide
themselves under Antichrist that Man of Sin. 2 Thessalonians. ^. 3.
What Is the reason that Men make have to be Rich, and with all violence pursue
the Riches of this World, and stick at no course be it never so unjust and base
forgetting worldly wealth; it is because they will not trust God? What Is the
reason then when Men are in great straights and difficulties they will not wait
Gods leisure, but wind themselves out by making Breaches upon their
Consciences? It Is for want of Faith and dependence on God.

Lastly Unbelief meets with dreadful Aggrav. 4. From the Judgments. 1.
Unbelievers are given over to a Judicial Blindness.
Judgments.

1. Unbelievers are given over to a Judicial blindness, what was their Sin, is
their Judgment, 2 Cor. 4. 4. In whom the God of the World has blinded the
minds of them, which believe not, least the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ which is the Image of God should shine unto them. Because when the light
of the Gospel breaks in by the Ministry of the Word, People shut their eyes and
will not see, therefore God leaves them to blindness as a dreadful Judgment.

2. Unbelievers are given over to Delusions, 2. Unbelievers are given over to
Delusions. 2 Thessalonians. 9. 10, 11.
and to believe Lies. For this cause Antichrist shall come with all
deceivableness of Unrighteousness, Because they received not the Love of the
Truth, that they might be saved: And for this cause God shall send them strong
Delusions, that they should believe a Lie, that they all might he Damned who
believed not the Truth, but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness. To be given over
to a Spirit of Delusion, and to have the Leprosy in the Head is a terrible
Judgment: Such an one the Priest pronounced utterly unclean, his Plague is in
Lev. 13. 44.
the Head, Levit. 13. 44. The Gradations are no more common then true; first a
Sceptique to question every truth, next an Heretic, at last an Atheist.

3. Unbelievers are given over to final 3. Unbelievers are given over to final
impenitency.
Impenitency. Joh. 8. 24. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your
Sins. No Death so bad as to die in ones Sins; To die on the Wheel, to be torn
in pieces by Wild Horses, to be burnt in a Cauldron of Scalding Lead or
Scalding Oil, these are exquisite Torments and Cruel Deaths: But to die in
Sins, and to die Unreconciled to Jesus Christ, this is the worst of all sorts
of Deaths beyond all expression and Apprehension. We read of a dreadful Woe
against the vilest of Sinners, who have this brand of Infamy stamped upon them,
Jude 12. Trees whose Fruit withers, (...).
without Fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the Roots. This is the condition of
Unbe-Lievers: They are as twice dead, being altogether and certainly dead,
irrecoverably, and totally deprived of all Vital Operations.

4. Unbelievers are in a state of Damnation. 4. Unbelievers are in a state of
Damnation. Joh. 3. 11. (...). Dictum est vetus; Illo nocens se damnat, quo
peccat die, si^ in legibus Romany. -- Ipse se Papae subdit. Et qui sceleratum
capiant consilium suo merito puniuntur. Grot. Nil tam erit debile tam
confractum tam objectum, in quo vel aliqua spes sit salutis acceptandae, quod
non curaturus ac servaturus sit. Musc. Joh. 3. 26.
Unless Mercy interpose to give them space and Grace to repent; They shall be
certainly Damned. An Unbeliever is condemned already as a Malefactor Condemned
to Death, who (though he may be a while Repriv'd, without all Question shall
shortly be Executed: Christ pronounces Damnation to all Unbelievers, Mark. 16.
16. He that Believes not shall be Damned. Christ, when he was to take the last
farewell of his Disciples leaves with them singular Exhortations and
Consolations, but he thundreth out dreadful Menaces against all Unbelievers: O!
how does Christ raise up weak Believers: Where is but a little Faith he
increases it, and where there is weak Faith he strengthens it. That Prophecy,
Isa. 42. 3. he applies to himself, Matthew. 12. 20. A bruised Reed shall he not
break, and smoking Flax shall he not quench, till he send forth Judgment into
Victory. But as for those that believe not, Christ pronounces their dreadful
doom; They shall not see Life, but the Wrath of God abides on them. They are
ranked with the Black Regiment of Hell for their company, and they shall have
Hell for their Portion, Rev. 21. 8. But the fearful and Unbelievers and the
abominable and Murderers, and Whore-mongers and Sorcerars and Idolaters, and
all Liars shall have their Portion in the Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone, which is the second Death. By what has been said in the
forementioned Aggravations, who of any understanding would continue willingly
one moment in the state of Unbelief? But herein consists the greatness of their
Misery, that though they are in a State of Unregeracy, Blindness, enmity
against God, and Infidelity, yet they are not sensible of their condition: O!
what necessity is incumbent upon every one of us to ask the Question as the
Disciples did: Is it I? Is it I? Am I the Unbeliever? Did a Man know the
greatness of the Sin, and the greatness of the Judgment of Unbelief, he durst
neither Eat nor Drink nor Sleep in that miserable condition.

CHAP. X.
Containing an Use of Examination.

3. Use For Examination.
SECT. I. I proceed to a third Use, which is for Examination, Sect. 1.
Examination whethe^ we prize Christ.
to put every one of us upon an exact Trial and Inquiery, to ask this Question
in a particular manner, Do I prize Jesus Christ?
NOW* by way of Character, I Will lay down three Propositions.

1. Those that set the highest price of Prop. 1.
Christ have an earnest high and unfeigned likeing and approbation of Christ,
and his ways and his Ordinances.

2. They endeavor to be like and conformable Prop. 2.
unto Christ.

3. They burn in ardent affection and Prop. 3.
love to Christ. To handle them distinctly. Propos. 1. Those that prize Christ
have a high liking of Christ and his ways. (...). Just. Mar^. Q. Orrhod. 98.


Those that set the highest price on Christ, have an earnest high and unfeigned
likeing and approbation of Christ and his Ways and Ordinances, and where this
high approbation is found it will be evidenced by these three Characteristical
Notes, ensuing.

1. There will be a deliberate choice of 1. A deliberate choice of Christ and
his ways
Christ and his ways: Men are not born true Believers by nature, but they are
made so by Grace and Mercy. A Believer whose Senses are exercised, to whom God
has given a precious anointing. he chooses Christ (though with his Cross)
before all the Treasures in the Universe. Thus did Moses choose Christ however
Reproached Heb. 11. 25.
rather than all the Treasures of Egypt. The ways of Christ are such excellent
alluring and rational ways, as a Man of understanding will try them, and walk
in them, and prefer them before all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of
them. Let it be put to Men's second and serious thoughts, whether they would
take Christ with his Cross, or the World with all it is Pomp and Bravery,
whether Men would make choice of those Riches which are transient and Fading,
or those which are durable, and last to all Eternity, it is easy to imagine
what choice a Wise Man would make who is endowed with a Spiritual Sense to
understand the excellency of the ways of Christ. For such an excellent Spirit
the Apostle prays Phil. 1. 9, 10. And this I pray that your love may abound
more and more in all knowledge, and all Judgment, that ye may approve things
that are excellent.

2. There will be an exceeding Cordial 2. A delight and rejoicing in Christ and
his ways.
delight, and rejoicing in Christ and his ways. O! how is a true Believer
ravished with Joy, when he enjoys Communion with Christ? The Eunuch after he
was Baptized by Phillip went on his way Act. 8. 39.
rejoicing. A whole City was full of Joy after they had received the Gospel. We
read what exuberant Joy the Prophet had for the Word of God, Jer. 15. 16. Thy
words were found, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the Joy and
rejoicing of my Heart. A Godly Man is known by this Character, his delight is
in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate Psalm. 1. 2.
Day and Night. God's Testimonies were David's Delight and Counselors, sweeter
then Honey, and the Honey Comb, more valuable than Rich Spoils, even than
Thousands of Gold and Sylver. He than that knows and has experimented the
Beauties, Treasures, and Consolations of Christ, O! how does he delight in
Communion with Christ? O! how does he prize Ordinances, and Delights to walk in
that way where Christ comes by? The Joy of taking great Spoil, the Joy of the
Vintage, the Joy of Espousals, the Joy of Harvest, are mentioned in Scripture
to represent causes of rejoicing: But all these are infinitely short of that
Joy which is in the Heart of a true Believer, who has a new Name, a white
Stone, and hidden Manna, who has a Sacred Communion Rev. 2. 17.
with Christ, and feels his Divine Influences: This is a Joy Unspeakable beyond
the Capacity of Men and Angels. Wherefore he that has a liking and approbation
of Christ and his Ordinances, he Joys in them, (as Job Professed) more than in
his necessary Food, and with the Job 23. 12
Love sick Spouse, he takes more delight in Christ, and is at more pains to
seek him then all besides, Cant. 3. 1. Even on the Bed of Sickness and
Affliction the Spouse sought her Beloved.

3. A ready and courageous Spirit to 3. A ready and courageous Spirit to bear
Testimony for Christ*
bear Testimony for Christ and the truth of the Gospel. He that likes and loves
Christ will vindicate him and his Honor from the Reproach of Gainsayers: When
a Believer speaks of Christ, he will speak with Reverence and highest
appretiation of him, when he speaks to Christ, he will speak with Faith,
Fervency, and Humility: And when he speaks for Christ he will discover an
Heroical Magnanimous Spirit, such a Spirit the Apostles had when they Acts ^.
17. (...). Hebraeorum more, qu^ vehementem and acrem significant
interminationem Eras.
were straightly threatened, that they should speak no more in the Name of Jesus,
they answered with an undaunted Resolution. Act. 4. 19, 20. But Peter and John
answered and said unto them, whether it be right in the sight of God, to
hearken unto you more than unto God, Judge ye, for we cannot but speak the
things which we have seen and heard? Thus the Apostle Paul took courage against
Elymas the Sorcerer when he sought to turn away the Deputy from the Faith: The
Apostle branded him for the Child of the Devil, and an Enemy of all Act. 13.
10. Praedicare Evangelium Dei, nihil ^liud est quam derivare in se to^ius
inferni furorem and Satanae. Lut. Loc. Com.
Righteousness. Luther knew what it would cost him, even to bring all the
Devils in Hell about his ears, yet he was resolved to go to Worms and Preach
the Gospel, though every Tile on the Houses was a Devil to oppose him. Bishop
Latimer said often, that the Preaching of the Gospel would cost him his
Heart-Blood: And so it came to pass, for when he was a Burning, his Blood
gushed forth, and quenched a great part of the Fire. Here then is a Proof of a
Christians likeing and approving of Christ and his Gospel, when he will plead
for the Truths, which are in Jesus, and vindicate Christ's Honor from Contempt
and Reproaches. A true Believer (when he is called to witness for Christ) is
neither like a Still-Born, nor a Tongue-Ty'd Person, but he will speak for
Christ, and stand up for the cause of Christ, what ever it cost him. He is not
afraid to be good, nor afraid to own a despised Christ, and a Persecuted
Gospel. To be of a timorous and cowardly Spirit, and to seal up ones Lips, when
Christ's interest lies a bleeding, what is this but to be spiritually benumbed, or
else Possessed of a dumb Devil? Wherefore Luther professed that he would rather
be guilty Impius sim avarus, adulter, i^^ ^mninm vitiorum reus; modo impii
silenti^ non arguar, dum Dominus patitur. Luth.
of the worst of Crimes, than of wicked silence when his Lord suffered.

SECT. II. Whether we prize Christ by our likeness and Conformity to him.
I Proceed to the second Proposition, Prepos. 2. Those that prize Christ
endeavor to be like and conformable to him.
that those who prize Christ endeavor to be like and conformable unto him.
Christ is our Head, and we are his Members, and there ought to be a conformity
between the Head and the Members. And where this is* it will be evidenced in
these three Particulars.

1. There will be a conformity to the 1. There will be a conformity to the
commands of Christ. Mark 1. 15. Mat. 6. 20. Mat. 6. 24.
commands of Christ, as that perfect absolute and infallible Rule of our
Obedience. Christ commands us to repent, and believe the Gospel, to lay up for
our selves Treasures in Heaven, to seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, to ask and it shall be given you, to seek and Mat. 7. 7.
ye shall find, to knock and it shall be openedunto you: Likewise Christ
commands, enter ye in at the Straight Gate, etc. In a Mat. 7. 13.
word Christ in his Gospel commands the whole Duty of Man. The Gospel is every
way comprehensive and sufficient to prescribe all things needful for our
Salvation. We may not then devise ways of our own Heads and Fancies, and
prescribe humane Inventions and Superstitions for Politic ends to justle out
Divine Institutions. It is not any Rule which will serve the turn. As it was
not any Partern which would serve for the Building of the Tabernacle, but that
Pattern only which was showed to Moses in the Mount. And the Lord gave a strict
charge, Exodus 25. 40. And look that thou make them after their Pattern which
was showed thee in the Mount: Neither is it any Rule will serve, but only the
Rule of the Word of Christ, which is the Everlasting Gospel, and commands our
Obedience. Wherefore the Apostle glories in nothing but the Cross of Christ,
Gal. 6. 14, 15. Neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision,
but a new Creature. And such are Partakers of Peace, and walk according to his
Rule, Gal. 6. 16. And as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them,
and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Let then Christ's command engage us to a
ready and cheerful Obedience, and let us not dispute but obey what he
commands, when he bids seek my Face, let our Hearts return this ready answer,
Thy face Lord will I Psalm. 27. 8.
seek.

2. There must be a conformity to the 2. There must be a Conformity to the Life
of Christ.
Life of Christ. Christ's Life is a perfect Pattern for our imitation, and an
exact example of Holiness. Christ lives in every true Believer, and he lives in
Christ. Christ's Image, which consists in Righteousness, Gal. 2. 20.
is imprinted upon the Lives and Hearts of all his Adopted Children. Christ
propounds his own example for Meekness and Humility: Let Us then thus argue the
case every one in particular, Was Christ Mat. ^^. 29.
humble, and shall I swell with Pride? Was Christ meek, and shall I be
transported with anger? Christ was much in Prayer and Meditation, much
exercised in watching and fasting; O! what a similitude ought there to be in
every one of us unto the Life of Christ? Christ went about doing good,
comforting the Afflicted, counselling the ignorant, strengthening the weak. His
whole business, even his Meat and Drink, was to do the Will of his Father. Now
what pains should we take to imitate Christ in some proportion?

Quest. But some will say how can we be as Holy, as Humble, and as Meek as
Christ was?

Answ. I Answer, though we cannot attain of that Holiness which was in Christ.
And what measure of Grace we have already attained, we may not propound as the
Just Standard, or the Ne plus ultra, but still we must labor for augmentation
of every Grace, after the example of the Apostle, forgetting those things which
are behind, Phil. 3. 13, 14.
and reaching unto those things which are before, I press toward the Mark, for
the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Every one that has true
Grace labors for more accessions to it, and he Qui desinit proficere, incipit
deficere. Bern. Desinit esse bonus, qui desinit vel* le fieri melior. Bern. 3.
There will be a Conformity to Christ in his Sufferings.
that cease to get more Grace, begins to fail of what he seems to have.
Here than is that perfect Pattern for our imitation, even the Holiness,
Meekness, Humility, and other Graces which eminently appeared in Jesus Christ.

3. There will be a conformity to Christ in his Sufferings. The Apostle tells
us, Phil. 1. 24. Who now rejoice in my Sufferings for you, and fill up that
which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in my Flesh, for his Bodies sake
which is the Church. We are not to conceive Christ's Sufferings to be imperfect
( for by one Offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.) But
as Christ had personal Sufferings in his Humane Body, which are finished, so
Christ has and shall yet have more Sufferings in his Mystical Body the Church.
Christ has suffered once for all upon the Cross. But the Saints Militant
(which are Christ's Body) must prepare for Sufferings, they are-appointed 1 Thessalonians. 3. 3. Luke 9. 23.
thereunto. They must take up their Cross daily. When Saul was Converted to be
a Preacher of the Gospel, and was changed both in his Name and Nature, and of a
Persecuting Saul, became a Preaching Paul, and a chosen Vessel to bear the name
Acts 9. 15, 1^.
of Christ unto the Gentiles, then the Lord showed him how great things he must
suffer for his sake. And this is that knowledge that the Apostle so highly
valued that he might know the fellowship of his Sufferings, Phil. 3. 10.
being conformable unto his Death. Every true Christian is a Martyr in Heart
and Resolution, willing to lay down his Life for Christ's sake. It Is observed
that Luther used to say that he should never have the Honor to dye for the
Professing of the Gospel: But he was a Man valient for the truth, and a Martyr
in the purpose and Integrity of his Heart, and a willing mind obtains
acceptance. It Is said by Faith Abraham when he was tried Heb. 11. 17.
offered up Isaac. God accepted the real Intentions of Abraham, as if he had
actually Sacrificed Isaac.

Christians must consider before hand, what Religion will cost them, not only
the loss of Liberties, Riches, Honors, but sometimes the loss of their Lives
also. And happy are they that die for and in Christ. Men in this respect have a
pre-eminence above Angels, for Angels have not Bodies to suffer withal as Men
have. Christians must consider that they are Members of Christ their Head, and
he has gone before them in Sufferings, leaving them an example to follow his
Steps. Shall Christian sexpect Pleasure, and think to Crown themselves with
Rose Buds, when Christ drank a Cup of trembling, and wrung out those bitter
ingredients down to the very Dreggs? Shall Christians pamper their Appetites
and live in Luxury and Wantoness when Non oportet membra deliciari sub capite
spinis coronato. Tert. Phil. 3. 10.
as Christ drank Gall and Vinegar, and in scorn was Crowned with Thorns? Let Us
consider farther that we must with the Apostles desire to be made conformable
unto Christ's Death.

Quest. But it will be asked wherein consists this conformity unto Christ's
Death?

Answ. I Answer in regard of Mortification of Sin. Christ condemned Sin in Romans
8. 3.
the Flesh. And there holds some proportion be^ween the Death of Christ, and
the Death of in u. Christ died for us that our Sins should dye in us: Christ
died a Cursed Death to note that we should abhor Sin as a most accursed thing:
Christ drank Gall and Vinegar to signify the sharpness of Gods Displeasure
against Sin, and that Sin ought to be in our account a most grievous and bitter
thing: Christ was nailed to the Cross and endured great pains to show that we
should never let Sin have a quiet Minute of ease, but that we should Crucify
every corruption.

SECT. III. Showing that those that prize Christ burn in ardent Afflictions of
Love to him.
LOve is as strong as Death: It Is hotter Prop. 3.
then the Coals of Juniper: All the Waters and Floods of Persecution cannot
quench Love. There Is nothing can turn Christ's Love from us, and therefore
nothing should be able to extinguish our Love toward him. Now where Christ is
valued there cannot be wanting an ardent Love. For those things which we prize
most, we love most: But because there are many pretenses, and semblances of
Love, where Love in reallity is wanting; we must bring the Love which ought to
be in every Believer toward Christ, unto the Touchstone and Trial. Wherefore I
shall fix upon five trials of our Love to Christ.

1. Our Love must consist in an universal, 1. Our Love must consist in an
universal Obedience to the Commands of Christ.
cheerful, and cordial Obedience unto the Commands of Christ. Obedience to
Christ's Commands, is an evident Character of our sincere Love to Christ, John
14. 21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me.
And ver. 23. If any Man loves me, he will keep my Words. It Is not the verbal
Profession of Love to Christ, that will serve the turn, but a practical
Conformity to the Commands of Christ, which will obtain acceptance. Pretenses
of Love are like the barren Fig Tree, which had Leaves without Fruits, or like
the Apples of Sodom, which seemed beautiful to the Eye, but as soon as they
were touched, they dissolved into Cinders and Ashes. We must not be Christians
only in Name, but in Deed and in Truth: We must not only name the Name of
Christ, but we must depart from Iniquity. And we must not only say that we love
Christ, but we must express our Love by our Obedience unto his Commandments.
And we must not Deus non vult cum exceptone coli, Le^ Dei est una tota
copulutiva. Illeric.
make any exceptions but we must take in all, It Is commonly observed, that the
Love which descends is greater than that which ascends, as the Love of the
Father to his Child is greater than the love of the Son to the Father. I am
sure God's Love to us is infinitely greater than our Love can be to him.
However we must endeavor after a sincere, cheerful, and universal Love. God's
Love to us is his Bounty and Beneficence, our Love to him must be a Love of
Duty and Service. And though we can never equalize and match the Love of Christ
to us. Yet we must endeavor by our Obedience to study to please him, and walk
in the ways of his Word, and hereby we give Testimony of our Love to Jesus
Christ.

2. Our Love to Christ must be a supreme 2. Our Love to Christ. must be a
supreme and principal Love.
and principal Love. Inferior and secondary sorts of Love are due to
Relations, provided they be in subordination to the Love of Christ, and neither
stand in competition with him, nor opposition to him. We may and ought to love
our Relations, and love our Lives and Creature Comforts, always provided that
the primacy of our Affections be given to Christ. Though things of this World
be dear and near unto us, yet Christ must be esteemed dearer and nearer than
all. Christ must be preferred above all and before all. The Parents of our
Bodies, the Children of our Flesh, the Wives of our Bosom, the Blood in our
Veins, the Heart in our Breast, even all the dearest things in this World must
be laid down and foregone if they stand in comparison and competition with
Jesus Christ. That Man that has had experience of the Love of Christ in his
own Soul, and has tasted how good and gracious Christ is, he cannot but
acknowledge, that there is ten thousand times more Beauty and amiableness, more
Honors and Riches, and more solid Satisfaction in Christ, than all the
choicest admirable things, which the World can afford in its greatest Estate
and Confluence. Christ therefore must have the chiefest Love, more than
superlative, even our Love to him must be beyond all degrees of comparison.
It Is to be observed, that the high Priest might not marry a Widow; Why not a
Widow? Because Lev. 21. 14.
her first Love was given to a former Husband. The high Priest was a Type of
Christ: He will not be contented with a second Love; He must be loved supreamly
and principally, His Services must be the best: A Lamb without blemish, a Male
in the Flock, and the best of the Substance was to be offered unto God in the
Levitical Law. And under the Gospel, the Worship must be pure, pure Hands must
be lifted up and purifyed Hearts are required by Christ. Fervent Jam. 5. 16. 2
Cor. 1, 12. Mal. 1. 8.
Prayer, Sincere Love: Simplicity and Godly Sincerity are required, God rejects
the lame and the blind and curses the Deceiver Mal. 1. 14.
that has in his Flock a Male, and voweth and offers unto the Lord a corrupt
thing. God's Mat. 6. 23.
Kingdom and his Righteousness must be sought in the first place. That Figure
called (...) must be abhorred in God's Worship. God must have the prime of our
Strength, the Marrow of our Bones, the Vigor of our Soul, the Activity of our
whole Body dedicated to his Service: Whatever is lovely and desirable under
the Sun must strike Sail, and yield Homage unto Jesus Christ. The supreme and
primary, the highest and the dearest Love must be given unto Christ alone.

3. This Love must be a whole entire 3. Our Love must be whole and undivided.
and undivided Love. It must not be shared with any Corrivals: Christ will not
admit any Competitors or Corrivals with him. He will either have all our Love
or none. Christ allows not Partnership, nor will have his love to be let to
halves. Christ is all in all unto us, and our Affection must be all in all unto
him. When the Sun arises in its Brightness, the lesser Stars appear not: upon
the appearance of our Love to Christ, all other sorts of love vanish and
disappear. I have read that in a Battle between Alexander and Darius a Motion
was made, that there should be made an equal devision between them, so that by
giving each a part a farther trial by the Sword might be laid aside. But
Alexander refused the Motion; No says he, there can be but one Sun in the
Firmament, meaning that his aim was to be sole Lord and Master of all. To
Christ this may be much more applied; He is our sole Redeemer; He has
conquered the World, Satan, and our own corrupt Selves; He has wrought a
perfect Redemption for us; He has merited our whole Love, and requires it
wholly and undividedly. It was the Language of that notorious Strumpet, Let it
be neither thine nor mine, but let it be divided. A divided Heart is faulty,
Hos. 10. 2. Their Heart is divided, now they shall be found faulty. David
professed with my whole Ps. 119. 10.
Heart have I sought thee. And our Love must be with the whole Man, many Alls
are reckoned together, Deuteronomy. 6. 45. Hear O Israel, The Lord our God is one
Lord. And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine Heart, and with all
thy Soul, and with all thy Strength* Christ expects from us a total, not a
partial Love. He will not have his Love parted between him and Antichrist,
between him and Mammon, between him and a Lust; Christ will not be so unequally
yoaked: The Ark and Dagon, the Ephod and Teraphim cannot stand together. A
Mungril Religion, partly for Popery, and partly for Protestantism, is
abominable in the fight of God. When Men (as Watermen look one way and Row
another) pretend in visage and show to be for the Interest of Christ, but in
reallity drive Designs for Antichrist: When Men (as Sanballat and Tobiah
offered to build for the Jews, but intended to destroy them) pretend in public
to propagate the true Religion, but in private undermine and seek the
extirpation thereof: such as these God will discover and their Sins will find
them out, and they shall appear not only odious to God, but to Men also. We
read of Redwald King of the West Saxons, that after he had professed himself
converted to Christianity, he ^rected in the same Church, one Altar for the
Worship of the God of the Christians, and another for the Worship of his
Heathen Gods. And this way of worshipping God was no worshipping, and worse
than no worshipping at all. We have an Instance in that mixture of the
Samaritans Religion: Several Nations and Cities amongst them according to their
own devised Intentions chose several Gods. And it is said, 2 Kings 17. 33. They
feared the Lord, and served their own Gods. But what a Judgment the Lord
passes on them, Psalm. 34. Unto this day, they do after their former manner,
they fear not the Lord. If then we pretend to love Christ, and love other
things in competition with him, we do not love him at all. It was the great Sin
of the Jews to make mixed Marriages, and to be unequally yoaked with Heathens:
Insomuch as their Language betrayed them not to be a genuine sort of the Jews,
not of the right breed of the Jews: For they speak in the Language of the Jews,
and in the Language of Ashdod. So it is their Sin, and a far greater to join
Christ with Harlots, I mean, to yoke Christ and Antichrist (as far as in them
lies) together. And such there are, who would reconcile England and Rome,
Protestantism and Popery. But they may as soon reconcile the Artick and
Antartick Poles, considering that there are between us fundamental differences
both in Principles and Practices: Christ will say one day as Elias does to the
Worshippers of Baal; How long halt ye between two 2 King. 18. 21.
Opinions: If the Lord be God follow him, but if Baal then follow him. So it
may be said, why do People hanker between Christ and Antichrist? Why do they
not plainly declare themselves what they design, that so we may know where to
find them? But be assured that if Men neglect Christ and seek after other
Lovers: If they leave the true Worship, and betake themselves to false Worship;
they will pay dear for it. Let Men pretend what they will, if they have a Heart
and a Heart, a double and a divided Heart partly between Christ and any other,
Christ will not accept of their Love as genuine and right, but account it false
and spurious.

4. Our Love to Christ must be sincere 4. Our Love to Christ must be sincere.
and incorrupt without Hypocrisy, abstracted from all self-Interests, and
sinister Respects. He that loves Christ must love him with a single, sincere,
and incorrupted Spirit. Incorrupted I name; because I have the Apostle for my
Warrant. Grace be unto all them that love our Lord Jesus Ephesians. 6. 24.
Christ in Sincerity. The Word rendered for Sincerity signifies Incorruption:
Such (...) Significatur is, qui nulla vi, nullis precibus, nullis illecebris,
i. e. a recto abduci patitur. Grot.
who are sincere and incorrupt abhor all mercenary Love and all verbal
Complements. Between true Love and complemental Love, there is as wide and vast
a difference, as there is between Courtship and Friendship. Christ ought to be
loved for Himself, for his Beauty, Goodness, and Excellency. There Is enough in
Christ to enamour a Soul, and ravish it with Delights, notwithstanding all the
hardships and sufferings which come by Christ. For one Beam of Christ's
reconciled countenance and one glimpse of his Love will superabundantly
recompense the greatest sufferings for his sake. Wherefore let us lay aside
altogether all oblique aims, and collateral Interests, and in the simplicity
and singleness of our Hearts love Christ with the most ardent Affection. The
Shecemites embraced Circumcision upon a Politic Design, to compass in all the
Cattle and Substance of the Israelites. The People Genesis 34. 23.
followed Christ for the Loaves: And therefore the Gadarens petitioned for
Christ's departute, because they were so affected with the loss of their Swine,
insomuch that they preferred their Swine before a Jesus. A Man mentioned in the
Gospel, pretended such respect to Christ, as he offered to follow him whether
ever he went: But Christ who knew his Heart, discovered, that he only aimed at
his own accommodations for a dwelling place, as may appear by Christ's Answer,
Mat. 8. 20. And Jesus says unto him, The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of
the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has not whereon to lay his Head.

Herein consists the high commendation of Love, when self is abandoned, and the
Beloved is entirely embraced, and when we renounce all self Love, and in
Sincerity set our Affection on Jesus Christ, then our Love is genuine and of
the right stamp: For to love Christ for Himself and Holiness for its self is a
constitutive difference of a Child of God, a divisive difference to distinguish
a true from a counterfeit Lover, and one that loves in show and semblance,
from him that loves in reallity and in Truth.

5. Love to Christ must be constant and 5. Love to Christ must be constant.
lasting; we must not love him by fits and starts, as humors take us, and as
may serve most for our particular Interests: Both in Prosperity and Adversity,
in a Storm as well as in a Calm, in days of Afflictions and Troubles (when Wars
and Oppositions are multiplied) as well as in Halcionian Days of Peace and
Tranquillity, our love must be one and the same, fixed on Jesus Christ. The
Church was of such an excellent frame of Spirit, as to give thanks in a time of
God's displeasure, Isa. 12. 1. O Lord, I will praise thee, though thou wast
angry with me. Both in Prosperity and Adversity David had a fixed and an
established Spirit. For when his Soul was amongst Lions, and when their Teeth
was as Spears and Arrows, and their T^ngu^^a Psalm. 57. 7.
sharp Sword. When his Enemies prepared Nets and dug Pits for him, yet then
he professes, My Heart is fixed, O God, my Heart is fixed, I will sing and
give praise. And when he was in Prosperity he shows Ps. 108. 1.
the same excellent temper. O God my Heart is fixed, I will sing and give
praise, even with my Glory.

Love is that grand lasting Grace: It lasts unto Eternity. Faith and Hope carry
us (as I may say) to Heaven Doors and there leave us, for when we enter into
Heaven our Faith is turned into Vision, and our Hope is turned into Fruition;
there we shall enjoy the blessed Presence of the Holy Trinity: But Love abides
for ever. We shall always love God: Our Love is here begun on Earth and shall
never be consummated till we partake of Eternal Glory. Wherefore then whilst we
live here in this World, let us not abate a jot of our Love, but daily
endeavor after Augmentations: Notwithstanding Hardships and Oppositions from
the World, let our Love to Christ be like the Love of Jonathan that abode in
its Strength. Love which holds out to the end, which passes through good
report and bad report; both through fair and foul Weather: that is the Love
which will obtain Acceptance. Love will conquer Difficulties, as Jacob's did to
Rachel, who thought many years but a few days because he loved her. Love to
Christ will make us willing to pass through Fire and Water, and encounter Sons
of Anach, and Beasts of Ephesus. Love will cause a Christian to be willing to
bear and suffer any thing for Christ: Persecutions, Oppositions, and variety of
Sufferings, try the Sincerity and Constancy of a Christian's Love to Christ,
There Is a constraining Power in the Love of Christ, which engages all Christ's
adopted Children to hold fast their Profession, to be faithful to Death, to
account Christ All in all, and persevere in their Faith, so that Difficulties
are as Whet-stones to sharpen a Believers Fortitude. And the Snuffers of
Persecution makes the Saints Candles burn brighter. And thus in these five
mentioned particular Trials, I have represented our Love to Christ.

CHAP. XI.
Containing an Use of Exhortation to labor for the excellent Grace of Faith,
and an Use of Direction.

THe forth Use is for Exhortation. For Exhortation to labor for Faith.
Is it so that Christ is only precious to Believers, then let us hence infer one
grand Duty to labor for the excellent Grace of Faith. Hereby we shall set the
highest value on Christ. Faith is an instrumental means to help us to know the
excellency of Christ: For Faith is an Eye to ^ehold Christ, Faith is a Hand to
receive Christ, a Mouth to feed on him, an Heart to believe on him. But we must
interpose this caution, that Faith receives all of Grace, and Mercy, and
nothing of Merit. Faith embraces Christ, but Christ first gives Faith to
embrace him. Faith rests and relies on Christ, but Christ supports our Faith.
If we believe, he works it in us, we must be thankful for what we receive, and
give God the Praise and Glory of all. The Apostle gives an absolute
determination, Ephesians. 2. 8. For by Grace are ye saved through Faith, it is the
gift of God.

That our Endeavors, Affections, even the whole Man may be quickened to get
this choice and excellent Grace of Faith. I shall lay down these ensuing
persuasive Arguments in the following Section.

SECT. I. Containing persuasive Arguments to get Faith.
THat I may use all the prevailing Arguments (as far as I apprehend) to get
Faith, I shall insist on these following.

1. Faith is a condition of the Covenant of Grace. The Covenant of Works was,
Faith is the condition of the Covenant of Grace.
do this and live, none but Christ who is God and Man could perform this
Covenant. The Covenant of Works will not abate us a Transgression in the least
title: It exacts perfect Obedience, and curses the Transgressor. Who continues
not in all Gal. 3. 10.
things, which are written in the Book of the Law to do them: But the Covenant
of Grace runs, Believe and thou shall be saved. The Law shows us our Sores
and Wounds: the Gospel applies Sovereign healing Plasters. The Law like a
Sergeant arrests and shuts us up, and so hampers us that we cannot possibly
escape. The Gospel sets us at Liberty, Gal. 3. 22. But the (...) Lex veluti sit
complexa, concluserit que omnes in peccatum, peccaturum virsus ostendit. Oecum.
Romans 9. 20.
Scripture has concluded all Men under Sin, that the promise by Faith of Jesus
Christ might be given to them that believe. Who then can lay any claim to this
Covenant but the true Believer, God accepts the Faith of a Believer through
Chtist's Merits, instead of legal Obedience: Where fore we read of that
Righteousness which was of Faith, which is a Righteousness imputed by Christ's
Righteousness, even a Righteousness without us, which is our Justification. And
here is the great privilege of a Believer; That he is justified by the
Righteousness of another, and not by any Righteousness of his own, but only by
the Righteousness of Christ by imputation: By Christ's Merits; of Unrighteous
we are made Righteous. For says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he has made
him to be Sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness
of God in him. So that hence it is evident that He was accounted a Sinner by
Imputation, for he imputed our Sins unto himself, and we are accounted
Righteous by Imputation, for he imputes his Righteousness unto us. Here then
appears Riches of Mercies, that Evanglical Righteousness is accepted instead of
Legal Righteousness. Christ's Wisdom makes amends for our Folly: Christ's
Obedience for our Disobedience, and Christ's absolute Perfection, for our
manifold Imperfections.

Now the Believer only has interest in the Covenant of Grace. Covenants
essentially include Conditions. The Covenant is a free Covenant, a free Gift,
and of free Grace. The Condition on our part is Faith, but the Condition as
well as the Covenant are given of God. Take heed therefore O Christian that
thou Sacrifice not to thine own Net and Dragge: O do not trust to thy own
Strength and Ability, as if thou were able to perform this Condition: For the
best of Believers by rheir own Strength are no more able to believe, than to
perform the Commandments. Both to will and to do are the work Phil. 2. 13. Ki
(...). Chrysostom.
of God. And as Chrysostom observes, God gives the very propension and
inclination to will. Faith indeed is the Believers Act, and it is his duty to
believe, but it is God's Gift; Faith is a lively Motion working upon a Believers
Heart, but this Motion is powerfully wrought by the Assistance of God's Spirit.
Whoever thou art, if thou believe give God the praise of working this Belief
in thee: For God enables thee to perform what he requires, and thou could not
do any thing acceptably unto God, unless he first gave to thee what he
commands of thee. Hence the Apostle tells us, that We are buried with Col. 2.
12.
him in Baptism, through the Faith of the operation of God, who has raised him
from the dead. The self-same Power that raised up Christ from the Dead, must
raise us up to believe in Christ.

2. Faith is an instrumental means of our Faith is an Instrumental Means of our
Union unto Jesus Christ.
Union unto Christ. Between Christ and us there must be an Union, before there
can be an Imputation of Righteousness. We believe before we are Justified. How
Justification may be (as some suppose) ab Aeterno, I can no more conceive than
Glorification is, (such is in the secret Decree of God.) That Faith goes
before Justification is evident from Gal. 3. 24. The Law was our Schoolmaster
to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith. We believe that
we may be justified, Christ is said to be of God, made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. It Is said unto us who were first
united unto Christ by Faith; That is that which the Apostle prays for, That
Christ might Ephesians. 3. 17.
dwell in their Hearts by Faith. As there is a substantial Union between God
the Father and God the Son, so there is a Mystical Union between Christ and all
his Members. This (as the Apostle says) is a great Mystery concerning Christ
and his Ephesians. 5. 31. Ut indicet ad istam Spiritus ^nitatem opus esse solida et
constanti cohaesione, qualus est membrorum in corpore, and ramorum in
arboribus. Musc.
Church. And this Union the Apostle declares farther, 1 Cor. 6. 17. But he
that is joined unto the Lord is one Spirit: The Spirit on God's part, and Faith
on our part (which Faith we could not have, unless God first gave it) makes up
this Union between us and Christ, i. e. a Mystical Union. And by virtue of this
Union we paticipate of Juice and Nourishment from Christ, as the Branch does
from the Vine, and receive influence as a Member from the Head, and we receive
Supportation and Strength, as the Building from the Foundation. Farther yet in
the very Grave we shall yet remain united to Christ. For Christ will be with us
in the Grave. Every Saint is a part of Christ's Body, and not one Member can be
wanting, otherwise (which is impossible) Christ's Body would not be complete.
And these Bodies of ours, (if they be the Bodies of true Believers) they shall
be made like unto the glorions Body of Jesus Christ. Phil. 3. 21.


This Union is the ground of Communion with Christ. There' a mutual Union and
Communion between Christ and his Members, for in Christ there is a fullness, and
of his fullness we receive Grace for Grace. Joh. 1. 19.
There Is in Christ fullness of Wisdom to Counsel us, and of Mercy to pardon us,
of Righteousness to justify us, and of Holiness to sanctify us, and of Eternal
Glory to make us happy to all Eternity. The Head takes care of all the Members.
Christ the Head of his Church will not leave it destitute of Supplies and
continual Influences from him, Now it is Faith that makes particular application
of all the benefits of Christ. By Faith we draw virtue from Christ, and fetch
Supplies from him. In hearing, by Faith we taste the sweetness of God's Word:
In praying, by Faith we have a sacred Communion with God, and receive a
gracious answer of our Prayers; In receiving the Lord's Supper, by Faith we
feel Strength and Help for the subduing of our Corruptions. So then Faith is an
Instrument that makes Christ and all his Benefits our own by particular
Application.

3. Faith gives us Victory over all our 3. Faith gives us Victory over all our
Enemies.
Enemies. There are three grand Enemies of our Salvation, viz. the Flesh, the
Devil, and the World.

1. The Flesh ( i. e.) corrupt Nature is The first Enemy is the Flesh.
a grand Enemy, always plotting destructive Designs against us, and the harder
it is to be avoided, because it is an inbred Domestic Enemy, an Inhabitant
that lies in our Bosom, like the Siren it lulls us asleep, and then devoureth
us, it kisseth and kills, embraces and strangles, Inter amplexus strangulat.
and when it makes the most fair and plausible pretenses, then it intends the
most mischief. It Is an Enemy to God, even Enmity it self in the abstract. We
read of the miserable estate of unregenerate Men, who have this grand Infamy To
(...). Rom 8. 7. Hic observemus hominis voluntatem divinae voluntati per omnia
adversari. Calv.
stamped on them fulfilling the desires of the Flesh: In the Original it is (...)
Ephesians. 2. 3. The Wills of the Flesh, plainly showing that the Flesh has a
commanding Will requiring Obedience. And the Flesh has an enticing alluring
way to entice Sinners, and draw them with all alluring Persuasions to follow
that way that leads to Destruction. For we read of Seducers that they allure
through the Lusts of the Flesh, 1 Pet. 2. 18. The Expression is emphatical
(...): They lay a bait and so allure to the rnine of those that take it. We
must beware of the Baits of the Flesh, least if we swallow them we be choked
by them. Many Diswasives the Scripture gives against lusting, loving and living
after the Flesh. It Is the Apostles charge, and entreaty both, 1 Pet. 2. 11.
Dearly Beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims abstain from fleshly
Lusts: And there is a strong Argument added to persuade in the following Words,
which war against the Soul. The Flesh sets it self in battle array, and uses
all the battering Engines which it can invent, that it may conquer the royal
Cittadal of our Immortal Souls. Other diswasives which the Scripture uses
against the Flesh are, Romans 8. 6. To be carnally minded is Death. And Romans 8.
8. They that are in the Flesh, that is, they that abide in the state of
unregeneracy, they cannot please God. And Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 15. 50.


Now having discovered our Enemies, let us prepare to encounter with them, and
the Weapon which we must use is Faith: For Faith is an Instrument to subdue our
selves even unto our selves, even corrupt self unto renewed self. When thy
pretended Friend ( i. e.) thy Flesh, but rather that real Enemy, which (as I
may compare) is as a Snake, which is in thy Bosom; I mean corrupt Nature
enticeth and allureth thee to Sin, and assaults thee with renewed Forces; fight
by a strong Faith against this dangerous Enemy: so through the strength of God
thy corrupt self will be subdued unto thy renewed self, ( i. e.) the Flesh unto
the Spirit.

A second Enemy is the Devil. The A second Enemy is the Devil.
Devil throws Darts, and not ordinary Darts, but fiery Darts: Wherefore the
Apostle exhorts us above all taking the Shield Ephesians. 6. 16.
of Faith, where with we shall be able to quench the fiery Darts of Satan. The
Devil is a potent Adversary compared to a Lion for Strength; and not to a Lion
penned up in his Den, but to a rageing Lion; not a sleepy, but a roaring Lion;
not a lazy, but an industrious Lion; and industrious to act Cruelties.
Wherefore the Apostle's caution is both seasonable and necessary, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Be sober, be vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion
walks about, seeking whom he may devour. And what is the Weapon offensive and
defensive against this potent Enemy? The Apostle prescribes it, ver. 9. Whom
resist steadfast in the Faith: This Adversary has strong holds. And the 2 Cor.
10. 4.
Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling
down of strong holds. Luther used to say. Although Esto Diabolus magnipoteris,
nunquam eris Omnipotens. Luth.
the Devil could do great things, yet he shall never do all things. This
Adversary is a subtle Adversary: He has Devices, Methods, Snares, and Depths.
He is an inveterate and long experienced Enemy; He uses all the Sophistry and
subtle devices to seduce Mankind. To Envy he adds Lies, and to Lies malicious
Prosecutions, and the most exquisite arts of cunning conveyance to destroy
precious and immortal Souls. How necessary is it for us to be always ready
armed with the Divine Panoply, even the complete Armor of a Christian, viz.
The Ephesians. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17.
Girdle of Truth, the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Shoes of the Gospel of
Peace, the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the
Spirit. Let us fight with these Weapons, and we shall overcome. Let us resist
the Devil, and he will Jam. 4. 7.
flee from us. Notwithstanding all the Arts of Legerdemain and the cunningest
sort of Sophistry which Satan uses, a well grounded unfeigned Faith (which
works by love, and purifieth the Conscience, and which relyeth and stays
upon God's Promises) this Faith under God will conquer Satan's subtle
Machinations. This is the Faith which will be victorious. Such a Faith joined
with fervent Prayer was in Luther, who fasted and prayed for a young Man at
Wittenberg who had given his Soul to the Devil: Whereupon the Devil threw in
the Indenture through the Window. Let Faith hold out, and let the strength of
Faith act vigorously, then will the Temptations of Satan be quickly vanquished.

3. Enemy is the World, with all its 3. Enemy is the World.
Riches, Honor, Grandeur, Pomp and Bravery: These tempt and allure Men to
Conformity to them. The World throws to one a Ball of Pleasure, to another a
Ball of Honor, to a third a Ball of Profit, and exceeding great Riches. O!
what sweet melodious Music does the World play, and how does it bewitch
Multitudes to dance after the World's Pipe, and how many are there who for the
fruition of a few paltry Delights of this present World have hazarded their
Souls to all Eternity? What way then is their left to get Victory over the
World? The Apostle informs us, 1 John 5. 4. This is the Victory that overcomes
the World, even our Faith. Where Faith is principled in the Word of God, it
will prevail with a Christian not to be conformed Romans 12. 2. 1 John 2. 15.
to the World: And not to love the World. Faith will help a Christian to live
above the World, and to mind heavenly things, and to have his Conversation in
Heaven. And thus through the strength of Faith being acted and enlivened by the
strength of Jesus Christ, we get Victory over our Spiritual Enemies, viz. the
Flesh, the Devil, and the World.

4. Faith gives us a Title to, and Interest 4. Faith gives us a Title to, and
Interest in the Divine Promises. 2 Cor. 2. 20. Tim. 4. 8.
in the Divine Promises. All the Promises are made in Christ, and in him they
are yea and Amen. Now Believers have only a propriety in the Promises: without
Faith we can lay no claim to any Promise. Godliness (says the Apostle) has
the Promises of this Life and that which is to come. There Is a love of
Beneficence, whereof all Creatures are partakers: Not the least creeping
Creature but tastes of God's Bounty: God feeds the poorest Creature. This is a
general Providence which extends to all good and bad, just and unjust. The Sun
shines on the unjust as well as on the just, through God's common Bounty. But
how many Curses, Forfeitures, and Variety of Mischeifs befall wicked Men, so
that their Bread is Gravel, their Table their Snare, their Bed a Bed of Thorns;
They have outward Riches, and no Man should rob them because they are wicked,
yet they have them unsanctifyed, they have not God's Turkium Imperium quantum
est, est nisi mica Panis, quam Pater Familias pro^icit su^ Canibus. Luth.
reconciled Countenance to comfort them. Therefore Luther, speaking of the
Turkish Empire, says, that as great as it is, it is no more than a Crum of
Bread, which the Father of the Family gives to his Dogs. Whatsoever wicked Men
have is ex largitione, of common Bounty and by virtue of a general Providence.
But Godly Men enjoy all their Substance, ex speciali Providentia and Promisso.
They have Christ with all their worldly Enjoyments. They receive all outward
things in Mercy, and sanctified. Not a Bit of Bread a Believer eats but it is
by virtue of a Promise: Wherefore Faith helps a Believer in all Streights and
Difficulties, to apply the Promises for his Supportation and Consolation.

Poor Persons plead their wants and pressing Poverty: But Faith answers all
Objections by proposing the Promises, one is, Psalm. 35. 9, 10. O fear the Lord
ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him: The young Lions do
lack and suffer hunger: But they that seek the Lord shall not want any good
thing. Another is, Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord God is a Sun and Shield, the Lord
will give Grace and Glory, no good thing will he withold from them that walk
uprightly. A third is, Matthew. 6, 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and
his Righteousness and all these things shall be added unto you. A fourth
Promise is, Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own. Son, but delivered him up
for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things. And that
one Promise may be added, ex abundanti, the last but not the least of what has
been already mentioned, viz. Heb. 13. 5. Let your Conversation be without
Covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have, for he has said I
will never leave leave thee nor forsake thee.

Those five Negatives have the force of (...)
the strongest Negation. Consider that all the Faithful are the Household and
Family of God, and he is never a whit the poorer by maintaining Multitudes Rich
Men may decrease in their Estates by being over liberal to others: this the
Mu^^^ Pat^imonia estude^run^^^c^^sulte (...) end. Q^id autem stultiui est quam
quod libe^ters ^acias (...) diuti^^ (...)? (...) Offic. l. ^*
Orator reproves as a very great folly: But God by giving wastes not. The Sun
loses no Light by communicating Light to others: For its Light cannot be
wasted. The Fountain loses no Water by giving Water to Streams. Now God is a
Light never extinct, a Fountain never exhausted; all the Granaries, Treasures,
Cattle on a Thousand Mountains, and all the Hearts of Men, are at Gods
disposing, and he orders them all for the supply of his People. There Is no
deficiency, nor weakness nor Poverty in God.

All the Promises are the Believers Interest, or Magna Charta, for Heaven: They
are so many Wells of Salvation. And Faith (through Gods Gift is a Bucke^ to
Isa. 12. 3.
draw Waters of Consolation out of those Wells. All the Promises are as so many
Breasts of Consolation, and Faith is as i were a Mouth to suck Milk out of
those Breasts.

Wherefore in all Conditions inward or outward, let Faith act on Promises, and
depend on them, and by experience a Believer will find ground of singular
support and comfort in the Promises.

5. Faith gives us an insight into Heaven 5. Faith gives us an insight into
Heaven, and a Prospect* of Eternity.
and a prospect into eternity, Paul was wrapped up into the third Heaven and by
Faith had a foretast of those unspeakable Joys. A Reverend and emineg^ly
learned Divine gives his conjecture that at that time when Paul was Stoned, ^^
was in a Trance, and saw the third Heaven. The Reaon of his Supposition he
gives, because the self same Year that Paul was Stoned, he was caught up into
the third Heaven. A. B. U^^^r.
Stephen by the Eye of Faith (though the Stones were about his Ears) saw the
Heavens opened, and Christ standing at the Right Hand of his Father. Job on the
Dunghill when he was scraping himself with a Pot-shread by the eye of Faith saw
his Redeemer. By Faith Moses amidst all the Reproaches and Cruel Bondage in
Egypt, saw the recompense of reward. Faith is the Eye, whereby we peep through
the Curtains of Mortality, and take a view of the Glory of Heaven. By Faith we
enjoy Communion, with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, we receive the first Fruits
of that plentiful Harvest, earnest, or part of payment of a greater Sum, which
we shall receive in Heaven. The Glory which is to be revealed is apprehended in
part in this Life, by true Believers. We have a pledge and some foretasts of
the Glory in Heaven. What necessity then is incumbent on us to get this Grace
of Faith both as to the truth and growth thereof? We have such daily need of
Faith as we cannot live without it. When we pray, Faith makes us successful;
when we hear the Word, Faith helps us to profit; when we suffer Affliction,
Faith helps us to be Patient. In a Word in dissertion Faith makes us
comfortable; in Trials and Encounters, Faith makes us so courageous as to stop
the Mouths of Lions, quench the Heb. 11* 33, 34.
violence of Fire, etc. In Life Faith makes us fruitful, and in Death Faith
makes us Victorious. And whilst we live in this World Faith helps us to a
Prospect of Heaven. As the Israelites saw a glimps of Canaan, though a far off,
whilst they were in the Wilderness; so a true Believer by the Eye of Faith sees
the Heavenly Canaan: He enjoys a Sacred Acquaintance and Communion with God in
his Covenants, Promises Gracious Influences, so that by Faith we enjoy an
Heaven upon Earth, ( i. e.) some fore-tasts of that Eternal Happiness which is
reserved in Heaven for us.

SECT. II. Containing an Use of Direction.
SEeing then (as it is evident by the for Direction how to get and increase
Faith.
premises) that only true Believers set a high estimate upon Christ, and Faith
is essentially requisite to get and keep so high an estimation of Christ. I
shall now proceed to the 5th. Use, which is for Direction, how we may get, and
increase Faith. To this purpose, I shall prescribe some means partly internal,
and partly external both exceeding necessary.

First for Internal, Means, and that is the The Spirit is an internal means of
getting Faith.
Holy Spirit of God. Faith is a Divine Habit infused into the Soul by the
Spirit of God: Hence we are said to have the Spirit of Faith. 2 Cor. 5. 13. The
Spirit does not stand in need of Moral Persuasions to excite us to Faith
leaving it to the indifferency of our wills and understandings whether we will
choose, or refuse, assent, or dissent: But the Spirit of God Nolentem praevenit
ut velit volentem subsequitur ne frustra velit, Arg. de Great. and lib. Arg.
works powerfully and irresistably, and of unwilling makes us willing by
antecedent Grace, and of willing makes us more willing by Subsequent Grace. The
Seeds of Faith are not sown in our Nature. We are Dead as were those dry Bones,
mentioned by Ezekiel. 37. 2.
Ezekiel, until the Spirit of God infuse vital Operations into the Soul. The
Beginnings of Augmentations and finishings of our Faith all proceed from the
Operations of the Spirit of God. Where this Spirit is, it opens the eyes of the
Mind, that so we may understand the infinite value of Christ, and the absolute
necessity of Faith to make particular application of him unto our selves. Faith
is a wise gift of God, and it makes Believers wise unto Salvation. Faith and
knowledge are hand-fasted and may not be separated. Joh. 17. 3. This is Life
Eternal to know thee to be the true God, and him whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ. (...), Clem. Alex.
There can be (says a Learned Author) no Knowledge without Faith, nor any
Faith without Knowledge.

2. The Spirit of God as it opens the eyes, so it inclines the will to yield
ready Obedience unto Christ. As soon as Divine Light breaks in upon the Soul by
the powerful illumination of the Spirit, then by the assistance of the same
Spirit, the will is made pliable and willing, and becomes as swift in it is
Motions as the Chariots of Aminadab, to embrace Jesus Christ with the Arms of
Faith. Now we cannot Cant. 6. 12. John 6. 44. Cant. 1. 4.
come to Christ, unless the Father draw us. Wherefore the Spouse prays, draw
me, and I will run after thee. Though we are not to be accounted as mere
Stocks, and Stones; (Because God has endew'd us with a reasonable Soul, and
the faculties of understanding and Will) yet unless we be assisted with
Supernatural strength, we cannot perform any Supernatural works: We must fetch
strength from Heaven, otherwise we cannot perform any Spiritual action in a
Spiritual manner, But being prevented and assisted by Divine Grace, we can
cooperate through the assistance of that Strength, as the Apostle professes.
Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. We cannot
understand any saving Mystery, till the Spirit inlightens us, neither can we
will any good thing till the Spirit of God inclines us: But by the assistance
of the Spirit we have our eyes opened to discern what is good, and our Wills
inclind to act what is good. Having mentioned the Internal means of getting and
increasing Faith,

I come now to the External means, and External means of getting and increasing
Faith.
they are three, the Word, Prayer, and the Lords Supper.

1. The Word is an External means 1. The Word is a means to get and increase
Faith.
both to get and increase Faith: and we are to consider the Word in a threefold
Capacity as it is Read, Preached, and Meditated on; and in all these respects
the Word exceedingly conduces both to the begetting and increasing of Faith.

1. The Word read is an Instrumental 1. The Word read.
means both for the begetting and augmenting of Faith. John Huss (whom Luther
calls Sanctissimum Martyrem) was Converted by reading of the Scriptures.
Reading of Scriptures in public Assemblies is an Ordinance of God, and
anciently practiced, for we read. Neh. 8. 8. So they read in the Book, in the
Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the
reading. It Is our Duty likewise in our private Houses, and in our Closets to
read the Word of God. Joshuah, a great General, is Commanded to read the Book
of the Law: His Military Employment allows no dispensation from reading of the
Book of God. He (notwithstanding his great and weighty affair) was enjoined
both to speak of, and Meditate in the Law of God Day and Night, This Josh. 1. 8.
Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy Mouth, but thou shall meditate
therein both Day and Night, that thou may observe to do, according to all that
is Written therein, for then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and Deuteronomy. 17,
18.
thou shall have good Success, The Book of Books, Kings themselves must read:
And it shall be when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall
write a Copy of this Law out of a Book, out of that which is before the Priest
and Levites. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the Days
of his Life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words
of this Law, and these Statutes to do them. The Holy Scripture is the Rule of
the Government, and the Conversation of the greatest Potentates. By keeping
close to the Rule of Scriptures, they both learn to govern well, and live well.
We read Acts 15. 21. For Moses in old time has in every City them that Preach
him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. The meaning I suppose to
be this, that after reading an Exposition was given of the sense and meaning.
It concerns all sorts of Persons to read the Scriptures. It Is the Peoples Duty
(though Popish Priests Sacriligiously Rob the People of the reading of the
Scriptures) to read the Scriptures, there is an express charge given. Deuteronomy. 66.
7, 8. Deuteronomy, 31. 11, 12. And Christ gives a strict Joh. 5. 39.
command, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Everlasting Life,
and they are they which testify of me. The Apostle Paul charge Timothy to
give attendance 1 Timothy 4. 13.
unto reading: If then we would get Faith in Christ, we must read and study the
Word of God. Every one is bound to believe with an Explicit Faith and not to
take things upon trust by an implicit Faith from Popish Priests: We must see
with our own eyes (as the Spirit of God has opened them) and not trust upon
the Popes Spectacles. It Is a great Sacrilege in the Pope and his Adherents to
keep the Scriptures from the sight of such (as they call Lay People) It was in
Q. Mary's days Prohibited to read the Bible, and some for reading of it were
brought to trouble, as William Hunter, and others, as in the Fox Acts and Mon.
Q. M.
Acts and Monuments stands upon Record. And K. Hen. Eighth made a severe Law
against the reading of the Scriptures in English. Bellarmine denies the reading
of Catholic^ Ecclesia statuit ne passim omnibus concedatur S^ript urarum
Lectio. Bellarm. L. 2. de verbo Dei.
Scriptures to all, so does Molanus, Costerus, Stapleton, and others of that
Bran. But are not People commanded to try the Spirit. 1 John 4. 1. and to prove
all things, and to hold fast that which is good. 1 These. 5. 21. But how can
they do this unless they search the Scriptures. Let us than consider it is our
Duty, and make it our business to hear the Word read in Public Congregations,
and to read it frequently when we are in private. Let Us both hear and read with
a serious reverential frame of Spirit: Let Us in reading compare the Old
Testament with the New, how the Old Testament abounds with Prophecies and
Promises concerning Christ, and how the New Testament makes Performances of
them. 2. The Word Preached.


2. As we must read the Word, so we must with due regard hear it Preached. The
Word read is sound and solid, and contains a sincere Milk, but something like
the Milk sucked out of a Sucking Bottle, which through our weaknesses and dull
Apprehensions may sometimes be dispirited: But the Word Preached is like the
Breast Milk: It being delivered with Power, and viva voce, is like the Breast
Milk most Nutritive. Though God can work without means, yet ordinarily he
vouchsafes his Blessing upon the Word Preached in the demonstration of the
Spirit and Power. The Ephesians. 6. 17. Isai. 53. 1. Romans 1. 16. 2 Cor. 5. 19. Heb.
4. 12.
Preaching of the Word is called the sword of the Spirit, the Arm of the Lord,
the Power of God unto Salvation, the Word of Reconciliation, It Is an exact
Critic of the thoughts, It divides between the Joints and Marrow: There Is no
such exact Inquisitor as the Word Preached: It will find out a Sinner in the
Crowd and tell him thou art the Man. Though the Preacher knows nothing of such
and such secret Crimes, whereof the Sinner is guilty (for no Man has
acquainted him with them, yet the word of God meets with the Sinner, and by the
powerful Ministry of the word the most secret sins are discovered, the most
hidden works of darkness are brought to Light. Some, when such sins have been
Preached against, have discovered their Murders Committed long before. The
Power of the word has so prevailed that the most secret Sinner has been
discovered, and with a troubled Spirit has addressed himself to the Preacher
by acknowledging of his Sins, and begging Prayers and Counsels for his Souls
edification. Neither Mountains nor Castles, neither Rocks nor Foretresses can
be able to withstand the conquering Power of the Word of God. If than we would
get and increase Faith. We must attend at the Posts of Wisdoms Gate, and (as
Bartimaeus did) we must lie in the way where Christ comes by. We must wait at
the Pool of Bethsdah, where the Angel will come and stir the Waters. We must
neglect no Sermon, for that Sermon, for ought we know might be a means of our
Conversion or Confirmation. The Apostle tells us, Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Therefore if we would get Faith, we
must attend with all reverence and diligence unto the Ministry of the Word.
Faith is like Oil to the Lamp, as it causes it at first to give light, so by
additions of supplies it keeps it Burning. Therefore let us neither absent our
selves from the Word read, nor from the Word preached. Both are Instruments to
get and increase Faith.

3. Both to reading and hearing let us 3. The Word Meditated.
join Meditation, otherwise we may loose the fruit of our Labors. Meditation
is the Spiritual Digestion of the Soul: It Psalm 4. 4. ^uk. 2. 19. J^r. 8. 6.
consists in a Communing with our own Hearts, a pondering, a calling our selves
to an account, and asking the Question, What have I done: It Is a ruminating,
digesting, a making what we hear or read our own by a particular application.
It Is true the work is difficult, it is as it were the climbing up a great Hill,
but it is exceeding profitable and comfortable. For this Meditation is a Divine
Contemplation whereby we have a view and Prospect of Eternity. It Is the Wing of
the Soul, by help whereof it soars aloft as high as Heaven. Wherefore that we
may profit by the Word read and by the Word preached, we must exercise our
selves seriously and frequently in this Divine art of Meditation. This was the
frequent practice of David Ps 63. 6. Ps. 119.
to Meditate on God in the night watch. He both Meditated on the Word of God
^^n the Works of God. He awakened with God in the Morning, and lay down with
him in the Evening by heavenly meditation. The Character he gives of a blessed
Man is, that his delight is in the Law of the Psalm. 1. 2.
Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and night. This was Isaac's practice
to meditate in the Field at the eventide. Genesis 24. 63.
He went out and sequestered himself from other Company, that he might enjoy
Communion with God. This then is the choice and excellent means for Christians
to thrive in Faith, Love, and all the Graces of the Spirit, and to be good
Proficients in the School of Christ, when they addict themselves unto frequent
and serious Meditation.

A Second External Means both of getting 2. Prayer is a means of getting and
increasing Faith.
and increasing Faith is Prayer. Faith is worth the asking for: Let Us then ^e
earnest and sollicitous to the Throne o^ Grace to obtain it. Let Us pray with
the Disciples, Lord increase our Faith; For he that has true Faith is desirous
of accessions thereunto: He finds many things wanting in his Faith, and
therefore he prays for daily Supplies and Augmentations. Let Us pray as the Man
in the Gospel did, Lord I believe, help my unbelief. There (...). 1 Thessalonians. 3.
10.
may be the Root of the Matter, even true Faith in a Christian, yet he* is
sensible of his Unbelief. He apprehends the remainders of Infidelity vexing him
as a broken Bone, he meets sometimes with Fears* Doubtings and Perplexities,
distracting Thoughts, but these things are his Burden and a Perplexity upon
his Spirit^^ Herein consists our Duty to be much i^ Prayer, that God would give
us the Spiri^^ of Faith. The Spirit is promised to thos^ that ask for it. And
it is the Spirit tha^ works Faith in us, and Prayer is an Instrumental means to
get the Spirit. God promises his Spirit, Luke 11. 13. and Matt^ 7. 11. He
promises to give good things t^^ them that ask him: which evidently shew^ that
God by giving his Spirit gives a^ good things. Let Us then be quickened t^ our
Duty to pray in Faith, and to pray for more Faith, and then we shall be sur^ to
speed, Matthew. 21. 22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer,
believin^ ye shall receive. Go then to God and complain of thy unbelieving
Heart, mour^ for it, be earnest and importunate for Faith. As Rachel cried out,
Give me Chi^dren or else I die; so cry out Lord, giv^ me Faith or else I am
undone. Lo^^ strengthen my weak Faith; quicken m^ dull Faith: thus making our
application to God in the Name of Christ, we sha^ receive a gracious Answer.

3. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper ^. The Sacrament ^^ the Lord's Supper is
a great means to confirm our Faith.
is a great means to confirm our Faith: It Is to be necessarily presupposed that
before we come to the Lord's Table we must have Faith, otherwise we cannot
discern the Lord's Body. There is a great difference between the Word, and the
Lord's Supper: For the Word both begets* and increases Faith, but the Lord's
Supper ordinarily increases Faith where it was begun before. The Sacrament is
a Seal, and God does not set his Seal to a Blank. An ignorant Person is as a
Blank, and he has no right to approach unto the Lord's Supper. An ignorant
Person is more fit to go a g^azing with Nebuchadnezzar amongst the Beasts of
the Field, than to participate of the Sacramental Elements of Bread and Wine:
exhibiting Christ Sacramentally to the Faith of true Believers. And profane
Persons are uncircumcised in Heart. No uncircumcised Person ought to
participate of the Passover, neither may the uncircumcised in Heart, any
debauched scandalous Liver presume to approach unto the Lord's Table. There was
but one Man who came without a wedding Garment, and Christ found him out and
doomed him to Judgment. Such then as walk in their Pollutions, and with profane
Hands and Hearts receive the Holy Eucharist expose themselves to dreadful
Judgments both temporal and eternal, 1 Cor. 11. 28. For he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation unto himself* not discerning
the Lord's Body. It Is of absolute necessity that we should labor for Faith,
pray for Faith, read the Word, hear it preached and meditate on it, that we may
get Faith. And upon survey of our Hearts and diligent Inquisition, when we find
our Faith weak and flagging we should add more unto our Prayers, and apply our
selves to the sealing Ordinance of the Lord's Supper. Sometimes we may not meet
with God in the Word read: our dullness may not apprehend the manifestation of
God's gracious Countenance unto our Souls. Therefore we must apply our selves
to the Word preached: It may be through our inadvertency and distractions, we
may not meet with God in the Word preached. Let Us then fall upon our Knees in
earnest Prayer: It may be God may hide his Face from us. Some Jonah we must
cast over Shipboard, and then there will be a Calm: Some Achan must be stoned
and then the Valley of Achor will be a Door of Hos. 2. 14.
Hope. And to hearing. reading, and praying; let us with preparation receive the
Holy Sacrament, Before we go thither let us do as the Jews did in case of
Leaven; They first made diligent inquisition, and took a Candle and searched
every Corner throughout: Having found Leaven they cast it out: And i^ they
found none, they took a voluntary curse upon themselves, if willingly they left
any Leaven in their Houses. Let us go and do likewise: Let us light up a double
Candle, viz. the Candle of the Word, and the Candle of our own Consciences,
then upon discovery of any Sin, let us loath abhor and cast it out, and
willingly allow our selves in no Sin. When we receive the Lord's Supper we
either do, or I am sure should do so, even enter into a solemn Covenant to
amend our Lives: And how much is our Faith strengthened by the Reformation of
our Lives? For Faith and Obedience, Faith and purification of the Heart go
together, and cannot be separated. Thus I have showed both internal and
external Means of getting and increasing Faith.

CHAP. XII.
Concluding with the sixth Use for Consolalation.

AND now to put a period to this Treatise, For Consolation.
I shall close with a Word of Consolation unto all true Believers, the adopted
Children of God. They esteem Christ precious, his Ordinances precious, his
Ministry, and all his Members precious, his Day, i. e. the Lord's day Sabbath,
they esteem precious, and account it the delight of their Souls; to such as
these I shall apply an Use of Consolation upon a double Ground.

1. Because they are precious in the account of Christ; hence they ground their
Comfort.

2. From the choice and Fruits which they receive from Justification by Faith
in Christ. 1. All true Believers are precious in Christ's estimation.


1. All true Believers are precious in Christ's estimation. Christ first prized
and valued them, making them precious by the application of his precious
Merits, before they knew how to prize him: Christ first loved them before they
loved him. Now if a Creature, a Man, can set such an high price on Christ,
after Christ has enlightened him to discern his inestimable Dignity; O! how
much more does God the Father prize Christ his Beloved Son in whom he is well
pleased? And if we honor Christ he will honor us. Let us therefore take a
narrow view, and thence make a Judgment, how precious all true Believers are in
the Eyes of Christ. This shall be evidenced in these four Demonstrations. 1.
Christ gives precious Names unto all true Believers. 2. Believers have interest
in Christ's precious Merit. 3. They have the precious influences of his Spirit.
And 4. Christ assures them of a precious Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven.
In all these respects it will abundantly be evidenced, That all true Believers
are precious in the estimation of Christ. For a distinct enlargement of these
Particulars.

SECT. I. Proving that Believers are precious in the account of Christ, and
this is a ground of their Comfort.
THere are in Scripture several precious Demonst. 1.
Names given by God the Father and God the Son unto all true Believers.

1. They have precious Names sounding ^. Believers have precious Names.
forth Bowels of Affection.

2. Precious Names of Honor and Dignity.

1. Christ gives Believers precious 1. Names of Affection. Heb. Mat. 12. 50.
Joh. 10. 28. Lnke 12. 36. Joh. 21. 15. Jer. 12. 7. Genesis 24. 31. Cant. 12. 2
Names full of Affection: He calls them Children, Friends, Brethren, Brother,
Sister, Mother, Sheep-Flock, Lambs. Further yet, the Saints are called the
dearly beloved of the Lord: The Spouse of Christ. From all those Names and
affectionate Titles given unto the Children of God, may evidently appear how
high they are in his estimation. Now then to wrong a Servant of Christ is to
wrong his Friend, his Brother, his Spouse. And questionless Christ will Revenge
those Injuries and Indignities which are offered unto his Servants.

And as there are Names of Affection, so 2 Names of Honor and Dignity.
there are Names of high Honor and Dignity put upon the Saints, even the
Living Members of the Body of Christ, for

First they are called Gods peculiar Treasure. Exodus 17. 5. That (as a Learned
Author Abulensis in Exodus 17. 5.
observes) is called Peculium, which the Son and Heir of the House has of his
own, besides the right of his Fathers Inheritance, which he may dispose of as
he thinks good. So though the Earth be the Lord Christ's by right of
Inheritance, yet he has an interest in his Church above all other. Add further
they are accounted Gods Jewels. Mal. 3. 17. Although vile and profane Persons
account Gods Children no better than the Offscouring 1 Cor. 4. 13. Scobem aut
Rumentum aut quicquid limando deteritur. Budaus. 1 Cor. 4. 13. (...) suut
Purgamenta aut excrementa seu quaequae de re immunda qua una fiat pura ne
pecatur in metallis Scocii in uno aut olei faeces. Illyric.
and Filth of the World, and no better than the Whitlings of Sticks, and the
Filth that comes from the scouring of Pots, yet God esteems them as his Jewels;
and whose Judgment will you take the Judgment of the Wise Infallible Lord God,
or the Judgment of foolish sin^ul Men?

2. They are accounted Kings and Priests unto God. Rev. 1. 5. When Gideon had
Zeba and Zalmunnah his Captives he propounded this Question unto them, What
manner of Men were they whom ye slew at Tabor? They Answered. As thou art, so
were they, eac^ one resembling the Children of a King. Judge. 8. 18. So will
Christ ask the Question, who are they whom you, the Men of the World, Revile
and Persecute? Who are they whom ye scorn and trample on? Are they vile,
contemptible Persons? No they are Spiritual Kings and Priests, Persons
Honorable in the account of God. And therefore as Gideon put Zeba and
Zalmunnah to Death for killing his Brethren, so will God severely punish the
Wicked of the World for all the Injuries and Persecutions, which they have done
unto the Children of God. However Ignorant Profane and Malicious Men debase and
scorn such as truly fear God, yet they are precious in the Sight of God and
honorable. There are many complicated Isa. 43. 4.
Epithets of Honor joined together. 1 Pet. 2. 9. But ye are a chosen
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a Peculiar People.

3. They are accounted a Crown of Glory, 3. They are accounted a Crown of Glory.
and a Royal Diadem, Isai. 62. 3. God calls his People his Glory. Isai. 46. 13.
I will plead Salvation in Sion for Israel my Glory. And the Saints are called
the House of Gods Glory, Isai. 60. 7. More yet they are called the Throne of
Glory. Jer. 4. 21. What need I enlarge further? All Gods Children are Col. 12.
Deu. 32. 9. Jer. 12. 10. Is. 19. 25.
Saints, his Portion, his pleasant Portion, His Inheritance. Other People are
the Work of Gods hands, but Israel is his Inheritance. They are the Church, the
Family, of the Firstborn, the Sons and Daughters of the Living God. In all
these respects (and many more which might be mentioned) it evidently appears
how precious all Christ's Members are in his estimation, and this is a singular
ground of Consolation unto them.

I proceed to a second Demonstration De mon. 2. All true Believers have
Interest in Christ's Precious Merits.
that all Believers have interest in Christ's precious Merits. Christ's
Redemption and Intercession: Christ's Blood, his Agony, his Sweating in the
Garden, his Crucifixion upon the Cross, all these were for his People. Isai.
53. 5. He was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our
Iniquities? The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we
are healed? So that hence it evidently appears, that Believers, and they alone,
have interest in Christ's Merits, and enjoy the benefits flowing from them. They
are his Seed, the Church, his Body, his Members, (...) Redeemed ones, a
Peculiar People. For them Christ prayed, Joh. 17. 9. For them Christ shed his
Precious Blood: For them he became a Ransom and a Price of Redemption. For
them he Died and Rose again: For says the Apostle, Romans 4. 25. Who was
delivered for our Offenses, and rose again for our Justification. And which is
the highest Degree of Christ's meriting for us: He took our Sins upon him by
imputation, as the Apostle says, the 2 Cor. 5. 21. For he has made him to be
Sin for us who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in
him.

A third Demonstration is, That Believers Demon. 3. Believers have the Precious
Influences Christ's Spirit.
have the Precious Influences of the Spirit of Christ. All true Believers do
partake of such Heavenly Influences as are from the Head shed down upon the
Members. Now the Influences of the Spirit of Christ are discovered.

1. By the Graces of the Spirit, and the resemblances whereunto the Spirit is
compared.

1. For the Graces of the Spirit or Fruits they are mentioned, Ephesians. 5. 9.
Goodness, Righteousness and Truth. And a large enumeration is set down, Ephesians. 5.
22, 23. Love, Joy, Peace, Long-Suffering, Gentleness, Faith, Meekness,
Temeprance: Every Grace is the Fruit of the Spirit. Now Christ as Head
Communicates Grace to all his Members, and they receive according to their
Measure and Proportion. There Is in Christ a fullness of Wisdom to Counsel, of
Mercy to Pardon, of Righteousness to Justify, of Holiness to Sanctify. And Pro
Legis gratia quae praeteriit gratiam Evangelii accepimus hanc manentem and pro
numbris and imaginibus veteris Testamenti gratia and veritas per Christum facta
est. Aug. Epist. 11.
there is a derivation from the Root to the Branches, Joh. 1. 16. And of his
fullness have all we received and Grace for Grace.

2. Lets consider the Resemblances whereunto the Spirit is compared.

There are certain Metaphors mentioned in the Scripture, whereby the Properties
and Influences of the Spirit of God are more evidenced, as for instance. 1. The
Spirit is compared to a Fire.


1. The Spirit is compared to a Fire.

1. As Fire enlightens and gives Light to a whole Room; so the Spirit of God
inlightens the understanding.

2. Fire ascends, so where the Spirit of God is, there the affections are
raised from Earth to Heaven.

3. Fire is Consumptive, it burns Stubble, so does the Spirit burn and consume
Corruptions.

4. Fire has a penetrative virtue to creep into the pores of a combustible
Body. So does the Spirit penetrate the Windings and Diverticles of the Heart:
The Spirit searches the Reins and discovers the most hidden things.

5. Fire does inflame and transform things into its own nature: It makes
combustible matter like it self: So the Spirit of God fills the Soul with a
Divine Ardour. It Is called the Spirit of burning, Isa. 4. 4. where the Spirit
of God comes it purges away the Dross of Corruptions by the Spirit of Judgment
and by the Spirit of Burning.

2. The Spirit is compared unto Water. 2. The Spirit is compared to Water. 1.
Water has a quenching Virtue.
In Water there is a quenching and purifying Property.

1. In Water there is a quenching Property. Water quenches Fire, at least
abates and cools the heat; so where God's Spirit comes, it sometimes quenches
the heat of inordinate Passions, and sometimes abates cools and moderates the
heat of them; God's Spirit is a Spirit of Meekness. A Man's own Spirit is a
boistrous Spirit, which upon any disgust is all in a Flame. But God's Spirit
extinguisheth the heat of Fury and Anger. When Christ bad the raging Sea be
still, there was a great Calm: so when the Spirit of God comes into the Spirit
of Man it becalms all the Affections, it sets them in order and fixes them
upon the right Objects. Philosophers write, De sedandis affectibus, and yet
they are mere Strangers to that Meekness which is one of the Beatitudes, Mat.
5. 5. Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the Earth. That is Meekness
in a Theological acceptance, which moderates Anger and keeps it within just
bounds, when there are causes of provocation. To know when to be angry and when
to be meek is a great Point of Wisdom. To be zealous in the cause of God, and
meek in a Man's own cause is well beseeming a Christian. Wherefore Luther
speaking of a right placed Anger or Zeal, says, It Is the best Ira in suo loco
est optimu^^ Dei Donum. Luth.
Gift of God. But when Men are transported with Passion, like the Lunatic in
the Gospel rending and tearing themselves, or like Cities without Gates or
Bars, or like Waters that will keep in no Banks, or like Fire that flames
higher and higher: O! what necessity is there of the cleansing Virtue of the
Spirit of God, which as Water quenches flames of Fire, so it quenches the
flaming Fury of exorbitant Passions, and brings a Man into a sedate and
composed frame of Spirit.

In Water there is a purifying and cleansing 2* Water has a cleansing Virtue.
Property. Water casts out Garbidg, and noisome Carrion. And as Water cleanses
bodily Filthyness: so the Spirit of Christ cleanses from filthyness of Flesh
and Spirit, ( i. e.) both outward and inward defilements. Where the Spirit of
God takes it is habitation, it ringeth and washes all clean: what is filthy and
noisome it throws out: For God's Spirit will not cohabit with a Cage of unclean
Birds, and noisome Lusts. We read that Elias, Christ's Forerunner, was like a
Refiners fire, and like Fullars Soap. As the Refiner purges out Mal. 3. 3.
Dross, so does the Spirit of Christ purge out Sin and Corruption: and as the
Fullers Soap scours, washes, and cleanses the Cloth and makes it pure and
white: so does the Spirit of Christ purify and cleanse the Soul. At Christ's
transfiguration we read, Mark 3. 3. And his Raiment became shining, exceeding
white as Snow: so as no Fuller on Earth can white them. From this comparison
it is intimated that although other Fullers can make Garments white and clean,
yet no Fullers Soap can make the Cloth so white and clean, as the Blood of
Christ can purify and cleanse the Soul. 3. The Spirit is resembled to Ointment.


A third comparison of the Spirit, (whereunto it is resembled) is Ointment. The
Properties of Ointment are,

1. To supple and assuage Humors in the Body: so does the Spirit of Christ
assuage and bring down all proud swelling thoughts. High Inclinations are cast
down by the Spirit of God. The hard Heart is molified and of insensible it
becomes sensible, and of seared it becomes tender and apprehensive of Sin.

2. Ointment has a penetrating Power to pass through the Pores, and diffuse it
self through every Pore of the ill affected part: So where there is the Unction
of the Spirit it opens the Eyes, subdues the Will, raises the Affections,
enlarges the Heart. Hence says the Apostle, 1 John 2. 20. But ye have an
Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things, i. e. All things needful for
Salvation. And this Unction is an abiding Unction, ver. 27. But the anointing,
which ye have received of him, abides in you, and ye need not that any Man
teach you, that is, they need not, that any should teach them any new Opinion*
Let them retain those Principles wherein they have been taught, and stick close
unto them.

3. Ointment has a refreshing and comforting Virtue. Ointments as they make
way for the emission of all noxious Humors, so likewise for the free passage of
all Vital Spirits, which do enliven, refresh and comfort the Heart. Hence we
Ps. 104. 15. ^sal. 4^. 7. Isa ^1. 3. Joh. 14. 25 Joh. 14. 16
read that Oil makes the Face to shine* And it is called the Oil of Gladness,
and the Oil of Joy: So the Spirit of God is a Spirit of Consolation, called the
Comforter, A Comforter that may abide with us for ever. In all our Troubles, if
we can get God's Spirit for our Comforter, we shall cheerfully rejoice in
Tribulation. The Question was Job 15. 1. ^*
propounded to Job, Are the Consolations of God small with thee? So it may be
asked, Are the Consolation of God's Spirit small with thee? No questionless;
for they abound in Comfort. The Illapses, Influences, and Communications of the
Spirit of God in comforting the Afflicted, binding up the Brokenhearted,
refreshing the Languishing, raising up those that are Fallen, strengthening the
Weak; all these set forth abundantly the singular benefit of Divine
Consolations flowing from the Spirit of God.

A fourth Demonstration that Believers Demon. 4. Believers have a P^e^ions
Inheritance.
are Precious in the sight of Christ is, because that Christ assures them of a
Precious Inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven. Heaven is Christ's Purchase, and
by virtue of Christ's Purchase it becomes the Saints Inheritance. The Tenure
where* by the Saints hold is in capite, in their Head, Christ. Now for their
full assurance there is a threefold Title whereby true Believers lay claim to
Heaven, viz. By Promise, Donation, and Possession.

1. By Promise; Christ has promised 1 Title by Promise.
Heaven unto his Children. Amongst many I shall select a few excellent
Promises, one is Joh. 14. 23. In my Fathers House a^e many Mansions, if it were
not so I would have told you, I go to prepare a place for you, and if I go and
prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto my self, that
where I am, there ye may be also* Another another Promise is, Matthew. 19. 28.
Verily I say unto you that ye which have followed me in the Regeneration, when
the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit upon
twelve Thronis, Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. A third Promise is, Matthew.
19. 29. And every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or
Father, or Mother, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall Inherit Everlasting
Life. The meaning is not, that all these things should be made up in kind, that
he should receive so many Fathers, Mothers, and Sisters, in the room of them,
but the meaning is, that he shall receive Christ and Everlasting Life, which is
his Purchase, and is infinitely more worth than all the World.

A second Title which Believers have to 2. Title by Donation
Heaven, is a Title of Donation. Eternal Life is the gift of Christ, as may
appear, Joh. 10. 28. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck, them out of my Hand. Further Christ's Donation
is evident, John 17. 22. And the Glory which thou have given me, I have given
them: Heaven is Christ's Gift, and there is no merit, nor any thing in the
Creature to procure God to bestow his great Gift, for says our Savior, Luke
12. 32. Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers good Pleasure, to give
you the Kingdom. But though we cannot merit Heaven, yet we must be constant
and conscientious in the performance of our Duties, we must repent, believe and
be zealous to do good works; and to such as are faithful unto Death, the
promise will be made good unto them. Rev. 2, 10. I will give thee a Crown of
Life. It Is true that Salvation is a free Gift, and Heaven is the purchase of
Christ's Blood, yet our Duty is to work out our own Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, Phil. 2. 12.

A third Title to Heaven is that of Possession. 3. Title by Possession.
Joh. 3. 36. He that Believes in the Son has Everlasting Life. A Believer has
such an assurance as present Possession can give him. For the Word of God is
his assurance: He has a Witness, 1 John 5. 10. He that believes on the Son of
God has the Witness in himself. And he has both Sealing and Earnest, Ephesians. 1.
13, 14. Ye were Sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest
of our Inheritance. The Sealing of the Spirit is Assurance, the Earnest is part
of Payment, or some first fruits of the Harvest, so than to have a Title of
Promise, Donation, and Possession must needs be a strong Title.

Quest. But the Question hence will be moved whether any can be assured of
their Salvation in this Life.

Answ. To this I Answer, That some have been assured, and others may be assured.

1. Some have been assured as Job, c. 19. v. 25. I know that my Redeemer
lives; and Paul, Gal. 2. 20. Who loved me and gave himself for me. And 2. Why
others may be assured of their Salvation in this Life. For in those Beautitudes
mentioned, Math. 5. If upon serious search and Examination, a Believer can
conclude that he is poor in Spirit, pure in Heart, etc. Thence he may infer,
that he is in a state of Blessedness.

Likewise the Scriptures give several distinguishing Characters, whence we may
evidence the assurance of Salvation.

One is love to the Brethren, 1 John 4. 14. We know that we have passed from
Death to Life because we love the Brethren.

Another Character is the loving of Christ's appearing. The Apostle speaks not
only in his own name but also in the name of all Saints. Henceforth there is 2 Timothy ^8.
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge
shall give me at that Day, and not to me only but unto all them that love his
appearing.

A third Character is effectual calling: If we make our calling sure, thence we
may be assured of our election. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore the rather Brethren
give diligence to make your calling and Election sure.

These may suffice for the Trial of the Grounds of assurance.

But we must know.

1. That many Precious Servants of God may for a time want the sense of Gods
favor, and be at a loss for assurance. Ps. 10. 1. Psalm. 88. 5.
David complains of Gods hiding his face from him: And so did Heman complain
that he was free among the Dead, like the Slain in the Grave, whom thou
remembrest no more. And he likewise expostulates the case with God, why hidest
thou thy face from me? Gods Children are always in a safe condition, yet they
are not always apprehensive of their safety. Sometimes they are under
Desertions, and Withdrawings of Gods Countenance. A Child of Light may walk in
Darkness. Comfort Isa. 50. 10.
may be near him, and yet he may not discern it, as Mary could not see Christ
for Tears in her Eyes.

2. Assurance admits Degrees, sometimes it is more sometimes less. The best are
not always at a stand: Upon strict Inquisition in their Hearts, they find cause
of Humiliation; and walking heavily. The remembrance of an old Sin may cause a
great damp and sadness upon the Heart,

3. Assurance may be a long time before it be obtained. There will be long
searching the Heart, fighting against Sin, Fervent and Assiduous Prayer, a
great deal of combating against the Flesh. A Holy Martyr could not get
assurance till he came to the Stake, at last he told his Friend, O Glover. Act.
Mon. Q. M. day^.
Austin he is come, he is come, he is come.

4. Notwithstanding there may be assurance, yet sometimes Doubts and Troubles
may arise in the Spirit, upon Apprehensions of Gods clouding his Countenance,
and upon Apprehension of the difficulty to get rid of some secret Sin.

Quest. But what is our Duty.

Answ. 1. Allow thy self in no Sin, be Direct. 1.
it ancient, customary, beloved, or secret, away with it. The hankering after
any beloved Sin, the delay of executing Justice upon it, may break thy peace,
and hinder thy assurance. Wherefore give no quarter to Benhadad, nor to Agag:
Make a League with no Gibeonite. Foster no Dalilah, no Herodias. Throw Jonah
over Shipboard that is the way to make the Sea calm. Stone Achan, that is the way
to make the Valley of Achor a door of Hope: Brain Goliath, a Champion Sin, and
than other Hos. 2, 14.
Sins will sooner be vanquished, as the Philistines were when Goliath was
destroyed.

2. Make it thy serious business to clear Direct. 2. Make it thy business to
clear up thy evidences.
up thy Evidences for Heaven? Examine whether thou have Christ formed in thee,
whether the new Creatute is manifested in thy understanding to know God, in thy
will to obey God, in thy affections to love him, in thy Heart, and Life,
whether they are enlarged to run the ways of Gods Commandments, search and
examine whether Sin be mortified and the Body of Sin Crucified, Whether thou
art Justified by the Blood of Christ, and Sanctified by the Spirit of Christ,
whether thou art Redeemed from thy vain Conversation: upon such a serious
Inquisition into thy Heart assurance may be obtained.

3. If thy Evidences be dim, and thou can not read them; yet let not thy
Direct. 3. Let not thy hold go.
hold go: What thou want in Evidence, make up in Adherence to, and
recumbance and reliance on God. Thus did David under Disertions. Ps. 42. 11.
Why art thou cast down O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope
thou in God for I shall yet Praise him, who is the health of my Countenance and
my God. And thus did Job behave himself amidst all his Afflictions; Job 13. 15.
Though he slay me yet I will trust in him. And such as are in a dark condition,
who apprehend not the light of Gods Countenance, they are exhorted to trust and
stay upon God. Isa. 50. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys
the voice of his Servant, that walks in Darkness and have no light: Let him
trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God?

4. Be fervent and frequent in Prayer. Direct. 4. Be frequent and fervent in
Prayer. Genesis
Rebekkah when there were struglings in her Womb, went to enquire of God. If it
be so, why am I thus? So amidst the Troubles Fears and Tumults of thy Spirit
exercise Prayer. If Gods Countenance be clouded pray with David, Restore unto
me Ps. 51. 22.
the Joy of thy Salvation. Thou want assurance and art troubled upon the
suspensions and hidings of Gods Countenance, thy duty is to be an earnest
Solicitor unto the Throne of Grace, and pray that the Lord would lift up the
light of his Countenance on thee, Ps. 4. 6. Great things are promised, Ezekiel.
36. viz. Sprinkling of clean Water, v. 26. A new Heart, the Spirit, 27.
Security, 28. Plenty and Fruitfulness, yet God expects and requires the Prayers
of his Children. Chapter 36. 37. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be
enquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them. If than we would obtain
assurance of Gods Love, we must pray much, and join Fasting and Watching with
Prayer. Gods loving kindness is better than Life, Ps. 63. 3.
therefore we must pray for it, and labor to get assurance of Gods love unto
our Souls. How welcome was Samuel to Hannah being the Child of her Prayers. And
oh how highly valued will assurance be to him who has obtained it in answer to
his Prayers? Wait than and pray, continue instant in Prayer. And to Prayer join
Hearing, Reading, Meditating, and receiving of the Lords Supper: And when once
thou have got it, be sure thou be thankful and watchful. Take heed of the least
Sin. The least crum of Leaven must be cast out. A Servant being encouraged by
more wages has more strong Obligations on him to serve his Master with more
diligence and Fidelity. Assurance and Manifestations of Gods love to a
Christian are Engagements to excite him to a more humble, holy, and close
walking with God. The more mercy he recieves, the more he is engaged to a
faithful performance of his Duty. Whatever Manifestation of love is given unto
thee know that thou ought to be more thankful and fruitful in every good work.
The Apostle Writing of the Blessed Vision, 1 John 1. 2. For we shall see him as
he is; infers our great Duty to be reduced unto Practice. v. 3. And every Man
that has this hope in him, purifies himself even as he Matt. 5. 8. Heb. 12. 14.
is pure. The pure in Heart are Partakers of the Blessed Vision. And without
Holiness no Man shall see the Lord. Let Us than follow after Holiness. If ever
we hope to be happy hereafter, we must here be Holy. No Holiness no Happiness.

SECT. II. Containing the Fruits of Justification, which are a Ground of the
Believers Comfort:
HAving proved the first Ground of the Comfort of Believers, because they are
Precious in the (...) of Christ. I come now (and with this Section I shall
conclude)

To lay down a second Ground of Believers Comforts drawn from the Fruits of
Justification. And they are set down, Romans 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Therefore being
Justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom also we have access by Faith unto this Grace wherein we stand, and rejoice
in hope of the Glory of God. And not only so, but we Glory in Tribulation, also
knowing that Tribulation works Patience, and Patience Experience, and
Experience Hope.

There are sixspecial Fruits of Justification by Faith mentioned as so many
Daughters of that Mother; or as so many Precious Fruits growing on that Tree.
And they are Peace, Access, Joy, Hope, Patience and Experience. These I shall
enlarge particularly and so finish the Treatise.

1. By being Justified by Faith we have 1 Peace with God.
Peace with God. We have sweet tranquillity and security upon our Spirits. What
though Men Condemn and the World Persecute us? What though troubles come as
violently as Waves in a Storm, dashing upon us with more renewed fury? Yet
Peace with God and security of Conscience will quiet our Spirits, and comfort
us amidst discontents, and fortify us against Euroclydons and most Tempestuous
Storms. When God Justifies who can Condemn? When God speaks Peace, who can
speak Trouble? It Is a grand encouragement, notwithstanding Troubles come thick
and threefold, that in Christ, we have Peace. He is our Peace and Peacemaker,
and Reconciler. However the World Storm, yet Christ becalms the most Blasting
Winds. These things (says he) I have spoken unto you that in me ye might have
Peace: But in the John 15. 33.
World ye shall have Tribulation, be of good cheer, I have overcome the World.
We should endeavor after the things that make for Peace, and (as the Apostle
Commands) If it be possible as much as in you Romans 12. 18.
lies, live peacable with all Men. But some are of such implacable Spirits, as
will never be at Peace, and of the same malicious temper with David's Enemies,
who when he was for Peace, they make themselves Psalm. 120. 7.
ready for Battle. Yet here is a ground of of singular Comfort, that we have
Peace with God, and this will make amends for all. For says the Apostle. What
shall we then say to these things? if God be for Romans 8. 32.
us, who can be against us? Wherefore let us labor to get and keep Peace with
God, and a good Conscience. Peace within will support and quiet us against all
Troubles without, as Aarons Rod swallowed up the Rods of the Egyptians.

2. Another Fruit of Justification by 2 Acces^ unto God.
Faith, is Access unto God. Sin sets Bars against us, and hinders our Access
unto the Throne of Grace: But Christ breaks the Romans 5. 2.
Bars and gives us Admission. We are led by the hand of Christ unto the
Father. The Original Word imports as much Romans 5. 2. (...).
This Manuduction or leading of us by Christ unto the Father is a great
Privilege Hereby we are admitted into the presence of the great King. None
might presume to come into the Court of Ahasuerus, unless the King held out to
him the golden Scepter. Behold Christ has purchased this Privilege of the King
of Kings to hold forth his golden Scepter, and admit Believers into his
presence. Hence a Beleiver enjoys a sacred Communion with the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and has freedom to make his request known in Prayer and
Supplication. What then remains but that we should make use of our Privilege,
and reduce the Apostle's Precepts in continual Practice, Heb. 4. 16. Let us
therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and
find Grace to help in time of need.

A third Fruit of Justification by Faith is 3. Joy.
Joy, and this is Joy in the Lord, or a spiritual Joy in believing. The sense
of God's Love: The apprehension of his reconciled Countenance: The Believers
Interest cleared up that he has a new Name, a white Stone, and the hidden
Mannah rejoices his Heart more than the Fruition of all the Honors, Pleasures
and Profits which the Universe can afford. When God speaks to the Soul, and
says, Thy sins are pardoned, this is the most joyful and welcome day that ever
a Believer saw* The good Hearers received the word with Joy, and brought forth
Fruit with Patience. Amidst great straits and exigencies the Church discovers
an heroical Resolution, Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I Hab. 3. 1^.
will Joy in the God of my Salvation. Amidst multiplicity of rolling
troublesome Thoughts, the Psalmist takes ground of encouragement, Psalm. 94. 19.
In the multitude of my Thoughts within me, thy Comforts delight my Soul. A
Believer's Joy acts extraordinarily; that which extinguisheth the Joy of a
Carnal Man, is Fewe^ to enkindle the Joy of a Godly Man: ^or (says the
Apostle) And not only so, but we Romans 5. 3. (...). Jam. 5. 2.
glory in Tribulation also. A Believer accounts it all Joy, when he falls into
diverse Temptations: He kisseth the Rod that beats him, and with a Martyr bids
welcome to the Cross of Christ, and with the Apostles, rejoice that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for the Name of Christ* Acts 5. 41.
O! what Joy does Faith bring to Believers in all their Sufferings! so that
scoffs and reproaches they account their Honor, whips and tort ures scars of
Mar^yrdoms Though a Believer be tossed up and down with boistrous Waves and
Tempests, he can see Christ by the Eye of Faith: Though his Body be tormented
upon the Rack, yet he can see Christ his Comforter; Though his Name be trampled
on upon Earth, yet he rejoiceth that his Name is written in Heaven.

A fourth Fruit of Justification by Faith 4. Hope.
is Hope: and this is the Anchor of the Soul. Were it not for Hope, the Heart
would break, in the days of Jacob's Troubles. But days of Jacob's Troubles are*
days of Jacob's Hope. When Ezra and the People were full of grief and
perplexities, because the Holy Seed had mingled themselves with Heathens, and
were unequally yoaked with strange Wives, but notwithstanding Hope was left,
quasi tabula post naufragium, Ezra. 10. 2. Yet now there is Hope in Israel
concerning this thing. Rom: 8. 24.
By Hope (says the Apostle) we are saved. When Spoilers come, a Believer is a
Man of Hope. Whatever they take from him, yet they cannot take away his Hope.
Amidst Clouds of Darkness his Hope is, That the Sun of Righteousness will arise
with healings under his Wings. He hopes against his Reason: Though Sense fails,
and Reason be non-plust, and all humane Confidence seem to be broken, yet the
hope of a Believer abides like the Bow of Janathan firm in it is strength. A
Believer has hope for his Helmet. For (says the Apostle) 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8.
putting on the Breast Plate of Faith and Hope, and for an Helmet the hope of
Salvation. Let Us then make God our hope, as the Prophet Jeremy did. Jer. 17.
17. Thou art my hope in the Day of evil. Let Us apply Jeremys Resolution, with
Jeremys Affection. Lam. 3. 24. The Lord is the Portion of my Soul, therefore
will I hope.

A Fifth Fruit of Justification by Faith 5 Patience
is Patience. In your Patience (says Christ) Possess ye your Souls. There Is an
absolute Luke 21. 19.
necessity of the Grace of Patience, for says the Apostle, ye have need of
Patience, Heb. 10. 36.
that after ye have done the Will of God, ye might receive the promise. Were it
not for Afflictions there would be no Trial of Patience: But Afflictions and
Sufferings try a Believers Patience. When Enemies make long Furrows on the
back of the Righteous, when the Vision is dark, and the Chariot Wheels of
deliverance drive heavily, when expectations (though highly raised) are
disappointed: In a Word, when Troubles, Losses and Persecutions come, and fear
upon ^ar, and one danger upon the Neck of another, as one Wave of the Sea
follows another, then, O! then, what necessity is there of the exercise of the
Grace of Patience, Submission and Resignation of our Wills in all things unto
the Will of God: A waiting Patient frame of Spirit is prepared to undergo
Hardships and Sufferings, with Courage and Alacrity. If then Faith and Hope
begin to flag, let Patience interpose. A Believer makes not have. He dares not
prescribe to God, nor limit the Holy one of Israel. When God hides himself, our
Duty is to continue waiting. Isa. 8. 17. And I will wait upon the Lord that
hides his Face from the House of Jacob, and I will look for him. There Is the
exercise of Faith and Patience. Let us then immitate those, who through Faith
and Patience have Inherited the Promises. Let Faith and Patience hold out, and
whatever Pressures are upon us, they will either be removed or else be made
more easy for us to bear them?

The best and last Fruit is Experience. If 6. Experi^nce.
Christians Treasured up their Experiences, and brought them forth upon variety
of emergencies they might live more comfortable Lives than they do. Faith makes
much (...) of Experience, and puts a Christian upon a serious review of
Gracious Passages of Providence, and thence draws Groans of Consolation. As for
Instance (says a Believer) I have been bewildred with Troubles on every side,
and then God delivered me. I have been at the brink of the Grave, and then God
delivered me. I have known a pinching season, and a great scarcity, then God
kept me alive even in a time of Famine, and made Provision for me. I have been
delivered from Satan's Temptations, and from my own Corruption^* I have been
delivered from Enemies within me, and Enemies without me. I have escaped Fire
when others have been a Taberah. I have escaped Pestilence when Thousands fell
besides me, and ten Thousands at my Right Hand: I have escaped the Sword when
many have been numbered to the Sword: Thus then let me infer, O! how thankful
ought I to be to God for all his Mercies, and O! what cause have I to trust and
depend on him, and conlcude that the same God Omnipotent Reigns, as Good, as
Gracious, as Merciful, as ready to help as ever, and therefore the experience
of former Mercies should engage me to depend on God for the Future. When David
was to encounter with Goliath, he assumed a strong ground of Encouragement from
his own Experience. 1 Samuel 17. 36. Thy Servant slew both the Lion and the Bear,
and this Uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he has
defied the Armies of the Living God. Let Us Write down our Experiences of Gods
dealing with us, and let us comfort our selves with this consideration, that God
is in Heaven still. There Is no deficiency in the All sufficient God: His Hand
is not shorned that it cannot help, his Ear is not heavy that it cannot hear.
Put then all these Fruits of Justification togegether, and labor to be
abounding and Fruitful in them. Now for a close of all, I heartily desire that
the Promise may abide on all our Hearts, and our profiting may appear, that so
I may comfort others with those Comforts wherewith I my self have been
comforted. I know (and I acknowledge) that there are many Practical Treatises
in Print (and I wish there were more) And I acknowledge that of Solomon, to be
an undoubted truth. Eccles. 12. 12. Of making many Books there is no end. Yet
if I can by this Treatise, or what I have formerly Written, be Instrumental for
the Spiritual good of any one Christian, I shall account it a great
encouragement to add greater Labors and further Pains, hoping that something
may leave a deep impression on the Hearts of Readers, that their Souls may
thrive thereby. The design I endeavor and desire to drive at in Writing is
this, that my self and others may be made better; my Conclusion therefore of
all shall be in the Words of that most excellent Father St. Bernard,

Therefore are all Books Written, that one Book of the Conscience may be
amended.

FAXIT DEVS.
FINIS.

