THE DECLARATION AND PROTESTATION OF The Kings Army in South Wales, Concerning
their Dread Sovereign the King; as also touching His Majesty's Freedom,
Honor, and Safety.

ASsented to and taken by Col. Poyer, and the rest of the Kings party in
South Wales, and now dispiersed into the several Counties of North Wales,
where it is now taking by the Cavalieres in the several Counties thereof. JOHN
POYER.

LIKEWISE, A Declaration of Sir Tho: Glenham, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and the
rest of the Kings Party in the North of England, concerning their present
Design for the Kings Majesty.

LONDON: Printed by R. W. MDCXLVIII.

An exact RELATION Of the ROYALISTS Proceedings in the North of ENGLAND.
Honored Sir,
SInce my last, there has happened strange accidents in these parts, the
Royalists are become Masters of the strong frontier Garrison the town of
Beiwick, and have possessed themselves thereof; for a party consisting of three
troops of Horse and Dragoones, commanded by Sir Thomas Glenham, Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, and Captain Woogan, on Satterday night last in the evening, on a
sudden, entered Mary gate Port, and marched down the great street toward the
town Hall, where they made a stand, dividing themselves into three parties, for
the better securing of the town and the Bridge. Sir Marmaduke Langdale advanced
toward the Bridge with a party of Horse and Dragoons, for the securing of that
place, and Sir Thomas Glenham, and cap. VVoogan made good the streets with the
other party; so that they soon became masters both of Town and Forts, and
immediately cleared the streets of all persons whatsoever: yet notwithstanding
this sudden Alarm, the Mayor of the town was very active and forward, and
endeavored to get strength to oppose them, but could not, by reason of their
sudden possessing themselves of all the three Ports, and Megs Mount: He was
forced to his house, together with diverse Aldermen, and other well-affected of
the town, where they were all surprised and taken. From thence, the Cavalry
marched to the Committee, where they took them also, except some few that
escaped. Sir Thomas Glenham and Langdale have taken a view of the whole town,
and are now fortifying the same. They are raising a great Sconce or half Moon
upon Kings Mount, for the c^eering the Rampires, and command of the Seas. They
are also repairing the Battery upon Megs Mount, and making a Spur or Hornworke
near the Castle and the Bridge, for clearing the River and Sands upon
Northumberland side. We hear that they intend to disarme all the Inhabitants
that will not adhere to them, and declare for the King. They have summoned (in
his Majesty's name) most of the Inhabitants about the towns adjacent, and
holds them close to their tacklings. They give out high speech, concerning
Tinmouth and Newcastle. But of this, more by the next.

Morpoth the 1. of May 1648. Your assured friend, Jonathan Wilkinson.

The Copy of a Letter from Newcastle.
SIR,
OUr new Governor Sir Arthur Haslerig is exceedingly well appro^ed of by the
well affected in these part^. He i^ v^ry careful to strengthen this Garrison
and Tinmouth, three Companies of Major Gen Skippons Regiment are come hither:
he is also very careful to appease any tumults or insurrections, which are
likely to arise in any of these parts.

From Scotland we hear, that the Parliament have passed their Declaration,
which is to be published, to give satisfaction to that Nation in general: the
contents thereof are, the d^ngers and duties in relation to Religion, and the
King and Kingdom. But because, that in the points of Religion, the Parliament
forgot to consult with the Commissioners of the Church (who were in the nature
of our Assemb^y of Divines in England) until the said Declaration was fully
concluded and vote^, many of the best affected, and others did protest against
it.

Newcastle 29. April, 1648.
SIR,
the Committee of this county upon a letter from Sir Arthur Haslerig met
yesterday to consider of his desire to them, to meet the Gentlemen of the other
Northern Counties at Richmond, May 2. to consider of put^ing their parts into a
posture of defense, The Commi^tee of Durham have resolved to do something in
relation thereun^o. The Cavaliers are very hi^h^^ expectation of the Scots and
Scottish-English to come into England, and begin to give big words to incense
the Kingdom. The Prentices of Y^rk should have risen in a tumultuous manner,
about the time of the mutiny at London, upon pretense of putting out the City
Journymen that are not free.

York the 29. of April, 1648.
A Declaration of the present proceedings of the Estates of the Kingdom of
Scotland.
THE Parliament of Scotland having finished their Declaration it has passed by
a major part in the vote upon the question. But the Marq. of Argyle and other
Lords and Members of Parliament, to the number of 60. protested against it, and
caused their protestations to be entered, except they took the advice of the
Kirk, and had their concurrence therein Yet nevertheless the Parliament
proceeded upon it, and putting it again to the question, passed it upon the
vote by 41, voices so that Forces are to be raised. But the Marq. of Argyle,
and the rest of the other party, with the Ministers, are resolved, that if they
do march into England upon that Declaration, that they will follow with another
Army in the Rear of them, and that they have assurance from the old Army, which
consists of about 2500. Foot, and 1000. Horse, to join with them, they
cleave fast to the Clergy. The other party gives out, that Prince Charles is to
come over hither, and the Marq of Montrosse with him, to lead the Army into
England when it is raised, and to hinder others from falling in their Rear. The
Parliament of Scotland have almost finished their Demands which they intend to
send to the Parliament of England, it is said, they consist of these heads, viz.

2. That the Kings Majesty be brought from the Isle of Wight to one of his
houses near London.

2. That Chutch-Government may be settled according to the solemn League and
Covenant of both Kingdoms.

3. That Sectaries may no longer be encouraged but quite abolished.

And lastly, touching the five Bills sent to the King without their consent.

These Proposals, with some others, are said to be fully resolved upon, and
that the Committee of Estates have made choice of one Colonel Marshal to be
speedily dispatched for England, and to present the same to both Houses of
Parliament assembled at Westminster.

BY Letters from Wales it is further advertized, that a party of about 3
Troops of Hor^e commanded by Col. F^emming (a Gentleman of valor and
resolution) which being on a sudden too deeply engaged with Poyers Forces, were
not only over powered, but engaged in a place of disadvantage, where relief
could not come unto them nor they make good their retreat: so that Col.
Flemming was slain, and few with him escaped. This is all we know for truth in
that business, and as for that report, that others of col. Hortons Forces were
routed, and their ammunition was taken, and they pursued, etc. there are no
letters which do express it, neither do we know any other grounds for it,
then men's humors, which often times speak as they would have it.

The Protestation.
WE whose Names are subscribed do declare, that we will use our utmost
endeavors, to bring the King to a personal treaty with his Parliament, with
freedom, honor, and safety, to the end, that the just prerogative of the
King, privilege of Parliaments, Laws of the Land, and liberty of the people,
may be all maintained and preserved in the proper bounds, and the protestant
Religion, as it now stands, established by the Laws of the Land, and restored
throughout the Kingdom, with such regard to be had to tender consciences, as
shall be allowed by Act of Parliament.

Assented to by Colonel John Poyer, Captain Powell. Colonel Powell. Captain
Smith.

May 4. 1648. Imprimatur G. M.


