(...).

A WORD in SEASON, FOR A Warning to England: OR A Prophecy of Perilous Times
Opened and Applied.

Wherein the Signs of Bad Times, and the Means of making the Times Good, are
represented as the great Concernment of all good Christians in this present Age.

First exhibited in a SERMON preached in the Abbey at Westminster, July 5. 1659.
and since enlarged and Published.

By THOMAS VVILLES, M. A. Minister of the Gospel, in the City of London.

Seal not the Sayings of the Prophecy of this Book: For the Time is at hand,
Rev. 22.10. How do ye say, We are Wise, and the Law of the LORD is with us? --
Lo! They have rejected the Word of the LORD, and what Wisdom is in them? Jer.
8.8, 9. Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis:
(...), sIC transIt gLorIa MVnDI.
LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliff, for Tho. Underhill, at the Blew Anchor in
Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

TO THE SENATORS and SOLDIERS, CITIZENS and STRANGERS,

To whom This SERMON was (As to its main SUBSTANCE) EXHIBITED FROM THE PULPIT,
IT IS NOW (WITH MUCH ENLARGEMENT) PRESENTED FROM THE PRESS, FOR THEIR SERIOUS
PERUSAL.

By A MESSENGER from CHRIST, A MINISTER of the GOSPEL, THOMAS WILLS.

Blessed are they that hear the Word of God and keep it, Luke 11.28. If ye know
these things, happy are ye if ye do them, Joh. 13.17. From the KING of SAINTS,
THE LORD JESUS CHRIST, To his Faithful and Well-beloved Servants, and Subjects,
that shall live in the latter Days.
TAke heed that no man deceive you. For many shall come in my Name, saying I am
Christ: and shall deceive many. And ye shall hear of Wars, and Rumors of
Wars: See that ye be not troubled: For all these things must come to pass, but
the End is not yet.

For Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and there
shall be Famines, and Pestilences, and Earthquakes in diverse Places. All these
are the Beginning of Sorrows.

Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye
shall be hated of all Nations for my Names sake. And then shall many be
offended, and shall betray one another. And many false Prophets shall rise, and
shall deceive many.

And because Iniquity shall abound, the Love of many shall wax cold. But he
that shall endure to the End, the same shall be saved.

By the Hand of his Trusty Servant and Secretary, Chap. 24. v. 4.-13.
MATTHEW Publicano-Christianus.

To the SACRED MAJESTY OF HEAVEN, THE KING of KINGS AND LORD of LORDS, The
Supreme Governor of the whole World.
The Humble Address and Representation of the Gratitude and Requests of many
Thousands of the Well-affected People of the Land, who desire to approve
themselves Faithful to the Cause of Christ, and to be found walking in the Good
Old way.
Most Mighty LORD,
WHereas it has pleased thy glorious Majesty, out of the exceeding riches of
thy Free Grace, and thy tender compassions in Jesus Christ, to call us thy
poor unworthy Servants out of the World, to the Profession of thy truth and
Gosspel, and the Participation of thy saving Grace, when out of thy infinite
Sovereignty and Justice, thou have past by Millions of men, and left them to
perish everlastingly in their sins, we humbly desire in a deep sense of our
own utter Unworthiness, to express our free and hearty Acknowledgement of that
infinite Obligation which thou have hereby laid upon our souls to perpetual
Gratitude, Love, Honor, and Obedience to thy Glorious Majesty for so
invaluable a Mercy. And we cannot but with sorrow of Heart confess, that we
have by our unsuitable Walkings, showed our selves very Unworthy of such rich
Discoveries of thy Love unto us. But we humbly implore thy Mercy in the
forgiveness of our many Miscarriages, and beseech thee to give us Leave, with
all Humility, to present thy Majesty with these few Petitions, to which we
earnestly beg a Gracious Answer.

That it will please thee to Magistracy, a Faithful and painful Ministry in the
Land, with that Blessed GOVERNMENT which is most agreeable to thy holy Word and
Will, both in Church and State.

That it will please thee who Hearts of all men in thy Hands, to put it into
the Hearts of our Counselors and Governors to study and endeavor the
Advancement of thy Glory, and thy Churches Good, by the suppression of Error
and Profaneness, and the Promotion of Truth and Holiness in the Land.

Power and Trust, who by their pernicious Principles and Practices make the
Times Perilous, thou will Graciously be pleased by thy Hand of Power to remove
them, and to set in their room men truly fearing Thee, and hating Covetousness,
who may cordially seek and endeavor the Peace and Welfare of thine English
Zion.

Spirit of Humiliation for the sins of the Land, that thou will graciously
pardon the Transgressions of thy People, and purge the Land from its
Abominations, that thou may dwell amongst us.

That thou will break the Designs, and dissolve the cursed Conspiracies of
those that under Pretenses of thy Name, Cause and Glory, violently prosecute
their Pernicious Purposes for the satisfaction of their Ambition and
Covetousness, and the Introduction of Errors, Heresies, and all manner of
Licentiousness into the Land, to the Hazard of many thousand souls, and the
dishonor of thy Glorious Name.

That it will please Thee to heal Breaches of thy own People, and to establish
these three Nations, England, Scotland and Ireland, in Peace and Love upon the
sure Foundations of Religion and Righteousness, and crown them all with thy
Loving-kindnesse, and tender Mercies. And to this End that thou will awaken the
spirits of thy Saints from their security in an unsettled and distracted
condition, to a serious minding of the great Concernments of thy Church and
People, their own Souls, and this sinful Nation.

Perilous Times, that are or may come upon thy people, according to the
Predictions of thy holy Prophets, into those Glorious Times, which thou have
raised the hearts of many of thy Saints in Expectations of, by thy Precious
Promises. However be pleased to preserve thy People in times of Peril and
Persecution, and to carry them (as on Eagles Wings) by thy Spirit of Grace,
through all Difficulties and Dangers, till thou shall receive them up into thy
Kingdom of Glory.

So shall we thy poor unworthy Subjects and Suppliants, as in Duty bound,
celebrate thy Glorious Name with everlasting Praises.

The Names of the Petitioners are written in Heaven.

A PROPHECY OF PERILOUS TIMES Opened and Applied.
2 TIMOTHY 3.1. (...).

This know also that in the last days perilous times shall come.


The Introduction.
THe knowledge of the Times and Seasons is very useful for all men. Without
this the Husbandman can neither duly till his ground, nor sow his Seed, nor
reap his Harvest. (...)
Time (which according to the Ari. Phys. 4. c. 11.
Philosopher, is, (...),
the measure of motion) is the necessary circumstance of Action, and (...).
Season, is Opportunitas rei gerendae, commoda, Erasm.

the Fitness of the Time for the work of man, or the Production of Nature. Now
its man's singular Prudence to discern the Times, that he may make the better
improvement of every Season. For, Eccl. 3.1.
To every thing there is a Season, and a Time for every Purpose under the
Heaven. Thus the Summer is the proper Season wherein the Prudent man (with the
Prove. 6.8.
Ant) will make Provision for the Time of Winter. Thus the Wise man will
prepare for Perilous Times, while he yet enjoyes a Prosperous Season. Its a
piece of Prudence to Pro. 22.3.
foresee Perilous Times; and to make Provision for them, while the Season
lasts, is a Work of Wisdom. This Wisdom God teaches his Saints in his Word,
and the Defect of this Prudence in the Foresight of future Dangers, is supplied
by the Prophetic Revelation of his Spirit. By the 2 Timothy 3.16. with 2 Pet.
1.20, 21.
Inspiration of this Spirit of Prophecy was the Apostle Paul enabled to give
this Premonition unto Timothy; This know also, that in the last Days P^rillous
Times s^all come.

It is true, Acts 1.7.
it is not for us to know the times and the seasons which God has put in his
own power, having sealed them up from us in his secret Counsel. For Deuteronomy. 29.29.
secret things belong unto the LORD our God: But yet those things which are
revealed belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all the
Words of his Law, and obey his Will in the world. And therefore it does concern
us to know the Times and Seasons which he has revealed to us in his holy Word,
and commanded us to take knowledge of, as in this Divine Prophecy; This know
also, etc.

The truth of the Prophecies manifested by the exact correspondency of future
Events to former Predictions, is one good argument for the confirmation of the
Truth, and Dignity of the Holy Scriptures. Who but that God, whose Ps. 147.5
understanding is infinite, can certainly and infallibly foresee and fore-tel
so long before, the things that shall come to pass so long after? And do not
our eyes in these days behold the Accomplishment of many things contained in
the Scripture Prophecies, which (even those of the latest Date, recorded in the
New Testament) were first given forth and committed to writing above fifteen
hundred years ago? How far the Prediction of Perilous Times, here in the
Text, receives an accomplishment in the present age wherein we live, will
easily apppear to any soberly wise Christian, that having first seriously
perused the Context, shall lift up his eyes, and look abroad into the World,
upon the men of this Generation.

For the Apostle having in the Words of the Text briefly exhibited his
Prediction of Perilous Times, does in the following Verses, give a lively
Description of the persons that should make the Times so Perilous. (says he)
that in the last Days

But to make way for a clearer Discovery of the Intent of the holy Ghost, in
this part of the holy Scripture, we shall consider it according to the proper
nature of a Prophecy, which respects the Future; and so as a lively Mirror, it
represents the Image of the After-Age, the Complexion of the Times to come. And
thus in the Text (whereunto we shall a while confine our selves, and thence
descend to the Explication of the Context, from which we must fetch Light for
the discovery of the times mentioned in the Text) there are these three things
to be taken into consideration, viz.

1. What these times shall be. 2. When these times shall be. 3. How Timothy was
concerned herein.
In the first of these we shall open the description which the Apostle gives of
these Times, by the Adjunct: in the second, we shall enquire into the import of
the Prediction, as to the determination of the Time of its Accomplishment; and
in the last, we shall consider the scope and intent of the Premonition given to
Timothy concerning these Perilous Times.

The Description.
WE are in the first place to consider what these times shall be? They shall be
(as the Apostle here styles and describes them) (...). Vulgatus Tempora
periculosa, Beza Molesta interpretatur: melius Tremellius e Syro, dura,
Castalio difficilia Verterunt Scult. in loc.
.
Perilous times, hard, difficult, and troublesome times, as Interpreters a
little varying in the Terms of Translation, agree in the Intent of the Word.
They shall be times of Difficulty, Distress and Danger. Dicitur and ipsum
Tempus difficile quod expectationi non respondet, in quo homines difficulter se
suaque tueri possunt; ut in Peste, Bello, Fame publica. Nam ita (...) est
homini aut vivere, aut sua tueri Aret. in loc.
.
And time it self is then called Difficult, when it answers not our
Expectation, and wherein men find it difficult to defend themselves, and keep
their own; as in time of Plague, War, or Famine. For in these Cases its a
difficult thing for a man to preserve his life or estate. So likewise upon the
same Account, in Case of Schism and Divisions in the Church (which is a kind
of Civil War in the City of God) or the Persecution of the Saints (which is as
the Invasion of a Foreign Enemy) they may be said to be hard and difficult,
troublesome and Perilous Times to the people of God. Such are the times spoken
of in this Prophecy. They shall be cloudy and stormy Days to the Church and
Saints. The Apostle raised upon the Mount of Vision saw a small cloud arising,
which he knew would overspread the whole Church.

For this Prediction of the Evil of the Times, is a Prophetical Representation
of the future State of the Church. And imports so much that their very (...).
Seasons of Grace shall become Days of Danger; their very Opportunities of
Doing or Receiving Good, shall be fenc't about with (...).
Difficulties, and filled with Dangers.

Moreover we are here to observe, that that is figuratively attributed to the
Times, which is properly applyable to them that shall live in them. For
properly time is not capable of any impressions of Good or Evil; it can neither
be priviledg'd with safety, nor oppressed with Difficulty, nor exposed to Danger.
But those are called hard and perilous times, wherein those that live in them,
are exercised with difficulties and exposed to Dangers.

Tempori tribuuntur ejusmodi Epitheta Metonymice, propter ea quae in tempore
contingunt, maxim propter hominum Mores ac studia Estius.

And therefore are the Times here called Perilous, because of those things
which should fall out in those Times, especially because of the perilous
Practices of the men of the Times. So likewise the Apostle elsewhere calls the
Ephesians. 5.16
Days evil, because of the Evil men that lived in those days, and the Evil
things that were done by those men, as Chrysostom well notes. What (...).
Chrysostom. (...).

(says he) is the evil of the Day? The Evil of the Day must needs be something
about the Day. What is the Evil of the Body? Sickness. What Is the Evil of the
Soul? Vitiousness. How then does he call the days evil? how does he call the
time evil? He calls them not so for their Nature or Essence, or as they are
Creatures, but for the things that are done in them. So that men are Authors
of the Evils that fall out in the Times, and for this Cause are they called
evil Times.

They are indeed bad men, that make the Times bad, hard Hearts, that make hard
Times; perilous Undertakings, difficult Designs, troublesome and tyrannical
Intrusions, Actings, Impositions of men of proud, daring, and ambitious
Spirits, that make these perilous, difficult, and troublesome Times. So the
same Father determines upon this very Text.

(...) Chrysostom. (...).
.
Perilous Times shall come. He speaks not this to accuse the Days, or find
fault with the Times, but the men that should then be. For we are wont to call
the Times good or bad, from the Things that are done by men in such Times.

And indeed, those are the worst Times that do produce the worst men, and
wherein these men do accomplish their worst Designs, and execute their most
mischievous Intentions. That Is the worst ground which is most overgrown with
weeds, especially if such weeds, as neither any good Grain, nor wholesome
Herbs, nor Fragrant Flowers will grow amongst them. And such are the Times
whereof the Apostle here Prophecies, so that we may truly say of him, as
Casaubon of Taci^us; Ejusmodi tempora descripsit quibus nulla, unquam aut
Virtutum steriliora, aut Virtutibus in imicitiora.


He has described such times, as never were any more barren of Virtues, or
more pregnant with Enmity and opposition to all Goodness. Those Times that are
most barren in Virtues, are ever most fruitful in Vices. Evils do most abound,
when Goodness is banished. Sin then reigns upon Earth, when Ultima Caelestum
Terras Astra^a reliquit. Ovid.
Righteousness flies up to Heaven. The Flowers are choked, when the Weeds
grow tallest. Thus was the Mat. 13.7
good Seed stifled amongst the thriving Thorns. When the Plague (of sin,
Error and Profaneness) reigns, the Times must needs be Perilous.

Thus we see what these Times here predicted shall be; even evil and perilous
Times.

The Prediction.
COme we now, in the next Place, to enquire, When these Times shall be. This
the Apostle tells us in these words; (...), in ultimis Diebus (seu in Diebus
novissimis) instabunt. Vet. Be^.



They shall come (they shall press upon us, and as it were, instantly overtake
us) in the last Days.

Now the Times of the Gospel in respect of the four thousand years that went
before, even the whole space of Time from Christ's first to his second Coming,
from his Ascension into Heaven to his Return to Judgment, at the end of the
world, is, in the Scripture Phrase, called the last Days. So says the Apostle
in his Epistle to the Hebrews Chap. 1. ver. 1, 2.
; God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son. So
the Apostle applies to his Times the Prophetic Prophecy of the Old Testament
Act. 2.16 17 Joel 2.28.
; This is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, And it shall come to
pass, in the last Days, (says God) I will pour out my Spirit upon all
Flesh. Of the same Import is that which the same Apostle speaks in his Epistle
to the believing Jews 2 Pet. 3.3
, knowing this, that there shall come in the last Days scoffers, walking after
their own lusts. The whole time therefore of the Evangelical Administration is
here to be understood by the last Days, yet so as the later the time, the
darker the days, unless in some lucid Intervals, and when those Illustrious
Prophecies and Promises of the Old Testament, concerning glorious Gospel Times
shall be fulfilled. As, that Isa. 30.2 6
The Light of the Moon shall be as the Light of the Sun, and the Light of the
Sun shall be sevenfold, as the Light of seven days. Yea, that Isa. 24.23
Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the LORD of
Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients
gloriously. And that Hab. 2.24
The Earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the LORD, as the
waters cover the Sea. Such may we expect the times to be, when the Lord shall
fulfill his Promises concerning the Rev. 18.2
Fall of Babylon, and 2 These. 2.8.
destruction of Antichrist, the Romans 11 25, 26.
Call and Conversion of the Jews, and the bringing in of the Fullness of the
Gentiles. But otherwise the last Age, we may expect (according to this and 2
Pet. 3.3 1 John 2.18 Jude v. 18. Mat. 24, 9 -- 12, 29. Rev. 8. and 9. and 20.
other Predictions in the New Testament) to be the worst Age, the last Days to
be the worst Days. Thus we see how the last Days respect the whole time of
the Gospel Church, from the Apostles times to the End of the World. This is the
Evening of the World, as the time before was the Morning. The nearer Night the
greater darkness, till the Glory of the Lord, like Lightning, shall break out
of the Clouds. The nearer the Bottom^, the more Dregs. The Absence of the
Sun makes Night in the World: And the longer the time is it has left us, the
greater is our darkness, till its Return shall make a new Day. Such is Christ's
Absence from his Church; yet (as we have seen) some Beams of Glory shall be
scattered upon Earth, before the King of Glory shall return from Heaven. Thus
the Dawne precedes the Day; but its usually darkest immediately before the
Dawne.

Now for our interpretation of the last days in this latitude, we have the
general concurrence of the best Expositors, who all conclude the same thing
with one consent. For (to instance in some) thus they speak upon this Text.

Sub extremis Diebus comprehendit universum Christianae Ecclesiae statum Calvin
in loc.
.
Under the last days ( says the judicious Calvin) the Apostle comprehends the
whole state of the Christian Church.

Now the last Days Novissimi autem vel ultimi Dies numerandi sunt ab Adventu
Christi ad Finem Mundi: Nam Tempus illud (...) dicitur respectu Initii and
Medii. Initium ab Adamo ad Mosen numeratur: Medium Temporis a Mose ad Christum:
Ultimum igitur esta Christo ad ejus Reditum Aret in locum.
.
(says Aretius) are to be reckoned from the coming of Christ to the End of the
World: For that Time is called the last Time, in respect of the Beginning and
the Middle-time. The Beginning is reckoned from Adam to Moses: The Middle-time
from Moses to Christ: And so the last Time is from Christ to his second Coming,
or his return to judgment.

Dicuntur autem Novissima Tempora, Hebraico More, non quae circa Mundi finem
proxime erunt; sed Posteriora quaeque suis Temporibus Novissima nominantur.
Quanquam and tanto pejora futura sunt Tempora, quanto fini hujus Mundi and
extremo Judicio fuerint proximiora Pelicanus in locum.
.
But now ( says Pelican) they are called the last Times, after the manner of
the Hebrews, not only which are nearest to the End of the World; but all the
times succeeding their own Age are styled the last times. Although the times
shall be so much the worse, by how much the nearer they are to the last
Judgment, and the End of this World Mat. 24.24. Luke 21.12
.

And that the last Days must, in this Text, be necessarily understood in this
Latitude, may yet more clearly appear, if we consider that they were already
begun when the Apostle wrote this Prophecy, and that they are still continued
to this Age wherein we live. That they were then already begun is manifest, in
that the Apostle describing the Persons by several Properties, who by their
ungodly Practices should make the Times so perilous, concludes his Description
with this Cautionary Premonition to Timothy Verse 5.
,

(...).
From such turn away: Or, turn such away; Authoritatively admonish, reprove,
reject them; hold no familiar Converse or Correspondency with them. And that
these times are to be intended to the following Ages, and are continued to this
present Age wherein we live, is it not sufficiently manifest, in that these
very Times are an evident Commentary upon this Text, and show the
Accomplishment of this Prophecy.

Thus we have seen when these Times shall be, and how long these last days
shall last; even from the Apostles Time to the End of the World.

The Premonition.
of what concernment this Prediction of perilous Times was to Timothy. And the
Apostles words upon his first entrance upon this Discourse do plainly declare,
that it concerned him to know this; (...). This know also.

It much concerns Christians, especially Ministers of the Gospel, to know what
perilous Times shall come upon the Church of God, and when they shall come.

All Christians are concerned herein. It Is profitable for them to know before
hand what perilous times shall come, that so they may not be unawares
surprised by them, but duly prepared for them. For, Praemoniti Premuniti.
Fore-warned Forearm'd.

And therefore it has pleased the Lord, for the manifestation of that special
Care which he has of his Church, to reveal to his Servants by the Spirit of
Prophecy, in all Ages, what evils his Saints should be exercised withal, and
what perilous Times they should pass thorough to their Rest and Glory. It is
he that brings Judgments upon his people for their sins, and yet reveals
his Purpose to his Prophets, that they might call his People to Repentance for
the Prevention of his Judgments. As it is said; Am. 3.6, 7.
Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the People not be afraid? Shall
there be Evil in a City, and the LORD has not done it? Surely the LORD God
will do nothing, but he reveals his secret unto his servants the Prophets. So
we read, when God had a purpose to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah (those lustful
and licentious Cities) with Genesis 19.24
Fire and Brimstome from heaven, Genesis 18.17
the LORD said, shall I hide from Abraham the thing which I do? No, he
presently revealed it to him, and sent his holy Angels also to his servant Genesis
19.12,-16. 2 Pet. 2.6-9.
Lot to forewarne him of the near-approaching danger, and to deliver him, by
leading him out of that wicked City, destined to a dreadful Destruction, from
it is inevitable overthrow. So God foretold the Israelites their Jer. 25.9 and
34.21 Ezekiel. 12.11, etc.
Captivity in Babylon, and Christ has foretold Christians Mat. 10.22, 23. Joh.
15.20 Mark 10.30. 2 Timothy 3.12.
their Persecution in the World.

Praevisa minus laedunt. Evils foreseen do less afflict.

Though Afflictions are the appointed Portion of the Saints on Earth, yet by
the Foreknowledge of these afflictions, they may be the better prepared to
bear them with Patience. And therefore God has never left his Church without a
Prophetic Representation of her future condition. So to the History of his
Church in the Old Testament, he has adjoined sundry Prophecies, and to the
Doctrine of Christ in the New Testament, he has annexed a Revelation.

And if God have been pleased thus to reveal in his Word the evils that shall
come upon his Church and Saints, and the perilous Times through which they
shall pass in the World, they are doubtless much concerned to take notice
thereof. How else shall they prepare themselves for the Lords Visitations, or
make a right Improvement of his holy Providence? How else shall they provide
Mat. 25.4
Oil in their Vessels, that they may have their Luke 12 35.
Lamps burning, when a Night of darkness shall overcome them? How else shall
they make such due Provision for perilous Times, that they may hold up their
Heads in a Day of distress? Doubtless as the Saints may loose a Harvest of
Mercy, for want of improving a Day of Grace; so may they fall into a Furnace of
Affliction, for want of foreseeing a Day of Wrath. And therefore Christ justly
taxes the Pharisees that they could Mar. 16.3
discern the Face of the Sky, but not the Signs of the Times. Yea, the Lord
brings in the Fowls of the Heaven to give in evidence against his own People,
for their clearer conviction of their Folly, and Stupidity in not discerning
the Time of his Judgments. For says the Lord in Jeremy Chap. 8. ver. 7.
; Yea, the Stork in the Heaven knows her appointed Times, and the Turtle, and
the Crane, and the Swallow observe the Time of their Coming, but my People know
not the Judgment of the LORD. Hence it comes to pass, that, as some of the
more foolish Birds, they are often taken unawares in the snares of Gods
judgments, as the Wise man observes; Eccl. 9.12
For man also knows not his Time; as the Fishes that are taken in an evil
Net, and as Birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men snared
in an evil Time, when it falls suddenly upon them. How pathetically did the
Lord Jesus Christ lament and bewail the deplorable state and condition of
Jerusalem, upon this very account, that they knew not, they considered not
their great danger, but were senseless and secure, notwithstanding all Warnings
and Premonitions, at the very brink of their threatened destruction? For thus is
it recorded of him in the Gospel, that Luke 19.41,-44.
When he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it; Saying, If thou
had known, even thou, at least in this thy Day, the Things which belong unto
thy Peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes. For the Days shall come upon
thee, that thine Enemies shall cast a Trench about thee, and compass thee
round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee even with the ground,
and thy children within thee: and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon
another, because thou knew not the Time of thy Visitation. And the Event (we
know) fully answered the Prediction. Thus for want of a due Foresight of
future Dangers, and a right Improvement of the Prophetical Discoveries of
Perilous Times, a sinful and secure people may be suddenly swallowed up into
an inevitable Destruction.

Thus it nearly concerns all Gods people, to take special notice of these
Predictions of perilous Times, that they may make a good improvement thereof
for their spiritual advantage.

But now the Ministers of the Gospel are in a special manner concerned herein.
They are to search, know, and consider what perilous Times shall befall the
Church according to the Prophecies of the holy Scriptures. This, that they may
give Warning to the People, that they may meet the Lord by Repentance, and that
those that fear the Lord may keep themselves pure from the Pollutions of the
World, that so they may be preserved by his special Providence, when he shall
come forth for the Execution of his Judgments. Thus the Lord warned the Old
World by Noah, 2 Pet. 2.5
a Preacher of Righteousness, and the Israelites by sundry Prophets, before the
Destruction of the one, and Captivity of the other. Thus did the People of
Jona. 3.4, 5, 10.
Nineveh prevent the Destruction threatened by turning to the Lord by Mat. 12.41
Luke 11.32
Repentance upon the Preaching of Jonah.

I may say of Preachers what the Noble Verulam Bacons Essays.
spoke of Princes; Shepherds of People had need know the Calendar of Tempests
in State, which are commonly greatest, when things grow to Equality; as natural
Tempests are greatest about the Equinoctials. This that they may house the
Lords Flock (as the Servants of Pharaoh did their Cattle Exo. 9.20
) till the storm be over-past.

The Ministers of the Gospel are the Watchmen of the City of God. They that
stand upon the Watch-Towers of the Holy City, should blow the Isa. 58.1.
Trumpet of Gods holy Word, and discover the danger which they see threatened,
and the Designs which they see managed against the Church and People of God.
Its their Duty to warn the People of their sins, lest they perish in them, in
the day of Gods Judgments. How strict is the Charge, which the Lord has given
to every Minister of his Word, in the Person of the Prophet Ezekiel; and how
sore is the Penalty, how dreadful is the danger of failing through
unfaithfulness in the discharge thereof! It surely concerns us, especially in
these perilous Times, very seriously to consider it, us (I say) whom the Lord
has called forth to dispense his sacred Oracles, and has committed to our
charge the souls of his People.

Son of man (says the LORD to Ezekiel Ezekiel. 33.1,-9.
) Speak to the Children of thy People, and and say unto them; When I bring the
sword upon a Land, if the People of the Land take a man of their Coas s, and
set him for their Watchman: If when h sees the Sword come upon the Land, he
blow the Trumpet, and warn the People; Then whosoever hears the sound of the
Trumpet, and takes not Warning; if the Sword come and take him away, his Blood
shall be upon his own Head. He heard the sound of the Trumpet, and took not
warning, his Blood shall be upon him: but he that takes warning shall deliver
his Soul. But if the Watchman see the sword come, and blow not the Trumpet, and
the People be not warned: if the sword come and take any person from among
them, he is taken away in his iniquity: but his blood will I require at the
Watchmans hand.

So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel:
and therefore thou shall hear the Word at my Mouth, and warn them from me.
When I say unto the wicked, O Wicked man, thou shall surely die; if thou do
not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his
iniquity, but his Blood will I require at thine Hand. Nevertheless if thou
warn the wicked of his way to turn from it: if he do not turn from his Way,
he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul.

Ezekiel. 3.20, 21.
Again, when a righteous man does turn from his righteousness, and commit
iniquity, and I lay a stumbling block before him, he shall die: because thou
have not given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and his Righteousness
which he has done shall not be remembered; but his Blood will I require at
thine hand. Nevertheless, if thou warn the Righteous man, that the righteous
sin not, and he does not sin; he shall surely live, because he is warned; also
thou have delivered thy soul.

Thus will the Lord call the Ministers of his Word to account for the loss of
those Souls, which through their unseasonable silence have perished in their
sins. O how much guilt then shall we draw down upon our own heads, if we do not
warn our People of those sins whereof they are in danger in perilous Times,
and do what lies in us to keep off guilt from their souls! O how much does it
concern us to be Faithful to God in the discharge of this Duty! Its a fearful
thing to be charged with the Blood of souls at the Judgment Day.

Be this then my warrant for what I shall speak, in the following Discourse
upon this Subject.

For this Text, Beloved Christians, gives me warrant to tell you that it much
concerns you all to know, that in the last Days perilous Times shall come.

And if the Apostle John could say in that Age, 1 John 2.18.
Little Children, It is the last Time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist
shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the
last Time: much more may we of this Age, upon whom (as the Apostle spoke of his
Time 1 Cor. 10.11
) the Ends of the World are come, say, these are the last Days, this is the
last Time. For if we consider the evils enumerated in the Context, and cast our
eyes upon this Generation, shall we not say that this Prophecy in the Text
looks full upon the present Age? May we not (with Hyperius) apply this
Prophetic Description of the Churches calamity to our present times?

Instruit amplissimam Malorum Congeriem, and quoddam Vitiorum Mare. Quae omnia
fi de ullis Temporibus a Christo nato dici potuerunt, certe de nostro seculo
multo aptissime verissimeque dici posse velimus nolimus fateri debemus. Imo
vereor ne omnia feculi nostri Mala, ab Apostolo hic non sint satis enumerata.
Adeo ferrea haec aetas nostra omnes aetates malitia videtur superare Andreas
Hyperius in 2 Timothy 3 1, 2, etc.
.
The Apostle (says he) presents us with a mighty Mass of Evils, and sets
before us, as it were, a Sea of Vices. All which, if they might be said of any
Times since the Birth of Christ, we must needs confess, whether we will or no,
may with much more truth and fitness be spoken of this our Age. Nay I fear
that all the Evils of our Age are not here fully enumerated by the Apostle; so
far does this Iron Age wherein we live, seem to exceed in Wickedness all other
Ages. And therefore it must needs very nearly concern us to take notice of, and
to prepare our selves for the perilous Times, which are prophesied of in the
New Testament, and particularly in this present Text of Scripture; This know
also, that in the last Days perilous Times shall come.

It will be well worth our Time and Pains therefore to make a serious enquiry
into these two things, viz. 1. What the Perilous Times are pointed at in this
Prediction. 2. How Pious Persons ought to demean themselves in these perilous
Times.


In the former of these we shall fitly exhibit what may be further requisite
for the Explication, and in the latter present you with the Application of this
Text, as to that which is the main Scope, and principal Import of it.

The First Enquiry. What the Perilous Times are, pointed at in this Prediction.
FOr the further clearing up of this Prophecy, that it may become more useful
to the People of God, it is necessary that we should make a serious enquiry
into these Perilous Times here spoken of. And for the clearing of this we
shall branch this General Enquiry into three Parts, by a more Particular
Enquiry into three things; sc.

1. How these Times may be known. 2. Why these Times are so Perilous. 3. What
is the peril of these Times.
The first Question.

Quest. 1. How may these Times be known?

Answ. It is indeed very necessary and useful for us to know when these
perilous Times are come upon us, that we may be both more watchful against the
Danger, and careful of the Duty, at such Times in a special manner incumbent on
us. No dangers are so great as theirs, that neither see nor perceive their
Dangers. Great is the danger of the Seaman, when his ship has sprung an
unperceived Leak. Great is the Danger of that Soldier who walks securely in
that path, on either side whereof his Enemies lie in Ambush. Great is the
Danger of that man who is fast-asleep, while the House is all on Fire over his
Head. Great is the danger of those who live in Perilous Times without
suspicion of Danger. Woe be to them who shall be surpised by the Judgments of
God, arising, as it were, out of Ambush against them. Its very necessary
therefore for all Christians to consider whether the Days wherein they live
are the Perilous Times, whereof they are fore-warned in the Prophecies of the
holy Scriptures, or not.

Now we may know when these perilous Times are come, by considering the
Chara^ters of men, and the State of things, as represented by the holy Ghost in
the Word of God, where such perilous Times are either described or predicted.
For the Times are denom^nated from the men that live in them, and the State of
things, as managed by such men. Pernicious men make peril us Times. When the
Times abound with men of pernicious Properties, Principles, and Practices, and
these have Power to order the State of things, according to their own pleasure,
the Times must needs be perilous.

Thus the Apostle here foretelling perilous Times, gives us the Characters of
those Persons, who by their pernicious Practices should make the times thus
perilous. And therefore for as much as this cannot but contribute very much to
the clearing up of the matter in question, before we proceed any further, we
shall make a particular survey of the several Characters of these dangerous
Persons described in the Context.

The CHARACTERS of the Persons that make the Times Perilous.
THese Pernicious Persons that should make the Times so perilous, are
described by these twenty Marks, Properties or Characters following; viz.

The first Character.
They are such as are, 1. (...). Est autem (...) inordinatus Amor sui.
1. Lovers of their own selves. Now self-love is a sinful Excess in a man's
Love of himself. A man both by the Law of God, and Nature is not only allowed,
but bound to love himself. Neither is that Proverbial saying justly liable to
Exception;

(...)
Every man is a friend to himself; Insomuch as, in the Divine Law, a man's Love
of himself is made the Rule of his Love to another;

(...)
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self Mat. 22.39
.

But this Self-love which is sinful, is such an Excessive Love to ones self, as
swallows up (with Pharaohs lean kine) both Love to ones Neighbor, and that
Divine Love, which is the sum of the first and great Commandment Mat. 22.37
the Love of God. And therefore,

(...) talis est qui se ita amat, ut reliquos prae se contemnat, in omnibus sui
laudem quaerit. -- Sic hypocritae in Religione seipsos quaerunt, h. e.
Dignitatem, Laudem, Pompam and similia, quae nocens est, (...) Aretius in loc.
.
A self-lover is such a one as so loves himself, as that he despises others in
comparison of himself, and seeks his own Praise in all things. Thus do
hypocrites under the cloak of Religion seek themselves, their own Honor,
Praise, Pomp, and the like; and this is a sinful self-love.

(...) igitur sunt isti qui sibi vehementer placent, suisque Commodis impense
student: Jodoc. Vilich. in loc.
Addo (ex Bullingero In locum
) aliorum rebus vel neglectis, vel afflictis etiam.
Lovers of themselves therefore are such as extremely please themselves, and
mainly study and pursue their own Interests, yea, not only with the neglect,
but to the Prejudice of others. This is that sinful self-love which (as a drop
of Poison extinguishes both Life and Heat) banishes both Piety and Charity from
the Heart. Such men are their own Idols and their own Idolizers. They set Self
above God: they set Self in the Throne, and God at the Footstool. This
Self-love is the Root of all Vitiousnesse; It Is here set in the Van of a Troop
of Vices. Self-denial is the Foundation of all Christian Virtues; But Self-love
is the Groundwork of a Babel of sin and Vice, Vanity and Confusion. Self-love
occasions the souls loss, and so becomes the ground of Self-destruction.

The second Character.
2. (...). Qui nummos admirantur. Tales sunt qui Religionem in Questum
convertant Aret. in loc.
.
2. Covetous. Silver-Lovers, as the Word impo ts. Such as are over-in-love with
Money. Such are they that take up Religion for Advantage 1 Timothy 6.5.
, supposing that Gain is godliness.

These men are no better then Idolaters, and Mat. 6.24
Mammon is their God. Sure we are, Col. 3.5.
Covetousness is Idolatry. And Idolatry cannot be consistent with true Piety.
Silver-Lovers, what ever their pretenses be, cannot well be Saints.

The third Character.
3. (...) Veritati opponitur: est ejus Excessus, (...) quaedam (...). Hi
praeterea fingunt honestas Causas ubi nullae sunt. Tales in Religione
perniciosi sunt. Ad hos pertinent qui ob Flagitia pulsi, Nomine Evangelii
exulare se fingunt, and de Persecutionibus suis ac constantia gloriantur sine
Ratione Aret. in loc.
.
3. Boasters. Now Boasting (according to the Import of the Word here used) is a
Vice whereby men speak of them selves, and to their own Praise more then the
Truth. It Is a feigned show ( as are the Colors of the Rainbowe) without
substance, a flourishing Ostentation of some Excellency which is not in them.
These in Matters of Religion are very Pernicious. Such are they who coin good
Causes for the credit of bad Actions. Such are they also, who when banished for
their Wickedness, pretend they suffer for the Gospel, and so without any Cause
at all, glory of their Persecutions, and Constancy in their sufferings. They
are Elati. Ver.
lifted up with a high Conceit of their own Excellencies, wherein they
Gloriosi, Bez. Sir.
glory. Such are they,

Qui plura sibi arrogant, quam revera possident Keck. Ethic.
: Vel,

Plura promittunt quam praestare possunt Ulpianus
.


Who arrogate more to themselves then they do indeed possess; and promise more
to others then they can perform.

The word here used (...).
is the proper Epithete of a Peacock. Such have a glorious train, but foul
feet. Their Lives proclaim their Pollutions, while their Lips boast of their
Perfections. Boasting is ever a sign of Emptynesse. Empty vessels give the
greatest sound.

The fourth Character.
4. (...) comes est (...). Isti enim se in omnibus quaerunt, arrogantes sunt
and animo elati Aret. in loc.
.
4. Proud. This Pride is the Daughter of Self-love, the Sister of
Covetousness, and Mother of Boasting. It Is near akin to the former Vices, and
the Venom of them runs in the Veins of this. For such men seek themselves
in all things, arrogate to themselves more then they ought, and are lifted up
with high conceits of themselves. Pride is the Companion of every Vice, and the
Ringleader in every Faction. Proud Persons gild themselves with an outward
glory, while they are utterly empty of real worth. They spread a great Sail
upon an empty Bark. They are painted Bubbles, shining Meteors, gilded Nothings,
lying Vanities.

The fifth Character.
5. (...). Maledici Bez. Sir.
.
5. Blasphemers. Evil-speakers Died.
, Slanderers and Defamers. This is a Vice of the Tongue, as the former were
Vices of the Heart. The Tongue is a Conduit-pipe by which the evil of the Heart
flows out; and this is that which defiles a man Mat. 15.18
. Herewith they blaspheme God, and defame men (the word here used imports both)
reviling both Magistrates and Ministers.

Obtrectantes fidelibus Doctoribus, and Deum ipsum traducunt Pareus in loc.
.
They are such who not only defame their faithful Ministers, but presume to
traduce the Name of God himself. Whither will not desperate Atheism and
unbridled Impiety carry men? Thus is the Word used in the Scripture; as when
its said, (...) Rev. 16.11
.

(...) Jude 8.
.

(...) Romans 3.8
.


They blasphemed God.

They spoke evil of Dignities.

As we are slanderously reported.

The Hebrew word (...)
used to blaspheme, or curse Number. 23.13
, signifies also to strike or pierce thorough Hab. 3.14
. Blasphemies are impoyson'd Arrows which wicked men shoot at God Almighty's
Face; slanders are venomous Darts wherewith they transfix the Names of his
children.

The sixth Character.
6. (...). Qui hominibus suis (i. e. iis qui presunt sibi) non obtemperant Sir.
Interp. Trem.
.
6. Disobedient to Parents. Who are not subject to them that (according to Gods
order) are set over them.

By Parents (according to the Hebrew Idiome Exodus 20.12
) we are to understand all Superiors, Rulers, Governors, whether Domestical,
Civil or Ecclesiastical. There are Natural, Spiritual, Political Parents: The
first are properly called Father and Mother, the two last are Ministers and
Magistrates, the word then in the latitude of its signification, denotes such
persons as being children are refractory toward their Parents, such People as
are regardlesse of their Pastor, such Subjects as are rebellious against their
Prince. It imports that sin which stands in the Violation of the fifth
Commandment. Such are the persons here described as cast off the Golden Yoke of
Government, and break the silken bands of wholesome Laws, whether founded in a
Natural, Moral or Civil Interest.

The seventh Character.
7. (...). Ingrati Beza.
, Negantes Beneficium Sir. Interp. Trem.
.
7. Unthankful. Such as never acknowledge any benefits.

These are such as make no acknowledgement of their greatest Obligations to God
or Man. Who are the living Sepulchers of Gods Blessings and Man's Benefits. Such
as disdainfully trample upon those stairs by which they rise and ascend to
their Greatness. Of such David complains Psalm. 41.9
, Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my Bread,
has lift up his heel against me. Such are like that Foul which bites off the
Head of the Dam that feeds it. Thus the frozen Serpent hisses and stings him
that cherishes and fosters it in his Bosom. Ingratitude is a devouring
Monster, which though continually fed, is nothing the fatter. Such is the Heb.
6.7, 8.
Ground which drinks in the Rain, but brings forth nothing but Briars and
Thorns. This is near to Cursing, and its End is to be burnt.

Ingratum si dixeris omnia dixeris.
Ingratitude is a comprehensive sin, a complicated evil, a brief Abridgement
and Compendium of all Vices.

The Eighth Character.
8. (...). Scelesti Vetus Interpr.
, Impuri, i. e. quibus nullum jus est nec fas Beza in loc.
. (...) dicitur (...), quod tum de moribus, tum de dogmatibus Doctrinae potest
intelligi Aret. in loc.
.
8. Unholy. Wicked men, Impure Persons, such whose Lusts are their Laws,
otherwise making no reckoning of Right or Wrong. The word here used notes that
which varies from the Divine Standard, that holy Law which is the Rule and
Measure of that which is Right and Good, whether it be in opinion or Practice.
And indeed when the mind is corrupted by Erroneous Opinions, we cannot expect
a Conformity in the Life to the Rules of Holiness. It denotes such as having
quenched every spark of Goodn^sse, and banished every motion of Godliness,
have given themselves over to all Licentiousness and Lasciviousness Jude v. 4
8.
, to commit all manner of wickedness and uncleanness with Greediness Ephesians.
4.19.
. Such who though they put a tincture of Holiness upon their Actions, have no
Truth of Grace in their Hearts. Who draw not the Lines of their Lives by the
golden Rule of Gods Law, nor center their thoughts in his Glory.

The ninth Character.
9. (...) est Affectus seu Amor Naturalis, qualis est Parentum erga Liberos.
Hinc (...) Nomen Patris apud Hebraeos fit ab (...) Voluit. q. Benevolus dictus,
a propensa erga liberos Voluntate Buxt. et alii.
.
9. Without natural Affection. The Word denotes the want of such a Natural
affection or love, as is in the hearts of Natural Parents toward their
Children. Hence we esteem and call such Parents as love not their children,
Unnatural Parents. Such are like to the Ostrich, of which it is said Job 39.16
, She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not hers. But can
this Hardness be found in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of Adam? Can
a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have Compassion on the
son of her womb? Yea, they may forget Isa. 49.15
. This want of Natural Affection is the punishment of Unnatural Lusts Romans
1.26, 27, 31.
. The Bruit-beasts, by natural Instinct, are very tender over their young.
Sin not only degrades Man to a Beast (as drunkenness) but makes him worse
then a Bruit, for Unnaturalness. Such sinners despise Grace, strangle Nature,
and destroy their own souls.

The tenth Character.
10. (...). Nescii Foederis Beza.
, sine Pace Vetus.
, Foedifragi Castalio.
, Irreconciliabiles Scultetus.
: Ab a privitiva, and (...), libo, sacrifico.
10. Truce Breakers. Covenant-breakers, such as are altogether regardlesse of
Oaths and Covenants, or who being once provoked and become Enemies, are
Implacable, Irreconcilable. For the Word is taken from the use of Sacrifices.
Now Sacrifices were used by the Heathens to pacify (as they thought) an angry
Deity. Hence it signifies (as some render it) Implacable. So a cruel and
continual War, which admits of no Truce, they call (...) Sic. Demosth. and
Aeschin.
.
An irreconcilable War.

And Sacrifices also were used in making of Truces, and for the confirmation of
Covenants. Hence it signifies Truce Breakers and Covenant-breakers. The Persons
therefore here described are such as are furious and implacable when provoked,
false and perfidious when engaged, though by the most sacred Oaths and
Covenants. Such in whom there is no truth or trust; who of feigned Friends,
pretended Lovers, will soon become real Foes, professed Enemies.

The eleventh Character.
11. (...). Calumniatores Beza.
. Graecis Philosophis dicitur (...): quod cum Satan proprie possit and faciat,
(...) Graecis recte dictus est Aret. in loc.
.
11. False-Accusers, Slanderers, Calumniators, Makebates, Devils, as the Greek
word imports. And with the Greeks it signifies such a one as by raising
slanderous reports and false accusations, cannot only set men at a distance
from, and at variance with one another; but also (which is the Property of the
Devil, and from hence amongst them he has his Name) can by this means make
very friends to become deadly Enemies. These are the nearest kinsmen to the
Prince of darkness, who is styled, Rev. 12.20
the Accuser of the Brethr^n. Calumny is one of the Master-Engines of the
Devils Kingdom.

(...), a traj^ciendo nomen habet.
Slander has its Name in Greek from thrusting thorough: Slanders are those Ps.
120.3
sharp Arrows of the Mighty, which are discharged against the white of
Innocence, those deadly Darts, with which, dipped in the Poison of malice and
revenge, Wicked men transfix the Names, and sometimes the hearts of the Saints.
Of such does holy David complain Psalm. 35.11, 12.
; False-witnesses did rise up; they laid to my charge things that I knew not.
They rewarded me evil for good to the spoiling of my soul. By Mat. 26.59, 60,
61.
such was our Saviors Name crucified before his Body. This is a kind of
Matthew. 5.11
Persecution of the tongue, under which the Saints have suffered in all Ages.
Such are they who first take away a man's good Name by a false Accusation, and
then his life by an unjust sentence. Just thus they dealt with Christ, and then
no wonder though Satan's Agents practice the same. Devilish Policy upon the best
of Christians. These are indeed (as the Word imports) Devils incarnate, who
cannot taste so much sweetness in any thing as in Innocent Blood. The Greeks
use the Word (...).
to denote Persons that are extremely Imp^ous, and even degenerated into the
very disposition of the Devil. Calumny banishes all Piety from the breast
wherein it lodges; its daily feasted with lies and falsehood. It Is a W^ed so
poisonous, that no wholesome Herb will grow upon the same Ground. In a word,
Slandering is a Satanical sin.

The twelfth Character.
12. (...). Incontinentes Vetus.
Intemperantes Beza.
. Qui se audit, and sibi modum statuere potest, and Affectibus imperare, is
dicitur (...). Hinc Socrates hanc Virtutem (...), esse judicavit. Sunt igitur
(...) soluti in omnem Voluptatem, proni in omnem Intemperantiam Aret. in loc.
.
12. Incontinent. Such whose sensitive Appetite is, without Bit or Bridle, of
Continence or Temperance, impetuously carried after sensual delights. He that
can command himself, and check his inordinate Desires or Inclinations is called
Continent. Hence Socrates judged this Virtue to be the foundation of all Moral
honesty and goodness. They therefore are called Incontinent, who dissolve
themselves into sensual Delights, pursuing brutish pleasures with loose reins,
and seeking in all things the satisfaction of their intemperate De res. They
stifle their Natural Affections, and yet cannot bridle their Sensual Appetite.
Their intemperance begets incontinency, and these two, as the two daughters of
the Horse-Leach, still crying, Give, Give Prove. 30.15
, suck out the Lifeblood of their souls. The lusts of these men, like fire,
whose rage is but encreast by fuel; the more Provision they make for them, the
more satisfaction they study to give them, the more do they become Excessive
and Insatiable, Incontinent Persons are such as in the Pursuit of carnal
Pleasures cannot contain themselves within the Bounds of Moderation.

The thirteenth Character.
13. (...). Immites Beza.
, Feri Vet. and Sir.
, Alieni ab omni Humanitate, quales sunt ferae Aretius.
.
13. Fierce, Cruel, Unmerciful men. Such as having banished all humanity, are
degenerated into Bruits through inhumane rage and cruelty. Bloody Beasts they
are, full of Fierceness, Unmercifulness and Revenge. Wicked men are, in
Scripture, compared to Psalm. 57.4
Lions, Ps. 22.12
Bulls, and Prove. 28.15
Bears, to Mat. 10.16
Wolves and Dogs Phil. 3.2.
, which cruelly devour the Sheep of Christ's Fold, the Lambs of his Flock, and
sometimes tear and devour one another. These are Ps. 68.30
the People that delight in War. These are they that (with Saul Act. 9.1.
) breath out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord. The
tender Mercies of the wicked are cruel Prove. 12.10
. As a roaring Lion, and a ranging Bear; so is a wicked Ruler over the poor
People Prove. 28.15
.

The fourteenth Character.
14. (...). Minime amantes Bonorum Beza.
; Sine Benignitate Vetus Interpr.
; Non a mantes Bonos, per Meiosin, Osores Bonorum Cornel. a Lap.
; Odio habentes Bona Sir. interp. Trem.
. (...) est Honestatis studiosus, boni and probi Ingenii homo. (...), qui non
tam bonos and honestos, quam ipsam honestatem exosam habet and aversatur Aret
in loc.
.
14. Despisers of those that are Good. Such as can by no means love good men.
These are not the Objects of their favor or Bounty. Yea, such as not only do
not love them, but hate them. Yea, such as are not only no Lovers of Good men,
but also Diodat.
Despisers of Goodness, as the Word may import. Such as are so far from
being truly good and honest themselves, that they despise in their hearts all
those that are so, and nourish a secret hatred of all Goodness and Honesty.
But this hatred of Goodness principally shows it self in their Contempt of, or
Opposition to, Good Men. The men of the World do naturally hate the children of
God. Christians must not expect to be beloved by such as Joh. 15.18
hated Christ. The godly are the great Eye-sores of the wicked. The Image of
God enstampt upon Saints renders them not amiable but abominable to sinners.
The Ethiopians account the blackest complexion to be the beautifullest. The
Genesis 3.15
Seed of the Woman is ever hateful to the Seed of the Serpent.

The fifteenth Character.
15. (...). Proditores, qui tum fidei, tum fratrum nihil pensi habent, modo
ipsi sint in tuto Aret. in loc.
. Amicitiae Desertores.
15. Traitors. Who make no reckoning of Truth and Hon^sty, nor do at all regard
their Brethrens welfare, so they can but secure themselves and their own
Interests. False friends who betray those that put most confidence in them. A
wicked man is a Reed of Egypt, that pierces his hand that leanes upon it. They
pretend Friendship, when they meditate Revenge, and proclaim Peace, when they
prepare for War. They are such as will betray their Prince for Money, their
Country for Reward, and the Cause of Christ for some private Gain, some
secular Advantage. Thus Judas betrayed his Lord and Master Mar. 27.3, 4.
for thirty pieces of silver, whereby he justly merited that ignominious Name,
(...) Luke 6.16.
the Traitor, which shall perpetuate the shame and infamy of so foul a sin
throughout all ages. Two sorts of men there are which are hated and abhorred of
all men, as well of the Bad as of the Good; a King that is a Tyrant, and a
Subject that is a Traitor. Such bring nothing but mischiefs to Commonwealths
on Earth, and can expect nothing but Exclusion from the Kingdom of Heaven.

Such a Traitor (to illustrate this by one instance) was that false and bloody
Tryphon, of whom we read in the Maccabean Story: Who taking upon him the
Protection of Antiochus, pretended to act for his establishment in his
Kingdom, usurpt by Demetrius, and shaken with Civil Commotions. And in this
undertaking he became strangely successful, carrying on the matter under
plausible pretenses of Loyalty to his Sovereign, whom, having punished the
Insolences of his Subjects, he pretended (doubtless to the joy of many
deceived, but well-meaning Hearts) he would make a glorious Prince. But behold
an execrable Design conceived, and soon after a cursed Paricide committed in
the Execution of it. Behold the Face of pretended Loyalty covered with a
Scarletblush, and her false Beauty stained with the guilt of innocent blood!
For (says the story)

(...).
Tryphon sought to advance himself to the Kingdom of Asia, and by stretching
his hand out against. Antiochus the King, to bring it back with the Royal
Diadem to his own head 1 Macc. 12.39.
. And his bloody enterprise failed not of a speedy execution. For its said of
him a while after,

Now Tryphon having taken the young King Antiochus in the snares of Deceit,
presently put him to Death, and usurpt his Kingdom, and so by setting the
Crown upon so cursed a Head, he became the cause of no small calamity upon the
whole Land 1 Mac. 13.31, 32.
. Thus a Traitor is a Public Plague, and the proper Parent of perilous Times.

But seldom has the Righteous God suffered such Treasons and Parricides to
escape Punishment. We read of a wicked Treason, and a cursed Parricide which
the Servants of Joash, the King of Judah, committed upon him, pretending for
the justification of so horrid a murder, his guilt of Innocent blood 2 Chronicles.
24, 25.
, that so a cruel piece of private Revenge might put on some appearance of an
Act of Justice. But God chastis'd that bloody Crime by the hand of Amaziah, his
son, who reigned in his stead. For (says the Scripture 2 Chronicles. 25.3.
) It came to pass when the Kingdom was established to him, that he slew his
servants that had killed the King his Father. We have another memorable Example
in the Holy Scripture, of the Execution of Judgment upon Traitors, wherein we
have many hands lifted up for the bringing down the stroke of Justice with the
greater strength. 'Twas upon Amon, King of Judah, that this Treason and Murder
was committed by his own Subjects. For (it is said 2 Chronicles. 33.24.
) His servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own House. Base
Rebels! Must the Royal Palace be the stage of your Princes Ruin by your wicked
Parricide? Bloody Butchers! Must the Royal Palace become the Slaughterhouse of
your Sovereigne? But what followed? Had this King no Loyal Subjects in the Land
that would dare to rise up for the Revenge of his Murder upon these wicked
Traitors, that the Throne of his Son might be established with the more
security? Yes, he had. For (it is said ver. 25.
) the People of the Land slew all them that had conspired against King Amon,
and the People of the Land made Josiah his son King in his stead. And
hereupon, there is none so ignorant of the sacred story, but he knows how happy
the Land was under the Government of the Good King Josiah. So for the Traitor
Judas, we all know he came to a miserable End Mat. 27.5 with Acts 1.18.
.

Thus we see Traitors are pernicious Persons, who make the Times perilous; but
they shall not carry their Treasons out with Impunity, nor for ever escape Gods
righteous Judgments.

The sixteenth Character.
16. (...). Protervi Vetus.
, Praecipites Bez. Sir.
. (...) dicitur temerarius, inconsideratus, sumpta Metaphora ab Avium pullis,
qui implumes dum volare conantur, humi decidunt Aretius.
.
16. Heady. Such as are inconsiderate in their undertakings; froward, rash, and
over-forward in their Attempts and Actings. Who (like birds that will adventure
to fly before they are fledged) run headlong upon desperate designs, whereby
they often hazard both their own and others Ruin. These are still running
forward, when they hardly know whither they go, nor what will follow. They are
such

Qui non vident (...),
Who look not both forward and backward, both before and behind, as a Wise and
Prudent man will do, before he undertakes any weighty Work, or attempts any
great Design. For, Eccl. 2.14
The wise man's Eyes are in his Head, but the Fool walks in Darkness. It Is
good counsel, that of the Poet Pythag. (...).
.

(...)
Consult before thou enterprise. He that fails in this Point of VVisdome,
shall soon see a proof of his own Folly. Wise Counsel is the soul and strength
of great undertakings. For (says that Oracle of Wisdom) Without Counsel,
purposes are disappointed Prove. 19.22
; but every purpose is established by counsel Prove. 20.18
. And therefore, says he, Prove. 24.5, 6.
A wise man is strong, yea, a man of knowledge increases strength. For by wise
Counsel thou shall make thy War: and in multitude of Counselors there is
safety. But now on the other side, inconsiderateness leads to Confusion, and
Rashness is the forerunner of Ruin.

The seventeenth Character.
17. (...). Tumidi Vetus.
, Inflati Beza.
. (...) animi est Tumor and Arrogantia prae se alios contemnentis, dum homines
amore and studio sui occupati sunt Aretius in locum.
. (...) non modo inflatum, sed in Genere dementatum and fanaticum significat
Victorin. Strigel. in N.T.
.
17. High-minded. Such as are puffed up with pride, and even swelled, like Toades
with Poison. This High-mindednesse is that Pride of Spirit, and Arrogance of an
aspiring Mind, whereby men do contemn all others in Comparison of themselves,
and center all their Affections and Endeavors in themselves, being wholly
taken up and busied about their own private and personal Concernments. The
(...).
Word imports such a lifting up of the Mind as unhinges Reason, and opens a
wide door to folly and madness to enter in. So it is used by Physicians to
signify Madness and Phrenetick Distempers. High-mindedness is a kind of
spiritual Phrensy and Madness of the Mind. Ambition, Pride, and Self-love are
the Ingredients of this strong Drink which strangely intoxicates the mind of
man, and if it be but mixed with some drams of Popular Applause and worldly
Glory, it ordinarily produces this Spiritual, (or if you will, Moral) Madness.
That famous Mutinist, Masianello of Naples, was not able to bear the new wine
of his disproportioned worldly Greatness. What Phrensy, what Fury possessed the
minds of Haman, of Herod, when they had drunk deep of the Worlds Golden Cup of
Glory! The one would sacrifice many thousand Lives to his Revenge for want of
the bowing of one man's knee Esther, chap. 3.
; the other (to outvy him in the desperate Madness of an audacious enterprise)
would plant his Engines higher, and attempt to kill God himself, to murder God
incarnate Matthew. chap. 2.
. Man's head cannot bear too great heights, but its presently filled with
giddiness, and prone to Precipitation. A small ship is soon overturned by the
winds when it carries too great a Sail. It Is then an excellent admonition,
that of the Apostle Romans 11.20
;

(...)
Be not High-minded, but Fear.

High-minded men are usually very Pusillanimous, and low-spirited in the most
Noble undertakings. They are but empty Bladders that are thus swelled with the
Wind of vanity.

The eighteenth Character.
18. (...). Elegans est (...). Voluptatum amantes potius quam amantes Dei Beza.
.
18. Lovers of Pleasures more then Lovers of God. They with the busy Wasp
(that little Epicure) are more taken with the sweetness of honey, then with
the Royal Eagle (that Emblem of Nobleness) with the Brightness of the Sun.
God is the Summum Bonum.
Chiefest Good, the most Amiable Object to an Intellectual Eye, and yet more
Amiable to a Spiritual Eye, as he discloses his Beauties in the Face of Christ.
Sensual Pleasure is a soon vanishing smile, a tickling of the Senses, causing
Eccl. 7.6
the Laughter of Fools. What Fools are those that prefer a vanishing shadow
before a never fading Beauty! And besides, these transitory Pleasures, thus
inordinately pursued, end in eternal Pains.

Momentaneum quod delectat, Aeternum quod cruciat.
The Delight of an Epicure (like the Job 20.5
joy of an hypocrite) is but for a moment, but his torment is everlasting. And
yet do these foolish Epicureans love their pleasures more then God, as appears
in this, that they forsake God to follow their pleasures, and while they are
taken up with the entertainment of their pleasures, they say to God depart from
us, we care not for the knowledge of thy Ways Job 21.10, 11.
. Such are they of whom the Prophet speaks Amos 6.4, 5, 6.
, That lie upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and
eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and the calves out of the midst of the Stall.
That chant to the sound of the Vial, and invent to themselves Instruments of
Music, like David, That drink Wine in Bowls, and anoint themselves with the
chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the Affliction of Joseph. They
banish sorrow from their hearts, and sink in downy Delights. They regard not
the State of the Church, nor care for the Commands of God. They live in a
Paradise of Pleasures, and so pass into a Purgatory of Pains; a place where
their Flowers are all faded, and where that Fire is kindled which shall burn
for ever. Thus the Apostle James reproves the Rich men of his Days, who were
great Oppressors of the Poor Jam 5.1, 4, 5
. Ye have lived in Pleasure (says he) on the earth, and been wanton: ye have
nourisht your hearts, as in a Day of slaughter. The words in the Orignal are
more Elegant and Emphatical.

(...)
Ye have been luxurious and lascivious.

But what is the end of these irreligious and wanton Epicures? They are but
fatted with the swine to the slaughter. A Voluptuous man cannot be a Virtuous
man. Virtue can find no Place, much less hope for Preferment in the Kingdom
of Pleasure. In the Deluge of Pleasure, the Dove of Piety can find no place
where to set the sole of her Foot. But punishment will take place where Piety
can find none.

The nineteenth Character.
19. (...). Habentes speciem quidem Pietatis, Virtutem autem ejus abnegantes
Vetus.
. Vel habentes Formam Pietatis, sed qui Vim ejus abnegarint Beza.
. Vel, quibus est species Reverentiae Dei, and a Virtute Dei long discedunt
Sir. Interp. Trem.
. (...) autem significat inane Pietatis simulacrum Bez. in loc.
.
19. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. These are
Hypocritical Professors of Religion, who make a fair show outwardly, but
there is no substance, there is nothing but Emptynesse within. They set up an
Image of godliness which was never enlivened with Grace. They make a show of
Devotion, without any Truth of Affection. They have an outward Form, but they
want that inward F^rvour, which should give Life and Heat to all their
exercises of Religion and godliness. The (...)
Word here used, signifies not an Essential but an Accidental form, the Visor
or Mask, not the Beauty or Lineaments of true godliness. They wear Christ's
Livery, but never learn that Lesson, which he taught his Disciples Mat. 10.38
Luke 9.23.
; To deny themselves, to take up their Cross and follow Christ. They are like
those that wear another Picture, when they care not for his Person. They
content themselves with the shell of Religion without the Kernel, the shadow
without the Substance, the form without the Power. They deny the power of
godliness, that is, they are utterly void of it, altogether strangers to it.
They neither feel nor exercise the Vigor and Life of true Godliness, solid
Christianity. They do not experiment the Efficacy of it upon their Hearts, nor
express the Beauty of it in their Lives. They are acquainted, it may be, with
the Letter, but strangers to the Spirit of the Gospel. They are as so many
Bull-rushes growing in the waters of the Sanctuary, smooth without, but spungy
and non-substantial within. Their Religion is but a Body without a Soul, a Cage
without a Bird, a painted Cabinet without the Jewel, a very Picture without
Life, strength or motion. They are in a word no better then painted Pageants of
pretended Piety.

To complete the number of these Characters we shall draw one more from the
thirteenth Verse of this Chapter, where these Persons before so largely
described by their several Properties are further called,

The twentieth Character.
20. (...). Mali homines and seductores Vetus.
; Vel, Improbi homines and Impostores Beza.
.

(...) dictus significat aliquid amplius quam (...), nempe eum qui sit in omni
scelere exercitatus, and ad injuriam cuivis inferendam totus comparatus Bez. in
Mat. 5.37.
. (...) est homo de industria malus, malignus, and ad male agendum exercitatus
Cornel. a Lap.
. Diabolus per quandam Antonomasiam vocatur (...) Drus. Obs. Sac. l. 13. c. 16.
.

(...) Praestigiatorem, seu Prestigiis, Incantatione and Imposturis fallentem,
apud Veteres Platonem sc. Herodot. and Alios.
Graecos, significat.


20. Evil men and Seducers. Sin and Seduction go hand in hand together. These
two fitly concur to make up one Character of a wicked man. The greater sinner a
man is, the sooner will he become a Seducer. The greater the sinner, the nearer
to Satan, the nearer to Satan the sooner a Seducer.

Now they are called evil men from their setting themselves to work
wickedness; so the word imports. Hence they are elsewhere called Psalm. 6.8.
Mat. 7.23.
Workers of iniquity. They are such as are desperately and determinately
wicked, thoroughly exercised in wicked works. They are such as trouble and vex
the truly godly by their wickedness. They are such as being made up of
mischief, do make a Trade, yea, a Sport of sin. It is (says the Wise man Prove.
10.23
) a sport to a Fool to do mischief. Hence is the Devil (whose only Delight is
in sin and Mischief) sometimes in Scripture called by this very Name Mat.
13.19. 1 John 2.13. and 5.18.
, The wicked One.

Seducers are here so called from their subtle Impostures, flattering
Illusions, and Ephesians. 4.14
cunning craftiness to deceive, according to the Import of the word here used.
They have something of the Genesis 3.1. Rev. 12.9.
subtilty of the old Serpent, whose seed and spawn they are. The word signifies
also a Delusion by means of Witchcraft or Incantation. Seducers are a kind of
Sorcerers, and Seduction is a kind of spiritual Witchcraft and Enchantment. O
foolish Galatians (says the Apostle Gal. 3, 1.
) who has bewitched you that you should not obey the Truth, before whose Eyes
Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth, crucified among you! These are they
that draw men off from the Ways of Truth, into the Bypath of Error, that
lead to Destruction. ver. 6.
These are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden
with sins, led away with diverse Lusts. These are they which using a kind of
spiritual sorcery do (with Simon Magus Act. 8.9, 10, 11.
) bewitch the People, who being taken with their Delusions are ready to cry
out, These men are the great Power of God. Thus they carry, as it were, in one
hand a flaming light, and in the other an impoyson'd Cup; and so the multitudes
that follow them for the one, hey cause to drink of the other; which causing a
spiritual drunkenness carries them headlong to Eternal Destruction. For, 2
These. 2.10, 11, 12.
Because they received not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved,
even for this cause does God send them strong Delusion (the Energie of Error
(...).
) that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned, who believed
not the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

These are the Foxes to which Satan has tied his Firebrarnds, which if not
speedily apprehended and suppressed, will soon set all in a flame, and cause a
fearful combustion both in Church and State. When these fiery Comets do appear,
they usually portend great changes in the Commonwealth, and great Calamities
to the Church of God. These therefore we may well look upon as the Messengers
of evil Tidings, and the Marks of perilous Times.

Thus we have seen the persons deciphered by their several Characters which
make the Times perilous. Now by a serious survey, and a deliberate
consideration hereof, every soberly wise Christian may easily discern when
these Days are come which the Scripture has foretold shall be perilous
Times, especially if the State of things also be but duly considered when such
persons as these do abound.

From the Characters therefore of men, and the Consideration of the state of
things, we may draw the Scripture-Symptomes of Perilous Times; and such are
these that follow.

The SYMPTOMS of Perilous Times.
The first Symptom. Prevalency of Impiety.
Perilous Times, Days of great Danger, When those impieties do exceedingly
abound, which are high Provocations of Gods Anger.

This is a Conclusion which may be clearly drawn from all the forementioned
Characters. When those sins are daily multiplied against God, whereby God is
provoked to execute his Judgments upon men. When Sin and Wickedness abounds
amongst a people professing true Religion and Godliness. Thus our Savior
speaking of the last Days, wherein these Perilous Times should be, tells us
that then Iniquity should abound Mat. 24.12
. They were evil Days, perilous Times with the People of Israel, when their
prevailing Impieties brought down prevailing Judgments. When the Land is
polluted with sin, it is time it should be purged with Judgment. When the
iniquity of the Amorites was full Genesis 15.16
, God cut them off, and planted the Israelites in their land. When the sins of
Sodom were come to their height Genesis 18.20
, Fire and Brimstone was rained down upon them from heaven Genesis 19.24
. When the Jews had filled Jerusalem with their manifold sins, and multiplied
Abominations, God caused them to be carried away Captives to Babylon See Jer.
Chap. 5. to 16
. When men draw iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and sin as it were with a
Cart-rope Isa. 5.18
, they do but pluck down Judgments upon their own Heads. Crying-sins are wont
to bring down cutting Judgments. When the Field is overgrowne with Thorns,
its time to set it on Fire. Men's sins are but Fuel to the Fire of Gods
Judgments. The Seed of sin brings forth the Fruit of Death; It Is so in a
Person, it is so in a Nation. This Observation is very often verified by sad
Experience. Even as I have seen (says Eliphaz in Job Chap. 4. v. 8, 9.
) They that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness reap the same. The thorns of
tribulation grow up from the seeds of sin. Though sin at the first bear a sweet
Flower, it at length grows up to a sharp Thorn. When a whole land is sow'n
with wickedness, what can we expect the Harvest-Time to be, but a Day of
Destruction? When the Harvest of sin is ripe, God sends forth an Angel with
a sharp Sickle to reap the Earth Rev. 14.14, 15.
. When the Lord of the whole earth has fenc't a Land about for a Vineyard to
himself, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest
Vine, and built a Tower in the midst of it, and also made a Wine Press
therein; and yet (notwithstanding all this cost and care) when God expects it
should bring forth Grapes, it shall bring forth wild Grapes ^sa. 5.2.
, what do you think, will he do to this Vineyard? Let God himself tell you,
who is as True in his Threatenings, as Just in his Judgments. Go to now (says
the LORD Isa. 5.5, 6
) I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard; I will take away the hedge
thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it
shall be trodden down: And I will lay it wast; It shall not be pruned, nor
dug, but there shall come up Briars and Thorns: I will also command the
clouds that they rain no rain upon it. Thus will God suspend his mercies from
an unthankful People, and inflict his Judgments upon a sinful Nation. Yea
further, God will at length send his Angel with a sharp sickle, to gather the
Clusters of these wild Grapes. So shall they be cast into the great
Wine Press of the wrath of God. So is his dealing with sinners Prophetically
represented to us in the Holy Scriptures Rev. 14, ^8, 19.
, when they have filled the earth with the cursed Fruits of sin. And upon the
execution of this sentence what follows? And (says the Scripture Rev. 14.20
) the Wine Press was trodden without the City, and Blood came out of the
Wine Press, even unto the Horse-bridles, by the space of a thousand and six
hundred Furlongs. Thus when a land is polluted with over-flowings of sin, it
may soon be punished with a Deluge of Blood. The Times are ever perilous
during the Reign of sin.

But for the further opening of this first Proposition, I shall do these two
things; 1. Show what those special sins are, which are Signs of Perilous
Times. 2. Consider the cases wherein such sins have, in a special manner,
this Symptomatical significancy.


The first Enquiry. What special sins make perilous Times.
FOr the Discovery of this, What sins they are that speak the Times to be
Perilous, I shall not presume to make a Particular enumeration of all those
sins which are Symptoms of evil Times, or signs of approaching Judgments;
(This would be a task perhaps too difficult, and occasion a Discourse too
tedious) But only instance in some of those special sins, which I find in
the holy Scriptures, have been the procuring causes of those Calamities, which
have made the Times Perilous to Gods people. Several other sins, which have
plentifully poured out the same malignant influence, upon the Places and people
under their Regency and dominion, we shall have occasion to speak of in the
following Symptoms. For the present then take we notice of these subsequent
sins as sad Symptoms and Presages of Perilous Times; viz.

The first Sin. Atheism and Irreligion.
THe Times are evil and perilous, When Atheism and Irreligion abounds. When
there is no Hos. 4.1.
knowledge nor Romans 3.18
fear of God to be found in multitudes of People, especially where the
Preaching of the Word, and the Means of Grace are plentifully afforded, its a
sad sign of some sore judgment. If God will pour out his Fury upon the
Heathens that know him not, and the Families of those Heathen Kingdoms that
call not upon his Name Jer. 10.25 with Psalm. 79.6.
; how much more upon those that are called Christians, and yet are grossly
ignorant of God, and live in the constant neglect of this great Duty of Prayer?
For the more are the Means that are vouchsaft to any People, and the greater
the Obligations are that are laid upon them to any Duty, the more heinous is
their sin, the higher is their Provocation if they neglect it, and the
greater shall the Judgments be, the heavier the punishments wherewith the Lord
will at length plague such a sinning People. And therefore does the Lord Jesus
pronounce such a terrible woe against Corazin and Bethsaida, and threaten them
with such a dreadful Destruction, because they were not amended notwithstanding
the Mighty works he had wrought amongst them Mat. 11.20, 21.
. But (says he v. 22, 23, 24
) I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the Day of
Judgment, then for you. And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven,
shall be brought down to Hell: For if the Mighty works which have been done in
thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this Day. But I say
unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom, in the Day of
Judgment, then for thee. The greatest outward Privileges will not exempt a
sinning People from the sorest Judgments 1 Cor. 10 1-11.
. Nay, the greater the Privileges are we do enjoy, the sorer shall our
Punishments be, if we improve them not, if we abuse them.

Now how may we tremble with a just Fear of some fearful Judgment, when we
consider how much Darkness there is in a Land of Light, how Ignorance,
Atheism and Ungodliness abounds amongst a People, which may plentifully enjoy
the Means of Grace! How many thousands are there that know not Jesus Christ,
nor care to know him! Yea, how many thousand Families are there in a Land blessed
for above a thousand years with the Gospel, that call not upon God! How many
Millions of People may be seen every Lords Day in the streets of Cities, in the
Fields and Villages, that make it their constant Practice to profane the
Sabbath, by Vanity and idleness, besides those Children of Darkness, which
are already in the Suburbs of Hell, who are then at their Pots and Pipes, in
their Dens of Iniquity! Now Jer. 5.9.
shall not the Lord visit for these things, and be avenged on such a People as
this? When such a black cloud of Darkness has overspread the Land, that men
see not the Light of the Sun at Noonday; how may we justly fear that the
Thunder of Gods judgments will suddenly break out against us!

We read that when the King of Asyria brought in strangers into Samaria, that
feared not the LORD, nor knew the manner of his worship, the LORD sent Lions
among them that destroyed them 2 Kin. 17 24, 25, 26.
. Atheism and Irreligion in a Holy Nation (a Nation called and consecrated to
Gods Worship and Service) is more provoking, and sooner plucks down Judgment
then in a Heathen Land. Wild Beasts may be secure and live long in a Large
Forest, but they are soon taken and slain when once found in a Tilled Field.

This was part of the Charge which the Lord drew up against his people Israel,
before he cast them to be melted from their dross in the Furnace of Babylon
Jer. 9.3.
; They proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, says the LORD. And
therefore says he to his Prophet, Jer. 9.6, 7
Thine habitation is in the midst of deceit, through Deceit they refuse to know
me, says the LORD. Therefore thus says the LORD of Hosts, Behold, I will melt
them and try them; For how shall I do for the Daughter of my People? Ignorance
is a damning sin^, a soul-destroying Evil. It is a People of no understanding
(says the Lord Isa. 27.11
) therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, aad he that formed
them will show them no favor. And again, 2 These. 1 7, 8, 9.
The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his Mighty Angels in
flaming fire to take vengeance as well on them that know not God, as on them
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. And these also, as well as
the other, shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his Power. But now when ignorance is joined
with obstinacy, as in those that refuse to know God, or to learn the Mysteries
of the Gospel, its a sin more inexcusable, and the punishment of it more
intolerable. Certainly, if the knowledge and worship of God do open a gate for
the bringing in of all manner of Blessings into a land, Ignorance and
Irreligion must needs open a wide door to Destruction.

Before the first destruction of Rome by Brennus and his Gauls, its observed
by the Heathen Writers themselves, that the People were grown altogether
Careless and negligent in the matters of Religion. The ancient Britans (it is
the Observation of Bid) a little before their Destruction by the Saxons, were
arrived at such a pitch of profaneness, as Odium in Religionis Professores,
tanquam in Adversarios, serre.
To hate the Professors of Religion, as if they had been their professed Enemies.

When men are become not only Strangers, but Enemies to Religion, its Time for
God to depart from such a People, and instead of the Gospel, the Ensign of
Peace, to send some grievous Plague, as a Besome of destruction, to sweep the
Land of its Inhabitants.

The second Sin. Murmuring against God.
THose are evil and Perilous Times, wherein People murmr against God, his
Providence, Judgments, Ministers, Mercies. This was the sin of Israel, for
which God slew them in the Wilderness See Exo. 1-12. with Psalm. 78.17, -31 and
1 Cor. 10.10.
. For (says the Scripture Psalm. 106 25, 26, 27.
) They murmured in their Tents, and hearkened not unto the Voice of the LORD.
Therefore he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them in the
Wilderness: To overthrow their seed also among the Nations, and to scatter
them in the Land. Yea, (says the Psalmist Psalm. 78.17-21.
) they spoke against God; They said, can God furnish a Table in the
Wilderness? Behold he smote the Rock that the Waters gushed out, and the
streams overflowed; can he give bread also? Can he provide flesh for his
People? Therefore the LORD heard this and was wroth; so a Fire was kindled
against Jacob, and Anger also came up against Israel: Because they believed not
in God, and trusted not in his salvation. To murmr against present
Providence, notwithstanding former Experiences, is a very provoking sin.
Murmuring against the God of our Mercies, because he does not answer our
desires in the satisfaction of our lusts, is grand Ingratitude, and speaks a
high Degree of Wickedness. Justly may the Lord throw down his heaviest
Judgments upon the heads of such a provoking People. Yea, though men do not
directly speak against God, yet when they speak against his Messengers, murmr
against Ministers, against their Maintenance, they do in effect murmr against
God himself. He that repines at the Reception of Ambassadors, and the charge
of their entertainment, is guilty of a Crime of State which will cast such a
reflection upon the King that sent them, as will receive but an ill Resentment.
And therefore in this Case we may say with Moses of the Israelites, Exodus 16.7,
8.
What are we, that ye murmr against us? Surely, the LORD hears your
Murmurings which you murmr against him. For what are we? your murmurings are
not against us but against the LORD? And do you thus requite the LORD for his
great Mercy in giving you the Gospel, O foolish people and unwise Deuteronomy. 32 6.
? May not he justly punish you for so great a Provocation, by depriving you of
so rich a Mercy, by taking away his Gospel?

So when men murmr at their great Plenty (the sin of thousands in the Land)
do they not provoke the Lord to plague the Land with Famine? when men murmr
against God in Times of Peace and liberty, how just is it with God to scourge
them with bloody Wars, and chastise them with a cruel Bondage? When men are
impatient under their losses and afflictions, and murmr at those sufferings
wherewith they are corrected for their sins, but yet neither take notice of the
sins which have caused those sufferings, nor the Hand of God which chastises
them with such Afflictions (as the Dog which flies at the stone, but regards
not the Hand that threw it) how do they provoke God to load them with heavier
Fetters, and chastise them with smarter Rods, more cutting calamities! when
murmuring grows up from a bitter root of Atheism, and brings forth the cursed
Fruit of Rebellion; it is time for God to take the Axe of his Judgments, and
cut down such a provoking People. Surely murmuring against God, is the
forerunner of many miseries amongst men, and so a sad presage of Perilous
Times.

The third Sin. Injustice, Cruelty, Oppression.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any People Prove.
14.34
. And especially Injustice, Cruelty, Oppression; sins which make the Times
evil and Perilous. This complicated Iniquity is in the Law of God
Interpretative murder: And therefore the LORD stops his Ears to the Prayers of
his People, and casts all their Sacrifices as dung in their Faces, saying, Isa.
1.11 -- 15.
To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices and solemnities? They are
a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them. And when you spread forth your hands,
I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when you make many Prayers, I will not
hear. Why so? Your hands are full of Blood. But how did they contract this
guilt? Surely by their Injustice, Cruelty, Oppression, as appears by those
Precepts which the Lord gives them in opposition to their present Practice;
Isa. 1.17
Learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the
Fatherless, plead for the Widow. Now hence it appears that Persons guilty of
these sins, are in Gods Account Murderers, men that are guilty of Innocent
Blood, which cries aloud to heaven for vengeance to be executed upon such
bloody wretches, covetous, cruel, and oppressing Tyrants. And this is yet more
clear from the following Complaint and Commination. For thus the Prophet
proceeds Isa. 1.21,-24.
, How is the faithful City become a Harlot? It was full of judgment,
Righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers. Thy Silver is become Dross,
thy Wine mixed with Water. Thy Princes are Rebellious, and Companions of
Thieves: Every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards: they judge not
the Fatherless, neither does the Cause of the widow come unto them. Therefore
says the Lord, the LORD of Hosts, the Mighty one of Israel, Ah, I will ease me
of mine Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies. For this Sin the Lord
threatened to lay wast his Vineyard Isa. 5.5, 6
, even to lay the Land of Israel and Judah open to Destruction. For the
Vineyard of the LORD of Hosts is the House of Israel, and the men of Judah his
pleasant Plant: and he looked for Judgment and behold Oppression; for
Righteousness, but behold a cry Isa. 5.7.
. This made their solemn Fasts abominable to God. Behold ( says the Lord Isa.
58.4
) ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness; ye
shall not fast as ye do this Day, to make your voice to be heard on high.

These are the sins which obstruct the Lords saving Mercies, and draw down his
sorest Judgments upon a sinful Nation. A large and lively Representation
hereof (which calls for our sad and serious thoughts, in a timely Reflection
upon our sins and sufferings in these distracted Times, that we may wisely
bethink our selves before it be too late, of the most effectual means for the
Prevention of the Lords sorer Judgments upon our Land) we have set before us
in the Prophecy of Isaiah Chap. 51. v. 1-19.
, in these words;

Behold, the LORDS hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, neither his Ear
heavy that it cannot hear. But your iniquities have separated between you and
your God, and your sins have hid his Face from you, that he will not hear. For
your hands are defiled with Blood, and your fingers with Iniquity; your Lips
have spoken Lies, your Tongue has uttered Perverseness. None calls for
Justice, nor any pleads for Truth: They trust in Vanity, and speak Lies; they
conceive Mischief, and bring forth Iniquity. They hatch Cockatrice Eggs, and
weave the Spiders Web: he that eats of their Eggs dies, and that which it
crushed breaks out into a Viper. Their Webs shall not become garments,
neither shall they cover themselves with their works: their Works are works of
Iniquity, and the Act of Violence is in their Hands. Their feet run to evil,
and they make have to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts are thoughts of
Iniquity; Wasting and Destruction are in their paths. The way of Peace they
know not, and there is no judgment in their goings: they have made them crooked
Paths; whosoever goes therein shall not know Peace. Therefore is Judgment far
from us, neither does Justice overtake us. We wait for Light, but behold
obscurity; for Brightness, but we walk in Darkness. We grope for the Wall
like the Blind; and we grope as if we had no Eyes: We stumble at Noonday, as
in the Night; we are in desolate Places, as dead men. We roar all like Bears,
and mourn sore like Doves: We look for Judgment, but there is none; for
salvation, but it is far off from us. For our Transgressions are multiplied
before Thee, and our sins testify against us: for our Transgressions are
with us, and as for our iniquities, we know them. In transgressing and lying
against the LORD, and departing away from our God; speaking Oppression and
Revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart Words of falsehood. And
Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off: for Truth is
fallen in the street, and Equity cannot enter. Yea, Truth fails, and he that
departs from evil makes himself a Prey, and the LORD saw it, and it
displeased him that there was no Judgment. And he saw that there was no man,
and wondered that there was no Or, Interposer, Heb. (...) so rendered Job 36.32
Intercessor. Therefore his Arm brought salvation unto him, and his
Righteousness, it sustained Him. For he put on Righteousness as a
Breastplate, and an Helmet of Salvation upon his Head; and he put on the
Garments of Vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a Cloak.
According to their Deeds, accordingly he will repay, Fury to his adversaries,
Recompense to his Enemies; to the Islands he will repay Recompense. So shall
they fear the Name of the LORD from the West, and his glory from the Rising of
the Sun: when the Enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord
shall lift up a Standard against him.

Thus we see how miserable the State of that Nation is, which is full of
Unrighteousness, Oppression and Cruelty, and how dreadful the condition of
that People, who are guilty of these sins, shall be, when the LORD of Hosts,
armed with Vengeance shall come forth in Wrath and Fury, for the Execution of
his Judgments.

These are usually the sins of the great men of the world. The Psalmist thus
describes them Psalm. 73.6-10.
; Pride compasses them about as a chain; Violence covers them as a Garment.
Their Eyes stand out with Fatness; they have more then heart could wish. They
are corrupt and speak wickedly concerning Oppression; they speak loftily. They
set their Mouth against the Heavens, and their tongue walks through the
Earth. Therefore his People return hither; and waters of a full Cup are wrung
out to them. But when their Insolences are grown intolerable, God takes down
their Pride with deserved Punishments. When they are come to the Zenith of
their glory, the least touch of the Almighty's hand sends them down into the
lowest Center of wretchedness and infelicity. That may be the very moment of
their Destruction, wherein they think to put a Period to the Churches Peace by
their bloody Tyranny and Oppression. For the oppression of the Poor, for the
sighing of the Needy, NOW will I arise (says the LORD) I will set him at
safety from him that puffs at him Psalm. 12.5
.

Oppressors are wont to prey upon the Poor, as the stronger Beasts upon the
weaker, the greater Fowls and Fishes upon the lesser. They are the Leeches of
the Commonwealth, which suck the Blood out of its Veins; the Suckers which
spring from the roots of the Trees, and draw away the Sap from the otherwise
fruitful Branches. The Oppressor is a most cruel Chemist; for he distills
Silver out of the sweat of poor men's Brows, and Gold out of the tears of Widows
and Orphans. The very Laws are made use of by such as Keys to open their
Coffers, as Buckets to draw all the water out of their Wells.

Aperi Bursam and ego aperiam Buccam.
Let me finger my Fee (says the greedy Lawyer) and I will canvase thy Cause.
Thus Justice runs upon Silver-wheels, while Oppression rules with an Iron Rod.
The Poor are dashed in pieces by the Proud, like Potters Vessels. Then is it
time for the Judge of the World to come forth and execute Judgment. Then shall
they feel the strength of his strokes, as well as others have felt the Power of
their Pride. Isa. 30.12, 13, 14
Wherefore thus says the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise this Word, and
trust in Oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon: Therefore this
iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high
Wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an Instant. And he shall break it as
the breaking of the Potters Vessel, that is broken in pieces, he shall not
spare; so that there shall not be found in the bursting of it, a sherd to take
Fire from the Hearth, or to take water withal out of the Pit.

Oppression, when it is become a reigning sin, precedes some sore Visitation of
that City, presages the utter Desolation of that Land, wherein it reigns. We
shall not doubt of the Truth of this, if we do believe the Word of God. Jer.
6.6, 7, 8.
For thus has the LORD of Hosts said, Hew ye down Trees, and cast a Mount
against Jerusalem: This is the City to be visited; she is wholly Oppression in
the midst of her. As a Fountain casts out her waters, so she casts out her
Wickedness: Violence and spoil is heard in her, before me continually is
Grief and Wounds. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from
thee: lest I make thee desolate, a Land not Inhabited.

The Riches gained by Oppression shall not prosper in the hand of Oppressors,
nor prefit them in the Day of wrath: Forasmuch therefore ( says the LORD Amos
5.11, 12.
) as your treading is upon the Poor, and ye take from him Burdens of wheat, ye
have built Houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them: ye have
planted pleasant Vine-yards, but ye shall not drink Wine of them. For I know
your manifold Transgressions, and your mighty sins: they afflict the just, they
take a Bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the Gate from their right. And
what follows? v. 16, 17.
Therefore the LORD the God of Hosts, the Lord says thus, wailing shall be in
all streets, and they shall say in all the Highwayes, Alas! Alas! For I will
pass through thee, says the LORD. Well then may the Apostle call the Rich men
of the World, who have been the Oppressors of the Poor, to weeping and
mourning, and bitter Lamentation. Jam. 5.1-6.
Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon
you. Your Riches are corrupted, and your Garments moth-eaten. Your Gold and
Silver is Cankered, and the Rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your Flesh as it were Fire; ye have heaped Treasure together for the
last Days. Behold the hire of the Laborers, which have reaped down your
Fields, which is of you kept back by Fraud, cries: and the cries of them which
have reaped are entered into the ears of (...) *
the Lord of Sabbath. Ye have lived in pleasure on the Earth, (...) the LORD of
Hosts.
and been wanton: ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. Ye
have condemned and killed the just, and he does not resist you. Bloody Tyrants!
Thus do Wolves devour the harmless Sheep. But the Mighty God will at length
roll down heavy Judgments upon the heads of such wicked worldlings.

Deceit and Violence are the two maine Pillars in the House of OPPRESSION,
wherein bloody Tyrants and Insolent Usurpers dwell. They lay snares for the
Lives of men, that they may take them by Deceit, and then drag them with
Violence to a bloody Death, or unjustly deprive them of the Comforts of Life.
Such is the State of things when Oppression reigns in a Land. Thus does the
Prophet describe these bloody and deceitful men, who seek to oppress the
Righteous and lie in wait for Innocent Blood, and shows how high a Provocation
this is of the great God to execute his Judgments upon such a sinful Nation.
For among my People says the LORD by the Prophet Jer. 5.26
) are found Wicked men: they lay wait as he that sets snares, they set a
Trap, they catch men. Jer. 9.8, 9
Their Tongue is as an Arrow shot out, it speaks deceit: one speaks
peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in heart he lays wait for him.
Shall I not visit them for these things, says the LORD? Shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this? Jerem. 5 27-29.
As a Cage is full of Birds, so are their Houses full of Deceit: therefore are
they become great, and waxen rich. They are waxen fat, they shine, yea, they
overpass the Deeds of the wicked: they judge not the cause, the Cause of the
Fatherless, yet they prosper: and the right of the Needy do they not judge.
Shall I not visit for these things, faith the LORD? Shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this? some passages of another Prophecy, we shall
select to the same Purpose. Ezekiel. 22 3-22.
Thus says the Lord GOD, The City sheddeth Blood in the midst of it, that her
Time may come. Thou art become guilty in thy Blood that thou have shed; thou
have caused thy Days to draw near, and art come even to thy years; therefore
have I made thee a reproach unto the Heathen, and a mocking to all Countries.
Those that be near, and those that be far from thee, shall mock thee, which
art infamous and much vexed. Behold the Princes of Israel, every one were in
thee to their Power to shed Blood. In thee have they set light by Father and
Mother; in the midst of thee have they dealt by Oppression with the Stranger;
in thee have they vexed the Fatherless and the Widow: Thou have despised my
holy things, and have profaned my Sabbaths. In thee are men that carry tales to
shed blood. In thee have they taken gifts to shed Blood: Thou have taken Usury
and Increase, and thou have greedily gained of thy Neighbors by Extortion, and
have forgotten me, says the Lord GOD. Behold therefore I have smitten my hand
at thy dishonest Gain which thou have made, and at thy Blood which has been
in the midst of thee. Can thine Heart endure, or can thine Hands be strong in
the Days that I shall deal with thee? I the LORD have spoken it, and will do
it. Now therefore thus says the Lord GOD, Because ye are all Become Dross,
behold therefore I will gather you, as they gather Silver and Brass, and Iron,
and Lead, and Tin into the midst of the Furnace, to blow the Fire upon it to
melt it; so will I gather you in my Anger and in my Fury; Yea, I will gather
you, and blow upon you in the Fire of my Wrath, and ye shall be melted, as
Silver is melted in the midst of the Furnace; and ye shall know that I the LORD
have poured out my Fury upon you. This is the portion of the wicked from the
Lord. Thus do Presumptuous men exalt themselves, Ps. 55.23
But thou; O God, shall bring them down into the Pit of Destruction: Bloody
and Deceitful men shall not live out half their Days.

The fourth Sin. Swearing and Cursing.
WHen the fearful sins of swearing and Cursing are grown common, the Times are
Perilous. When these Black sins, these Ill-boading Fowls (that are wont to
feed upon the Brinks of the bottomless Pit) do abound, its a Sign the Winter
of Gods Judgments is at hand. When men Thunder out Oaths and Curses on Earth
(as alas! how often are our ears pierced with these Hellish sounds in the open
streets) it is time for God to Thunder down his Judgments from heaven.
Doubtless men may curse away all the Lords Blessings, and by their abominable
Oaths, swear down Vengeance from heaven upon their own Heads, yea, soon swear
their own souls into Hell. Yea, cruel Curses and bloody Oaths, may soon fill
the Land with Cruelty and Blood. Jer. 23.10 Hos. 4.2, 3.
Because of Swearing may God justly cause the Land to mourn. This sin, we
find in the holy Scripture strictly forbidden and severely punished. I say
unto you (says our Savior Mat, 5.34-37.
) swear not at all, neither by Heaven; for it is Gods Throne: nor by the Earth;
for it is his Footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for it is the City of the
great King. Neither shall thou swear by thy Head, because thou can not make
one hair white or black. But let your Communication be, Yea, yea, Nay, nay;
For whatsoever is more then these comes of evil. The Apostle James Chap. 5.
ver. 12.
further backs this Injunction, and earnestly presses this Prohibition. But
above all things (says he) my Brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven, neither
by the Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let your Yea, be yea, and your
Nay, nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation. How strange it is that men should
delight to pollute their own souls, and pull down judgment on the Land, by
the Customary Commission of a sin so strictly prohibited, under the Pain of
Damnation! This is a sin which has in it no Profit, no pleasure, no not
sensual sweetness enough to bait a temptation. How does this argue a Devilish
Disposition in men, that they will do a thing so much abhord of God, so
strictly forbidden in the Word, so certainly Destructive to their souls. when
they cannot taste so much as a seeming sweetness, nor see so much as an
appearing Goodness in it, to be any ground of their Allurement thereunto, or
occasion of their frequent Commission thereof! when such a fin abounds, must
not God needs be provokt to plague and punish such a desperately wicked People?

So for the sin of cursing, a sin of the same Hellish nature, a fruit of the
same root of bitterness, how has the Lord manifested his Displeasure against
it, by the punishment which he ordained to be inflicted on such as were guilty
of it in his holy Word! We read Lev. 24.10-16.
of the Son of an Israelitish woman, whose Father was an Egyptian, that went
out among the Children of Israel in the Camp. And this Son of the Israelitish
woman blasphemed the Name of the LORD, and cursed: And they brought him unto
Moses: And they put him in Ward that the mind of the LORD might be showed them,
And the LORD spoke unto Moses, saying, Bring forth him that has Cursed,
without the Camp, and let all that heard him, lay their hands upon his Head,
and let all the Congregation stone him. And hereupon the LORD made it a Statute
in Israel, that whosoever should be found guilty of this sin, whether Israelite
or Stranger, he should surely be put to Death. And therefore however amongst
men this sin may go unpunished, yet seeing the Name of God is hereby profaned,
the LORD will not hold them guiltless Exo. 20.7
, that are guilty of it, nor suffer them to escape his Righteous judgment.

That Imprecation of the Psalmist is Prophetical, and has the force of a
Commination, Psalm. 59.12, 13.
For the sin of their Mouth, and the words of their Lips, let them even be
taken in their Pride: and for Cursing and Lying which they speak. Consume them
in wrath, consume them, that they may not be; and let them know that God rules
in Jacob, unto the Ends of the Earth.

Doubtless the Curse of God hangs over the Heads of those that are given to
Cursing. Dreadful is that Jmprecation of David, of the same Nature with the
former. Psalm. 109 17, 18, 19.
As he loved Cursing so let it come unto him: as he delighted not in Blessing,
so let it be far from him. As he clothed himself with Cursing like as with his
Garment; so let it come into his Bowels like Water, and like Oil into his
Bones. Let it be unto him as the Garment which covers him, and for a Girdle
where with he is girded continually. Woe be to him whose Body, Belly, Bones,
are thus clothed, filled, consumed with Cursing. This is doubtless worse then
the most deadly Disease, and will prove more intolerable then the torturing
Wracks of the terriblest Tyrants in the World. Cursing will surely fill the
awakened Conscience of the guilty sinner, with tormenting Agonies which shall
last to Eternity.

Oaths and Curses are as Arrows shot up against heaven which at length fall
down upon the Heads of them that shot them. Yea, they are sparks of Hellfire,
or rather Firebrands of Hell, which are thrown into the Air; and may (if
timely Repentance with speedy Reformation, and infinite mercy prevent not)
kindle a deadly burning in that City or Nation wherein they abound unpunished.

And yet is not this the sin, not only of the basest sort, but of many of
the great Gallants of the Times? Oaths are the Sause of their Mirth, and
Curses are the Stings of their Anger. Oaths are in Fashion amongst them, and
to rap them out roundly is a piece of their Gallantry. Curses still wart upon
their commands, and whosoever or whatsoever does but a little cross them, they
wish all the Plagues of hell to light upon them. Surely the Devil himself
cannot speak more desperate language, and utter more damnable speeches then
these horribly Profane Gallants. If any where there be a Hell upon Earth, it is
where these Children of Hell, these firstborn sons of the Devil, that have
Damnation written in their Foreheads, are met together, and sit (the Devil
being doubtless in the Head of the Company) Bowzing, Swearing, Storming,
Cursing, Blaspheming, as if they would tear Heaven to let down flaming
Vengeance, and rend the earth to the Bottom of Hell, that they might go down
quick into that fiery Prison, fall down headlong into the burning-Lake. A
wonder it is of the Divine Patience, that when they are rending the Sacred Name
of God with Oaths, Blasphemies, Cursings, God does not give them up into the
hands of the Devil, to tear them instantly in pieces (as we read he has dealt
with some) and carry them Body and Soul into Hell. But God in Justice lets them
live for the Aggravation of their sins, and the increase of their Torments in
Hellfire to Eternity. For how can they hope for any salvation by Christ, or
benefit by his Blood who desperately wrap up his wounds and blood in their
Oaths and Curses, and so (as it were) throw them in God Almighty's Face?
whence is it he does not with some dreadful Thunderbolt instantly smite them
into Hell? How should they expect that God should save them in the Day of their
Death, who disperately bid God damn them every day? How can they escape Hell
and Damnation, who are still bidding the Devil take them upon every slight
occasion? O desperately Profane Wretches! O Devilish wicked Creatures! Is it
possible there are such to be found under the Sun? Is it possible there
should be such Monsters found within the Pale of the Church; such Incarnate
Devils in a Land enlightened with the Gospel of Christ, and honored with the
glorious Profession of Christianity? O that the tingling Ears, and trembling
Hearts of many of Gods children, who have occasionally heard this Language of
Hell (though never privy to the thousandth Part of these Hellish Impieties)
were not too sad an evidence of these Abominations abounding in the Land. Now
shall not the Lord visit for these things? Shall not his soul be avenged on
such a Nation as this? Is it not a wonder Heaven is not all in flames over our
heads, and the Earth all staind with blood under our Feet for this sin long
before now? Surely this deserves sadly to be laid to heart, as a fearful
Presage of some very dreadful Judgment.

I shall close this fourth Instance with the Excellent counsel of the Son of
Sirach. Accustom not thy self (says he Eccl. 23.9-13.
) to Swearing; neither use thy self to the Naming of the Holy One. For as a
servant that is continually beaten shall not be without a blew mark; so he that
swears, and names God continually, shall not be faultless. (...).
A man that uses much swearing shall be filled with iniquity, and the Plague
shall never depart from his House. If he shall offend, his sin shall be upon
him; and if he acknowledge not his sin (...).
he makes the offense double. And if he swear in vain, he shall not be
innocent, but his House shall be full of Calamities. There is a Word that is
clothed about with Death. God grant that it be not found in the Heritage of
Jacob; for all such things shall be far from the godly, and they shall not
(...).
wallow in their sins. Use not thy mouth to (...).
intemperate swearing; for therein is the word of sin.

The fifth Sin. Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness.
When the Land is defiled with Adultery, Fornication, and Uncleanness, the
Times are Perilous and Evil. God is a God of infinite Purity and Holiness.
When a Land therefore is polluted with these Impurities and Abominations, what
can be expected but that the Lord should abhor it? When the Lord has e poused
a Nation to himself, and it has Hos. 1.2
committed great Whore^omes, what can be expected but that the Lord should give
it a Bill of Divorce? When the Lord's Mercies are turned into the Fuel of
Uncleanness, what may we expect but Wrath and Judgment? Dreadful are the
Judgments which the Lord has executed for the Punishment of these sins.
Yea, so dreadful, that never has the world seen more terrible Demonstrations
of the Wrath and Vengeance of an angry God, an incensed Majesty. 'Twas for the
Punishment of this Sin that God drowned the whole world, and burnt up the
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah with Fire and Brimstone. For the Old World burned
in Lust and Wantonness before it was drowned with Water; and Sodom was drowned
in Luxury and Filthiness, before it was burnt with Fire. In the former, the
Sons of God doted on the Beauty of the Daughters of men Genesis 6.2
; and in the latter, the Sons of men sought to commit Folly with the Angels of
God Genesis 19, 4 5
. Desperate Pollution! that would attempt the Violation of Angelical Purity.
But their unnatural Lusts received a supernatural punishment, God sending down
upon them Hell out of Heaven. But now these sins amongst us are worse by a
thousand Degrees then they were amongst them. For a Christian by profession,
whose Body has been consecrated by Baptism for a Temple of the holy Ghost, to
abuse himself by filthy Lusts, is to do an Act beyond all the Abominations of
the Heathens, even to turn the Sanctuary into a Stews. The Apostle therefore
uses this Argument to take off the too lascivious Hinc (...) scortari, Chil.
Eras.
Corinthians from this sin. Flee Fornication (says he 1 Cor. 6.18, 19.
.) Every sin that a man does, is without the Body: But he that commits
Fornication sins against his own Body. What? know ye not that your Body is
the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are
not your own? Now where the Lords Temples are thus profaned, may not he justly
abhor them, and utterly forsake that Land? Yea, if for this sin especially, the
Lord 2 Pet. 2.5, 6
brought in the Floo^ upon the World of the Ungodly: And turning the Cities of
Sodom and Gomorrah into Ashes (...).
, condemned them with an overthrow, making them an Example to these that
afterward should live ungodly, who are Jude v. 7
suffering the Vengeance of Eternal Fire; of how much sorer Punishment, think
you, shall they be thought worthy, who under the Light of the Gospel,
Profession of Christianity and Means of Grace, commit these horrid
Abominations? Surely it is a wonder the flaming Vengeance of God is not before
now broken forth against the provoking People of this Land. But we know, Heb.
13.4
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.

For this sin does God complain of his ungrateful People, the Jews. When I had
fed them to the full (says the Lord Jer. 5.7, 8, 9.
) they then committed Adultery, and Assembled themselves by Troops in the
Harlots Houses. They were as fed Horses in the morning, every One neighed after
his Neighbors Wife. Shall I not visit for these things? says the LORD: and
shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? So the Prophet
complains as of one of the great Evils of his Time, Jer. 23 10
the Land is full of Adulterers. And when the Lord found the Land full of such
filth, he came and swept it with the Besome of Desolation, in the Babylonish
Captivity. The committing of Adultery is one of those sins, for which the LORD
has said Hos. 4.2, 3.
, The Land shall mourn.

The sixth Sin. Gluttony and Drunkenness.
WHen Gluttony and Drunkenness are those Idols to which men sacrifice the
Marrow and Fatness of the Land, together with their Time and Strength, the
Days are evil, the Times are Perilous. When these two appear together (as
Castor and Pollux promise safety in the Sea) they presage a storm in the
State. These two Monsters are enough to devour a whole Land, and they provoke
God to destroy the Place where they prevail. Men were eating and drinking (as
if that had been the end of their Creation) when God brought the Flood, and
drowned the world Mat. 24.38
, whereby they were involved in a sudden Destruction. And we know there is a
Day a coming (which shall steal upon men as a Thief in the Night) wherein the
World shall be destroyed with Fire 2 Pet. 3.10
: And (says our Savior Luke 21.34, 35.
) Take heed to your selves, lest at any Time your Hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness (or (...), a (...), Vinum. Gourmandise, and
Yurongnerie, Gallic. Genev.
Gluttony and Fullness of Wine) and cares of this Life, and so that day come
upon you unawares. For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the
Face of the whole Earth. However though the Day of the General Judgment (which
yet cannot be far off) should not surprise the present Generation, they may be
suddenly overtaken with the black and gloomy day of some Particular Judgment.
When the good Creatures of God are abused to Excess, God may justly plague
that Land with War and Want. So of the Israelites its said, Exo. 32.6 1 Cor.
10.7
The People sat down to eat, and to drink, and rose up to play. They minded
neither the God that gave them their blessings, to be thankful; nor the end for
which he gave them, that they might serve the LORD their God with joyfulnesse,
and gladness of heart for the abundance of all things Deuteronomy. 28.47
. But what followed? The Scripture tells you, Exodus 32 28
There fell of the People that Day (by the edge of the Sword, in the hands of
their Brethren, by the Order and Appointment of God) about three thousand men.
Thus may God take occasion, when the people are guilty of this sin, of Jude 12.
feeding themselves without Fear, to reckon with them for all the rest of their
sins and abominations. Thus did the Lord afterward cause his People Israel to
be carried into Captivity for the Punishment of their self-indulgence in this
sin of Luxury. For thus says the Lord in Amos Chap. 6. v. 4-8.
, They lie upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches. [Or,
(as the Margin has it) abound in superfluities.] They eat the Lambs out of the
Flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the Stall. [They were so fine fed
that they could digest nothing but Delicacies.] They chant to the sound of the
Viol, and inv^nt to themselves Instruments of Music, like David.] Their Meat
would not down without Music: like true Epicures, they must at once feast all
their Senses.] They Drink Wine in Bowls, [They drank by Measure without
Measure. Thus they transgrest in the quantity, as well as in the quality of
their Provisions.] And anoint themselves with the chief Ointments: [Feasting is
usually attended with Effeminacy.] But they are not grieved for the affliction
of Joseph. [ Gluttony and Drunkenness harden the heart to an Insensiblenesse
of Sions sufferings. In Riots and Revels men are never affected with the
Churches Concernments.] Therefore now shall they go Captive ( (...) *
in the very Head and Front of the Captives, (...)
or) with the first that go Captive, and the ^anquet of them that stretched
themselves (straining their Estates to satisfy their Lusts, in maintaining
their Luxury; Or, that stretched themselves upon their Couches ver. 4.
) shall be removed. [This latter part of the Verse has various Versions. For
thus do some render the Original Hebrew.

(...)

Tunc cessabit amovebiturque Designatio Redundantium Jun. and Trem. vide Annot.
in Locum.
.

Et recedet Luxus luxuriantium Buxt,
.

Et recedet vel amovebitur Conv^vatio luxuriosorum R. Salom.
.

Et auferetur Factio las^ivientium Vulg. Lat.
.

(...) LXXII. Interp.
.

(...) Justin.
.

(...): Paraph. Chald.
(...)

Et recedet Conv^vium Funeris extensorum Ar. Mont.


Et appro^^nqua^^ Luctus se extendentium Lectis Sant. Pagnin.
.


And all the Preparation of Exceedings shall cease; Or, All the costly
delicacies prepared for the riotous Feasters, by those that are by appointment
to give Order for the furnishing out of the Feast, shall cease and be removed.
The Luxuriancy of their Feasting shall be lopt off, and their exquisite
Dainties shall be taken away from their Table by the hand of Justice. The
Vul^ar Translation (usually ascribed to Hier^me) renders it, The Faction of the
wan^ons shall be taken away. The Seventy, though in terms more remote, are
thought in sense to concur with this Vulgar Version. For they render it, The
neighing of the horses shall be taken away out of Ephraim. So likewise is it
rendered in the Arabic Translation: Now the sense which is generally given of
it, is this; The lasciousnesse of Ephraim, whereby they are become like fed
Horses in the morning (as the Prophet speaks Jer. 5.8.
) every one neighing after his neighbors Wife, shall be made to cease by their
sufferings. And this sense is not unsuitable to the scope of this Scripture,
which is to represent the Sin and Punishment of Excess in Feasting, whereby
men become guilty of Riot and Drunkenness, which are proper Parents of L
sciviousnesse, and beget many Acts of Uncleanness. For Luxury is the Fuel of
Lust, and Wine (which the Poets call (...). Aristoph.
The milk of Venus) is the Food of Wantonness. Whence its said by the Father;

Vent^r aestuans mero facile ^esp^mat in Libidinem Hieron.
Et, Idem in Ep^st. ad Titum.
In vino Luxuria est, ubicunq^e saturitas; and u^i E^rietas, ibi Libido
dominatur.
When the body is inflamed with Wine, Wantonness is the Froth of Drunkenn^sse.
And again, there is Luxury in Wine where ^ver th^re is Saturity, and Lu^^ gets
Dominion by Drunkenn sse. To this of the Sep ^agint another G^e^k Translation
adds, And the habitation of Ev^l do^rs shall b^ removed. Thus Drunkenness
leads to VV^n o^^ ss^, and VVantonn^sse ends in Woeful ^esse, when their Luxury
is punished by their being carried into Captivity. The Ch^lde Paraphrase speaks
to this Purpose, Then shall the ^or of their Hearts depart, and the costly and
curious Furniture of their Houses shall be taken away from them. The Impo^t of
this Version answers the scope of the Text and sense of the words, which is
this, Their Festi^al joy and gladness, together with all their rich Furniture
for Feasting, shall be utterly lost, when they shall be carried awa^ Captives.
And because such sumptuous Feasting, such splendid Magnificence was principa ly
found amongst great men, as being proper to Princes, the Syriack Translates it,
The Exultation, or Exuberancy of Joy, shall be taken away from th ir Princes.
It imports their Bondage under the Babylonian Captivity should be so bitter,
that their joyful Feasts should be turned into afflicting Fa^s, and their
wanton Mirth nto woeful Mourning. And hence some ^ave rendered the Words, Genev.
Trans. Sic Pagn. ut supra, and alii.
The sorrow of them that have stretched out themselves is at hand. But now the
literal Translation answering most exactly to the Hebrew Origi^al, is this; And
the Funeral-Feast of hose that are stretched out (as suppose lying down upon
their Beds, the Posture of Feast^ng among the Jews) is removed. For it was a
custom among the Jews to make a Feast at ^he Funerals of the Dead, to comfort
the ^riends of the deceased. And therefore the Prophet Jeremy represents the
great distress and C lamity of the Jews, by the ceasing of these
Funeral-Feasts. Neither (says he Jer. 16.7 See the Margin.
) shall men break b^ead for them in mourning, to comfort them for the Dead,
neither shall men give them the Cup of Consolation to ^rink for their Father,
or for their Mother. Now the Word used by the Prophet Amos, when he says their
banquet shall be removed, properly signifies such a Funeral-Feast. And therefore
(though hence it may be transferred to signify any Feast or Banquet) if the
Feasting here spoken of was upon such an Occasion, it was no small Aggravation
of their sin of Luxury. For was Feasting upon Delicacies, and excessive
Drinking, represented by their drinking Wine in Bowls, seasonable or suitable
for such an Occasion? Nay, was it not more excessively si^ful at such a time as
this, when they were called to attend such a sorrowful Solemnity? But whether
this were their sin or not, sure I am it is a Sin too common in the grea City
of this Land, and no small Stain to its Glory. For upon such occasions as these
of our Funeral Solemnities it is too ordinary a thing for Women of the lower
rank (I am ashamed to speak it, and yet afraid to be silent, let so horrible a
Sin should pass unreproved) not only to drink wine in Bowls, but o drink
off Bowls of wine, to a manifest Exce^s, a beastly Drunkenness. Neither can
it be denied, when sometimes their shameful spewing in the open Congregation
testifies against them. How horrible a thing is this that women professing
Christianity, and who would take it in foul scorn that an^ should say of them
they were strangers (...) Religion and godliness, should be guilty of such an
abominable Excess, such a filth^, scandalous, damnable Drunkenness. Is it not
a shame (if those may be Judges that have not utterly renounced all Sobriety)
that some one Woman, should at one Time, drink several quarts of Wine, one
after another, upon such an Occasion? This me thinks should seem incredible to
strangers, which manifest and too frequent evidence amongst us, makes
altogether unden^able. O horrid vitiousnesse, and worse then brutishness of
such intemperate wom^n, the shame of their Sex, the scum of our City (however
some of them may seem to be of good fashion) and in the eyes of all sober
Persons, more loathsome then the Dung in the streets! May not the Lord justly
Jer. 13.9.
mar the Pride, and stain the Glory of a City polluted with such foul
Abominations! May not the Lord say concerning such a People, as here of Israel
for his Epicurisme and Excess; The Lord GOD has sworn by himself, says he
LORD, the God of Hosts, I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his Palaces:
therefore will I deliver up the City with all that is therein.

Strange it is that any should seek to themselves a Name and affect Glory by so
shameful a sin, so ignominious an Abuse of Gods Creatures, as they are guilty
of, who sacrifice them to their Luxury, and in a fearful excess of
Prodigality, consume them upon their Lusts. Yet many such abominable Epicures
there have been, and doubtless still are in the World. Thus we read of that
Luxurious and Lascivious Queen of Egypt, Cleopatra, that to give the more Noble
Reception, and Honorable Entertainment to Mark Anthony, she ordered at a
Banquet, One Dish to be prepared at the Expense of two Hundred and fifty Pieces
of Gold, to be served up to the Table in the second Course. And further to
express (as she thought) the Love and Honor she bore to Mark Anthony, her
Wanton Paramour, having dissolved a Pearl of fifty thousand pounds price, she
drank it off to his Health at one draught. Oh infamous Excess! O Licentious
Lady of Luxury, worthy of no greater Honor in all after Ages then this, to be
styled the Grand Patroness of Prodigality. But what think you was the end of
this great Epicure? When Mark Anthony to requite this Honor was resolved to
make her Emperesse of the World, and to that end attempted the ravishment of
the Roman Scepter, he was vanquished by Octavious Augustus at Actium, whence
he fled to Alexandria, and there in Despair of Life, and Disdain of Death from
the Hand of an Enemy, he fell upon his own sword and died. Hereupon Cleopatra,
that she might not become the Matter of the Roman Triumph, enclosed her self
in a Tomb, and there setting two Serpents to her Breast, she ended a Luxurious
Life with a miserable Death. Thus at length the Pleasure of Luxury expires in
Pain, and the Glory of Prodigality is buried in shame, and covered with
everlasting Ignominy and Contempt.

But I needed not to have traveled into Egypt for an Example of Luxury, while
I might have produced one in England, hardly to be paralleled in the whole
Empire of Epicurus. But when I consider the quality of the Person, and the
Place that he held, I am afraid lest by the Relation of it, I should give an
Occasion to the Churches Enemies to cast Reproach upon the most Honorable
calling in the World, which is that of the Ministry of the Gospel. But when I
consider that surely the most enraged Malice of men cannot but be satisfied by
the severity of the Judgments of God, in punishing the Pride and Vanity of men
of that Order and Degree wherein he was placed, I conceive the Report of it may
bring in some Profit, without any Prejudice or Danger. For this man, of whom I
speak, was in his Time an Archbishop in the Church of England. And its
sufficiently known to the World that God has of late years been pouring out
the full Vialls of his just Wrath upon this glittering Sun of Englands Glory.
This man then, George Nevil by Name, brother to the Earl of Warwick, in the
days of King Edward the fourth, made a Prodigious Feast for the Nobility,
prime Clergy, and chief Gentry, at his Installment into the Archbishopric of
York. He rifled the Air, Earth, and Sea for all so^ts of Provisions and costly
varieties for this pompous and magnificent Entertainment. See his Bill of fare
in Godwin his Catalogue of the Bishop of York, p. 65. And Fullers
Church History. l. 4 p. 193.
Above twenty thousand Fowls, Peacocks, Pigeons, Capons, Cranes, etc. Above
six thousand Cattle and Land-creatures, Oxen, Sheep, Dear, etc. Above six
hundred Fishes, Porpaises, Pikes, Seals, and Breames lost their Lives to
maintain the Luxury of this one Feast; besides which five thousand Dishes of
Gelly, with other Palate-pleasing Delicacies were prepared. And to digest these
Dainties he provides three hundred and thirty Tuns of Ale, and above four
hundred Tuns of Wine, besides a Pipe of spiced Wine to please the more curious
Palates, and for a stronger Provocation to Excess. Thus he exceeded the 1
King. 4.22, 23.
Magnificence of Solomon by the Excess of his Prodigality.

O prodiga Rerum

Luxuries, nunquam contenta paratu,

Et quaesitorum Terra Pelagoque ciborum

Ambitiosa Fames, and lautae Gloria Mensae Lucan. l. 4. Pharsal.
!


O Prodigal Luxury, and Luxuriant Prodigality! O Ambitious Appetite, that
cannot be content except it stretch its Dominion over all the Delicacies of
Earth and Sea! O the Pride of Epicurism! The Glory of Gluttony. But (alas!)
what is it, but a shining, but soon-vanishing Meteor, exhaled from the Fumes of
a pompous Feast, brightened a little with the Beams of the Royal Favor, which
in the Revolution of a few years, we may see with Astonishment in the Eclipse;
Even so it fell out here. For not long after, the King, out of some Jealousies
of State, caused this Bacchanalian Bishop to be apprehended, seized upon his
whole Estate, to the value of twenty thousand pounds, and sent him over
Pri^oner to Callis in France, where suffering a strict Imprisonment, he lay
languishing in Misery and Want Victus jacuit in summa inopia. Godw.
Thus were the Plumes of his Pride plucked off by the Power of his Prince, and
his excessive Prodigality was punished by extreme Poverty, by the Justice of
God.

Punishment still follows at the Heels of sin, and yet sinners will be still
following their sinful Pleasures, until they are overtaken by their justly
deserved Punishments. How desperately wicked a wretch was that rich Citizens
son, presented to us in Part. 2. p. 110, 111
the Theater of Gods Judgments, who to please all his five senses at once,
allowed to the delight of every several sense an Hundred Pounds. For which
purpose he provided a Room richly hung, and beautified with the most curious
Pictures to please his Eye; There he had the rarest Music to delight his Ear,
the richest Perfumes to ravish his Smell, and the choicest Dainties to content
his Taste; and to gratify his Feeling Sense he wanted not a beautiful Harlot
for his wanton Embraces. All this sensual Pleasure he drunk as it were at one
draught, while he thus feasted all his five senses in one day. Neither was he
herewith satisfied: but three years did he spend in the pursuit of his sensual
Pleasures, and loose Delight, wherein he wasted his Estate, having in this
short time spent no less then thirty thousand pounds. And yet after all this
he swore that if he had three times more then ever he had, he would spend is
all to live one we^k like a God (as he accounted it) though he was sure to be
damned to Hell the next day after. Desperate Profaneness! But to what
Extremity of Torments will men at length be carried by such an unbridled
Excess! Dives fared deliciously every day while he was here on Earth, but he
could not get one Drop of water to cool his flaming tongue in Hell Luke
16.19-26.
.

Now this sin is one of the Cords by which a Nation plucks down Judgment upon
it self. The fiercest and cruellest Plagues are often let loose for the
Punishment of the sin of Luxury. It was the Gate of Intemperance by which
Death at first entered into the World, with his whole Army, consisting of many
Millions of Miseries, which are continually warring against miserable
mankind. Through Intemperance Adam lost his Paradise, and cast his Posterity
in an undone condition. Fullness of Bread was one of the Sins of Sodom, for
which God destroyed that wicked City with a dreadful destruction Ezekiel. 16 49
. And to this Day Fullness of Bread is the ordinary forerunner of Cleanness of
Teeth. A Glutton is an extremely pernicious Person: He ruins himself, and his
Posterity, and besides contributes much to the ruin and Destruction f the
whole Nation. For, the Glutton entombes his Ancestors in his Bowels, and
devoures his Posterity (as Saturn was said to do his Sons) and by his provoking
of God, becomes a Plague to the present Generation. Slanderers make a sword of
their Tongue, and Gluttons dig their Grave with their Teeth Adag. Gallic.
; yea, hereby also they dig a Pit for the Destruction of the whole Land.

And is not this (among many others) the Sin of these our Days? surely some
there are that (with the Sea-Asse Arist. Hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 17.
) have their Hearts in their Bellies, yea some that (with the gormandizing
Cretians Tit. 1.12 (...), per Aphaeresin pro (...), Poet. pro (...), Gulosi,
helluones, Ventri ad Insaniam usque indulgentes. Pas. Phavorin. Drus.
Praeterit. in loc.
) make their Belly their God, to which they sacrifice the best part of their
precious Time and Treasure. These are they of whom the Apostle tells us weeping
Phil. 3.18 19
, that they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, whole End is Destruction,
whose God is their Belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly
things. How many are there that will needs live above their Rank, and spend
above what their estates will bear, till they have at once undone themselves
and many others! If they have but occasion of Feasting their Friends, every
thing must be set off with such a Princely Magnificence, as if they were Lords
of such an Ocean of wealth as knew neither Bounds nor Bottom. Thus Nabal, upon
whose Name that Folly was engraven, which was rooted in his Nature upon the
Occasion of shearing his sheep 1 Samuel 25 36
, held a Feast in his house like the Feast of a King, wherein he himself was as
drunk as a beggar. Thus Luxury halted not in his House, but went upon both its
legs, Gluttony and Drunkenness. But whoever they are that take this course,
will at length find that Riot is the Road to Ruin, and that Poverty is the
next neighbor to Prodigality. Its therefore the Wisdom of such to hearken
betimes to the Counsel of the Wise man; Prove. 23.19, 20, 21.
Hear thou my Son, and be Wise, and guide thine heart in the way. Be not
amongst Wine-bibbers, amongst Riotous Eaters of Flesh. For the Drunkard and the
Glutton shall come to Poverty: and Drowsinesse (the ordinary companion of
Drunkenness) shall cloth a man with rags.

Dreadful are the Woes which the Lord in his Word has pronounced against
Drunkards. Woe unto them (says the Lord by the Prophet Isa. 5.11, 12.
) that rise up early in the morning that they may follow strong Drink, and
continue until Night, till Wine inflame them. And the Harp and the Viol, the
Tabret and the Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts: But they regard not the Work
of the LORD, neither consider the operation of his Hands. And no wonder; For,
Hos. 4.11
Whoredom and Wine, and new Wine take away the heart. Drunkenness makes men so
sottish and senseless that they take no notice of Gods Dispensations, till
they are overtaken with his Judgem nts. Thus its said of Nabal after his
Drunkenness, 1 Samuel 25 37, 38.
that his Heart died within him, and he became as a stone: And it came to pass
about ten days after, that the LORD smote Nabal, that he died. Again, says
the LORD, Isa. ^.22.
Woe unto them that are Mighty to drink Wine, and men of strength to mingle
strong Drink. He then is the greatest Drunkard in Gods sight who is able to
drink most without Distemper. For what is Drunkenness, but Excess in Drinking,
though no Distemper of Body or Brain should follow thereupon? But he is the
greatest Drunkard of all, who not only drinks to Excess himself, but labors
also to draw on others to Drunkenness, enforcing more upon them then they
would otherwise receive. Such a devilish Drunkard deserves no less then double
Damnation. A dreadful Woe hangs ever his Head, and a Cup of Wrath shall be put
into his Hand, and the Lord shall cause him to drink up the Dregs of it. Woe
unto him (says the LORD Hab. 2.15, 16.
) that gives his Neighbor drink: that put thy Bottle to him, and make
him drunken also, that thou may look on their Nakedness. Thou art filled
with shame for glory: drink thou also, and let thy Foreskin be uncovered, the
Cup of the LORDS right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing
shall be on thy glory. Neither does this sin of Drunkenness draw down a Woe
upon the drunkards head only, but also brings in a Deluge of Judgments upon
the whole Land, which is defiled by it. And therefore says the Lord, Isa.
28.1-4.
Woe to the Crown of Pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim: whose glorious beauty
is a fading flower, which are on the head of the fat Valleys of them that are
overcome with Wine. Behold the Lord has a mighty and strong one, which as a
tempest of Hail, and a destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters
overflowing shall cast down to the earth with the Hand: The Crown of Pride, the
drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under feet. And the glorious beauty which
is on the head of the Fat Valley; shall be a fading Flower, and as the hasty
fruit before the Summer; which when he that looks upon it, sees it, while it
i^ yet in his hand he eats it up.

Thus may a Land, which is as a flourishing Field, for the sins of those that
live in it, be turned into a barren Desert, a Wilderness of Thorns.

Thus Gluttony and Drunkenness, when they abound in a Land, are the Causes,
Presages, and Symptoms of Perilous Times.

The seventh Sin. Fantasticalnesse, Vanity and Pride of Apparel.
When Fantasticalnesse, Vanity and Pride of Apparel is a Predominant sin, it
speaks Perilous Times. It pleased God to bestow a singular Honor upon man, at
his first Creation, in imprinting upon him the Beauty of his own Image. For,
Genesis 1.27
God Created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him. The Soul
of man was indeed the Principal Subject of this glorious Impression: but yet
the Body of man was, by the Wisdom of God, Psalm. 139 15
curiously composed to such a comeliness of shap^, as that it might be a fit
Cabinet for so inestimable a Jewel, embellisht with so Divine a Portraicture.
Then was naked Innocence man's most glorious clothing. But since the defacement
of this Image of God, and the defilement of the Nature of man, miserable man
has been forced to beg Relief of the other Creatures, for the covering of
the shame of his Nakedness. But alas vain man! How foolishly does he abuse
this second Benefit! How does he bewray the Nakedness of his Mind by the
Apparel of his Body! How vainly does he turn the covering of his shame into
the displaying of his Pride! How shall we now know the ^^ape of a man, or where
shall we behold the Comeliness of his first Composure, when he is now daily
^ransforming himself ( Proteus like) into a strange Variety of Fantastic
F^s^ious? And how strangely is he bewitched with this Vanity, that whereas he
should in Reason shape his Apparel to his Body, h^ seems to go about to shape
his Body to his Appar^l! How ridiculous world it be to see a man stick his Body
with Peacock^ Plume and Ostrich Feathers, and then Pride himself in the
pleasing variety of their curious colors! And is it not every whit as absurd
and beggarly for a Person of quality to carry a Pedlers Shop about the streets
of the City, leading (as it were) his Pride in Triumph, and making an open show
of the spoils of the silkworme? And as if the costlinesse of the matter did
contend with the Curiosity of the Fashion, how do the Gallants of the Times lay
out their Riches and Revenues for the maintenance of their Pride of Apparel!
How do they trample with disdain upon the Poor of the Country, treading them
under feet, as they would a Worm into the mire, while they walk like Monsters
of Pride, with whole Orchards, Fields, Woods upon their Backs, bearing at once
in the costlinesse of their Garb, the revenues of a whole Lordship! Such was
the luxuriant Pride and Gallantry of a Roman Emperor Heliogabalus.
, who jug'd it a piece of state to wear sumptuous Apparel, and an unworthy
baseness to appear twice in the same suit, though never so rich and splendid.
His shoes were embellish't with Pearls and Diamonds; his Seats strewn with
Musk and Amber; his Bed covered with Gold and Silver, and inchac't with the
costliest Gemmes, and his Way strewn with the Powder of Pearls.

But the Female Sex has ever been more generally guilty of a strange Excess
in Apparel and Ornaments. How strange is the Vanity of the Minds of Women,
especially of those accounted of the better Rank, in the affectation of Variety
of Fashions in their Clothes and Deckings! Proud women have a Mundus maliebris.
(...), Plat. 2. de Rep.
World of Ornaments, and, Dum moliuntur, dum comuntur Annus est Terent.
.
A Year is spent in their tricking and trimming themselves with them; yea,
scarcely will an Age suffice them to run all the Stages of their
still-changing Fashions. The Prophet Isaiah, being himself conversant in the
Court, had diligently observed the Gallantry of the Proud Dames of those days,
whom he does as faithfully reprove, opening a full Pack of their Toys and
Vanities (the Ensigns of their Pride) which they, it seems, much pleased
themselves in, as very decent and well-becoming Ornaments. But he declares unto
them their sin, and in the Name of the Lord, pronounces the Doom of such
proud, self-Idolizing Vanities, as the Daughters of Zion were then become
through a strange affectation of multiplicity of Ornaments, and singularity in
Carriage and Behavior. For thus does he deliver his Message to them from the
Lord.

Isa. 3.16-26.
Moreover the LORD says, because the Daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk
with stretched forth. Necks, and wanton eyes, walking and mincing [or, tripping
it neatly (...)
Plaudendo, Ar. Mont. tripudiando, Pagn.
] as they go, and making a tinkling with their Feet, [as if they walked in
Fetters, or had Bells or Rattles tied to their Feet (...)
Tinniebant, A. M. pedibus suis compeditas agunt, Jun. Trem. Calceamenta
habebant cum crepitaculis, Pagn.
] Therefore the Lord will smite with a Scab the Crown of the Head of the
Daughters of Zion, and the LORD will discover their secret Parts. In that day
the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling Ornaments about their
Feet, and their Cauls [ or Ornaments of Network, or Needle Work wrought with
Eyes (...)
Reticula Ar. Mont. Vittas instar retis Pagn. Opera Oculata Jun. Trem.
] and their round Tires like the Moon. The Chains [ or, sweet Balls, or Boxes
of perfuming Ointments, their Golden Boxes of rich Gummes and precious Balsome
(...)
Myrothecidia, Jun. Vascula aurea in quibus ponebatur (...) Stacte aut Balsamum
juxta Kimch. and R. Levi. Buxt. Lexic.
] and the Bracelets and the Mufflers [ or thin Veiles, or Head-Ornaments
glittering with waving gold, or starry Spangles (...)
Velamina, Ar. Mont. Bracteolae, quae Collaribus, Vittis ac Peplis muleribus
addi solent; sic dictae (a (...) tremere) quod semper tremulae appareant. Buxt.
.] The Bonnets, and the Ornaments of the Legs, and the Headbands [ or
Haire-laces, or Neck-laces (...)
Vittae, A. M. Redimicula, Jun. Ornamenta Colli fuerunt. Buxt.
] and the Tablets [ or the Boxes of Aromatical Confections for the perfuming of
the Breath (...)
i. e. Domus Animae, seu Halitus: q. d. Breath-Boxes. Pagninus Pectoralia,
Junius Bucculas vertit, exponitque superba illa Aulicarum Instrumenta quibus os
suum contegunt velut pastomidibus; est enim os meatus animae sive anhelitus,
cujus obex propterea Hebraeis Domus Animae appellatur.
] and the Earrings [ or Amulets (...)
Amuleta, Jun. Golden or Silver Plates engraven with certain Characters against
Enchantment. Aben Ezra.
] The Rings and (...)
Jewels which hung down from the Forehead to the Nose.
Nose-jewels [ or Jewels for the Face] The changable Suits of Apparel, and the
Mantles, and the Wimples, [Aprons or embroidered Vestures (...)
Ventralia, Jun. Buxt. Linteamina, Pagn. Pepla, Ar. Mont. Sic and Kimchi.
] and the Crisping-Pins [ or, Cushnets, Purses, Pin-pillows, Needle-Cases (...)
Loculi, Aciaria. Pagn. and Ar. Mont. Crumenas vertunt, Junius vero Aciaria,
sive (ut Graeci vocant) (...), quibus Acus and aciculae infigi aut includi
solent.
] The Glasses, and the fine Linen, and the Hoods, and the Vailes. And it shall
come to pass that instead of sweet smell there shall be Stink; and instead of
a Girdle, a Rent; and instead of well-set Hair, Baldness; and instead of a
Stomacher, a Girding of Sackcloth; and Burning instead of Beauty. Thy men shall
fall by the Sword, and thy Mighty in the War. And her Gates shall lament, and
mourn, and being desolate, shall sit upon the Ground.

Thus we see Vanity, Fantasticalness and Pride of Apparel, brings down the
Judgments of God upon a Land. For this may God cloth the Land with Confusion,
and fill the City with Fears, and stain the Beauty of these proud Gallants with
Blood. For this may God scourge the City with the Plague, and chastise the
Country with Wars, and lay the whole Land desolate.

How doleful is the Representation of Gods dreadful Judgments upon the Land
of Judah, whereby he threatened to punish the Pride of Jerusalem! How may it
make the stoutest heart to tremble to see the LORD of Hosts leading up an Army
of enraged and implacable Enemies against his own People! To see Destruction in
the Van, and Desolation in the Rear of a terrible and (because armed with
Divine Justice) invincible Army of Aliens! Behold how the Prophet was affected
with the Visionary Representation of it. My Bowels! (says he Jer. 4.19 -- ult.
) My Bowels! I am pained at my very heart; my heart makes a noise in me; I
cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard, O my soul, the sound of the
Trumphet, the Alarm of War. Destruction upon Destruction is cried, for the
whole Land is spoiled: suddenly are my Tents spoiled, and my Curtains in a
Moment. How long shall I see the Standard, and hear the sound of the Trumphet?
For my people is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish Children,
and they have none understanding: they are wise to do Evil, but to do good they
have no knowledge. I beheld the Earth, and lo! it was without form, and void;
and the Heavens, and they had no Light. I beheld the Mountains, and lo! they
trembled, and all the Hills moved lightly. I beheld, and lo! there was no man,
and all the Birds of the Heavens were fled. I beheld, and lo! the fruitful
place was a Wilderness, and all the Cities thereof were broken down at the
presence of the LORD, and by his fierce Anger. For thus has the LORD said, The
whole Land shall be desolate; yet will I not make a full End. For this shall
the Earth mourn, and the Heaven above be black: because I have spoken it. I
have purposed it, I will not repent, neither will turn back from it. The whole
City shall flee, for the Noise of the Horsemen and Bow-men, they shall go into
Thickets, and climb up upon the Rocks: Every City shall be forsaken, and not a
man dwell therein. And when thou art spoiled, what will thou do? Though thou
clothest thy self with Crimson, thou deckest thee with Ornaments of Gold,
though thou rentest thy face with Painting, in vain shall thou make thy self
fair, thy Lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life. For I have heard a
voice as of a woman in Travel, and the Anguish as of her that brings forth
her first Child, the Voice of the Daughter of Zion; that bewail^th her self,
that spreads her hands, saying, woe is me now, for my soul is wearied because
of Murderers.

O ye proud Gallants, ye fantastic Ladies, how long will ye provoke the Lord
by your Pride and Wantonness, to stain your Glory, to strip you of your
Ornaments, and to plague the whole Land for your sakes with his sorest
Judgments? Has not the Lord threatened to punish your Pride, and to break
those Pillars of Power that sustain your Glory? Has not the Lord said, Jer.
13.9.
After this manner (even as Jeremiah's linen Girdle was rotted in the earth
Ver. 7.
) Will I mar the Pride of Judah, and the great Pride of Jerusalem? You set
off your Beauty by these fantastic Ornamens to the eyes of men, but know you
not that your Pride in the mean time makes you odious in the sight of God? Know
you not that Pride is ever attended with shame, and shall at length be
over-taken with Destruction? For, When Pride comes, then comes Shame Pro. 11.2
, and Destruction stays not long behind; For, Pride goes before Destruction
Prove. 16.18
. Have you not read of the Judgment threatened against Israel, Ephraim and
Judah for their Pride? The Pride of Israel ( says the Lord Hos. 5, 5.
) does testify to his fac^, therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their
iniquity: Judah also shall fall with them. O remember when you are decking your
selves with your excellent Ornaments, you are but as it were sticking a Corpse
with curious Flowers, which when God gives the Word must be rumbled into the
Grave, and turned into Dust. And as for the souls of such Proud Persons, they
must be for ever shut up in the flaming Prison of Hell. For if God turned proud
Angels out of Heaven, certainly he will never suffer proud women to enter in.
David would not suffer a Proud person to dwell in his House Ps. 101.5
, and surely God will not suffer a Proud Peacock to alight in Heaven. O
consider when you are priding your selves in your Beauty and Ornaments, you are
plucking of Judgments down upon the Land. Your Pride makes you the Spots of
the Church, the plagues of the City, and the procurers of a thousand Miseries
to the whole Nation.

What is it, Ladies, that is the ground of your Pride? Is it the conceit of
your Beauty? And Alas! What Is Beauty, but a little shining Dust, and that which
is the best that many of you can boast of to the world, no better then painted
Clay? And yet there is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes, and their
eyelids are lifted up Prove. 30.13
Or is it the rich Apparel wherewith you set off your Beauty that foments your
Pride? O vain Minds! Can you be proud of Dust and Clay, and the Excrements of
Beasts, or other more contemptible Creatures? And yet you would be accounted
Christians, and some of you (perhaps) would be thought to be forward
Professors. But is this think you to live according to the Rule of the Gospel?
Can you by these proud Deckings of your Bodies adorn the Doctrine of God your
Savior Tit. 2.10
? If your Bodies are indeed the Temples of the Holy Ghost, you cannot surely
think it acceptable to God that you should adorn them with such foolish and
fantastic Ornaments. But perhaps you think Christ has taken no care, given no
order in the Gospel concerning such matters. But know God in the Gospel has
given command to women professing Christianity, not so much to mind these
outward Ornaments, as to take care of beautifying and adorning their souls with
inward excellencies. Whose adorning (says the Scripture 1 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5.
) let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the Hair, and of wearing of
Gold, or of putting on of [ (...). Vox (...) vero vestes superiores and majoris
pretii denotat. Chemnit. Casaub.
costly] Apparel: but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is
not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great Price. For after this manner in the old Time, the Holy
women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves. And says the Apostle Peter
1 Pet. 5.5
, (...).
Instead of knots of Gold and Silver, put on the rare Ornament of Humility; For
God resists the Proud, but gives grace to the humble: these shall find
Favor, when he comes against the other in Fury. But its much to be feared that
you that so much mind these Vanities, do very little regard the Gospel.
However as for you that would disdain not to be called and accounted
Christians, and think your selves the only true Protestants, methinks you
should blush to see the Folly and Vanity of your Pride, both of Beauty and
Apparel, so lively represented to you by the elegant Pen of that Popish
Jesuit, with whose Writings it is but too certain, you are, many of you, far
more familiarly acquainted, then with the Holy Scriptures. You will therefore I
hope take Acquaintance of this Passage which speaks fully to this Purpose.

To boast the Beauty of Body, is to have a great defect in the Judgment, which
is the Beauty of the Soul. It Is verily a desperate Vanity, when a Lady, under
the Color that some scribbling Rimer has given her the Locks of Aurora, the
Eyes of Venus, the Port of Juno, the Feet of Thetis, makes her self the Queen
of Antioch, and glorifies her self many times with a Beauty merely imaginary
Queen Stratonica, the Wife of Sel^ucus, had not one Hair upon her Head, yet
notwithstanding gave six hundred Crowns to a Poet, who had celebrated her in
his Verse, and sung that her Hair had the tincture of the Marigold. I know not
how this soothing Flatterer meant it, but this Queen became very Proud, which
made her so much the more Ridiculous. Although this Beauty were true, it is but
white and vermillion skin distended over a Carcass, which covers many
Ordures: it is a Dunghill blanch't with snow, an Idol of Fools, a Flower of
the Field, which has (as it were) for Horizon the instant of its Birth. We may
well give it the Epitaph of the Rose;

Mirabar celerem fugitiva aetare ruinam
Et dum nascuntur, consenuisse Rosas.

Here lies the Rose in one day come
From the first Blossom to a Tomb.
A much more notorious Folly it also is, to boast and brave it in Apparel,
which are Plasters of the Scars of sin, to wit, Nakedness; borrowed
Feathers from all kind of Birds, unpunished Thefts, Witnesses of our Poverty,
which causes us to beg the Assistance of all creatures to cover our shame.
What an indignity is it to be desirous to brave it above our State, Quality or
Port, and to arrive at this Height often times to bear the Fat and Marrow of
the Poor in the Plaits of Garments? Nay these many Rapines are not sufficient
to entertain this enraged Prodigality. Debts must grow which cannot be
discharged. Silk must be dragged at your Heels, and a Sergeant ready behind
you; to show Gold, and hide Misery and Sin; to adorn a Body, as if it were a
Temple of Egypt, with all possible splendour, and to Lodge within it the Soul of
a Rat. What Infamy is it to behold in a Banquet a Roman Lady, called Lollia
Paulina, Plin. l. 1. c. 35.
carry about her in Chains, Carcanets, and precious Stones, a Million of Gold,
and her Father who had dispoyl'd all the Roman Provinces to cloth this only
daughter, drink afterward Poison, overwhelmed in the Despair of his own
affairs? Is not the Chamlet coat of the greatest of all our Kings Lewis of
France.
, of power to confound all Courtiers of both Sexes, who having nothing worthy
of Praise in them, would dignifie themselves with Apparel, showing they have
like a Peacock a little Head, little Brain, Beautiful Feathers, and a long Tail?

Its doubtless a great shame, and gives occasion to our Adversaries to cast
Reproach upon Religion, when so much Pride, Vanity and Fantasticalnesse shall
be seen in a Land professing true Christianity, in a City honored above all
the Cities under the Cope of Heaven, with the pure and powerful preaching of
the Gospel. When the Maid shall vye with her Mistress, and the Children shall
be dressed like Puppets, and the Church shall become a Shop of Vanities, is it
not time for God to remove his Golden Candlestick, may he not justly for the
punishment of our Pride, deprive us of his Gospel?

Is it not a shame, and should it not be a grief of heart to all those that
truly fear God, to behold such Idols of Vanity set up in the Congregations of
Christians? Rich Apparel, and conceit of her own Beauty, is the Proud woman's
Devotion. Hence she comes into the Church, as upon a Stage, not to seek God,
but to show her self. There she feeds her Eyes, but not her Ears; and while
she sacrifices to her pride, draws others to sacrifice to their Lusts, who Mat.
5.28
commit Adultery with her, in the open Congregation. Thus she is her own Idol,
and the wanton's Stews, set up in Gods Temple. She brings her self thither as a
Feast for wanton Eyes, not considering that she shall be shortly brought
thither as a Feast for Worms.

Is it not a fearful sin and shame, that in a Christian Commonwealth, Christ
should go naked in his poor Members, when many shall yearly sacrifice hundreds
and thousands to their Pride in Apparel? shall Gallants flaunt it in the
streets in their silk^ and Satin, in Silver and Gold, while poor Families of
Christians are ready to perish for want of necessary relief? May not the Lord
Jesus justly draw back his golden Scepter, and unsheath his glittering sword,
and cut off the Proud that will not pity his Poor, nor abate one Inch of their
foolish vanities, to raise Relief for such distressed Christians.

Is it not time for the Christian Magistrate By the force of some good Law, to
give a check to this luxuriant Vanity, lest it should at length strengthen it
self to an unbridled Excess, not only to prevent the Ruin of many Families,
but also the Judgment of God upon the whole Land? If this redress be too long
neglected, may not the Dis^a e become incurable. Behold a sad and strange
Example hereof.

At the end of the second Carthaginian War, and upon the victory obtained
against Philip, King of Macedon, Luxury began to lift up its head in Rome, and
to outbrave opposition by its daring Insolence. For (as Valerius reports) the
Women assembled themselves in an audacious Riot, beset the house of the Bruti,
because they understood they were resolved to stand up for the Oppian Law;
which the women desired to be abrogated. For by this Law they were not sufferd
to wear any clothes of Diverse Colors, not to exceed half an Ounce in any
Adornments of Gold, nor to use any Coach or Chariot within a Mile of the City,
unless to carry them to the Sacrifices upon the Solemn Days of Divine
Service. And so far did they prevail by this insolent carriage, that the
Law, which without Interruption had continued in Force full twenty years, was
hereupon presently abolish't.

Non enim providerunt Seculi illius Viri, ad quem Cultum tenderer insoliti
Coetus pertinax Studium, aut quo se usque effusura esset L^gum victrix Audacia:
quod si animi muliebris Apparatus intueri potuissent, quibus aliquid quotidie
Novitatis sumptuosius adjectum est, in ipso intro^tu ru^nti Luxuriae
obst^tissent Val. Max. l. 9. c.
.
For (says he, adding the reason of this Concession) the men of that Age could
not foresee to what Vanity of Fashions that liberty granted to the obstinate
D^sires of so unw^nted a concourse, would by them be abused, or to what more
desperate Designs such an unbridled Insolence, overmastring the strength of
Laws, might carry them: But could they but have seen the vanity and
Fantasticalness of Women's Minds, whose Fancies are continually at work for the
Invention of new Fashions, every day exceeding another in costlinesse and
curiosity, they would certainly have opposed such a luxuriant Vanity at its
first entrance, and never have suffered it with such an impetuous Violence to
have rusht into the City.

But now is it not a far greater sin and shame, for those that are called by
the Gospel, to the Profession of true Religion and godliness, who ought thence
forth Ephesians. 4.17
not to walk as the other Gentiles walk, in the Vanity of their Mind, to
exceed Heathens in this foolish vanity and affectation of novelty and change of
Fashions in Apparel and Ornaments? And yet how difficult a thing is it, Ladies,
more Honorable if you were but more humble, to reclaim you, by the sharpest
Reproofs, the most serious Admonitions, from these co^^ly vanities? Will you
hear a Pagan Philosopher teaching a Lesson of modesty to women, with greater
success (I speak it to your shame) then the Preachers of the Gospel does same
Doctrine amongst Christians.

Inter haec (de Pythagora refert Justinus) velut Genetricem Virtutum
Frugalitatem omnibus ingerebat, consecutusque assiduitate disputationum erat,
ut Matronae auratas Vestes, coeteraque Dignitatis suae ornamenta, velut
instrumenta Luxuriae deponerent, preferens vera Ornamenta Matronarum
Pudicitiam, non Vestes esse Justin. Hist. lib. 20
.
Pythagoras, instructing the Crotonians to the exercise of Virtue (in the Days
of Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant) did principally press upon them all,
Frugality; holding forth that the true O^naments of Honorable Women, were not
those of clothing, but that of chastity; and so far prevailed he by his daily
discourses, that the honorable women laid aside their Gold-embroyder'd
Garments, and other Ornaments of their Dignity, as the Instruments of Luxury.

But (alas!) it is to be feared the Sword must be drawn for the letting out of
Englands proud Blood, before ever the Land will be h^aled of this distemper.
For never were Times harder, never was Trading (the Key of Englands Treasure)
deader, and yet never did people of all sorts more brave it in Gallantry and
Costlinesse of apparel and Ornaments. Its not easily imaginable how many
thousands, yea, Millions of money are yearly wasted by the proud Da^es, the
fantastic Fashionists of this Nation. And yet is the shameful and whorish
Nakedness of many proud and wanton women as provoking a sin, as is their
costly clothing and infinity of Fashions. Yea, as if the letting open the
Doors and Windows of the shops were not enough to proclaim their Immode^^ies,
and call in Customers to drink of their stolen waters, how do they shamefully
hang forth their signs, as it were, on painted Posts, their Love-spots (or
rather Lust-spots) on their painted whorish Faces! How are many arrived at such
an intolerable height of impudency, that they are not ashamed to proclaim
their Immodesties by setting as many Spots in their Faces, as they have
received Blots to their Honor, till their Faces are almost covered with these
Badges of their Infamy! O degenerate Gentry! O ignoble Nobility! How foolish
are you become in these fantastical Fashions! How weak, how wicked are you to
pride your selves in such ridiculous Vanities, and to account these signs of
your baseness, ^o be Badges of your Honor! Are you so stupid and senseless as
not to observe that ^od has been tumbling down the greatness of the world,
staining the Pride of ^an, and rolling his glory in the Dust? And will you by
your Pride and Vanity pluck down greater Judgments on the Land, and plunge
your selves into everlasting miseries? Surely these Badges of your Pride, are
but the Presages of your Punishment. Tertullian calls painted women Ancillas
Diaboli.
the Dev^ls Chamber-maids or Waiting-women. But then surely those who
prostitute their painted Beauties to these wanton Blacks are the chiefest
Ladies in the Kingdom of Lucifer. And his Pride, you know, cost him a flaming
fall; 'twas the forerunner of his Destruction. What then shall become of those
of his Household? Surely these painted, plastered, spotted Vanities, will end
their days in Vexation. How justly may God punish their shamel sse Pride (as
he has do^e many) with shameful Poverty on earth, and their wanton Pleasures
with woeful Pains in Hell! Surely these Luxuriancies in lustful Vanities
provoke God to plague the Land with dreadful Judgments, and so speak these
days wherein they abound to be perilous Times.

Thus we have seen what sins do, in a special Manner provoke the Lord to wrath,
and solicit vengeance against such a sinning People. Surely where these seven
Abominations are found, especially where they are predominant, they presage
sore Plagues, fore-run heavy Judgments on such a place or People. For, shall
not the Lord visit for these things, and shall not his soul be avenged on such
a People as this, that provoke him to Anger with so many fearful Abominations?
Surely God may justly pour out all the Rev. 16.1.
seven Vials of his flaming wrath upon such a sinful Nation. These ^ins
therefore must needs be sad Symptoms of Perilous Times.

Come we now to consider in what Cases these sins are thus Symptomaticall.

The second Enquiry. In what Cases the forementioned Sins are Symptoms of
Perilous Times.
ADAM in Innocence lived in Genesis 2.8.
EDEN, a Place prepared by God himself, to be the Mother of Plenty, the Nurse
of Pleasure, and Queen Regent of Divine Delight. Happy man, had he not by the
Loss of his Innocence (the Palladium of Paradise) lost his Happiness! Yea,
the World was an Universal Paradise (whereof Eden was the Eye, the Beauty of
its Beautie^) till sin committed a Rape upon its Virgin Purity, and cast a
defilement upon its Primitive Glory. Then did its flowring Beauties fade in its
Face, and stinging M^series sprang up apace in its Bosom. Thus did the world,
once a Garden of Delights, become a Wilderness of ^hornes; before a Palace
Royal of pure unmixed Pleasures, now a bloody Stage of sufferings and sorrows.
Thus is sin the procuring cause of all Miseries, and so the too certain
Prognostic of Perill^us Times. Was it not for s nne, how should England be as
Eden, the Garden of God, crowned with the smiles of Heaven, and clothed with
the Virgin-Mantle of Peace, and endowed with the choicest Blessings on Earth,
and so admired by all its Sister Islands, its Neighbor Nations for Beauty,
Riches, and Renown. But sin it is which spreads a black cloud upon it is
Glories, which threatens the Thunder of some dreadful Judgments. The sins of
England are many, and what can we expect, but that the sufferings of England
should be great?

The sins of men are wont to draw down the Judgments of God, and so they are
the Symptoms of Perilous Times to the People of God, especially in such Cases
as these that follow.

The first Case. The Commonness of Sin.
WHen gross Sins are commonly committed, the Times must needs be Perilous.
When Lying, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Stealing, Cheating, Deceiving, Cruelty,
Oppression, Drunkenness, Adultery, and all manner of Uncleanness does abound,
the Days are evil and full of Danger. These sins are as so many Cords to pluck
down Judgments upon the Heads of such a People. Thus did sin abound in the
Old World before God destroyed all Flesh with the Flood. For its said Genesis
6.11, 12, 13.
, The Earth was corrupt before Go^, and the Earth was filled with Violence. And
God looked upon the earth, and behold it was corrupt; for all flesh had
corrupted his way upon the Earth. And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh
is come before me, for the Earth is filled with Violence through them; and
behold I will destroy them with the Earth.

The Scriptures do abound with comminations of Judgment against that People,
that Land, wherein such Abominations do abound. Take notice of some of them,
and Oh that you would sadly lay them to heart!

Jer. 7.8, -- 16.
Behold (says the Lord to the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem)
ye trust in lying words that cannot profit. Will ye steal, murder, and commit
Adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other
Gods whom ye know not [i. e. maintain diversities of Religion amongst you] and
come and stand before me in this House, which is called by my Name, and say, we
are delivered to do all these abominations? [q. d. This is the Liberty, for
which we adventured our Lives, in the High Places of the Field.] Is this House
which is called by my Name become a Den of Robbers in your Eyes? [q. d. Is this
the fruit of your Victories, and the glorious Deliverances whereof you speak,
to cast contempt upon my House, Worship, and Ordinances?] Behold even I have
seen it, says the LORD: But go ye now unto my Place which was in Shiloh, where
I set my Name at the first, and see what I did to it for the Wickedness of my
People Israel. And now because ye have done all these works, says the LORD,
and I spoke unto you, rising up early, and speaking, but ye heard not; and I
called you, but ye answered not: Therefore will I do unto this House which is
called by my Name, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you,
and to your Fathers, as I have done to Shiloh. And I will cast you out of my
sight, as I have cast out all your Brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim.
Therefore [sayes the LORD to the Prophet] Pray not thou for this People,
neither lift up Cry nor Prayer for them, neither make Intercession to me, for I
will not hear thee.

Thus multiplied sins do at length bring down upon a sinful, stubborn and
rebellious People, manifold miseries, and remediless extremities.

Thus does the Lord proclaim War against his People Israel, by the Prophet
Hosea, for their manifold Provocations. Hos. 4.1, 2, 3.
Hear the Word of the Lord ye children of Israel, for the LORD has a
controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land, because there is no Truth, nor
Mercy, nor Knowledge of God in the Land. By Swearing, and Lying, and Killing,
and Stealing, and committing Adultery, they break out, and Blood touches
Blood. Therefore shall the Land mourn, and every one that dwells therein
shall languish, with the Beasts of the Field, and with the Fowls of Heaven,
yea the Fishes of the Sea also shall be taken away.

Thus the Commonnesse of sin is the Ground of Gods entering a Controversy
against a Land. Thus the Land of Israel was become a sink of sin, before God
emptied out upon it his Vials of Wrath. And so does our English Prophet De
Excid. Britan.
Gildas show us how England was overspread with sins, Adultery, Drunkenness,
Oppression, etc. before it was overwhelmed with Judgments.

When men fly far from God in the commission of all sorts of sins, then does
God come near to them in the Execution of his sorest Judgments. Such was the
carriage of the Rebellious Jews toward God, and thus did the Righteous God
deal with his People the Jews. I will come near to you (says the LORD to them
Mal. 3.5.
) to Judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the Sorcerers, and
against the Adulterers, and against false Swearers, and against those that
oppress the Hireling in his Wages, the Widow and the Fatherless, and that
turn aside the stranger from his Right, and fear not me, says the LORD of
Hosts.

Its sin thus abounding, which changes the Countenance and Constitution of the
Times, whence of sound and good, they become distempered and evil. Hence is it
that the smiling Face of Time is altered and beholds us with a languishing
Look. Hence it is that the most fruitful Seasons are punished with a barren
womb. Hence it is that the most joyful Days, which almost continually appeared
in Festival Garments, come forth drooping in a mourning Dress, hanging down the
Head both for shame and sorrow. Much to this purpose does the Father speak, as
it were with a sigh to his Children, his Auditors, in his Sermon upon the the
Famine and Drought Basil. (...).
.

(...).
Behold (says he) how our abounding sins, our multiplied Abominations, have
changed the Temper of the Times striping them naked (as it were) of their
proper natures, and have drawn strange lineaments upon the Face of the Seasons,
altering the very Native temperament and fixed constitution thereof. It Is indeed
nothing but sin that furrows the beautiful Face of Time with the frowns and
wrinkles of affliction and sorrow. It Is sin which often alters the Seasons,
changing Summer into Winter, Calms into storms, the Summer of Peace, Plenty,
Prosperity, into the Winter of Affliction, Scarcity and War. When sin thus
casts its Spawne into the Waters of Time, it produces a numerous offspring of
sufferings and sorrows, Miseries and Calamities to the Children of men.

The second Case. The Generality of Offenders.
both Great and Small, Rich and Poor, Princes and People, Noble and Obscure,
the Times must needs be perilous. Thus before God brought the Flood upon the
World, Genesis 6.12
all Flesh had corrupted ^his way upon the Earth. Thus not only were the
Common People of Israel Isa. 1.3, 4
Ignorant, and Profane, but their ver. 23.
Princes were rebellious and companions of Thieves, and then the LORD comes
forth to ver. 24.
execute Judgment on his Adversaries, and to avenge himself on his enemies.

The Prophet Jeremy knowing that unless the righteous stand in the Gap, the
Judgments of God would soon break out upon a Rebellious People, having in the
Name of the Lord, called upon others to run to and fro to seek such out, he
himself runs from one sort of men to another to find them, but when he finds
none, he denounces the Judgments of God against a people so Generally corrupt
and wicked. Behold herein the justice and goodness of God, with the complaint
and carriage of the Prophet. For says the Lord Jer. 5.1-6.
,

Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and
seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that
executes Judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. And though
they say, the LORD lives, surely they swear falsely. O LORD are not thine eyes
upon the Truth? Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou have
consumed them, but they have refused to receive Correction: they have made
their Faces harder then a Rock; hey have refused to return. Therefore I said,
Sur^ly these are poor, they are foolish: for they know not the way of the
LORD, nor the Judgment of their God. I will get me unto the Great men, and
will sp^a^ unto them; for they have known the way of the LORD, and the
Judgment of their God: but these have altogether broken the Yoke, and burst
the Bonds. Wherefore a Lion out of the Forest shall slay them, and a Wolf of
the Evenings shall spoil them, a Leopard shall watch over their Cities: Every
one that goes out thence shall be torn in pieces: because their Transgressions
are many, and their Backslidings are increased.

So likewise does the Lord by the Prophet Ezekiel complain of the Corruption
of the Priests, Princes, Prophets, and People of Judah and Jerusalem, for which
he severely punished them in the fierceness of his Wrath and fiery Indignation.
Son of man ( says the LORD Ezekiel. 22.24-31.
) say unto her, Thou art the Land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the
Day of indignation. There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst thereof,
like a roaring Lion ravening the prey: they have devoured souls: They have
taken the treasure and precious things: they have made her many Widows in the
midst thereof. Her Priests have violated my Law, and have profaned my holy
Things: they have put no difference between the Holy and Profane, neither have
they showed difference between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their
eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them. Her Princes in the midst
thereof are like Wolves ravening the prey, to shed Blood, and to destroy
souls, to get dishonest Gain. And her Prophets have daubed them with
untemper'd Mortar, seeing Vanity, and Divining Lies unto them, saying, Thus
says the Lord GOD, when the LORD has not spoken. The People of the Land have
used Oppression, and exercised Robbery, and have vexed the Poor and Needy:
yea, they have oppressed the Stranger wrongfully. And I sought for a man among
them that should make up the Hedge, and stand in the Gap before me for the Land
that I should not destroy it: but I found none. Therefore have I poured out
mine Indignation upon them, I have consumed them with the Fire of my Wrath;
their own way have I recompensed upon their heads, says the Lord GOD. Thus we
see the General Corruption of the Inhabitants, may soon bring upon the whole
Land, an utter and inevitable Destruction. It Is as easy with God to cut down
Cedars, as to stock up Shrubs; yea, if the Fire of his wrath be once kindled,
'twill easily, suddenly, irresistibly consume the whole Jer. 21.14
Forest of People, both small and great. If some Branches of the great Tree of
a Kingdom or Nation be barren, or bear evil Fruit, God may in mercy prune it,
with some smaller Judgments, to make it the more fruitful; but if both the
Body and Boughs be corrupt and rotten, God may justly destroy it, both Root and
Branch.

The third Case. Obstinacy and Impudency in Sinning.
the Days are evil, the Times are perilous. Such was the state of the People
of Israel, before their utter Destruction. Moreover ( says the Lord to the
Prophet Jeremy Jer. 8, 4, 5, 6.
) thou shall say unto them, Thus says the LORD, shall they fall, and not
arise, shall he turn away and not return? [q. d. If men do fall, will they lie
still, and not rise again? If a man be gone out of the Way, when he perceives
it, will he proceed, and not rather turn back again?]

(...) Quare rebellis [refractarius Ar. Mont.
] est populus iste Jerusalaim Rebellione forti Pagnin.
[Aversione pertinaci Ar. Mont.
, pervicacissima Jun. Trem.
?]

(...) Septuag.
;


Why then is this People of Jerusalem slidden back, by a perpetual Backsliding?
[ Or, why is this People of Jerusalem, this my People, become refractory and
Rebellious, and have turned away from me with such a stubborn and obstinate,
impudent and pertinacious Aversion, so stout and stiff-necked a Rebellion?]
They hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. I hearkened and heard, but they
spoke not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I
done? Every one turned to his course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle.

And further, says the LORD v. 12-16
, Were they ashamed when they had committed Abomination? Nay, they were not at
all ashamed, neither could they blush. And what follows? Therefore shall they
fall among them that fall, in the Time of their Visitation they shall be cast
down, says the LORD. I will surely consume them, says the LORD; there shall
be no Grapes on the Vine, nor Figs on the Fig Tree, and the Leaf shall fade,
and the Things that I have given them shall pass away from them. Why do we sit
still? Assemble your selves and let us enter into the defenced Cities, and let
us be silent there: for the LORD our God has put us to silence, and given us
water of Gall to drink, because we have sinned against the LORD. We looked for
Peace, but no Good came; and for a time of health [or, healing (...) *
] and behold trouble. Medelae.
The snorting of his Horses [sc. of the Chaldean Army] was heard from Dan: the
whole Land trembled at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones; for they
are come, and have devoured the Land, and all that is in the City, and those
that dwell therein.

Thus when men will not forbear sinning, God will not spare them in punishing;
when they will not be reclaimed from their Wickedness, they shall be consumed
by his just Judgments. When the Preaching of the Word, by the Prophets and
Ministers of the Lord, will not prevail with men to forsake their sins, and
seriously to engage in the service of God, then Punishment is at hand, and the
sword of the Lord is ready drawn to cut off such an obstinate and rebellious
people.

Thus its said 2 King. 57 13-20.
, The LORD testified against Israel, and against Judah, by all the Prophets,
and by all the Seers, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my
Commandments, and my Statutes, according to all the Law which I commanded your
Fathers, and which I sent to you by my servants the Prophets. Notwithstanding
they would not hear, but hardened their necks, like to the neck of their
Fathers, that did not believe in the LORD their God. And they rejected his
Statutes, and his Covenant that he made with their Fathers, and his Testimonies
which he testified against them, and they followed vanity, and became vain, and
went after the Heathen that were round about them, concerning whom the LORD had
charged them, that they should not do like them. And they left all the
Commandments of the LORD their God, and made them molten Images, even two
Calves, and made a Grove, and worshipped all the Host of Heaven, and served
Baal. And they caused their Sons and their Daughters to pass thorough the Fire,
and used Divination and Enchantments, and sold themselves to do evil in the
sight of the LORD, to provoke him to Anger. Therefore the LORD was very angry
with Israel, and removed them out of his sight, there was none left but the
Tribe of Judah only. Also Judah kept not the Commmandments of the LORD their
God, but walked in the Statutes of Israel which they made. And the LORD
rejected all the seed of Israel, and afflicted them, and delivered them into
the hand of spoilers, until he had cast them out of his sight.

Thus the multiplied Abominations of a pertinaciously wicked People, provokes
the Lord to an utter extirpation of them out of the Land. Justly may the Lord
give their Land to Strangers, who are continually provoking the eyes of his
glory by their sins.

Custom in sinning takes away the Conscience of sin: and so do men confirm
themselves in their evil ways, and (with Pharaoh) harden their hearts to their
own Destruction. For, says the LORD by the Prophet Jer. 13.23, 24.
, Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye
also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. Therefore will I scatter them as
the stubble that passes away by the wind of the Wilderness.

How severely will the Lord deal with stubborn sinners, that wilfully walk in
their own wicked ways! Take heed therefore lest there should be among you
(says the LORD to his people Israel Deuteronomy. 29 18, 19, 20.
) a root that bears Gall and wormwood, and it come to pass when he hears
the words of this Curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall
have peace, though I walk in the imagination [or, stubbornness So the Marg.
Heb. (...) Secundum cogitationem, Pagn. In Obstinatione, Ar. Mont.
] of mine Heart, to add Drunkenness to Thirst: The LORD will not spare him,
but then the Anger of the LORD, and his Jealousy shall smoke against that man,
and all the Curses that are written in this Book shall lie upon him, and the
LORD shall blot out his Name from under Heaven. If then multitudes of People
shall be thus obstinate in their evil ways, is it not enough to bring down the
most dreadful judgments of God upon the whole Nation?

So the Prophet Hosea, having reproved the People of Israel for their
multiplied Abominations, does thus represent their Refractorinesse, and
prophecy their Ruin; yet (says he Hos. 4.4, 5
) let no man strive or reprove another: [q. d. let not men contend with them
any longer with the Words of Reproof, for God himself is now coming to plead
his Cause against them with the Sword of Justice:] For this People are as they
that strive with the Priest. [Opposition of Ministers, as it proceeds from
obstinacy in sin, so does it prognosticate Destruction from God. For]
Therefore shall thou fall in the Day, and the [false] Prophet also shall fall
with thee in the Night, and I will [cut off (...) *
or] destroy thy Mother, [the whole Kingdom, succid^m.
or the body of the Nation.]

And when Impudency is joined with obstinacy, it aggravates the sin, and more
strongly sollicits the Justice of God to the speedy execution of Judgment upon
such sinners. For this does the Lord complain of the People of Judah, and
threatens a confounding Judgment. Jer. 3.3.
Thou had a Whores Forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed. Jer. 22.21, 22.
I spoke unto thee in thy Prosperity, but thou said, I will not hear: this
has been thy manner from thy youth, that thou obeyest not my Voice. The Wind
shall eat up all thy Pastors, and thy Lovers shall go into Captivity; Surely
then shall thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy Wickedness. But this sin
is yet capable of a higher aggravation; when men are so far from being
ashamed of their sin, that they glory in their shame, and boast themselves in
their Impieties, as the Thief in his cunning craftiness to deceive; and the
Drunkard in his Isa. 5.22.
strength to pour in strong Drink, and bear it without distemper; and the
impious Politician in the successfulnesse of his wicked Designs. But we know
that the Judgment of God is just against those that do such things; and that
their Phil. 3.19
end is Destruction, whose glory is in their shame.

The fourth Case. Remisseness of Magistrates and Officers in Punishing
Offenders.
When there is little or no Care taken for the Punishment of such prevailing
Impieties, by those that are entrusted with Authority and Power for this
Purpose, they must needs be evil and perilous Times. When the Magistrate, who
is by his Office, Romans 13.4.
the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil,
shall bear the Sword in vain, and not draw it out for the execution of
Judgment, in the Punishment of sin and vice. When the sins of Israel were
multiplied, how often does God complain of the Defect of Justice in the Execution
of Judgment! how often is this mentioned in that one Charge which is drawn up by
the Prophet Isaiah against them Chap. 59.
! None (says he v. 4.
) calls for Justice v. 8.
; and there is no judgment in their goings. And again v. 9.
, Judgment is far from us, neither does justice overtake us [to vindicate us
from the violence of our Oppressors, and deliver us from the injuries of the
wicked: as it follows] v. 11.
We look for Judgment, but there is none, for salvation, but it is far from
us. And again, v. 14.
Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off: v. 15.
And the LORD saw it, and it displeased him that there was no judgment. So God
himself takes his Sword of Justice, and comes forth for the Execution of
Judgment, upon these unjust Judges, and this perverse and wicked People v. 17,
18.
. So also the Prophet Jeremy declares, that it was because there was not any
man that did execute Judgment Jer. 5.1, 2, etc.
, that the wrath of God was kindled against the wicked Jews, to their utter
destruction. Whereas, on the other side, when the Israelites had provoked God
to Anger with their Inventions, and the Plague brake in upon them, insomuch as
there died, in one Day, three and twenty thousand Number. 25 9. with 1 Cor. 10.8
, Phineas stood up, and executed judgment (in slaying Zimri, and Cozbi, in the
very act of uncleanness) and so the Plague was stayed. And that was counted to
him for Righteousness, unto all Generations, for evermore Psalm. 106 29, 30,
31. with Number. 25.6-15.
. And therefore does the Lord, by the Prophet call the Judges and Magistrates
of Judah, to the Execution of Judgment upon evil Doers in the Land, for the
Prevention of their utter Ruin and Destruction, which was now ready to come
upon them for their abounding sins, and unpunish't Provocations. And (says the
LORD to the Prophet Jer. 21.11, 12.
) touching the House of the King of Judah, say, Hear ye the Word of the LORD.
O House of David, Thus says the LORD, Execute Judgment in the morning, [which
was the Time of the Convention of their judicial Assemblies; when also the
People were wont to repair for Justice to the Places of Judicature Exodus 18.13
: Do it also (as the phrase may import See Psalm. 101.8.
) Seasonably, Speedily, Constantly:] and deliver him that is spoiled, out of
the hand of the Oppressor, lest my Fury go out like Fire, and burn that none
can quench it, because of the Evil of your Doings. For, Jer. 21.14
I will punish you according to the Fruit of your Doings, says the LORD.

Certainly when all manner of sin and wickedness abounds, and yet Law,
Justice, and Judgment is not executed in a Land, its a sad Symptom of some
sore approaching Judgment, if not of the utter Destruction of that Nation. So
the Prophet Habbakkuk complains, Hab. 1.4
the Law is slacked, and Judgment does never go forth; whereupon follows a
terrible commination of a dreadful Judgment, whereof the cruel Chaldeans
should be the bloody Executioners, to whom the Kings and Princes of Judah
should become miserable Captives ver. 5-10
.

Now when Iniquity thus abounds, and Judgment is not executed, in the
punishment of those Persons that are found guilty of such Enormities, this
makes these sins to become National sins, which provoke the Lord to scourge
the whole Land with National judgments, as the Plague, Famine, or War. Surely,
When sin reigns without Restraint, Judgment must be expected without Relief.

But the Case is yet worse, and the Provocation higher, when Magistrates and
Rulers that ought not to be a terror to good works, but to the Evil Romans 13.3
, do tolerate the Evil, and become a Terror to the Good. That Nation is sure
ripe for destruction, when such bitter and cursed fruits grow upon the top-most
Branches of the tallest Trees in the Land. So likewise when those that should
punish sin in others, are themselves guilty of those sins which do deserve
the sharpest Punishment. When those that are entrusted with power for the
execution of Justice upon Swearers, Drunkards, Adulterers, Sabbath Breakers,
and such like are themselves guilty of these fearful sins, and God-provoking
Abominations. This speaks the state of such a People to be desperate, the
disease of such a Nation to be deadly. When there is Poison in the Plaster,
and the Physician himself has the Plague upon him, what hope of cure can there
be for the Patient. If those that should be the Healers of the Nation, do wound
it by their transgressions, what can be expected but a sudden and inevitable
Destruction? Certainly corrupt Magistrates, and Ministers of Justice, are the
Lands sharpest Scourges, and the chief procurers of its sorest Judgments.

The fifth Case. Incorrigiblenesse and (...) i. e. (...).
.
When men are not amended by Corrections, but grow worse and worse under all
the Dispensations of Divine Providence, it is a sure and sad Symptom of
perilous Times, a clear and undeniable evidence that the last days are come
upon us, and the Evil of them has overtaken us. For the Apostle fore-warning
us that in the last Days perilous Times shall come, tells us, that in those
Days, 2 Timothy 3.13
Evil men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being
deceived. It Is a sad sign that judgment is at hand, and Destruction is at the
Door, when men grow worse and worse under all the means of making them
bett^r. When they are not reclaimed by Judgments, reduced by benefits,
reformed by all the means of grace and Salvation. Surely Incorrigiblenesse
under judgments, and customary continuance in Sin, and a continual progress
in impiety from one degree to another, notwithstanding all the means and
mercies vouchsaft for their amendment, is a Forerunner of their inevitable
ruin. If the Tree be pruned, and dug about, and dung'd, and watered, and
yet notwithstanding all this cost and pains, after long waiting, does not
only bring forth no good Fruit, but much evil, and every year worse and
worse, it shall certainly be cut down that it no longer cumber the ground Luke
13.6-9.
. If when the Lord might justly expect good Grapes from his Vineyard, it bring
forth nothing but wild Grapes, and these every Vintage worse and worse, its
just with him to pluck up the Fence thereof, and lay it wast Isa. 5.1-6.
.

God is wont by his Word, his Rod, and his Sword to proceed against sinners. By
his Word, he calls them to repentance; but if they will not be reclaimed by
that, with his Rod he chastises them for sin, he exercises them with several
Afflictions; if they will not hereby be amended, he is ready with the Sword of
his Justice to cut them off, in the execution of his Judgments. So by the
neglect and non-improvement of the two former, a sinning People come to
experiment the severity of the last and sorest of these dispensations. Thus
does the Lord complain of Judah, Zeph. 3.2
She obeyed not the Voice, she received not Correction; and so hereby she
provoked the wrath of God to her own Ruin and Destruction.

When men do commonly cast contempt upon the Word and Ordinances of God, and
are generally unprofitable under the means of grace, its just with God to give
them up to Blindness of Mind, and hardness of Heart, and then according to
the ordinary Methods of his Justice, to second these Spiritual Judgments with
a Temporal Destruction, and so for the Unprofitableness of the People, to lay
the Land desolate.

Of this Import is that dreadful commission, which the Lord gave unto the
Prophet Isaiah, concerning the People of Israel. Go (says He to him Isa.
6.9-12.
) and tell this People, hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed,
but perceive not. Make the heart of this People fat, and make their ears
heavy, and shut their Eyes: lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their
Ears, and understand with their Heart, and convert and be healed. Then said I,
Lord, how long? And he answered Until the Cities be wasted without Inhabitant,
and the Houses without man, and the Land be utterly desolate, and the LORD have
removed men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the Land.

Of the very same import is the Criminatory Complaint, and Prophetic
Commination of the Prophet Jeremy against the men of Judah, and the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem, in the Name of the Lord. This thing commanded I them (says the
LORD Jer. 7.23-29.
concerning their Fathers, whom he had brought out of the Land of Egypt)
saying, Obey my voice and I will be your God, and ye shall be my People: and
walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto
you. But they hearkened not, nor inclined their Ear, but walked in the
Counsels, and in the Imagination [or, stubbornnesse] of their evil Heart, and
went backward, and not forward. [Thus they became worse by the means used to
make them better.] Since the Day that your Fathers came forth out of the Land
of Egypt unto this Day, I have even sent unto you all my servants the Prophets,
daily rising up early, and sending them. Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor
inclined their ear, but hardened their Neck; they did worse then their
Fathers. Therefore thou shall speak all these words unto them, but they will
not hearken to thee: Thou shall also call unto them, but they will not answer
thee: But thou shall say unto them, this is a Nation that obeys not the Voice
of the LORD their God, nor receives Correction: Truth is perished and is cut
off from their Mouth. Cut off thine Hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away, and
take up a Lamentation on high Places; for the LORD has rejected and forsaken
the Generation of his Wrath. And what follows? ver. 34.
Then will I cause to cease from the Cities of Judah, and from the streets of
Jerusalem, the Voice of Mirth, and the Voice of Gladness, the Voice of the
Bridegroom, and the Voice of the Bride: for the Land shall be desolate.

But yet before the Lord proceeds to the utter Destruction of a People, he is
wont to try them by lesser Judgments, lighter Afflictions, whether they will
return to Him by Repentance or no. These lesser Judgments are his Warning
pieces, which he shoots off, to see whether they will make their Peace with him
before he levels against them his Battering Ordnance, and discharges upon them
his Murdering Cannons, his dreadful destroying Judgments. Lighter Afflictions
therefore are to be improved for the Prevention of heavier Judgments. For,
(...). Nocumenta Documenta.
Corrections for sin are Instructions to Righteousness.

But now when men are Incorrigible under Gods Corrections, these are but the
Forerunners of their utter Destruction. For this does the Lord complain of his
People, the Jews; Jer. 2.30.
In vain have I smitten your Children; they received no Correction. And says
the Prophet, Jer. 5.3.
Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved, thou have consumed them,
but they have refused to receive Correction: They have made their faces harder
then a Rock, they have refused to return. And, Oh! how terrible are the
Punishments of this Stubbornness in sin, how dreadful the Judgments ordained
for this Inc^rrigibleness under Correction! The people (says the Prophet
Isaiah Isa. 9.13-17.
) turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek the LORD of
Hosts: Therefore the LORD will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and
rush in one day. The Ancient and Honorable, he is the Head: and the Prophet
that teaches lies, he is the Tail. For the Leaders of this People cause them
to err, and they that are led of them are destroyed. Therefore the LORD will
have no joy in their young men, neither shall have Mercy on their Fatherless
and Widows: for every one is an Hypocrite, and an evil Doer, and every mouth
speaks folly; for all this his Anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still.

For this Stubbornness and Incorrigibleness, notwithstanding Instruction by his
Word, and Correction by his Rod, does the LORD threaten one Judgment after
another, against his People Israel, by the Hand of Moses. If ye walk in my
Statutes (says the Lord Lev. 26.3, 4.
) and keep my Commandments, and do them: then will I give you Rain in due
Season, and the Land shall yield her increase, and the Trees of the Field shall
yield their Fruit. v. 6.
And I will give you Peace in the Land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall
make you afraid, etc. v. 11, 12.
And I will set my Tabernacle amongst you, and my soul shall not abhor you. And
I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my People. v. 14-29
But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these Commandments:
and if ye shall despise my Statutes, and if your soul abhor my Judgments, so
that ye will not do all my Commandments, but that ye break my Covenant: I also
will do this unto you, I will even appoint over you Terror, Consumption, and
the burning Ague; that shall consum^ the Eyes, aad cause sorrow of Heart; and
ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it. And I will set
my Face against you, and ye shall be slain before your Enemies: they that hate
you shall reign over you, and ye shall flee when none pursues you. And if ye
will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven times
more for your sins. And I will break the Pride of your Power; and I will make
your Heaven as Iron, and your Earth as Brass: and your strength shall be spent
in vain: for your Land shall not yield her Increase, neither shall the Trees of
the Land yield their Fruits. And if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not
hearken unto me; I will bring seven times more Plagues upon you, according to
your sins. I will also send wild Beasts among you, which shall rob you of your
Children, and destroy your Cattle, and make you few in number, and your
Highways shall be desolate. And if ye will not be reformed by these Things,
but will walk contrary unto me; then will I also walk contrary unto you, and
will punish you yet seven times for your sins. And I will bring a Sword upon
you, that shall avenge the Quarrel of my Covenant; and when ye are gathered
together within your Cities, I will send the Pestilence among you; and ye shall
be delivered into the Hand of the Enemy. And when I have broken the staff of
your Bread, ten women shall bake your Bread in one Oven, and they shall deliver
you your Bread again by weight: and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied. And if
ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me: then I
will walk contrary to you also in fury; and I, even I will chastise you seven
times for your sins. And ye shall eat the Flesh of your Sons, and the Flesh of
your Daughters shall ye eat. v. 31, 32.
And I will make your Cities waste, and bring your Sanctuaries unto Desolation,
and I will not smell the savor of your sweet Odours. And I will bring the Land
into Desolation; and your Enemies which dwell therein shall be astonished at it,
etc. Thus Incorrigibleness under manifold Corrections, will at length kindle
implacable wrath, and so procure inevitable Ruin. When lesser Judgments have
wrought no Reformation, there is just cause to fear, God is preparing greater
Judgments, to lay that Land desolate. When the Field that is often plowed and
sowed, brings forth nothing but Briars and Thorns, we may expect shortly to see
the Master of that Fi^ld set it on Fire. Those proud Turrets that are neither
shaken with the Wind, nor softened with the Rain, may soon be scattered with
the Thunder. Though they have long threatened Heaven, one moment may throw them
down to the Earth. When men are not melted, softened, separated from their
Dross, by the Fire of Afflictions, what may we expect but that the Lord should
turn the whole Land into a Furnace of Judgment, and heat it seven, and yet
seven times hotter, till he has utterly consumed them from off the Earth?
Surely, Incorrigible Impiety shall at length be punished with inexorable Fury.
The longer men have gone on in sin, notwithstanding Instructions and
Corrections, the sooner shall they be overtaken with Judgment: and the higher
their Provocations, the heavier their Punishment.

Thus we have seen what special sins make the Times perilous, and in what
cases these sins have, in a special manner, this evil Influence upon the times.

The second Symptom. Formality in Religion.
THE Times are justly to be accounted perilous, When the Generality of
Professors take up in some outward Forms of Worship, without pressing after the
Life and Power of Godliness. The Apostle in this Prediction of Perilous Times,
seems to wind up, in the close of his Description of the Persons that should
make the Times perilous, all the Characters of them into this one; they are
men, 2 Timothy 3.3.
Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof.

And certainly there cannot be a surer Symptom of evil Times, then Formality
and Overliness in the matters of Religion and Worship of God, amongst all sorts
of Professors. The Times must needs be evil and perilous, when Religion is
made but a matter of Faction; and men's Zeal for Religion is estimated by their
vehement Ardour and Forwardness to promote this or that way of Government or
Worship, in opposition to all the rest, which yet may be found in a man that
has never experimented the Power of Religion, or Work of Sanctification upon
his own soul. Thus some are Zealous for the Episcopal, others for the
Presbyterial, and others for the Congregational, and not a few for the
Anabaptistical way; and herein lies the Main of their Religion. Whereas the
Life of Religion, the soul of true Godliness lies in the Spiritual Worship of
God Joh. 4.24
: It Is good indeed to be zealously affected always in a good matter Gal. 4.18,
; but its neither good nor safe to rest in a superficial Form, a mere empty
outside of Religion; though never so splendid and glorious. But alas! what do
these men do, that so earnestly contend for that way of Worship which is most
agreeable to their own Fancies, and censure all others as no Christians, no
Saints, that are not molded after the same Model; what do they but promote the
Distractions, increase the Divisions, and widen the Differences of the Church
of God, which every good Christian should studiously endeavor to compose and
heal? Surely the setting up of, and the Adhering to, this and the other Party,
is not the way to promote the Interests of the Kingdom of Christ. He is that
(...)
MELCHIZEDECK,

King of SALEM; Rex (...) Justitiae.
He is King of Righteousness, and King of Peace Heb. 7.1, 2
. And his Kingdom stands not in meat and drink, but Righteousness and Peace,
and (which results from them both) Joy in the Holy Ghost (...) *
(...) Rex Pacis.
When such Religious Factions prevail, they sadly portend the Ruin of the
Church: Romans 14.17
And ^hen are not such perilous times?

In the Primitive Ti^es, which were Times of P^rsecution, how zealous were
Christians in the things of God, and how fervently did they love one another!
Those Times were surely less perilous then these, wherein the H^a^ of
Persecution is not more abated, then Zeal for God, and Love to one another
amongst Christians.

But when P ofessors are generally Formal in the performance of the Duties of
Religion, very Perfunctory and Superficial in the service of God, its a sad
Symptom of perilous Times. When a man having tipped his Tongue with the Silver
of the Sanctuary, and so is able to speak well of the things of God, to
discourse well of the Matters of Religion, shall for this only Reason be
esteemed very Religious. Whereas (as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 4.20
) The Kingdom of God is not in Word, but in Power. When there is indeed much
Preaching, much Hearing, frequent Receiving of Sacraments, but (alas!) little
Life in Preaching, less in Hearing, little or no Affectionateness in Receiving,
and least of all of Conformity to these Gospel Ordinances in the Life and
Conversation. Time was, when Ministers preached with Plainness, Life and Power,
so that their earnest Romans 10.1.
desire of saving souls was apparent in their Preaching; and Christians that
feared God, Acts 17.11.
Received the Word with all readiness of Mind, entertained the 2 These. 2.10.
Truth in the Love of it, and had their Hearts much stirred and moved by every
Sermon. They not only heard the Preacher with their Ears, but felt him in their
Hearts and Consciences, and were very much affected with all the Discoveries of
the Will of God to them. They took pains to work the Word upon their own
Hearts; They met together to whet it upon one another; to exhort, encourage,
and comfort one another in the ways of God. Oh! The Word of the Lord was
precious in those days 1 Samuel 3.1.
. How beautiful (in those days) were the Feet of them that preached the
Gospel of Peace, and brought glad Tidings of good Things Romans 10.15.
! The Ministers of the Gospel (now so generally slighted and despised) were
then received by all good Christians as Angels of God, yea, even as Christ
jesus Gal. 4.14.
. And then did Religion flourish in the Church, and Christians manifested their
experimental acquaintance with the Power of Godliness. But when Preaching is
become, for the most part, Notional, and accommodated rather to the pleasing of
the Fancy, then informing the judgment, convincing the conscience, and
affecting the Heart; when Sermons are stuffed with affected phrases, and
exquisitely embroidered with Artificial Ornaments, and so delivered by the
Preacher, without one spark of Life or Zeal, with such a singular care to
observe the Emphasis and Elegancy of his studied Expressions, such a wary fear
of rumpling his fine, smooth forms of speech, as if he was come thither to play
the part of an idle Orator, rather then to do the duty of a Gospel-Preacher,
who is to treat with men in the Name of Christ about the great affairs of
their precious souls, for their eternal Salvation; this is a sad change
seriously to be laid to heart, and sadly to be lamented. When People forsake
and regard not sound, solid Preachers of the Gospel; but follow and flock after
those that suit with their Humors, and with such like quaint and curious
notions, please and delight their Fancies, it argues a great Decay in Religion,
and speaks men to be great strangers to the Power of Godliness. Nay, when
those that are indeed good Christians, and sound in the Maine, shall become
very Formal, Overly, Superficial in the discharge of Religious Duties, in their
attendance upon Gospel Ordinances; When they shall take no pains to prepare
themselves for Sabbaths and Sacraments; when they shall be little or nothing at
all affected with the Preaching of the Gospel; when they seldom or never
stir up themselves to the Exercise of the Graces of the Spirit in the duties
of Religion; when they take no Pains to work upon their Hearts by Meditation
and Prayer, the truths which are delivered unto them, nor study to express in
their lives a rest^onsiblenesse to the Doctrines of the Gospel; when they thus
rest in the Form, and press not after the Power of Godliness, its a Symptom
of an Evil Age, a Presage of Peri^lous Times.

We find God nothing regarded the outward Performances of the People of
Israel, when they were utterly deficient in those Duties wherein consisted the
Life of Religion. Isa. 1.11-15.
To what Purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, says the LORD? I
am full of the Burnt-offerings of Rams, and the Fat of fed Beasts, and I
delight not in the Blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of He-goats. And, when ye
come to appear before me, who has required this at your hand to tread my
Courts? Bring no more vain oblations, Incense is an abomination unto me, the
New Moons and Sabbaths, the Calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, it is
iniquity even the solemn meeting. Your New Moons, and your appointed Feasts my
soul hates: they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them. And when ye
spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many
prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood. Why did the Lord thus
disregard all their Ceremonial Services, and sacred Solemnities, which in the
time of the Old Testament he had commanded them? Surely for no other reason,
but because they rested in them, and neglected the great and weighty Things of
the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith: these ought they to have done, and not to
leave the other undone Mat. 23 23
. So the Lord elsewhere reproves them for their formal Devotion, and
hypocritical Fasting, because they were extremely defective in that which was
the principal Part of their expected Obedience, and the choicest Fruit of all
such Religious Performances; namely, Reformation, Justice, and Charity. For
says the Lord to the Prophet Isaiah Isa. 58.1, 2
, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my People
their Transgression, and the House of Jacob their sins. Yet they seek me daily,
and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook
not the Ordinance of their God: they ask of me the Ordinances of Justice: they
take Delight in approaching to God. Who would not judge these to be a very Holy
People, that should but take notice of this their Diligence in Duties, Desires
of direction, and Delight in drawing nigh unto God. But (alas!) how soon may we
hear them murmuring against God for not having respect to their services, nor
regard to their Solemnities, as if they had received wrong from God, by his not
granting, what they conceived their Right, to them; so highly were these proud
hypocrites conceited of their poor Performances! v. 3-7.
Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not? Wherefore have we
afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge? But the Lord replies to their
demand, and reproves them for their Deceit and Hypocrisy, and so instructs
them in their Duty. Behold (says the Lord) in the Day of your Fast you find
Pleasure, and exact all your Labors. Behold ye fast for strife and debate, and
to smite with the Fist of Wickedness, ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to
make your Voice to be heard on high. Is it such a Fast that I have chosen, a
Day for a man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head as a Bul-rush,
and to spread sackcloth and Ashes under him? Will thou call this a Fast, and an
acceptable Day to the LORD? Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? to loose
the bands of Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burden? and to let the oppressed
go free, and that ye break every Yoke? Is it not to deal thy Bread to the
Hungry, and that thou bring the Poor that are cast out to thy House? When thou
see the naked that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine
own flesh? Thus without charity (the Master-wheele of good Works) the most
specious Acts of Religion are unacceptable to God.

Formality in religion is a kind of spiritual Falsehood and Dissimulation. It Is
but a Mocking of God, a presenting him Leaves for Fruits, or Lies for Devotion.
To offer up unto God formal Performances, is to become guilty of real
Provocations. When the heart is wanting in Duties of Divine Worship, men do but
offer dead sacrifices to the living God, and so provoke the pure Eyes of his
Glory. When the Glory of the Lord leaves the inward Sanctuary, its a sign of
his departure from Jerusalem, and a sad Presage of its utter Destruction See
Ezekiel chap. 1. and 11.
. When the Spirit of God is, in a great measure gone from the Hearts of men, in
the duties of his Worship, its a sad Symptom of perilous Times with the
Church of God.

Before the persecution of the Christians in Africa by the brutish Vandals, the
Church of God in those Countries was much degenerated from its ancient Purity,
and declined, as to the Power of Godliness, as Salvian, Bishop of Massilia
complains Vict. Epist. Utic.
. So a little before the Massachre at Paris, it was observed, there was such a
general stupidity seized upon the Protestants, that few of them seriously
minded the things of God, or were zealously affected with the matters of
Religion, but were wholely taken up with their worldly Businesses and secular
Concernments. If Religion amongst men be once degenerated into Farm (as a
fruitful into a barren Vine) what can be expected but that the Righteou^nesse
of God should be armed with Power, for the punishment of such an unprofitable
People? We know, The Mat. 21.19
barren Fig Tree, being cursed by Christ, presently withered away. When a Nation
flourishes in the Leaves of Formality, without the Fruits of solid Piety, who
knows how soon it may be cast into a withering condition? Surely, Formal
Services will at length procure real Sufferings.

The third Symptom. Impiety veiled with Hypocrisy.
When under glorious pretenses of Religion, and Gods glory, men studiously
prosecute secular designs. When men seek themselves under plausible Pretenses
of doing Service to God: When men that pretend Piety, and a Public Spirit, are
(...) 2 Timothy 3.2
v. 4.
.
Such as do in deed prefer their private Interests before the Public Good;
with whom Silver is of more value then Sanctity; and who pursue their own
Honor and Advancement, wherein they would seem to promote Gods Glory.

Hi sunt qui boni videri, non esse: Mali non videri, sed esse volunt Bernh.
Sermon. 66. in Cant.
.
Th^se are they who (as Bernard speaks) would be thought good, but care not to
be so; who care indeed bad, but would not be thought so. They are such as (in
their Designs) row toward Hell, while (in their Pretenses) their Faces are
toward Heaven. They speak of beautifying Sion, when (at the same time) they
are Building Babel.

But now the Times must needs be perilous, when men thus pretend Godliness
and Gods glory, for the more easy accomplishment of their own works of
Wickedness, to his Dishonor. When men Prostitute Religion to their own base
Lusts, and so vitiate her Virgin-Honour. When they cast a veil of Hypocrisy
over the vilest Acts of Impiety. Hypocrisy, is sin gilded with pretenses of
Sanctity. This outward Gilding makes them not so glorious in the Eyes of men,
as their inward Guilt m kes them odious in the sight of God. Thus the Cloud,
which armed with the Bow, challenges all the world to a Combat for the Beauty
of Colors, is not more bright to the Earth, then its black to Heaven.

Simulata Aequitas non est Aequitas, sed duplex Iniquitas, quia Iniquitas est
simulatio August. in Psalm. 23.
.
Equity pretended or dissembled ( says Augustine) is not Equity but double
Iniquity, because dissimulation is Iniquity.

And the more glorious the Pretense is which covers a base Design, the more
vile and wicked is the Person, that thus audaciously steals the Robes of
virtue, to cloth his otherwise naked viliany. Caligula (the Roman Emperor)
was never more Profane, then when, in his Pride, he would put on the Vestments
of the Gods. Nero within, and Cato without, is an abhorred Monster in the Church
of God. When the Devil appears in the habit of Samuel, it is but to prophecy the
prevalency of the Philistines, and the Overthrow of Israel.

When Pernicious Projects are veiled with glorious Pretenses, the Times are
perilous. When Piety is made subservient to Policy, and Gain is accounted
Godliness. This is not Religion, but Robbery.

Latro est, and Domum Dei convertit in speluncam Latronum, qui Lucra de
Religione sectatur, cultusque ejus, non tam Cultus Dei, quam negotiationis
occasio est Hier. sup. M^t. l. 4.
.
He is a Robber ( says Jerome) and turns the House of God into a Den of Thieves,
who takes up Religion merely for the getting of Gain, and whose worship of God
serves only for a fitter Occasion to advance his Trading in the World. And we
know it was not long after the Temple was made a Den of Thieves, that it became
a heap of Ruins.

The Times are perilous, when the Royal stamp is put upon counterfeit coin,
and self-interest is called the Cause of God. And the Danger is greater
according to the Degree of the Person. Self-seeking, especially under plausible
pretenses of the Good of the People, is extremely pernicious in such Persons as
have the chiefest Power in their hands, which ought not to be used as an Engine
for the advancement of men's private Interests, but to be ever put to the best
improvement for the Public Good. And therefore the pious and learned Father
makes this the great difference betwixt a Tyrant, who rules after his own
Lusts, and a King that governes his People by good and wholesome Laws.

(...) Basil. (...).
.
In this (says he) does a Tyrant differ from a King, that the one has still an
Eye to his own Interests, the other lays out himself for the Good of his
Subjects. But yet amongst a People professing godliness, such Tyrants (which
makes their wickedness so much the worse) are wont to pretend the interests of
Religion, and the Honor of God, for the coloring of their irregular
enterprises, and the covering of their wicked intentions, till they have
accomplished their cursed Designs, and so attained their own ends. So the
bloody Nero, in the beginning of his Reign, made great Pretenses of Piety, but
when he was established in his Empire, he delighted in nothing but wickedness
and cruelty. And how perilous those Times were to the Christian Church, the
Tears and Blood of many thousand persecuted Christians gave sufficient
Testimony, whose Rev. 6.9, 10
Souls are under the Altar of God, still crying with a loud Voice, and saying,
How long O Lord, Holy and True, do thou not judge and avenge our Blood, on
them that dwell on the Earth? But now was it not for such fair Pretenses,
these bloody Tyrants could never so smoothly carry on such foul Enormities, to
a full accomplishment. It Is the Glory of God therefore which they pretend to
the world, to be the End of their audacious Actings; but their own Names are
firmly wrought into that Shield of Gods Glory, which they hold out to the
world, for the Protection of the basest Designs, as its said the Name of
Phidias was, by his curious Art, wrought into the Shield of Minerva. Woe be to
the People that are subjected to the Power of such pernicious persons; for
these a^e they which do, with a witness, make the Times perilous.

The Times then are perilous, when glorious Titles are stamped upon base
Designs, and glorious ends are pretended for the crediting of such Enormous
Actions, as Religion cannot but blush that they should be called her children.
Thus Celsus, the Philosopher, having written a Defense of Paganism, gilds over
his rotten wood with this golden Title or Inscription, Verbum Veritatis Orig.
contra Cells. l. 2.
. The Word of Truth.

Thus Absalom pretended a solemn Act of Religion, in paying his Vow unto God,
when having plotted a cursed Treason, he went on purpose to raise a bloody
Rebellion, against his Prince and Father 2 Samuel 15 7-10.
. Th^^ J^hu pretended the Reformation of Religion, when he sought nothing but
the establishment of the Kingdom to himself 2 King. 9 and 10.
; and therefore the executions done by him (though according to Gods Order and
Appointment 2 King. 9.6, 7
) are charged upon him as so many bloody Murders, soliciting the Divine
Vengeance. For (says the Lord Hos. 1.4
) yet a little while, and I will avenge the Blood of Jezreel ( i. e. the
bloodshed in Jezreel 2 King. 9 15, 24, 25, 26, 30. ult.
, the Royal City of the Land of Issachar Josh. 19.17, 18.
) upon the House of Jehu, and will cause to cease the Kingdom of the House of
Israel. Thus, one wicked Tyrant may be the Ruin of the whole Kingdom. Yet
does this bloody Wretch, this Self-seeking Jehu, while he was yet reeking in
Blood, and hot in pursuing his selfish Designs, boast of his zeal for the
Cause of God. Come (says he to Jehonadab 2 King. 10.15, 16.
) Come with me, and see my zeal for the LORD. Thus do many wear a Cloak of Zeal
upon a Habit of Vice. Thus Saul, out of his Zeal for the Israelites, became a
bloody Butcher of the Gibeonites, and so brought a plague upon the whole Land
of Israel 2 Samuel 21 1, 2
. Thus that wicked Ahab proclaims a Fast for the putting to death of Naboth,
that he might take to himself his Vineyard, and so by one Act, involves himself
in the guilt of Murder, Perjury, and unjust Usurpation of the Right and
Possession of the Innocent and Righteous 1 King. 21 12-16
. So the Historian tells us of the Devilish Policy of Hanno, a rich Prince of
the Carthaginians, who having laid a desi^ne for the Destruction of the whole
Se^ate (herein worse then Heliogabalus, whose Pride was satisfied in the
Expulsion of the Senators Fulg. l. 9. c. 5.
) made use of a sacred S^lemnity in the Celebration of his Daughters Marriage,
Ut Religione Votorum nefanda committeret, and nefanda Commenta facilius
tegerentur Justin. Hist. l. 21.
.
For the Execution and Concealment of his Damnable Design and Hellish Treason.
Thus did the Monster of men, Herod, pretend he would Mat. 2.8
worship Christ, whilst he was plotting to murder him, in the prosecution of
which bloody Design, he cruelly Mat. 2.16
put to death (as it is thought) about fourteen thousand Innocents, the early
Buds of Martyrdom, the first blown Violets and Roses of the Royal Garden, of
the Christian Church.

Now the times must needs be sad and perilous, when men under high Professions
of Religion, shall attempt Parricide and Murdering of Innocents, yea, and of
such as are eminent and illustrious Persons, merely for their own establishment
and security. When men shall pretend Gods honor, and the Preservation of
Religion, with the just Rights and Liberties of the good People of the Land,
both as men and Christians, for the justifying of those Bloody Acts (in
pursuance of some secular Designs, and for the procuring of their own private
Interests) whereby God is dishonored, Religion reproached, and the Land
polluted with Blood. How strangely does Ambition blind the eyes of men, that
they should think themselves secure within those walls that are cemented with
innocent Blood! That they should think to get themselves a Name, and to raise
up Monuments of glory, for the perpetuating their Memory, by Acts so full of
Infamy, that whatever flattering Titles the Time-servers of the present
Generation may give them) shall never be mentioned by the after Ages, without
abhorrency and Detestation! Who can but wonder at the intemperate Desires of
Renown that possessed the heart of Val. Max. l. 8. c. 14.
Pausanias, and to see him shut his eyes while he swallowed the Ironical advice
of Hermocrates, in the pursuit of glory, that he might get him a Name in the
world? For he demanding of H^rmocrates, by what means he might soonest become
Famous, received this Reply; Si illustrem vitum aliquem occidisset, futurum ut
Gloria ejus ad ipsum redundaret.
By being the death of some illustrious Person: For so it would come to pass
that his glory would redound to himself. Hereupon he soon engages in a bloody
Enterprise, to which he pricks himself forward by the spurs of Discontent and
Revenge. For with a Traitorous hand he murders his lawful Prince and Sovereign,
Philip King of Macedon, who was a man (abating some Vices ordinarily incident
to such great Persons) Eminent for many excellent Qualities, and worthy
Actions, which had imbellisht his Name in the world, and not undeservedly given
him the Title of a Good Prince. Neither did Pausanias herein altogether fail
of the End of his Enterprise. For by this means it came to pass, that he, in
some sort, obtained what he desired, a never dying Memory. For the just Renown
of Philips virtues transmitted the memory of this infamous Parricide to the
after-Ages. Thus Ambition, like a seeled Dove, flies up to receive a greater
Fall.

Ambition stimulates men to desperate and dangerous Designs; whence (says the
Lord Verulam Bacon's Essays, c. 36
) to take a Soldier without Ambition, is to pull off his Spurs: But then
Policy, Lieutenant to Ambition, advises to conduct these daring Actions, under
the displayed Ensigns of Religion. It Is a Maxim of Machiavel, that Religion
it self is not to be cared for, but only the Appearance; because the credit of
it is a help, but the use a cumber. Hence (says the Poet) -- Exeat Aula Qui
volet esse Pius; Virtus and summa Potestas Non coeunt Lucan. l. 4
.
He must relinquish the Court (much more the Camp) who would exercise Piety:
For solid Piety is not consistent with Supreme Power (much less with carnal
Policy.) But this we must understand of the Courts of Pagan, not of Christian
Princes, who have many of them cherisht and brooded the fairest Virtues, under
the Wings of their happy Government. But yet amongst Christians, it is but too
fitly applyable to the Courts of Tyrants, who by the strength of Policy, have
possessed themselves of the Supreme Power. For, as another Poet speaks,

(...) Sophoc. in Ajace.
.
Its no easy matter for a Tyrant to be truly Religious. A pious Tyrant is a
Paradox in Christian Politics. True Piety is doubtless a very rare thing in
the Court of a Prince that rises by Policy, and rules with Tyranny. Yet some
there are that say a precious stone may be found in the head of a poisonous
Toad. But sure we are, a glorious show of Religion may be far easilier found,
then the least dram of sincerity in such great Politicians and arbitrary
Princes.

Sad are the times when Ambition and Covetousness become the Ensigne-bearers
of Christianity; and Gain and Glory are the Prizes sought for under Christ's
Colors. For, Qui ad Ostentionem Sanctitatis praetendit, ut aliis quandoque
praeesse desideret, ille non est Discipulus Christi, sed Pravitatis Sectator
existit: qui non pro Deo sed Seculi hon^re studet portare Crucis laborem Isidor.
.
He that pretends Sanctity, but affects Principality, is not CHRIST'S Disciple,
but SIN'S Sectary, who if he do for a time bear the Burden of the Cross, it is
not for the Honor of God, but because (perhaps) he has beheld the Beauty of a
Crown, and by this means aspires to greatness and glory in the World. Thus
Ambition will needs wear a Cloak of Religion. And Covetousness, which as an
officious Servant, still attends Ambition, comes not far behind in this Art of
the Dissimulation of Piety. The Love of Gold will make men adventure upon that
which is Treason against the King of Heaven, to Counterfeit Grace. Godliness
shall be fairly written upon men's Carriages and Discourses without, when
there is nothing at all to be found within, but a Design for Gain. But now
such persons as these by their wicked Policies and Practices do make the Times
perilous. For are they not evil Days, perilous Times, when Abhorrency of
IDOLATRY is pretended for the Commission of SACRILEGE Romans 2.22
, and the Churches Portion and Dowry is taken away for the better Preservation
of her Beauty, and Prevention of her Defilement? Sacrilege is a Sin, that
under what pretenses soever it has been committed, has proved fatal to them
that have committed it. Hereof they cannot be ignorant that are not altogether
strangers to History.

We have a memorable Example hereof in the Story of the Maccabees, wherein we
read of the Sacrilege of Antiochus, and the sufferings that befell him, with
that sad Confession which he uttered under the pangs of an accusing Conscience,
that these sufferings were the just punishment of his Sacrilege. For it is
said, that 1 Mac. 1.20-24.
After Antiochus had smitten Egypt, he returned again in the hundred forty and
third year, and went up against Israel and Jerusalem with a great multitude,
and entered proudly into the Sanctuary, and took away the Golden Altar, and the
Candlestick of Light, and all the Vessels thereof. And the Table of the
Shewbread, and the pouring Vessels, and the Vials, and the Censers of Gold,
and the Vail, and the Crowns, and the Golden Ornaments that were before the
Temple, all which he pulled off. He took also the silver and the gold, and the
precious Vessels: also he took the hidden Treasures which he found: and when he
had taken all away, he went into his own Land, having made a great Massacre,
and spoken very proudly. But after seven years respite, we find Justice
calling him to account, and severely scourging him with those Scorpions which
by this sin he had fed in his own conscience, and this (which is very
remarkable) at the same Time that he sought to possess himself of a rich
Booty, by a second Sacrilege. For, says the story 1 Mac. 6.1-16.
, About that Time King Antiochus, traveling through the high Countries, heard
say, that Elemais, in the Country of Persia, was a City greatly renowned for
Riches, Silver and Gold: and that there was in it a very Rich Temple, wherein
were Coverings of Gold, and Breastplates, and Shields, which Alexander, son
of Philip, the Macedonian King, who reigned first among the Grecians had left
there. Wherefore he came and sought to take the City and spoil it, but he was
not able, because they of the City having had warning thereof, rose up against
him in Battle. So he fled and departed thence with great heaviness, and
returned to Babylon. Moreover there came one who brought in Tidings into
Persia, that the Armies which went against the Land of Judea were put to
flight: and that Lysias, who went forth first with a great Power, was driven
away of the Jews, and that they were made strong by the Armor and Power, and
store of Spoils, which they had gotten of the Armies whom they had destroyed.
Also that they had pulled down the Sea chapter 1.54.
Abomination which he had set up upon the Altar in Jerusalem, and that they had
compassed about the Sanctuary with High Walls, as before, and his City
Bethsura. Now when the King heard these words, he was astonished and sore
moved; whereupon he laid him down upon his Bed, and fell sick for Grief,
because it had not befallen him as he looked for. And there he continued many
days: for his Grief was ever more and more, and he made account that he should
die. Wherefore he called for all his friends, and said unto them; the Sleep is
gone from mine Eyes, and my Heart fails for very Care. And I thought with my
self, into what Tribulation am I come, and how great a Flood of Misery is it
wherein now I am? For I was bountiful and beloved in my Power. But NOW I
remember the Evils that I did at JERUSALEM, and that I took all the Vessels of
Gold and Silver that were therein, and sent to destroy the Inhabitants of Judea
without a Cause. I perceive therefore that for THIS Cause these troubles are
come upon me, and behold I perish through great Grief in a strange Land. Then
called he for Philip, one of his Friends, whom he made Ruler over all his
Realm: and gave him the Crown and his Robe, and his Signet, to the end he
should bring up his son Antiochus, and nourish him up for the Kingdom. So King
Antiochus died there, in the hundred forty and nine year. Thus Conscience,
though stifled for a time, will not always lie asleep. Thus the proudest
presumptuous sinner carries his Accuser, Judge, Witnesses and Executioner in
his own bosom. Thus Sacrilege, though for a time carried out with success,
shall at length recoile upon the head of him that committed it, to the
Astonishment of all beholders.

Surely when men's Hearts and Hands are engaged in this sin, what ever their
Pretenses be, they take the ready course to pluck the Judgments of God down
upon their Heads, which may involve the whole Nation in many woeful calamities,
and so bring upon the Church of God very sad and perilous Times.

And are there not too many in these Days, that under the Pretenses of Piety
(which makes the Provocation higher) are guilty of this sin of Sacrilege? We
read when the City Carthage was taken by the Romans, the rude Soldiers,
rushing into the sacred Temples, stripped the Image of Apollo of a golden Robe:
but (says the History) the Sacrilegious hands of them that took it, were found
amongst the Fragments of that sacred Vesture Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1.
. If the like Judgment should befall those that have stripped the Church
(Christ's Monument on Earth) of her Golden Robe, or at least attempted such a
Sacrilege, how might we say in the words of the Psalmist Psa. 76.5
a little varied, Many of the men of Might have lost their Hands! But perhaps
what I call the Churches Golden Robe, some may style a Babylonish Garment; and
what I esteem sacred, as her Dowry, they may call accursed Gold. But let them
remember, all Israel smarted, and the Troubler of Israel, Achan, with his
Family and Cattle, dyed in a shower of stones, and were wrapped up in a Sheet of
flames, for plundring the Golden Wedge, and Babylonish Garment Josh. c. 7.
.

The Phocian Generals who paid their Soldiers with the Gold of the Temple of
Apollo, came all to untimely deaths Diod. Sic.
. Gold, the sick man's Cordial, is the sacrilegious man's Poison. Its a snare
(says Solomon Prove. 20.25
) to the man who devoureth that which is holy, and after vows to make Enquiry.

So likewise the Soldiers, which under the Conduct of Quintus Caepio, a Roman
Consul, having taken the City Toulouse in France by storm, rifled the rich
Temples there, carrying away all the Gold and Silver out of them, were all
overtaken by those Judgments, which are in pursuit of such daring
Sacrilegists, and came to a miserable end Corn. Tacit.
. Thus they that enrich themselves with Sacrilegious hands, do but therein
pluck down the Judgments of God upon their own heads. And when Towers fall,
the Under-Buildings must needs be battered. The commission of this sin
therefore, especially under Pretenses of Religion, must needs speak the Times
perilous.

When Calvin understood how the Senate of Geneva was about to employ part of
the Revenues formerly pertaining to the Monasteries, to Civil Uses, he told
them in his Sermon, that he could not endure such Sacrilege, which he knew God,
in the end, would punish most severely. What is given to God, though out of a
blind Devotion, may not again be taken from God, but ought to be employed for
God in the Maintenance of his Worship, and the Exercises of true Religion.
There Is surely a Moral Equity in that Levitical Law; Notwithstanding (says the
LORD to Moses Lev. 27.28
) no devoted thing that a man shall devote unto the LORD, of all that he has,
both of man and beast, and of the Field, and of his Possession, shall be sold,
or redeemed: Every devoted Thing is most holy unto the Lord. And therefore the
Theft of Achan (in stealing the Golden Wedge Josh. 7.1 21
, was the Sin of Sacrilege; because the Gold of Jericho was consecrated to the
LORD Josh. 6.19
For if a man that has a true Propriety in his own Goods shall alienate them
to another use, who can deprive him of them without Intrenchment upon his just
Right, to whom they are given? And then is not he guilty of Mal. 3.8.
Robbing of God, which shall take away that, and turn it to a secular Use, for
his own advanrage, which was consecrated to Gods holy service? Yea though a man
that dedicates any thing to God, should not do it with a Right intention, yet
is it the Lords Right, after it is consecrated to a Religious Use. And
therefore Christ calls the Temple built by Herod for vain glory, his Fathers
HOUSE, and whips out them that profaned it 1 John 2.15, 16.
. Much more will God scourge with his judgments those that under the pretense
of Religion. commit Sacrilege. 'Twas one of the Laws of the twelve Tables in
Rome, Sacrum, Sacrove commendatum qui clepserit rapseritve, Parricida esto Cic.
pro Rosc.
.
Let him that steals or violently takes away holy things, or things
dedicated to a holy Use, be reputed and punished as a Parricide. And should
Sacrilege be esteemed a less Crime amongst Christians, then it was amongst
Heathens? shall we think it a less sin to rob the true God, the Genesis 1.1 Ps.
124.8.
Creator of Heaven and Earth, whose Ephesians. 2.10
Workmanship we are; for his Psalm. 119.73
hands have made and fashioned us; then they did to rob their false gods, which
were so created by men; to defraud their Idols, which were the Ps. 115.4
work of men's hands, being but Ezekiel. 20.32
Wood and Stone, or at the best but Psa. 135.15
Silver and Gold? Surely, if they to express the heinousness of this sin,
reckoned it amongst the vilest murders of Bodies, we shall want a sin with
which to match it, which is, in effect, a murder of souls. It Is sad to think
how many thousand souls were murdered at one stroke, when the Revenues of the
Church were alienated, in many places in England, an act then which the
Infernal Powers could hardly have decreed any thing more Diabolical and
Destructive to the Kingdom of Christ, however pretended for the purging of the
Land from Superstition and spiritual Tyranny. For have not many thousand souls
by this means eternally perished in their sins, who, for want of a competent
maintenance for a sound and able Ministry, have never enjoyed the Means of
Grace and Salvation; but have sat down in Darkness and the shadow of Death,
under an ignorant, unprofitable, and scandalous, soul-murthering Ministry,
maintained by some broken reversions of those rich Revenues which were cut off
from the Church, by that cursed Sacrilege? Doubtless the Blood of thousands
of souls will give Testimony to the truth hereof at the Day of Judgment, to
the eternal confusion of such damned Sacrilegists, who if they escaped
punishment in this present Life, shall be overtaken with the Wrath and
Vengeance of God in the world to come. Of this great evil does Calvin complain
(upon account of the Alienation of Abby-Lands, and other depredations made upon
the Churches revenues here in England) in his Epistle to Cranmer, Archbishop
of Canterbury, as a mighty obstruction to the prosperous success of the
Gospel, and Hindrance of the flourishing of the Christian Religion. For, says
he,

Id quo minus fiat, occultis quidem artibus obsistit Satan. Unum tamen apertum
obstaculum esse intelligo, quod praedae expositi sunt Ecclesiae Reditus. Malum
sane intolerabile.
That this might not be, Satan by his secret slights prevails to the raising of
a strong resistance. But one thing I understand is an open Obstacle, and that
is, that a Sacrilegious Rape is committed upon the Churches Revenues. This is
indeed a mischief intolerable.

And therefore it was both wise and holy Counsel, and worthy of a Christian
Prince, which Christopher of Wittenberg, gave to Andrew, an eminent Divine in
his Dominion, when he was sent for by Lodwick, Count of Oeting for his advice
in some special concernments in the Church; that if Count Lodwick should set
upon a REFORMATION, that under the Pretense of Religion, he might rob God, and
by seizing upon the Revenues of the Church, under the pretense of suppressing
SUPERSTITION (because they were anciently given for the maintenance of
Monasteries) turn them to his own private use and advantage, he should
presently leave him, as a SACRILEGIOUS Person, and come back to his own
Country.

How strange is it that such Sacrilegious Persons should go on secure in their
sins, without fearing the judgment of God, which is at their heels in pursuit
of them! What a sad end befell Cardinal Woolsey, that first began to enrich
himself by Lands given to Monasteries! And what a revenging hand pursued his
five chief Agents, that were most serviceable to him in that Sacrilegious
Enterprise! One of them killed his fellow in a Duel, and was hanged for it: a
third drowned himself in a Wel^: a fourth fell from a great estate to extreme
Beggary: Dr. Allen, the last and chiefest of them, being made Archbishop of
Dublin, was cruelly slain by his Adversaries. Whereupon says the Scult^t.
Relator of this sad Story, Utinam his and similibus Exemplis edocti discant
homines res semel Deo consecratas timide attrectare.
O that these and such like Examples might teach men to be afraid to meddle with
such things as have at any time been consecrated unto God.

But judgment does not always fall upon the Person, but is sometimes reserved
for the Posterity of those who have stained their hands with the guilt of
Sacrilege. Dionysius of Syracuse was wont to make a Mock of Sacrilege, a
sin he thought he might boldly jest with, as having made it his Familiar.
Amongst the rest he took a golden Vestment from the statue of Jupiter Olympius,
and instead thereof put a Cloak of cloth upon it, saying, Gold was too heavy
for Summer, and too cold for Winter, but this would suit well with either
Season. (Some have pretended the Churches good, in taking away her G^^ments of
Gold, as if while her clothing is of wrought Gold, she can never be all
glorious within Ps. 45.13
.) Now might not all men expect some remarkable judgment should be inflicted
upon this Sacrilegious Tyrant? Yet herein were men's expectations frustrated.
For (says Valerius) he underwent not the punishment he deserved. But take
notice (for its worthy our observation) of the Divine Conclusion which the
Heathen Historian makes hereupon.

Qui tametsi debita supplicia non exolvit, Dedecore tamen Filii mortuus Poenas
rependit, quas vivus effugerat. Lento enim gradu ad Vindictam sui Divina
procedit Ira, tarditatemque supplicii gravitate compensat Val. Max. l. 1. c. 1.
.
Though (says he) he suffered not the punishment due to his insolency, during
his Life, yet was the DISGRACE of his SON a punishment of his pride, and stain
to his glory after his Death. Thus Divine Justice proceeds with a slow pace to
a self-vindication by a just Revenge, but yet this delay is dreadful, seeing
the slower in striking, the sorer the stroke.

Now that Disgrace of his Son, which he mentions as the Punishment of the
Father, was his Devestment of his splendour and dignity, in his violent
Expulsion from his Throne and Government, upon which he lived an obscure and
ignoble life at Corinth, being had in much scorn and contempt by the People.
And so great was his disgrace herein that it became a Proverb, Dionysius
Corinthi.
Dionysius at Corinth (for so was the Son called after the Name of his
Father) used to signify such a one as was fallen from great Honors, and much
Applause of the People, into a most disgraceful and contemptible condition.
Thus for the sin of Sacrilege does God Job 12.21
pour contempt upon Princes, and weaken the strength of the Mighty.

And therefore (says the same Author, continuing his Observations hereupon)
Thymasitheus, Prince of the Leparitans, took the wisest course to decline the
stroke of an offended and angry Deity. For when some of his Citizens playing
the Pirates, h^d taken a Goblet of gold, of great weight, and were hot to have
it divided amongst them, he gave a cooling to their covetousness. For, Ut
comperit a Romany Pythio Apollini Decimarum Nomine dicatum, manibus
venundantium ereptum, Deo Delphos perferendum curavit.
When he understood that it was dedicated by the Romans to Apollo Pythius,
under the Name of TITHES, he caused it to be taken out of the hands of them
that would have sold it, and to be carried back again to the Delphian Deity.
Surely those are but bad times in the Christian World, when none will be found
to do as much for Christ, as this Heathen Prince for Apollo.

But behold here another grand Imposture which these profane Politicians put
upon the World, when they pretend much zeal for the punishment of this sin of
Sacrilege in others, that they themselves may the more securely, and with the
less danger of suspicion, commit it, when an opportunity of Self-enrichment
thereby shall be offered. So when men are mightily active for the Preservation
of the Churches Revenues, because thence, by a cursed Sim^niacal Chemistry, or
other fraudulent Arts, they can Sacrilegiously extract their own advantage.
Philip, King of Macedon, never won so much glory in the World by any Act, as by
that, when he drew his Sword for the revenge of the sin of Sacrilege upon
the Phocians. Hereupon he was adorned with glorious Titles. All men thought
themselves bound to pay him some Tribute of praise for so noble an enterprise.
Hence they styled him, Illum Vindicem Sacrilegii, illum Ultorem Religionum:
quod Orbis viribus expiari debuit, solum qui piacula exigeret extitisse dignum.
Itaque Diis proximus habetur, per quem Deorum Majestas vindicata sit Justin. l.
8
.
The renowned revenger of Sacrilege, and defender of Religion; a work worthy
of the united virtue and valor of the whole world. He was accounted the gods
chiefest Favorite for this vindicacation of the Majesty and honor of their
injured Deities. But how was the glory of this so much honored and admired
action stained, when it appeared that this his REVENGE of SACRILEGE, was but a
Preface of Gold to an Oration of Iron, a plausible pretense for the better
carrying on his Ambitious Designs. For having an opportunity not long after,
he raised to himself a mighty Gain by the very same sin, whereof his pretended
punishment was his greatest glory.

Thus the times must needs be perilous, when plausible pretenses are made use
of, for the promoting of pernicious Designs. When REFORMATION is pretended for
the RUIN of the Church. When men villanously rob God for their own Enrichment.
This is a Crime which may bring the Curse of God down upon a whole Kingdom.
For, says the LORD by the Prophet Malachi Chap. 3. v. 8, 9
, Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me: But ye say, wherein have we robbed
Thee? In Tithes and Offerings. Ye are cursed with a CURSE: for ye have robbed
me, even this whole Nation. Fearful is the Provocation of those men, and
dreadful shall their Punishment at length be, who thus Sacri e^iously raise
their Estates, and heap up riches to themselves, to the Dishonor of God, and
Demolishment of the Church, and yet impudenly pretend the Churches Good
therein, and Gods glory. The times cannot but be evil and perilous, when Gods
glory is made a Footstool for the Pride, Avar^ce, and Ambition of men. When
they make use of the Bible for the raising them up higher to reach their
secular Designs; a thing which the pious Prince, Edward the sixth refused,
with disdain of the motion, laying it to his Heart, when one offered it him to
lay under his Feet, to reach something that was over his head, and above his
Reach Sir John Haywood in Vita.
. But the times are surely perilous, when men have Iron Hands and Brows of
Brass; when they cruelly crush Religion, and yet impudently boast of their own
ZEAL and Godliness.

Thus Josephus largely relates the barbarous and savage cruelty of a wicked and
bloody Sect among the Jews, that yet would needs style themselves the ZEALOTS.
The Jews had woeful experience of the burning rage of these men's bloody Zeal.
For amongst other their barbarous Villainies, and bloody Outrages Joseph. (...).
, which when they had attained to a Predominancy in that miserably distracted
Nation, they continually committed upon that poor oppressed People, they slew
twelve thousand of the (...).
Sons of the Nobles, in the Prime and Glory of their Youth, at once to cut
them off from any possibility of a present Resistance, and the hopes of a
future Revenge, by the hands of their posterity. These were the (...) Id. ibid.
(...).
.
Zealots: For so (says he) they called themselves, as being singularly zealous
for good Undertakings, whereas there was indeed no Villainy in the world so
great, but their zeal would digest it, yea, no evil of so high a Nature, but
they would strive to equal or exceed it, being superlatively wicked. Now this
pestilent Sect so far prevailed and so strengthn'd their Faction in the chief
City of the Land, Jerusalem, that they became the causes of its utter Ruin,
with many thousand miseries which hereupon befell the Jewish Nation. For, says
Josephus.

(...) (...).
.
The Dominion of the Zealots over the People gave the first stroke to the
Destruction of the City. But the bloody cruelties of proud Pretenders, and the
bleeding Miseries of poor afflicted ones, will at length awake Divine
Vengeance. So far did these bloody Zealots proceed in their cruel Practices,
that at length they provoked the God of Patience to scourge them with most
cruel Punishments. Their Practices and punishments are thus recorded by the
same Historian. Having spoken of the cruelty of sundry factious Spirits, says
he (...).
, With all these did the Idumeans contend, as it were, for Priority in the
expresses of an unbridel'd Fury. For these being most desperately wicked,
murdered the chief Priests, (...) (...).
.
That so no part of Piety toward God might be preserved, but that true
Religion, both root and branch might be destroyed in the Land. By them was the
City despoyl'd of its just Privileges and Immunities, instead whereof they
introduc't all manner of Insolences and Enormities, so far forth as there was
not so much as the Face or Footsteps of any good Government left. Now, says
he, (...) (...).
.
Herein was that Generation called the Zealots, most vigorously active, who
justified their Name by their Works, verified their Appellation by their
Actions. For there was never any wickedness attempted in the memory of man,
but their Zeal carried them to the commission of it, although they would needs
call themselves by this Name (as before was noted) for their Zeal, which they
pretended, to that which is Good. And such was their savage disposition, they
either subtilely deceived them, whom they injuriously oppressed, by their
deluding pretenses, or openly triumphed in their Overthrow, as accounting the
chiefest virtue to consist in the highest Degree of Vitiousnesse. But Divine
Justice suffered not these cruel Cannibals to escape a deserved punishment. No,
they died as Wretched a death, as they before had lived a wicked Life; and
their desperate Courses brought them to a dreadful Conclusion.

(...) (...)
.
For they came all of them to an end so agreeable to their enterprises, that
the triumphs of the Divine Justice became illustrious in their deserved
punishment. For as great torments as humane nature can possibly undergo, did
altogether light upon them, which burden of miseries they were forced to bear
to the very last stage of their Lives, and so with the cruel pangs of manifold
tormenting Agonies, they were scourged into the house of Death. But if any man
should say, that these sufferings were less then their deservings, let him
withal remember, that such was the degree of their wickedness, that no
punishments could be found that might equalize their Deserts. Thus we see that
some men under pretenses of Zeal, have presumed to act most horrible Villainies;
but that the Justice of God has at length overtaken them, and severely
chastised them, for all their Insolences and impieties, with the sorest
punishments. However thus much light does clearly shine from this Observation,
that while such a cruel Faction of pernicious men prevails, the Times must
needs be perilous.

The fourth Symptom. Iniquity clothed with Authority.
THey are days of Danger, evil and perilous Times, When violence usurps Such
were the times of which the Psalmist complains, and expostulates with God
Psalm. 94.20, 21.
; Shall the throne of Iniquity have fellowship with Thee, which frames
mischief by a Law? They gather themselves together against the soul of the
Righteous, and condemn the innocent blood. Now here (...) *
, the Throne of Iniquity, (...)
Junius renders Solium aerumnarum, i. e. Tyrannicum, aerumnas aliis afferens
immerito Jun. in loc.
.
The Throne of misery, and interprets it, the Throne of Tyrants, who oppress
others with causeless calamities, freely bestowing upon them miseries without
their merits. Yea, being ever Liberal in such Largesses, they give men Death
(the Righteous man's best Reward, when Rebels come to Reign) without Desert:
for so says the Psalmist in the next words, They gather themselves together
(as to hold a cruel Court of high Injustice) against the soul (that is, the
Life) of the righteous, and condemn the innocent blood (that is, they pass an
unjust sentence of condemnation upon the righteous, in the execution whereof
they shed innocent blood.) And this mischief which they thus frame against the
righteous, they do, as Junius translates it, Praeter statutum, id est, contra
jura and leges.
Besides the Statute, that is (as he interprets it) against the just Rights and
Laws. The Will of a Tyrant is his Supreme Rule, and (even in matters of Life
and Death) his Lusts are his Laws. Neither is there a discrepancy in our
Translation, which says, he frames mischief by a Law; for we may well unite
them both into a sound sense; These Tyrants making Laws against the Laws,
that so the highest Acts of Injustice and Iniquity, may be colored with a
pretense of Equity and Justice, do frame mischief by a Law contrary to the Law.
And much to this purpose does the Judicious Calvin interpret this Place.

Solii autem consulto meminit, quia non accusat vulgarios ficarios, vel fures,
quorum infamia passim nota sit, sed contra Tyrannos invehitur, qui fallaci
juris praetextu opprimebant Ecclesiam.

Perstringit igitur Propheta improbos Judices, qui per omne Oppressionum genus
grassando, simulabant tamen se tenere rectum Officii cursum. Sic enim perfidi
Judices, ut possessionem honesti and speciosi Tituli retineant, varios colores
accersunt ad tegenda suae Tyrannidis flagitia Calvin in loc.
.


Mention (says he) is here on purpose made of the Throne, because the Psalmist
does not here draw up his accusation against common cutthroats, or pilfering
Thieves, there being no need to blazon their Infamy, but he is inveighing
against Tyrants, who under a fallacious pretense of RIGHT, do oppress the
Church. The Prophet therefore herein sharply reproves wicked Judges, who though
they violently prosecuted men with all manner of Oppressions, would yet make
show of holding a right course in the execution of their Office. For so
perfidious Judges are wont to make use of many fair colors, to give a
beautiful embellishment to the deformed face of their horribly wicked Tyranny,
that they may the better maintain the possession of a fair and specious Title.
Thus that Power and Dominion which is gained by wicked Policy, is maintained
and preserved by oppressive Cruelty, and this is often covered under Pretenses of
Law and Equity. These are evil and perilous Times. And therefore does Calvin
justly complain of these sad Disorders, in his Explication of the next words
(before rehearst) which represent the unjust process of these wicked Judges,
in conspiring against the Righteous, and condemning the Innocent to Death.

Triste quidem, ac etiam ^urpe Exemplum fuit, in legitimo conventu ita regnare
improbos, and Collegium Judicum nihil aliud esset quam latronum Turba. Nam hoc
bis indignum est, ubi oppressi fuerint innoxii homines, simul cum injuria
probrum sustinere. Deinde quid minus consentaneum, quam ut tota forensis ratio
nihil aliud fit quam scelesta Conspiratio ad insontes damnandos Calvin in Psalm.
94.21
?
It was indeed (says he) a sad and foul Example, that wicked men should so
reign in a Lawful Assembly, that a Convention of Judges should be nothing
else but a Company of Robbers. For this is a double Indignity, in the
Oppression of Innocent persons, that besides the Injury they therein sustain,
they should be loaded with the Reproach and Infamy of a false Charge. And then
again, what can be less consonant to a Court of Justice, then that it should
be nothing else but a wicked conspiracy for the condemning of the Innocent. Now
if the Times may be estimated from the state and condition of the Church and
Saints, who are ever the better (though not the greater) part of the World,
these must needs be accounted evil and perilous Times. And doubtless they
were so accounted by the Psalmist, who thus poures out his Prayer and Complaint
in the beginning of the Psalm Psalm. 94 1-5.
; O LORD God to whom vengeance belongs: O God to whom Vengeance belongs,
show thy self. Lift up thy self thou JUDGE of the Earth: render a reward to the
PROUD. LORD, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph? How
long shall they utter and speak hard things? and all the workers of Iniquity
boast themselves? They break in pieces thy People, O LORD: and afflict thine
Heritage.

Now when this is the state of things in a Christian Commonwealth, we need no
longer doubt whether the Prophecy of Perilous Times be fulfilled or no. When
Violence is in the Throne, and Iniquity bears the Sword, these must needs be
Times of great Danger and Distress to the Righteous, who have no way left to
relieve themselves under the greatest Oppressions. When any of the four
Pillars of Government (says the Lord Verulam Essays, chap. 15.
) are mainly shaken, or weakened (which are Religion, Justice, Counsel and
Treasure) men had need to pray for fair weather. And says the Psalmist Psa.
11.3
, If the foundations [Law and Justice] be destroyed, what can the Righteous do?
For what can be expected in this case but a cursed Toleration of all impieties?
So the Psalmist elsewhere complains, after a Representation of the Insolences
of ungodly Rulers, Ps. 12.8.
The Wicked walk on every side while the vilest men are exalted. That is to say
(says a late Judicious Expositor Diodati.
) all manner of Licentiousness and Impunity reigns, when public Offices are
enjoyed by unworthy and infamous Persons. 'Twas Cato's complaint, and that not
without cause, having seen much Injustice in the Roman Senators, that poor
thieves oft-times sit in the stocks, and are laid in cold Irons, when great
Thieves walk in Gold Chains, are clothed in Purple, and sit in the seat of
Judicature Aul. Gel.
. Thus the Pirate told Alexander, he did but that with a small company, which
himself did with his great Army. Vice armed with violence, and crowned with
success, is presently baptized into the Name of virtue Foel^x vitium virtus
vocatur
: and if Authority be out of the way to answer for it, Power will stand up and
supply its place.

Now this Exaltation of the vilest of men to the highest Places of Power and
Trust, this Investiture of base and unworthy Persons with Honorable Offices of
State, is an evil whereof the wise Solomon complains in his Political
Observations. There is (says he Eccl. 10.5, 6, 7.
) an evil which I have seen under the Sun, as an error which proceeds from
the Ruler, (or, a fruit and effect of Tyranny:) Folly is set in great Dignity
(or in great heights (...) in excelsis.
) and the rich sit in low place. I have seen servants upon Horses, and Princes
walking as servants upon the earth. Thus the worst and unworthiest of men are
sometimes exalted to Places of the greatest Trust and Power. They that proudly
contemn God and trample under feet the Ordinances of his worship, do sometimes
by Power and Policy invade the Throne, and make the necks of freeborn Princes
to become their Footstool. This has made some, that before have had some
Touch of Religion, turn flat Atheists. Such desperate wretches were those that
presumed to make an audacious Reply to the LORD'S just Charge by the Prophet
Malachi Mal. 3.13 14, 15.
; Your words have been stout against me, says the LORD: yet ye say, what have
we spoken so much against thee? ye have said, It is vain to serve God; and
what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinance, and that we have walked
mournfully before the LORD of Hosts? And now we call the proud happy: yea, they
that work wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered.
'Twas said of Augustus, Ei gratius fuit Nomen Pietatis, quam Potestatis.
He preferred Piety before Power: But these are herein Antipodes to Augustus,
who prefer Power before Piety. Nothing is more intolerable then a poor man that
is extreme Proud, a mean man that is very Ambitious: a Servant that will
dominere over his Lord; a Subject that will dare to snatch the Scepter out of
the hand of his Sovereign. Such are the men that make perilous Times. We may
see in their Faces several Lineaments of that Pourtraicture which the Apostle
gives us of the persons that should make the Times perilous. He tells us they
are such as are Proud, Fierce, Traitors, Heady, High-minded 2 Timothy 3 2, 3, 4.
. When we see then these Properties legibly engraven upon men's Practices, we
may conclude, the Prophecy is fulfilled, the perilous Times spoken of are come.

When men of low Estates are set in high Places, and men of ambitious spirits
are still contending for Priority, it is very prejudicial to the Commonwealth,
and of ill consequence to the Church of God. Plato therefore, who in his
Political Discourses undertakes to give us the Model and Plat-forme of a
well-governed Commonwealth, judges none to be fit for the Government thereof,
but such as are men of good Estates, as well as of great virtues.

(...) Plato de Rep. l. 7.
.
For if men that are poor, and want Estates of their own (b ggarly, and
hunger-starved fellows) shall come once to be set over the Commonwealth,
they will make account they may and must raise their private Estates out of the
Public Revenues: This City, this Community is not well constituted, cannot be
happy. For hence will arise Contentions for the Principality, which being a
kind of Domestic and Intestine War, will both destroy the Competitors, and
the rest of the City.

'Twas observed of Varus Governor of Syria, that he came poor into the
Country, and found it rich; but departed thence rich, and left the Country
poor. To prevent this Oppression of the Poor, by proud Officers of State,
it is a good Law, that of the Venetians, whereby they punish with Death,
whosoever shall employ a penny of the Public Stock to his own private Profit.

The strongest Engines of State are made of the same metal that the greatest
Idols of the Heathen, Silver and Gold Ps. 115.4
. For want of these many proud, ambitious spirits, aspiring to Sovereignty, are
still kept in a state of servitude. Thus their poverty turns to the profit of
the Commonwealth. For hereby they are fettered and restrained from many
Insolences, which they would otherwise commit, whereby they would increase
their own guilt, and others grief, whose sufferings would become the matter of
their Triumphs. Certainly Riches and Power are the two Pillars of Tyranny,
which being once removed, the glory of such men would soon fall to the ground:
And therefore does Philo account it as great an advantage that the wicked want
them, as that the righteous have them. For as to the one they are the necessary
supporters of Magnificence and Authority; so to the other they are notable
Instruments of Oppression and Cruelty. It Is not then without just reason that he
thus concludes, (...) Philo Jud. (...).
.
Poverty and weakness is profitable to bad men, as riches and strength is very
advantageous to good men. But as Aaron could not want Gold to make a molten
Calfe, while the Israelites wore it in Jewels and Earrings Exodus 22.2, 3
: so neither will a Tyrant want Treasure sufficient to serve his turn, while
those are worth any thing that are subjected to his Tyranny. Though he that
wants both Riches and Power, is thereby cut off from an advantage of rising to
greatness and glory in the world, though his breast be full of Ambition, and
his heart of Revenge; yet when proud Politicians, ambitious spirits have once
gotten Power in their hands, they will soon raise up riches to themselves, out
of the Ruins of others, by an unjust seizure upon the Rights and Revenues of
the truly virtuous, who endeavor to cross and obstruct their impious
proceedings. And to worse Tyrants then these can a miserable People hardly be
enslaved, or upon worse terms exchange their golden Liberty for an Iron
Bondage.

Ambition is a poisonous Root, from which a thousand Branches of public
Calamities do spread themselves in a Commonwealth. Surely Nebuchadnezzars Dan.
4.11
great Tree, whose shadow robbed a great part of the Earth of the Light of the
Sun, did at the first spring from a small seed of Ambition. When men of low
Degree do aspire to the highest Honors, and in pursuit thereof make use of the
Sword to gain the Scepter, the Times do presently become perilous. Plato, in
his Discourse of the Lib. 8.
Commonwealth, speaks of the several sorts of Government. There is, says he,
(...).
A Government which is called Oligarchie, which is a Government managed by a
few men, but replenisht with many Miseries, wherein evils do, as it were,
crow'd for Elbow-room; Democracie, or a popular Government, and that generous
Government by a Prince, which when it degenerates into an irregular and
arbitrary Domination, is by later Writers called Tyranny. After the mention of
these, he speaks of

(...).
A Government springing from Ambition, for which he confesses himself to be at
some loss to find a fit Name, and therefore calls it a State of Honor, as
arising from an intemperate Desire of Dignity, an inordinate affectation of
Principality. Now from this Ambition of Rulers, and affectation of Priority in
Government, whereby every one is still climbing up, and thrusting out him that
is before or above him, come frequent Changes of Government, and many
successions of Governors in a short time: then which nothing is more
prejudicial to the Peoples Peace and Welfare. This is a great Punishment of
their sins, and no small Symptom of perilous Times. It Is Solomon's
Observation in his Divine Politics, Prove. 28.2
For the Transgression of a Land many are the Princes thereof. And still he
that succeeds in Government, forcing out the former, is wont to exceed him in
obliquities and rigor in governing. Seldom (we say) comes the better. And
therefore did that old woman of Sicily pray so heartily for the life of the
cruel Tyrant Dionysius; for having lived long, and had experience of the
Tyranny of his Predecessors, every one worse then the former, and he then
living the worst of them all (as she feared not to tell him to his Face, when
he demanded the reason of this her Devotion) if he should be taken from them by
Death, she much feared what should become of them all, when a worse then he
should rise up in his room.

Now he that is carried by his Ambition to cloth himself with Authority shall
not fail to inherit the Hatred of the People, and to entaile the inheritance
upon his Posterity. Says the son of Sirach, (...) (...). c. 20. v. 8.
.
He that usurps Authority shall incur Hatred. And never can the Subjects be
happy under the Government of a Prince that is hated. It Is the Blessing of God
upon the Government which makes it a means of Good to the People, and them
which sit under such a Government to be Blessed. But now he must wait for Gods
bringing him to the government, that expects Gods blessing upon his Government.
But Ambition is ever upon the spu^ in the pursuit of Glory, and will not wait
for the Divine Manuduction. Now, says Augustine,

Quoties hominibus praeesse desidero, toties Deo praeire contendo Aug. in Psalm.
.
So often do I strive to run before God, as I desire to rule over men. Now
nothing is more pernicious to the State then this same

Regnandi dira Cupido Virg. Georg.
.
Cursed desire of Rule. Ambition is wont to seize the Scepter by storm; and
such violent Proceedings are usually attended with a multiplicity of Miseries.
The Seas are by some observed to swell before a Tempest. The swelling of the
proud waves of the People, does prognosticate a storm in the State, a Tempest
of troubles in the Church. And this ambition, and eager desire of Government
proceeds from the corruption of men, however it pretends to Perfection. For, as
Plato well observes,

(...) Plato (...).
.
Did a City or Commonwealth wholely consist of good men, there would be as
much striving not to rule, as now a days there is Contention for Principality
and Domination. And this modesty would be no less conducible to the settlement
of Peace, then Ambition is for the raising of Commotions in a City or
Commonwealth. The same Philosopher confirms this, by that which he sets down
as a certain conclusion, in another Book of his Political Discourses;

(...) Plato (...).
.
That City wherein those that are called to govern, were not at all ambitious
of Government, must needs be best governed, and freest from sedition, and the
contrary is to be concluded concerning that City which has Magistrates of a
contrary Disposition. Experience is a sufficient Comment upon this Text. The
Orators Observation may sufficiently verify the Philosophers Conclusion. Says
he,

Complures se seclere contaminarunt imperii cupiditate Cicer. Offic. l. 3.
.
Many out of an inordinate desire of Rule have contaminated themselves with the
guilt of wicked attempts. And do we not know that many have attempted the
murder of Princes, yea, and have accomplished their wicked and bloody Designs,
that they might make a seizure of the Supreme Power, and possess themselves of
the chief seats of Government? Has not such a Fire of Ambition been kindled in
some men's Breasts, as that nothing would quench it but the Lifeblood of their
lawful King? Is not this it for which the LORD complains of the People of
Israel, the children of Ephraim? Hos. 7.7
They are all hot as an oven, and have devoured their Judges; all their Kings
are fallen, there is none among them that calls upon me. That is (says a
learned and Pious Expositor Diodat.
) Their rage discovers it self chiefly in their seditions, frequent
conspiracies, and murders of their Kings. Thus did Baasha conspire against
Nadab, King of Israel, and slew him, and reigned in his stead; and so in his
Blood founded his most wicked Government; yea, and for his greater security
therein he slew all the Royal Family, insomuch as he left not alive any that
breathed 1 Kin. 15 25-34.
. Then after his Death, when Elah his son began to reign over Israel, Zimri
his servant ( Captain of half his Chariots) conspired against him, and flew
him, and reigned in his stead 1 King. 16 8, 9, 10.
. Thus he that had taught Subjects Treason and Rebellion, by cutting off the
Family of his Prince for his own establishment, had his own Family presently
after his Death, by the like act, cut off from the Government which he had
usurpt. Thus, The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes Psalm. 9.16
. Thus we read that when Zachariah, the son of Jeroboam was made King over
Israel, Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him, and smote him before
the People, and slew him, and reigned in his stead. 2 King. 15 8, 9, 10.
And when Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign, and had reigned a full
month in Samaria, Menahem the son of Gadi, went up from Tirzah, and came to
Samariah, and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria, and slew him, and
reigned in his stead v. 13, 14
. This bloody Menahem to maintain his security in the possession of an usurpt
Kingdom, laid heavy Burdens upon all the rich men of Israel, exacting a sum
of money from all the mighty men of wealth, for the raising of a thousand
Talents of silver, to engage the Forces of the King of Assyria to confirm the
Kingdom in his hand v. 19, 20.
. By this means he held the Kingdom for the space of ten years, and then by
the King of Terrors, who would not be bribed with gold, he was at once
deprived of his life and Kingdom. Yet did his son Pekahiah reign in his
stead. But by that time he had reigned two years, Pekah the son of Remaliah,
a Captain of his conspired against him, and smote him in Samaria, in the
Palace of the Kings House, with Argob, and Arieh, and with fifty men of the
Gileadites: and he killed him, and reigned in his room v. 23, 25
. Thus was the Scepter ravished by the Sword, and the Sovereignty deflour'd by
the Soldiery. Thus was the Palace polluted with the Blood of a Prince, or
rather it was washed from Pollution with his Blood, who by the Effusion of
Blood had polluted it. Thus was an Usurper slain, and dispossessed of his
Kingdom by the hand of a Traitor. But what became of the bloody Parricide,
Pekah? Is it not strange that he that waded to the Throne in Blood, and ruled
the Kingdom rather by the Sword then Scepter, should for v. 27.
twenty years together sit upon the Throne of Israel? But yet at length behold
the Sun of his Sovereignty sets in a cloud of Blood. For it is said v. 30.
, Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of
Remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, and reigned in his stead. Thus we have
opened a bloody Scene, and showed you the Treasons, Murders, Cruelties,
Exactions, Revenge, which are the terrible Attendants, that continually wait
upon this State-Fury, AMBITION, which is maintained in the world by the Breath
of Honor, and the Blood of Kings.

Now who will not judge these to be perilous Times to the People of God? But
when Iniquity thus Reigns, then does God at length come in, as a Righteous
Judge, and executes his just Judgments upon such perfidious Traitors, and
unjust Judges. For, Psalm. 82.1, 2.
God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty; he judges among the Gods. How
long (says he) will ye judge unjustly, and accept the Persons of the wicked?
The Injustice of men, sollicits the just Vengeance of God. His Judgments hang
like mighty weights upon slender wires over the heads of such a provoking
People. He, in his wise and holy Providence, suffers wicked men, for a time, to
be set up; but at length by his hand of Power and Justice, he casts them down.
And therefore Tolluntur in altum, Ut lapsu graviore ruant.
They are but lifted up on high that they may have the greater Fall; as the
Eagle carries the shellfish up into the Air, that so letting it fall, it may
break in pieces upon the Rock. The Wisdom, Power, and Justice of God is
wonderfully seen, in the punishment of the wicked, when he turns their cruel
designs against the righteous, to their own destruction. I shall therefore
conclude these Political Observations with holy David's Prophetic
Representation of the Practice and Punishment of the Profane Politician, with
the Praise which he therein returns unto God. Behold ( says he Psa. 7.14 -- 17
) he travelleth with Iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and brought forth
falsehood. He made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which he
made. His mischief shall return upon his own Head, and his violent dealing
shall come down upon his own Pate, I will praise the LORD according to his
Righteousness: and I will sing praise to the Name of the LORD most high.

The fifth Symptom. Perjury and Covenant Breaking.
When the most sacred Ties of Conscience, Oaths, Protestations, Vows and
Covenants, are made no account of, in cases of Loyalty and Religion. When they
are but as Spiders webs, which entangle the smaller Flies, but the greater
break through and escape. When, as Sampsons bands, they snap them in two, like
Judge. 16.9
threads of Flax when they touch the Fire. As the Demoniack, which was bound
with Chains and Fetters, but he brake all the bands wherewith he was bound
Luke 8.22
. You may call such LEGION; for many Devils are surely entered into them, to try
their strength in them. The Laws of men are chains of Iron; the commands of
God, are chains of Gold; Oaths and Covenants added thereunto, are chains of
Adamant: If Satan once be so strong in men, as that they break all these
chains, we may well expect perilous Times. For what desperate wickedness
will not such men attempt? What horrid and unheard of Villainies will not such
men commit, as bid defiance to God, in the breach of the most sacred bands of
Duty, and solemn Obligations to obeObedience? Woe be to the Inhabitants of the
Earth, when such Furies of Hell shall be let loose upon them.

This sin of Perjury and Perfidiousnesse, of false-hood and lying unto God in
the violation of Vows and Covenants, is a sin which exceedingly incenses
Heaven, and provokes the Lord of Hosts, the King of glory (whose sacred name is
hereby profaned) to execute his fiercest judgments upon such a People; and
therefore is a sad Symptom of perilous Times, and fearful Presage of
following Judgments.

Thus when Saul, out of his zeal for the children of Israel and Judah (as the
Scripture tells us) sought to destroy the Gibeonites, as being strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel, God punished the Violation of that League which Joshuah
had About four hundred years.
long before made with them Josh. 9.3 16, 17.
, by bringing a Famine upon the Land for three years uncessantly in the days
of David 2 Samuel 21 1, 2
. Though the Gibeonites deceit was the foundation of this Covenant, and Saul's
Zeal the principle of the prosecution of them contrary to it, yet is the
violation hereof severely punished by the plague of Famine. Though it be the
Fire of Zeal that burns in two these sacred bands, yet will the Fire of Gods
wrath be kindled against them that shall voluntarily violate them.

So the LORD threatened Captivity, and very sore Judgments against the Princes
and People of Israel, for their violation of their Covenant, of granting a
Manumission to their Hebrew servants; and the Punishment answered the
Prognostic. Observe the Lords Charge and Commination, the sting of that
Prophecy, wherewith Jeremiah was sent unto them. Jer. 34.13-22.
Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, I made a COVENANT with your Fathers,
in the day that I brought them forth out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House
of Bondmen, saying, At the end of seven years, let ye go every man his Brother
an Hebrew, which has been sold unto thee: and when he has served thee six
years, thou shall let him go free from thee: But your fathers hearkened not
unto me, neither inclined their ear. And ye were now turned, and had done
Right in my sight, in proclaiming every man Liberty to his Neighbor, and ye
had made a COVENANT before me in the House which is called by my Name. But ye
turned and polluted MY NAME, and caused every man his servant, and every man
his Handmaid, whom he had set at Liberty at their pleasure to return, and
brought them into subjection, to be unto you for Servants, and for Handmaids.
Therefore thus says the LORD, Ye have not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming
Liberty every one to his Brother, and every man to his Neighbor: behold, I
proclaim a Liberty for you says the LORD, to the Sword, to the Pestilence,
and to the Famine, and I will make you to be removed into all the Kingdoms of
the Earth. And I will give the men that have transgressed my COVENANT, which
have not performed the words of the COVENANT which they had made before me,
when they cut the Calfe in twain [a Rite signifying, so let it be done to him
that shall violate his Covenant] and passed between the Parts thereof, the
Princes of Judah, and the Princes of Jerusalem, the Eunuchs, and the Priests,
and all the People of the Land, which passed between the Parts of the Calfe, I
will even give them into the hand of their Enemies, and into the hand of them
that seek their Life, and their dead Bodies shall be for meat unto the Fowls
of the Heaven, and to the Beasts of the Earth. And Zedekiah King of Judah, and
his Princes will I give into the hand of their Enemies, and into the Hand of
them that seek their Life, and into the Hand of the King of Babylons Army,
which are gone up from you. Behold, I will command, says the LORD, and cause
them to return to this City, and they shall fight against it, and take it, and
burn it with Fire, and I will make the Cities of Judah a Desolation, without
an inhabitant. Thus for this sin of Covenant Breaking may God break in pieces
a perfidious People with the Iron Rod of War, and lay a flourishing land
desolate.

For this sin does the Lord, by the Prophet Amos, draw up a Charge likewise
against Tyrus; Am. 1.9, 10
Thus says the LORD, For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for four, I will
not turn away the punishment thereof; because they delivered up the whole
Captivity to Edom, and remembered not the BROTHERLY COVENANT [which was formerly
made between David and Solomon Kings of Judah, and Hiram, King of Tire, who
being Brethren by identity of Office, as Kings; and mutual Amity, as Friends,
did hereby knit the Bands of Brotherhood with a faster knot 2 Samuel 5.11 1 King.
5.1 and 9.13.
] But I will send a Fire on the Wall of Tyrus, which shall devour the Palaces
thereof.

God himself takes an Oath, and solemnly swears by his Life, that he will
punish the King of Judah with Death, and his People with Destruction, for his
violation of his Oath and Covenant with the King of Babylon. See how severely
the Lord proceeds against him for this Sin. Say now to the Rebellious House
(says the LORD to the Prophet Ezekiel Chap. 17.12-21.
) Know ye not what these things mean? Tell them, Behold, the King of Babylon is
come to Jerusalem, and has taken the King thereof, and the Princes thereof,
and led them with him to Babylon. And has taken of the Kings seed, and made a
COVENANT with him, and has taken an OATH of him; he has also taken the Mighty
of the Land: that the Kingdom might be base, that it might not lift it self
up, but that by keeping of his COVENANT it might stand. But he rebelled against
him in sending his Ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him Horses and
much People. Shall he prosper? shall he escape that does such things? Or shall
he BREAK THE COVENANT, and be delivered? As I live says the Lord GOD, surely
in the place where the King dwells that made him King, whose OATH he
despised, and whose COVENANT he brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon,
he shall die. Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty Army, and great Company
make for him in the War, by casting up Mounts, and building Forts, to cut off
many Persons. Seeing he despised the OATH, by breaking the COVENANT, (when lo,
he had given his HAND) and has done all these things, he shall not escape.
Therefore thus says the Lord GOD, As I live, surely mine OATH that he has
despised, and my COVENANT that he has broken,, even it will I recompense upon
his own head. And I will spread my Net upon him, and he shall be taken in my
snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with him there, for his
Trespass that he has trespassed against me. And all his Fugitives with all
his Bands shall fall by the Sword, and they that remain shall be scattered
toward all winds: and ye shall know that I the LORD have spoken it. Thus will
no Force, no Confederacy avail for the securing of that person from a deserved
Punishment, who by this sin of Perjury, and Covenant Breaking is become
obnoxious to Divine Justice.

An OATH is a sacred thing; it binds in the Name of God: if it be violated it
provokes God to arm his Justice with vengeance against the Violator. The LORD
will not hold him guiltless that takes his NAME in vain Exo. 20.7
.

Perjury A pejerando fit Vox pejor, quod perjurio nihil pejus.
is a desperate and damnable sin. It proceeds from Atheism, the mother of
Abominations, and produces Rebellion with a thousand impieties. Its a sin which
the Heathens have not only justly condemned, but also severely punished. The
Egyptians and Scythians punished Perjury with Death. The Romans censure of it,
in the Law of the twelve Tables was this, Perjurii Poena divina Exitium, humana
Dedecus Cic. l. 2. de Legibus.
.
Though Perjury have no punishment amongst men but Disgrace, it is punished by
God with Destruction. That which was thus detestable amongst Heathens, should
be much more abominable amongst Christians. However God has declared his Wrath
against it from Heaven, as some remarkable Passages of the Divine Providence do
fully declare, whereof we shall mention two, out of the Turkish History.

The Emperor Albert had made a Truce with the great Turk, and solemnly
ratified the same with an Oath. But Pope Eugenius the fourth sent him a
Dispensation from his Oath, and excited him to renew the War against the
Turk. Thus does the man of sin make void the Law of God. But in the first
battle wherein the Emperor engaged, he was discomfited and slain. Thus he
that with his Sword cut in two the sacred Band of his Oath, had his Perjury
written by his enemies Sword, with his own Blood; whereas had he kept his Oath,
he might have saved his Life. But the Infidels hereupon took occasion to cast
reproach upon Christianity, as a Religion that gave Patronage to Perjury, and
Covenant Breaking, when the most solemn Obligation had been sealed with the
Name of Christ. Thus Covenant Breaking brings the most blessed Religion in the
World into contempt, and makes Christianity the scorn and reproach of Heathens.

Uladislaus, King of Hungary, having for a time managed his War with Amurath
the great Turk, with good success, at length brought him to conditions of
Peace, which were to himself sufficiently advantageous. For upon this Agreement
certain Provinces were to be restored to the Hungarians, which otherwise could
not have been recovered by the sword without the loss of many Lives. But a
Peace being concluded betwixt them, a solemn League and Covenant for the
confirmation thereof, was interchangably sealed with an Oath, taken by both
Parties. But the Pope (whose Holiness was thought sufficient to sanctify the
sinfulness of the vilest Perjury) sent a Letter of Dispensation to his son
Uladislaus, as a Key of his Cabinet, to unlock those Bonds and Fetters
wherewith he was bound hand and foot, from the further prosecution of the War
with the Turks. And to promote the Popes design, the Cardinal of Flor^nce, See
the Hungarian History.
Admiral of the Navy, on the one hand, and Cardinal Julian, the Popes Legate in
Hungary, on the other hand, help to lift him up out of his Honorable Restraint
(the Liberty of War being barred up to him by a League of Peace) into an
infamous Freedom by strong solicitations to the renewal of the War with
Amurath. Hereupon staining the glory of his Crown with the breach of his
Covenant, he assaulted the Turk unawares with a great Army, who yet rallying
his Forces with all the speed and vigor he could, -- Dubiis victoria pennis.
Inter utrumque volat.
gave him Battle. The Victory for a good while together hanging in an equal
Balance, inclined to neither side. But at length the Scales began to turn,
and Victory forsaking the Army of Amurath, seemed now ready to alight upon the
Standard of Uladislaus. Amurath perceiving this, and withal seeing a Crucifix
in a displayed Ensign of the Christians Army advanced against him, plucked the
Writing, wherein the late League was contained, out of his bosom, and with
eyes and hands cast up to Heaven, said, O thou crucified Christ, Behold this is
the LEAGVE which thy Christians made with me, and sealed with a solemn OATH,
swearing by thy Name; and this have they, without cause, this day, violated. If
thou be a GOD, as they say thou art, Revenge the wrong done unto thy Name, and
the injury offered unto me, upon thy perjured People, who though they honor
thee in their Words, do in their Deeds deny thee. Immediately hereupon the
battle turned, and the Turks prevailed mightily against the Christians. The
King himself was slain by the Janissaries, and fell in the midst of his
Enemies, though not so much by their hands as by a stroke of Justice from
heaven. The Christians fled before the Mahumetans, and perish't by a miserable
slaughter, eleven thousand being slain in the place, very few escaping with
their Lives. Thus has the Blood and Lives of many slaughtered Christians given
testimony to the Justice of God triumphing in the punishment of Perjury, and
the violation of Covenants. This is that which (according to the intent of the
wicked counsel of Balaam Rev. 2.14
) engages God himself against his own People.

Xenoph.
Agesilaus general of the Grecian Army returned this answer to Tissaphernes,
Lieutenant to the King of Persi^'s Army, when contrary to his Oath, he had
levied an Army, and denounced War against him; That he gave him no small thanks
for that by his Perjury he had made the Gods angry with the Persians, who he
hoped for his Fidelity would be favorable to the Grecians. And the Event
answered the Omen; for joining Battle he gave the Persians a great overthrow.

Pausanius notes this to be one chief cause why Philip King of Macedon, with
all his Posterity were so quickly destroyed, because (however otherwise
acomplish't with Princely Virtues) he made no account of keeping his Oaths, but
swore and unswore, as might stand best with his Interest. How justly may we
expect that God will root out the Posterity of perjured persons from the Land,
however they may at present flourish in their worldly prosperity!

Though Eccl. 11.2
all things (at present) come alike to all; yea, though he that swears and
violateth his Oath be more successeful then he that fears an Oath, yet there
is a day of account to come, wherein God will bring every work into judgment
Eccl. 12.14
, and then dreadful shall the estate be of forsworn Atheists. Certainly a
sword hangs over the Head of every perjured Person, and all his worldly
greatness shall not shield him from the danger; as over the head of Damocles
in the Palace of Dionysius, a sword was hung by a hair, which when he
perceived, he could take no Pleasure in all the sumptuous Preparations which
the Tyrant had made to give him a momentany taste of his worldly greatness and
felicity. The Lord has said, that Mal. 3.5
he will be a swift witness against the false swearers, and though they say to
God, Depart from us, the LORD has said, I will come near to you, to judgment.
The perjured person shall not be able to keep that Zech. 5.1
flying Roll out of his house, which shall bring in with it that curse of God,
which shall consume his dwelling place. For, Zech. 5.4
I will bring it forth, says the LORD of Hosts, and it shall enter into the
House of the Thief, and into the House of him that swears falsely by my Name:
and it shall remain in the midst of his House, and shall consume it, with the
Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof. All the precious substance of perjured
Persons shall be but as Stubble, when the wrath of the Lord, like Fire, shall
be kindled against them.

Personal sins shall have Personal punishments. But when a sin is become common
and National, justly may we fear some National judgment. How justly may God
spread a thunder-cloud over a whole Land for the punishment of the sin of
falsehood and perjury, in the violation of sacred Oaths and Covenants. Shall
not the LORD have a Controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land, when there
is no TRUTH, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land? When by swearing and
forswearing the Land is polluted, may we not justy fear that the Land shall
mourn, and that every one that dwells therein shall languish Hos. 4.1, 2, 3.
? Will not the Lord hew that people in pieces by the sword, and consume that
City with the Plague, that shall break the sacred band of a solemn Covenant?
Thus says the LORD by Moses to his people Israel, concerning this sin; Lev.
26.25
I will bring a SWORD upon you that shall avenge the QUARREL of my COVENANT:
and when ye are gathered together within your Cities, I will send the
PESTILENCE among you, and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the Enemy.
Thus Perjury and Covenant Breaking brings in War and Destruction upon a Land,
and so must needs be a Prognostic of perilous Times.

And more sad and fearful yet it is, when this sin is twisted with the sin of
Treason and Rebellion, and committed under pretenses of Religion. The soldiers
of Alexander, called (...).
Argyraspides, because by Alexanders gift, they wore Silver Shields (as
Plutarch relates of them) were grand TRAITORS to their GENERAL, to whom they
had bound themselves by many solemn OATHS and PROTESTATIONS, insomuch that
Antigonus, with whom they had treacherously complied against their Prince, the
son of Alexander, and their General, Eumenes, whom they had delivered up
bound into his hands, so perfectly hated them for this their perfidiousnesse,
that he burnt one of their Colonels, and slew the other, and engaged the rest
in such desperate services in foreign Countries, that not one of them
returned alive home. When men under the silver shields of Religious Pretenses,
presume they shall be secure in the guilt of the detestable sins of Perjury,
Treason, and Rebellion, they shall be sure not to escape punishment by the Iron
sword of Justice. But now when such hateful vices as these lift up their heads,
and proudly outbraving all opposition, usurp the Throne of the most Heroic
Virtues, we may safely conclude the days are come, which the Apostle has
foretold us shall be perilous times. For these are those very black brands,
and marks of Infamy wherewith the Apostle has stigmatized those sinners, which
(how Saint-like soever they should appear in their Disguise of formal
godliness) should by their diffusive wickedness make the days Evil, the
Times perilous. For in those Days he has told us men shall be (...) 2 Timothy
3.1-4.
.
Truce Breakers, Traitors, Rebels: such as make no conscience of keeping their
Covenants, but violate the most solemn Obligations, religiously ratified; such
as betray the Persons or Interests of those that have reposed Trust in them,
and to whom they are obliged by solemn Oaths and Protestations of fidelity;
such as are disobedient to their Natural or Political Parents, who rise up in
Rebellion against their lawful Princes and Governors, to whom they have sworn
Alleagiance, or at least made solemn Protestations of subjection and service,
with hazard of their Lives and Estates. Such perfidious Persons make perilous
Times.

A further and fuller Description of such men, we have in the Prophet Hosea, if
we rightly understand the place, for which purpose, I shall produce the
interpretations of some of the most solid, pious, and judicious Divines, who
may deservedly be reckoned amongst the best Expositors. The words of the
Prophet are these; Hos. 10.2 3, 4.
Their Heart is divided: now shall they be found faulty: he shall break down
their Altars: he shall spoil their Images. For now they shall say, We have no
KING, because we feared not the LORD; what then should a King do to us? They
have spoken words SWEARING FALSELY in making a COVENANT: thus Judgment
springs up as Hemlock in the Furrows of the Field. The Interpretation of this
Scripture is given thus;

Their heart is divided, Or (as it is in the Margin) he has divided their
heart (...)
(...)
:] viz. Having taken away the Spirit of Peace and concord from them, he has
given them over to Divisions, Factions, and frequent Murders of Princes, which
will cause the utter ruin of the Kingdom Diodati.
.

For now they shall say, We have no King] Within a very short time God shall
take away their King, etc. This taking away of a King, is a remarkable Evidence
of Gods Wrath Lam. 4.20
, and convincing the same, even to a people obdurate in sin, that would feign
deny Gods hand to be in it Engl. Annot.
. Or, Nullus Rex est nobis] id est, Non Reges nostri nobis; sed nos ipsi
Regibus nostris imperamus, Leges ferimus, exauctoramus, etc Jun. and Tremel.
.
We have no King] that is, we bow not to the commands of our Kings, but we make
our Kings bow to our commands; We by our own Power, make and null Laws at our
own pleasure. And by the following words it appears, they made no more matter
of casting off their Laws, and cutting off their King, then a man would make of
breaking a bubble. For its said ver. 7.
, As for Sama^ia, her King is cut off as the Foam [or, a Bubble Diod. Ital
] upon the Water. Which the Septuagint render thus;

(...).
Samaria has contemptuously cast off her King, as a withered weed upon the Face
of the water. Thus did these wicked wretches cast of all Loyalty in cutting off
their King; and for the further aggravation of their daring crimes, they cast
off all Religion too, in their breaking their OATH of Allegiance to their King,
and their COVENANT of new Obedience to God, as if they resolved by some
desperate Design, to show themselves professed Enemies both to God and Man. For
to this purpose are the following words interpreted;

They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a Covenant.] Swearing
falsely, viz. to God, in promising him Conversion and Service; or to their
King, binding themselves to be faithful to him, etc Diodat.
. The words impott, Omnes perjuri and foedifragi sunt, ac novae Conspirationes
quotidie inter ipsos pullulant Jun. and Trem.
.
They are all of them perjured Persons and Covenant-breakers, and new
conspiracies do daily spring up amongst them. Such are the persons here
described, and such are their Practices. Now what can be expected to follow
hereupon, but Miseries and Calamities to the People of the Land, and at length
the punishment of such perjured Persons? For its said,

Thus Judgment springs up as Hemlock in the Furrows of the Field] i. e.
instead of wholesome judgment, to relieve the oppressed, cruel Oppression
covers the Land, which, as poisonous Hemlock, overgrows the poor oppressed
People, who by the barbarous usages, and merciless cruelties of these insolent
Traitors and Tyrants, are furrowed (as a Field that is plowed) with continual
afflictions Vide Calvinum in loc.
. Or, as others interpret it of their punishments, which they shall at length
procure to themselves by these wicked practices; Gods Judgments shall multiply
like Hemlock, or other poisonous Herbs which grow abundantly in the Fields
Diodati and Engl. Annot.
. Thus they that sow Injustice shall at length reap Judgment. When such
cursed seed as this is cast into a Land, it will not fail to yield a plentiful
Crop of Miseries and Vexations. Hence then we may safely conclude, that evil
Days, perilous Times are at hand, when men make no conscience of Oaths and
Covenants, in Matters of Loyalty and Religion.

The sixth Symptom. Practical Atheism.
When men dare in their words to entitle God, to those wicked works wherein
they deny God. When men presume to prefix the sacred and glorious Name of God
to the most injurious Usurpations and flagitious Enormities under the Sun.
When men pretending to act for the Cause of God, and the good of his precious
people, having by such barbarous and bloody Enterprises, as make the very Earth
to blush under the eye of heaven, accomplished their cursed Designs, shall
dare to charge the actual accomplishment thereof upon the all-glorious God, as
having effected the same by his good hand of Providence. When men having
brought to pass their own wicked devices Psa. 37.7
, by such desperate Acts of Injustice and execrable villainies, as the very
report thereof casts astonishment upon the minds of all men that have not
utterly banished all humanity and fear of God, shall yet say, This is the LORDS
doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes Psa. 118.23
. Bold blasphemers! For what more horrid blasphemy can possibly be imagined,
then to make that God, who is infinitely and essentially holy, and Just, and
good, the Author of such intolerable Insolences, unparalled Impieties, and
superlative sins of these desperately daring spirits? These are certainly the
perilous Times whereof the Apostle has forewarned the people of God. For in
those days he has told us that men, however pretending godliness, shall
indeed be (...) 2 Timothy 3.2
.
Blasphemers.

This was the wonted Practice of that man of sin, the son of Perdition, who
opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God 2 These. 2 3, 4.
, insomuch as it grew to a Proverb, In Nomine Domini omne Malum.
All mischief comes a Gods Name. He dethrones Princes, makes unjust War
against Nations and Kingdoms, persecutes Christians to death with as much
Cruelty as any of the Heathen Emperors, gives dispensations to subjects to
rebel against their Sovereigns, absolving them from their Oaths of
Alleagiance, and all Obligations to Loyalty and Obedience, and all this in the
Name of God, and by the pretended conduct of the Divine Providence. And does
not this 2 These. 2 7
Mystery of Iniquity still work in the Christian world? And must not these high
Provocations of God needs make perilous Times? When men entitle God to the
greatest Irregularities, and most detestable Impieties that ever were acted
amongst men. When men securely act the highest Rebellions, and as securely
proceed in these audacious actings under the pretended Patronage of the Divine
Providence. Was not God infinitely Patient, he would send down Fire from heaven
to consume such Atheists on earth.

How often has the Church of God been put into Blood by those that in their
displayed Banners have borne the Name of God! How often has that sacred Name
IMMANUEL, GOD WITH US, been abused by them that have assembled all their forces
to fight against God! How often have they gloried in the Appearings of the LORD
of Hosts for them, who when they have prosper'd in their audacious attempts,
have dared to bid defiance to the Hosts of the LORD! How vainly have men
boasted that the Prove. 18.10
Name of the LORD has been a strong Tower of defense unto them, when (by
divine permission) they have prosper'd in those enormous actings, which carry
in them a flat Contradiction to all Gods glorious attributes! Thus is the Name
of God fearfully abused by the worst of men. Thus do the Practitioners of the
black Art (a fit name for so dreadful a Work of Darkness) make use of the Name
of God for the raising up the Devil. And do not profane Politicians practice
the same Art? And is not this the way to turn the Earth into a Hell? needs
then must the times be perilous, when such Artists do abound, when such
Atheists prevail and prosper in the world.

Plato, a Heathen Philosopher, so abhorred all Representations of God, the
CHIEFEST GOOD, as the Author or Patron of such irregularities and grand
enormities by men committed, for the satisfaction of their own lusts, as that
he determines it utterly unfit that any such thing should be so much as once
spoken or written in a well ordered Commonwealth, lest it should administer an
occasion to people to entertain any Conceits of God, unworthy of the purity and
goodness of his most holy nature. And for the reason of this his
determination, he gives us this Divine Axiom of undoubted verity; (...) Plato
de Rep. l. 2.
.
God is not the Author of Evil. How may this testimony of Plato make these
impious Politicians, who pretend they have been taught in the School of Christ,
to blush at their impieties were they not as well shameless as Godless) in
charging God foolishly, with those successeful attempts and monstrous
achievements which could never have been brought forth into the World, or have
seen the light, had not the very sinews of Law and Justice been cut asunder
with the sword! How wickedly are such enormities offered to the Peoples kind
embraces, as issuing from the womb of Gods most wise and holy Counsels, and
midwif't into the world by the powerful efficiency of his good hand of
Providence, when they are indeed the Births of their own Policies, and the
proper issues of their own Eccl. 7.29
inventions! That God had a hand in permitting them, we grant; for there is no
evil done without the Permission of the Divine Providence: And that he will
have a hand in Punishing them, they shall at length feel, by their own woeful
experience, who were the Actors of those enormities, which they blasphemously
charge upon God as the Author. God will certainly vindicate the glory of his
holiness, by the severe punishment of such bold Blasphemers, such presumptuous
Atheists. Yea, such fearful Provocations may at length pluck down dreadful
Judgments upon the whole Land. The Times therefore must needs be perilous
when the great God is thus provokt by such fearful blasphemies, and horrid
impieties.

The seventh Symptom. Impiety acted with Impunity.
THe Times are perilous to the People of God, When Ambitious men carry When
those that under pretenses of Religion and Gods glory, seek nothing but the
satisfaction of their own lusts, and those who accomplish their ungodly
designs by the most injurious means, and yet presume to entitle God to their
impious proceedings, do not only escape punishment under these high
Provocations, but also prosper in their works, and flourish in the world. Thus
does God sometimes permit it to be, for the Trial of his peoples Faith and
Patience, the Exercise of their Love, Zeal, and other Graces; as also for a
judicial hardening of such Atheists in their wicked ways, to their just
Destruction. Thus sometimes Mal. 3.15, 16.
those that work wickedness are set up and established, while those that truly
fear the Name of God, are cast down and oppressed. Thus Righteousness does not
only for the present lose its reward, and Iniquity escape with Impunity; but
righteous men are oppressed and contemned, and the wicked are exalted, and
crowned with Dignity and honor, and flourish in the world in Prosperity and
Peace. This is that of which the Wise man complained Eccl. 8.14
, There is a vanity which is done upon the Earth, that there be just men, to
whom it happens according to the work of the wicked; again, there be wicked
men, to whom it happens according to the work of the righteous. But now these
Times must needs be perilous to the People of God; both in respect of their
outward estate in the world, wherein they are subject to the oppression of the
proud, and in danger of Persecution through the insolences of the wicked: and
also in respect of their souls and spiritual condition, wherein they are
obnoxious to many sore Temptations, as to call in question Gods Providence, and
to faint in the ways of Righteousness. Thus was holy Or, Asaphs.
David's Faith staggered, his feet almost slipped, and he was in danger of a
fearful Fall, and began to speak unadvisedly with his lips, while he gave way
to carnal reasonings, and so drew a false Commentary upon the sacred Text of
Gods Providence, darkened by wicked men's prosperity in the world. Truly (says
he Psalm. 73.1, 2, 3.
) God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart. But as for me,
my feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh slipped. For I was envious at
the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. Then he describes the
tranquillity of their State, their Impunity and exemption from trouble,
notwithstanding all the insolences, irregularities, and impieties they were
guilty of. For (says he v. 3-12
) there are no bands in their death: but their strength is firm. they are not
in trouble as other men: neither are they plagued like other men. Therefore
Pride compasses them about as a chain: Violence covers them as a garment.
Their eyes stand out with Fatness: they have more then heart could wish. They
are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning Oppression: they speak loftily. They
set their mouth against the Heavens; and their tongue walks through the
Earth: Therefore his People return hither: and waters of a full cup are wrung
out to them. And they say, how does God know? And is there knowledge in the
most high? Behold these are the ungodly who prosper in the world; they increase
in riches. And how sad a Conclusion did the Psalmist, under this temptation,
draw from these premises. v. 13, 14
Verily, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence.
For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning. Thus do
wicked men prosper in their highest Impieties, as if they were priviledg'd with
a perpetual Impunity. And, as Calvin speaks, Triumphos suos ut plurimum agunt
impii: and quum data opera Dei ultionem provocent, impune videntur illudere dum
illis parcit.
This their Impunity through Gods Forbearance, when they do, as it were set
themselves on purpose to provoke his vengeance, is the ground of their proud
Triumphs, and insolent insultations over his Providence, Patience and Justice.
Now this is a great stumbling block in the way of the godly, while it occasions
in their minds unworthy thoughts of the Divine Providence, and mightily weakens
that Restraint, whereby they are kept from the Commission of such Impieties.
And therefore it is, as he says,

Gravis and noxia Tentatio, ubi non modo tacit cum Deo litigamus, quod res in
ordinem non componat, sed etiam habenas nobis laxamus ad peccandi audaciam, dum
nobis videmur id impune facturi Calvin in Initium, Psalm. 73.
.
A sore and hurtful temptation, not only as it nourishes a secret Prejudice
against the Divine Providence, as suffering things to go out of Order, but also
as it unbridles unruly lusts, and emboldens to walk in forbidden ways, while
it banishes the fear of punishment, and flatters the soul with promises of
security in sin. This then must needs make the Times perilous. Concerning
this therefore does the Prophet expostulate with the Lord, as the cause of many
Calamities to the Land. Righteous art thou O LORD (says he Jer. 12.1-4.
) when I plead with thee: yet let me talk with thee of thy Judgments [Or, as
the Margin reads it, Let me reason the Case with thee concerning thy
judgments:] Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all
they happy that deal very treacherously? Thou have planted them, yea, they
have taken toot: they grow, yea, they bring forth Fruit; thou art near in their
mouth, and far from their reins. But thou, O LORD, know me, thou have seen
me, and tried mine heart toward thee; pull them out like sheep for the
slaughter, and prepare them for the Day of slaughter. How long shall the Land
mourn, and the Herbs of every Field wither, for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein? [q. d. Will thou O Lord for ever suffer these wicked ones, who
are the cause that the whole country is ruined through thy just wrath Diod. in
loc.
?] The Beasts are consumed, and the Birds, [viz. by the drought and Famine
brought upon the whole land for the punishment of the excesses of these wicked
ones, and their Atheistical contempt of the Divine Providence] because they
said, he shall not see our last end. [q. d. We are so firmly rooted in our
places of Power, that notwithstanding the Judgments of God threatened against
us, we shall flourish for ever. True, Engl. Annot. in loc.
this Jeremy tells us what at length will befall us, and that all our present
prosperity shall end in extreme misery: but his words are but wind; he will
never live to see any such matter befall us; we shall sooner see an end of him,
then he any such end of us.] Thus do the worlds proud Potentates, under
pretenses of Piety, securely proceed in their ways of wickedness, secretly
slighting the Lords threatenings, and contemning his Providence, because they
are not presently overtaken with their often deserved punishments. And does not
this Prosperity and Immunity of such profane Politicians, presumptuous
Atheists, speak the times evil and perilous?

But now it pleases God in his most holy and righteous providence, to permit it
thus to be, that wicked men being hereby judicially hardened in their sins,
might more securely pass on and be punished, and so at length be suddenly
swallowed up into an inevitable Destruction. Thus, there is a time wherein one
man rules over another to his own hurt Eccl. 8.9
: For, wickedness shall not deliver those that are given to it Eccl. 8.8.
. Yet, because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil Eccl.
8.11
. But at length God brings the wheel of his Providence over them, and
stretching forth his hand of Power, armed with Justice against them, he
suddenly thrusts them down from the top of their earthly pomp and glory into a
dreadful destruction. This was the resolution which David received of his
difficult question in this case, which so much perplexed his spirit, when he
had sought the Lord in his Sanctuary. When I thought to know this (says he
Psalm. 73.16-20.
) it was too painful for me. Until I went into the SANCTUARY of God, then
understood I their END. Surely thou did set them in slippery places: thou
castedst them down into Destruction. How are they brought into Desolation, as
in a moment they are utterly consumed with terrors. As a dream, when one
awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest thou shall despise their Image. That is,
when thy PROVIDENCE, which seems to sleep during the time of their Impunity,
shall awake to their just punishment, then shall their earthly prosperity, and
all their worldly greatness and glory, which is but an IMAGE of happiness
vanish away, and give place to those afflicting miseries, that everlasting
ig^ominy and contempt, which shall suddenly and irresistibly come upon them. So
likewise does JOB excellently describe the flourishing state of these wicked
men, and fully resolves the Question, and cleares the case of their present
impunity, by setting before us the triumphs of the Divine Justice in their
future Punishment, their final destruction. The Tabernacles of the Robbers
(says he Job 12.6
) prosper, and they that provoke God are secure; into whose hand God brings
abundantly. But, Job 21.7 -- 20
Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are MIGHTY IN POWER? Their seed
is established in their sight with them, and their offspring before their
eyes. Their houses are safe from Fear, neither is the Rod of God upon them.
Their Bull gendreth and fails not, their Cow calveth, and casts not her
Calfe. They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children
dance. They take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ.
They spend their days in Wealth [ and Mirth (...)
] and in a moment go down into the Grave. Therefore they say unto God, Depart
from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the Almighty
that we should serve him? And what profit should we have if we pray unto him?
Lo, their good is not in their hand, the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
How often is the Candle of the wicked put out? And how often comes their
destruction upon them? God distributeth sorrows in his Anger. They are as
stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the storm carries away. God
lays up his Iniquity [or, the punishment of his iniquity See the Marg.
] for his children: he rewards him, and HE SHALL KNOW IT. His eyes shall see
his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty. Now what can
be more pleasant and desirable then the Beginning of these wicked worldlings;
and what can be more dreadful and formidable then their latter End? And
further, says he, Job 24.1
Why, seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know him, not
see his Days? i. e. The time by him appointed for the punishment of the
wicked. v. 2.
Some remove the Landmarks; They violently take away Flocks, and feed thereof.
v. 4.
They turn the needy out of the way: the poor of the earth hide themselves
together. v. 7.
They cause the naked to lodge without clothing, that they have no covering in
the cold. v. 12, 13
Men groan from out of the City, and the soul of the wounded cries out: yet
God lays not Folly to them. They are of those that rebel against the Light;
they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof. v. 22.
He draws also the Mighty with his POWER he rises up and no man is sure of
Life. That is, says Diodati, they subvert and overthrow all public Order, and
lawful Government with their violence. Thus far do the wicked prevail and
prosper. But what follows? v. 23, 24
Though it be given him to be in safety, whereon he rests; yet his eyes [even
the eyes of God] are upon their Ways. They are exalted for a little time, but
are gone and brought low; they are taken out of the way as all other, and cut
off as the tops of the ears of Corn. This may be understood (says a late
Expositor Trap in loc.
) of the like violence, wherewith Tyrants shall be cut off, by which they have
cut off other Mighty and great men: as Thrasibulus, King of the Milesians, by
striking off with his staff certain ears of corn (which began to lift up
their heads above their fellows) and Tarquin, King of the Romans, by doing the
like to certain Poppies in his Garden, signified their minds to have diverse
chief men beheaded: which was accordingly accomplished.

But now when wicked men carry on their wicked Designs, under the specious
pretenses of RELIGION and LIBERTY, and carry out their most enormous
enterprises with IMPUNITY and GOOD SUCCESS, such Times must needs be extremely
perilous. For hereby a wide gap will be opened to many grand impieties, which
will all heighten the provocation of God, to inflict upon such a people his
sorest Judgments. For as those that truly fear God will hereby be much
discouraged in the ways of truth and righteousness, so will the wicked be
much hardened and hearten'd in their sins, and emboldened to proceed in their
Impieties, as the surest path to Prosperity, Greatness, and Honor in the
world. Thus will multitudes unite their strength, with these strong Cords of
wickedness, to pluck down Gods heaviest Judgments upon their own heads, which
may involve all the Inhabitants of such a sinful Nation in Misery, Affliction
and Woe.

Plutarch, in his Morals, has an excellent Discourse upon this Subject, from
which I shall select a few Passages which speak fully to our present Purpose.
It cannot surely either be unpleasant or unprofitable to hear a Heathen
discoursing of the Providence of God in permitting of sins, and delaying for
a time the punishment thereof; and in this discourse to hear corruption
quarrelling with these dispensations; and to see virtue in a fainting fit, and
Vice emboldening it self thereby; and then presently to behold NATURE coming in
with her golden Lamp, and clearing up the Divine Justice in a severe
compensation of this delay, partly by Judgments more seasonably executed in
this life, and partly by eternal Punishments prepared for such sinners in the
world to come. For thus he brings in Patrocles speaking of Gods delay in the
punishment of notorious offenders.

(...).
The slacknesse and delay of the Divine Power in proceeding to the punishment of
wicked men seems to me to be a very sore evil. Plut. (...).
And he gives us the reason of this his Opinion.

(...).
For when the discharge of this debt of the Divine Justice is thus delayed from
day to day, it does more then any thing discourage the hopes, and defect the
spirit of those that suffer wrong, and on the other side, it makes the wicked
that oppress them the more confident and audacious. And again, this is another
evil, (as Olympiacus replies to Patrocles)

(...).
That this slackness of punishment weakens the Belief of the Divine Providence:
It also obscures the rays of Righteousness, and scatters the Fears of
wickedness.

But Plutarch most divinely commends Sobriety in judging of the things of God.
For as one unskilful in the art of Music or War, or Physic (as he
excellently illustrates it) not knowing the grounds and reasons thereof, is not
able to give a right judgment of the actings of those that are expert in these
Arts: so much less fit are we to prescribe a method to the wise Providence of
God for the Punishment of Offenders. And for this purpose he produces Pindar
calling the chief Deity.

(...).
The chief or best Artist: for as much as to him it pertains, as the
Administrator of Justice, to determine when, and how, and how far every wicked
man is to be punished. And for all these his Determinations there are good
Grounds and Reasons well known to his wisdom, though he sees it not meet to
manifest them to his creatures, who by the Law of their Being which they have
received from him, are bound quietly to submit to all his determinations, as
ever founded in infinite Wisdom and Justice. Neither should the Proceedings of
his providence seem strange to us, because the Reason is hid from us. For
(says he) even Humane Laws, the Reason unknown, would seem absurd; yet being
made by Reasonable Creatures we would not presently judge them irrational.
When God therefore delays the Execution of his Judgment upon sinners for the
punishment of their crimes, it is not for fear of Error or Repentance, but to
give us an example of Patience and Meekness, to banish from us Anger and
Impetuousnesse in punishing Offenses and revenging wrongs. Then he makes a
large representation of their torments in Hell, who through Gods forbearance,
have escaped punishment on Earth. Thus we see what sound and solid doctrine is
taught in the School of a Heathen Moralist, concerning those Providence of God
which sometimes puzzle the thoughts of sober and understanding Christians.
Hence also we may take notice that this Impunity of wicked men, notwithstanding
all their Provocations, is a matter of ordinary Occurrence, and universal
Observation.

Moreover such times must needs be perilous, if we consider that Gods
permission of people to proceed in ways of wickedness without punishment, is
the sorest Judgment, and a sad presage of the utter d^struction of such a
sinful people. Ah sinful Nation! (says the LORD concerning Israel, when they
were designed to destruction Isa. 1.4, 8
) a People laden with iniquity, a seed of evil Doers, children that are
corrupters; they have forsaken the LORD, they have provoked the holy One of
Israel unto anger, they have gone away backward. Why should ye be stricken any
more? Ye will revolt more and more: the whole head is sick, and the whole heart
faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the head, there is no soundness in
it, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores; they have not been closed,
neither bound up, neither mollifi'd with ointment. But behold the approaching
destruction of this unpunisht people. Your Country is desolate, your Cities
are burnt with Fire: your Land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it
is desolate, as overthrown by strangers. And the daughter of Zion is left as a
Cottage in a vineyard, as a Lodge in a garden of Cucumbers, as a besieged City.
Thus though justice have leaden feet, and be slow in coming, yet it has iron
hands, to crush the rebellious, and break in pieces a provoking people.

Impunity is a sad sign of God's implacable wrath against a people, that
notwithstanding many warnings, are become stubborn in their sins. Hereby
they are but reserved for some greater Judgment, fitted for a sorer
punishment. God never spoke with a more wrathful voice to the people of Israel,
and to the children of Ephraim, then when he said, Hos. 4.14
I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your Spouses
when they commit Adultery: for themselves are separated with whores, and they
sacrifice with Harlots: therefore the people that does not understand shall
fall, [or, be punished Margin.
.] And again, v. 17.
Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. When God thus permits particular
persons (especially such as are set in high places, and so are the more
Exemplary in their abominations) to proceed without punishment in their sins,
its a fearful presage of some General Judgment to be inflicted upon the whole
Land. Thus it was in the case of Ephraims and Isreal's sin. I know Ephraim
(says the Lord Hos. 5.3, 4, 5.
) and Israel is not hid from me: for now, O Ephraim, thou committest whoredom,
and Israel is defiled. They will not frame their doings to turn unto their God:
for the spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them, and they have not known
the LORD. And the pride of Israel does testify to his face: therefore shall
Israel and Ephraim fall in their Iniquity: Judah also shall fall with them.
When great persons escape punishment from God in the guilt of flagitious
enormities, and fearful Provocations, let the whole Land tremble for fear of
Gods judgments.

The eighth Symptom. Toleration of Errors in Religion.
THe Prediction of perilous Times is When the simplicity of the TRUTH, and
true WORSHIP of God, is out-fac't by the impudency of ERROR, false WORSHIP and
profaneness. When Error shall set up its Throne in the Temple of God (a
Christian Church) and Truth shall be set at the footstool. When false worship
shall lift up its head, and true worship shall hang the Wing. When Profaneness
shall proudly press into the Sanctuary, and humble Piety shall either be
excluded or derided. When the ancient and venerable Truth and true Religion
shall grow out of Credit, and Error, false worship and Profaneness, as a new
upstart clad in a glorious Disguise, and waited on by his insolent Atendants,
on either hand, shall be all in Fashion and favor. When the latter shall be
suffered to brow-beat and justle out the former, in many places of the Land.
When the Vultures shall drive the Doves from their Houses, and the Wolves shall
contend with the Sheep for the Fold, they must needs be perilous Times.

When false Teachers, the Captains of the Train-bands of the Prince of
Darkness, who for the carrying on of this design, transformes himself into an
Angel of Light 2 Cor. 11 14
, shall by their Satanical stratagems, so far prevail against the Kingdom of
Christ, as to carry away Captive many of his Subjects, who in their Baptism
received their Press-money to fight under his Banner, the perilous Times
prophesied of by the Apostle are come See 2 Timothy 3. v. 1. with v. 6
.

Doubtless the Times are perilous when Saints shall be rejected as sinners,
and Seducers shall be received as Saints, though they daily grow worse and
worse, deceiving and being deceived 2 Timothy 3.13
. When Religion shall be derided as superstition, and humane inventions shall
be obtruded upon seduced Christians as the Ordinances of Christ. When the proud
Philistines shall defy the Army of the Israelites, the Hosts of the Living
God, and Saul, with his men of War, shall stand and look on; if David, or
rather the son of David come not to succor us, we must needs be in a
dangerous condition. When Dagon is brought into the Temple of God, and set
above the Ark; when Jeroboams Calves have more Worshippers and Followers then
the God of Israel; when Christ in his Ministers is set at naught by Herod and
his men of War; When true Christianity is crucifi^d betwixt two thieves, Er^or
on the one hand, and Profanesse on the other, do not the People of God know and
feel that these are evil and perilous Times?

When Idolatry shall justle out true Christianity, the Times must needs be
perilous. To set up I^ols in the Temple of God, what is it but the Abomination
which makes desolate? Now error and Heresy is a kind of spiritual Idolatry.

Multi haeretici cum Paganis alios and alios Deos ipsi sibi finxerunt, alios
and alios Deos sibi ipsi fecerunt, and eos etiamsi non in Templis, tamen, quod
est pejus, in suo cord posuerunt, and falsorum ridendorumque simulacrorum
Templa ipsi facti sunt Aug. in Enarrat, Psalm. 80.
.
Many Heretics (says Augustine) as well as Pagans, have themselves feigned
and formed many Gods unto themseves, and though they have not set them up in
Temples, yet which is worse, they have enshrined them in their own hearts, and
so they themselves have become the Temples of false and foolish Images. Now
when Christians that have been consecrated by Baptism to be Temples of the
Holy Ghost, shall turn themselves into Temples of such fantastic Idols, of
their own Invention, this must needs be a sin highly provoking the Lord to
Jealousy, and so speak the Times perilous.

But for the further clearing up of this Symptom, I shall do these two things;
viz.

1. Lay down the Characters of Erroneous Persons. 2. Show the Cases which, upon
this Account, constitute perilous Times.
The Characters of Erroneous Persons.
ERroneous persons, when they appear, do (as Comets) portend great Calamities
to the Church of God, the Kingdom of Christ. And if we search the Prophecies
of the New Testament, we shall find that the arising and abounding of false
Teachers, Heretics and Seducers is expressly foretold to be in the last days,
when the Apostle has told us perilous Times shall come. False-Fires are not
wont to appear till the approach of Night: and these misguiding New-lights
shall appear in the evening of the world; and great is the danger of those that
are misled by them. Our Savior in his discourse of the end of the world, and
Prophecy of those things which should come to pass in the last days,
forewarns us of such deceivers. Then (says he Mat. 24.23, 24, 25.
) if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there: believe it not.
For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the
very Elect. Behold I have told you before. God, before his wheat is gathered
into his Garner, before his Church on Earth is translated into Heaven, before
gracious Saints are taken up into his glorious Kingdom, will suffer the winds
of false Doctrines to blow thereupon, that so graceless ones, who are as Psalm.
1.4.
Chaff, carried about with every wind of Doctrine Ephesians. 4.14
, may be separated from the Wheat, the truly gracious. And therefore, says the
Apostle 1 Cor. 11 19
, There must be also Heresy, [or Sects Margin.
] among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you. And
says the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2
There were false prophets also among the People, even as there shall be false
Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying
the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And
many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of Truth
shall be evil spoken of. And for the time of their appearing, this he intimates
to us in what he further speaks of them afterward; 2 Pet. 3.3
Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last Days scoffers, walking
after their own lusts. This is fully confirmed by what the Apostle Paul speaks
of them in his Premonition given to Timothy, in both his Epistles to him
directed. In the former, says he, 1 Timothy 4.1 2
Now the spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter Times some shall depart
from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and Doctrines of Devils:
speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience sear^d with a hot iron.
And in the latter, says he, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 6, 7.
This know also that in the last Days perilous times shall come. For men
shall be lovers of their own selves, etc. Of this sort are they which creep
into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse
lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. So
likewise does the Apostle John tell us, that the coming of many Antichrists
(false Teachers opposing the Doctrine of Christ contained in the Gospel) does
manifestly discover that it is the last time 1 John 2.18
. And says the Apostle Jude, Jude v. 17, 18, 19.
Beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of the
Lord Jesus Christ: How that they told you there should be Mockers in the Last
time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts. These be they who separate
themselves, sensual, having not the spirit, how much soever they may pretend
thereunto. Thus we see its undenyably manifest from the Holy Scriptures, that
False Teachers, Sectaries and Seducers shall abound in the Church of God in the
last days, which the Apostle has told us shall be perilous Times. Whence we
may certainly conclude that whenever these Locusts and Caterpillars shall
abound amongst us, then are the perilous times spoken of come upon us. And
that we may the more infallibly know when those very Sectaries and Seducers are
come, which are spoken of in these Prophecies, there are certain Marks and
Characters stamped upon them by the Holy Ghost, whereby they may be easily and
infallibly known to us. So the Apostle to his Prediction of Perilous times,
subjoyns a large Description of those Erroneous Persons, who by their
pernicious Practices, should make the times so perilous 2 Timothy 3.1-5.
. He describes them by very many Characters (which we have already viewed) to
which might many more be added from several other places of Scripture, wherein
they are in their proper Colors represented to us. But it will be sufficient,
as to our present purpose, to produce a few of the principal of them, to which
many of the rest may easily be referred. These seducing spirits then, which
raise Storms in the State, and cause Confusions in the Church, may be known by
these distinguishing Marks and Characters, which follow.

The first Mark. Pride and Self-conceitednesse.
FAlse-Teachers are very proud and highly The Apostle Paul having recommended
to Timothy the preaching and pressing of the sound and Orthodox Doctrines of
the Gospel, subjoynes this premonitory description of False Teachers.

(...) Ab (...) and (...), q. super re aliqua insistens eique attento inhaerens
animo.
.
If any man ( says he 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5.
) [be Heterodox, or] teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even
the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to
Godliness, [or, come not to the sound preaching of the Gospel:] He is PROUD [
or puffed up, sc. with an opinion of his own knowledge, yet] KNOWING NOTHING
[or, having no right understanding, no settled and solid knowledge of any thing]
but doting [ or, sick] about questions and strifes of words, whereof comes
Envy, Strife, Railings, Evil surmisings, Perverse disputings [chafing and
galling one another with unprofitable Contentions] of men of corrupt Minds,
and DESTITUTE OF THE [knowledge of the] TRUTH. Thus were these False-teachers
as extremely ignorant, as they were unsufferably Proud. So in the Apostles
Prophetic Premonition, wherein he represents them, as the Troublers of their
Times, they are styled (...).
Boasters, Proud, High-minded. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3.


These are the Bubbles which we may see passing too and fro, in Pride and
Pomp, upon the face of the Waters, when some Tempest in the State has
troubled the waters of the Sanctuary. They appear beautiful and glo^ious in the
eyes of the simple, who are deceived with their Colors, when indeed there is
nothing at all in them but wind and emptynesse. What glorious vaunts of
knowledge have some Vile Sects made, who have been no better then the
Glowwormes of the Night. Certain Sectaries in Aragon called themselves the
Illuminati.
Illuminated, as if they only had been in Light, and all the world besides in
Darkness. Foolish People! that having a glimpse of the Sun, thought it shone
upon none in the world but themselves. The Nicholaitans and Valentinians called
themselves GNOSTICS (a name signifying Knowledge) as conceiting all others
besides themselves, to be grossly ignorant of the great Mysteries of Religion.
They might (perhaps) more fitly have been styled Luciferians (for their Pride)
as a pestilent Sect that arose up after them, were called upon another account.
The first Founders of any Schismatical Society, built upon some Heretical
Opinion, have ever been great pretenders to singular eminency of knowledge.

Omnibus una Intentio Haereticis semper fuit, captare Gloriam de singularitate
scientiae Bern. in Cant. Ser. 65.
.
All the Heretics that have ever been, (says holy Bernard) have had this one
Project in the chase of glory to make show of singularity of Knowledge. The
proud Heretic Eunomius, boasted that he was able with his understanding to
fathom the Depths of Gods Divinity, and to search into his hidden Glory. But
the wise Father Saint Basil, to convince him of his Ignorance, and the folly of
his Arrogance, in thinking to measure the Ocean with his Cockle-shell, puzzled
him with one and twenty Questions about the Body of an Ant Epist. 168 ad Eunom.
. For this Pride of Knowledge, notwithstanding gross ignorance, St. Ambrose
compares Heretics to an Owl.

Noctua mirum in modum illuminatur obscuritate, luce caecatur. Istud Animal
Haereticorum Figura est Ambr. Sermon. 43.
.
The Owl (says he) is after a mavelous manner inlighten'd in Darkness, and
blinded with Light. This Creature is a Figure of Heretics. It Is true, as to
their Pretenses. But they pretend they see, when they are blind; and boast of
their Light, when they are buried in Darkness.

A Proud Heart is a Seed-plot of all Errors. These Weeds grow apace in a rank
soil. They are proud spirits which trample upon Pearls of Truth, which the
children of God wear, as Jewels in their bosoms. Pride and Confidence are two
principal Ingredients of a Heretic. False Doctrines are, in Scripture,
compared to Leaven, which is of a swelling and rising Nature. Mat. 16.6, 12
Mark 8.15 Luke 12.1.
The lightest ears of corn lift up their heads the highest, when those that
are weightiest, being full of good grain, hang down their Heads. The light
Corn braves it above the water, while the massy Gold sinks down to the
bottom. Truth makes a solid Judgment and an humble Heart, when Error makes a
vain Mind, and a proud Spirit.

The second Mark. Self-separation from the true Church.
SEctaries and Seducers are wont to separate They shun Communion with the
Members of the true Church, for fear of Pollution, and separate themselves (as
they pretend) into purer communion. Thus the Pharisees, Gnostics, Adamites,
the filthiest Sects, have done. These indeed made a Profession of more Purity
then ordinary, but their Practices were well known to be full of Pollution. The
Pharisees made a fair show outwardly, but within (by our Saviors own
Testimony Mat. 23.25 Luke 11.39
) they were full or all manner of Filthiness and Iniquity. Whence he fitly
compares them to Mat. 23.27, 28.
whited Sepulchers, which are Beautiful and splendid without, but full of
Corruption, and Uncleanness within. The Gnostics who pretended to be wholely
taken up with sublime Speculations, did yet so far plunge themselves into the
vilest Impurities, and filthiest Abominations, that the Name of Borborites
(taken from Mire and Mud (...), Coenum.
) was fitly set upon them, as a Brand of Infamy, for the abhorred loathsomeness
of their impure Conversations Aug. de Haeres. c. 6.
. Thus while they would seem to have their heads in Heaven, their feet stuck
fast in the Mire and Clay of a filthy life: And while they would be thought to
have escaped the pollutions of the World through the KNOWLEDGE of the Lord
Jesus, and the Mysteries of the Gospel, they returned with the dog to his own
vomit, and as (...).
The Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire 2 Pet. 2.20, 22.
. Not long after the Gnostics, sprung up that filthy Sect of the Adamites, who
under that Name clothed their Nakedness with the Pretenses of the same
Purity, that Adam had in his state of Innocence. But their very Principles led
to Uncleanness, and their Practices were full of Pollution. For they held it
unlawful for men or women to wear any clothes in their Assemblies for worship,
as a thing very unsuitable to the Nature and intent of their meetings, which
were to be esteemed the only Paradise on Earth, wherein they were to enjoy the
Pleasures of eternal Life, and not to expect them in Heaven. For as God brought
Adam into his Paradise, so should Christians enter into theirs, naked, casting
away their Clothes, as the Badges of their sin and shame, from which they were
perfectly freed (which is both the Opinion and Practice of many Quakers at this
day) being perfectly pure and holy. In their Night-Assemblies (for that time
they chose, as indeed fittest for their works of darkness) after some
extravagant Discourses of Religion (for they rejected Prayer as needless,
seeing God knows our wants without our Advertisement) they put out their
Lights, and so committed all manner of Uncleanness in their Promiscuous
Copulations. How fitly does the Apostles Character and description of the
unbelieving Gentiles pertain unto them! Who Ephesians. 4.18, 19.
having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the Blindness of their
heart. And being past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness,
to work all uncleanness with greediness. So a Pestilent Sect (as Sands
relates it) sprang up not long since in Arag^n (whose Founders were a crew of
their hypocritical Priests) who at the first professing a kind of Angelical
Purity, fell suddenly to the very contrary point of justifying Bestiality.

The Scripture speaks of such self-separating Sectaries as these are, both in
the Old Testament and the New, as a sort of men, notwithstanding their glorious
Pretenses of holiness and spirituality, justly odious in the sight of God.
Concerning such says the Lord, by the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 65.2-5
I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious People, which walks
in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts: a People that provokes
me to anger continually to my Face, that sacrifices in gardens, and burns
incense upon Altars of brick: which remain among the Graves, and lodge in the
Monuments, which eat swines flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their
Vessels: which say, stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I AM HOLIER
THEN THOU: These are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the day. Thus
these profane Idolaters and wicked Necromancers, would needs (under pretense of
greater Holiness) separate themselves from all others, though members of the
true Church, lest by Communion with them, they should contract Pollution to
themselves. So the Joh. 4.9
Samaritans, for the same Reason, refused to hold so much as any Civil
Correspondency with the Jews, though they were, (however corrupt) the only
People at that time whereof consisted that Church of God, wherein only men
might, upon any Scripture-ground, expect salvation Joh. 4.22
. Of such also does the Apostle Jude speak, when warning the believing Hebrews
of Mock rs that should come in the last Time, who should walk after their own
ungodly Lusts, he says, These be they who SEPARATE themselves, sensual, having
not the Spirit. Vile hypocrites! who though they walked after the Lusts of the
Flesh, should thus separate themselves from the society of the Saints,
pretending (doubtless) therein to be led by the Spirit. Thus we see
self-separation from the true Church is a Scripture Character of
false-Teachers, and Seducers.

Amongst many such separations, that of the Donatists is, as to our present
purpose, very considerable. The Father of this Sect was Donatus, a Numidian,
who merely out of Envy and Spite, because Cecilian was preferred before him to
the Bishopric of Carthage, and his devilish Design which he conceived
hereupon, for the extirpation of him and all the Bishops that ordained him, by
a false accusation, fell to the ground, in Contempt of all their Churches,
built up his Wall of Separation. And though by his Pride, Envy, Lying, and
Malice he had printed so many stains upon his own soul, yet had he the
impudence to affirm, that could be no true Church which was not altogether
without spot or blemish, and that such was the Church by him founded and
fathered, and no other in the world. And yet they had no better Marks of their
unstained Purity, then these following Articles of their Faith, viz. LIBERTY OF
CONSCIENCE; that no man must be pressed to the Practice of piety, but every man
left to live as he list: TOLERATION OF ERRORS; that the Magistrate might
punish no man for his Opinion, though never so wicked in Matters of Religion:
REBAPTIZATION OF BELIEVERS; that Believers, Baptized in their Infancy ought to
be rebaptiz'd, because Infant Baptism was a Nullity: KILLING NO MURDER; that
though the Magistrate might not by virtue of his Office punish any man for his
Religion or conscience, yet they themselves, being thereto moved by the Spirit,
might lawfully, and without any scruple, kill any man that was not of the
Household of Faith (or rather of the Synagogue of Satan) if they had him at an
advantage. But may we not say of them (and receive our warrant from our blessed
Savior) Joh. 8.44.
Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will do: He
was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the TRUTH, because there is
NO TRUTH in him. When he speaks a LIE, he speaks of his own: For he is a
LIAR, and the Father of it.

Now after a while this Church of the Donatists was divided in it self, and so
one separation still springing from another, it at length expired in a fruitful
Dissolution. For, as Vipers are said to have a bloody Birth by the Death of the
Dam, thus issued from the Bleeding Bowels of this divided Church, many petty
Congregations, and yet all of them in some of the forementioned Features and
Lineaments, somewhat resembling both Father and Mother. Thus was the
Schismatical Confederacy, which at first rent it self from the true Church,
minc't and mangled, as Augustine speaks, In minutula Frustula.
Into small shreds of Society, amongst whom there was nothing retained, but a
few rags of Religion, which were not sufficient to hide their Nakedness,
either from the eyes of God or men. The chief of these Sub-Sects was that of
the Circumcellions, so called from their Cells and Cottages, in which they
lived separated from all Society, that they might have the more freedom for
the use of certain Austerities (as they pretended) for self-mortification. But
the truth is they rather lurkt in them as Lions in their Dens, to take the
better advantage for the exercise of their cruelty in the murder of Innocents.
For without touch of humanity these bloody Monsters would barbarously murder
all they met with, that were not of their Religion, whereby they became more
dangerous then Highway Robbers, and more detestable then the vilest of men, as
being Enemies to mankind. And thus at length did that separated Church, which
gloried in its singular sanctity, produce a Company of common Cutthroats. And
by all this we see that Seducers are justly Stigmatized with this brand of
SEPARATISTS.

They are such as have a high Opinion of themselves, though never so bad, and a
low Opinion of others, though never so good; and so they separate themselves
from the Saints, as being too good for their Society. But we know that God
himself vouchsafes to be present in the Assemblies of his Saints Psalm. 89.7
Mat. 18.20
. These therefore are by the Apostle fitly styled, (...).
Lovers of themselves, but despisers of those that are good 2 Timothy 3 2, 3.
. And therefore however they may make a glorious Profession of godliness, if we
duly consider their Properties and Practices, they are such as carry a flat
contradiction to that golden Rule of the Gospel; Phil. 2.3
Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind,
let each esteem other better then themselves.

It Is true, some of them, it may be, are of a Life unblamable; But, Haeresis
docta est mentiri, non Lingua tantum sed Vita: si Fidem interrogas, nihil
Christianius; si Conversationem, nihil irreprehensibilius: and quae loquitur,
Factis probat Bern. Ser. 65. in Cant.
.
Heresy is not to learn the Art of Lying, which it can perform, not with the
lips only, but with the Life also: If you demand an account of their Faith,
there is nothing more Christian; if you make enquiry of their Conversation, its
most unblamable; and look what they affirm in their words, they will by their
works confirm it. But the more holy they are in appearance, the more hurtful.
An unblamable life is the fittest Field for Satan to set his snares in to take
deceived souls. The Serpent has a beautiful skin, but a deadly sting. A
beautiful Harlot shall have the most Followers. Beautiful and glorious
Appearances often veil the foulest and filthiest Abominations. The great WHORE
comes forth in a glorious Dress; and gives her Lovers Poison to drink in a
golden Cup. Behold her as she is represented to us in the Celestial Mirror of
the REVELATION. And (says John the Divine Rev. 17.4
) the woman was aray'd in Purple, and Scarlet-colour, and decked with gold, and
precious stone, and Pearls, having a golden Cup in her hand, full of
Abominations and filthiness of her Fornication. The Spouse of Christ is not
more glorious in her Apparel and Ornaments, then this Mother of Abominations. A
Scarlet Robe may cover an ulcerous Body. The Plague of Errors may be upon a
man that wears cloth of Gold in his Conversation. Satan never shows himself so
much a Devil, as when he appears like an Angel of Light. And if Satan himself
is thus transformed into an Angel of Light, it is no great thing if his
Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of righteousness, whose end
shall be according to their works 2 Cor. 11 14, 15.
.

The third Mark: Railing and Reviling.
SEducers are wont with enticing words to deceive weak and unstable souls, but
to load them that are sound and steadfast in the Faith, with vile Invectives,
and railing Accusations. They can hide both Honey and Gall under their tongue:
they drop honey with their words, when they would deceive; and mix their
speeches with Gall, when they mean to revile. Their soft and silken words are
snares to take the simple; their sharp and cruel speeches are swords to slay
the Innocent. Yet it is less danger to be wounded by their sharpest
reproaches, then to be won by their sugared speeches. For while their Reproaches
cast upon the righteous, do (as Arrows shot against a wall of Adamant) recoile
upon themselves, their Deceivings prove (as a Potion of deadly poison) the
destruction of others; so that their words are, in effect, swords to slay,
those whom they are snares to take. So that David's description of his deceitful
enemy Ps. 55.21
, is fitly applyable to them: The words of their mouth are smoother then
Butter, but war is in their heart: their words are softer then Oil, yet are
they drawn swords. The Apostle Paul giving the Romans a Caution concerning
them, subjoyns thereunto a description of them by this very property and
Practice. Now I beseech you, (says he Romans 16 17, 18.
) Brethren, Mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. For they that are such, serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly, (...).

Et per dulces Sermones and Benedictiones seducunt corda innocentium Vet.
Interp.
.

Et per Blandiloquentiam and Assentationem corda hominum minime malorum
seducunt Beza.
.


And by good words and fair speeches, [or, by plausible and pious Expressions]
deceive [seduce, or lead out of the way, as the Highway Robber does the unwary
Traveller, that follows him without suspicion of any harme] the heart of the
simple [of poor innocent and harmless People.] Thus the silly Birds, deceived
with the Fowlers Call, are taken in his Net. There Is ever a deadly hook under
the dainty Baits, which these subtle Seducers (expert in the Art of Angling
for souls) cast amongst these poor, simple, ignorant people. They gild over
their blackest and bitterest Pills (their vilest soul-destroying Errors) with
glorious pretenses, or roll them in Sugar (of soft and sweet expressions) that
their poor deluded patients may be tempted to take them to their own
Destruction. The Apostle warnes the believing Hebrews of them, telling them the
intent of these their fine speeches, and subtle insinuations, says he, (...).
With feigned words [with plastered phrases] will they make Merchandise of you
2 Pet. 2.3
. Their language is a kind of spiritual Enchantment, whereby many souls are
Gal. 3.1.
bewitched into a belief of their erroneous opinions, insomuch as they give an
unquestioned entertainment to their damnable Doctrines, and give themselves up
to be guided by them in their pernicious ways. Thus do Seducers draw Disciples
after them, whom by the Music of a smooth tongue, they make to dance all the
changes of their wild opinions.

But we have yet beheld but one side of the Image of their Words or Discourse,
which as it looks one way, does (as we have seen) appear beautiful as an
Angel, but if we consider it on the other side, it presents the foulest Fiend.
These that bespeak their followers with these fair and flattering speeches,
when they speak of those that upon just and holy grounds oppose their evil and
ungodly ways, are wont to use the most railing and reproachful language that
their lewd imaginations can invent. If you cannot afford them your favorable
opinion, and account them the children of God, what shall you presently hear
from them, but Thou child of the Devil! But (alas) how justly may this be
retorted upon themselves! Railing is surely the Language of Hell (not the
Dialect of Heaven) and it does but too sadly discover them that use it
(whatever they profess or pretend) to be the children of the Devil.

Now this Railing-language is a Scripture-Character of those Seducers, of whose
coming in the last times, the Apostles have warned us by the Spirit of
Prophecy. For thus are they described to us; Compare 2 Pet. 2.10, 11, 12. with
Jude v. 8, 9, 10.
Presumptuous are they, and self-willed, they slight Government and despise
Dominion, and (...).

Non horrent Dignitates convitiis incessere Beza.
.


They are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities [they tremble not to cast
slanderous reproaches upon worthy and honorable Persons.] Whereas Angels,
which are greater in Power and Might, bring not (...).
a RAILING ACCUSATION against them before the Lord. For, Michael, the
Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he disputed about the Body of Moses,

(...).

Non ausus est ei impingere notam maledicti Beza.
.


Durst not bring against him a railing Accusation [or, he was not so bold as to
JUDGE and CURSE him] but said, The Lord rebuke thee. But these as Natural (...).
Bruit-Beasts [being as well brutish in their Behaviors, as sottish in their
Opinions, unreasonable in their Reasonings and Revilings] made to be taken and
destroyed (...).
, speak evil of the things that they understand not [they wickedly blaspheme
those Mysteries of Religion which are above their apprehension] and shall
utterly perish in their own Corruption. Thus the speaking evil of Dignities,
the Reviling and Railing upon Magistrates and Ministers, is made a certain
Character of the vilest sort of Seducers. These because they cannot spit their
poison in the Face of God himself, spit it in the faces of those, who in
respect of their office, do bear his Image. Their spite and malice principally
vents it self against the Ministers of the Gospel, concerning whom Christ has
said, Luke 10.16
He that hears you hears me; and he that despises you, despises me, and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me. And surely was Christ himself
upon earth, such men would not stick to rail upon him and revile him. We shall
the more easily believe it, if we call to mind the carriage of the Sect of the
Pharisees. These were a people that used many Austerities, and pretended to
more then ordinary Purity, and yet there is no man that has read the Gospel,
but knows how fearfully they abused the Son of God, with their scornful
Railings and Reproaches. Yea, these vile wretches did not fear to screw up
their malicious Railings and Revilings of CHRIST into the highest and most
hellish Blasphemies. They wickedly went about to represent the Son of God,
the SAVIOR of the world, as a SORCERER, and one that dealt with the Devil.
They did not stick to say, he wrought those Miracles by the power of the Devil
Mat. 9.34 and 12.24
, which were the wonderful works of God. Yea, they feared not to call him
DEVIL, and Mat. 10.25. with 9.34.
Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils, who was and is GOD blessed for evermore.
Now, says our Savior Mat. 10.24, 25.
, The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord. It is
enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the servant as his Lord:
if they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how much more shall they
call them of his household. It Is our Honor, who are the Ministers of the
Gospel, that the Lord has made us not only his Servants, but the 1 Cor. 4.1
Stewards of his House. Seeing then the Master of the House has undergone such
reproaches from the vilest of men, let not us think it strange if we be reviled
and railed upon by men of the like spirit, with the most Opprobrious Names of
Dog and Devil.

Now what is the design of these Seducers herein, but the bringing the Ministry
of the Gospel into contempt, that having by this means fastened many
Prejudices in the minds of the People against the Preachers of the Gospel,
they might the more easily draw them off from their Attendance upon the sound
Doctrine by them delivered to the embracement of their own Erroneous Opinions.
For, as Saint Augustine well observes, Heretici, cum ipsam Divinae Scripturae
Veritatem, quae ubique disfusa Christi Ecclesia commendatur, criminari and
obscurare non possunt, homines, per quos praedicatur, adducunt in odium, de
quibus and fingere quicquid in mentem venerit, possunt Aug. Ep. 137. ad
Hipponen.
.
Heretics, when they can neither stain nor cloud the Sun of SCRIPTURE-TRUTH,
which spreads its Beams throughout the Church of Christ, and is accounted its
glory, endeavor by disgraces to darken the Stars, by Reproaches to cast an
Odium upon them by whom this Truth is preached; For of them they can freely
speak whatsoever their mind ( or malice) can invent.

And this their Malice against the Ministers of the Gospel, they manifest by
persecuting them, as Cain; by Cursing them, with Balaam; by opposing and
contradicting them, by exalting themselves into their sacred Office, as Corah.
And therefore says the Apostle Jude, Jude, v. 11
Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after
the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the Gainsaying of Core. They
are ver. 13.
raging Waves of the Sea, foming out their own shame. For what are these vile
reproaches which issue from their mouths, but the foam of that cruel Rage which
boyleth in their hearts? They utter many hard speeches against the children of
God, and especially against the Ministers of the Gospel, that oppose their
damnable Doctrines, and soul-destroying opinions. They are Murmurers and
Complainers of good Governors who restrain them, and Flatterers and Admirers
of wicked leaders, who countenance and encourage them. But their doom has
been declared long ago, as appears by that most ancient Prophecy, which the
Apostle Jude mentions and applies to this very sort of Seducers. For, Enoch
(says he Jude, v. 14, 15, 16.
) the seventh from Adam prophesied of these, saying, Behold the Lord comes
with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they
have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners
have spoked against him. These are Murmurers, Complainers, walking after their
own lusts, and their mouth speaks great swelling words, having men's Persons
in Admiration because of advantage.

These snarling Sectaries are still quarrelling at the Doctrines of the Gospel,
delivered by the Ministers of Christ, and crying up the wild Notions of their
own Brain in opposition thereunto. For as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses,
so (says the Apostle Paul 2 Timothy 3.8
) do these also resist the TRUTH; men of corrupt minds, reprobate [or of no
judgment Marg. Gr (...).
] concerning the Faith. Herein they are but the Devils Agents sent forth to
oppose Christ's Ambassadors. For, Diabolos Haereticos movet ut sub vocabulo
Christiano, Doctrinae resisterent Christianae Aug. de civitate Dei, l. 18. c.
51.
.
Heretics by the Instigation of the Devil, do under the Name of Christians
oppose the Name of Christ.

We read in the Book of Job chapter 1. v. 6.
, that when the Sons of God came to present themselves before the LORD, Satan
came also among them. So when the children of God come to present themselves
before the Lord, in the Assemblies of his Saints, to seek his Face in the
Beauties of holiness, and to be instructed in his will revealed in his word,
these Agents of Satan will likewise sometimes come amongst them, but it is only
with this devilish Design, to make some opposition to the Ministers of the
word, and to subvert the Faith of the Hearers, by some contradiction of the
Doctrines of the Gospel by them delivered. 'Twas not then without cause that
Saint Cyprian makes this complaint of them; Ad nos saepe studio magis
contradicendi, quam vera discendi veniunt, and clamosis vocibus personantes
malunt sua impudenter ingerere, quam nostra patienter audi^e Cyp. contra Demet.
.
They often resort to us, but it is rather with a design to contradict, then a
desire to learn the Truth which is taught them; and then setting up their
Note, they make a fearful bauling, and will needs impudently ur^e their own
Opinions, rather then patiently h^are our Instructions.

This Spirit of Contradiction, had they but once power in their Hands, would
soon be turned into the Sword of Persecution. Yea, this very Heb. 12.3
Contradiction of sinners is one kind and degree of the Persecution of the
Saints. And therefore says Augustine, Eos teneamus Interfectores Prophetarum,
quos contradictores invenerimus Linguis Prophetarum Aug. l. 2. contra. lit.
Petil. c. 14.
.
Let us hold them to be the Persecutors that kill the Prophets, whom we find to
be the persons that contradict their Prophecies.

These railing Apostates, these slandering Seducers are by the Apostle called
(...) 2 Timothy 3.3
.
DEVILS, being indeed like to the^^ great Master, in that they are
FALS^-ACCUSERS of the Brethren the children of God. Doubtless Railing and
Reviling is not the Language of the Spirit of God, by which they pretend to
speak. Alas they know not what spirit they are of. But we know, it is not the
property of Sheep to bark and bite, but of Phil. 3.2.
Dogs and Act. 20.29
Wolves: And by the names of these hurtful and cruel creatures we find
Seducers to be set forth in the Holy Scriptures. When ever therefore in
discourses of the Things of Heaven, we hear from any man this Language of
Hell, we may well say, As Mat. 26.73.
Surely thou also art one of them; for thy speech bewrays thee.

There are two other Characters by which the Holy Ghost does in a special
manner describe these Seducers, which I shall but briefly represent, partly
because I have already touched upon them, and partly because they arise from
latent Properties, by which we cannot so easily discern them.

The fourth and fifth Mark. Covetousness and Uncleanness.
SEducers, however pretending Piety and They so manage the matters of Religion
as 1 Timothy 6.5
supposing that gain is godliness. They 2 Pet. 2.3.
through COVETOUSNES, with feigned words, make Merchandise of poor seduced
People. They cry out against Covetousness in others, that themselves may pass
more unsuspected in the guilt of this secret sin, this spiritual Col. 3.5.
Idolatry. Thus while they condemn others for Covetousness, themselves are
condemned by their own Conscience. And therefore was not the conscience of
these men cauteriz'd, they would find such Tumults within themselves, as would
make them take little delight in troubling others. But these are they who 1 Timothy 4.2
speak lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences seared with a hot Iron.
These are indeed the Troublers of Israel, and how fairly soever they carry it,
the golden Wedge may be found in their Tents. A heart they have exercised with
covetous Practices 2 Pet. 2.14
. This is the Testimony of the Searcher of Hearts, of Truth it self, against
which there can be no exception. These are they whom we have but now, by
Scripture-Evidences, convicted of cursing the Israel of God, who Jude 11.
run greedily after the Error of Balaam for a REWARD. They are indeed, as they
are styled by the Apostle, (...) 2 Timothy 3.2
,
LOVERS OF SILVER, though Boasters of Saintship; and admirers of Gold, more
then followers of Godliness. However they falsely grave upon their Church,
HOLINESS TO THE LORD, they can truly write upon their Coin, GOD WITH US.

Seducers are such also as while they boast of spiritual Liberty, are in
Bondage to fleshly lusts. Spiritual Pollution is usually accompanied with
corporal Defilement. These filthy Dreamers do defile the Flesh Jude 8.
. They are by the Apostle called, (...) 2 Timothy 3.3
,
INCONTINENT, (perhaps) for their being carried headlong to Acts of
Uncleanness, by their unbridel'd (...) libidinosum denot at apud Xenoph.
Lusts. For these are they 2 Pet. 2.10
who walk after the Flesh in the Lust of UNCLEANNES, Jude 4.
turning the grace of God into LASCIVIOUSNES. Often while they have Holiness in
their mouth, they have an Adulteress in their Eye. So says the Apostle, 2
Pet. 2.14
They have Eyes full of Adultery [or, So the Marg. Gr. (...).
an Adulteresse] and that cannot cease from sin. Yea, many Seducers are no
better then Jude v. 7.
Sodomites.

Corrupt Opinions are usually accompanied with lewd Practices, with filthy
Lives. The Nicholaitans, Carpocratians, Adamites, and several other Heretics,
did professedly give themselves over to a loose and libidinous life. Community
of Wives was an Article of their Creed, and promiscuous Adulteries were their
constant Practice. The Bohemian Adamites, when they desired to satisfy their
beastly Lusts, were wont to say, My spirit is waxed hot toward such a woman:
To whom he that was the head of the Faction would reply, Go, and replenish the
Earth. In all Ages, the Churches (if we may so call them without defiling a
Name so sacred) which have been founded and fathered by false-Teachers and
Seducers, have been Rev. 18.2
Cages of unclean Birds.

But it is Time we get out of this filth and mire for fear of defilement. Behold
then, for a close of this Characteristical discourse, the fittest Characters,
filthy conversation, and fearful conclusion of these vile Apostates, these
deluding Dreamers, and self-deceiving Seducers, as represented to us by the
Apostle Peter, in his Prophetic Premonition concerning them, which he penned
by the conduct of the holy Spirit for a perpetual Caution to the Christian
Church. These (says he 2 Pet. 2.17-22.
) are wells without water, Clouds that are carried with a Tempest, to whom the
Mist [or Blackness So Jude v. 13. Gr. (...).
] of darkness is reserved for ever. For when they speak great swelling words
of Vanity, they allure through the LUSTS of the FLESH, through much WANTONNESS,
those that were clean escaped from them who live in ERROR. While they promise
them Liberty, they themselves are the servants of Corruption: for of whom a man
is overcome, of the same is he brought in Bondage. For if after they have
escaped the POLLUTIONS of the world, through the Knowledge of the Lord and
Savior, Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome; the
LATTER END is worse with them then the BEGINNING. For it had been better for
them not to have known the way of Righteousness, then after ^^ey have known
it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto them. But it (...)
happened unto them according to the true Proverb, The Dog is turned to his own
vomit again, and ^he So^ that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.

Thus we have seen the Characters of Seducers, whereby we may know when,
according to the Scripture Predictions, they are come amongst us: Come we now
to consider in what cases the times are to be accounted evil and p^rillous,
upon the account of the Errors introduced, and false-worship maintained by
these over-active Agents of Satan, for the distu^bing of the Peace of the
Kingdom of Christ, and the promoting of the interests of the Kingdom of
darkness in the world.

The Cases wherein Error and false-Worship make the Times Perilous.
The first Case. Licentiousness colored with Liberty of Conscience.
When Liberty of conscience is pleaded, (or illlimited) Toleration of
irregularities in Opinion and Practice, the Times are justly to be accounted
evil and perilous. The CONSCIENCE of man is indeed the COURT of God, but it
has no obliging power but from Gods command. No man indeed may command or can
compel the conscience. Its subjected solely to the Law and Sovereignty of God.
The Will of God, as manifested by the light of Nature, as the Moral Law, or by
Divine Revelation, as the commands of the Gospel, is the only Law which lays
an Obligation upon the conscience of man, or whereunto a man is purely out of
conscience bound to yield obedience. As for the Laws of men, they lay not an
Obligation upon the Conscience, neither is any man bound out of conscience to
obey them, any further then he is thereunto ob^ig'd by the Law of God, by which
every humane Ordinance and constitution is ratified, which is founded in a
lawful Authority. And therefore says the Scripture; 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
submit your selves to every (...),
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme; or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the Punishment of evil
Doers, and for the Praise of them that do well. Subjection and obedience then
is due to every lawful Magistrate by the Word of God; yea, and every Christian
ought out of conscience to yield it to him. Romans 13.4, 5.
For he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does
evil. Wherefore (says the Apostle) ye must needs be subject not only for
wrath [i. e. for fear of punishment] but also for CONSCIENCE sake. Yet is not
the conscience herein to be subjected to any Law of man, but only to the Law
of God requiring this subjection and obedience to the Civil Magistrate for the
preservation of Order and good Government in the world. For as it is the
highest degree of Spiritual T^ranny for any to lay the Act. 15.10
Yoke of any humane Laws or Constitutions, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical,
upon the Neck of the Consciences of men; so is it no less then the sin of
Idolatry for any to subject their Consciences to any such Laws or
Constitutions, seeing it is Gods Prerogative Royal to be the LORD of the
CONSCIENCE. He only can give a Law to bind the heart and conscience, who can
discern when that Law is broken or kept, and accordingly give forth a
righteous Punishment or a Reward of grace. The Conscience then is not, may not
be subjected to the Will of Man, but only to the Law of God, his Will revealed
in his Word.

But now when the Law of God (the only adequate Rule of the Conscience) is
declared, his Will is revealed in his Word, it is altogether absurd to imagine
that the conscience of man (which in this respect Quoad (...) seu prout
Conservatrix Principlorum, unde oritur Obligatio.
, is but the Custos Rotularum
Keeper of Gods Court-Rolls) should oblige to any thing that is contrary to it,
or should absolve a man from an Obligation to yield obedience thereunto. To
plead Liberty of Conscience therefore for the divulging of wicked Opinions
contrary to the clear and manifest truths of the Word of God; and for the
Pra^t^se of gross Impieties, as in decrying the Ordinances and worship of God,
commanded in his Word, and the setting up a false worship in the room of it,
contrary to the express Rules of the Gospel, this must needs be a sore Evil,
and a very great Provocation of the most high God; especially when such
wretched men shall be favored, protected, encouraged, in so unjust a claim to
this sinful Liberty, by those that are in Authority or Power, who ought to take
care that the Law of God be kept, that they might set a Crown of Praise upon
the head of them that do well, and be a Romans 13 3
Terror to evil Doers, by whom it is violated. When this Liberty is thus
granted and used, the times must needs be perilous.

To plead Liberty of Conscience for an Exemption from any Obli^ation to the
embracement of the Truth revealed, the attendance upon the Ordinances
instituted, the discharge of the Duties enjoined in the Word of God, is to
break open a wide gap, to all manner of Licentiousness, which is the ready way
to pluck the Judgments of God down upon the Land. This is to make the
Conscience which is a Court wherein the Laws of God are to be pleaded, to
become a Consistory, wherein a man shall be empowered to absolve himself from
any of Gods Laws, and shall take the freedom to act in all things according to
his own Prescriptions. What can be im^gin'd to be more Irrational and
Atheistical then this? This must needs be an Inlet to all manner of
Abominations. Even they that blaspheme God, pluck the Lord Jesus (as much as in
them lies) from the Throne of his Deity, be^y the Holy Ghost in charging the
vilest Errors upon the holy Spirit of Truth, trample upon the precious
Ordinances of the Gospel and pretend to be above them, revile, reproach, and
curse the children of God, and when they have opportunity persecute them to the
death, even these will for these wicked Opinions and Practices plead Liberty of
Conscience. Intolerable Impudence! Damnable Impiety!

Now such weeds as these grow apace under the favorable Influences of the
higher Plan^ts. This Liberty once indulged will soon become abundantly fruitful
in the worst of Evils. Let this Jubilee (the year of General Release) be but
once proclaimed, and the Church of God shall soon feel the sad and woeful
effects thereof. Leave every man but to walk in his own way, and we shall soon
see the Vineyard of God trodden down, while its continually traverst in a
thousand cross and crooked paths. Thus when there was no King in Israel, every
one did that which was right in his own eyes Jud. 17.6. and 21.25.
. And what was this, but every one might be as wicked and licentious as he
list? These were perilous Times in Israel. But when the Bounds of sin are
removed, the Banks of the Sea of Gods Wrath shall be broken up, and his
Judgments shall break forth as mighty Waters upon such sinners. So says the
Lord by the Prophet Hosea, Hos. 5.10
The Princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound; therefore I will
pour my Wrath upon them like Water.

Thus when that liberty is contended for which tends to Licentiousness, when
Impiety is grown so impudent as to plead for Impunity, the Days are evil, the
Times are perilous. But if the Opinion (favored) be so perilous, the
Practice (allowed) must needs be extremely pernicious. If the Seed be so
bitter, what fruit can we expect it should bring forth but Gall and Wormwood?
This Provocation therefore is capable of a higher Degree, which must needs be
productive of the greater Peril; as in the next case.

The second Case. Protection of Error and false-Worship.
When Error and False-worship the Times must needs be perilous. When the
Harlot has equal favor with the Queen, and the Stews as strong a guard as the
Palace. When Thieves and Robbers shall be as quietly permitted, and as fully
protected in stealing and robbing as the faithful Shepherd in watching his
Flock, and painful Labourer in working in the vineyard. When Madmen shall be
suffered to go up and down with naked swords in their hands, to kill and slay
all that are not able to resist them. When Plague-sick men shall have freedom
to walk the streets; and our Enemies full liberty to impoyson our Springs. When
a Guard shall be granted to them that come to throw Baits of Wildfire into the
City of God, for the kindling of those fires that cannot be quenched. When men
shall be protected in their undermining the foundations of the House of God,
and in bringing in their Powder and March to blow it up. When those shall be
admitted Stewards of Divine Mysteries, who put Poison into the meat of the
Kings children, the Times must needs be sad and perilous. When illitera^e
Mechanics shall be allowed to be public Preachers, who shall confidently vent
the grossest Errors for glorious Truths. When those that publicly cast
contempt upon the Call of the Ministry, upon that Ordinance of God, which is
the only Gospel-way for the Investment of fit persons with Ministerial
Authority, ORDINATION shall be suffered to usurp the Ministerial Office, and
impudently to challenge the Churches Dowry, merely so violating of her
Chastity, or if that fail, for falsely accusing her to be be a Harlot. When so
wide a Gap shall be cut out by the Sword into this sacred Function, that Popish
Priests and Jesuits, in a Disguise, may enter in, and have as much Countenance
and Encouragement as the ablest Orthodox Minister of the Gospel. When a
Schismatic shall be the only Surgeon allowed to heal the Churches
Breaches; and a Wolf shall be set over the Flock of Christ; and the Souls of
men shall be committed to the charge of one of the chief Agents of Satan, are
not these Days of Danger and Distress, perilous Times?

When multitudes of discordant opinions, and Diversities of Religion, or ways
of worship are tolerated by the Civil Magistrate, in his Dominion, the Church
of Christ is turned into a Chaos of Confusion. This indeed was a piece of the
Pagan-Policy of the Vid. Dio. Sicul. de Egypt. Reg lib. 11.
Egyptian Kings, for the prevention of whatever Conspiracies might prove
prejudicial to their Establishment in their Kingdom. For with what Rigor
soever they ruled over the People subjected to their Scepter, while they kept
them at a Di^^ance one from another by Diversities of Religion, they judged
there was less danger of their conspiring together, or uniting their strength
to cast off the Yoke and Burden laid upon them. For still one Faction would be
jealous of another, and so while they were divided by different designs, they
could hardly be ever united in one Common Interest. But it must needs go ill
with the Church of Christ when such carnal and cursed Policies have place in a
Christian Commonwealth. Hereunto therefore we shall oppose what we find in
the learned and judicious Casuist Baldwin, upon this Question; Number consultum
est Conscientiis and saluti publicae, plures quam unam, in been constituta
Republica, admittere Religionem D. Baldwin. de Cas. Conse. l. 2. c. 6. cas. 3.
?
Whether it be consistent with Peace of Conscience and public safety to admit
of more then one Religion in a well-constituted Commonwealth?

Having mentioned the Opinions and Judgment of some others in this matter he
thus concludes, Idcirco apud omnes in confesso est, Magistratum illum graviter
peccare in DEUM and subditos, qui Religiones varias, quas praecavere potuisset,
in Republica voluntary admittit, recipit, fovet, aut absque ulla necessitate
retinet. Is enim nihil aliud facit, quam quod confusam Dei ignorantiam and
Opinionem (quam Lib. 19. de Legibus.
Plato summam omnium rerum publica^um Pestem appellavit) introducit, siquidem
omnis humanae Societatis Fundamentum convellit, qui Religioni est noxius.

Qua propter Lib. 2. de Eunomia.
Tholosanus censuit, Magistratum, si adventitias Religiones admiserit, tanquam
Rei publicae eversorem and clancularium Patriae Proditorem, privandum esse
Authoritate and Dignitate gubernandi non tantum, sed and si Rex fuerit, Regno
ac Ditionibus suis; quae in praedam and Possessionem eorum veniant qui eas illa
lue liberaverint, idque per novam constitutionem Friderici Imperatoris fieri
adserit.


It is therefore confessed on all Hands, that, that Magistrate does grievously
sin against GOD and his Subjects, who voluntarily admits, receives, cherishes,
or without any necessity, retains diverse Religions in the Commonwealth, which
he might have made Provision against. For he does no other then introduce a
confused ignorance and opinion of God (which Plato called the chiefest Plague
of all Commonwealths) forasmuch as he destroys the foundation of all humane
society, who is injurious to Religion.

Wherefore Tholosanus judged that if a Magistrate should admit of whatsoever
Religions should arise, he was proceeded against as an underminer of the
Commonwealth, and a privy traitor to his Country, and so not only to be
deprived of his Authority and Dignity of governing, but also if he was a King,
of his Kingdom and Dominions, which should become a prey and possession to
them which should have freed them from such a plague; and this he asserts to be
done by a new constitution of the Emperor Frederick.

This resolve I shall leave to the censure of them that shall peruse it; only
this I shall say (and that I conceive upon a sufficient ground) that an
Authoritative Allowance and public Protection of diversities of Opinion and
Practice, about the Fundamentals of Doctrine and Worship, in the same Religion,
is every whit as pernicious as the Toleration of different Religions. For as in
the liberty of different Religions, People are in danger to be drawn off from
the true Religion to a false, so does the allowance of different opinions and
practices about fundamentals, tend to the utter subversion of the true
Religion, to the manifest and inevitable Ruin and Destruction of men's precious
and immortal souls. The Magistratical Protection then of Errors in Religion,
and different ways of Worship, swarving from the rule of the Word of God, must
needs speak the times perilous; especially when this LIBERTINISME shall be
established by LAW, reckoned amongst the just rights and Privileges of the
People of God, and accounted a GLORIOUS LIBERTY. When the Plague is thus far
broke out amongst us, we may all write upon our Doors, LORD HAVE MERCY UPON US.

The third Case: Misusing Gods Ministers.
When men shall mock Gods messengers, and abuse his Ambassadors, the times
are evil and perilous. This is a sad Symptom of approaching judgments. God
is infinite in Patience, but this is a sin so highly provoking, that God can
bear no longer, he cannot (I may well say, with Scripture-warrant) withold
his hand from punishing such a people. For it is the highest abuse of his
richest Mercy, and gracious condescension to the children of men. Shall the
Lord send his Messengers with messages of Love; his Ambassadors with Embassies
of Peace to a sinning, a provoking People, that deserve to be visited with
Judgment and destroyed in his Wrath, and shall those vile sinners dare to
affront and abuse them, yea, deal with them as Malefactors, rather then the
Lords Ministers; must not this needs provoke the Lord to arm his Justice with
vengeance against such a people, and to punish them without Mercy, in the
execution of his sorest Judgments? This was the sin which made the state of
the Jews desperate and deplorable. This the Lord charges upon them as a higher
Provocation then their Idolatries, for which therefore he visited them with
remediless punishments. This, this was that sin of the Jews for which God
delivered them up into Captivity, and brought an utter destruction upon the
City Jerusalem. For thus does the Lords charge stand upon perpetual Record
against them in holy Scripture. 2 Chronicles. 36.14-20
Moreover all the chief of the Priests, and the People transgressed very much,
after all the Abominations of the Heathen, and polluted the House of the LORD,
which he had hallowed in Jerusalem. And the LORD God of their Fathers sent to
them by his Messengers, rising up betimes That is (says the Margin)
continually and carefully
, and sending; because he had compassion on his People, and on his dwelling
place. But they MOCKED the MESSENGERS of God, and despised his words, and
MISUSED his PROPHETS, until the wrath of the LORD arose against his People,
till there was no REMEDY. Therefore he brought upon them the King of the
Chaldees, who slew their young men with the sword, in the house of their
Sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that
stooped for age: he gave them all into his hand. And all the vessels of the
House of God great and small, and the Treasures of the House of the LORD, and
the Treasures of the King, and of his Princes; all these he brought to Babylon.
And they burnt the House of God, and brake down the wall of JERUSALEM, and
burnt all the Palaces thereof with Fire, and destroyed all the goodly Vessels
thereof. And them that had escaped from the Sword carried he away to Babylon:
where they were servants to him and his sons, until the Reign of the King of
Persia. Thus great were the calamities, sore were the Judgments with which God
plagued the people of Judah for the contempt, reproach and scorn which they
cast upon his Prophets and Messengers, which he sent in his mercy to them.

Abuse of Ambassadors is a high Crime of State, a barbarous villainy, violating
the LAW of NATIONS. Princes are wont to write such Crimes in the Blood of the
guilty, unless where an Arm of Power is wanting to weild the Sword of
Justice. The contempt and reproach which is cast upon Ambassadors reflects
upon the King that sent them. Abuse of the Lords Ambassadors is a high offense,
a fearful Crime committed against the LAW of GRACE. The contempt and reproach
cast upon them reflects upon God himself. He that despises them, despises
CHRIST, despises GOD Luke 10.16
. Now it is just with God in this case to call home his Ambassadors, and to
denounce WAR against those his Luke 19.27
ENEMIES which have abused them, or being in place and Power, have suffered the
abuse to go unpunisht.

When David thought to show kindness to Hanun, and sent his Ambassadors to
comfort him after the Death of his Father, and they were shamefully treated,
and villanously abused by him, David raised WAR against him and his people to
destroy them 2 Samuel 10
. The Gospel is a Letter of Comfort, which God, the King of Heaven, sends by
the hands of his Ambassadors, the Ministers of the Gospel, to poor miserable
sinners, involved in manifold sufferings and sorrows upon the Death of their
Father, ADAM, with Commission to comfort them; and to this end to invite them
to a sumptuous Isa. 25.6
FEAST, richly furnished with the choicest Dainties, which he has provided for
them. But now when these unthankful wretches shall abuse and vilify the Lords
Ambassadors, how do ye think will he deal with them? But perhaps you will think,
this is so high a degree of Baseness and Ingratitude, that its not to be
imagined that any men should be found so void of all virtue and humanity as to
be guilty of it. Hear then a true Relation from the Lords own mouth, of that
Reception which some of these sinners gave the Lords Ambassadors, and of the
sad effects and consequents thereof. The first messengers being shamefully
repulsed, Mat. 22.4-7.
Again he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold
I have prepared my Dinner: my Oxen and my Fatlings are killed, and all things
are ready: Come unto the Marriage
FEAST, but they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his Farm,
another to his Merchandise: and the Remnant took his servants and entreated
them spitefully, and slew them. But when the King heard thereof, he was wroth:
and he sent forth his ARMIES, and destroyed those MURDERERS, and burnt up their
City. Thus ill do men requite the Lord for his love: thus severely does the
Lo^d revenge the reproach and wrong offered to his Servants, the Ministers of
the Gospel.

When the Lord of the Vineyard sends his servants to the Husbandmen, to whom he
has left his Vineyard, and they abuse them, how will he deal with these
Husbandmen? He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his
Vineyard unto other Husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their
Season See Mat. 21.33-14
. For this sin, after the return of the rebellious Jews from the Babylonish
Captivity, wherewith God had severely scourged them, for full 2 Chro, 34.21.
threescore and ten years, for this sin, did the Lord utterly and finally
destroy the City Jerusalem, and lay the whole land desolate. Hear the Lord
Jesus Christ for this making that most pathetical Lamentation over this
rebellious City, and foretelling its ruin. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem (says he
Mat. 23.37, 38, 39.
) thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee,
how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a Hen gathers
her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Behold your house is left unto
you desolate. For I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall
say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord.

When King Philip had besieged Athens, and put the City into much distress, he
promised to raise his siege, if they would give him in hostage ten of the
ablest Athenian Orators. But Demosthenes to divert the Athenians from answering
his desire by closing in with this Overture, made use of this Apologue. The
Wolves (said he) desired a League with the Shepherds, upon this condition that
the cause of their strife might be taken away, which was the Shepherds
Mastiffs. This granted, and the sheep deprived of their Guard, the ravenous
Wolves feasted their cruel hunger, and satisfied their thirst of blood at the
shepherds cost, by a fearlesse preying upon the poor slaughtered sheep. Just
thus (said he) would Philip deal with you, if once you should yield to deliver
unto him your vigilant Watchmen, your faithful Orators. Alas, we are taught by
a more certain Oracle, that if the Shepherds be smitten, the sheep must needs
be scattered Zec. 13.7
. Nahash the Ammonite would make a Covenant of Peace, with the men of
Jabesh-Gilead upon no other terms then these; that he might thrust out all
their right eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel 1 Samuel 11 1, 2
. If those persons, that wicked Generation of men, that will never be satisfied
with any Propositions of Peace, unless the Seers may be put out of their
Places, the Priests (as they reproachfully call them) may be cast out of their
Possessions, well may it be laid as a lasting REPROACH upon our English ISRAEL.
If such persons as these shall have liberty to plead against the Pastors of the
Church, the Shepherds of the Lords Flock, shall we not judge these to be
perilous Times? What then shall we say to these things? 2 These. 3.1, 2
Finally, Brethren, pray for us that the Word of the Lord may have free course,
and be glorified, even as [yet] it is with you: and that we may be delivered
from [such absurd Marg. Gr. (...).
] unreasonable and wicked men,

The fourth Case. Contempt of Gods Ordinances Countenanc't.
WHen men under the Countenance and the days must needs be evil, the Times
perilous. If when the Ministers of the Gospel are despised, Iniquity does
abound, surely when the Ordinances of God, the very means of grace, are
contemned, sin must needs superabound. And superabounding sin, will
certainly at length bring the overflowing scourge. When the Beasts of the Field
shall defile the Waters of the Sanctuary; and the filthy swine shall trample
down the green Pastures, wherein the shepherds of Israel are wont to feed their
Flocks. When the Courts of the Lord shall be covered with the Filth of
Reproach; and the Gold of the Sanctuary shall be trampled under feet. When men
shall cast dirt into the Galleries of the great King; and disgrace the Throne
of his glory. When men shall vilify the Lords Tabernacles, and spit in the
face of the Beauties of Holiness. When men shall cast stones at the Windows of
the Sanctuary, by which the Sun of Righteousness sheds forth his beams of
light upon the children of Zion. When men shall cut in two those golden Pipes,
by which the Waters of Life are conveyed from the Wells of Salvation, for the
refreshment of the City of God. When men presume to act these Impieties, and
are therein countenanc't by the higher Powers, the Times are sad and perilous.

Contempt of Gods holy Ordinances is a very provoking sin. 'Twas a high charge
against Judah, Eze. 22.8
Thou have despised my Holy things, and have profaned my Sabbaths. To cast
reproach upon Divine institutions, is to blaspheme the Name of God. So sore an
evil must needs make sad Times. Of this does the Psalmist complain, and
expostulate with God. O God (says he Ps. 74.10
) how long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy Name for
ever? He reproaches Caesar that vilifies the coin that bears his Image and
Superscription. The Ordinances of the Gospel are that Gold of Sion which bears
the Royal stamp. When men shall reject this Gold and call it Dross, surely
Jer. 6.30
Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the LORD has rejected them.

The days are evil, when vile sinners (who yet account themselves the only
Saints) shall contemptuously trample upon the precious Ordinances of Jesus
Christ. When those blessed Gospel Ordinances of INFANT BAPTISM, by which only
the children of Believers are admitted into the Church, and Sacramentally washed
from their sins in the blood of their Savior; ORDINATION OF MINISTERS, by
which only fit persons are authorized to preach the Gospel, and dispense the
Seals of the Covenant; SINGING OF PSALMS, wherein the Church on earth becomes
a lively Image of Heaven, and the Saints of God have a kind of Pre-possession
of Paradise; when these blessed Ordinances (I say) shall be slighted, vilifi'd,
contemned by a company of hypocritical Professors, who have taken up a show of
Religion only to delude men, and dishonor God, the times must needs be
perilous; especially when such ungodly Ones shall be protected and promoted by
the higher Powers, by whom they ought rather to be punished for their
Irreligion and Profanesse in their open contempt of God, his Authority, Worship
and Honor in these his holy institutions. Yea, when they shall be
countenanc't, not only in the contempt of these Divine Institutions, but also
in the Introduction of sundry humane Inventions, instead of these and other
Ordinances of God, to the utter exclusion of Gods true Worship, and the setting
up of a false worship, founded in their own Will, in the World. As when they
shall introduce into their Schismatical Societies, falsely called Christian
Congregations, the REBAPTIZATION OF BELIEVERS, which is nothing else but an
actual Renunciation of their former Baptism, and so consequently of the
Covenant of their God, and a Heb. 10.29
counting of the blood of the Covenant wherewith they were sanctified, an
unholy thing: Horrid Impiety! Also, the constant PREACHING OF GIFTED BRETHREN,
who are so far from being called to the work of the Ministry, that they
wickedly scoff at the only Gospel-Call thereunto, Ministerial Ordination; yea,
which is yet worse, when these proud Intruders, presumptuous Usurpers of the
Ministerial Office, shall be accounted the only Gospel Ministers, such as will
preach the Gospel freely to poor Creatures. This is a very sore evil; for as
much as under this pretense of exercising their GIFTS, the vilest Heretics in
the world, shall have an opportunity of poisoning the people of God with their
damnable Doctrines, by public preaching in the open Assemblies. Horrid
stratagem of Hell, for the subversion of souls! Moreover, when BREAKING OF
BREAD by the pretended Pastors of Churches, shall be introduc't in stead of the
Supper of the Lord, which is indeed no better then a mock-Sacrament, being
administered by them that are no Ministers of the Gospel, and so have no
authority at all to administer any of the Ordinances of God. For if the
changing of the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper from a
common and ordinary to a sacred Sacramental Use, be an act of Ministerial
Authority, as doubtless it is, then this their breaking of Bread is no better
then a mocking of God in an Apish imitation of the sacred actions of one of his
holy Ordinances. So when instead of singing of Psalms, they shall introduce
into their Assemblies the singing of silly HYMNS, of vulgar Composure, which
whether for Rhyme or Reason, are not much to be preferred before those which the
common Ballad-mongers sing in the streets under the Name of Godly Ballads. When
Gods holy Ordinances shall be contemned, and these fearful Corruptions in his
worship and service shall be introduc't and allowed, needs must the Times be
extremely evil and perilous.

Yea, when a wicked Generation of men shall be suffered, with Impunity, to cast
Contempt upon all the Ordinances of Gods Worship; to vilify and reproach the
Assemblies of the Saints, calling them the Synagogues of Satan, with many more
vile reproaches, which I think not meet to mention; what shall we think, are
not the Days evil, the Times perilous? When those shall be countenanc't,
honored, advanced in the State, being set in Places of Power and Trust, who do
what they can to cast an Odium upon the Ordinances of the Gospel, are not the
days evil, the Times perilous? These sacred Ordinances are the paths of
Christ wherein he walks amongst his People, and hereby do men Ps. 79.51
reproach the footsteps of Gods anointed. Hereby do vile persons cast dirt at
the Chariots of the King of glory. Hereby is the Lord continually provoked to
depart from such a people, and therefore the days which are defiled with these
Abominations must needs be perilous Times.

The fifth Case. Sinners Sedulity and Sloth in Saints.
When the spirit of Error and Profanesse prevails more and more in the
World, and the Spirit of Prayer and Zeal for truth and holiness decays more
and more in the Church, the Days are evil, the Times perilous. When false
Fires appear, and the Fire of the Altar goes out, sure God is departing from
his Temple. When the Locusts and Caterpillars swarm in the Fields, and the
Frogs croak in every corner of the House, the Judgment of God is already upon
the Land. When 2 Timothy 3.6, 7
silly women are led captive in Troops by subtle Deceivers, and soul-deluding
Seducers 2 Pet. 2.2
draw many Disciples after them, the last Days, which we are told shall be
perilous Times, are come upon us. Activity of bad men, in carrying on their
wicked Designs, and Lukewarmnesse in good men, in promoting the Cause and
Interest of Christ, is a sad Symptom of some sore evil at hand. When few are
zealous for Truth and Righteousness, and multitudes are zealous for Error and
Impunity in the contempt of Gods holy worship, we may justly fear God will
shortly bring some fearful judgment on the Land. When Mat. 24.12
Iniquity abounds, and the love of many waxes cold, the Winter is come, and
storms must be expected. When the Spirit of Prayer departs, the Spirit of
Judgment comes in the room of it. When the Wind ceases, presently the Rain
falls. When the hands of Moses fall down in Prayer, and Amalek prevails in
battle, we must needs expect it should go ill with Israel.

When Christians are fallen from their Rev. 2.4
first Love, and Professors are grow'n Rev. 3.16
Lukewarm in Religion; yea, and many are become Key-cold in the Cause of
Christ, whilst others are very forward and zealous to promote the Honor and
Adoration of the Deified IMAGES of their own Fancies, they must needs be
perilous Times. ZEAL is the Pulse of the Church, as JUSTICE is of the
Commonwealth. Now a wise Physician by feeling the Pulse may judge of the state
of the Patient. If it be violent and irregular, the body is inflamed and in a
great distemper; if it be very weak, slow, remiss, and much interrupted, it is
a sad Symptom of approaching Death. Apostasy in Religion is a forerunner of
Ruin and Destruction to such a particular Church and People Jer. 8.5, 15
. Lukewarmnesse in Religion is a loathed temper. I know thy Works (says the
Lord of the Church of Laodicea Rev. 3.15, 16.
too true a Pattern of the Church of England) that thou art neither cold nor
hot: I would thou were cold or hot. So then because thou art Lukewarm, and
neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth.

In these cases all good Christians have cause to bewail the sad condition of
the Church of Christ.

The ninth Symptom. Divisions in the Church, and Union of her Adversaries.
THe children of the Church have experience When the Professors of the true
Religion are divided, and the professed enemies thereof are united. When the
Canaanites are combined against the Israelites, and the Israelites are divided
amongst themselves, needs must they be distressed by their Enemies. When
Idolatrous Nations join in Confederacy against the People that profess the
true Religion, their State must needs be dangerous. Of this does the Psalmist
complain as speaking the sad state of the People of God, and therefore he makes
his earnest suit to God for redress, saying; Psalm. 83.1-8.
Keep not thou silence, O God: hold not thy Peace, and be not still, O God.
For, lo! thine Enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lift up the
head. They have taken crafty COUNSEL against thy People, and consulted against
thy hidden ones. They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a
Nation: that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. For they have
consulted together with one CONSENT: they are CONFEDERATE against thee. The
Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites: of Moab and the Hagarens. Gebal, and
Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines with the Inhabitants of Tire. Ashur also is
joined with them: they have helped the children of Lot. Needs must those be
perilous Times with the People of Israel, when as a small Flock of sheep, they
were surrounded with so many troops of Wolves, Lions and Bears, thirsting after
their blood, and ready to tear them in pieces and devour them.

When, in the Days of Jehoshaphat 2 Chr. 20
, Moab, and Ammon, and mount Seir conspired against Israel, and came up against
Jehoshaphat to battle, both he and all the people of the Land were struck with
fear in the apprehensions of their great danger. And well might they fear,
when three Nations had armed themselves against that People, that had provoked
the Lord by their sins to give them up into their Enemies hands. But behold a
strange turn of Providence, which affords a further illustration to the matter
in hand. These three great Armies, by a wonderful stratagem of the Divine
Providence were divided one against another, and so now their great strength
became the cause of their weakness and destruction; for even without any
stroke struck by Israel, they themselves destroyed one another, insomuch that
when Israel came against them, they had none to encounter with but the v. 24.
dead Bodies of the slain, which were fallen to the earth, and none escaped.
Thus as their Conjunction was their strength, their Division became their
overthrow.

Sad Divisions and bitter Contentions amongst Christians, do not only make
them a scorn and Derision to their enemies, but also expose them to the danger
of an utter Destruction. Such Christians as (like Cranes) fight amongst
themselves, do easily become a prey to others. Their enemies (like Eagles and
Vultures) will hasten to their Overthrow. Thus did the Roman EAGLES prey upon
the miserable Jews, conflicting together in Civil Dissentions, until the
streets of Jerusalem ran down with blood, and the Body of the City became as a
bloody Mat. 24.28
CARKAS. For before the final devastation of that renowned City, it was divided
(as Josephus relates) into a threefold Faction, which under the Conduct of
John, Simon and Eleazar, cruelly contested one with another; and that bloody
Generation, called the Zealots (of whom we have formerly spoken) adhering, as
occasion served, to each party, ceased not to foment this cruel Dissension, and
to enrage the heat of this burning Fever in the heart of the holy City, which
could never be cured without the shedding of abundance of Blood, and the loss
of many thousand lives. And when the Body of the City was miserably torn with
these Dissentions within, and in continual danger of the Romans Invasion from
without, methinks that Pathetical Representation which the Historian makes of
their miserable condition, with the weeping wishes of the woeful inhabitants, is
enough to fetch Tears from the eyes of any that shall but seriously mind it.
For, says he Joseph. (...).
, (...).
The City being assaulted on every side by treacherous conspiratours, and a
rabble multitude of unneighbourly Neighbors in the out-parts thereof, the
People in the midst, like to some great body, were cruelly rent and torn. But
the ancient men and the women being utterly at a loss which way to escape such
pressing calamities, wished for the Romans, hoping that a foreign War might
give them some releasement from the bleeding miseries of these intestine
Broiles. Thus the afflicted Patient wishes, sends for the Surgeon to make an
Incision into his Body, and draw away the blood from his Veins, for the
cooling of the boiling heat which he feels in his heart. But sad is the state
of that people who are in more danger, in more fear of their own bloody
Brethren, then of the most enraged Enemies. But alas when the Romans furiously
came against them, how easily did a divided self-destroying people become a
prey to their cruel enemies, who slew with the sword about eleven hundred
thousand of them, utterly destroyed that famous City, and that glorious Temple,
which was justly renowned throughout the whole World.

A great River, whose water runs in one channel, is not easily fo^dable: but
cut it into lesser streams and Rivulets (as Cyrus did Euphrates when he
assaulted Babylon) and it may be easily passed over. Thus Sedition in a state
facilitates the way to its Destruction. And, the matter of Sedition (says the
Lord Verulam Bacon, in Essays, c. 15
) is of two kinds; much Roverty, and much coffeehouse. It is certain
(says he) so many overthrown estates, so many Votes for Troubles. When a Fire
is kindled amongst old broken Houses, it burns most violently and irresistibly.
When men are grown desperate, the times must needs be dangerous. Now, the
Causes and motions of Seditions (says the same Author) are Innovation in
Religion; Taxes; Alteration of Laws and Customs; Breaking of Privileges;
general Oppression; Advancement of unworthy Persons; Strangers; Dearths;
Disbanded Soldiers; Factions grown desperate; and whatsoever in offending
People, joyneth and knitteth them in a common Cause. These things carry in them
so much light and evidence for their own truth and certainty, and that
sufficiently confirmed by many sad experiences, that when we see this Matter,
these Motives of Sedition, we need not doubt to say, the Times are perilous.

It Is most certain, that Union is the Stength, Division the Weakness of any
People. This the Wise Father taught his children, when he gave them a bundle of
Rods to break, which they were not able to do when bound together, but easily
snapt them in sunder when severed, and singly delivered unto them. Union is the
Principle of Self-preservation, but Division tends to Self-destruction.

Nostine igitur, quod omne quod est; tam diu manner atqu^ subsistere, quam diu
sit unum: sed interire atque dissolvi pariter, quando unum esse desierit Bo^t.
de Consol. l. 4
?
Do thou not know then (says Boethius) that every thing that is, does so
long abide and subsist as it continues to be ONE; but when once it ceases to be
one, then is it dissolved and comes to nothing? A house well compact will stand
in a storm, but when the Building is dis-joynted, an easy push will throw it
down, and one part of it serves as an instrument to break the other in pieces,
and is it self broken in breaking. And therefore, (...) Arist. Polit.
.
Perilous are Breaches amongst Brethren: when this is the Epidemical disease
of a Nation, it speaks the times to be perilous.

Union of the Inhabitants, is a Nations strength and glory: but Dissentions
weaken its Strength, stain its Glory, and presage its Ruin. Union of the
Inhabitants is a brazen Wall of Defense round about a Nation, to keep its
enemies out; but Division opens an hundred Gates for them to enter in. Its
easy to subdue that Nation, which takes the only way to destroy it self. But
now, Nulla, quamvis sit minima Natio, cito potest ab Adversariis deleri, nisi
propriis simultatibus seipsam confecerit Veget. l. 3
.
No Nation, be it never so small, can be suddenly destroyed by its Adversaries,
unless it dispatch it self by its own discords and dissentions. But when a
Nation shall by sundry Factions and frequent Seditions tear in pieces its own
bowels, it may soon be crush't and quelled by a Foreign Force.

When two great Nations professed enemies to the true Christian Religion are
combined in a League of Amity, and one small Nation professing the Christian
Religion, is divided within it self into almost a thousand fragments, by a
multitude of discordant Sects, and many of them are already inflamed after War
and Blood, and can hardly forbear some bloody Attempts, for the tearing in
pieces of their Fellow Members of the same Nation, and a great number of them
are the close Friends to the open Enemy, and are continually blowing up the
sparks of Dissension, for the kindling of the Fire of War in the whole Kingdom,
are not such a People in a dangerous state, and are we not to account such
days to be perilous Times? For, When Discords, and Quarrels, and Factions are
carried openly and audaciously (as that learned Statesman ^acon, in Essays,
c. 15
, before mentioned, well observes) it is a sign the reverence of Government is
lost. And Reverence (says he) is that wherewith Princes are girt from God.
When this Girdle is once loosed, the Garment will easily be plucked off, the
Government will soon be dissolved. And yet mo^e easily, when it is not only
loose, but rent, with these Civil Dissentions. Divisions have produced great
Alterations, accompanied with many woeful- Effects, in the most potent Kingdoms
on Earth, the mightiest Monarchies of the World. The Divisions amongst the
Trojans (as a D. Featly.
Modern Divine well observes) brought in the Graecians; the Divisions amongst
the Graecians, brought in Philip; The Divisions of the Assyrian Mona (...)
b^^ught in the Persian; of the Persian, (...) Macedonian; of the Macedonian
(...) the Roman; of the Roman, brought in the Turk: Lastly (says he) the
Divisions am^^g the Britans of this Nation, brought in first the Saxons, then
the Danes, and last of all the Normans; and who shall come next, invited by our
Civil Distractions, God knows.

Our Savior whose Testimony is truth it self, plainly tells us, Mark 3.24, 25.
If a Kingdom be divided against it self, that Kingdom cannot stand: And if a
House be divided against it self, that House cannot stand. Does not nature it
self teach as much? Is it not a Divine Harmony which has tuned the world into
such a beautiful Frame, and makes the Sun, Moon, and Stars keep such a regular
Dance? Are not Kingdoms, Cities, Houses then most happy, when they do not, by
the noise of their tumults, deprive themselves of the sweet pleasure of this
Heavenly Music? When PEACE that Bird of Paradise, sits and sings in the Land,
do not we presently see a flowery Spring of all desirable earthly Felicities?
And when by our kind usage we invite her to our Bosoms, does she not
presently still our tumultuous Thoughts, put our affections into a delicious
Dance, and heighten our hearts gladness to a kind of ravishment and sweet
excess, by her Angellick Notes; yea, does she not tune all our Voices to sing
in Consort, this short and sweet Ditty?

Nulla salus BELLO: PACEM te poscimus omnes Aen. 11.
.
No safety lies in War: For PEACE we all declare. Or rather that which the
Angels sang at the Birth of the Prince of Peace, when the Temple of Janus was
shut, and Wars were all hushed in the World Cuncta atque continua totius generis
Humani aut Pax fuit, aut Pactio. Flor. Hist. l. 4.
;

(...).
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth PEACE, good Will toward men Luke
2.14
. Welcome dear Peace, come from the Bosom of Heaven to pour Balsome into our
bleeding Wounds, and heal our cruel Contentions on Earth.

And well may PEACE be welcome to us. For, says the Orator, Nomen PACIS dulce
est, and ipsa res salutaris. PAX est tranquilla libertas. Nam nec privatos
focos, nec publicas Leges, nec Libertatis Jura chata habere potest, quem
Discordia, quem caedes Civium, quem Bellum civil delectat: eumque ex numero
hominum ejiciendum, ex finibus humanae Naturae exterminandum puto Cic. in
Philip.
.
The very Name of PEACE drops sweetness, and the Thing it self is Health,
Safety, Happiness. PEACE is a Tranquillity in the Fruition of Liberty. And
therefore he neither tenders the welfare of his private Family, nor the public
interests of Laws or Liberties who delights in Discords, the slaughter of
Citizens, and Civil War; and therefore (says he) I think him fit to be banished
the Bounds of Humane Nature, and not to be reckoned in the number of men.
Surely if sacred HARMONY should lay aside her Harp, by which she composes so
many discordant Natures into, an amiable and well-agreeing Order, the whole
Creation would presently fall into a fiery Contention, and so all the Beauties
of this rare Building would be stained with the Blood of the warring Creatures,
until the whole Fabric, weakened and wasted with these Flames and Wars, would
suddenly sink down into the first Chaos of Confusion. And if once DISCORD
should draw her sword, and with her Forces and Followers, Wrath, Cruelty,
Revenge, Malice, Murders, Massacres, Fears, Fury, Horror, and the rest of her
ragged regiment, march forth into the world to war against miserable
mankind; and if once, according to her wonted success in all her wars, she
should come to dominere over Kingdoms, Cities, Families, they would soon
become so many miserable Maps of Confusion, and Stages of Blood. HAPPINESS would
presently take Wing and fly from them, when once DISCORD should come to reign
amongst them.

Neque enim Civitas in Seditione potest esse: beata, nec in Discordia Dominorum
Dominus Cicer. l. 1 de fin. Bon. and Mal.
.
For no City can be Happy that is the Seat of Sedition, nor will Happiness
dwell in that House which is the habitation of Strife, the very Governors
whereof are under the Dominion of Discord. When therefore Peace, Love, Unity
departs from a Nation or Church, and Strife, Hatred, Division succeeds in the
the room, and regency thereof, that people must needs have experience of
perilous times.

For surely when we see in the same Land, Church against Church, Altar against
Altar, Pulpit against Pulpit, People against People, its a sad Symptom of the
Ruin and Destruction of that Land. For Division brings Confusion, and
Confusion brings Destruction. And when the Sheep turn head and strike at one
another, it is a sign a storm is at hand Plin. Not. Hist. l. 11. c. 17.
. They that are thus wanton while the winds are still, will find their state
woeful when the storm is come For, Discordiarum fraternarum horrendi even^us;
fratres ipsos, stir^emque suam, domos, regna, funda everterunt Livy, dec. 1. l.
3.

Discords amongst Brethren have produced dreadful effects: hereby have they
destroyed themselves and their Families, both Root and Branch; yea, Houses,
Kingdoms, Foundations have been overturned by them. Thus terrible are the
storms of Civil Dissentions, which break forth upon a Church or Nation, when
once the sacred bands of brotherly love, wherewith they were bound up and held
under Restraint, are broken. God whose holy and gracious Presence makes his
Church happy and glorious, is a God of Peace and Love, and he requires all his
children to live together in Love and Peace, that he may dwell amongst them. So
says the Apostle to the Corinthians; 2 Cor. 13 11
Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one Mind, live in Peace; and the God of
Love and Peace shall be with you. But when the People of God do by their
continual Jarrings banish these excellent Virtues (which as Doves when they
hear a noise, fly out of their House) they provoke God to depart from them,
and by his Departure at once to despoyle them of all Happiness. When the Bees
fight in the Hive, the King flies away and leaves them, after which (as
Naturalists observe) they never prosper. If for the Contentions of Christians
Christ should forsake his Church, we must needs be in a most miserable
condition.

Thus we see how sad the state of a Church or Nation is, which is shaken and
shattered with Civil Dissentions. But the state of such a divided people is yet
more sad, when the enemies seeing them thus weakened by Division, do strengthen
themselves against them by Confederacy and combination. For as that great
Historian observes; Per Discordias Civiles externi tollunt animos Livy, d. 1.
l. 3.
.
Civil Dissentions animate Foreign Foes to a hostile Invasion. Its the Devils
maxim in the Church, and a principle of Machiavillian Policy in the State;

Divide and Impera.
Rend and Rule; Divide a People into Fractions, and then they are easily
subdued by a foreign Power, who are already weakened by their own Divisions.
Woe be to the godly, when they are divided amongst themselves, and the wicked
are combined against them. When Herod and Pilate (who before were at enmity
between themselves Luke 23.12
) were made Friends, Christ was soon after condemned and crucified. Certainly
for the Divisions of Brethren there is cause of great Thoughts, great
searchings of Heart; and the Combinations of the Churches Enemies are by all
good Christians to be resented as the sad Symptoms of perilous Times.

The tenth Symptom. Security in a State of Uncertainty.
THe Times are then least free from peril, When there is a general Security
upon the Spirits of men without any regular settlement of Church or State. When
all things are much out of Order, and yet all sorts of men sit down secure in
their present state and condition. When notwithstanding the great changes
wrought by the Divine Providence in the world, men are generally so secure as
if they had never seen, or were sure they never should see any change. Strange
it is that a ship newly tossed with a Tempest, and very lately like to have been
swallowed up by the Seas, should sail securely among the yet unquiet Waves,
when the cloudy heavens threaten a new storm. Though the storm be past, it is
no wisdom while men are yet at sea, to be secure in a Calm. Men are often in
most Danger when they are in least fear of Danger. Do not your Mariners
observe, that the greatest Calm is often the Forerunner of the greatest Storm?
And have not the most dangerous Earthquakes come unawares, after a still and
quiet season, and suddenly swallowed up men and beasts, Houses and Cities?
^owever, security, especially in an unsettled state of things, is a Symptom of
great Danger, a Prognostic of perilous Times. How easily may a sleeping man
be slain, as Alexander slew him whom he found asleep on the watch, and well he
deserved so sudden a Death, who was so secure in a Time of Danger.

Strange it is that men should sit still in a mindlesse security,
notwithstanding the great mutations, unexpected emergencies, various turnings
of the wheels of the Divine Providence, which call aloud upon them to mind
what great works God is doing in the world, and to meet him by Repentance, lest
he should suddenly destroy them in his wrath. Strange it is that men should be
secure, when contrary winds blow hard upon the great Sea of the world, and the
mighty Waves dash themselves in pieces one against another. When twins do
strangely struggle together in the teeming womb of Time, and Providence seem
to carry in them Contradictions, to the beholders eye. When the Times are such
as that which the Father describes, if we take his Observations in a Political
sense. For says he, (...) Greg. Naz. Orat. 53. (...).
.
This Time is full of Contrarieties, of Births and Deaths, of the flourishing
and plucking up of Plants, of curing and killing, of building up and breaking
down of Houses, of weeping and laughing, of mourning and dancing. Now when the
Times are such, that the Rise of some, is the Fall of others; the Glory of
some, is the Disgrace of others; the Joy of some, is the Grief of others; is it
not strange that men should be secure? Yea, when the Rising of a few, shall be
the Ruining of many; the Enriching of a few, shall be the Undoing of many; and
the Rejoicing of a few, shall cause the Lamenting of many; are not the Times
perilous, and is it not strange that men can be secure? When the Strong shall
be made Weak, and the Rich shall become Poor, and the Honorable shall be
esteemed Base; while those that were poor, and weak, and base, shall become
Rich, and Strong, and great in the World, are not the Times perilous? May we
not then say, 1 Cor. 10 12
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall? Is it not strange
that at such a Time men can be secure? But then does Security much increase the
Danger, and make the Times the more perilous.

How often have great Armies and Cities living in security, been suddenly
surprised and destroyed by a small handful of men! Thus Gideon with three
hundred men, weary, hungry and faint, went up against the two Kings of Midian,
Zebah and Zalmunna, and their Hosts, about fifteen thousand men, and vanquished
them, and took the two Kings prisoners: Thus they discomfited the whole Host;
for its said, The Host was secure Judge. 8.11, 12.
.

Thus when the Danites spies came to Laish, and saw the People that were
therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and
secure, and there was no Magistrate in the Land, that might put them to shame
in any thing Judge. 18 7
; they made the Report hereof to their brethren that sent them, and encouraged
them to attempt the Invasion of them, saying, Arise, that we may go up against
them: for we have seen the Land, and behold it is very good: and are ye still?
Be not slothful to go, and to enter to possess the Land. When ye go, ye shall
come unto a People secure, and to a large Land: for the Lord has given it into
your hands: a Place where there is no want of any thing that is in the Earth
Judge. 18 9, 10.
. So six hundred men of the Danites took to them their Arms, and came unto
Laish, unto a People that were at quiet and secure: and they smote them with
the Edge of the Sword, and burnt the City with Fire Judge. 18 11, 27.
, and so they took their Land unto themselves for an Inheritance. Thus security
exposes men naked to Danger, and opens a wide door to destruction. For when
they shall say, Peace and Safety: then sudden Destruction comes upon them, as
travail upon a woman with Child, and they shall not escape 1 These. 5.3
. And therefore says the Lord, Woe to them that are So the Marg. Heb. (...)
SECURE in Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria, which are named chief
of the Nations, to whom the House of Israel came: [as to places of Worship,
Seats of Justice, Courts of their Kings.] Pass ye unto Calneh, and see; and
from thence go ye unto Hemath the great; then go down to Gath of the
Philistines: [all of them once great and mighty Cities, but now for their
sins, destroyed and ruined: so that whatever they sometimes were, behold them
now and see] be they better then these Kingdoms [of Judah and Israel?] or
their Border greater then your Border? ye that [in your carnal security] put
far away the Evil Day, [the Day wherein God will call you to account for all
your miscarriages, and severely punish you for all your provocations, though
you now (that you may the more securely continue in your sins) put the
Thoughts thereof far from you] and cause the Seat of Violence to come near
Amos 6.1, 2, 3.
. That is, says Diodate, You Chieftains, who put away far from you all thought
and fear of Gods Judgments, and in the mean while join with, and draw near
to Public Tyranny; as if sins and their punishments could go the one without
the other. But Gods Judgments will for certain at length surprise secure
sinners.

The Danger must needs be great when men live secure in the guilt of those
sins and Provocations, whereby they have made God himself to become their
Enemy. When men presume of safety, merely because they prosper in their sins;
and are settled on their Lees, because they are not yet emptied from vessel to
vessel, in the execution of the Lords Judgments; that think with themselves
because God has hitherto let them alone, he will neither meddle nor make, in
any thing that concerns them. Dreadful is the day of the Lords Wrath, which is
at hand, when he will narrowly search out these secure sinners, and severely
punish them for all their Provocations. For says the Lord, Am. 1.12 -- 18
It shall come to pass at that time [which is prefixed for their punishment]
that I will search Jerusalem with Candles, and punish the men that are settled
on their Lees; that say in their heart, The LORD will not do good, neither will
he do evil. Therefore their Goods shall become a Booty, and their Houses a
Desolation: they shall also build Houses, but not inhabit them; and they shall
plant Vineyards, but not drink the Wine thereof. The GREAT DAY of the LORD is
near, and hastes greatly, even the Voice of the DAY of the LORD: the mighty
man shall cry there bitterly. That Day is a DAY of WRATH, a Day of trouble and
distress, a Day of Wastness and Desolation, a Day of Darkness and
Gloominesse, a Day of Clouds and thick Darkness, a Day of the Trumpet and
Alarm against the fenced Cities, and against the high Towers. And I will bring
distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have
sinned against the LORD, and their Blood shall be poured out as Dust, and their
Flesh as the Dung. Neither their SILVER nor their GOLD shall be able to deliver
them in the day of the LORDS WRATH, but the whole Land shall he devoured by the
fire of his Jealousy: for he shall make a speedy Riddance of all them that
dwell in the Land. Thus presumptuous and secure sinners may at length pluck
down dreadful Judgments both upon themselves and the whole Land. When such
sinners are to be found in Zion, the Times must needs be perilous.

Before the persecution in Bohemia, the Churches there having had a long
continued calm of Peace, in the plentiful enjoyment of the Gospel and means of
grace, men began to grow extreme loose in their Lives, and very secure in
their sins, though they were guilty of many and great Provocations, insomuch
as many pious and prudent men began to presage that some horrible storm would
suddenly arise, and some fearful tempest would fall upon them: And the Event
answered the Expectation.

Now how perilous are those Times, wherein the Judgments of God are ready
every moment to fall upon the Heads of a secure People! When every man minds
his own private concernments, and little regards the Public; when no man duly
lays to heart the sins of the Times, or mournes for those Abominations
whereby the Lord is provoked to destroy the Land; when no man See Isa. 64.6, 7.
stirs up himself to take hold on the LORD, and call upon his holy Name; When
Gods own people do not so take notice of the Psalm. 28.5. Isa. 5.12.
Operation of his hands, do not so seriously mind his Providential
Dispensations, and lay to heart the distracted condition of his Church, as they
ought; when there is not that watchfulness, that care and zeal for the cause
of Christ, that frequency and seriousness in seeking of God that there ought to
be; but an universal slumber and security is fallen upon the children of men,
it is a sad Symptom of perilous Times.

Thus I have given you the Symptoms of perilous Times, and have now completed
the Number I intended; But I shall add one more by way of Corollary and
Conclusion, which carries in it a respect to all the rest,

The last (but not least) Symptom. The Peril of Plain-dealing.
THe Times are then perilous, When its a perilous thing for a man to lay down
They are the sins of men that make the Times perilous, and thence must we draw
the Symptoms of perilous Times. Now the more obdurate men are in their
sins, the more Impatient they are of reproofs, the more enraged they are at
their Reprover, hating him for telling them the Truth, and persecuting him for
warning them of the wrath to come, the more perilous are the times. Thus when
the wicked and rebellious Jews were faithfully reproved by Stephen, for those
fearful sins whereof their own consciences told them they were deeply guilty;
as when he plainly told them to their faces, that however they would be thought
the only people of God, they were no better then Persecutors and Murderers,
persecutors of the best of men, Murderers of the Son of God; they were cut to
the heart, and gnashed upon him with their teeth, and stoned him with stones to
death Acts 7.52 54, 59.
. And who knows not that these were perilous Times to the People of God?

Yea, these are perilous Times both to the Reprover, and to the Reproved: the
one is in danger of Persecution from men; the other is in Danger of Destruction
from God. Of such Times does the Lord speak by the Prophet Amos, saying; Am.
5.10
they hate him that rebukes in the Gate [the place of Public Conventions,
where wisdom cries to the simple Pro. 1.21
] and they abhor him that speaks uprightly, [not dealing deceitfully with
them in the matters of the greatest concernment.] But what follows hereupon?
Forasmuch therefore (says the Lord v. 11, 12, 13
) as your treading is upon the Poor, and ye take from him burdens of Wheat, ye
have built Houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them: ye have
planted pleasant Vineyards, but ye shall not drink Wine of them. For I know
your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins: they afflict the just,
they take a Bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the Gate from their Right.
Therefore the Prudent shall keep Nam sub Tyranno dicere quod velis,
periculosum; quod nolis, miserum est. Plin. Ep. 14. l. 8.
silence in that time, for it is an evil time. This, unless they had a Call
from God, as had the Prophets of the Lord, to reprove these wicked ones for
their sins, and to give in their Testimony, in the behalf of God against
their irregular and unjust proceedings.

The times are unquestionably perilous, when the Terrible one is in Power, and
the Scorner is in Favor, and they that watch for iniquity are rewarded: That
make a man an Offender for a Sub Tyranno voces non sunt liberae, multo minus in
Tyrannum Drepan. Paneg. c. 2.
Word, and lay a snare for him that reproves in the Gate, and turn aside the
just for a thing of naught. These are perilous Times to the People of God,
neither can the Church, according to the Scripture-Calculation, expect good
Days, till Isa. 29.20, 21.
the terrible one is brought to naught, and the scorner is consumed, and all
that watch for Iniquity are cut off: That make a man an offender for a Word,
and lay a snare for him that reproves in the Gate, and turn aside the Just
for a thing of naught. In that day v. 18, 19
shall the meek increase their joy in the LORD, and the poor among men shall
rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. Then v. 24.
they also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that
murmured shall learn Doctrine.

When the Great men of the Times shall become Terrible ones to the People of
God, and watch for opportunities to ensnare his Prophets, and seek an occasion
to persecute the Preachers of his Word, who reprove them for their fearful
Impieties and horrid enormities, whereby they pluck down Judgments upon the
whole Land, the Times must needs be evil and perilous. But yet let such know
the Judgment of God is ready to fall upon their own heads, who have thus laid
snares for the life of others. For, Judgment is toward you (says the LORD
Hos. 5.1, 2
) O House of the King [O ye State-Robbers, that have turned the Kings House
into a Den of Thieves] because ye have been a SNARE on Mizpah, and a NET spread
upon Tabor: [ i. e. You have laid snares to entrap the Innocent in their Lives
and Goods, as Hunters and Fowlers do upon the Hills of Mizpah and Tabor Diod.
Annot.
.] And the REVOLTERS are profound to make SLAUGHTER [q. d. they are profound in
making PLOTS to murder men] though I have been a REBUKER of them all [who have
thus villanously conspired against them, who have rebuked them for their sins
in my Name.] Thus will the Lord at length find out and punish proud and
presumptuous Persecutors of his Prophets and People; yet during the time of
their Prevalency and Predominancy, in Church and State, the Days must needs be
evil, the Times perilous.

When Micaiah, the Prophet of the LORD is rudely interrupted by false Prophets,
and smitten on the cheek for prophesying the Truth 1 King. 22.24.
: When this Injury is protected by an ungodly Prince, yea, and seconded by a
false Imprisonment, it is surely a perilous Time. When a wicked Ruler, rashly
engaged in a destructive enterprise, shall say concerning a Preacher of Gods
Word, that sought to reclaim him, ver. 27.
Put this fellow in the Prison, and feed him with Bread of affliction, and with
Water of affliction, until I come in Peace. When if a Prophet of the Lord, do
but forewarne the People of following judgments, some furious Captain shall
apprehend him, and falsely Accusandi frequens and publica Rabies gravius
togatam civitatem confecit. Senec. l. 3. c. 26. de Benef.
accuse him to the Princes of the people, and these shall without Color of Law
or Justice, smite him and cast him into prison. Yea, when this will not yet
satisfy their malice and cruelty, but they shall press hard upon him with
their false Accusations, saying, He weakens the hands of the Soldiers and
Citizens by preaching such things as these are, at such a season as this is;
and so under these pretenses seek to put him to Death; these are manifestly
perilous Times for the People of God, and surely some great Judgment hangs
over the Heads of such a Nation. For just thus did the Princes of Judah deal
with the Prophet Jeremy; and what followed thereupon, but the utter Ruin and
Destruction of the City Jerusalem, and the carrying Captive both of the Princes
and of the People into Babylon, as we read in the sacred Records of the Holy
Scripture See Jer. 37, 38, and 39. chapter
? Behold his usage, the fore-running presage of these soon-following calamities
on the Jewish Nation. It came to pass (says the sacred Story Jer. 37.11-15.
) that when the Army of the Caldeans was broken up from Jerusalem for fear of
Pharaohs Army, then Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the Land of
Benjamin, to separate himself thence in the midst of the People. And when he
was in the Gate of Benjamin, a CAPTAIN of the Ward was there, whose name was
Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah, and he took Jeremiah the
Prophet, saying, Thou fallest away to the Caldeans. Then said Jeremiah, It is
false, I fall not away to the Caldeans: but he hearkened not to him: so Irijah
took Jeremiah, and brought him to the Princes. Wherefore the PRINCES were wroth
with Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in PRISON in the House of Jonathan
the Scribe: for they had made that the Prison: But these wicked Princes are not
yet satisfied herewith. We have a further account of their injurious
proceedings against him, their false charge and bloody Petition preferred in an
unjust Court, with the Issue thereof, suiting to their own Desires, or rather
(though disguised in a Petitionary Way, as appears by the story) their
peremptory Demands, so little Reverence did they bear to the Authority of
their King. For thus is it recorded; Jer. 38.1-6.
Then Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah the son of Pashur, and Jucal
the son of Shelemiah, and Pashur the son of Malchiah, heard the words that
Jeremiah had spoken unto all the People, saying, Thus says the LORD, he that
remains in the City shall die by the Sword, by the Famine, and by the
Pestilence; but he that goes forth to the Caldeans, shall live: for he shall
have his Life for a Prey, and shall live. Thus says the LORD, This City shall
surely be given into the hand of the King of Babylon's Army, which shall take
it. Therefore the Princes said unto the King, We beseech thee let this man be
put to DEATH: for thus he weakneth the Hands of the men of War that remain in
the City, and the Hands of all the People, in speaking such words unto them:
for this man seeks not the [PEACE So the Marg. Heb. (...)
, or] Welfare of this People, but the HURT. Then Zedekiah the King said,
Behold, he is in your hand: for the King is not he that can do any thing
against you. Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him into the Dungeon of
Malchiah, the son of Hammelech that was in the Court of the Prison: and they
let down Jeremiah with cords: and in the Dungeon there was no water, but mire:
so Jeremiah sunk in the mire. Thus wicked Rulers are wont to exercise their
Rigours upon the Lords faithful Prophets, and then needs must such Times be
perilous to the People of God.

Thus when the Apostle fore-warnes us of perilous Times, he plainly tells us,
that in those Days, 2 Timothy 3.3
men shall be False-accusers, Fierce, Despisers of those that are Good. Say the
CAPTAINS of the Host to Jehu, concerning a Prophet of the LORD, 2 King. 9.5,
11.
Wherefore came this MAD fellow to thee? Thus when Piety is banished from the
Court, and Iniquity abounds in the Camp, Is. 59.15.
he that departs from Evil is accounted MAD So the Marg. and Jun. Hebr. (...)
Praedae exponit; se sed secundum R. Salom. Aberrans, vesanus, stultus habetur.
, and so hereby makes himself a PREY.

When the Scepter is snatched from the hand of VIRTUE, and the Sword is put into
the hand of VICE; when AUTHORITY is stripped of her Robes of State, and POWER is
clothed and adorned with her Spoils, it is high time for TRUTH and PIETY to
fly to the Sanctuary of God, and there to wait for the HONOR of MARTYRDOM at
his holy Altar.

When the Mines are made, the Powder is laid, and the Match is lighted for the
blowing up of the House, as the Danger is great to them that are therein, so
cannot the Discovery be made without Danger.

How sad is the state of things, when Warning shall be given to men from God of
their near approachings evils and Judgments, which God is ready to execute
upon them for their sins, and they shall contemptuously reject all such
Admonitions, with many tart invectives (at least) and sharp reflections upon
them that have thus warned and admonisht them in the Name of the Lord, saying,
All this is but out of the Pride of their hearts, the bitterness of their
spirit, and their Disaffection to the Government. Thus did the rebellious Jews
reject the reproofs and premonitions of the Prophet Ezekiel, immediately before
they experimented the strength of Gods hand, and the smart of his Rod in the
Babylonish Captivity. For thus, says he unto them, Ezekiel. 33.26
Ye stand upon your sword, ye work Abomination: q. d. Now ye have the sword in
your hand, ye trust in your own strength and are secure in your sins, as if
the Evils and Judgments whereof I have warned you in the Name of the Lord,
should never befall you. But says he unto them, v. 33.
When this comes to pass, (lo it will come) then shall they know that a
Prophet has been among them.

Demosthenes, the famous Athenian Orator, and illustrious Assertour of the
Grecian Liberties, against the injurious intrusions of the Macedonian Monarch,
being banished by his ungrateful Citizens, as he departed out of the City, a
company of the Athenian Youth coming to see him, he gave them this counsel;
that if they were wise they should never meddle in matters of State, all
Activity in public concernments being, through the Malice of some, and Envy of
others, continually attended with manifold Dangers and Disgraces. And further
to confirm his Counsel, for his own part he assured them, that if the Athenians
would afford him the Liberty of Choice, whether to go (as he was wont) into the
Assemblies to make Orations to the People, or to climb a Scaffold to receive
the stroke of Death, he now knew so much by his own experience of the Fears,
Envies, Suspicions, Slanders, Accusations and Injuries that still attend him
that shall interesse himself in the Affairs of the Commonwealth, though out
of a desire of the Public Good, he would rather choo^e the plain Way to
Death, then that rough and dangerous Path to Honor Plutarch, in Vita Demosth.
. What should be the ground of this Choice, but that he thought one Death was
rather to be chosen then many? Thus we see how public Persons are exposed to
Danger in perilous Times, especially when the Commonwealth is pestered with
Factious People. There are two things which a Factious, Ambitious People can
never bear, the Tongue of the Preacher, and the Head of the Prince. But beyond
all color of contradiction, the peril of Gods Ministers in delivering his
Message to a people professing Religion and godliness, speaks the Times to be
perilous.

But what shall I say more to this wicked Generation, but with the Apostle,
Gal. 4.16
Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Be it so;
Nevertheless (says the LORD Eze. 33.9
) if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it: if he do not turn from
his way he shall a^^ in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul. Well
then, Isa. 49.4.
I have not labored in vain, I have not spent my strength for naught and in
vain: For my judgment is with the LORD, and both my (...)
WORK and REWARD is with my God. Opus, Metonym. Operis, Merces. Buxt.


Thus we have largely resolved the first Question concerning the knowledge of
those Times, which the Apostle has foretold us shall be perilous: We shall
now give a brief answer to the two remaining Questions, and so proceed to the
second principal Enquiry which was at first propounded for the prosecution of
the subject.

The second Question.
Why are these Times so perilous?

Answ. Because, I. God is provoked. Favor of a gracious reconciled God makes
the Saints happy, and the Times blessed and glorious. But when the sins of
men have provoked the wrath of God, what can we expect but perilous Times? God
is no less dreadful in his Judgments, then he is gracious to his Saints in
the distribution of his Favors. Doubtless it is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God Heb. 10.31
. And the Abominations of such Times are so many Provocations of the most high
God. If his Jealousy burn like fire Ps. 79.5. Zeph. 1.18 and 3.8.
, and his fierce wrath should once be kindled Psalm. 2.12 Number. 11.33 Ps. 106.40
against us, how should the Inhabitants of the Land be as withered stubble
before him! What dreadful Judgments has a provoked God thrown down from
heaven upon a provoking people! He drowned the world with water, and burnt up
Sodom and Gomorrah with Fire, and has slain many thousands of his Enemies
with the edge of the Sword, for those fearful Impieties wherewith they provoked
the pure eyes of his glory. Needs must those be perilous Times, wherein the
Lord of hosts is fearfully and continually provoked to arm himself with
vengeance, and come forth to the Punishment of a rebellious People See Isa.
59.12-19
. He has lightening in his eyes, and thunder in his hands: if once he be
provoked to anger, he can in a moment burn up a sinful Nation, in an instant
break in pieces a rebellious People.

Men are perverted. When the minds of men are perverted by the Doctrines of
Deceivers, all their paths are full of darkness and danger. For the Mind is
the eye of the soul. And the Light of the soul, as of the Body is the eye: if
therefore thine eye be single (says our Savior) thy whole body shall be full
of Light. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness
Mat. 6.22 23
. He whose eyes are blind walks in darkness at noonday. And when men walk in
Darkness, they are continually exposed to Danger. When damnable Doctrines are
publicly preached, and multitudes are baptized into the Belief of them, and so
the souls of men are perverted and impoyson'd by them, these must needs be
Days of Danger, perilous Times. When the Power of Truth fails, and the
Plague of Error and Heresy reigns; When the Glory of true Christianity is
eclipst, and the Mystery of Iniquity is mightily working in the minds of men,
such Times must needs be perilous and pernicious.

III. The Land is polluted. Reigning patronized by those by whom they should be
punished, whereby they become National sins, do exceedingly pollute a Land.
Now when the Land is polluted, what can be expected but that God should depart
from it, and bring in a Deluge of Judgment, or kindle a dreadful burning to
purge it? Is not this then a sad presage of perilous Times? After the House of
the Lord in Jerusalem was polluted by the Abominations of the people of Judah,
both the City and the Temple was destroyed 2 Chronicles. 36.14, 15, etc.
. When the Land of Canaan was polluted by the sins of the Canaanites, God
delivered both them and their Land into the hand of the Israelites, and when it
was polluted by the Israelites, he delivered them up into the hand of the
Canaanites, as we read in the Book of the Judges See also, Psalm. 106.38-42.
. When the Land is polluted by its sins, it is just with God to Lam. 2.2
pollute it by his Judgments. And what then can we expect but perilous Times
in a polluted Land?

The third Question.
WHat is the peril of these Times?

Answ. The evils to be feared in these Times are such as these;

The judgment of God on the Land. God may justly bring the Sword and Famine
and Pestilence for the punishment of such a provoking People. These three
Arrows are ever ready in Gods Quiver to be discharged against his Enemies. God
may sweep that Land with the besome of Desolation, wherein men under pretenses
of Gods glory seek their own interests and establishment. He may punish
spiritual Abominations with temporal Judgments: Persecution, with War; the
plague of Errors, with the Pestilence; the Contempt of the heavenly Manna of
his holy Word, with Famine and want of necessary food. He may wash that Land
with Blood that has been defiled with Oppression and Murder. He may sweep that
house with the Pestilence that has been defiled with Pride and Perjury. He may
scourge that people with Famine, that have sinned through Fullness of Bread. He
may break that land in pieces by the thunder of his Judgments, that has not
taken warning by the lightening of his Threatenings, in the preaching of his
Word.

So for spiritual Judgments; for the Abominations of his People, the Lord may
go far from his Sanctuary Ezekiel. 8.6
. When a Church has left its first love, God may come speedily and remove its
Candlestick out of his Place Rev. 2.4, 5
. When men shall abuse the servants of the Lord, sent forth to gather the
Fruits of his Vineyard, he may justly destroy them, and give the Vineyard unto
others Mark 12.9.
. When men are grown greedy of the gain of Oppression, and weary of the
Ordinances of God; when Covetousness is become cruel in grinding the faces of
the Poor Isa. 3.25
, and Profanesse bold in slighting of Sabbaths and sacred Solemnities of Divine
Worship, God may justly cause that Land to tremble for the horror of his
Judgments, and plague that peoples contempt of his Worship by a Famine of his
Word. And so has the Lord threatened to punish these sins in his people
Israel, by his Prophet Amos, saying; Amos 8.4-12.
Hear this O ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the Poor of the Land
to fail, saying, When will the New Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn? and
the Sabbath, that we may set forth Wheat, making the Ephah [wherewith they
measured their Grain] small, and the Shekel [wherewith they weighed the money
which they received for payment] great, and falsifying the Balances by deceit?
That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes; yea,
and sell the refuse of the wheat? The LORD has sworn by the excellency of
Jacob, surely I will never forget any of their Works. Shall not the Land
tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwells therein? and it shall rise
up wholly as a flood, and it shall be cast out and drowned, as by the flood of
Egypt. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord GOD, that I will
cause the Sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear
day. And I will turn your Feasts into Mourning, and all your Songs into
Lamentation, and I will bring up sackcloth upon all Loins, and baldness upon
every Head: and I will make it as the mourning of an only son, and the end
thereof as a bitter Day. Behold the days come, says the Lord GOD, that I will
send a FAMINE in the Land, not a Famine of Bread, nor a Thirst for Water, but
of hearing the Words of the LORD. And they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and
from the North even to the East, they shall run to and fro to seek the Word
of the LORD, and shall not find it. When the Lord shall bring these judgments
upon a Land or Nation professing the true Religion, the Church may call her
Children 1 Samuel 4.21
ICHABOD, for the Glory is departed. Thus for the sins of Judah did the Ezekiel.
9.3 and 10.4, 18, 19.
Glory of the Lord (an illustrious pledge of his gracious presence) depart from
Jerusalem, and sad were the Calamities which ensued thereupon. Thus the Times
are perilous when the sins of men are grown to that height, that we may
justly expect the Judgments of God upon the Land.

II. Persecution of the Church. When Clouds of Darkness are spread over the
City of God, what can be expected to follow but showers of Blood? For when the
Sun shall be turned into Darkness, we well know the Moon shall be turned into
Blood Joel 2.31
. When a storm is raised by the Prince of the power of the Air, what can we
expect but that the Ship wherein Christ is embarked with his Disciples, should
be tossed on the Waters, and almost overwhelmed with the Waves Mar. 8.24
? When Images of Gold are set up and adored by the men of the World, what can
the children of God expect but to be cast into a fiery Furnace Dan. 3.1, 21
? When Gain is accounted Godliness, and Oppression of the innocent is styled
Justice, then whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution 2 Timothy 3.12
. When the Wolves come in flocks to the Fold, and Lions are the Lords of the
Soil, what can be expected but that the Sheep and Lambs should be worried?
When there is much Cockle amongst the Corn, much Chaff amongst the Wheat, we
may conclude it shall not be long (at least if the wind rises or turns)
before it be winnow'd. When we see every Shepherd in Israel is an abomination
to the Egyptians Genesis 46.34
, we may expect the Egyptians should pursue the Israelites, even into the heart
of the Red Sea. When the subtle Foxes are come into the Vineyard, we may
conclude their cruel Teeth will be soon died red in the Blood of the Grapes. If
the Scarlet Whore be once brought into the House of God, we shall soon see her
drunken with the Blood of the Saints Rev. 17.4, 5, 6.
. We still find the Names of the Saints written in Red Letters in the Romish
Calendar. If the SWORD depose the SCEPTER, and rule in its stead, we may be
sure it will eat flesh and drink Blood, yea, the blood of Kings, and Princes,
and Prophets, who leaving the Sword stained with the Guilt of Murder, shall be
themselves crowned with the Glory of MARTYRDOM. SIN is a cruel Monster; if it
once get the Supreme Power, it will soon turn a Land of Beauty into a Sea of
Blood.

III. Destruction of men's souls. If the great red Dragon with his Tail draw
down Stars of Heaven and cast them to the Earth Rev. 12.4
, we may expect a dark night to follow. If the Springs be impoyson'd, it must
needs be Death to men to drink of the waters. If the Philistines carry away the
Ark from Israel, we must expect many thousands to be slain and perish 1 Samuel 4
10, 11.
. If God take away his abused Gospel, call home his despised Ministers, and so
men loose the true Religion, how many thousand souls must necessarily perish
everlastingly. The soul is exceeding precious; its a Jewel inestimable, of more
worth then the whole World Mat. 16.26
: its loss is irreparable; a World of Gold cannot redeem one soul See Psalm.
49.7, 8. with 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
. Now when such a storm is risen that the souls of men are in danger of being
ship-wrackt, the state of that people is sad, the Times are perilous.

Thus we have seen the Characters of the Persons that make the Times perilous,
and the several Symptoms of perilous Times, with the Causes and Consequences
thereof, and so fully finished our first Enquiry.

The second Enquiry. How pious persons must demean themselves in perilous
Times.
IT much concerns the people of God to consider with themselves, what the Lord
calls them unto, and calls for from them in all conditions into which he is
pleased to cast them, that their Lives and Carriages may express a
Responsiblenesse to the Divine Providence. These are they whom the Lord has
selected from thousands to lift up his Name and Glory in the World. They are
therefore in a special manner to glorify God, by such Actings and Demeanours
as may be suitable to all his Dispensations. When God is most dishonored by
the wicked, the godly should most honor him. Saints are Soldiers called forth
to fight the Battles of the Lord of Hosts: when the Enemies of the Lord do most
abound and are most active, the Soldiers of his army should be most valiant
for his Cause, most vigilant against their force and Politic Encroachments
upon the interests of his Glory. The Trees of righteousness of Gods own
Planting, should bring forth Fruit in all Seasons. Times of Peril to the
Church, are Times of Trial of the Piety of the Saints. When sin appears in its
highest Pride, then should Grace shine forth in its greatest Glory.

As for you therefore, my beloved brethren, that truly fear the name of the
Lord, and desire to know what your Duty is in such Cases, attend these
Directions which I shall give you out of the Word of God.

When it is your Lot to live in perilous Times take notice of these Duties.

The first Duty. Sorrow for the Sins of the Times.
DO you live in evil Times? Then, Bewail Prevailing Impieties make the Times
perilous. The sins of the wicked call for the sorrows of the Saints, because
hereby the Name of God is dishonored, and the souls of men are defiled. Thus
was David's heart grieved and his eyes shed Tears for the sins of his Times. I
beheld the Transgressors (says he) and was grieved because they kept not thy
Word Psalm. 119 158
. And again, Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy
Law Psalm. 119 136
. When a Land is defiled by sin, these Rivers of Tears are the best means to
prevent a Deluge of Blood. When the wrath of God is kindled against an ungodly
Nation, there is nothing more powerful to quench it then the Tears of the truly
godly. By this means shall you preserve your selves from Defilement by the
sins of the wicked, and happily prevent the Judgments which are ready to be
executed on a sinful Nation.

Now, Christians, is not this a duty you are very Defective in? And yet is
there not much cause for it? When did you shed a Tear for all the Sins of the
Times? When did you ever look upon London, as Christ upon Jerusalem, a sinful
City, and weep over it Luke 19.41
? What? shall the streets of it run down with Rivers of Blood before you can
shed a few drops of Tears for its preservation? When did you meet together to
weep over a sinful Nation? When did you, that can easily weep upon other
occasions, go apart and pour out Tears into the bosom of God for the Sins
and Abominations of England, and say, Ah Lord! In thy Isa. 63.9
Pity and in thy Mercy spare a sinful Nation? Do you not see upon England many
Symptoms of her Destruction, except fervent Prayers steeped in penitent Tears
do prevent it? O how many and how great are the Abominations of the Land, the
Provocations of the most high God! What dreadful Days may we yet live to see
if the Lord should deal with us according to our Deservings! How soon may the
Clouds of heaven, which were wont to drop down Blessings on our heads, be
dissolved into showers of Blood.

Ah, my Beloved! have you not read, in the holy Scriptures, what dreadful
Judgments the Lord has executed upon Cities, Nations, Kingdoms, his own
People, yea the whole World? Know you not that God turned the whole Earth into
a Sea, and destroyed all Flesh (save the Family of Noah) with a Flood? How he
poured a Flood of Fire and Brimstone upon the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, and
consumed them with Flames, and turned that pleasant plain, that was as the
Garden of God Genesis 13.10
, into a noisome Lake? How that God was wroth with his own people, the children
of Israel, whom he had chosen to himself out of all the kindreds of the earth,
and slew them in the Wilderness, so that only Joshua and Caleb, of all those
that came out of Egypt, entered into Canaan? And how often after they were
possessed of the Land of Canaan, he sold them into the hands of their enemies
that oppressed them in the Time of the Judges? How in the days of Eli, he
delivered them into the hands of the Philistines, who slew them with a great
slaughter, insomuch that in one battle there fell of Israel thirty thousand
Footmen 2 Samuel 4.10
? How the Lord sent a Pestilence amongst them in the days of David, which
raged so exceedingly, that in three days space there died of the people
seventy thousand men 2 Samuel 24 15
? How the Lord brought the King of Babylon into Jerusalem, who burnt the Temple
of the Lord, the Palace of the Prince, and the Houses of the Nobles with Fire;
brake down the Wall thereof and utterly destroyed the City; carried both
Princes and People Captives into Babylon, where they endured a hard Bondage for
threescore and ten years 2 Hing. 25. and 2 Chro. 36.14 -- ult.
? Now (know you not that) all these things happened unto them for ensamples
unto us, and that they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of
the World are come 1 Cor. 10 6, 11.
? Oh do but consider seriously with your selves, what were the Causes of all
these fearful Judgments which God, who is the Father of Mercies, brought upon
the men of the world, yea, upon his own People. Were they not the sins of the
Times whereby men plucked down upon their own heads these Plagues and
Punishments? Now pause a little and consider seriously, Are not the same sins
that drew down Judgments upon them to be found amongst us? Is not the Pride,
Luxury, Lasciviousness, Licenciousness, Atheism and Impieties of the old World
to be found amongst us? Are there not Genesis 6.4.
Mighty men (Giants in worldly Greatness) who employ their might in fighting
against God, in these our Days? Are not the sins of Sodom to be found amongst
us? Is not the City and Land polluted with the vilest Impurities and
Pollutions? Are not the Murmurings, Cruelties, Injustice, Oppressions,
Falsehoods, Covenant-breakings, Revoltings, neglect of Gods Worship, Contempt of
his Ordinances, Hypocrisies of Israel to be found amongst the people of
England? Have we not then cause to tremble in the Apprehension of the
judgments which hang over our heads? especially if we seriously consider that
those sins which severally in them drew down such dreadful judgments, are to
be found jointly in us, and that notwithstanding the Light of the Gospel and
the Means of grace plentifully enjoyed by us, which are most fearful
Aggravations of this dreadful guilt? Nay, is not the guilt of many horrid
Blasphemies, and hellish Impieties which have not been heard of in former Ages,
to be found amongst us? Does it not make your hearts to tremble to consider
that so many crying sins, so many provoking impieties, so many bloody
Abominations should abound and reign amongst us, when for any one of them so
reigning, so abounding, the whole Land might be involved in miseries and
Confusion and Blood? Are not these then perilous Times? Surely, it is of the
LORDS mercies we are not consumed, and because his compassions fail not Lam.
3.22
, But who knows how soon the Lord in his Justice may proceed to the execution
of his Judgments upon us, and so turn our Chephzibah, a Land of Beauty, the
Lords Delight, into an Acheldama, a Field of Blood?

What then is to be done by us, Christians, for the Prevention of the Lords
Judgments on a sinful Land? O come and bring every one your two Buckets, and
pour them out before the Lord, for the quenching of the Fire of the Lords wrath
which is kindled against a sinful Nation. Fasting, and Weeping, and Mourning
has been a way which has proved very effectual for the turning away the
sorest Judgments, the diverting of the nearest Destruction. Thus was the
destruction of Jerusalem delayed in the time of Josiah 2 King. 22.19, 20.
, and the destruction of Nineveh in the Days of the Prophet Jonah Jon. chapter 3
. This is that to which God calls at such a time as this, in a Day of Danger
and Distress. When the Lord had threatened terrible Judgments against Zion,
this was the duty to which by his Prophet he called the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem. Joel 2.12-19.
Therefore also now says the LORD, Turn ye even to me with all your Heart, and
with FASTING, and with WEEPING, and with MOURNING: And rent your Hearts, and
not your Garments, and turn unto the LORD your God: for he is Gracious and
Merciful, slo^ to Anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the Evil.
Who knows if he will return and repent and leave a blessing behind him, even
a Meat Offering and a Drink Offering to the LORD your God?

Blow the Trumpet in Zion, sanctify a FAST, call a solemn Assembly. Gather
the People: sanctify the Congregation: Assemble the Elders; Gather the
children and those that suck the Breasts: Let the Bridegroom go forth of his
Chamber, and the B^ide out of her closet. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the
LORD, weep between the Porch and the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy People,
O LORD, and give not thine Heritage to reproach; that the Heathen should rule
over them. Wherefore should they say among the People, Where is their God?

Now mark what follows. Then will the LORD be jealous for his Land, and pity
his People. Yea, the LORD will answer and say unto his People, Behold, I will
send you Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith, and I
will no more make you a reproach among the Heathen. Now how great an
encouragement should this be to us in perilous Times, to seek the Lord
solemnly, seriously with Fasting and Prayer! Do you ever remember that the
Judgments of the Lord came upon his people while they were Fasting, and
Weeping, and Mourning? No, when sinnners are Feasting, and Sporting, and making
Merry, then does the Lord bring his judgments upon them, even sudden
destruction. For (says the holy Ghost) When they shall say, Peace and safety:
then sudden destruction comes upon them, as Travail upon a woman with child,
and they shall not escape 1 These. 5.3
. Do you know, or have you considered what was the carriage of the men of the
old world, when the Lord brought the Flood upon them; and of the children of
Israel a little before they were carried captive into Babylon? Why the
Scripture tells you, that in the Days of Noah, that were before the Flood,
they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in Marriage, until the day
that Noah entered into the Ark, and knew not until the Flood came and took
them all away Mat. 24.38, 39.
. They knew not, that is, they considered it not, regarded it not: For they had
been warned of the coming of the Flood by the Preaching of Noah for the space
of one hundred and twenty years, and by his preparing an Ark for the
preservation of himself and his own Family. So the careless posture of the
people of Israel, in a free indulgence of their sensual Delights, did but a
little precede that cruel Captivity and bitter bondage, which they so long
sustained in Babylon See Am. chap. 6.
.

Now are not the people of the Land, in these our Days, generally senseless of
the crying sins, and fearlesse of the following Judgments which may justly
fall upon us? Is it not time then for them that fear the Lord, to lay these
things to heart, and to weep and mourn before the Lord for these Abominations?
Does it not both well become, and neatly concern the people of God in the
Land, to call one another to Fasting and Mourning, and bitter Lamentation, lest
the Lord should kindle a fire in his wrath, so that none can quench it? O
Christians, can you sit still and be secure in such Times as these? What, do
you not care how soon the Gospel, the glory departs from England? Do you not
care what becomes of Religion, what befalls the Church, how soon you loose your
Opportunities of enjoying the blessed Ordinances of the Gospel? Oh are not
these Opportunities precious, are not the Ordinances of God precious, are not
the Ministers of the Gospel, and the People of God precious in your Esteem?
How then will your hearts bear it to see these Ministers of the Gospel
murdered, these people of God led as sheep to the slaught^r? Alas! you know
not how near the Days may be wherein you may say, Time was when we enjoyed the
Ordinances of God, and had many opportunities of seeking the Face of God in the
Assemblies of his Saints, but (alas) now we a^e deprived of these enjoyments.
And oh! will you not yet lay these things to heart, so as to mourn before the
Lord for those Evils whereby we have provoked the Lord to plague the whole Land
with his Judgments, and utterly to deprive us of these precious Privileges?

Do you see no cause of Fear, no signs of Danger? Are not Sabbaths profaned,
Ordinances contemned, the Word despised, the Sacraments slighted, Ministers
reviled, Scriptures rejected, the Spirit resisted, Christ crucified afresh, and
the Name of God blasphemed amongst us? Now are not these fearful Provocations
of the most high God? May not the despised Manna be restrained, and God give us
Quails (meat for our Lusts) in wrath? May not God justly punish men's
weariness of his Worship with a Famine of his Word? when men prize the World
above the Word of God; may not the Lord justly take away his Word and Gospel
from such an unworthy people? May not he suffer the seals of his Covenant, the
Pledges of his love to be taken away from us, or polluted to us? May not our
Teachers be removed into a corner? May not the Holy Scriptures, the
Well-springs of our Comforts and Joy, be sealed up from us? May not God take
away his Holy Spirit from us, that he may no more Genesis 6.3
strive with a people devoted to destruction? May not God charge upon the Land
the guilt of his Sons Blood, and revenge upon a rebellious people the wrong
done to his own Name? Is it not then high time for us to Am. 4.12
meet the Lord by Repentance, and to humble our selves before him for the sins
of the Land, lest his indignation break forth upon us as a Breach of the Sea,
and there be no means left to escape?

Come then, Christians, and let us weep and mourn before the Lord. It may be
he may regard our Tears, and hear the voice of our weeping Psalm. 6.8
, and put on Bowels of Compassions toward us, and spare our Land. Who knows
but the whole Land may fare the better for the sakes of a few Mourners in Zion?
Oh let us every one labor to become one of that number. So when the Lord shall
arise and have mercy upon Zion, we shall be called to partake of her Joy.
Rejoice for joy with her (says the Lord Isa. 66.10
) all ye that have mourned for her.

However, Christians, go into your Closets, and weep before the Lord in secret,
for the sins whereby God is openly dishonored: This was the holy resolution
of the Prophet Jeremy upon the pride and stubbornness of the people of Judah,
the sad Symptoms of approaching Judgments. Hear ye (says he) and give ear,
Jer. 13.15, 16, 17.
be not proud: for the LORD has spoken. Give glory to the LORD your God,
before he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark
Mountains, and while ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of Death,
and make it gross Darkness. But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in
secret places for your Pride, and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with
tears, because the LORDS Flock is carried away captive.

Now if you be of the number of those that mourn and sigh for the Abominations
of the Times, if the Lord shall bring his Judgments in your days upon the
Land, he will prepare his secret Chambers of providence for your preservation.
Thus the Lord sent his Angel to set a Mark upon the foreheads of the men that
mourned for the sins of Jerusalem, that they might be spared, when all the
rest of the City by an impartial stroke were to suffer an inevitable
destruction See Ezekiel. 9.4-7.
. Thus Lot living in Sodom, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
a lustful City, vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with a holy sorrow
for the sins of the filthy Sodomites, and so the Lord preserved him in the
dreadful overthrow of that sinful City. O then, Christians, mourn and weep for
the sins of the Times, the Abominations of the Age wherein you live, and it
may be you may by this means save the City, save a Kingdom from destruction,
however you shall be sure to save your own souls.

The second Duty. The Practice of Piety.
ARe they Days of Danger, Times of Dare to be pious though the Times be
perilous. To be religious, when Religion is both in Fashion and in favor is
no great praise: but its the glory of a Saint to be Holy and Good, when the
Times he lives in are sinful and Evil. It Is a Crown of glory which shall
flourish for ever, which the Hand of God himself has set upon the head of
Noah; Genesis 6.9.
Noah was a just man, and perfect in his Generations, which were sinful and
wicked. Job shone as a bright Star in the East, when almost all the world was
overspread with Darkness. And therefore God himself has given him an
honorable Testimony in his Word, both for Job. 1.1
Piety and Jam. 5.11
Patience, and thereby an everlasting blessed Memorial. Doubtless its a Saints
Duty to be religious, when for Religions sake he is exposed to Danger. Here Is
the trial of sincerity, when Truth fails, Isa. 59.15. See the Margin.
and he that departs from iniquity makes himself a prey, and is accounted mad
for his pains. Better it is to lose the favor of men, then to incur the
displeasure of God. The loss of the favor of men is nothing, compared to the
gain of the favor of God. Its nothing to flock to the Tabernacle in Times of
Peace; but its worthy of Israelites indeed to accompany the Ark of God in all
the perils of War. Be not discouraged, Christians, by the Danger of the Times,
from doing those Duties whereby in your places you may glorify God.

Moreover, consider, to be good in bad Times, is the way to make bad Times
good. And therefore, says Hierome, Ne dicas priora Tempora meliora fuere quam
nunc sunt; Virtutes faciunt Dies bonos, Vitia malos Hier. in Eccl. c. 41.
.
Say not the Times were better heretofore then now they are; Virtues make good
Days, Vices bad. Its then the wisdom of a Christian to turn his complaint of
evil Times, into the Practice of excellent Virtues; for this will be singularly
conducible to the making of the Times good.

(...). Chrysostom. (...).

For the Day is good or bad (says Chrysostom) not according to its own Nature
(for one day does nothing differ from another:) but according to our diligence
or slothfulness in the improvement of it. If thou workest righteousness, the
day becomes good unto thee; if thou committest sin, evil and full of Vexation.
If thou wisely considerest these things, thou may so dispose thy self, as to
have the whole year prosperous and happy: This, if thou make Prayer and
Almsdeeds to be thy daily exercise. Thus Christian Virtues, and Exercises of
Religion are the most excellent Antidotes against Evil Times. To be diligent,
serious and constant herein, is the only way to see good Days. Though a man
be encompast with the blackest midnight of Darkness, let him light up his
Lamps, and he presently enjoys the Benefit and protection of the Light, which
does, as it were, with a thousand glistering Spears, defend him against the
Invasion of all the Forces of Darkness. Certainly there is nothing more
necessary and conducible, more excellent and efficacious for the changing of an
IRON AGE into a GOLDEN SEASON, then the constant exercise of PIETY and CHARITY
amongst Christians.

And if every Christian would but seriously mind his Particular Duty, how much
might he contribute to the General good! How soon are the foul streets of a
great City made clean, by every man's sweeping his own Door! How soon would the
great work of REFORMATION be accomplished, if every one would but reform one! So
should the most dangerous Days soon become, what by many they are falsely
called, glorious Times. For its the Goodness or Badnesse of men which makes
the times good or bad. Those are the worst Times, wherein men are worst; and
those the best Times, wherein men are best. Though bad Times are worst to the
best men, yet good men should be best in the worst Times. Such was Noah in the
old World, Lot in Sodom, Daniel in Babylon; Golden Saints in an Iron Age. Thus
in the Evening of the Old Testament-Administration, when the darkest shades
veiled the Churches Glory, some Saints there were which shone as bright rising
Stars in the rays of true Piety, which sparkled as orient Jewels in the luster
of godly Zeal and invincible Sincerity. For when base Hypocrites began to
blaspheme, and say Mal. 3.13-17
, It was in vain to serve God, and it was to no profit or purpose to keep his
Ordinance, or to walk humbly before him: When they began to call the proud
happy, because they saw them that wrought wickedness exalted, and those that
tempted God delivered; Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to
another. And oh precious were these Persons, and this their Piety in the
account of God! For, Then the LORD hearkened, and heard it, and a Book of
Remembrance was written before him for them that feared the LORD, and that
thought upon his Name. And they shall be mine says the LORD of Hosts, in that
day when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own
son that serves him. Now who would not but desire this special interest in
Gods Love and Favor, in Times of Danger and Distress? What an encouragement
then, Christians, should this be unto you to be good in bad Times!

Certainly, Christians, sanctity is the best way to security. The (...), i. e.
qui Coelum spectar. Athen. l. 7. and Plin. l. 32. c. 7.
Uranoscope is a Fish (as the Naturalists tell us) which has but one eye, just
on the top of the head, looking upward toward heaven, yet thereby she foresees
and prevents Dangers. To keep the Eye of the soul ever open Heavenward, is the
safest way for the Prevention of those Dangers to which we are exposed in the
troublesome Sea of this World. For God has an Eye continually open upon them
for their Preservation, who have an Eye continually open upon him, in their
Convertions. Yea, by this means you may nor only save your self, but be a
happy means to save the whole Nation, by standing in the Ezekiel. 22.30
Gap (as Psalm. 106.23
Moses) to hinder the breaking in of Gods Judgments upon a provoking People. O
then be Diligent, Christians, and Constant in the serious Practice of solid
Piety.

This General Duty has several Branches, which are of special Concernment to
Christians that live in perilous Times; and therefore take notice of them in
these following Particulars.

The first Branch.
KEep your selves from the Corruptions of the Times. Take heed of being tainted
with the sins and Abominations of the Times wherein you live. The fuller the
World is of Defilements, the greater must your care be to Jam. 1.27
keep your selves unspotted from the world. Thus Noah kept himself clear from
the Corruptions of the old world; Lot preserved himself pure from the
Pollutions of Sodom; Daniel was not defiled with the Idolatries of Babylon.
Thus the Fish retains its Freshness in the salt Sea, the Rose its sweetness
amongst the noisome weeds, and the Diamond its Brightness though it lie in the
Dust. Gold though melted in the Furnace will not mix with the Dross. Keep your
selves pure from sin, as you desire God would preserve you (as Noah in the Ark)
safe from Danger in perilous Times. If you cannot make the Times better, yet
see that the times do not make you worse. In Times of a common Contagion
there is much danger to eevery particular Person. Take heed of Decays of grace
by the increase of sin in the World. When Mat. 24.12
Iniquity abounds, take heed lest your Love to God and goodness wax Cold.
Though Errors abound, be careful you decay not in your love to the Truth. You
have been forewarned of these Evils in the Word of God, that you might not be
ensnared with them, when the perilous Times therein foretold are come upon
you. Let me bespeak your ear and watchfulness in this respect, in the words
of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18.
Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also
being led away with the Error of the wicked fall from your own steadfastness.
But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
to him be glory both now and for ever. Amen.

The second Branch.
STrengthen not, by an active Compliance, These are they which make the Times
perilous. A quiet submission to the Providence of God, wisely ordering all the
Changes in the world, does well become the Saints. It is good for a Saint to
take notice of Gods hand in all things, and to submit to his Will (as well in
permitting of Evil, as in Depriving of good) with silence. So David, though at
the first Ps. 39.1, 2
troubled to see the wicked in Power while the righteous was oppressed, at length
expressed his submission by silence; Psalm. 39.9
I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. But every Godly man
must have a singular care, lest by any active compliance, he should strengthen
the hand of Evil Doers in their irr^gular actings. This was the sin wherewith
the Lord sharply charged Jehoshaphat, a good King, by the hand of Jehu, the
Prophet, and threatened wrath for it. 2 Chr. 19 2
Should thou (says Jehu to Jehoshaphat) help the ungodly, and love them
that hate the Lord? Therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. And
therefore though the Lord of all may permit great changes to be irregularly
made, both for the manifestation and punishment of the Pride of man, yet must
not his people yield any consent or concurrence to them that irregularly make
them. This is the wise Counsel of the wisest of men, which was dictated to him
by the wisdom of God; Prove. 24 21, 22.
My son, fear thou the LORD and the King: and meddle not with them that are
given to change, For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the
ruin of them both? Take heed therefore, Christians, of contributing to the
Rise of Evil Doers, lest you fall in their Ruin Rev. 18.4
. Partake not in their sins, lest you partake of their Plagues, and feel the
smart of their Punishments, for having tasted the sweetness of their Favors.
Esaias 8.11, 12.
For (to speak to you in the words of the Prophet) the Lord spoke thus to me
with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this
people, saying, say ye not, A Confederacy, to all them to whom this people
shall say, A Confederacy; neither fear ye their Fear, nor be afraid. Take heed
therefore lest by your concurrence with them whose pernicious practices do make
these perilous Times, you contract to your selves the guilt of their sins,
and contribute to the Evil of the Times.

Let not the Desire of Gain or Glory, nor the Fear of Disgrace or Danger induce
you hereunto. A man can never be undone by the greatest loss he can sustain
for the keeping a good conscience, and preserving an interest in Gods Love and
Favor. He is Rich and Happy that has God for his Portion, and Heaven for his
Inheritance, how great soever his sufferings and losses be; when he that wants
this, notwithstanding his greatest worldly Gain or Glory, is Poor and
Miserable. Account not that Gain which may hazard the loss of your immortal
soul. Mar. 8.36
For what shall it profit a man, if he should gain the whole world and loose
his own soul? Abhor the baseness of serving your self of the evil of the
Times, by seeking a private gain, by that which will turn to the public
loss. Abhor the baseness of fearing to adventure a private loss, by that
which may turn to the Public gain. Never expect that God should bless those
Riches to you or yours, which are raised out of the Ruins of the Church or
Commonwealth. He is no good member of either that has not learned to deny his
Private Interests for the Public Good.

The third Branch.
COnsider one another to provoke unto Love and good Works Heb. 10.24
. When a Fire is kindled in a House, in a City, every one that can should
contribute his help to quench it. O labor to quench the Flames that are
kindled in the Church, which is the 1 Timothy 3.15
House and Heb. 12.22
City of the living God. O stir up one another to the exercise of Brotherly
Love and Charity, and so help to cement the Breaches that are amongst Brethren
in the Family of God. It Is the Policy of your enemies to Divide you to your
Ruin; It Is your wisdom jointly to endeavor after that Union which is your
beauty, strength, and glory. Stir up one another also to good works as means
singularly conducible to the amendment of evil Times. There is no season so
sharp but the Trees of Righteousness should be laden with fruit. Good Works
are a singular Ornament to the Saints in evil Times. Good Works are a
Christians Shield and Crown; his safety in Danger, as they interesse him in the
Psalm. 41.2
Promise of Preservation, and in Disgraces his Crown of glory. Now it well
becomes Christians to encourage one another to those duties whereby they may
most honor God in times of danger and discouragement. When the Proud were
invested with Power, and profane Politicians had exalted themselves; they were
perilous Times for the People of God; yet Mal. 3.16
Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, by way of Counsel,
Comfort, and Encouragement in the ways of God. O labor to do as much good as
you can in a little time. For when the Days are Evil, you know not how little
time you may have, how few Opportunities of well-doing you may enjoy. Ephesians.
5.15, 16.
See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, Redeeming the
Time because the Days are evil.

The fourth Branch.
LIve in the exercise of your most excellent Let the Luster of them appear in
the eyes of the World, that so you may diminish the Darkness of an evil
Generation. When the Nights are darkest every one should be careful to hang out
their Lights. When the Sun, the Chariot of Light, has carried the Day to
another World, the Night comes forth decked with all her Jewels. Search your
Cabinets, put on your Jewels, exercise your Graces, your Faith, Love, Patience,
Humility, Zeal, Hope, Confidence, and so labor to preserve a Day of Light and
Holiness, in spite of all the encroachments of the darkness of Sin and Vice.
Labor to be every whit as Good as others are Evil. Stir up your selves
especially to the exercise of those Graces, which stand in opposition to the
reigning Vices of the Times. Study to show your selves as Active for God, as
others are for the World: as truly Content with your condition as others are
Covetous, Oppressive, Ambitious; as Faithful, as others are False; as Pious, as
others are Profane; as much to excel in Charity, Moderation, Humility, as
others exceed in Cruelty, Censoriousnesse and Pride. It well becomes Saints to
be best, when the Times are worst. So Fire burns hottest in the coldest
weather, and Stars shine brightest in the darkest Nights. So shall you lift up
the Name and Glory of God in the World, and your lives shall be illustrious
Testimonies for the cause of God against a wicked world. Beg Grace of God
therefore that in evil and perilous Times you may live to his Glory; Phil. 2.15
That ye may be blameless and Harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke, in
the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as Lights in
the World.

The fifth Branch.
DAre to appear in your places for the Why should not every pious Christian
dare to do more for God, and the interests of his Glory, then any profane
Politician dares to do against him? Why should you be afraid to appear on the
stronger side? It is indeed desperate Folly and Madness in impotent man to
presume upon any action or undertaking, which carries in it an apparent or
consequential Opposition to an Omnipotent God, upon whose Providence he has a
continual dependence, insomuch as without some concurrence thereof, he cannot
move a Hand, nor stir a step? Alas! This Almighty God can with the least
Finger of that glorious Hand by which he governes this All, in one moment crush
the greatest Armies of the mightiest men upon earth, as a Job. 4.19
Moth, and crumble them into dust. But for the Saints, that are guarded with an
Omnipotent Arm, they may with a holy confidence appear in the Cause of God,
against the most potent adversaries in the world. For greater and stronger is
he that is with us, then they that are with them: For (as the good King
Hezekiah said to the Captains of his Army at the approach of the King of
Assyria 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8.
) with them is an Arm of Flesh, but with us is the LORD our God, to help us.
And Romans 8.31
if God be for us, who can be against us? Fear not then, ye sons of the
mighty, ye children of the most high, to appear for God and his cause against
the impieties and iniquities of evil and perilous times. Remember, Rev. 21.8
the fearful are set in the Front of that Troop of Rebels, that shall be sent
to Hell. Know you not that in this case when Gods Cause and Glory suffers, He
that is not for God is against him. Take heed then lest while you fear a lesser
danger you fall into a greater. It Is then your greatest wisdom and safety to
take the strongest side, and that is to appear for God. So may you say; with
David, Ps. 118.6
The LORD is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me? And again,
Ps. 56.11
In God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto me.
Psalm. 118 8, 9.
It is better to trust in the LORD then to put confidence in man. It is better
to trust in the LORD, then to put confidence in Princes.

Dare to appear for God therefore in your places, and to plead his Cause
against wicked and unreasonable men with more Courage, Resolution, and
Boldness, then they have to oppose it. Stand up therefore in Days of Danger,
and appear for the Truth and Glory of God that made you, for the Honor and
Interests of the Lord Jesus Christ, that redeemed you with his own precious
blood; appear for his Word and Worship, his Ordinances and Ministers, his
Sabbaths and Sacraments, his Church and Saints, and all the just Rights, Dues
and Privileges thereof, against a wicked Generation of men that dare openly
deny the Truth, and profane the Name of God; that are not afraid to cast
Contempt and Reproach upon his Word and Worship, to scoff at his Sabbaths and
Sacraments, and slight his holy Ordinances, to abuse, revile and vilify his
Ministers, his Ambassadors, seeking to pluck their meat from their mouths,
desiring to imbrue their hands in their blood, endeavoring their utter
extirpation out of the Church of God; that dare to lay sacrilegious hands upon
the Rights and Revenues of the Church (which she holds by a firmer Title then
the greatest Lord in the Land does or can do his inheritance) and thereby seek
to turn her children out of their Possession, that they may enrich themselves
(as too many have done) by the Churches Ruins. Now, Christians, will you be
afraid or ashamed to appear in so just a cause, against such wretched men, such
wicked Adversaries as these? Shall these come under the Name of Religion, and
rob you of the thing, while you sit still and do nothing? Shall the Interests
of Christ, and Glory of God fall to the ground, rather then you will rise up
and appear for the maintenance of the one, and defense of the other? How will
you answer it to God at the great day of account? O therefore be not afraid to
appear for the Cause of God against the Evil of the Times, in the Places and
Stations wherein God has set you. This will be your Crown of Glory, and Cause
of Rejoicing at the great Day of the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ.

And oh that those that are Highest in Place and Power would seriously lay
these things to heart, and quitting all self-interests inconsistent with the
Cause and Interests of the Kingdom of Christ, sincerely study and endeavor
the advancement of Gods Glory, in the establishment of Truth, and true Religion
amongst us! And is it not most reasonable which I plead for, when those I speak
to are professed Christians, and that I plead for is the Cause of Christ? Why may
nor the Ministers of the Gospel be as well heard to plead for the Worship and
Ordinances of Christ, as the professed Enemies of the Gospel Ministry to plead
against them by whom these Ordinances of Worship (according to the order of the
Gospel) are to be administered. Give me leave then to reason with you, and plead
the Cause of God. Why stick you at the Establishment of the Worship of God in
the Land, and the punishment of such rebellious Atheists as obstinately refuse
to worship him? What think you, is there a God, or not? If there be a God, and
but one God, is he to be worshipped or no? If he be to be worshipped, whether are
you still to seek how he is to be worshipped, and still in doubt what are the
Ordinances of his Worship? What, are not the holy Scriptures the Word of God?
Is not his Will therein plainly and clearly revealed touching the Ordinances of
his Worship? Well then, are not the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, undeniably
the Ordinances of his worship? Have they not been so received and reverenc't by
the Churches of Christ in all Ages? Ought not this Worship then by the Civil
Sanction of the Christian Magistrate to be established in the Land? Ought not
they that are in Gods stead for Government to see that God be worshipped? Ought
not then Ministers of the Gospel, rightly called to that sacred Office,
according to express Gospel-Rule, to be placed, maintained, and protected in
every City, Town and Parish (where there is a competent number of people to
attend the service of God) for the administration of the Ordinances of his
Worship? Ought not all the People of these places to be Authoritatively
enjoined to give dilgent, constant, reverent Attendance upon the Public
Worship of God in these holy Ordinances, and that under some Penalty for every
Wilful Neglect, which might be conveniently employed for the Relief of the Poor
in such places? And ought not those that obstinately refuse to worship God in
these his holy Ordinances, and much more those that cast Reproach upon them,
and them that do attend them, to be chastised (as the worst sort of Romans 13.3,
4.
Evil doers, being open Rebels against the God of Heaven) with some severer
punishment? Shall not they that neglect their Duty in this kind be guilty of
all the dishonours that are done to God, by all those that neglect, contemn
and reproach the Ordinances of his Worship? Was the Scripture silent, does not
the Light of Nature clearly discover an Obligation, as to the substance of this
duty, to lie upon those who are called forth by Divine Providence to Govern
for God, to whom alone pertaines, by original Right, the Government of the
World? I shall leave these things to your Consideration, only minding you that
you shall be called to account at the Judgment Day for whatsoever Power you
are entrusted with, how you have obtained, employed and improved it for God;
and setting before you the excellent Example of an Heathen Prince, even
Artaxerxes King of Persia, who releast the children of Israel from their
Captivity in Babylon, and gave order for their return to Jerusalem, and the
setting up and establishment of the right Worship of the true God, by the
special Direction and Conduct of the Spirit of God. A special passage of his
Commission or Letter of Trust to Ezra the Scribe (as is recorded in the holy
Scripture Ezra 7.25, 26, 27.
) we have in these words; And thou Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God, that is
in thy hand, set Magistrates and Judges, which may judge all the People that
are beyond the River, all such as know the Laws of thy God, and teach ye them
that know them not. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law
of the King, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto
death, or to Banishment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment. And
that this Counsel was of God, it appears from the Words of Ezra hereupon,
Blessed be the LORD God of our Fathers, which has put such a thing as this in
the Kings Heart, etc. Now what is this but a branch of the Moral Law, requiring
the right worship of the true God, explained in the Edict of a Heathen Prince,
whose hand was herein guided by the Spirit of God, and his Example recorded to
be approved of God, and so consequently of perpetual obligation to all people,
and at all times, as well under the New Testament as the Old? But the Robbery
of the wicked shall destroy them; because they refuse to do judgment Pro. 21.7
.

It much concerns also inferior Magistrates and Officers, who are entrusted
with Power for the Punishment of Offenders, to be faithful in the discharge of
their Duty. By this means a good stop might be put to many of the spreading
Abominations of the Times. Drunkenness and R^velling, Swearing and
Sabbath-breaking, and such like vile enormities, and God-provoking sins might
in a great measure be restrained, if those persons in every Town and Parish, to
whom it pertaines by virtue of their Office to take cognizance of these and
such like Crimes, were but as Vigilant and Active as they might and ought to
be, to bring those that are found guilty of them to condign punishment. But
through the sloth and regardlesnesse of Officers, such Offenders grow bold,
and such Crimes become common, such Abominations are exceedingly multiplied.
But oh that such would consider, that all the sins of those Places and Persons
which they have received Power to restrain or punish, and exercise it not, are
justly chargeable upon their heads, and they stand guilty of them in the sight
of God. For it is a sure Rule; Malum qui, cum potest, non prohibet, facit.
He that may hinder an Evil and does not, is guilty of it. And if according to
this Rule, all the Oaths, Curses, Drunkennesses and Profanations of the Lords
day, which might have been prevented or punished by Persons invested with
Authority and Power for that purpose, be justly chargeable upon them for their
neglect of their Duty in this Case, we may surely say, without any slander,
Many of our Magistrates and Officers (however they may seem sober and
religious persons) are the greatest Swearers, Cursers, Drunkards, and
Sabbath Breakers in the Land. And doubtless many shall be indicted and
condemned for these sins, at Gods Tribunal, in the Day of Judgment, because
they have not exercised the power wherewith they were entrusted, in their
Places, for the punishment of them in others. Oh therefore stir up your selves
with Zeal and Faithfulness to the Execution of your Office, the discharge of
your Duty in this kind, that you may restrain Sin in others, and keep off
Guilt from your own souls, prevent the Dishonor of God, and the Destruction of
the Land. This also would very much conduce to a Happy Change of the Times. For
never can we expect to see good Days, till Am. 5.24
Judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream, for the
purging of the Land from its Impurities and Abominations.

The third Duty. Prayer for Amendment.
IS it your Lot to live in Evil Times, Pray to the Father of Eternity for the
Change and Amendment of the Times. All our Ps. 31.15
Times are in his Hand; he changes them from good to bad, or bad to good as
pleases him. It Is he that causes the Sun to shine, or covers it from us with a
Cloud, as he pleases: Our Days are clear or cloudy, our Times are good or
evil, according to his Ordering and Government. To whom then should we go but
to him, that orders all changes, for the change of evil and perilous, into
good and prosperous Times? He can take away evil men, or make them good, and so
amend the Times. When we see men continue in their sins, and daily grow to a
greater height of Wickedness, we have then cause to fear the Times will grow
worse rather then better. And therefore in this Case, the People of God had
need be very earnest and importunate with God in their Prayers, lest the
Provocations of the wicked should be more prevailing for the bringing down of
the Judgments of God, then the Prayers of his People for the Prevention of
those Judgments, and the Procurement of his Mercies, upon the Land. When the
sins of the Land cry aloud for Judgment, the Saints of God had need to cry
aloud for Mercy. The Prayer of Faith is the most effectual means, by Gods own
appointment for the Removal of evils felt, the Prevention of evils feared, and
the Procurement of good things desired. There is not therefore a more sad
Symptom of the approach of some dreadful Judgment then the Restraint of the
Spirit of Prayer in the People of God. Thus when Israel had fearfully provoked
God, by customary commission of gross sins after glorious deliverances, as
Theft, Murder, Adultery, Perjury, Idolatry; and had extremely aggravated these
sins by pretenses of Religion and godliness; (For they would come and stand
before the LORD in his House, as if they should say, We are delivered to do all
these Abominations, as the Lord has testified against them by his Prophet Jer.
7.9, 10
) and when thereupon God purposed to cast them off for their sins, he forbad
his Prophet to pray for them. For, says the Lord, Jer. 7.15 16
I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your Brethren, even
the whole seed of Ephraim. Therefore pray not thou for this People, neither
lift up Cry nor Prayer for them, neither make Intercession to me, for I will
not hear thee. This Prohibition of the Prophets Prayer for them, was more
terrible then the Commination of the sorest Judgment against them. While a
Praying Spirit is kept up in the hearts of Gods people, there is hopes of
prevailing with God for mercy for a sinful Nation. Prayer does as it were bind
up the hands of Omnipotency, that an offended God cannot inflict a deserved
Punishment upon a provoking People. And therefore when the Israelites had made
them a Molten Calf, and worshipped it, and the wrath of God was kindled against
them to destroy them, Moses by his Prayer prevented their Destruction. And
therefore did the Lord speak thus to Moses; Exodus 32.9, 10. with Deuteronomy. 9.13 14
I have seen this people, and behold it is a stiffnecked people. Now therefore
LET ME ALONE that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume
them, and blot out their name from under Heaven. And I will make of thee a
great Nation, even a Nation mightier and greater then they. Thus we see God
could not execute his fierce wrath upon his people, unless Moses would let him
alone by ceasing to pray for them. But this Command being rather Declarative of
Gods wrath against Israel, then expressive of his Pleasure that Moses should
cease Praying, ( Holy Prayer being Gods Delight) Moses still proceeds in his
Intercession for Israel, and joins Fasting with his Prayer, and so prevailed
for Mercy. For it is said, Exodus 32 11, 12.
Moses besought the LORD his God, and said, Lord, why does thy wrath wax hot
against thy people, etc. Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil
against thy people. And how gracious an Answer did he receive unto his prayer!
For it is said hereupon ver. 14.
And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people. And
again, when Moses had beheld their abomination, in making and worshipping the
molten Calf, he thus relates his Carriage and success; Deuteronomy. 9.18, 19,
And I fell down (says he) before the Lord, as at the first, forty days and
forty nights: and I did neither eat bread nor drink water, because of all your
sins, which ye sinned in doing wickedly, in the sight of the LORD to provoke
him to Anger. For I was afraid of the Anger and hot displeasure wherewith the
Lord was wroth against you to destroy you. But the Lord hearkened unto me at
that time also. And therefore is it recorded of him in the Holy Scripture, that
the Lord said, That he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood
before him in the Breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them
Psalm. 106 23
. And does not the Lord (such is his infinite Patience) before he proceeds to
the Execution of his Judgments upon a rebellious People for their unsufferable
Provocations, seek for a man among them that may make up the hedge, and stand
in the Gap before him for the Land, that he may not destroy it Ezekiel. 22 30
? O then that some Moses might arise and plead with the Lord for his people,
that he might remove his Judgments, and continue his Mercies to them, and
spare a sinful Nation, a defiled Land! So Abraham brought down Gods Mercy by
Steps, in his Genesis 18.23. ult.
Intercession for Sodom, so far, that if but Ten righteous persons had been
sound in that whole sinful City, God would not have destroyed it. Now how
great an Encouragement should this be unto you, Christians, in Perilous Times,
to make your Addresses to God by fervent Prayers! Oh! Is there none that will
lift up a Prayer for a sinful Nation, before the Lord proceed to execute the
fierceness of his wrath upon it? O stir up your selves to wrestle with God in
his own strength, and resolve not to let him go till he bless the Land. O Pray,
Pray, Pray without ceasing, that the Lord would turn away his Anger from us,
and after all our Shakings and Divisions, settle Peace and Truth, Righteousness
and true Religion amongst us. And, Oh! Esaias 62.6, 7
Let the Watchmen that stand upon the Walls of the City of God, never hold their
peace: O ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence; And giv^ him no
Rest, till he establish England, and make his Church in this Land a Praise in
the Earth. Oh let all the Children of God unite their Forces, with Faith and
Fervor to present unto the Lord that excellent Prayer of the Church, with
which I shall conclude this Direction, and may they have the same gracious
Answer of Peace. O then lift up your hearts, and say, Psalm. 85.4 ult.
Turn us, O God of our Salvation, and cause thine Anger toward us to cease.
Will thou be angry with us for ever? Will thou draw out thine Anger to all
Generations? Will thou not revive us again, that thy People may rejoice in
thee? Show us thy Mercy, O LORD, and grant us thy salvation.

I will hear what God the LORD will speak: for he will speak peace unto his
People, and to his Saints: but let them not turn again to Folly. Surely his
Salvation is nigh them that fear him, that Glory may dwell in our Land. Mercy
and Truth are met together: Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other.
Truth shall spring out of the Earth; and Righteousness shall look down from
Heaven. Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good; and our Land shall yield
her increase. Righteousness shall go before him, and shall set us in the way of
his steps.

The fourth Duty. Taking Sanctuary in God.
ARE you fallen into Perilous Times? Make God your Refuge till these dangers
be overpast. God is a Hiding place for his Saints, their Rock and Refuge in
times of Trouble; their Fortress and strong Tower in times of Danger and
Distress. So hash he revealed himself in his Word; and so have his Saints found
him to be by sweet Experiences in the Times of their sad Extre^ities. The Lord
(says David Psalm. 18.2
) is my Rock and Fortress, and my Deliverer: my God, my Strength in whom I will
trust; my Buckler, and the Horn of my salvation, and my high Tower. Thus under
various expressions he sets forth Gods Power as engaged for his Saints
Preservation. So says he elsewhere, Ps. 27.1
The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Then to fortify his
Confidence, he produces his experience; v. 2.
When the wicked, even mine Enemies and my Foes came upon me to eat up my
flesh, they stumbled and fell. And then upon this Experience he builds his
Confidence; v. 3.
Though an Host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear; though War
should rise against me, in this will I be confident. And the ground hereof was
this, that God was his Refuge and Preserver: For (says he v. 5.
) In the Time of Trouble he shall hide me in his Pavilion: in the secret of his
Tabernacle (the most inviolable Sanctuary) shall be hide me, he shall set me up
upon a Rock. And again, says he, Psalm. 32.7
Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from Trouble: thou shall
compass me about with songs of deliverance.

Yea, Its the Privilege of every Saint, that he has an Interest in this
preserving Power and Mercy of God in times of Distress and Danger. So says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 9.9.
The Lord also will be a Refuge for the oppressed, a Refuge in Times of
Trouble. And therefore this is the ground of the Churches confidence, in the
Times of the greatest Trouble and Confusion? Psalm. 46.1, 2, 3.
God is our Refuge and Strength; a very present help in Trouble. Therefore will
not we fear, though the Earth be removed; and though the mountains be carried
into the midst of the sea. Though the waters thereof rore and be troubled,
though the mountains spoke with the swelling thereof. God is both a Ps. 84.11
Sun and a Shield to his Saints, their Light in Darkness, and Defense in
Danger. They are dear to him, and he Isa. 49.2.
hides them in the shadow of his hand: He wears them as Mal. 3.17
Jewels in his bosom; he Deuteronomy. 32 10
keeps them as the Apple of his eye. Zec. 2.8.
He that touches you, (says the Lord concerning the Children of Zion)
touches the Apple of mime eye. He has secret Chambers of Providence for the
Preserving his People in Times of Danger by public Calamities. Come, my people
(says the Lord Isa. 26.20, 21.
) enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy Doors about thee: hide thy self as
it were for a little moment, until the Indignation be over past. For behold
the Lord comes out of his Place to punish the Inhabitants of the Earth for
their Iniquity: the Earth also shall disclose her Blood, and shall no more
cover her slain.

The glorious Attributes of God are as it were a Tower of Defense to the truly
godly in Times of Danger. The name of the Lord (says the Wise man Prove. 18.10
) is a strong Tower: The Righteous runs to it, and is safe. When Peril
pursues a Saint, he runs to God as his Refuge. Yea, Pro. 22.3
A prudent man fore-seeth the Evil, and hides himself; but the simple pass on,
and are punshed. This Prudence does well become the Pious in Times of Peril.

But that you may with Boldness and Comfort have Recourse to God, in Times of
Distress and Danger, as your Refuge in the storm, your hiding Place in Times of
Trouble, Do these three things.

The first Work.
CLear your Interest in God. If you think to have Recourse to God for safety in
Danger, and have no Interest in God, your Hope may deceive you, and you may
^ail of this special privilege of Divine Preservation, and instead thereof,
fall and perish by a just Destruction. If a man pursued by his Enemies in the
Times of War, shall have Recourse to those for Refuge of whom he has no
assurance that they are his Friends, he may but fly from one Danger, and fall
into the mouth of another. Yea, though you should have an Interest in God, yet
if you have no Evidence of this Interest, you cannot with that Boldness and
Confidence, wherewith otherwise you might, fly to God for Refuge in Days of
Danger. Be it your care therefore not only to get an Interest in God, but to
clear it up by undeceiving Evidences to your soul and Conscience. Then may you
triumph with David in the very Face of Danger, Psalm. 27.1
The LORD is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? The LORD is the
strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid? So again, says he, Psalm. 28.7
The LORD is my strength, and my Shield, my heart trusted in him, and I am
helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth, and with my song will I praise
him.

Quest. But how may I clear my Interest in God?

Answer; By these Evidences, 1. Faith in Him, 2. Love to Him, 3. Conformity to
his Will revealed in his Word. Faith unites the soul to God. Union is the very
Foundation of Interest, and so a sufficient Evidence thereof. Faith interests
the soul in the Covenant of Grace, and the Mar. 16.16
Salvation therein promised. Now it is by virtue of the Covenant of Grace the
soul comes to have an Interest in God. The discovery therefore of the Grace of
Faith is a sufficient Evidence of the souls Covenant Interest in God. Faith
unites the soul to Christ, Who dwells in the heart by Faith Ephesians. 3.17
. Now it is in and through Christ that Believers have an Interest in God. Hence
is the life of a Believer said to be hid with Christ in God Col. 3.3.
. He then that is by Faith united to Christ, is thereby interessed in God.

And as Faith is the Band of our Mystical, so is Love the Band of our Moral
Union with God, and so it likewise evidences the souls Interest in Him. Our
Love to God springs from Gods Love to us. For we love Him, because he first
loved us Joh. 4.19
. Now who are they that have an Interest in God, but they that are beloved by
him?

Now its the Nature of both these Graces, Faith and Love, to work the soul
wherein they are seated to a Conformity to the person upon which they are
acted. The Eye of Faith beholding the Beauty of Holiness in the Face of God,
transforms the soul into the same Image. So the Apostle speaking of the Glory
and Efficacy of the Evangelical Administration, thus expresses himself. 2 Cor.
3.18
For we all with open Face, beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord. So likewise Love assimilates the person loving, to the person beloved.
When Metal is melted, it bears the figure of the Mould into which it is cast.
Indeed in God the immutable Pattern of all Perfections, Love is of a more
transcendent Nature and Efficacy in all its operations. God by loving us
assimilates us to himself; but we by loving God, are assimilated to him. For
this Assimilating motion of Love springs from the Quickering Motive thereof,
which gives Life, Vigor and Activity to Love. Now the Motive of our Love to
God, is in him: but the Motive of Gods Love to us, is not in us, but in
himself. It Is a Flower that springs from the Root of free Grace. But now this
Conformity to God in the Beauty of Holiness being produced by the Efficacy of
these excellent Graces, Faith and Love, must needs evidence the souls Interest
in God. It Is Grace flowing from God to the soul, which raises the soul up to a
Conformity to God, and his Will revealed in his Holy Word. And Communication of
Grace speaks the souls Interest in God. If the Branch flourish by Virtue of sap
derived from the Stock, it is certainly ingraffed thereinto.

Now does your soul rest upon God in a way of Believing? Does your Heart go out
after God in a way of loving? Do you express a Conformity to God, and his Will
revealed in his Word, in a way of Holy Living? Does your Faith work by Love?
Does your Love produce Likeness? Does this Likeness nourish your Love? Does
this Love strengthen your Faith? Do yon find your soul to move toward God, by
Faith and Love; and to press after Conformity to God in Holiness of Heart and
Life? Then have you good and sure Evidences of your Interest in God.

The second Work.
ACT all the Powers of your soul upon God.

Let your Understanding eye him in his glorious Excellencies and
All Sufficiency, as infinite in Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Truth. Let your
Will choose him, as the chiefest good, and your highest Happiness, and rest in
him as your only Satisfaction and Security. Let your Affections, with full
tide, carry your soul to him, as your only Rock and Refuge. Let your Love be to
him, your Desires after him, and your Delight in Him, above all things in the
world. Stir up your self also to the lively Exercise of your most excellent
Graces, whereby your soul may be lifted up above Difficulties and dangers in
the world, and much advanced and advantaged in its nearest Approaches and
Approximations to God. Set your Faith, Hope, Trust on work; Act your Faith on
his Promise, your Hope in his Mercy, your Trust in his Power. So shall you be
ever near unto God, as a Child under his Fathers Arm, a Favorite in his Princes
Bosom.

There is a sort of Echini.
Fishes, called by Cassiodore, for their delicate Temper and curious Color,
Croceae Deliciae divitis Maris.
The Saffron-colour'd Delights of the rich Sea. These when a Storm arises,
gather to themselves little stones (the same thing have some observed of the
Bees) to poise themselves in swimming thorough the boisterous waves (as the
Bees in flying thorough the blustering Win^s) and so they make to some Rock (as
the Bees to their H^ve) as their Refuge from the tempestuous Fury of the sea.
So Believers, who are

Mundi Divitiae, Deliciae Christi.
The Riches of the World, and the Delights of Christ, when any Storm or Tempest
arises in the Church or State, gathering to themselves the Pearls of
Gospel-Promises, to keep them in an even Poize in Perilous Times, that they
may not be driven away with every Ephesians. 4.14
Wind of Doctrine, nor discomposed by every Wave Luke 6.48
of Temptation, should speedily make to Christ, as a Hive of sweetness, and a
Rock of Strength, for their Security and Peace. Now this Application to him is
made by the Believing souls Acting of Faith upon him, in time of Trouble.

And thus must the Saints act the Powers of their souls upon God, if they would
be interessed in that Protection which pertains to the Saints by Divine
Promise. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts Himself (says the Prophet Isa. 8.13 14
) and let him be your Fear, and let him be your Dread: and he shall be for a
Sanctuary. Now what is it to sanctify the Lord in our Hearts (as the Apostle
expresses it 1 Pet. 3.15
) but to present his glorious Excellencies and Perfections, his infinite Power
and Greatness before the view of our souls, and to stir up our selves to those
Actings which carry in them a suitableness and correspondency to such
manifestations of God to us? And what is this, but to act all the powers of our
souls upon him, as a God, who for his greatness is worthy to be feared and
adored, for his goodness is to be loved and desired, for his Wisdom, Mercy,
Power and Truth is to be trusted in, and submitted to in all Things? Now he
that thus fears his Name, believes his Word, trusts in his Power, and waits for
his Mercy according to his Promise, shall be priviledg'd with a comfortable
Security on Earth, or (which is much better) admitted into the inviolable
Sanctuary of Heaven.

For to such do the Promises of Divine Protection pertain. They may be for a
time afflicted and distressed through the Pride and prevalency of the wicked,
Psalm. 37.39, 40.
But the salvation of the Righteous is of the LORD; He is their strength in the
Time of Trouble: And the LORD shall help them and deliver them: He shall
deliver them from the wicked, and save them because they trust in him. And
therefore he is said to be a Pro. 30.5.
Shield and Ps. 18.30
Buckler to them that trust in Him. He is their Psalm. 71.3
strong Habitation whereunto they may continually resort: He is their Rock and
Fortress for their Defense against all the Assaults of their Enemies. And
therefore Ps. 125.1
They that trust in the LORD shall be as Mount Zion which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever. For Nah. 1.7
The LORD is good, a strong hold in the day of Trouble, and he knows them
that trust in him.

The third Work.
BE much in Communion with God. The Lord is the Preserver of his Saints in
Perilous Times. And who are they that are interested in this special
protection, but those that are raised into this spiritual Communion? Communion
with God is a Saints sweetest and safest Sanctuary in Times of Danger. And
therefore did David so much desire of God that he might Psalm. 27.4
Dwell in the house of the LORD all the days of his Life, to behold the beauty
of the LORD, and to enquire in his Temple; that is, that he might live in
Communion with the true Church in the Use of holy Ordinances, to enjoy a
constant Communion with God all the Time of his continuance in the world. For
(says he, v. 5.
giving you the Reason of this his Request) In the Time of Trouble he shall
hide me in his Pavilion: in the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide me, he
shall set me up upon a Rock. As if he should say, He shall keep me in Secrecy,
preserve me in Security* advance me to Dignity and Glory. As he says elsewhere,
Psalm. 3.3
Thou, O LORD, art a Shield for me, my Glory, and the Lifter up of my head. A
Saint never rests so securely as when he dwells in the same Pavilion with God,
when God himself hides him under the Ark, in the most secret Place of his holy
Sanctuary. The further from God, the nearer to danger, as a sheep that is gone
astray from the Fold: But the nearer to God, the further from Danger: As a
Child under the Arm of the Father. Gods special preserving Providence is as a
Pavilion to that Saint that lives in Communion with God. There Is no such place
of safety for a Subject in times of Peace, as in the Presence Chamber of the
King: nor in Times of War, as in the Royal Tent. Noah was safe in the Ark,
though tossed with the Waves and Billows of an universal deluge, when all the
World besides was drowned with water. A Saint in communion with God is kept
safe in the Ark of his holy Covenant. Upon this account, its more safe for a
Saint to dwell in Gods House in Times of Danger, then to fly to the strongest
Fortress for safety. I had rather (says David Ps. 84.10
) be a Doorkeeper in the House of my God, then to dwell in the Tents of
Wickedness. Why so? He gives you the Reason, v. 11.
For the Lord God is a Sun and Shield; He is a Help at hand, a strong Defense
to his Saints in time of Danger. Psalm. 91.1
He that dwells in the secret place of the most high, shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty. He that dwells in the secret of communion with God,
shall be safe under the shadow of the Protection of his power. In communion
with God a Saint Isa. 40.31
mounts up as with the wings of an Eagle, and so sores above the Difficulties
and Dangers of the lower world. Communion with God is a garden enclosed: As no
stranger can enter into it, so a Saint has most safety while he dwells in it.
Communion with God is a Saints peculiar Privilege, heightened with this, that
it interests him in a special Protection.

O then, Christians, be much in communion with God. Be much in those Duties of
Religion wherein gracious souls do maintain this holy Communion. Be much in
Mat. 6.6
Closet-Prayer, much in Genesis 24..63. Heb. (...)
D^vout-Meditation, much in Psalm. 4.4
Communing with your own Heart, as an excellent help to communion with God.
Stir up your graces, and set all the Powers of your soul on work in these
spiritual Duties; for otherwise you may spend much Time daily in Reading,
Praying, Meditating, and yet enjoy no communion with God. Leave not a Duty till
you can get your heart warmed by it, till you can feel it melting, burning
within your breast, melting with Psalm. 119 136
sorrow for sin, and Joy in God; burning with a holy Anger and an ardent Psalm.
119 139
Zeal for Gods Glory, suffering by the sins of the Times. Cease not till you
can find your very soul going out to God, and God, by the powerful Influences
and Operations of his holy Spirit, coming in to your heart, in holy Duties.
This is to maintain communion with God; and this is to live in Heaven on Earth.
This will be to you a Spring of living Comforts, in a dry and barren
Wilderness. You shall have no cause to be disconsolate in your
Desert-condition, while the Manna of spiritual Mercies drops down from Heaven
upon your soul in Communion with God. Hereby you shall be able to fetch Waters
of Comfort out of the Flin^y Rocks of Affliction and Persecution. And which may
be sufficient to revive your drooping Spirit in the greatest dangers, from this
Holy Mount (of Communion with God) you may take a fair Prospect of the
Heavenly Canaan. Yea, he that lives in communion with God on earth, does
already dwell in the Suburbs of Heaven.

The fifth Duty. Longing to leave the Earth and live in Heaven.
take off your hearts from things on earth, and long to live in heaven. O
Christians, here are Perils below, but there is Peace above: you find troubles
on earth, but you have Treasures in heaven. It Is time for you to be dead to the
world, if you are indeed risen with Christ. Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits on the right hand of God. Set your affection on things above,
not on things on the Earth. For (if true Believers) ye are dead, and your life
is hid with Christ in God. And when Christ who is our life shall appear, then
shall ye also appear with him in Glory. O with what pantings, what thirstings,
what longings should your hearts be draw'n forth, in these perilous Times,
after this appearing of Christ, after these Participations of glory! When you
look downward to a world of Sin and Misery, full of wicked men, defiled with
wicked works, me thinks you should say with the Psalmist Ps. 120.5
, Woe is me that I sojourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar. And
when you look up to a Heaven of Bliss and Glory, to a God of Grace and Mercy,
who fills Heaven with Divine Beauties and everlasting Delights, being to all
his Saints above, an inexhaustible Fountain of unexpressible pleasures,
Felicities, Joys, me thinks you should cry out with holy David; Ps. 42.1, 2
As the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after Thee, O
God. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: When (O when) shall I come
and appear before God? When you consider the frequent Changes which you see on
earth, with those many Dangers, Fears, Troubles and Calamities, which are
occasioned thereby, and do commonly ensue thereupon, methinks you should grow
weary of this World, and extremely long to leave the Earth, that so you might
for ever live, where all the Saints enjoy an unchangeable Happiness in Heaven.

But you will say, It Is true, we live in troublesome Times, ^herein the Evils we
fe^l are many, and those we fear are more; and so we have no great Reason to be
over in-love with this present World. It Is true, likewise, that Heaven is a
glorious Place, wherein I do believe the Happiness of the Saints is so great,
that they cannot desire it to be greater, the Fruition exceeding the
Expectation. And therefore I know it is ten thousand fold bett r to live in
Heaven, then to abide still on Earth, in the most prosperous, and therefore
much more in the most perilous Times. But who can be willing to leave the
Earth, before he is first sure of Heaven? And therefore I desire to be resolved
how I may know that Heaven is mine? To this I answer;

Dare you live on Earth, without any evidence for eternal life in Heaven? How
is it you fear not every moment to drop into Hell? What pains have you taken
to attain this evidence? Have you ever spent one whole Day, one serious Hour
for the attainment of it? O lazy Believers! Is it not pity but you should want
the Comfort of it, who can so well content your selves without it? Would you
not readily take more pains for the attainment of a firm title to an earthly
Inheritance, to an estate of two or three thousand pounds a year, then ever
you have yet taken, for the attainment of a well-grounded Evidence for the
Kingdom of Heaven? O careless and secure Christians! How unworthy are you of
the glorious things which God has prepared for his Saints in the World to
come! Surely if God save you, you shall feel the Flashings of Hell, to fright
you out of your security, before you enter into the Joys of Heaven. And what
are you resolved still to continue secure in this uncertain condition, not
knowing what shall become of your souls to Eternity? To what purpose should I
direct you to the attainment of this most blessed Assurance of salvation, and
eternal blessedness in heaven, when you will scarce take the pains, or think
it worth the while, to examine your consciences, or to try your Evidences for
an eternal 1 Pet. 1.4
Inheritance reserved in Heaven for all the children of God? Well then I shall
spare my pains and speak no further to you, but leave you to sleep on in your
security, till God by some sharp Dispensation shall awake you.

But yet to afford some Help to the poor trembling soul, that would rather
then all the World attain this comfortable Assurance of its salvation, and is
willing to deal seriously with it self, in searching for those Evidences, which
may clear its title to this glorious Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven, I
shall give some Direction toward this Discovery.

Poor soul, do thou desire to know whether Heaven be thine? Whether God
has instated so poor a Creature as thou accountest thy self to be, in so
rich an Inheritance; Then tell me; or rather ask thy own soul, these Questions
I shall put to thee, and observe what Answer shall echo from thy conscience
thereupon. Say then, Is God thine? Is Christ thine? Is the Spirit of God and
Christ given to thee? If God have given thee himself, his Son, his sacred
Spirit, lift up thy heart with joy, thy soul with praise, Heaven with all the
Beauties and Blisses, all the Joys and Glory of it, is undoubtedly thine to
all Eternity. He that has given the greater, certainly will not deny the
lesser. Now if when God could give thee nothing greater, he has given himself,
with his Son and holy Spirit to thee, certainly he will not withold the
lesser, he cannot deny thee Heaven. He that has God for his God, must needs
have Heaven for his Inheritance. For God and Heaven are inseparable. Where the
King is, there is the Court: where God is, there is heaven. As none can
possibly enjoy Heaven without God (who is the Heaven of Heaven) so neither can
any possibly enjoy God without Heaven, without a present Title to it,
sufficient to secure the future Possession of it to Eternity. For these great
Romans 11.29
Gifts of God are without Repentance. Never did God give himself to any soul,
and afterward cast that soul into Hell. Well then, poor soul, see how rich
and happy thou art. Can thou say to God, my God and my Father? Can thou say
to Christ, Joh. 20.28
My Lord and my God? Can thou say to the holy Spirit, my Guide and my
Comforter? Look then up to heaven and say (as thou truly may) This is my Home
and my Inheritance; this when I leave the Earth must be my habitation for ever.

But thou will say unto me; How shall I know this, that God is my God, and that
he has given his Son and holy Spirit to me? This latter difficulty is as great
to me as the former.

Thou say; How shall I know that God is my God? Why, do thou take him for
thy God, can thou say, the Lord is my God, and him will I serve. Psalm. 144 15
Happy is the soul that is in such a case. Do thou give thy self up unto
him, as thy God, and place thy happiness in the enjoyment of him as the
chiefest good? Can thou say, Ps. 73.25.
Whom have I in heaven (O Lord) but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee. Does thy heart close in with him according to the Tenor
of the Covenant of Grace; Ye shall be my people, and I will be your God Jer.
30, 2^
? Does thy heart say, Amen, to this Covenant-promise? Be it so Lord, Will thou
give thy self unto me? Will thou indeed be my God? Then will I be thine, and
only thine for ever. Behold here am I, O Lord, do what thou will with me, for
to thee do I give my self, body and soul for ever. Can thou indeed say thus?
Then is God thine, Heaven is thine. Speak; What say thou to this?

This I can truly say; If these things be so, the Lord is surely my God. For I
do freely, with my whole heart and soul give my self wholly unto him. I desire
in all things to be obedient to his will. I would not willingly for the gain of
the whole world, do any thing that might offend or dishonor him. I desire that
he would enable me more and more by his Grace to serve him: For I desire not to
live a day longer, then I may live to his Glory. And I am not only willing to
take him for my only happiness, and freely to leave all the sweetest and
dearest Comforts I have in this world, for the enjoyment of him, but I should
look upon it as the ground of my highest joy, and of everlasting thankfulness,
that though he should take away all from me, he would yet be pleased to give
himself unto me, to be my God and Genesis 15.1.
exceeding great reward.

Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift 2 Cor. 9 15.
. If thou can indeed speak thus, Happy art thou, God is thine and thou art
his, and shall be happy in him, and with him, for ever in Heaven.

Blessed be the Name of the Lord who has magnified his Mercy to me, and has
had compassion on me, the chiefest of sinners, the least of Saints. I am
willing upon this ground of the New Covenant, to believe his Love, to look up
to him as my God. But how may I know that Christ is mine?

Why, If God be thine, Christ is thine also. If he have given thee himself to
be thy God, he has given thee his Son to be thy Savior. It Is in Christ that
he is thy God. The Covenant of Grace, wherein God becomes thy God, is founded
in Christ, his Mediation and Satisfaction. And Christ, in all his Col. 1.19.
Fullness of Grace and Glory, is that great Joh. 4.10
GIFT OF GOD, which is promised in the Covenant of Grace. Now then if God be
thine, and thou art his, according to the Tenor of the New Covenant, he has
given his Son unto thee (as a Jewel from his bosom, for a pledge of his
glorious everlasting love) and has given thee to his Son, (as a part of his
richest Treasure in the World) to redeem, sanctify and save Thee. And if
Christ be thine, and thou art his, Heaven, the Inheritance which he has
purchased for Believers with his blood, is thine also. For thus has he said,
Joh. 17.24
Father I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they may behold my Glory, which thou have given me: for thou lovedst me
before the Foundation of the World.

Moreover, further to clear it up to thy soul that Christ is thine, let me ask
thee, Has God ever showed thee what a poor, lost, undone Creature thou art in
thy self, by reason of thy sins? Has he made known to thee the Fullness and
All Sufficiency of Christ, with thy absolute necessity of him to justify,
sanctify and save thee, or thou must perish forever? Have thou, in the Glass
of the Law, seen thy own Deformity, and the incomparable Beauty of Christ in
the Glass of the Gospel? Have thou seen thy own Rev. 3.17, 18.
Nakedness, and apprehended thy need of the Righteousness of Christ, as
glorious clothing for thy naked soul? Have thou been made sensible of thy Mat.
5.3.
spiritual poverty, and have the Ephesians. 3.8
unsearchable riches of Christ, been unfolded before thee in the Gospel? How
have these things wrought upon thy heart? Have thou felt thy heart stirred
within thee hereupon? Have thou felt God Joh. 6.44
drawing thy heart out in desires and longings after Christ? Have thou been
made willing to take Christ upon his own terms; to be thy Sovereign as well
as thy Savior? To rule over thee as well as to save thee? To save thee from
thy lusts and Mat. 1.21
sins, as well as to save thee from Wrath and Hell? Have thou been made
willing to take his Yoke upon thee, Mat. 11.29, 30.
and to bear his Burden? Has Christ been welcome to thee when he has come
with his Luke 9.23
Cross, to lay it upon thee, as well as when he has come with his Cordials,
to refresh and comfort thee? Speak seriously, can thou account thy self more
happy in the presence of Christ in Prisons, and Perecutions, then in the midst
of all worldly Pleasures and Prosperities without him? Tell me truly, if thou
might certainly have thy wish, and desire granted, what would thou wish
for, whom would thou desire? Ah, None but Christ, None but Christ. What do
thou trust to, on whom do thou rest for salvation? On thy own righteousness,
in thy own strength? Oh no, None but Christ, None but Christ. Art thou indeed
Vile in thine own eyes, and are all things in the World but vile in thy
esteem, in comparison of Christ? And is Christ above all things unto thee
exceeding precious? Truly, if I know mine own heart, I esteem all the Riches
of the world to be but Phil. 4.8.
loss, and dung in comparison of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord. Well then, thou art a Believer? For unto them only that believe
is Christ precious 1 Pet. 2.7
. And if thou art a Believer, thou shall certainly be saved, thou shall surely
one day behold thy Savior in Heaven, and there live in the fruition of his
glorious Loves unto all Eternity. Joh. 3.16.
For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life.

Now what say thou, poor soul? How does thy Heart echo to these Questions?

Why, through the Grace of God, this I can say. It has pl^^^ed the Lord so far
to discover the emptynesse of self, and sinfulness of sin unto me, that
sometimes when I look down upon my self, I Eze. 36 ^1
loath and Job 42.6
abhor my self, and cannot but wonder that ever the Lord should vouchsafe to
look upon me, and love me. Yea, I wonder he has not thrown me into Hell. And
when the Lord first revealed Christ Jesus to me in his Gospel, in his
All Sufficiency and Readiness to save me, it even ov^rcame my Heart, and my
thoughts and reasonings were such as these; Oh good God! And have thou given
thy dearest Son, to suffer such a cursed and cruel death for such a vile sinner
as I am! O sweetest Mercy! O infinite goodness! O glorious Love! Then me
thought I first felt my Heart, that before was like a Eze. 36.26
stone within me, to melt and sensibly dissolve at once into sorrow and joy;
Zac. 12.10
* Sorrow, that ever I had sinned against such a good God; Luke 2.10
Joy, that ever Mercy and Salvation should be tendered to such a vile sinner.
And then when I cast up my Eyes to Christ, and beheld him, sometimes as
crucified on Earth, sometimes as glorified in heaven, my heart sure spoke
within me, much to this purpose; O dear Jesus! And have thou endured such
grievous sufferings, for the salvation of such a miserable sinner as I am? What
would thou leave thy Fathers Joh. 1.18.
Bosom and glory, to live here on Earth, and die on the Phil. 2.8.
Cross, to save the Life of a crawling Worm? Have thou poured out thy Joh. 19
34.
Hearts blood, to que^^^ thy Fathers dreadful wrath, and to ^^^chase his
glorious Love to a poisonous Toad? Is it possible? Can it be believed for
Truth, that the Son of God should come to save such a sinful wretch as I am?
Yea, He has said it, and I believe it. 1 Timothy 1.15
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Hereupon I found my
heart carried out in a restless and insatiable longing desire after Christ,
yea, and indeed inseparably cleaving to Christ, thus manifesting himself to me
in the Gospel. For then I not only saw the sinfulness of my sins, but I
looked upon all my Isa. 64.6.
Righteousnesses as filthy rags, and so humbling my self for my sins, and
renouncing utterly my own righteousness, I cast my self wholly upon my
Savior, and resolved Job. 13.15
though he should slay me I would trust in him. And now though since I have not
often found such sweet and powerful workings upon my Heart, yet this is the
state wherein I stand, I have solemnly resigned my self wholly up into the
hands of Christ, as my Sovereign and Savior, to be done with, and disposed of
in every thing, as seems best unto him, and on him only do I rest for
Righteousness and Life Eternal.

Happy soul! God has magnified his Mercy to thee, and done more for thee, then
for thousands. God has drawn thee t^ Christ, and united thy soul to him by
^^^h, a Band indissoluble. For thou have in this Declaration of Gods dealings
with thee, laid open the very Mystery of Faith, and manifested how the Holy
Ghost has by this Heavenly Band inseparably knit thy soul unto thy Savior.
Rejoice then in thy God. For thy soul is safely locked up in the Everlasting
Blessed Embraces of thy Redeemer. Yea, thou shall be for ever worn as a Jewel
in his bosom. Fear not, For in the day that God makes up his Jewels Mal. 3.17
, he will remember thy soul. And though thy Faith be weak, be not discouraged.
Thou stand not in thy own strength, but in the strength of Christ, who is
Isa. 63.1
Mighty to save. The safety of the Child in the Mothers Bosom, lies not in the
strength of its own weak Arms, wherewith it clings about her; but in the
strength of the Mothers Arm, and the Affectionate Tenderness of her heart
toward it. What? though thy Faith be weak, thy strength be small, and thy
Enemies strong, thou art kept by the Power of God through Faith unto salvation
1 Pet. 1.5.
. Christ is thine, and so Heaven and Happiness is thine also.

The Lord grant I may live to his Praise, that has showed Mercy on me. For the
Glory of God is, I know, the end of these Dispensations of his Grace. For thus
it is written Ephesians. 1.12, 13, 14.
That we should be to the praise of his glory who first trusted in Christ. In
whom (says the Apostle) ye also trusted, after that ye heard the Word of
Truth, the Gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye
were sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest of our
Inheritance, until the Redemption of the purchased Possession, unto the praise
of his Glory. But how may I know that God has given me this Earnest of my
Inheritance; that I am sealed with his Holy Spirit, or that he has given his
Holy Spirit to me?

If God has given you Faith in Jesus Christ, he has certainly sealed you with
his Holy Spirit, and so given you the Earnest of your heavenly Inheritance. For
it is the Spirit of God, which is the Spirit of Grace, by which that Faith was
wrought in your Heart, by which you have been united to Jesus Christ. The
Graces of Sanctification, Repentance, Faith, Hope, Love to God, Charity, etc.
are the prints of this Privy Seal, wherewith God seals Believers as his own
Peculiar, which in whatsoever soul they are found, to that soul is the Spirit
of God given as an Earnest of an eternal Inheritance in Heaven. And where there
is one Grace of the Spirit, as that of Faith, which has already been
evidenc't, there are all the rest, though not equally visible. Though sometimes
but one Star do appear in the Heavens, yet we are sure all the rest are fixed
there, though they are clouded from our sight.

Moreover the Spirit of God where ever it is, is a Spirit of Holiness, Prayer
and Comfort. Now do you desire to know whether the Spirit of God be given to
you, and do indeed dwell in you? Then search your Heart, and tell me what you
discover upon these Enquiries. Do you find sin to be a Burden to you, and are
you weary of it? Do you indeed hate your sweetest sins, and love the strictest
ways of Holiness? Do you maintain a constant Conflict against your
Corruptions? Can you truly say with the Apostle, Romans 7.19
The good that I would, I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do.
For, v. 21.
I find a Law that when I would do good, evil is present with me. Yet I delight
in the Law of God after the inward man. Oh do you not extremely long to be
freed from this Bondage of Corruption, that in the duties of Holiness you might
enjoy a more glorious Freedom of Communion with God? What is it which chiefly
makes the world uncomfortable to you? Is it Sin or Suffering? Which of these
two is it which you most constantly fear, and most carefully decline? Can you
heartily bless God for Affliction, when it becomes a Means to promote in your
Heart the work of Grace and Holiness? Is not your heart grieved for the Sin
that cleaves unto you in your best performances? Do you not find your heart
endeared to the Children of God, more then to any others in the world? Do you
know what it is that thus engages your Affections to them? Is it not the
Beauties of Holiness? If it be thus with you, then surely does the Spirit of
Holiness dwell in you.

Furthermore, Do not you find your Heart drawn out in holy Breathings after
God? Are you not wont to pour it out daily in Mat. 6.6.
Secret, into the Bosom of your Heavenly Father? If any thing afflict you, or
oppress your Spirit, are you not wont to go and make your moan unto God Ps.
142.2
? When you want any choice Blessing, are you not wont to go and ask it of God?
Do you not esteem it a singular Privilege, that you may freely go upon all
Occasions, and open your Heart unto your Heavenly Father? And do you not find
sometimes when you go unto God under great Discouragements, many sweet
Enlargements in Prayer? Do you not find your heart inflamed with Love to God,
when you perceive he is pleased to hear your Prayers, and answer your Requests?
But is not your Spirit much Psalm. 30.6
troubled, when he hides his Face from you? Do you not account those sad Days,
wherein you find such a Deadness in your Heart, such a Dullness upon your
Spirit, that you cannot find that Refreshment in prayer, which you was wont to
receive even in your sorest Afflictions? But are not those days festival with
your soul, wherein God inlarges your Heart in Prayer, and in Returns thereof,
inlarges his Hand with Blessings? Is it thus with you? Then surely the Spirit
of God is given to you, and 2 Timothy 1.14
dwells in you. For the Zec. 12.10
Spirit of Grace is a Spirit of Supplication. For when of Sinners God makes us
Sons, he sends the Spirit of Adoption into our Hearts whereby we cry, Abba,
Father Romans 8.14, 15.
. Such then are the Children of God, and Heirs of the Kingdom, Romans 8.17
joint Heirs with Christ of the Kingdom of Glory.

To conclude, Has your soul ever tasted the sweet Comforts of Communion with
God? Have you been sensible of the refreshing Influences of his Holy Spirit,
when sometimes his Face has shone upon your soul in Duties or Ordinances? Do
you prize these Comforts above all earthly Delights? Have you felt your Heart
sometimes melting under the glorious Sunshine of Gods ravishing Face? Have you
felt your Heart dissolved (as a Lump of Sugar in a Bowl of Wine) into Holy Joy
under the Pourings forth of the Love of God? Then you may indeed, Romans 5.2
Rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God: and your Romans 5.5
Hope shall not make you ashamed, because the Love of God is shed abroad in
your Heart by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto you.

Behold then, O gracious believing soul, what ground thou have to long for
Heaven, seeing if it be thus with thee, thou have a clear undoubted Title to
it, as thine Eternal Inheritance! For can thou not by the foregoing
Evidences, dear up thy Receipt of the Earnest thereof, the Holy Spirit of God?
What say thou?

Truly I dare not deny what great Things God has graciously done for me. This
then I can truly say, though I am a poor sinful Creature, I do heartily desire
that God would sanctify me throughout by his Holy Spirit, and make me holy.
Though sin be in my heart, yet my heart is not toward my sin, but against it.
I know by sad experience my Infirmities are so many, my Corruptions so strong,
that I daily sin against God, but yet if my Heart deceive me not, I would
rather choose to undergo the greatest suffering, then willingly to commit the
least sin against my good God. I have had experience of many Troubles and
Afflictions of one kind or another, but this I am sure of, that none of them
have been such a Hearts-grief unto me as this, that I have offended and
dishonored God by my sins. And it is my daily Request unto him, that he would
vouchsafe to give me such a Measure of his Grace, that for the Time to come, I
might live only to his Glory. I find my Heart, I do confess, many Times much
straightened in Prayer, but yet still the bent of my soul is toward God. And I
find that when I have been most enlarged in Prayer, my heart is most apt to be
lifted up in Spiritual Pride, and when most straightened, to be most cast down
in Self-Abasement. And yet, I bless God, I do not in these Enlargements forget
my own Vileness, nor in these Abasements forget Gods Goodness. And thus I do
perceive that it pleases God to do my soul good by his different Dispensations.
But Oh how sweet, how ravishing, how glorious are the Incomes of God to my soul
sometimes in Prayer! O me thinks I am lifted up above all the worlds Vanities,
above its Riches and Glory, in so much, that if the whole world was a Globe of
Gold, I should no more regard it then a Heap of Dung, in comparison of the
glorious soul-ravishing Joy I feel in Communion with God. Oh me thinks my soul
is walking with God in Paradise; its soaring with the sacred Seraphims, about
the Throne of God; its bathing it self deliciously in the Psalm. 36.9
Fountains of Life, and Rivers of Pleasures, that are at Gods right hand Ps.
16.11
; it is even drencht in the glorious Joys of Eternity. O then m^thinks it
grieves me to come out of such a Paradise, to come down from such a Heaven, to
turn mine eyes from beholding so much Beauty and Glory as my soul then sees in
the Face of God; or that the worlds Vanities interposing, should again rob me
of such a beatifical Vision. But alas! it is but seldom I experiment such
precious Enjoyments. My heart, alas! often for a long while together, is as an
Instrument unstring'd, and utterly out of Tune, upon which I can make no
Music, no Melody at all. I am in a dead, flat, dull Temper, and can hardly
tell, how to bring out a Word in Prayer, or put up one petition to God with any
Fervor. But yet even in this Condition I can a little refresh my self with
Reviews of the Lords former loving Kindnesses to my soul. For I have sometimes
felt my heart marvellously refresht with his gracious Comforts, and my soul
has been sometimes sprinkled with glorious Joys. If these then be the fruits
and flowrings forth of the 1 John 3.9
Seed of God in me; if these be the Productions of the Spirit of Holiness, and
Evidences of its In-being in the heart, then I hope I may comfortably conclude,
that God has been pleased to give unto me his Holy Spirit.

Blessed be thou, O Believer, for thou have unlockt unto me Christ's Garden of
Spices, and have refresht my Spirit by leading me up and down in flowery walks,
while thou have laid open before me thy Experiences of Gods gracious Dealings
with thy soul, in the Communications of his Spirit to thee; whereby thou have
given me Occasion to review some sweet Passages of that soul-ravishing
Communion, which a poor Creature, and a worse sinner then thy self, has
sometimes had with the All-glorious and ever gracious God. Now assure thy self
I dare no more delude thee in these great Concernments, these Matters of
everlasting Consequence, then I dare delude my own soul. For should I dare to
speak Peace to thee in an unsecure Condition, and so flatter thy soul into
Hell, thy Life would God require at my hand, in the Judgment day. Know then,
dear Soul, to thy present Comfort and everlasting Joy, these are not the fruits
of Corrupt Nature, but of saving Grace; and this Grace flows from the Spirit of
Holiness which is given to thee, and in respect of these blessed Fruits,
Effects, Influences and Operations thereof dwells in thee, and will certainly
conduct thee to a Kingdom of Glory. Fear not then the Evils that are or shall
be upon Earth; for thou have an Eternal Inheritance reserved for thee in
Heaven. Thou art one of the small number of Christ's ltttle Flock, and it is thy
Fathers good pleasure to give thee tht Kingdom Luke 12.32
.

Thus I have showed thee, O Believer, how thou may clear thy Title to the
Kingdom of Heaven, thine Evidences for eternal Life. How thou may know, upon
infallible Scripture-Grounds, that Heaven is thine Inheritance. What then
remains, but that living in Perilous Times on earth, thou should long to be
possessed of the Glorious Joys of Heaven?

And therefore now we are here together in the Wilderness, come, Believer, come
along with me to the top of Pisgah, and let us there take a Prospect of the
Holy Land. See thou there the Isa. 33.17
Land that is a far off? Behold, that is the Land of Promise, where after our
wearisome Pilgrimage, we shall have an everlasting glorious Rest. There the
Flourishing Vines are ever laden with full Clusters of the richest Grapes. Oh!
Happy shall we be, when instead of the Waters of the Wilderness, we shall come
to drink of the Wines of Canaan. There the Rivers do continually flow with Exo.
3.17 Flumina jam Lactis, jam Flumina Nectaris ibant Ovid. Aetas Aure^.
Milk and Honey. The^e shall we sit down by the Crystal streams of the purest
Pleasures, and drink our Fills of the fresh Fountains of glorious Joys,
everlasting Delights. Here we are encompast with Enemies; but there we shall
have a perfect Tranquillity, an eternal Security, an unchangeable Felicity. Oh
that we had but Psalm. 55.6
Wings like a Dove, that we might fly from this High Mountain to that HOLY LAND.

Come, Believer, why stand thou here gazing upon a tumultuous Throng of
people, that rush out of the Gates of Babylon, to persecute and afflict the
Children of Zion? Isa. 33.20, 21.
Look upon Zion, the City of our Solemnities: Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a
quiet Habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the
Stakes th^reof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the Cords thereof be
broken. But there the glorious LORD will be to us a place of broad Rivers and
Streams, wherein shall go no Gally with Oars, neither shall gallant s^ip pass
thereby. No, there shall be no Enemy to terrify us with a threatened Invasion,
nor any to molest us with a bloody Persecution; for our City shall be Isa. 26.1
walled with Salvation, and our streets shall be paved with Peace.

Happy are the Inhabitants of the Heavenly Jerusalem. There they that have
wallowed in the Dust, shall walk on Rev. 21.21
Gold: They that have been wrapped up in Darkness, and buried in Disgrace, shall
wear Robes of Light and Crowns of Glory. Were all the glittering Stars of
Heaven turned into glorious Suns, what glorious Robes of Light would their
intermixed Beams weave for the Inhabitants of the Earth! And yet all this would
be but a shadow of the Glory of Heaven. For were all these Suns in the highest
Heavens, they would be at once eclipst and disappear, darkened with the
All-transcending Brightness of the Rev. 21.23
Glory of God. Sure we are, Isa. 24.23
The Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts
shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients
gloriously. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God Psalm. 87.3
.

Incomparabiliter clara est Civitas aeterna, ubi Victoria, ubi Veritas, ubi
Dignitas, ubi Sanctitas, ubi Vita, ubi Aeternitas Aug. de Vita aeterna.
.
The Eternal City ( says Augustine) is of incomparable Claritude, where there
is Victory, where there is Verity, where there is Dignity, where there is
Sanctity, where there is Life, where there is Eternity. Oh who would not long
to live in that place, where the Inhabitants are possessed of so many inestimable
Privileges!

Come, Christians, what say you to these glorious things above, now you
experiment such perilous Times below? Here you are wandering in the
Wilderness; Do you not long to be possessed of the Land of Promise? to see the
Beauties, taste the Pleasures, and enjoy the Privileges of the Celestial
Canaan, the supernal Jerusalem? Here you are tossed on a troublesome Sea, should
you not desire to arrive at the Haven of HAPPINESS, to Land in GLORY? Here you
sit by the Rivers of Babylon; should you not weep when you remember Zion? Even
weep for sorrow that you are so long absent from it, which is the Place of your
Triumph and Joy? Know you not that when once you are arrived at the Psalm. 48.2
City of the great King, your Waters of sorrow shall be all turned into the
Wine of Joy? For the ransomed of the LORD shall return and come to Zion with
Songs, and everlasting Joy upon their Heads: they shall obtain Joy and
Gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away Isa. 35.10
. The^e shall you see those Turtle Doves, whose mourning voice you heard by the
Waters of the Sanctuary, having their Psa. 68.13
Wings covered with Silver, and their Feathers with yellow Gold, glassing their
Eyes in the crystal Fountains of Eternal Life.

The State of man may be distinguished into three Regions; there is a lower
Region, which is the Region of Nature; a middle Region, which is the Region of
Grace; and the highest Region, which is the Region of Glory. There Is no true
Tranquillity nor Safety in the first; there are many Storms and Tempests in
the second: there is Rest and Joy, a perfect Peace with the purest Pleasures in
the third, without intermission or end. Oh how should the Saints, who have been
translated from the Region of Nature, into the Region of Grace, long to be
translated (especially in stormy and tempestuous Times) from the Region of
Grace into the Region of Glory.

True they must be unclothed of this Mortal Body, before they can enter into
that Region of Light, to put on the Robes of Immortal Glory. For, Induci in
Nubes, penetrare in plenitudinem Luminis, irrumpere claritatis Abyssos, and
lucem habitare inaccessibilem, nec temporis est hujus nec corporis *.
To be taken up into the Clouds, to pass into the fullness of light, to break
into the Abysses of Claritude, and to dwell in the Light which is inaccessible,
Bern. sup. Cant. Ser. 38.
is neither consistent with this state of Body, nor competible to this present
Time. But why should we not be wiling that God should cast down our 2 Cor. 5.1
Tabernacle of Clay, when we are assured he will raise us up a 1 Cor. 15 43
glorious Temple in the room of it, a fit Mansion for an immortal soul allied
to God, arrayed with Glory?

We are indeed incompast with Mercies on Earth; but we shall be surrounded with
Glories in heaven. Mercy speaks a state of Imperfection and Misery; but Glory
speaks a state of perfect Felicity. Ah Christians! Your Enemies will pursue
you, till you are entered into the Sanctuary of God. The Avenger of blood will
pursue you, until you have taken the City of Refuge. Who are these Enemies but
your Sins, with those Troops of Miseries, which they lead up against you to
destroy you? Who is the Avenger of blood, but Satan, who seeks the Life of your
souls to destroy it? Now what is this Sanctuary? What is this City of Refuge?
It Is Heaven, the place of the Saints Rest and Peace, Joy and Glory.

Ah Christians! Why are your affections like ravenous Vultures) seeking their
Prey upon Earth, when (with the Royal Eagl^) they should be mounting up to
Heaven, to seek their Rest in Glory? Ah Christians! What amiable Objects can
you behold upon Earth, which make you so loath to be going hence, at least to
long so little to leave this World, that you might live for ever in the
Contemplation of the Glorious Beauties of Heaven? Surely it grieves your Hearts
here to see Christ in his Blood, as he is daily Heb. 6.6
crucified afresh by the sins of men; but then oh how will it joy your souls
to behold the Is. 33.17
King in his Beauty, Christ at his Fathers right hand in glory, where he shall
sit till all his Foes are made his Footstool Ps. 110.1 Heb. 1.13.
. Oh me thinks if Christ be indeed the dearly beloved of your souls, and
infinitely more precious in your esteem, then all these earthly enjoyments,
you should extremely long to be dissolved, that you may live with him for ever
in Heavenly Glory.

Ah Christians! What can you find or expect but Troubles and Miseries on Earth?
What then should your desires and longings be, but to be at Heb. 4.9.
Rest with Christ in Heaven? Why does it please the Lord, who by his powerful
Providence and Government orders all things that come to pass in the World, to
suffer these storms and tempests to arise, and so sorely shake the Isa. 61.3
Trees of Righteousness of his own planting, but to loosen their Roots from
the Earth, and so to prepare them to be transplanted into Paradise? Its the
Privilege of the Saints of God, that Romans 8.28
all things work together for their good. And it is a considerable advantage
that the people of God have by perilous Times, that thereby they are weaned
from the world, made willing to be dissolved, and desirous to leave the Earth
to live for ever in Heaven. Oh labor, Christians, to fetch this honey out of
the Carcass of the Lion; to make this good use of bad Times. Let your hearts
sit loose to all your earthly Contentments, and let your souls daily long more
and more to be unclothed of your mortal Bodies, and to live in immediate
communion with Christ in heavenly Glory. Oh long and labor to get out of this
Wilderness of Thorns, and to enter into that Flowery Paradise of everlasting
Delights, which God has prepared for his children, when this life is ended. O
long to see an end of these evil Days, that those glorious Days, whereof the
Pious Father speaks, may at length begin, which never shall have an end.

(...) Basil. in Psalm. 33.
.
Now (says he) indeed our Days are evil, but there are other Days that are
good, Days whose light shall never be cut off by darkness, Days that shall
never be severed by the dark Curtains of Night: For God himself shall be their
eternal Light, crowning them with the resplendent Rays of his own glory. O the
difference betwixt our Days on Earth and these Days of Heaven! Here we have
often cloudy and stormy Days, but there is an everlasting Calm, an everlasting
Sunshine of Love and Glory. These are oftimes days of Trouble and Torment, but
those above are always Days of Triumph and Joy. These are Days of Sin and
Labor, of suffering and sorrow; but those are all holy Sabbaths of Rest, and
sacred Festivals of Divine Delights. So the same Father styles them, (...).
Delicious, Holy, Everlasting Sabbaths, Days of eternal Delight. So says the
Apostle also; (...).
Heb. 4.9
There remains therefore a Rest (an everlasting glorious Sabbatisme) for the
People of God. Oh how should the Saints long and labor to enter into this
glorious R^st!

Happy are you, Saints, if all the Waves of afflictions, and rolling Billows
upon which you are tossed in the troublesome Sea of this World, set you daily,
hourly nearer to the fair Havens of everlasting Happiness. But, O then be
sure you steer your Course by the sacred Compass of the Word of God. Oh be
daily preparing your selves by a holy Life, for a happy Death, if you desire to
enter into a glorious eternity. In vain shall you long for Heaven, if you
still live in sin, which is but to walk in the way that leads to Hell.
Unless the Image of God be renewed upon your souls in the Beauties of
holiness, while you are yet on Earth, never shall you see the Face of God in
Heaven. For, Heb. 12.14
without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Oh then, be daily crucifying your
Corruptions, exercising your Graces, 2 Cor. 7.1
perfecting holiness in the Fear of God, and so preparing your selves for
heaven, that you may be Col. 1.12
meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. Then may you
with comfort look for Christ's coming, who will receive you up into his Kingdom
and Glory.

True believers are such as 2 Timothy 4.8
love the appearing of Christ, such as may with confidence 2 Pet. 3.12
look for, and hasten unto the coming of the Day of God. But then consider, 2
Pet. 3.11
What manner of Persons ought you to be in all holy Conversation and
Godliness, that you may with comfort look for the coming of Christ, and with
confidence have to the Judgment day? Remember that the Tit. 2.11, 12, 13.
Grace of God, revealed in the Gospel, which brings salvation to you, teaches
you that denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts, you should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present World; So, looking for that blessed hope,
and the glorious appea ing of the great God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Let Prayer and Piety then be your daily Exercise, during Life, that though you
live in perilous Times, you may finish your Days in Peace. Be diligent in
doing of good, and 1 These. 5.22, 23.
Abstain from all appearance of Evil. And the very God of Peace sanctify you
wholly: and I pray God your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body be preserved
blameless unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Jude 24, 25
Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultlesse before the presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy; to the only
wise God, our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever.
Amen.

FINIS.
The Author's Advertisem^nt.
REader thou art now come to the End of this Book; let me tell thee what was
the End of the Author in publishing it. God, in the Scripture, tells us that
evil Days, perilous Times shall come. This is doubtless written for our
Instruction. It Is then surely the Duty of a Minister of the Gospel, to give
People WARNING of these perilous Times, and (after the Example of the
Prophets, and faithful Preachers of the Word in all Ages) to give in his WITNESS
against the evil of the Days. This, out of Faithfulness to the great Interests
of the Glory of God, and the Salvation of souls. The Author, upon this Ground,
readily embraced, what he judged his fittest Opportunity, for the discharge of
this Duty, that so he might have a good conscience, both toward God, and
toward men.

Moreover, the Author observing with Grief, how the generality of men
perceiving their Danger in such perilous Times, are wont to study their safety
by carnal Compliances with every rising Party, whereby when a wicked Party
prevails, it strengthens it self mightily to the carrying on and
Accomplishment of those Designs, which are destructive to the whole Nation, in
the Safety or Ruin whereof particular Persons and Societies must needs stand
or fall. Thus the Trees submit themselves to the scratching Bramble, and put
their Trust under its shadow, till at length Fire coming forth from it to
devour the Noble Cedars, consumes the whole Forest. Such is the Folly of men,
that oft-times by that very means whereby they seek for Safety, they run
themselves into the greater Danger. I judged it my Duty therefore to endeavor
a Discovery of a more excellent Way.

Doubtless here lies our greatest Danger; in our provoking God by our sins, to
punish us and the whole Land by his Judgments. If he become our Enemy, they
are not men, be they never so great and mighty in Power, that can help or save
us. And by sinful compliances how soon may the whole Nation be involved in the
guilt of those horrid Perjuries, injurious Encroachments, fearful Enormities,
and God-provoking Abominations, which may pluck down the sorest Plagues and
Punishments upon all the People of the Land. Our only safety then lies in
making our Peace with God, by humbling our selves for all our sins, and
turning to him with our whole Hearts, and so in walking humbly with him in his
holy ways, and keeping our selves clear from the Evils and Abominations of
the Times. For if God be with us, who can be against us? If he that is Mighty
to save be our Friend, we need not care who are our Enemies, nor fear what man
can do unto us. Now this is the Scope and Drift of the present Treatise; and to
give a timely Warning of this Danger, and a seasonable Admonition of this Duty,
was the Design, and is the Desire of the Author.

For this Reason and end therefore was this Sermon first preached, and
afterward by the Advice of many of his Reverend Brethren, the Ministers of the
Gospel in the City of London, was this Discourse published. If thou desire to
know what was at the first preached in the Sermon, and has been since added in
the Discourse, which has swelled it to this Bigness, take this Account. The
Sermon mainly consisted of these two things; the Symptoms of perilous Times,
and the Duty of the Saints in such Days of Danger. For the former; those seven
Symptoms were laid down, which according to the Order wherein now thou find
them, are the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, eighth, ninth and last. For the
latter; the first and second Duties only were pressed, and therein principally
the fifth Branch of the second Duty. Almost all the rest, with sundry
illustrative Enlargements of these, are added in this Treatise, that it might,
by the Blessing of God, become of more General Usefulness. This Advertisement
I have added for thy satisfaction, which I shall conclude with this Caution;
Take heed thou art not one of them that make the Times perilous. By a serious
Perusal of the foregoing Discourse, and a Religious Reflection upon thy self,
thou may come to know whether thou art on Gods side or against him. But see
thou do thy self no Hurt by what is meant for thy Good. Harden not thy self
against the Admonitions given thee in the Name of the Lord. For, Know; the BOOK
in thy hand, however buried in Contempt, will rise up in Judgment against many
Great Ones, many Guilty Ones in this Nation, at the last Day; whose guilt will
be aggravated by their slighting of this timely Warning, given them by

A poor, unworthy Servant of the Lord Jesus, in the Ministry of his glorious
Gospel, THO. WILLS.
London, Aug. 15. 1659.
The Book commended to Gods Blessing.
GLORIOUS GOD, This poor thing, which thy unworthy servant has finished in thy
strength, is now pressed for thy service. And behold I have here brought it
before thy Majesty, that it may receive thy Blessing. Thou, who art the great
God, delightest to do great things by weak Means, that thy Power may appear,
and thy Name may have the Glory. O that it would please thee to make use of
this poor thing, as an Instrument in thine own hand, for the Glory of thy great
Name, and the good of thy People, in this sinful Nation! Oh let not the
Weaknesses and Infirmities of thy servant, that herein disclose themselves,
hinder the success of this small service, which he desires hereby to do thy
distracted Church. Lord, own and accept what is Good in it, for it is thine
own: but what is Evil, pardon and cover, as proceeding from the weakness of a
poor Creature, that would willingly do thee much better service, and yet is
willing to submit to thy Will, though Thou should subject him to the meanest
employment. And give, O Lord, so much Charity to his dear Brethren, that they
may cover the Infirmities of their poor weak Brother in Love; and not seek to
hurt him, by that whereby he desires to do others Good. Oh that thou would
be pleased to put it into their Hearts, from the discoveries of thy poor
servants Weaknesses, to take an occasion to adore the Riches of thy free Grace,
and to exalt thy Name with Praises, for that thou have been pleased to entrust
them with more excellent Abilities for thy service! So shall thy servant have
cause to glory in his Infirmities, when thereby some Glory shall redound to thy
Name.

But as for the Proud, who make it their Glory to oppress the Poor, keep thy
servant ever in that Resolution, to which by thy grace thou have raised his
heart, rather to perish by their Power, then by any unworthy Compliance, to
seek his own Preservation or Advantage, to thy Dishonor. Fill his Heart, and
the Hearts of all thy faithful servants, with a holy Contempt and Scorn of
their Favor, whose Friendship is flat Enmity with God. Make thy servant one of
them, in whose Eyes a vile Person is contemned, how Great or Glorious soever he
be in the World's eye; but let him ever honor them that fear the LORD. Let
not thy servant think it strange if he suffer Reproach from them, that cast
Dishonor upon Thee; but rather rejoice in their Reproaches, as the Badges of
his Faithfulness, and wear them as his Crown and Glory. Let him not study to
please men, lest he loose the Honor of being the servant of Christ. Oh let thy
servant behold Smiles in thy pleased Face, and taste the sweetness of thy
precious Promises, and so shall he not fear the Frowns, nor regard the Threats
of Proud, Perfidious, and Presumptuous sinners. Let him never desire to have
them for his Friends, who by their horrid Enormities have made God their Enemy.
Let him never seek to be esteemed by them, whose Insolences proclaim to the
world that they contemn God. Yet, Oh that thou would open their Eyes to see
their sins, before thou tumble them from their Earthly Glory into Hell! Oh that
in stead of accounting thy servant their Enemy for telling them the Truth, they
might see and consider that it is the highest act of Friendship to show them
their Danger before it be too late. Oh that it would please thee by thy Spirit,
to convince them of those sins, and fearful abominations, which thy servant
has endeavored herein to represent, as in a Glass, before their faces! Oh
give them to repent of their wicked Deeds, and to humble themselves for their
insolent Actings. However, Lord, by thy powerful Providence restrain them in
their ways of wickedness, whose Ambitious and aspiring spirits prompt them to
the most Audacious and illegal Actings, for the securing of their own
Interests, and the Establishment of their own Glory and Greatness upon the
Ruins of the Church and Commonwealth; restrain them, O Lord, lost they pluck
down Judgments not only upon their own heads, but also on the too guilty
Nation.

And vouchsafe, O God, to look down from thy high and holy habitation, upon
this sinful Land; but not with an Eye of Fury and Revenge, but with an Eye of
Mercy and Love. Thou see what fearful Abominations are committed amongst us:
Thou know what perilous Times are come upon us. Thou see how cruel
enemies do rend the body of thy dear son, the CHURCH, which he has redeemed
with his own blood. Thou hear with what hellish Oaths and Blasphemies vile
Creatures daily tear thy sacred and glorious Name. Oh! If thou wast not
infinite in Mercy and Patience, thou had long ago rained down Fire and
Brimstone upon our heads, or involved the whole Land in Confusion and Blood. It
is of the Lords mercies we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.

But now, O Lord, hear; O Lord, have Mercy; O Lord, forgive the many and great
sins and Provocations of this Land, and do not forsake us utterly, nor
irresistibly destroy us, as we have deserved. We must needs confess that we
and our Princes have greatly sinned against thee, and fearfully provoked the
pure Eyes of thy Glory. Lord humble us from the highest to the lowest; give us
a true Repentance for all our sins, and Grace to turn to thee our God with our
whole hearts, and so spare us, and heal our Land. Oh stir thy people up to
those special Duties, which are at this Time in a special manner incumbent on
them. Let this Warning and Call which thou give them by the hand of thy
servant, become, through thy Blessing, effectual for the Awakening of thy
servants out of their Security, and the Engaging of them to those Duties,
whereby thy Wrath and Judgments may be prevented, and a wide Door may be
opened, whereby thy Blessings may flow in abundantly upon us. O Good God,
punish not this Land with a Famine of thy Word. Oh take not thy Gospel and
Ordinances from us; Remove not thy golden Candlestick. Oh never let it be said,
The Glory is departed from England! It were better for us to see our streets
run down with the Blood of the slain, and to behold the Bodies of thy
Saints burnt in flames, then to live in peace, and grow cold in our love to thy
Truth, till we have utterly lost the Gospel. Prayers put up in Flames and Blood
might recall it again, when a general sloth and security in sin, may forfeit
it for ever. But, O Lord, continue thy Gospel, preserve thy People, and bless
thine Inheritance in the Land. But if for our sins, thou shall suffer those
storms to arise, whereby thy Church shall suffer Shipwreck, Oh let this poor
Plank cast out by the hand of thy unworthy servant, be a Means to save some
Souls. Oh let this small Light direct some souls in the right Path, for their
eternal Salvation, to the Glory of thy free Grace, through the Lord Jesus, our
only Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata Typographica.
Some small Mistakes have escaped the Press, whereof some few are amended with
the Pen. Some few Mispellings, Mispointings crave their Pardon of course, as
Things of such ordinary Incidency in Printing, that the greatest Diligence can
hardly prevent them. Some of the most material Mistakes, which offered
themselves to Notice upon a swift Review, are these that follow.

Errata. Correcta. Page Lin. intended extended 13 29 Premuniti. Praemuniti. 14
24 overcome overtake 16 20 (...). (...). 37 19 Vial Viol 48 6 Frevalency
Prevalency 54 5 Excess; Excess?] 93 13 he the 93 14 Octavious Octavius 94 16
victus vinctus 97 marg. scattered shattered 150 22 (...). (...) 141 marg. Corn
Cork 257 5 thus there 263 11 Diabolos Diabolus 275 1 Name Doctrine 275 5 Baits
Balls 287 23 Baldwin. de Cas. Conse. Balduin. de Cas. Consc. 289 marg. he was
proceeded against he was to be proceeded against 291 1 (...) Error Seculi.
. (...). Romans 12. v. 11.

A SYNOPSIS of the foregoing TREATISE in six TABLES.
The first Table. JN unfolding the Prophecy of perilous Times, we are to
consider the Parts of the
1. TEXT, the Subject of the Discourse. These are 1. Prediction of Danger,
wherein we are to consider the 1. Terms, wherein it is expressed; Perilous
Times shall come. 2. Time, when it is to be expected; in the last Days.
2. Premonition of Duty, directed to Timothy, and in him to every faithful
Minister and good Christian; This KNOW also that in the last Days perilous
Times shall come.
2. TREATISE, or the Discourse upon the Subject; which (answerable to the Parts
of the Text) are two, sc. the I. DANGER to be discovered. Here are two things
to be considered; sc. the 1. Means of the Demonstration, when these Times are
come; This by the 1. CHARACTERS of pernicious Persons. Tab. 2. 2. SYMPTOMS of
perilous Times, which (as to the main intent of them) are 1. Moral. Tab. 3.
2. Political. Tab. 4.

2. Ground of the Denomination, why these Times are so called; sc. because of
the Evils and Dangers of them. Tab. 5.
II. DUTY to be discharged. Tab. 6.

The second Table.
The CHARACTERS of pernicious Persons are drawn Properties and Practices, and
are 1. Positive and absolute; as, 1. Lovers of their own selves. 2. Covetous.
3. Boasters. 4. Proud. 5. Incontinent. 6. Fierce. 7. Heady. 8. High-minded.
2. Relative, in Reference to 1. God; as, 1. Unholy. 2. Lovers of Pleasures
more then Lovers of God. 3. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power
ther^of.
2. Men; as, 1. Disobedient to Parents. 2. Without Natural affection. 3.
Truce Breakers. 4. False-Accusers. 5. Despisers of those that are good. 6.
Traitors.
3. Both God and men; as, 1. (...), Blasphemers, Revilers. 2. Unthankful. 3.
Wicked men and Seducers.



The third Table.
The Moral SYMPTOMS of perilous Times are these, 1. Prevalency of Impiety:
wherein are some 1. Special sins, making the Times perilous; as, 1. Atheism
and Irreligion. 2. Murmuring against God. 3. Injustice, Cruelty, Oppression. 4.
Swearing and Cursing. 5. Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness. 6. Gluttony and
Drunkenness. 7. Phantasticalnesse, Vanity and Pride of Apparel.
2. Special Cases, wherein the Times by reason of these sins, are in a
special manner perilous; as in case of 1. Commonnesse of sin. 2. Generality of
Offenders. 3. Obstinacy and Impudency in sinning. 4. Remissness of
Magistrates and Officers in punishing. 5. Incorrigiblenesse and (...).
2: Formality in Religion. 3. Security in a state of uncertainty. 4. Divisions
in the Church and Union of her Adversaries.


The fourth Table.
The Political SYMPTOMS of perilous Times, are these, 1. Impiety veiled with
hypocrisy. 2. Iniquity clo^^^ (...) Authority. 3. Pe^jury and
Covenant Breaking. 4. Practical Atheism. 5. Impiety acted with Impunity. 6.
Toleration of Errors in Religion. Here we are to consider the 1. Characters of
erroneous persons, which are these 1. Pride and self-conceitedness. 2.
Self-separation from the true Church. 3. Railing upon Magistrates and
Ministers. 4. Covetousness. 5. Uncleanness. ibid.
2. Cases, which upon this account constitute perilous Times. These are 1.
Licentiousness colored with Liberty of Conscience. 2. Protection of Error
and False-worship. 3. Misusing Gods Ministers. 4. Contempt of God's Ordinances
countenanc't. 5. Sinners sedulity, and sloth in Saints.

7. Peril of Plain-dealing.

The fifth Table.
The Evils of perilous Times are to be considered as the 1. Causes thereof; as
the 1. Provocation of God. 2. Perversion of men. 3. Pollution of the Land.
2. Consequents thereof; as the 1. Infliction of Judgment on the Land. 2.
Persecution of the Church. 3. Destruction of men's souls.


The sixth Table.
The DUTY of the Saints in perilous Times is 1. Mourning for the Abominations
of the Times. 2. The serious practice of true Piety. This Duty consists of five
Branches, which are these, 1. To keep themselves from the corruptions of the
Times. 2. To take heed of active compliance with those that are the chief
causers of the evils of the Times. 3. To consider one another to provoke unto
Love and Good Works. 4. To live in the Exercise of their most excellent Graces.
5. To appear boldly in their places against the Evils of the Times.
3. Earnest Prayer to God for the amendment of the Times. 4. Making God their
refuge till the Dangers are overpast. For this end there is a threefold Work
required; sc. 1. To clear up their Interest in God. 2. To act all the Powers of
their souls upon God. 3. To be much in communion with God.
5. Taking off their hearts from Earth, and longing after Heaven. Looking and
longing for the coming of Christ.

Rev. 22.20 21.
He which testifies these Things, says, surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so,
Come Lord Jesus.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

FINIS.

