HIS MAJESTY'S Most Gracious LETTER To the PARLIAMENT- of Scotland.
WILLIAM R.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe continuance of the War obliging Us to Call you together at this time, for
your own Safety and Security, as well as for Our Service, and hindering Us to
be present in Person: We have appointed Our Right Trustee, and Right well
Beloved Cousin and Counselor, JOHN Earl of Tullibardine to be Our
Commissioner, for Representing Our Person and Authority in this Session of
Parliament. The knowledge We have of his Capacity, as well as of his zealous
Affection, and firm Fidelity to Our Person and Government, will certainly
render him Acceptable. We have fully Instructed him in all that may Concern the
Good and Welfare of that our Ancient Kingdom, and the Interest of Our Service;
And therefore you are to give him entire Trust and Credit. He is to Ask nothing
of you in Our Name, but what your own Safety makes necessary.

The Delivery that God Almighty lately gave Us, from that Imminent Danger to
which both Our Person and Kingdoms were Exposed, by the Crafty and Bloody
Designs of Our Enemies, is fresh in your Remembrance, and Calls for Our Joint
Care and Providence for the future.

The Supplies Granted in the last Session of Parliament, are now almost
expired; And you also know how much the Funds there to appointed, are sunk
below Expectation.

The Continuing of the Forces, the Buying of Arms and Ammunition, the Repairing
of Forts and Garrisons, and the Provisions for your Frigates, being all for your
own Defense, with the other Charges and Contingencies of the Government, will
readily persuade you to give what is Needful, for those Ends. And that in the
most effectual and easy manner, Recruits during the War must also be had; which
We hope you will provide in such ways as may best prevent Abuses.

We have Empowered Our Commissioner, to Give Our Royal Assent, to such Laws as
shall be judged necessary, for the better Securing to Our Subjects their Rights
and Properties.

It has been, and shall still be Our Royal Care, to Preserve you in Peace and
Safety, and to Promove your Welfare and Prosperity: And therefore We expect you
will Treat and Conclude all Matters, with that Prudence, Calmness and concord,
as will be most to Our Satisfaction, and no less to your own Honor and
Advantage; And so We bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Loo the 28 August 1696. And of Our Reign the Eighth
year.

