The Sope-Patentees Of Londons PETITION Opened and Explained.

OR, The Unmasking of these cruel Sope-Patentees deceitful Petition, presented
by them to the Honorable House of Commons.

Wherein you have a Discovery made (in part and but in part) of the great
Sufferings of this Commonwealth: As also of the special Sufferings of some
Freeborn Subjects in their Liberties and Estates, sustained by these cruel

SOPE-MONOPOLERS. By Richard Wilkins.

Habbac. 2. 12. Woe unto him that builds a Town with Blood, and establishes
a City by Iniquity.

Ier. 17. 11. As the Patridge gathers the young which he has not brought
forth, so he that gets Riches and not by right, shall lose them in the midst
of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.

London, Printed by I. F. for John Rothwel, and are to be sold at the Fountain
and Sun in Paul's Churchyard, 1646.

THere are three things that these Patentees are eminently guilty of. First,
the Monopolizing of the mystery of Sope-boyling of the whole Kingdom into eight
or ten men's hands, to the great oppression of the Commonwealth, and the ruin
of many Families in their Estates and Liberties. Secondly, they have been, and
still are, great deceivers of the Subjects, not only by adulterated and base
Soap, but also by those ways which I have declared in my Answering their
Propositions. In these two particulars you have these three things observable,
First, that to Monopolize, they did take their Patent, and this offense they
translate upon the first Sope-Patentees. Secondly, that by Monopolizing, they
have been great and barbarous oppressors; this offense they charge upon the
Kings Majesty, and the Lords of the Council. Thirdly, that by several ways they
have been great deceivers; and this offense they also unjustly translate upon
the ruined and oppressed Sope-boylers. The third and last thing which they are
eminently guilty of, is this, That by lies they deceived the Kings Majesty, and
Lords of the Council, and now by lies they have endeavored to deceive the
Honorable and High Court of Parliament, not only by this vain and deceiving
Petition, but also by their Propositions for the Excise of Soap: All which
wickedness, together with the several aggravations of these Innovators of our
Laws and Liberties offenses, you have demonstrated in the ensuing Discourse, I
could give you many Arguments deductable, from the cries of the oppressed
Sope-boylers; from the cry of this oppressed and deplorable Commonwealth,
which calls to our Worthyes for Justice against these cruel, wilful and
covetous oppressors and fomentors of our present Troubles; but I will only
mention these two; First, that I might keep all men undeceived, for general it
concerns all, but especially our most Honored and Worthy Senators, in that
sense which the Scripture speaks (Prove. 24. 21, 22. Hos. 7. 12.) concerning
these changers of our Laws: or rather that I may take off that sense which
godly and wise men have received of them by their glorious words of deceit, by
which they have put a false gloss upon their oppressings; for I find that with
some that fits at the Stern in the City, nay may I not say, it is to be feared
with some in the Parliament, that the sense of these Patentees sufferings by
the cruel oppressions of the first Sope-Projectors (for which they have already
satisfied themselves) has swallowed up the sense of their cruel oppressing of
others, that the false sense of their being necessitated to take a Patent, has
swallowed up the sense of their delinquency in acting against Law and Liberty
of Subject in their taking of their Patent. Secondly, that the executing of
judgment upon these Projectors, is the only way as to Judge the poor oppressed
Sope-boylers with Righteousness; so it is the only way, and there can (under
favor) be no other by which these Patentees can be forced to make restitution
to the Commonwealth, which they have greatly oppressed: For the raising of a
Sum of money from these Monopolers answerable to their demerits (which they are
able to satisfy) for the benefit of the State, is a Negative restitution to
the Commonwealth, that which inforces and backs this Argument is this, because
that it is consistent to the Intentions, the unwearied and unparalled Actings
and Declarations of the honorable Houses of Parliament, which I will make out
from three Scriptures: Sure I am, that the Laws and Liberties of this
Commonwealth has been wounded by these Innovators, the sad consequent is the
present bleeding condition of this our Nation, by the unnatural Civil War that
we have had, and still is upon us, execution of judgment is the means of
healing of us, Ier. 51. 1. Secondly, sure I am, that your intendments, Right
Honorable, is to loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens
from the oppressed, to execute judgment upon these fomentors of our present
troubles, as well as others, and God has accepted and embraced your
intendments, while you are in the way, as the Father the prodigal Son, witness
the glorious and happy success that God has given to your Armies: O let not
the want of execution of Justice bring our, I hope ungrounded, fears upon us,
which is the renewing of our troubles by the unfaithfulness of Brethren, and
so turn the smiles of God into frowns: For your encouragement unto a speedy
hearing of the oppressed cries, read your portion (Right Honorable) given you
of God, Isa. 58. 8. The third Scripture is the words of Solomon, recorded Prove.
20. 8. A King that sits in the Throne of judgment, chaseth away all evil
with his eyes; the Marginal note thus renders it, Where righteous judgment is
executed, there sin cease, and vice dares not appear. O remember how their
impudency in propounding to you, Right Honorable (that in their Propositions,
which is no less then a Monopoly) that which calls upon you for justice, an
unparalleld presumption, having engagement upon me hereunto by Covenant and by
trust; let these words of sobernes and truth find acceptance from him that is
a well-wisher to the Kingdoms Peace and happiness.

R. Wilkins.

To the Right Honorable, The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses OF The House of
COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of Lieut: Colonel John
Hardwick, Captain John Hayes, Edmund Whitwel, Laurence Whitwel, Simon Weedon,
Sope-boylers of London,
Most humbly shows:
1. THat whereas your Petitioners, His Majesty's Native Subjects, have been
brought up and served in the Art aforesaid, according to the Statute, did use
the same till 7. Caroli Rex, wherein diverse Projectors (Enemies to the
Commonwealth) under the Name of Gentleman Sope-boylers of Westminster (upon
false pretenses) obtained a Patent under the great Seal, for the making of
white Soap, to the great abuse of His Majesty, and extraordinary damage to the
Kingdom.

1. The Petitioners (not being able with good Conscience to comply with them)
used their own Trade aforesaid (according to the liberty of the Subject) in a
just and legal manner, until for the same they were greatly oppressed (by the
said Patentees) by Suits in Star Chamber, caused them to be Fined in great Sums
of money, their persons imprisoned for diverse years (some dying in Prison)
their houses broken open, their goods Seized (to the Beds they lay on) to their
very great impoverishing, and unexpressible damage being totally disabled from
the use of their Trade, to the (...) Sope-makers to forsake the Kingdom and
live Exile in Foraign parts.

3. Under which heavy burden and bondage the Petitioners groaned diverse years,
until they and others of their Art were forced to buy their Trade and Liberty
(which they were born to) by giving the King a greater yearly Revenue then the
Projectors did,

4. Nevertheless many persons (not having been brought up nor served as
Apprentises in the Petitioners Art) did use the making of Soap privately and
secretly, putting the same to sale, even to the ruin of the Petitioners, and
great deceiving of the Kingdom by base Soap.

5. For remedy whereof, and to secure the Revenue, the Petitioners and the rest
of the Company were enjoined by His Majesty, and the Lords of the Privy
Council, and bound in 40000. l. Bond, to suppress all such persons from the
making Soap, which indeed were prosecuted (only) but according to the tenor of
the King and Lords Warrants.

6. For so doing, many Suits in Law have been prosecuted against the
Petitioners upon the Statute of Monopolize, to the expense of 1000. l. some of
them recovering 1000. l. 500. l. 300. l. when the Petitioners proved they were
not really dampnified ^. l. and many more Actions are brought, and threatened to
be brought against the Petitioners only (being but few, to the many which were
of their company) which will tend to the great disinabling of the Petitioners,
in being serviceable to the King and Parliament as formerly, and as they still
desire, in which cause they have greatly engaged their purses and persons, but
now are like to be utterly undone if not relieved.

In tender consideration of the premises, and in regard that your Petitioners
are most willing and ready to make satisfaction to their utmost abilities, to
all that can make it truly appear they are damnified by your Petitioners, (they
having paid diverse to the value of 6000 l. for satisfaction of which their
wrongs the Petitioners never received one penny.

And in regard many of the Petitioners company (who received a far greater
benefit by His Majesty's said grant then the Petitioners did) do refuse to make
as is herein desired, and leave the insupportable burden totally upon the
Petitioners, who never acted any thing in the premises as private persons, but
only as Members of their Company for the general service and good of the same:
May it therefore please this Honorable Assembly to take the sad condition of
the Petitioners into your Pious consideration, and to appoint a Committee to
call all such persons as aforesaid before them, and to examine their particular
damages, and to compel all that had benefit by His Majesty's said Grant, to
join with the Petitioners in giving such satisfaction (without Suit in Law) as
to the same Committee shall seem most meet. The parties who allege themselves
grieved (by the Petitioners and their Company) being greatly desirous to be
relieved by the same means, as by their humble Petition, hereunto annexed,
appears, whereby the Petitioners may be preserved from utter ruin.

And your Petitioners, etc.

Having set down and presented to your view the Petition of the last
Sope-Patentees, the most ancient and most cruel Monopolers of the Art of
Sope-boyling, I shall first give you the parts of it, and then explain it;
wherein I shall show, not only the greatness of their oppressing Patent, but
also their wilful being oppressors and invaders of the Subjects Liberties
(which being done, will not only render them to be the greatest oppressors, and
most ancient Monopolers, but also men covering the sins with lies) which at
present I shall do it briefly (yet satisfactorily) because their more fuller
declaring of their taking a Patent, was not to gain their Trade, but the
enriching of themselves by oppressing their Fellow Subjects in their Liberties
and Estates) is more proper either in answering their Book, Entitled, A true
Relation concerning the Soap business, or in proof of the Charge which I shall
exhibit against them (in the High and Honorable Court of Parliament) for their
Delinquency, not only in their taking of their oppressing Patent, but also in
their cruel, barbarous, and inhumane prosecution of it; in both which I have
made some progress in, and preparation for,

1. The general parts of their Petition are three:
1. The body or subject matter of their Petition, which consists of six
particular Branches.

2. The Arguments on which the request of their Petition is grounded.

3. The Requests of their Petition it self.

2. The opening or explanation of this their Petition.
In the general part of this their Petition, which is the body or subject
matter of the Petition, you shall find these four things laid down.

First, That these Patentees were, by the Patent and practice of the white
Sope-Patentees, prohibited their Trade for diverse years together: Together with
the sad consequences that did fall upon these Petitioners, by reason of the
Patent, which they demonstrate by these five particulars:

1. By vexatious Suits in the Star Chamber.

2. By the great Fines imposed upon them in that illegal Court.

3. By the long Imprisoning of their persons.

4. By breaking open their houses.

5. By Seizing and carrying away their goods.

This first thing, together with these five particulars, declaring these
Petitioners sufferings by the Patent and practice of the other Patentees, are
expressed in the two first Branches of this Petition.

The Answer is,
That thought it is an undeniable truth which they have set forth, yet they are
not to be thought (or does render them) the more excuseable; nor is their sin
in taking their oppressing Patent extenuated (thereby) but aggravated; and that
for this reason, Because they acted the sin of others against light, namely,
the sin of Oppression, not of an ordinary, but of a scarlet dye; not only
acting unrighteous Decrees, but procurers of them, thus making their Prince an
oppressor to his people by their false pretenses; in not only a Law destroying,
but a Land ruinating sin, which they themselves have demonstrated unto us by
four things in these first and second Branches (so that I may say unto them as
Christ said to the unprofitable servant, They may be judged out of their own
mouth) which being well confidered, will render the Petitioners Enemies (as
well as the other Patentees) not only to the Kings Majesty, but also to the
Law, Liberties and Estates of the Subject in their taking of a Patent. I will
only give you one Scripture instance, which does aptly prove the Argument, and
render these Patentees greater offenders and sinners then the other (and then I
will name the four particulars by them expressed) Adam sinned as well as the
woman in eating the forbidden fruit; and yet it was true which he said to God,
The Woman which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did
eat: Nay, his sin was greater then the woman's (so is the sin of these Patentees
greater then the others) if ye consider these two things: 1. The tempter was
stronger that deceived her. 2. He was stronger to resist the temptation. To
apply. The first Patentees were Papists, and so were principled to ruinate the
Kingdom, and therefore must needs see a goodness in a Patent, being agreeable
to their principles: So it is said of the woman (but not of the man) that she
saw the Tree was good for food: These Patentees are Protestants, at least at
large (but, is to be feared, no more) I judge them not) and therefore their
principles should have led them, to maintain, not to destroy their King and
Kingdom (as now it is) which they have a great share in.

And though it be a digression, yet because it is both reasonable and
considerable, I will commend four things (in this Chapter considerable) in
reference to the Lords judicial proceeding upon man sinning) as to the serious
consideration of the Right Honorable and High Court of Parliament, by way of
president for their imitation, so also to the serious consideration of these
Patentees, by way of expectation; namely, That though they endeavor to cover
their sin with lies, they shall not prosper: That though they have got much
riches by that which is not right, yet they shall leave them in the midst of
their days, and their end shall be fools, as the Scripture speaks, Jer. 17.
11. Even then, when from our worthy Senators Justice shall run down like water,
and Judgment like a mighty flood; when they shall Judge with righteousness
the poor, and reprove with equity (these Projectors) for the meek of the Earth
Isaiah 11. 4.

The four things observable are,
1. That God did execute Judgment upon sinners, as he had said, Genesis 2. 17.
compared with Chap. 3. 14, 15, 16. Hos. 7. 12.

2. That God began Judgment where sin began, Genesis 3. 14.

3. That God did not only begin Judgment where sin began, but also proceeded
on as sin proceeded, Genesis 3. 14, 15, 16, 17.

4. The suitableness of Gods Judgment to the Nature of sin, this is called, A
reproving with equity, Isa. 11. 4. Achan troubled Israel, and the Lord troubled
him, Josh. 7 17.

The application which I shall observe to you, most Honored and worthy
Senators, that youmay bear his Image in this.

1. God executes Judgment, as he has said, so must ye against these
Monopolors, in respect of those that have been ruinated by them. Statute 21.
Jacobi, against Monopolers.

2. God began Judgment where sin began, so have ye, witness your Act of
200000. l. against the first Sope-Patentees.

3. God proceeds on in Judgment as sin proceeded, so must ye against these
Monopolers (as well as others) execute Judgment.

4. Gods Judgments are suitable and equal to the sins of men, so must ye
reprove with equity these Monopolers; and that you may reprove them with
equity, though it is impossible to express all the damage which they have done
to King and Kingdom, by the obtaining and cruel prosecuting of their illegal
Patent; yet this they are guilty of oppression by their Patetnt, to the Sum of
Four hundred thousand pounds. I come now to express the four particulars which
these patentees have expressed, which is appliable to themselves, and renders
them greater offenders then the other Sope-Patentees; which are these four:

That it was a Patent 1. Against the Law, Liberty and Estates of the Subject.
2. Abusive to the Kings Majesty. 3. Of extraordinary damage to the Kingdom. 4.
Which their Consciences could not suffer to comply with.

I will conclude speaking to this first general, with this (they have expressed
in the last of these four particulars) namely, the tenderness of these
Patentees Consciences, not daring to comply with the other Patentees; and the
reason they give is to be taken from, or made up by the other three
particulars, and it is this, Because that it was a Patent against Law and
Liberty of the Subject, against King and Kingdom; and yet consider how soon
were these tender Consciences seared and made hard, for that immediately they
did take up another Patent, more oppressing (in its Covenants) to the Subjects
then the other, and were more barbarous, cruel, and oppressive in their
prosecution, then the other Patentees; by which it does appear, That their
refusing to join with the other Patentees, did not arise either from
tenderness of Conscience, or an unwillingnesse to get riches by oppression (as
they falsely pretend, and would make men believe) but to gain a Patent to
themselves to Monopolize the Sope-boyling Mystery (from all other Sope-boylers)
into their own hands, to get riches in abundance (as they did) by oppression.
For you must know, that these oppressing cruel Patentees, are not like those
sinners which Solomon's speaks of, that said, Cast in thy lot amongst us, let us
have all one purse, Prove. 1. 14. These men will have no Competiters in their
gains, they well knowing by experience how to suck (out of a Monopelizing
Patent) a greater sweetness of gain then the other Sope-Projectors, having for
twenty years together (before ever any Patent was) gained much riches by
Monopolizing the Sope-boyling Mystery solely into eight or ten men's hands, to
the ruin of many a Family. I come now to speak to their second general, which
is this:

Secondly, That these Petitioners did take their Patent only to regain their
Trade from the other Patentees, and were forced thereunto: which they
demonstrate by these two Arguments:

1. That they did contend for their liberty of Trade, by suffering many years.

2. That confidering they could not gain liberty of Trade by suffering, they
were forced to purchase it, by giving the King a greater yearly benefit then
the other Sope-Projectors.

This second general, as also these two Arguments, you have contained in the
third Branch of the subject matter of this their Petition.

The Answer which I shall give to it is this:
The explaining and showing wherein the necessity of these Patentees (taking of
their Patent did lie, I will truly demonstrate to you by this ensuing
Proposition.

The Proposition.
That the Petitioners, to Monopolize the Sope-boyling Art into their own hands
(from all other Sope-boylers) and to enrich themselves by suppressing and
tyranizing over all other Sope-boylers, and by being oppressors of the
Commonwealth in this sense and in no other, there was a necessity of their
taking of a Patent: But there was not, nor could there be in that sense which
they pretend (and would make men believe) that is, To gain liberty of Trade.

There are these two parts in this Proposition.

1. That liberty of Trade could not be the Design of these Projectors in their
taking of a Patent.

2. That their Design in taking of their Patent, was to Monopolize the Art of
Sope-boyling, and to oppress.

Many Arguments may be given to prove both the parts of the Proposition; but I
will only mention these four Reasons at present; two to prove the first, and
the other two to prove the second part.

The two Arguments to prove the first part, namely, That liberty of Trade was
not the Design of these Patentees taking of their Patent, which is the Negative
part of the Proposition, are,

1. Because, that though there may be a necessity of suffering for, yet there
cannot be a necessity of sinning against God, Liberties and Laws; and the
reason is, because God, Liberties and Laws is to be contended for; yes, it is
the duty of Saints, and the duty of Subjects, to contend for their Birthright,
witness both the present contention in the Land, and the present ruins that
is upon us, the sad consequences of the actings of these Patentees, as well as
others, have brought upon us, as I have already shown.

2. Because that these Petitioners and Patentees, at that time when they did
take their Patent, might freely have used the Art of Sope-boyling, and enjoyed
liberty of Trade without a Patent; and the Reason why they might have had
liberty of Trade without a Patent, is, because the other Patentees were not
able any longer to hold their Patent, being disabled to pay the King His yearly
Revenue, by these two things:

1. The general distaste that the people took against that project.

2. The constant supply of Soap (Imported from Foreign parts and made at home)
for the Subjects use.

The consideration of this Argument, being judiciously observed, will render
these Patentees, not only Enemies to the Commonwealth, but also wilful
introducers of our troubles, and wicked oppressors, because covetous.

The two Arguments to prove the second part of the Proposition, namely, That
these Patentees Design in taking of their Patent, was to Monopolize and
oppress, which is the Affirmative part, are,

1. Because that these Patentees, by virtue and in prosecution of their said
Patent, they did not only prohibit all others from boiling Soap, and all
manner of Soap, but even such as had served themselves Apprentiships, yea, and
even such as were as ancient Sope-boylers as themselves; but also did carry
away their goods, and destroy their vessels.

2. If their Design in taking and prosecuting of their Patent were not to
Monopolize, then why was the Merchants throughout the Kingdom (to their great
damage and discouragment of Trade) by the cruel practice of these Projectors
prohibited, not only the importing of any Potashes to any Port of England, but
at London, but also the selling of them (so imported) to any other but
themselves.

That they did gain such a power, not only to the great damage of the
Merchants, and prejudice of all other Sope-makers, but also to the great damage
of all other Tradesmen dealing with, and using of Potashes; yea, to the ruin
of some Families. I will give you a Copy of the Order of the Star Chamber,
which the Merchants were served with, by them moved for, obtained and
prosecuted.

At Star Chamber the 18. of October. 1637.
Present,
Lord Archbishop of Cant. Lord Keeper. Lord Treasurer. Lord Privy Seal. Earl
Marshal. Earl of Dorset. Lord Cottington. Mr. Controller. Mr. Secretary Cook.
Mr. Secretary Wyndebank.
THis day was read to their Lordships an Order of this Board, made the 2. day
of May last, touching Potashes, and the restraint of the common sale thereof,
to the prejudice of the Sope-makers of London, on whose behalf it was now by
their Council prayed that the same Order might be explained and enlarged in
these particulars following:

First, That no Merchant, or other person or persons whatsoever, should
directly or indirectly, by themselves, their Agents, Factors or Servants at any
time or times hereafter, Sell, Barter, or do away, or deliver any Potashes
whatsoever, to any person or persons whatsoever, save only to the said Company
of Sope-makers of London, who has promised to furnish Dyers and
Leather-dressers with such quantities as they shall use, at the same price for
which they are bought, without any increase or further charge in that behalf.

Secondly, That no Merchant, or any other person whatsoever, shall land or
bring to Shore any Potashes, imported from beyond the Seas, save only at the
Port of London, and at no other Port, Haven, Creek, or place whatsoever.

Thirdly, That no person that does or shall make, or have any Pot ashes, shall
Sell, Barter, or do away the same, to any person or persons whatsoever, save
only to the Sope-makers of London, that are known lawfully to use that Trade,
and not to any undue makers of Soap, or to any other: Nevertheless, it is not
their Lordships pleasure, nor was it now desired, That any Merchant or other
should in any wise be restrained to Export out of the Kings Dominions into any
of the parts beyond the Seas, any Potashes, Foreign or English, and there to
be vended.

And their Lordships being informed, That the Merchants having since the Month
of May last sold 600. Tun of Potashes to the said Company, to the value of
Thirteen thousand pounds, or thereabouts.

Sithence nevertheless, they have brought in and imported about 450. Tun,
which if they be disposed to undue makers of Soap, will overthrow the
business, every Tun of Ashes so used, being near 30. l. loss to the King,
besides the Companies loss.

It is thereupon Ordered, That the several matters before desired be in all
parts observed, by the said Merchants and others, and that that they so govern
themselves therein, as that no further Complaint be hereafter made against
them, for or concerning any of the premises, And that they cause this Order to
be publicly read at their next general meeting, to the end, that they may the
better observe the same: Yet notwithstanding, if the Merchants shall find
themselves agrieved in any of the premises, as that they shall think themselves
able to give good and sound Reasons, why the same should not be observed, nor
enjoined them as aforesaid, then their Lordships do hereby appoint them to give
their attendance on the Board the 3. of Novem. next, together with the said
Sope-makers, that after due hearing of both sides, such final order may be
therein made as shall be fitting.

Ex. Dudley Carlton.

By what has been said, you may see how Absolon like these Patentees have
dealt with King and Kingdom: Absolon pretended Justice and good to the people,
but his Design was Rebellion and Treason against his Father David, to aspire
his Throne, 2 Samuel 15, 16, and 17. Chapters, you have the History: The
consequent was a Civil War, and therein he perished, God catches this wicked
one in his craftiness, as Job speaks, Cap. 5. 13. Even so these Patentees, by
their false pretenses of good to the people, gained of His Majesty a Patent to
Monopolize, and to oppress thereby to enrich themselves, which was their
Design; and how far their Rebellion against King and Kingdom has a share in
the present Miseries and Civil Wars that is now upon us, as Introducers, I
shall leave to the judgment and determination of our grave and wise Senators:
And why these changers of our Laws should not tremble to consider the nearness
of their downfall, I understand not, because the Scripture speaks positively of
their ruin, Prove. 24. 21. compared with the 22. Verse of that Chapter. And
Chapter 22. Verse 23. And the rather because they still persist and go on in
the self same sinful design, under the self same sinful pretenses; for as they
then dealt with the King and Kingdom in gaining of their Patent, so now these
Patentees deal Absolon like with the Parliament and Kingdom, witness their
Propositions concerning the Excize of Soap, by them presented to the Honorable
House of Commons, which being well consisidered, are to me and others (which
well know their workings, and have felt their cruelties) no less then a
Monopoly, as I have already declared in Answering of them in that sheet of
Paper Entitled, A Looking-glass for Sope-Patentees. Much more may be said
against the Propositions (and shall, when Providence gives me a fit
opportunity) but I shall not now, because it is a digression; only I will mind
you of a Scripture or two that I cannot omit: Isa. 32. 7. The Lord by the
Prophet shows this, That lying words are the weapons of wicked men to undo the
poor: The words in the Text are, For the weapon of the Churl are wicked, he
devises wicked counsels (what these wicked weapons are, and whereto they tend,
you have in the following words) To undo the poor with lying words, and to
speak against the poor in judgment. Eccles. 8. 11. Solomon tells us what is
the result and use that wicked men make of the delay of Justice, in these
words, Because Sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the hearts of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil:
The reason why I could not pass by the citing of these Scriptures, is, because
the actings of these Patentees are the Exposition of them. There is a third
Scripture, with which I will end this digression, propounding it by way of
Question, because the pertinatiousnesse of these Patentees occasion (the High
and Honorable Court of Parliament) to say, as the Lord said of those wicked
ones in the time of the Prophet, Isa. 50. 21. These things have thou done (what
things? namely these things, Thou see a Thief, and runnest with him; with thy
tongue thou forgest deceit, and speak against thy Brother. V. 18, 19, 20.
observe the parrallel) And I kept silence, therefore thou thoughtest I was like
thee. (Is it not high time, Right Honorable, to do, with these Projectors, as
the Lord said?) But I will reprove thee, and fet them in order before thee. I
will now conclude speaking to this second general, showing how they labor (by
vain words) to cover all their cruelty, saying, They were forced to take their
Patent to gain liberty of Trade, which I have by four Arguments proved to be a
false pretense, and their Design undoubtedly herein, is the endeavoring to
divert Justice (now Justice requires restitution) but let the Counsel of God
take place in the hearts of Parliament men: Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you
with vain words. I come now to speak to the third general head.

Thirdly, That many persons, not having been brought up to the said Art, did
boil and put to sale, to the ruin of the^e Projectors, and the great deceiving
of the Kingdom by base Soap, and that they did suppress: together with the
reason why, and the manner how.

There is in this third general, contained in the fourth and fifth Branches of
their Petition, these two parts:

First, some thing supposed, which is the Negative part.

Secondly, some thing expressed which is the Positive part.

1. That which is supposed consists of these three things.
1. That none was suppressed but such which were not brought up and served
Apprentiships to these Patentees Art.

2. That all those that these Patentees did suppress from boiling, did boil
illegally.

3. That all the cruelty which these Patentees acted in breaking open men's
houses, imprisoning their persons, seizing and carrying away their goods,
breaking and spoiling men's materials, and woulding men's persons, is wholly and
only chargeable upon the King and the Lords of the Council.

2. That which is expressed are these four things.
1. That many persons not being brought up in the Art of Sope-boyling, did boil
and put to sale base Soap.

2. That these persons boiling of base Soap, was ruinous to these Projectors,
and a deceiving of the Commonwealth.

3. That these Projectors did suppress them, and were both engaged by Bond,
and commanded by the King and Lords Warrants to suppress them.

4. That these Projectors suppression of them, was only according to the
purport and tenor of the said Warrants.

The Answer which I shall give to each particular of these two general parts of
this third general Head, shall be as they are proposed: and first, I will speak
to those three things here expressed to be supposed and employed, briefly,

1. That not only many, but all persons (which were not Patentees) that had
served Apprentiships, and had been brought up in the Mystery of Soap, were
suppressed (by these Patentees) and prohibited to boil Soap, yea, and some of
them their goods Seized, and materials spoiled and destroyed, yea all men
hindered, and became a prey to them which did boil for the maintenance of
themselves and Families; but if by not being brought up to these Patentees Art,
they do mean, were not brought up and served Apprentiships in their Art of
Monopolizing the Mystery of Sope-boyling into eight or ten men's hands, then the
Supposition is true, but else it is falsely employed: Now there is this Reason to
be given, deductable from their own showing in the Order of the Star Chamber,
which I have here recited; why by their Art must of necessity be understood
their Art of Monopolizing the Sope-boyling Art, because by their own showing
that all men which bo^led Soap, and was not a Member of their Monopolizing
Patent, were undue boylers of Soap.

2. That all men which these Patentees did suppress from boiling Soap, did as
legally boil as themselves, yea and more legally.

3. Though it be true, that the King and the Lords are not excuseable,
concerning the special and universe sufferings of the Commonwealth, by this
Monopolizing and oppressing Patent; yet it does not lessen or extenuate the
offense of these cruel opressing Patentees, and that for these Reasons:

1. Because these Patentees are not only guilty of acting, but were (by false
pretenses) the procurers of these illegal and oppressive Warrants.

2. Because that they wilfully of purpose to oppress and Monopolize, did gain
the said Patent and Lords Warrant, though by their own experience did know them
to be illegal and oppressive.

I come now to speak to the four things expressed, which is the second part of
this third general Head; and I shall give you the Answer in these two
particulars.

The answer to those things expressed, 1. That those persons which these
Patentees did suppress from boiling Soap, did boil better Soap then the
Patentees, and did sell to the Subjects at cheaper Rates; this I can prove by
multitude of Evidences, and Reason tells every rational man, that it had been
neither policy or profit for them to have boiled base Soap: The Arguments to
prove this are these two:

1. Because that men buying of Soap prohibited by these Patentees, they did
endanger not only the seizing of the said Soap, but also the being much vexed
and troubled by the cruel and illegal persecution of their illegal Court; for
what Soap was made by any that were not Patentees, being sound, was seized,
whether in the hands of maker or buyer of it.

2. Because that when men may buy Soap freely, that will not suffer themselves
to be defrauded and run a danger too.

This is sufficient for Answer to the first and second particulars, and does
declare, That as this is that false pretense by which they deceive the King,
and gained their Patent; so it is their vain words to deceive the Parliament,
their end undoubtedly is to divert them from doing Justice, by rendering the
oppressing Sope-boylers odious to the Parliament (under the notion of being
deceivers of the Commonwealth by base Soap) now they are Petitioning the
Parliament for Justice.

2. That they were neither by Bond bound, nor by the Lords Warrant commanded to
suppress any from Sope-boyling (which had a right to boil) as they have
alleged; for you must know, that the Lords warrants are not warrants
commanding these Patentees to seize Soap against their will, as they do affirm,
but are Warrants of Assistances, by these Patentees sued for, and by them
procured of the Lords (by the same salfe pretenses by which they gained their
Patent, commanding power to Aid and Assist their cruel, barbarous, and
blood-sucking Agents in their execution of the illegal Deputations which these
Patentees did issue forth under the Seal of their illegal Company: For
confirmation whereof, and to complete the Answering of this third general Head,
I will give you a view of the Lords Warrants by them obtained.

Whereas diverse great abuses and deceits have been and are duly committed in
the making of Soap, and his Majesty has now settled the Manufacture thereof
under the Government of the Corporation of Sope-makers of the City of London:
And whereas diverse Misdemeanors have been and are daily committed, as Well in
the undue making, buying, and selling of Soap prohibited, not made under the
said Rule and Government; as also in resisting and not assisting the Searchers
appointed by the Society of London, and their Deputies in the Searching, for
seizing and carrying away of the said Soap prohibited: These are therefore to
will and require you the Messengers of His Majesty's Chamber, or any of you, or
any other whom it may concern, That from time to time you Arrest, Apprehend,
and take into Custody, all and every such person and persons as the Governor or
the Deputy of the said Society of Sope-makers of London for the time being
shall nominate and direct you to Apprehend, for their contempt in all or any of
the Premises: And also by the like nomination and direction, to make stay and
seizure of all the said prohibited Soap, not made under the said Government, or
to seize and carry away all Lees and other Materials, as Oil, Tallow, and
Potashes, prepared for the undue making of Soap, remaining in the Custody and
Charge of any person or persons in any place privileged or not privileged;
and that every person which shall be so Apprehended, you bring, or cause to be
forthwith brought to the Council Chamber to enter their Appearance, to be
proceeded withal according to their demerits. Hereof fail you not at your
utter peril.

Dated at Whitehall the 28. of July, 1637.
To all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Bailiffs, Constables,
Head-boroughs, and all other His Majesty's Officers and loving Subjects whom it
may concern, and especially to the Messengers of His Majesty's Chamber, and to
every of them.
W. Cant. W: Land: Arundel and Surry, Dorset, Wimbleton, Cottington, John Cook,
Tho: Iurman, Fra: Wyndebank.

The fourth and last general Head, which is contained in the sixth and last
Branch of their Petition, is this:

4. That many actions upon the Statute against Monopolies have been brought
against these Patentees, by the oppressed Sope-boylers of London, for recovery
of of their losses and damages* which they express as a grievance, and
demonstrate it by these two particulars,

1. That by reason of this prosecution they have expended 1000. l.

2. That some have recovered 1000. l. some 500. l. some 300. l. and yet upon
proof they have not been damnified five pounds.

The Answer that I shall give to both these particulars briefly shall be this;
and first to Answer the first particular, which is their expense of One
thousand pounds, being prosecuted by Law.

The Answer is threefold.
1. The prosecution is a just and legal prosecution for recovery of
satisfaction of their several damages and losses, sustained by these cruel
projectors barbarous prosecution of their illegal Patent; a just means of
relief against, and unjust oppression, which has the stamp of the Parliaments
approbation for its vindication.

2. There was a necessity of this prosecution, because that these Patentees
would not make restitution without suit of Law, unless they will accept of
that satisfaction which they will give them, which is not a half penny, no not
to some a farthing for a penny, whatever they do pretend.

3. That if they have spent 1000. l. (sure I am that some of it must be spent
either in a corrupt or excessive way) as we use to say that Thieves are good
Guess upon the Rode, spend free) yet they have made great advantage by that
expense, because the detainer of the complainants money, by vexatious delays,
for these five years and upwards, has been annually at least 1500. l. benefit
to them. I come now to speak to the second, which is their expressions, that
the recoveries are unreasonable that have been recovered against them; namely,
That some have recovered 1000. l. some 500. l. some 300. l. and yet never been
damnified five pounds.

The Answer is:
The falsity of this their affirmation is so obvious, that no rational man will
give credit to it, but because it implies either an unrighteousness or
oppression in the Law (for so they have and do express) and so secretly charge
our Law makers) or in the Jury who are Judges of the damages, I shall by way of
vindication of both, thus positively and truly speak.

1. That the recoveries were but 306. l.-13.^.-4. 150. l. and 90. l. all which
some by virtue of the statute were trebled by the Court: Thus you see that
these presumptuous oppressors do secretly charge our Law makers of oppression.

2. That the parties did not recover, nor did the Jury award in damages more,
no not so much as the Plaintiffs proved that they had sustained by these cruel
Patentees.

I will now conclude speaking of and to the subject matter or body of their
Petition, with the observing some short notes that are deductable, probably
from the closier of this first general part of this Petition (which is this)

That they have been serviceable (and still desire to be) to the King and
Kingdom, by great engaging of their Purses and Persons.

Their ends and intentions in this expression, undoubtedly must of necessity be
to render them Friends and not Enemies to King and Kingdom; having hinted to
you their end, I will give you the Observations.

First, if you consider how these Petitioners are Enemies, as is above
expressed, and then take their being serviceable to King and Kingdom, by way of
co-^n^ction; then the probable result of these words may be this: That they
have given assistance to both sides. And there is reason to be rendered, Because
that at the breaking up of the last Parliament, May 1640. they did give the
King Ten or Twelve thousand pounds to take up their Patent again, (which they
had surrendered) in hopes never to see Parliament more in England; which money,
as was supposed, was given as an additional assistance against the Scots.

Secondly, if you consider, That if the Parliament do prevail, they are
accomptable for their Delinquency; then their giving assistance probably is
polity, and not piety; self-seeking, not Gods glory; themselves, not the
Kingdoms good.

Thirdly, if you do consider, That they do oppressively detain the other
Petitioners Estate, and the advantage they make of that detainer, to the
disabling of them which are cordial for the Parliament (and have as far engaged
their persons as those Patentees) it affords these two Propositions.

1. That it is not an engaging of their own but other men's purses.

2. That their engaging of their purses is not an advantage but a damage to the
Parliaments Cause.

I have done with the first general part, I shall only observe some few things
from the other two general parts, and so conclude.

1. That these Patentces are most ready and willing to make satisfaction to all
that can make it appear that they have wronged them.

To this I answer, That their willingness that satisfaction should be given,
does not lie in their desire of making restitution, but in this, That they are
most willing to be disburthened of the suits at Law against them commenced by
the Parliament, forcing their fellow Projectors thereunto.

2. That of all the goods they have forcibly and oppressively taken and spoiled
of the other Sope-boylers, they never received one penny.

To this I Answer.
That all the goods that was by them seized and spoiled of the oppressed
Sope-boylers, was seized for the use of these Projectors, one moity thereof,
and the other moity for the use of the Kings Majesty, and was by these
Projectors appointment and command, seized and brought to their own houses, and
converted to their own use, which is evident by their Patent; by which Grant
Col: John Hardwick, Captain John Hayes, James Baker, and Jonathan Mot, (Members
of that illegal Corporation) were constituted and ordained searchers of the
said company, some of them barbarously breaking into houses, seizing and
carrying away men's goods, others receiving in the goods illegally seized and
carried away, witness the account that Col: John Hardwick made in the
Exchequer upon his Oath, who was one of the first searchers, and most activest
Member of that Patent. There is one thing which I will relate to you, which is
not only an aggravation of this strange, and I presume unparalleld presumption
of theirs, in daring to present to so Honorable an Assembly as the High
Honorable House of Commons, so deceiving and vain a Petition as this; but also
discovers to what a height of wickedness, what dangerous designs
coveteousnesse will put men upon: The Relation is this, what these Petitioners
have here untruly affirmed, namely, that not one penny of the goods seized came
to them. Anthony Whitwel, one of these Sope-Patentees, did falsely depose the
same at a Trial between John Doughty Plaintiff, and Col: John Hardwick, and
other Patentees Defendants, which perjury was to the damage of the Plaintiff
Doughty 200 l. as the Jury then confessed, and has been since proved at the
Trial of the Action, upon a statute of perjury, which the said Doughty did
bring, and proved against the said Anthony Whitwel, and the Jury did at Trial
find him guilty of perjury against the Plaintiff, committed in the former
Action to his damage of 200. l. and did find in damages, according to the
limitation of the statute; but there was a special Verdict found by the
direction of the Judge, for that the Plaintiffs Attorney did not produce a copy
of the Original in the former Action, and since has compounded for the same. I
have mentioned this to show of what validity their words are; and the rather
for this reason, because one of the Petitioners has told me since his
conviction, that they all would take the same Oath. Thus you see these men, as
they did not leave any way of cruelty unattempted and acted, that might conduce
to accomplish their covetous design, though never so destructive to the
Commonwealth, and ruinous to their fellow subjects in their Estares and
Liberties: so now they will not cease covering their sins with lies, even with
an Oath.

3. That many of their company that had greater benefit by their patent then
themselves, refuse to join in making satisfaction.

To this I Answer.
1. That there are not many that refuse had greater benefit.

2. That this is in the most part of it rather a pretense then real matter of
complaint; for the petitioners dares not cause all those (which they have
nominated and presented to the Honorable Committee of the House of Commons for
petitions) to be compelled to join with them in making restitution,

Much more might be spoken to these three particulars, to show how they
endeavor to deceive the Honorable House of Commons by these vain words; but I
will neither trouble my self or you, because it is not material to the Judge
to hinder him in execution of Justice, whether the Malefactor be willing or not
willing to be tried, whether a Malefactor do possess any of the money which he
has stolen or not possess, whether the rest of the Malefactors be discovered
or not discovered, at present I will conclude with the words of Solomon, Prove.
18. 17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his neighbor comes
and searches him.

FINIS.

