JVRA MAJESTATIS, THE RIGHTS OF KINGS BOTH In CHVRCH and STATE: 1. Granted by
God. 2. Violated by the Rebels. 3. Vindicated by the Truth.


AND, The wickednesses of the Faction of this pretended PARLIAMENT at
Westminster.

1. Manifested by their Actions. 1. Perjury. 2. Rebellion. 3. Oppression. 4.
Murder. 5. Robbery. 6. Sacrilege, and the like.
2. Proved by their Ordinances. 1. Against Law. 2. Against Equity. 3. Against
Conscience.

PUBLISHED 1. To the eternal honor of our just God. 2. The indeleble shame of
the wicked Rebels. And 3. To procure the happy peace of this distressed Land.
Which many fear we shall never obtain; until 1. The Rebels be destroyed, or
reduced to the obedience of our King. And 2. The breaches of the Church be
repaired.
1. By the restoration of Gods (now much profaned) service. And 2. The
reparation of the many injuries done to Christ his now dis-esteemed servants.


By GRYFFITH WILLIAMS Lord Bishop of OSSORY.

Impij homines, qui dum volunt esse mali, nolunt esse veritatem, qua
condemnantur mali. Augustinus. Printed at Oxford, Ann. Dom. 1644.

Carolus D: G: Mag: Brittaniae Fra: et Hiberniae Rex ^^r.
portrait of King Charles I

TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
Most gracious Sovereign,
WIth no small pains (and the more for want of my books, and of any settled
place, being multum terris jactatus and alto, frighted out of mine house, and
tossed betwixt two distracted Kingdoms) I have collected out of the sacred
Scripture, explained by the ancient Fathers, and the best Writers of Gods
Church, these few Rights our of many, that God and nature, and Nations, and the
Laws of this Land have fully and undeniably granted unto our Sveraigne Kings.
My witness is in Heaven, that as my conscience directed me, without any squint
aspect, so I have with all sincerity, and freely traced and expressed the
truth, as I shall answer to the contrary at the dreadful judgment; (...);
therefore with all fervency I humbly supplicate the divine Majesty, still to
assist Your Highness, that, as in Your lowest ebb, You have put on
righteousness as a breast plate, and with an heroic resolution withstood the
proudest waves of the raging Seas, and the violent attempts of so many
imaginary Kings; so now, in Your acquired strength, You may still ride on with
Your honor; and, for the glory of God, the preservation of Christ his Church,
and the happiness of this Kingdom, not for the greatest storm that can be
threatened, suffer these Rights to be snatched away, nor Your Crown to be
thrown to the dust, nor the sword that God has given You, to be wrested out
of Your hand by these uncircumcised Philistines these ungracious rebels, and
the vessels of Gods wrath, (...), unless they do most speedily repent; for if
the unrighteous will be unrighteous still, and our wickedness provoke God to
bring our Land to desolation, Your Majesty, standing in the truth and for the
right, for the honor of God and the Church of his Son, is absolved from all
blame, and all the blood that shall be spilt, and the oppressions, insolences,
and abominations that are perpetrated, shall be required at the hands, and
revenged upon the heads of these detested rebels. You are and ought, in the
truth of cases of conscience, to be informed by Your Divines; and I am
confident that herein they will all subscribe, that God will undoubtedly assist
You, and arise in his good time, to maintain his own cause; and by this
war, that is so undutifully, so unjustly made against Your Majesty, so Giant
like fought against Heaven, to overthrow the true Church, You shall be glorious
like King David, that was a man of war, whose dear son raised a dangerous
rebellion against him, and in whose reign so much blood was spilt; and yet,
notwithstanding these distempers in his Dominion, he was a man according to
Gods own heart, especially, because that from a to o As, in the beginning, by
reducing the Arc from the Philistines, throughout the midst, by settling the
service of the Tabernacle, and in the ending by his resolution to build, and
leaving such a treasure for the erecting of the Temple.
, the beginning of his reign, to the end of his life, his chiefest endeavor
was to promote the service, and protect the servants of the Tabernacle, the
Ministers of Gods Church. God Almighty so continue Your Majesty, bless You
and protect You in all Your ways, Your virtuous, pious Queen, and all Your
royal Progeny. Which is the daily prayer of

The most faithful to Your Majesty GRYFFITH OSSORY.

The Contents of the several Chapters contained in this TREATISE.
CHAP. I. Shows who are the fittest to set down the Rights which God granted
unto Kings: what causes men to rebel: the parts considerable in S. Peter's
words, 1. Pet. 2.17. in fine. How Kings honored the Clergy: the fair but most
false pretenses of the refractary Faction, what they chiefly aim at, and
their malice to Episcopacie and Royalty. Page 1 CHAP. II. Shows what Kings
are to be honored: the institution of Kings to be immediately from God: the
first Kings: the three chiefest rights to Kingdoms: the best of the three
rights: how Kings came to be elected: and how, contrary to the opinion of
Master Seldom, Aristocracie and Democracie issued out of Monarchy. Page 12
CHAP. III. Shows the Monarchical Government to be the best form: the first
Government that ever was: agreeable to Nature, wherein God founded it:
consonant to Gods own Government: the most universally received throughout the
world: the immediate and proper Ordinance of God: etc. Page 20 CHAP. IV.
Shows what we should not do, and what we should do for the King: the Rebels
transgressing in all those: how the Israelites honored their persecuting King
in Egypt: how they behaved themselves under Artaxerxes, Ahashuerus, and under
all their own Kings of Israel: etc. Page 29 CHAP. V. Shows how the Heathens
honored their Kings: how Christ exhibited all due honor unto Heathen and
wicked Kings: how he carried himself before Pilate, and how all the good
Primitive Christians behaved themselves toward their Heathen persecuting
Emperors. Page 41 CHAP. VI. Shows the two chiefest duties of all Christian
Kings: to whom the charge and preservation of Religion is committed: three
several opinions: the strange speeches of the Disciplinarians against Kings
are showed, and Viretus his scandalous reasons are answered: the double service
of all Christian Kings: and how the Heathen Kings and Emperors had the charge
of Religion. Page 48 CHAP. VII. Shows the three things necessary for all
Kings that would preserve true Religion: how the King may attain to the
knowledge of things that pertain to Religion; by His Bishops and Chaplains,
and the calling of Synods: etc. Page 62 CHAP. VIII. Shows it is the right of
Kings to make Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons, proved by many authorities and
examples: that the good Kings and Emperors made such Laws by the advice of
their Bishops and Clergy, and not of their Lay Counselors: how our late Canons
came to be annulled: etc. Page 72 CHAP. IX. Shows a full answer to four
special Objections that are made against the Civil jurisdictions of
Ecclesiastical persons: their abilities to discharge these offices, and desire
to benefit the Commonwealth: why some Councels inhibited these offices unto
Bishops: etc. Page 86 CHAP. X. Shows that it is the Kings right to grant
Dispensations for Pluralities and Non-residency: what Dispensation is: reasons
for it: to tolerate diverse Sects or sorts of Religions: the four special
sorts of false Professors: S. Augustines reasons for the toleration of the
Jews: toleration of Papists and of Puritans, and which of them deserve best to
be tolerated among the Protestants; and how any Sect is to be tolerated. Page
101 CHAP. XI. Shows where the Protestants, Papists, and Puritans do place
Sovereignty: who first taught the deposing of Kings: the Puritans tenet worse
then the Jesuits: Kings authority immediately from God: the twofold royalty in
a King: the words of the Apostle vindicated from false glosses: etc. Page 116
CHAP. XII. Shows the assistants of Kings in their government: to whom the
choice of inferior Magistrates belongs: the power of the subordinate
officers: neither Peers nor Parliament can have supremacy: the Sectaries
chiefest argument out of Bracton answered: our Laws prove all Sovereignty to
be in the King. Page 127. The two chiefest parts of the regal government: the
four properties of a just war: and how the Parliamentary faction transgress
in every property. Page 134 CHAP. XIII. Shows how the first government of
Kings was arbitrary: the places of Moses, Deuteronomy. 17. and of Samuel, 1. Sam. 8.
discussed: whether Ahab offended in desiring Naboths Vineyard, and wherein: why
absolute power was granted unto Kings, and how the diversities of government
came up. Page 142. The extent of the grants of Kings: what they may, and what
they may not grant: what our Kings have not granted, in seven special
prerogatives; and what they have gran^^^ (...) Page ^47 CHAP. XIV. Shows the
Kings grants unto his people to be of three sorts. Which ought to be observed:
the Act of excluding the Bishops out of Parliament discussed: the Kings Oath at
his Coronation: how it obliges him: and how Statutes have been procured and
repealed. Page 155. Certain quaeres discussed, but not resolved: the end for
which God ordained Kings: the praise of a just rule: Kings ought to be more
just then all others in three respects: and what should most especially move
them to rule their people justly. Page 163 CHAP. XV. Shows the honor due to
the King. 1. Fear. 2. An high esteem of our King: how highly the Heathens
esteemed of their Kings: the Marriage of obedience and authority: the Rebellion
of the Nobility how heinous. 3. Obedience, fourefold: diverse kinds of
Monarchs: and how an absolute Monarch may limit himself. Page 169 CHAP. XVI.
Shows the answer to some objections against the obeying of our Sovereign
Magistrate: all actions of three kinds: how our consciences may be reformed:
of our passive obedience to the Magistrates: and of the Kings concessions, how
to be taken. Page 181 CHAP. XVII. Shows how tribute is due to the King: for
six special reasons to be paid: the condition of a lawful tribute: that we
should not be niggards to assist the King: that we should defend the Kings
Person: the wealth and pride of London the cause of all the miseries of this
Kingdom: and how we ought to pray for our King. Page 190 CHAP. XVIII. The
persons that ought to honor the King; and the recapitulation of 21
wickednesses of the Rebels, and the faction of the pretended Parliament. Page
203 CHAP. XIX. Shows how the Rebellious faction have transgressed all the ten
Commandments of the Law, and the new Commandment of the Gospel: how they
have committed the seven deadly sins; and the four crying sins; and the
three most destructive sins to the soul of man: and how their Ordinances are
made against all Laws, equity, and conscience. Page 212 CHAP. XX. Shows how
the rebellious Faction forswore themselves: what trust is to be given to them:
how we may recover our peace and prosperity: how they have unking'd the Lords
Anointed: and for whom they have exchanged him: and the conclusion of the
whole. Page 223
The Rights of Kings, both in CHURCH and STATE, And, The Wickednesses of this
pretended PARLIAMENT manifested and proved.
CHAP. I. Shows who are the fittest to set down the Rights which God granted
unto Kings; what causes men to rebel; the parts considerable in S. Peter's
words, 1 Pet. 2.17. in fine. How Kings honored the Clergy; the fair but most
false pretenses of the refractary Faction, what they chiefly aim at, and their
malice to Episcopacie and Royalty.
IT was not unwisely said by Ocham that great Schoolman to a great Emperor
(which M. Luther said also to the Duke of Saxony) Tu protege me gladio, and
ego defendam te calamo; Guliel. Ocham. Ludov. 4.
do you defend me with your Sword, and I will maintain your right with my pen;
for God has committed the Sword into the hand of the King, and his hand which
bears not the Sword in vain knows how to use Romans 13. v. 4.
the Sword better than the Preacher, and the King may better make good his
Rights by the Sword than by the pen, which having once blotted his papers with
mistakes, and concessions more than due, though they should be never so small
(if granted further than the truth would permit, as I fear some have done in
some particulars) yet they cannot so easily be scraped away by the sharpest
sword; and God ordered the divine tongue and learned Scribe to be the pens of
a ready Writer, and thereby to display the duties and to justify the Rights of
Kings; and if they fail in either part, the King needs neither to perform
what undue Offices they impose upon him, The Divine best to s t down the Righ s
of k ngs.
nor to let pass those just honors they omit to yield unto him; but he may
justly claim his due Rights, and either retain them or regain them by his
Sword, which the Scribe either wilfully omitted, or ignorantly neglected to
ascribe unto him, or else maliciously endeavored, (as the most impudent and
rebellious Sectaries of our time have most virulently done) to abstract them
from him.

And seeing the Crown is set upon the head of every Christian King, and the
Scepter of government is put into his hand, by a threefold Law 1. Of Nature,
that is common to all. 2. Of the Nation, that he rules over. 3. Of God, that
is over all.
As,

Every Christian king established by a threefold Law.
1. Nature teaching every King to govern his People according to the common
rules of honesty and justice.

2. The politic constitution of every several State and particular Kingdom,
showing how they would have their government to be administered.

Psalm. 119.
3. The Law of God, which is an undefiled Law, and does infallibly set down
what duties are to be performed and what Rights are to be yielded to every
King: for whatsoever things are written of the Kings of Israel and Judah in the
holy Scriptures are not only written for those Kings and the government of that
one Nation, To what end the stories of the kings of Israel and Judah were
written. Romans 15.4.
but as the Apostle says, They are written for our learning, that all Kings
and Princes might know thereby how to govern, and all Subjects might in like
manner, by this impartial and most perfect rule understand how to behave
themselves in all obedience and loyalty toward their Kings and governors; for
he that made man knew he had been better unmade than left without a Government;
therefore as he ordained those Laws whereby we should live, and set down those
truths that we should believe; The ordination of our government as beneficial
as our creation.
so he settled and ordained that Government whereby all men in all Nations
should be guided and governed, as knowing full well that we neither would nor
could do any of these things right, unless he himself did set down the same
for us; therefore though the frowardness of our Nature will neither yield to
live according to that Law, nor believe according to that rule, nor be governed
according to that divine Ordinance, which God has prescribed for us in his
Word; yet it is most certain, that he left us not without a perfect rule and
direction for each one of these, our faith, our life, and our government,
without which government we could neither enjoy the benefits of our life, nor
scarce reap the fruits of our faith: and because it were as good to leave us
without Rules and without Laws, Unwritten things most uncertain.
as to live by unwritten Laws, which in the vastness of this world would be
soon altered, corrupted and obliterated; therefore God has written down all
these things in the holy Scriptures, which though they were delivered to the
People of the Jews for the government both of their Church and Kingdom, yet
were they left with them to be communicated for the use and benefit of all
other Nations, (God being not the God of the Jews only, Romans 3.2^.
but of the Gentiles also) because the Scripture in all moral and perpetual
precepts (that are not merely judicialia Judaica, or secundae classis, which
the royal government was not, because this was ordained from the beginning of
the world to be observed among all Nations, and to be continued to the end of
the world: nor the types and shadows that were to vanish when the true
substance approached) was left as a perfect pattern and platform for all Kings
and People, Pastors and Flocks, Churches and Kingdoms throughout the whole
world, to be directed how to live, to govern, and to be governed thereby. Such
was the love and care of God for the Government of them that love and care as
little to be governed by his government.

Every Government the better by how much nearer it is to the Government of the
Scripture kings.
And therefore the dim and dusky light of bleare eye'd Nature, and the dark
distracted inventions of the subtillest politickes must stoop and yield place
in all things, wherein they swerve from that strict rule of justice and the
right order of government, which is expressed necessarily to be observed in the
holy Scripture, either of the Kings part toward his People, or of the Peoples
duty toward their King.

And though each one of these faculties, or the understanding of each one of
these three Laws requires more than the whole man, our life being too short
to make us perfect in any one; yet seeing that of all three, the Law of God is
abyssus magna, like the bottomless sea, and the supreme Lady, to whom all
other Laws and Sciences are but as Penelopes handmaids to attend her service;
the Divine may far better and much sooner understand what is natural right,
The Divine is better able to understand Law, than the Lawyer to understand
Divinity. Psalm. 1.2.
and what ought to be a just national Law, and thereby what is the Right of
Kings, and what the duty of Subjects, than any, either Philosopher or Lawyer
can find the same by any other art; especially to understand the same so fully
by the Law of God, as the Divine that exercises himself therein day and night
may do it; unless you think (as our Enthusiasts dream) that every illiterate
Tradesman, or at least a Lawyers Latin (I speak of the generality, when I know
many of them of much worth in all learning) may easily wade with the reading of
our English Bibles into the depth of all Divinity, and that the greatest
Doctor that spent all his days in studies, can hardly understand the
mysteries of these Camelion-like Laws, which may change sense, as often as the
Case shall be changed, either by the subtlety of the Pleader, or the ignorance,
or corruption of the Judges. But we know their deepest Laws, discreetest
Statutes, and subtillest Cases cannot exceed the reach of sound reason; and
therefore no Reason can be showed, but that a rational man meanly
understanding Languages, may sooner understand them, and with less danger
mistake them, than that Law, which (as the Psalmist says) is exceeding broad,
Psalm. 119.96.
and exceeds all humane sense, and the most exquisite natural understanding,
1 Cor. 2.14.
when (as the Apostle says) The natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishnes unto him, neither can he know them,
because they ar^ spiritually discerned: and being not discerned or
misunderstood, they make all such mistakers liable to no small punishment, if
God should be extreme to mark what is done amiss: and this not understanding
of God's Law, is the error of other Laws, and the cause of much mischief;
What causes many men to rebel. The Scriptures say more for the right of kings
than any book in the world. D wning in his d scourse of the Ecclesiastical
State, p. 91.
for if men understood the Law of God, or would believe us that do understand
it, I assure my self many of the Rebels (such as rebel not out of pride,
disobedience, or discontent) are so conscientious, that they would not so
rebel as they do, being seduced through their ignorance, by the subtletie of
the most crafty children of disobedience.

And therefore letting the usual impatience of the furious firebrarnds of
sedition, and the malicious incendiaries of Rebellion, together with those
treacherous Judasses, that insensibly lurk in the King's Court, and are more
dangerous both to the Church and State than those open Rebels that are in the
Parliament House, to lay on me what reproach they please; as some of them being
galled, and now gone, have already done, August.
Ego in bona conscientia teneo, quisquis volens detrahit famae meae, nolens
addit mercedi mea. I shall believe it in a good conscience, that whosoever
shall wittingly detract from my repute, and unjustly load me with un^u^
disgrace, shall unwillingly add to my reward; neither shall I ever think,
Ambros^
Plus ponderis esse in alieno convicio, quam in testimonio meo, that there is
more account to be had in the foul slander of another man's malice, than in the
spotless testimony of mine own conscience: but considering (as Saint Hierome
says) that, Apud Christianos non qui patitur sed qui facit contumeliam miser
est; among Christians, not he that suffers, but he that offers injuries and
reproaches is wretched; Osor. in Epist. Regina Eliz^ page 7.
though (as Osorius says) Multa insidiae principibus a suis domesticis
intenduntur, multae frauds in aula Regia quaestus and compendii gratia
suscipiuntur, multa, partim adulatione and perfidia, partim offensionis
periculosa formidine dissimulantur, ita ut raro inveniantur qui Regibus libere
loqui audeant; many snares are laid for Princes by their own domestique
servants many deceitful tricks and cunning plots are undertaker in the King's
Court for gain and honors sake, How kings are deluded by their own Courtiers,
and the truth concealed from them.
and many things partly for fear of offending, and partly through a perfidious
and false flattery, are dissembled, and the truth of things is imprisoned from
the sight of the King, so that he that sees with these Courtiers eyes, and
hears with their ears, can hardly know the certain state of his own
affairs, especially when these flattering Parasites shall bear so heavy a
hand over the faithful servants, that few of them shall dare freely to declare
the Truth; yet I am resolved to set down the plain face of Truth, The
Authors resolution with Gods assistance.
without either flattering of my royal Master, or fear either of the Court
flatterers hatred, or the Parliamentarie Factions cruelty; and though my
eldest Brethren, that are abler than my self, should reprove me, and say unto
me as Eliab said unto David, 1 Samuel 17.28.
yet I will take my staff in my hand, mine own integrity to uphold me, and my
fidelity to my King and to the King of kings to protect me, and I will gather a
few stones out of the Brook of living waters, out of the Book of holy
Scriptures, and I hope with one of them to smite the Philistine, The
Adversaries of regal right.
the three-headed Gerion, the Anabaptist, Brownist, and Puritan Rebel, in the
forehead, that he shall fall to the earth, his head shall be cut off with his
own sword, and the whole army of the uncircumcised Philistines, that is, all
the rest of the wilfully seduced Rebels, that refuse to be un-deceived, and to
accept of his Majesty's grace and pardon, shall fl^e away and be destroyed. And,

The first stone that comes into my hand (which I believe will hit the Bird in
the eye, and be abundantly sufficient to do the deed) is a stone taken out of
the Rock, that appears highest in the Brook, that is Saint Peter, which our
Savior in the judgment of some Fathers, which I quoted in my True Church,
calls a Rock, and in the judgment of most of the Fathers, and the sober
Protestants, is the Prince of Apostles: for he says, (...), 1 Pet. 2.17.
Honor the King; and this one short sentence truly understood, (though I
confess many others may seem more full) is absolutely sufficient to overthrow
all the Anti-royalists, and to silence all the Basileu-Mastices, all the
opposers of their own Kings, throughout all the world, especially, if we
consider, 1. Who says this, S. Peter. 2. What is said, Honor the King. 3. To
whom he says this, to every Soul.


First, the words are the words of Saint Peter, 1. The Author of these words:
the first in order, the chiefest for authority, and the greatest for
resolution of all the Apostles of Christ; 2 Pet. 1.21:
and he spoke them as he was inspired by the holy Ghost; therefore we may
believe them, and we should obey them, or we should fear the judgments of
God; Hebr. 12:27:
for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall
not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven.

Secondly, 2. The substance of the precept.
the substance of this precept contains as many parts as there be words, 1.
Who is to be honored, the King. 2. What is that honor that is due unto him.


Which two points rightly understood, and duly observed as they are enjoined,
would make a peaceable Commonwealth, and a most flourishing Kingdom, without
any Civil broiles or intestine Rebellion, which is the greatest plague, and
heaviest curse that God has ever laid upon any Nation.

Bella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos. Lucan. l. 1.
I have therefore resolved (to prevent this evil, and to dissuade us from this
miserable mischief) to say something of these two points, as may best heal
the bleeding wounds of these unhappy and distracted times.

First, It is the most Gracious promise of our good God to all them that will
faithfully serve him, 1 Samuel 2.30.
I will honor them that honor me: and Saint Augustine says, that Sicut verax
est in punitione malorum, ita and in retributione bonorum; as he is most
certain in his threatenings, for the punishment of the wicked, so he is most
faithful in his promises for rewarding of the Godly; and that not only for
the future, but also in these present times, 1 Timothy 4.8.
because Godliness has the promise both of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come.

Therefore pious Princes, How kings have honored those that honored God.
that are God's Vicegerents here on earth, and his Deputies to discharge his
promise, have accordingly honored them, that have by their upright life and
indefatigable pains honored God in his Church, with double honor.

1. With Dignities.
1. With titular Dignities, honorable Places, and considerable eminencies in
the Commonwealth, as conceiving it not unworthy, to make the greater lights of
the Church to be not of least esteem in the Civil State, but judging it most
convenient, that they whom God had entrusted with the souls of men should with
all confidence be entrusted with their personal actions, and with the
employments of the greatest trust.

2. With maintenance.
2. With competent means, in some sort answerable to support their Dignities,
without which means as the Poet says, Virtus nisi cum re vilior alga, so
honorable Titles without any subsistence is more contemptible than plain
beggary; therefore out of their piety to God, and bounty to the Church, they
have conferred many fair Lordships and other large endowments upon the best
deserving Members of Christ's Ministers.

Matthew. 13.24. (...).
But as the good Husbandman had no sooner sown his pure Wheat, but immediately
Inimicus homo, the evil and envious man, superseminavit zizania, sowed his
poisonous Tares amongst them; so God had no sooner thus honored his servants,
but presently the Devil, which is (...). 2 Cor. 4.4.
the god of this world, began to throw dirt in their faces, and to deprive them
of both these honors: for,

1. He stirred up ignorant men, of small learning but of great spirits, of no
fidelity but of much hypocrisy, that, as Pope Leo wrote unto Theodosius, Leo
papa Epist. 23.
Privatas causas pietatis agunt obtentu, and under a fair pretext did play the
part of Aesop's Fox, who being ashamed that his tail was cut off, began to
inveigh against the unseemly burdensome tails of all the other Foxes, What
the factious Preachers pretended.
and to persuade them to cut theirs off; that so by the common calamity he
might be the better excused for his obscenity; for so they cried down all
Learning as profane, they railed at the Schoolmen, they scorned the Fathers,
and esteemed nothing, but that nothing which they had themselves: and although
they professed to the Vulgar, that they aimed at no end but the purity of the
Gospel, they desired nothing but the amendment of life and reformation of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and hated nothing but the pride and covetousness
of the Bishops, and the other dignified Prelates, which stopped their mouths,
and imprisoned the liberty of their conscience; yet the truth is, that because
their worth was not answerable to their ambition, to enable them to climb up
to some height of honor, their envy was so great, that they would feign pull
down all those that had ascended and exceeded them.

And therefore with open mouths that would not be silenced, they exclaimed
against Episcopacie; and as the Apostle faith, spoke evil of Dignities,
employing all their strength, like wicked birds, to defile their own nests, to
disrobe us of all honor, and to leave us naked; yea, and as much as in them
lay, What the Factious aim at.
to make us odious, and to stink (as the Israelites said to Moses) in the eyes
of the people. Then

2. As Plutarch tells us, Plutarch. in lib. (...).
that a certain Sicilian Gnatho and Philoxenus the son of Erixis, that were
slaves unto their gutts, and made a god of their bellies, to cause all the
other guests to loath their meat, that they alone might devour all the
dainties, did use Narium mueum in catinis ^mungere; so do these men spit all
their poison against the revenues of the Bishops, and that little maintenance
that is left unto the Ministers, and are as greedy to devour the same
themselves as the dogs, that gape after every bit they see us put into our
mouths; for, so I heard a whelpe of that litter, Doctor Burges.
making a bitter invective in the House of Commons against Bishops, Deanes, and
Chapters, and the greatness of their revenue; and concluding that all they
should be degraded, their means should be sequestered, and distributed all
without any diminution of what they now possessed, but with the restitution of
all Impropriations unto himself, and the rest of his factious fellow
Preachers; which speech, as it pleased but few in the latter clause, so no
doubt it had faut^rs enough in the former part, when we see this little remnant
of our forefathers bounty, this testimony of our Princes piety, is the only
mote that sticks in their eye, the undigested morsel in their stomachs, and
the only ^ait that they gape after; for did our King yield this garment of
Christ to be parted among their Soldiers, and this revenue of the Church to be
disposed of by the Parliament, I doubt not but all quarrels about the Church
would soon end, and all other strife about Religion would be soon composed.

What many men would willingly undergo to procure peace.
But, would this end all our civil wars, would the unbishoping of our
Prelates bring rest unto our Prince, and the taking away of their estates
settle the State of the Commonwealth, and bring peace and tranquillity unto
this Kingdom? If so, we could be well contented for our own parts, to be
sacrificed for the safety of the people; for though we dare not say with Saint
Paul, (...). Romans 9.6.
that we could wish our selves (...), or separated from Christ for our
Countrymen; yet I can say it with a sincere heart, that I believe many of us
could be well contented our fortunes should be confiscated, and our lives
ended, so that could procure the peace of the Church, which is infinitely
troubled, redeem His Majesty's honor, which is so deeply wounded, and
preserve this our native Country from that destruction, which this unparalled
Rebellion does so infallibly threaten, The abolishing of Episcopacie would not
satisfy the Factious.
but the truth is, that the abolishing of Episcopacie, root and branch, the
reducing of the best to the lowest rank, and the bringing of the Clergy to
the basest condition of servility, to be such as should not be worthy to eat
with the dogs of their flock, as Job speaks, will not do the deed; because,
Iuven. Sat. 2.
as the Satyrist says, nemo repent fit turpissimus, but as virtues, so vices
have their increase by use and progression, and primum quodque flagitium gradus
est ad proximum, and every heinous offense is as an iron chain, to draw on
another. For as Seneca says, Seneca de Clem. lib. 1.
nunquam usque adeo temperata cupiditates sunt, ut in eo quod contigit
desinant, sed gradus a magnis ad majora fit, and spes improbissimas
complectuntur insperata assecuti: our desires are never so far temperated,
that they end in that which is obtained, but the gaining of one thing is a step
to seek another: And therefore, cum publicum ju^ omne positum fit in sacris,
Plato de legibus lib. 12.
as Plato says, how can it be, that they which have profaned all sacred
things, and have degraded their Ministers, should not also proceed to depose
their Magistrates? if you be diffident to believe the same; let the Annals of
France, Germany, England and Scotland be revised, and you shall find that
Charles the fifth was then troubled with war, when the Bishops were
turmoyled, and tumbled out of their Seas: and Scoti uno eodemque momento
numinis and principis jugum excusserunt, nec justum magistratum agnoverunt
ullum, ex quo primum tempore sacris and sacerdotibus bellum indixerunt: and the
Scots at one and the selfsame moment did shake off the yoke of their
obedience both unto their God, and to their King; neither did they acknowledge
any for their just Magistrate after the^ had once warred against Religion and
religious men, which were their Priests and Bishops, says Blacvodaeus:
Blacvod. Apolog. pro regibus. page 13.
and in France (says he) the same men were enemies unto the King that were
adversaries unto the Priests; quia politicam dominationem nunquam ferent, qui
principatum ecclesia sustulerunt, nec mirum si regibus obloquantur, The haters
of the Bishops ever enemies unto Kings.
qui sacerdotes flamma and ferro persequuntur; because (as I have showed at
large in my Grand Rebellion) they will never endure the Political Magistrate
to have any rule, when they have shaken off the Ecclesiastical government;
neither is it any wonder that they should flander, rage against, and reject
their King, when they persecut^ their Bishops with fire and sword.

And I think the sad aspect of this distracted Kingdom at this time, makes
this point so clear, that I need not add any more proof to beget faith in
any sober man; for does not all the world see, that as soon as the seditious
and traiterous faction in this unhappy Parliament, had cast most of the
Bishops, How soon the Faction fell upon the King, after th y had cast off
their Bishops.
the gravest and the greatest of all, with Joseph, into the dungeon, (a thing
that no story can show the like president in any age) and had voted them all,
contrary to all right, out of their indubitable right to sit in the House of
Peers, (^n act indeed so full of incivility, (...). Matthew. 8.34.
as has no small affinity with that of the Gergesites, who for love of their
swine, drove not out, but desired Christ to depart out of their coasts:) they
presently began to pluck the sword out of the Kings hand, and endeavored to
make their Sovereign in many things more servile then any of his own
Subjects, so that he should be gloriosissime servilis as Saint Augustine says,
that Homer was suavissime ^anus: and to effect this, you see how they have
torn in pieces all his Rights, they have trampled his Prerogatives under foot,
they have as much as they could, laid his honor in the dust; and they have
with violent war and virulent malice, sought to vanquish and subdue their
own most gracious Sovereign, which cannot choose but make any Christian heart
to bleed, to see such unchristian and such horrid unheard of things attempted
to be done by any, that would take upon him the name of a Christian.

Therefore to manifest my duty to God, and my fidelity to my King, I have
undertaken this hard, and to the Rebels unpleasant labor, to set down the
Rights of Kings: wherein I shall not be afraid of the Rebels power, neither
would I have any man to fear them; for however, Victores victique cadunt, The
Rebels for the punishment of our sins may prosper for a time, but at last they
shall be most surely destroyed. Prove. 8.15. Psalm. 68.30. Joshua 9.16. Psalm
91.16.
there may be a vicissitude of good success many times on both sides, to
prolong the war for our sins, and they may prosper in some places; yet that
is but nubecula quaedam, a transient cloud, or a summer storm that will soon
pass away; for we may assure our selves they shall not prevail, because God
has said it, By me Kings do reign, and He will give strength unto his King,
and exalt the horn of his Anointed; He will scatter the people that delight
in war, and make the hearts of the cursed Canaanites to melt, and their
joints to tremble; but, He will satisfy the King with long life, and show him
his salvation.

CHAP. II. Shows, what Kings are to be honored; the institution of Kings to
be immediately from God; the first Kings; the three chiefest rights to
Kingdoms; the best of the three rights; how Kings came to be elected; and how,
contrary to the opinion of Master Seldom Aristocracie and Democracie issued out
of Monarchy.
TO proceed then, you see the person that by Saint Peter's precept is to be
honored to be the King, and what King was that? but (as you may see in the
beginning of this epistle) the King of Pontus, Galatia, Cuppadocia, Asia, and
Bythinia; and what manner of Kings were they, I pray you? I presume you will
confess they were no Christians, but it may be as bad as Nero, who was then
their Emperor, and most cruelly tyrannizing over the Saints of God, gave a
very bad example to all other his substitute Kings and Princes to do the like;
What Kings are to be honored.
and yet these holy Christians are commanded to honor them. And therefore, 1.
Heathen, Pagan, wicked and tyrannical Kings are to be truly honored, by Gods
precept. 2. Religious, just, and Christian Kings are to have a double honor,
because there is a double charge imposed upon them: as,


1. To execute justice and judgment among their people; The double charge of
all Christian Kings. 1. To preserve peace.
to preserve equity and peace, both from intestine broils and ferraig^^ foes;
which careful government brings plenty and prosperity in all external
affairs unto the whole Kingdom, and this they do as Kings, which is the
common duty of all the Kings of the earth.

2. To maintain true Religion, 2. To protect the Church.
to promote the faith of Christ, and to be the guardians and foster-fathers
unto the Church and Churchmen, which tie their people unto God to make them
spiritually and everlastingly happy; and this duty is laid upon them as they
are Christian Kings: and therefore in regard of this accession of charge, they
ought to have an ^^^ession of honor, more then all other Kings whatsoever.

1. Then I say, that the Heathen, Pagan, wicked and tyrannical Kings, such as
were Nero, Dioclesian, and Julian, among the Christians, or Ahab and Manasses
among the Jews, or Antiochus, Dionysius, and the rest of the Sicilian Tyran^^
among the Gentiles, are to be honored, served, and obeyed of all their
Subjects, and that in three special respects.

1. Of their institution, 1. All Kings to be honored in three respects.
which is the immediate ordinance of God. 2. Of Gods precept, which enjoyneth
us to honor them. 3. Of all good men's practice; whether they be 1. Jews. 2.
Gentiles. 3. Christians.

1. The institution of Kings, is immediately from God. Justin. lib. 1.
1. Justin tells us, that, Principio rerum gentium nationu^mque imperium penes
reges erat, from the beginning of things; that is, the beginning of the world,
the rule and government of the people of all nations was in the hands of Kings;
Qu^s ad honoris fastigium non ambitio popularis, sed spectata inter bonos
moderatio provehebat. Herodot. lib. 1. Clio.
And Herodotus sets down how Deioces the first King of the Medes had his
beginning. And Homer also names the Kings that were in and before the wars
of Troy. But the choice of Deioces, and some others about that time and after,
Cicero in Officus.
whereof Cicero speaks, may give some color unto our rebellious Sectaries,
to make the royal Dignity (...), a humane ordinance; therefore I must go
before Herodotus, and look further then blind Homer could see: and from the
first King that ever was, I will truly lay down the first institution and
succession of Kings, and how times have wrought by corruption, the alteration
of their right, and diminution of their power, which both God and nature had
first granted unto them.

God the first King. (...). 1 Timothy 1.17. Apoc. 19.16.
And I hope no Basileu-mastix, no hater of Kings, nor opposer of the royal
government can deny, but that God himself was the first King that ever the
world saw, that was the King of ages before all worlds, and the King of Kings
ever since there were any created Kings. The next King that I read of was
Adam, whom Cedrenus styles the Catholic Monarch; (...): a mighty King, of a
large Territory, of great Dominion, and of unquestionable right unto his
Kingdom, which was the whole world, the earth, the Seas, and all that were
therein. For, the great King of all Kings said unto him, Be fruitful and
multiply, and replenish the earth, Genesis 1.28.
and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the Sea, Adam the first King
of all men.
and over the foul of the air, and over every living thing that moves upon
the earth. Which is a very large Commission, when dominare is more then regere;
and therefore his royalty is so plain, that none but wilful ignorants will
deny it to be divinum institutum, a divine institution, and affirm it, as they
do, to be humanum inventum, a humane ordination, when you know there were no
men to choose him, and you see God himself does appoint him: Johan. Beda, de
jure regum. p. 4.
and after the flood the Empire of Noah was divided betwixt his 3 sons;
Japhet reigned in Europe, Sem in Asia, and Cham in Africa.

Yet I must confess the first Kingdom that is spoken of by that name, is the
Kingdom of Nimrod, Genesis 10.9.
who notwithstanding is not himself termed King, but in the Scripture phrase a
mighty hunter, because he was not only a great King, but also a mighty Tyrant,
or oppressor of his people in all his Kingdom; or as I rather conceive it,
because he was the first usurper that incroached upon his neighbors rights, to
enlarge his own dominions: and the first King that I find by that name in the
Scripture was Amraphell, King of Shinar, Genesis 14.1.
with whom we find 8 other Kings named in the same chapter.

But we are not to contest about words, or to strive about the wind, when the
Scripture does first give this name unto them: the plain truth is that which
we are to enquire after; and so it is manifest, there were Kings ever since
Adam, and so named ever since Noah's flood; for Melchizedech, which in the
judgment of Master Seldom, Broughton, and others, was Sem the eldest son of
Noah, (though mine own mind is set down otherwise) was King of Salem; and
Justin tells us, that long before Ninus, which was the son of Nimrod, there
were many other Kings, as Vexores King of Egypt, (...). Euripides de Cyclop.
and Tanais King of Scythia, and the like; and as reason shows us that every
one, qui regit alios rex est, so every master of a family that rules his own
household is a petite King, as we commonly say to this very day, every man is a
King in his own house; and as their families were the greater, so were they
the greater Kings: so Abraham had 300 and 18 servants, Genesis 14.14.
that were able men for the war in his own house: and therefore the
inhabitants of the Land tell him, Princeps Dei es inter nos, thou art a Prince
of God, that is, a great ruler amongst us: and yet the greatest of these rulers
were rather reguli then reges, Kings of some Cities, or small Territories, and
of no large dominion, Josh. 12.14.
as those 31 Kings which Joshua vanquished, does make it plain.

Seldom in his Titles of honor, cap. 1.
But Master Seldom confesses that civil societies, beginning in particular
families, the heads thereof ruled as Kings: and as the world increased, or
these Kings incroached upon their neighbors, so their Kingdoms were enlarged.

Kings therefore they were, and they were Kings from the beginning. But how
they came to be Kings, or what right they had to that regal power, from whence
their authority is derived.

1. Whether God ordained it: or, 2. Themselves assumed it: or, 3. The people
conferred it upon them:
herein lies all the question.

The chiefest rights to Kingdoms either of three ways.
To which I must briefly answer, that the right of all Kings which have any
right unto their Kingdoms, is principally either 1. By birth: or, 2. By the
sword: or, 3. By choice.
whereof The last is and may be just and good. The second is so without
question: but, The first is most just, and so best of all. For,


1. The best right, without contradiction, is by inheritance.
1. The best right, whereby the Patriarchs and all the rest of the posterity of
Adam enjoyed their royalty, was that which God has appointed; that is, the
right of primogeniture, whereby the elder was by the law of nature, to reign
and rule over the younger; as God says unto Cain, though he was never so
wicked an hypocrite, Genesis 4.7.
unto thee shall be the desire of thy brother, and thou shall rule over him,
though he was never so godly and sincere a server of God: Genesis 25.31.
which made Jacob so earnestly desirous to purchase the birthright, or the
right of primogeniture from his brother. And

2. The right by conquest is a just and a good right.
2. When the rightful Kings became with Nimrod to be unjust Tyrants, then God
that is not tied to his Vicegerant any longer then he pleases, but has right
and power Paramount to translate the rule, and transfer the dominion of his
people to whom he will; Psalm. 89 44. So the Israelites enjoyed the kingdom of
Canaan, and David the territories of them that he subdued, etc. Esdras 1.2.
Esaias 45.1, 2. Dan. 2. etc. 4.
has oftentimes thrown down the mighty from their seat, and given away their
crowns and kingdoms unto others, that were more humble and meek, or some
other way fitter to effect his divine purpose, as he did the kingdom of Saul
unto David, and Belshazzar's unto Cyrus; and this he does most commonly by the
power of the sword, when the Conqueror shall make his strength to become the
Law of justice, and his ability to hold it, to become his right of enjoying it;
for so he gave the Kingdoms of the earth to Cyrus, Alexander, Augustus, and
the like Kings and Emperors, that had no ^^her right to their Dominions, but
what they purchased with the edge of their swords; which notwithstanding must
needs be a very good right, as the same comes from God, which is the God of
war, Psalm. 144 10.
and gives the victory unto Kings; when, as the Poet says, Victrix causa Deo
placuit; and he deposes his Vicegerents, and translateth the government of
their Kingdoms, as he sees cause, and to whom he pleases.

3. When either the Kings neglected their duty, 3. The right of elective kings,
and how they came to be elected.
and omitted the care of their People so far, as that the People knew not
that they had any Kings, or who had any right to be their Kings, or upon the
incursions of invading foes, the Nations being exceedingly multiplied, and
having no Prince to protect them, did change the orderly course of right,
belonging unto the firstborn (which their rude and salvage course of life had
obliterated from their minds) unto the election and choice of whom they thought
the better and the abler men to expel their enemies, and to maintain justice
among themselves; so the Medes being oppressed with the insolences and rapines
of enemies and the greater men, said, it cannot be that in this corruption and
lewdness of manners we shall long enjoy our Country: and therefore (...). Let
us appoint over us a King, Herodot, lib. 1.
that our Land may be governed by good Laws. (...): and we turning our selves
to our own affairs need not be oppressed by the rage and violence of the
lawless; and finding by their former experience of him, that Deioces was the
justest man amongst them, they chose him for his equity to be their King; which
is the first elective King that I do read of: Cicero in Offic. page 322.
and Cicero says, Mihi quidem non apud Medos solum, sed etiam apud majores
nostros, justitiae fruenda causa videntur olim been morati reges constituti:
even as Justin said before. And when the People do thus make choice of their
King, it is most true which Roffensis and our most learned Divines do say,
Roffensis de potestate Papae, fol. 283.
that Licet communicatio potestatis quandoque sit per consensum hominum,
potestas tamen ipsa immediate est a Deo, cujus est potestas; though the power
be sometimes conferred by the consent of men, yet it is immediately gi^en from
God, Spalet. tem. 2. 529.
whose power it is. Et communitas nihil sui confert regibus (says Spalet.)
nisi ad summum personam determinet; and potius personam applicat divina
potestati, quam divinam potestatem persona: and ita Winton. Resp. ad Matthew.
Tort. fol. 384. says, Christi Domini, non Christi populi sunt.

Why kings were rejected by the people.
But as their justice and goodness moved the People to exalt them to this
height of Dignity; so either their own tyranny, when change of place did change
their manners, or their Peoples inconstancy, that are never long pleased with
their governors, caused them to be deposed again, and many times to be
murdered by those hands that exalted them.

Then the People perceiving the manifold evils that flow from the want of
government, How the Aristocracie and Democracy issued out of Monarchy.
do erect other governments unto themselves, and rather than they will endure
the miserable effects of an Anarchie, they resign their hurtful liberty, and
their total power sometimes into the hands of few of the best of the flock,
which we call Aristocracie or optimacy, and sometimes into the hands of many,
which we call Democracie, or a popular state. In all which elections of
Magistrates, and resignations of the Peoples power voluntarily to the hands of
their governors, Each form of government lawful:
call them what you will, Senate, Consuls, Duke, Prince or King, though I dare
not any way reject any of them as a form utterly disallowed and condemned of
God; yet comparing them together, I dare boldly say, the farther men go from
God's first institution the more corruption we shall find in them; and
therefore it must needs follow that Democracy is the next degree to Anarchie,
Democracy the worst kind of Government.
and Aristocracie far worse than Monarchy; for though it may seem very
unreasonable that one man should have all the power; -- toto liber in orb
Solus Caesar erit --
And many plausible reasons may be alleged for the rule of the Nobles, or of
the People; yet the experience, Inter patres plebemqu^ certamina exercere modo
turbulent tribuni, medo consules praevalidi; and in urbe ac foro tentamenta
civilium be^lorum, mon e plebe infima C. Marius, and nobilium sae vissimus L.
Sylla victam armis libertate^ in dominationem v^rterunt, Tac. l. 2. hist. p.
16. usque 28. Prove. 28.2.
that the Roman state had in those miserable Civil Wars, that so frequently
and so extremely afflicted them, after they had put down their Kings, (as when
Caius Marius, the meanest of the Commonalty, and Lucius Sylla the cruellest of
all the Nobility, destroyed their liberty, and rooted ^^t all property, by
their Civil faction, and the assistance of an illegal Militia, and a
multitude of unruly volunteers) and the fatal miscarriages of many businesses,
and the bad successes of their Armies, when both the Consuls went forth
Generals, together with the want of unity, secrecy, and expedition, (which
cannot be so well preserved amongst many) do sufficiently show, how defective
these Governments are, and how far beneath the excellency of Monarchy, as it
is most fully proved in the unlawfulness of Subjects taking up arms against
their Sovereign; and more especially by the wisest of men that tells us
plainly, that for the transgressions of a Land many are the Princes thereof,
but by a man of understanding and knowledge the State thereof shall be
prolonged: and in another place he cries, Ecclesiast. 10, 16.
Woe to that Land whose king is but a child, either in knowledge or in years;
for that during his infancy and the want of ability, the government will be
managed by many others, which can produce nothing else but woes to that
Commonwealth; Aug. de l. arbi^. l. 1. c. 6.
and therefore Saint Augustine says, that if they who bear rule in Democracy
do corrupt justice, a good powerful man may lawfully change that Democraticall
government into an Aristocraticall or Monarchical; but you shall never find it
in any Christian Author, that any man, be he never so good, never so powerful
may lawfully, upon any occasion or pretense, change the Monarchy into an
Aristocracy, or Democracy; because it is lawful for us to reduce things from
the worst and remotest state to the better and the nearer to the original
form, but not from the better to a worser and remoter from its original
institution, which is then soundest when it is nearest to its first ordination.

CHAP. III. Shows the Monarchical Government to be the best form; the first
Government that ever was; agreeable to Nature, wherein God founded it;
consonant to God's own Government; the most universally received throughout the
world; the immediate and proper Ordinance of God; when the other Governments
began; how allowed by God; the quality of elective Kingdoms, not primarily the
institution of God; and the nature of the People.
The Monarchical government best.
THerefore it is apparent, that of all sorts of Government the Monarchy is
absolutely the best, (and of all Monarchs the best right is that which is
hereditary) because it is, 1. The first in Nature. 2. The prime and principal
Ordinance of God. For,


1. Reason. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, lib. 1.
2. Though Master Seldom says, that naturally all men in oeconomicke rule,
being equally free, and equally possessed of superioty in those ancient
propagations of mankind, even out of Nature it self, and that inbred
sociablenesse which every man has, as his character of civility, a popular
state first raised it self, which by its own judgment afterward was
converted into a Monarchy; and in the fourth page of his Book rejects the
opinion of great Philosophers, that affirm with Saint Austin the first of the
three Governments to be a Monarchy, and affirms positively that the Monarchy
has its original out of a Democracy, as Aristocracie likewise had; yet I say,
that this contradicts his first Thesis, where he asserteth that the husband,
father, and master of the house ruled as a King: and therefore the Monarchy
must needs be before either Aristocracy or Democracy: and where civing
Pausanias, that In Boceticorum initio, says, (...). Monarchy ancienter than
any other government.
All Greece was anciently under Kings and no Democracies, he is driven to
confess, page 5. that a family, being in Nature before a public Society or
Commonwealth, was an exemplary Monarchy, and in that regard Monarchy is to
be acknowledged ancienter than any other state; and so not only the
Orthodoxall people, but the Pagans also had this notion thereof by the instinct
of Nature; for the Cappadocians being vanquished by the Romans, Monarchical
government most agreeable to Nature.
did instantly request them to give them a King, protesting that they were not
otherwise able to maintain themselves; and so most other Nations esteemed that
true, which Herodian says, that as Jupiter has command over all the gods, so
in imitation of him, it is his pleasure, that the Empire of men should be
Monarchical.

And indeed it is concluded by the common consent of the best Philosophers that
the Laws of Nature lead us to a Monarchy, Monarchy founded in Nature.
as when among all Creatures both animate and inanimate, we do always find
one that has the pre-eminence above all the rest of his kind, as among the
Beasts the Lion, among Fowls the Eagle, among Grains the Wheat, among Drinks
the Wine, among Spices the Baulme among Metalls the Gold, among the Elements
the Fire, among the Planets the Sun; and all the best Divines conclude the
Monarchical government to be the most lively image and representation of the
divine regiment and government of God, Consonant to the Divine government.
who as sole Monarch rules and guides all things; and therefore we find all
the Nations of greatest renown lived under the Royal Government, as the
Scythians, Aethiopians, Indians, Assyrians, Medes, Egyptians, Bactrians,
Armenians, Macedonians, Jews, and Romans first and last; and at this day the
most famous people live under this form, as the English, French, Spaniards,
Polonians, The government of the most famous Nations Monarchical.
Danes, Muscovites, Tartars, Turks, Abissines, Moors, Agiamesques,
Zagathinians, Cathaians; yea and the Salvage people lately discovered in the
West Indies, as being guided thereto only by the rules of Nature, do all of
them in a manner live under the Government of Kings; and I believe the Apostle
does specially mean the Regal Government, -- Summo dull eius unum stare loco,
s^^^is^ue con e discordia regnis, Statius Thebaid. 1.
though he speaks plurally of powers, as understanding the same of many
Kings, because he speaks but of one (...), one sword, which being wrested out
of the hand of the King, and put amongst many would make them all, like mad
men, fall out and fight, which of them should bear it, when one Sword can
never be well guided by many hands; and therefore I think it is a madness
indeed for any people to be weary of that government which God first ordained,
which is most agreeable unto Nature, most consonant to God's government, most
acceptable to God himself, and most profitable unto men, and to affect a late
new invented government full of all dangers and inconveniences.

Therefore it is apparent that Monarchy is the first Ordinance of all
governments; a family being nothing else but a small Kingdom, A family is a
small kingdom, and a kingdom a great family.
wherein the paterfamilias had Regal power, and potestatem vita and necis,
even over his own children, as I have elsewhere showed in the example of
Abraham, and of other Heathens, that justly executed their own sons; and a
Kingdom being nothing else but a great family, where the King has paternall
power, and more than fathers now have, because of the great abuse that diverse
fathers committed, while they had their plenary authority: therefore it was
thought fit to abridge them of that pristine power, and to place it all in the
hands of the more public father.

And to make this yet more plain unto the world, I would fain know of these
Democraticall men, 1. When 2. How
their Democracy and Aristocracy had their being, and came first in use.

I have showed the age of Monarchy to be from Adam.

-- primaque ab origin mundi,
Ad mea perpetuum deduxi tempora Regem.
And I cannot remember that any Democracie or Aristocracy was in all the
Assyrian Monarchy, When Aristocracies and Democracies began.
which notwithstanding lasted above a thousand years; for the Aristocracies of
Greece, alas, they are but of yesterday, of no age, long after Homers time,
which yet lived but about the time of Jephte Judge of Israel, and besides, I
will not believe, -- Quicquid Graecia mendax
Audet in historjis --
And for the Democracy of Rome, Titus Livius shows when it was first hatched,
after the expulsion of Tarquinius Superbus; if therefore you will believe
Tertullian, that Id verius quod prius, you must needs give the precedencie of
all governments unto Monarchy.

But that which is more considerable is to understand how these birds flitted
out of the nest of Monarchy? Our Savior says, Matthew. 15.13^.
Every plant which my father planted not shall be rooted up: that he planted
Monarchy, I have made it plain; but when this Vine began to grow wild, What
caused the change of Monarchy.
and instead of grapes to bring forth bitter clusters, that is, oppression,
instead of justice; the people grew weary of God's Ordinance, and loath to be
contained within the bounds of obedience, when they found strength and
opportunity they withstood their lawful but degenerated Kings, and then they
deposed them from their estates and deprived them of their lives; so that as
the Poet says; Juvenai Satyr. 10.
Ad generum Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci
Descendunt reges, and sicca morte tyranni.
And thinking to find a better way than that which they found so thorny, and a
better government than that which formerly they found so bad, they elected
those men, whom they thought would make them happy, sometimes more, The
unconstancy of the people in the choice of their governors.
and sometimes fewer, as their disposition was, to be their governors: so
after the expulsion of Tarquinius the Romans chose two Consuls, and these
giving not a plenary content unto the People, they added the Tribunes to bridle
the disorders of the Consuls, and when all this would not satisfy their
unsatiable expectation, they must have their December viros, and in great dang^^
their Dictator, then comes the Triumvirat, of Antony, The government never
settled till it came, as all things in nature, (...), to Monarchy.
Lepidus, and Augustus, who at last takes upon him the name of an Emperor, but
the full power of a King, and governes all as the sole Monarch: thus they ran
in a ma^e, and turned round like a wheel: and I should but weary my Reader to
trace the Greek Histories, to set down the state of Athens, under the thirty
Tyrants, or of the Lacedem^nians under those Eph^r^^. that bore a fair show to
restrain their Kings, Lacedaemoniorumaristocratia ex duobus Regibusquinque
Ephori^, octo and viginti senatoribus composita^
but were indeed a scourge and plague unto the People; so that in truth, the
remedy proved far worse than the disease, excessit medicina modum, and the
change of Government never brought any other good, but an exchange of miseries,
the greater for the lesser, unto the People, as for that one rape of Lucrece by
Tarquinius, to undergo a thousand greater insolences under the new erected
Government of the Consuls and Tribunes; and the Israelites for preventing the
snatching of the flesh out of their pots, 1 Samuel 2.14.15
by the sons of Eli, and growing weary of the sons of Samuel, Chap. 8.11.
to have a Saul, that shall tear their own flesh in pieces, and take their
sons and their daughters for his vassals.

2. Reason that Monarchy is the best form of government.
2. As the hereditary Monarch is the first kind of Government, so it is the
principal and best government; because it is the immediate Ordinance of God,
that he set down for the Government of his People; for this was ordained by God
himself, and so continued among his People, even in an hereditary way, unless
the same God designed another person by those Prophets, that he inspired for
that purpose; as it was in the case of David, Solomon, and Jehu; and it is
certain, that the wisest of men cannot devise a better Form of Government than
God ordained: therefore the choice of one or more, made by the People to be
their King or Governor, cannot be (if not without sin) yet I am sure, without
folly; but seeing, as our Savior says, a Sparrow cannot light upon the ground
without the providence of our heavenly Father: Matthew. 10:29:
so I must confess; -- hac non sine numine divum
Eveniunt --
This election of Kings and change of the first Ordina^^e happened not without
God's providence, either for the tyranny of the evil Kings, or the punishment
of the rebellious people: and therefore as Moses for the hardness of those
men's hearts that hated their wives, to prevent a greater mischief, either
continual fighting, or secret murdering one another, suffered them to give
their wives a bill of divorcement, Deuteronomy. 24.1,
(but as our Savior says, Non erat sic ab initio, Matthew. 19.8.
it was not any primary Ordinance of God, but a permissive toleration of the
lesser evil; so when the People out of their froward disposition to God's
first Institution of the Regal Right, and presuming to like better of their
own choice do alter this hereditary Right and divine Ordinance into the
election of one or more Governors, How God allowed the Aristocraticall and
Democraticall Government, and why.
either annual, as among the ancient Romans, or vital, as it is in the
present state of the Venetians,; God, out of his infinite lenity to our humane
frailty, rather than his People should be without Government, and so many
heinous sins should go unpunished does permit, and it may be allow and
approve the same, though sometimes not without great anger and indignation for
our contempt and distaste of his heavenly institution; Deuteronomy. 33.5.
as when the Israelites, weary of the Judges that succceded Moses, who was a
King in Jesurun, and that God raised still to rule as Kings amongst them, to
make War against their enemies, and to judge them according to the Law in the
time of peace, which are the two chiefest Offices of all Kings, desired to have
a King, to judge them like all the Nations; 1 Samuel 8.5.
not a King simply (for so they had indeed though not in name) but a King like
all the Nations, that is, a King of a more absolute power than the Judges had,
as Samuel shows, and they seem contented therewith: God sent them a King in
his wrath, because they had rejected him, that he should not reign over them;
that is, verse. 7.
they had refused to submit themselves to his Ordinance, and to obey the Kings
that he appointed over them, but they must needs be their own carvers and have
a King of their own election, or such a King (invested with a more absolute
power) as they desired, though notwithstanding they did most hypocritically
seem to desire none but whom God appointed over them; and therefore perceiving
their own error, and seeing their own offense by the anger that God showed,
they confessed their fault, The lamentable success of the first elective Kings.
and did always thereafter accept of their Kings by succession, but only when
their Prophets by the sacred Ointment had ordained another by God's special
designation.

But I cannot find it in all the Scripture, or in any other Writings
authentical, where God appointed or commanded any People to be the choosers of
their Kings, but rather to accept of him, and submit themselves to him, whom
the Lord had placed over them. Rossen, de ^otest. Papae, 282.
For I would very fain know, as Roffensis speaks, An potestas Adami in filios
ac nepotes, adeoque omnes ubique homines, ex consensu filiorum ac nepotum
dependet, an a solo Deo ac natura profluit? And if this authority of the Father
be from God without the consent of his children, then certainly the authority
of Kings is both natural and divine immediately from God, and not from any
consent or allowance of men; Pineda de rebas Solo. l. 2 c. 2.
and Pineda says, Nusquam invenio Regem aliquem Judaeorum populi suffragiis
creatum, quin si primus ille erat, qui designaretur a Deo, vel a Propheta ex
Dei jussu, vel sort, vel alia ratione quam Deus indicasset. Neither do I
remember any one that was chosen King by the Children of Israel, but only
Abimelech the bastard son of Gedeon, and (as some say) Jeroboam that made
Israel to sin; and the Scripture tells you how unjustly they entered, how
wickedly they reigned, and how lamentably the first, Strange that the People
should bestow the greatest favor or dignity on ear^h. Esaias 42.8.
that was without question the Creature of the People, ended both his life and
his Reign; to teach us how unsuccesfull it is to have other makers of Kings
than he that is the King of kings, and says, He will not give his glory unto
another, nor hold them guiltless that intrude into his Throne, to bestow
Sovereignty and create Kings at their pleasures, when as he professes, it
belongs unto him, not to the People, to say, Ye are gods, and to place his
own Viceroy to govern his own People.

Arist p^^ l. 3.
And therefore though I do not wonder to find Aristotle of that opinion, Vt
reges populi suffragio constarent, that Kings should be elected by the People,
and that it was the manner of the Barbarians to accept of their Kings by
succession, Quales sors tulerit, The nature of the people.
non virtutis opinione probatos, such as nature gave them, and not those which
were approved by the People for their virtues; Blac^od. p 61. and as T. Li^.
says, Aui serri^ hu^liter, aut don^atur superse.
because he was ignorant of the divine Oracles; yet me thinks it is very
strange that men continually versed in God's Word, and knowing the nature of
the People, which as one says, Semper aeger est, semper insanus, semper furore
and intemperiis agitur, and specially reading the story of times, should be
transported with such dreams and fopperies, that the People should have any
hand in the election of their Kings: for if you briefly run over most of the
Kings of this world, you shall scarce find one of a thousand to be made by the
suffrage of the people; Of all the Kings of the world, very few made by the
suffrage of the People.
for Nimrod got his Kingdom by his strength, Ninus enlarged the same by his
sword, and left the same unto his heirs; from the Assyrians the Monarchy was
translated to the Medes and Persians, and I pray you how? by the consent of the
People, or by the edge of the sword? From the Persians it was transferred to
Alexander, but the same way; and it continued among his successors by the same
right: and Romulus, Ad sua qui domit^s deduxit flagra Quirites. did not obtain
his power by the suffrage of his People; and if you look over the States of
Greece, we shall find one Timondas which obtained the Scepter of the
Corinthians, and Pittacus the Government of the Mitylenians by the suffrage of
the People; but for the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Sicyoni, Thebanes, Epirots,
and Macedons, among whom the Regal Dignity flourished a far longer time than
the popular rule, Non optione populi sed nascendi condition regnatum est; Idem
page 63.
their Kings reigned not by the election of the People, but by the condition of
their birth: and what shall we say of the Parthians, Indians, Africans,
Tartars, Arabians, Aethiopians, Numidians, Muscovites, Celtans, Spaniards,
French, English, and of many other Kingdoms that were obtained, either by
gift, as Abdolonimus received his Kingdom of Alexander, Juba the Kingdom of
Numidia from Augustus, Quintus Curtius.
and the French King got the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily; or by Will, as the
Romans had the Kingdoms of Egypt, Bithini^, Pergamus, and Asia; or by Arms,
as many of the foresaid Kingdoms were first gotten, and were always
transmitted afterward to posterity by the hereditary right of blood? Claud. de
4. cons Honorii.
And the Poet could say, -- terra dominos pelagique futuros
Immenso decuit rerum de principe nasci.
It behoved the Kings of the earth to be borne of Kings.

Besides we must all confess, that the King is the Father of people, the
Husband of the Commonwealth, and the Master of all his Subjects: Children and
servants not allowed to choose what fathers and masters they please.
and can you show me, that God ever appointed that the children should make
choice of their fathers? then surely all would be the sons of Princes; but
though fathers may adopt their sons, as the King may make a Turk or any
other stranger a free Denizon; yet children may not choose whom they please for
their fathers, but they are bound to honor those fathers that God has
appointed, or suffered to beget them; though the same should be be never so
poor, never so wicked; so the wives, though while they are free, they may have
the power to refuse whom they dislike, yet they have no such prerogative to
choose what husbands they please; or if they had, I am sure no woman would be
less than a Lady; and the like may be said of all servants.

Therefore the election of Kings by the People seems to me no prime Ordinance
of God, but as our Sectaries say, (...), A humane Ordination indeed, and the
corruption of our Nature, a mere (...), and an imitation of what the Poet
says, Optat Ephippia bos niger, optat arare caballus. Just as if the women
would feign have that Law of liberty to choose what husbands they please, and
the servants to make choice of what Masters they like best; The People are in
all things greedy to have their own wills.
so the People, never contented with whom God sends, never satisfied with his
Ordinance, would fain pull their necks out of God's yoke, and become their own
choosers both of their Kings and of their Priests, and indeed of all things
else, when as nothing does please them but what they do, and none can content
them, but whom themselves will choose; and their choice cannot long satisfy
their minds, but as the Jews received Christ into Jerusalem, with the joyful
acclamation of Hosanna, and yet the next day had the malicious cry of
Crucifige, so the least distaste makes them greedy of a new change; such is the
nature of the People.

But though I said before, the election of our chief Governors may for many
respects be approved of God among some States, yet I hope by this that I have
set down, it is most apparent unto all men, contrary to the tenet of our
Anabaptisticall Sectaries, that the hereditary succession of Kings to govern
God's People is their indubitable right, and the immediate prime, principal
Ordinance of God: therefore it concerns every man, as much as his soul is
worth, to examine seriously, whether to fight against their own King be not to
resist the Ordinance of God, for which God threatens no less punishment than
damnation, from which Machiavel cannot preserve us, nor any policy of State
procure a dispensation.

CHAP. IV. Shows what we should not do, and what we should do for the King;
the Rebels transgressing in all those; how the Israelites honored their
persecuting King in Egypt; how they behaved themselves under Artaxerxes,
Ahashuerus, and under all their own Kings of Israel; and how our Kings are of
the like institution with the Kings of Israel; proved in the chiefest respects
at large; and therefore to have the like honor and obedience.
2. AS every lawful King is to be truly honored in regard of God's Ordinance,
2. All Kings are to be honored in respect of God's precept, considered two
ways.
so likewise in respect of God's precept, which commands us to honor the
King; and this duty is so often inculcated and so fully laid upon us in the
holy Scripture, that I scarce know any duty toward man so much pressed, and so
plainly expressed as this is;

1. Negatively, what we should not do, 1. What we should not do.
to deprive him of his Honor.

2. Affirmatively, what we should do, to manifest and magnify this Honor
toward him: for,

1. Our very thoughts, words, 1. To think no ^ll of the King; Curse not the
King, no not in thy thought, Eccles. 10.30.
and works are imprisoned and chained up in the linkes of God's strictest
prohibition, that they should no ways peep forth, to produce the least
dishonor unto our King: for,

1. The Spirit of God by the mouth of the wisest of men, commands us to think
no ill of the King, let the King be what he will, the precept is without
restriction; you must think no ill, that is, you must not intend and purpose
in your thoughts to do the least ill office or disparagement unto the King
that ^^leth over you, be the same King virtuous or vicious, mild or cruel,
good or bad: this is the sense of the Holy Ghost. For, as the child with Cham
shall become accursed, if he does but dishonor and despise his wicked father
(or his father in his wickedness) whom in all duty he ought to reverence, so
the Subject shall be liable to Gods vengeance, if his heart shall intend the
least ill to his most tyrannical King.

To sa^ no ^ll of the King ^xod 22.28. Act. 23.^. (...).
2. The same Spirit says, Thou shall not revile the Gods; that is, the Judges
of the Land; nor curse, that is, in Saint Paul's phrase, speak evil of the
Ruler of the people: and what can be more evil, then to belly his Religion, to
traduce his Government, and to make so faithful a Christian King as faithless
as a Cretan, which is commonly broached by the Rebels, and preached by their
seditious teachers.

3. To do no hurt to the King. ^^al. 105.15. 1 ^am. 24.4, 5.
3. The great Jehovah gives this peremptory charge to all Subjects, saying,
Touch not mine Anointed; which is the least indignity that may be: and
therefore David's heart smote him when he did but cut off the lap of Saules
garment. What then can be said for them that draw their swords, and shoot their
Canons, to take away the life of Gods Anointed, which is the greatest
mischief they can do? I believe no distinction can blind the judgment of
Almighty God, but his revengefull hand will find them out, that so maliciously
transgress his precepts, and think by their subtilty to escape his
punishments.

2. What we should do to honor the King. Eccles 8 2. 1. To observe the Kings
commands.
2. The Scriptures do positively and plainly command us to show all honor unto
our King. For,

1. Solomon says, I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment; or, as the
phrase imports, to observe the mouth of the King; that is, not only his
written law, but also his verbal commands, and that in regard of the oath of
God; that is, in respect of thy religion, or the solemn vow which thou made
at thine initiation and incorporation into Gods Church, to obey all the
precepts of God, whereof this is one, to honor and obey the King; or else that
oath of allegiance and fidelity, Et si religio to ^^^litur, nulla n^be^ cum
coelo ratio est. Lactant, Inst. l. 3. c. 10.
which thou have sworn unto thy King in the presence and with the approbation
of thy God, which certainly will plague all perjurers, and take revenge on them
that take his name in vain; which is the infallible, and therefore most
miserable condition of all the perjurod Rebels of this Kingdom. For if moral
honesty teaches us to keep our promises, yea, though it were to our own
hinderance, then much more should Christianity teach us to observe our
deliberate and solemn oaths, whose violation can bear none other fruit, then
the heavy censure of Gods fearful indignation.

But when the prevalent faction took a solemn Oath and Protestation to defend
all the Privileges of Parliament, and the Rights of the Subjects; How the
prevalent Faction of the Parliament forswore themselves.
and then presently forgetting their oath, and forsaking their faith, by
throwing the Bishops out of the House of Peers, (which all men knew to be a
singular Privilege, and the House of Lords acknowledged to be the indubitable
right of the Bishops) and their doctrine being to dispense with all oaths for
the furtherance of the cause, it is no wonder they falsify all oaths that
they have made unto the King.

2. The people said unto Joshuah, 2. To obey the Kings commandments. Josh.
1.18.
Whosoever rebelleth against thy commandment, and will not hearken to the
words of thy mouth in all that thou command, he shall be put to death:
surely this was an absolute government, and though martial, yet most excellent
to keep the people within the bounds of their obedience; for they knew that
where rebellion is permitted, there can be no good performance of any duty; and
it may be a good lesson for all the higher powers, not to be too clement,
(which is the encouragement of Rebels) to most obstinate, Traiterous, and
rebellious Subjects, who daring not to stir under rigid Tyrants, do kick
with their heels against the most pious Princes: and therefore my soul
wishes (not out of any desire of blood, but from my love to peace) that this
rule were well observed, Whosoever rebelleth against thy commandment, he shall
be put to death. Quia in talibus non chedientes mortaliter peccant, nisi foret
illud quod praecipitur contra praceptum Dei, vel in salutis dispendium: Angel.
summa verb. obedientia. 3. To give the King no just (...) cause of anger.


3. The wisest of all Kings, but the King of Kings, says, The fear of a King
is as the roaring of a Lion, Prove. 2.2.
who so provokes him to anger sins against his own soul. And I believe
that the taking up of Arms by the Subjects against their own King, that never
wronged them, The Rebels have given him cause enough to be provoked.
and the seeking to take away his life, and the life of his most faithful
servants, is cause enough to provoke any King to anger, if he be not (...), too
Stoically given, to abandon all passions: and that anger should be like the
roaring of a Lion to them that would pull out the Lions eyes, and take away the
Lions life.

4. To speak reverently to the King, and of the King. Eccles. 8.4.
4. The King of Heaven says of these earthly Kings, That where the word of a
King is there is power, and who may say unto him, what do thou? And Elihu
demands, Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked; or to Princes, you are
ungodly? Truly if Elihu were now here, he might hear many unfitter things said
to our King by his own people, and which is more strange, by some Preachers;
for some of them have said, but most maliciously and more falsely, that he is a
Papist, he is the Traitor, unworthy to reign, unfit to live; good God! do
these men think God says truth, Where the word of a King is, there is power,
that is, to blast the conspiracies, and to confound the spirits of all Rebels,
who shall one day find it; because the wrath of God at last will be awaked
against their treachery, and to revenge their perjury by inabling the King to
accomplish the same upon all that resist him, Jerem. 27.8.
as he promised to do in the like case.

5. To pray for the King. Ezra 6.10.
5. The Israelites being in captivity under the King of Babylon, were commanded
to pray for the life of that Heathen King, and for the life of his sons. And
Saint Paul exhorts Timothy to make supplications, 1. Tim. 2.1, 2.
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks for Kings, and for all that are
in authority: and how do our men pray for our King? in many Pulpits not at
all, and in some places for his overthrow, for the shortning of his life, and
the finishing of his days (nullum sit in omine pondus:) and they give thanks
indeed, not for his good, but for their own supposed good success against
him; thus they prevaricate and pervert the words of the Apostle, to their own
destruction, Psalm. 109.6.
when as the Prophet says, Their prayers shall be turned into sin.

6. 6. To render all his du^s unto him.
Christ commands us to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, that
is, (as I shall more fully show hereafter) your inward duties of honor, love,
reverence, and the like; and your outward debts, toll, tribute, custom, etc.
and the Rebels render none unto him, but take all from him, and return his
Arms to his destruction.

I might produce many other places and precepts of Holy Scripture to enforce
this duty to honor the King; but what will suffice him, cui Roma parum est; if
they believe not Moses, neither will they believe if one should arise from the
dead; Luke 16.31.
and if these things cannot move them, then certainly all the world cannot
remove them from their wickedness. Yet

3. Quia exempla movent, plus quam praecepta docent; 3. All Kings should be
honored by the example of all Nations. 1. The Israelites. 1. In Egypt.
you shall find this doctrine practiced by the perpetual demeanor of all
Nations. For

1. If you look upon the children of Israel in the Land of Egypt, it cannot be
denied but Pharaoh was a wicked King, and exercised great cruelty, and
exceeding tyranny against Gods people; yet Moses did not incite the Israelites
to take arms against him, though they were more in number, Exodus 12.37. Exodus
1.9.
being six hundred thousand men, and abler for strength to make their party
good then Pharaoh was, as the King himself confesses; but they contained
themselves within the bounds of their obedience, and waited Gods leisure for
their deliverance; because they knew their patient suffering would more
manifest their own piety, and aggravate King Pharaohs obstinacy, and
especially magnify Gods glory, then their undutifull rebelling could any ways
illustrate the least of these.

2. David's demeanor toward Saul is most memorable; 2. Under Saul. The loyal
Subjects belief, p. 55.
for though (as one says) King Saul discovered in part the described manner of
such a King, as Samuel had fore-shewed; yet David and all his followers
performed and observed the prescribed conditions, that are approved by God in
true Subjects: never resisting, never rebelling against his King, though his
King most unjustly persecuted him. Samuel also when he had pronounced Saul's
rejection, 1. Sam. 15.
yet did he never incite the people to Rebellion, but wept and prayed for him,
and discharged all other duties, which formerly he had showed to be due unto
him; 3. Under Ahab.
and Elias, that had as good repute with the people, and could as easily have
stirred up sedition, as any of the seditious Preachers of this time; yet did he
never persuade the Subjects to withstand the illegal commands of a most wicked
King, 1. Reg 21.25.
that as the Scripture testifies, had sold himself to work wickedness, and
became the more exceedingly sinful by the provocation of Jezabell his most
wicked wife, and harlot; but he honored his Sovereignty, and feared his
Majesty; when he fled away from his cruelty.

Two examples of the whole Nation under Heathen kings. 1. Under Ar^^xerxes.
Ezr^ 1.1, etc.
And because these are but particular presidents, I will name you two observable
examples of the whole Nation.

1. When Cyrus made a Decree, and his Decree (according to the Laws of the
Medes and Persians) should be unalterable, that the Temple of Jerusalem should
be re-edified, and the adversaries of the Jews obtained a Letter from
Artaxerxes to prohibit them, the people of God submitting themselves to the
personal command of the King, contrary to that unalterable Law of Cyrus,
pleaded neither the goodness of the work, nor the justness of the cause, but
yielded to the Kings will, and ceased from their work, until they obtained a
new License in the second year of King Darius: and if it be objected that they
built the Temple in despite of those that hindered them, with their sword in
one hand, and a trowell in the other: it is rightly answered, that having the
Kings leave to build it, they might justly resist their enemies, that did
therein, not only show their malice unto them, but also resisted the will of
the King.

2. Under Ahashuerus. Hester 3.10.
2. When Ahashuerus, to satisfy the unjust desire of his proud favorite, had
wickedly decreed, and most tyrannically destined all the Nation of the Jews to
a sudden death; yet this dutiful people did not undutifully rebel, and plead
the King was seduced by evil counsel, and misguided by proud Haman, therefore
nature teaching them, vim vi pellere, to stand upon their own defense, they
would not submit their necks to his unjust Decree; but, being versed in Gods
Laws, and unacquainted with these new devices, they return to God, and betake
themselves to their prayers, Hester 8.11.
until God had put it into the Kings heart to grant them leave to defend
themselves, and to sheath their swords in the bowels of their adversaries;
which is a most memorable example of most dutiful unresisting Subjects: an
example of such piety, as would make our Land happy, if our zealous generation
were but acquainted with the like Religion.

But here I know what our Anabaptist, Brownist, and Puritan will say, that I
build Castles in the air, The author of the Treatise of Monarchy, p. 33.
and lay down my frame without foundation; because all Kings are not such as
the Kings of Israel and Judah were, as the Kings that God gave unto the Jews,
and prescribed special Laws, both for the Kings to govern, and the people to
obey them; but all other Nations have their own different and several Laws
and Constitutions, according to which Laws their Kings are tied to rule, and
the Subjects bound to obey, and no otherwise.

I answer, Henric. Stephan, in libello de hac re contendit in omne^ respull.
debere leges Hebraerum, tanquam ab ipso Deo profectas, and per consequens
omnium optemas ^educi.
that indeed it is granted there are several constitutions of Royalties in
several Nations, and there may be Regna Laconica, conditional and
provisionall Kingdoms, wherein perhaps upon a real breach of some expressed
conditions, some Magistrates like the Ephori, may pronounce a forfeiture,
as well in the successive as in the elective Kingdoms; because (as one says)
succession is not a new title to more right, but a legal continuance of what
was first gotten: which I can no ways yield unto, if you mean it of any
Sovereign King, (because the name of a King does not always denotate the
Sovereign power, as the Kings of Lacedamon though so called, yet had no regal
authority; and the Dictator for the time being, and the Emperors afterward
had an absolute power, though not the name of Kings) for I say, that such a
government is not properly a regal government, ordained by God, but either an
Aristocraticall or Democraticall government instituted by the people, though
approved by God for the welfare of the Commonwealth; 1. Sam. 8.4.20.
but as the Israelites desired a King to judge them like all the Nations, that
is, such a King as Aristotle describes, such as the Nations had, entrusted
with an absolute and full regal power, as Sigonius shows; so the Kings of
the Nations, if they be not like the Spartan Kings, were and are like the Kings
of Israel, both in respect of their ordination from God, by whom all Kings, as
well of other Nations as of Israel, do reign, and of their full power and
inviolable authority over the people; which have no more dispensation to resist
their Kings, then the Jews had to resist theirs; And therefore Valentinian,
though an elected Emperor, yet when he was requested by his Electors to admit
of an associate, answered, S^zom. h^stor. l. 6. c. 6. Niceph. hist. l. 11. c. 1.
it was in your power to choose me to be an Emperor; but now, after you have
chosen me, what you require is in my power, not in you; Vobis tanquam subditis
competit parere, mihi vero quae facienda sunt cogitare, it becomes you to obey,
as Subjects, and I am to consider what is fittest to be done.

And when the wife takes an husband, there is a compact, agreement, and a
solemn vow past in the presence of God, that he shall love, cherish, and
maintain her; yet if he breaks this vow, The wife may not forsake her
husband, though he break h^s vow, and neglect his duty.
and neglects both to love and to cherish her, she cannot renounce him, she
must not forsake him, she may not follow after another; and there is a greater
marriage betwixt the King and his people: therefore though as a wife they might
have power to choose him, and in their choice to tie him to some conditions, yet
though he breaks them, they have no more power to abdicate their King, then
the wife has to renounce her husband; nor so much, because she may complain
and call her husband before a competent Judge, and produce witnesses against
him; whereas there can be no Judge betwixt the King and his people, but only
God; and no witnesses can be found on earth; because it is against all laws,
and against all reason, that they which rise against their King, should be both
the witnesses against him; and the Judges to condemn him: or, were it so, that
all other Kings have not the like constitution which the Scripture sets
down for the Kings of Israel; yet I say that, excepting some circumstantiall
Ceremonies, in all real points, the Laws of our Land are (so far as men
could make them) in all things agreeable to the Scriptures in the constituting
of our Kings, An Appeal to thy conscience, page 30.
according to the livelyest pattern of the Kings of Israel; as it is well
observed by the Author of the Appeal to thy conscience, in these 4 special
respects.

1. In his Right to the Crown. 2. In his Power and Authority. Our kings of the
like Institution to the kings of Israe^.
3. In his Charge and Duty. 4. In the rendering of his Account.
For

1. As the Kings of Israel were hereditary by succession, and elective, unless
there were an extraordinary and divine designation, as in David, Solomon, John:
Kings of England are kings by birth. Proved.
so do the Kings of England obtain their Kingdoms by birth, or hereditary
succession, as it appears.

1. By the Oath of Allegiance, used in every Leete, that you Charles, and to
his Heirs.

2. Because we owe our legeance to the King in his natural Charles the Son
and Heir apparent of King James; Coke, l. 7. Calvin's case.
when as homage cannot be done to any King in his politic capacity, the body
of the King being invisible in that sense.

3. Because in that case it is expressly affirmed, that the King England by
birthright, inherent by descent from the bloud-royall; therefore to show how
inseparable this right is from the next in blood. Hen. 4. though he was of the
bloud-royall, being first cozen unto the King, and had the Crown resigned unto
him by Rich. 2d, Speed, l. 9. c. 16.
and confirmed unto him by Act of Parliament; yet upon his deathbed, confessed
he had no right thereunto, as Speed writes.

4. Because it was determined by all the Judges, at the Arraignment Watson and
Clerk, 1. Jacobs.
that immediately by descent his Majesty was completely and absolutely King,
without the Ceremony of Coronation, which was but a royal ornament, and
outward solemnization of the descent. And it is illustrated by Hen. 6. Speed,
l. 9. c. 16.
that was not crowned till the ninth year of his reign; and yet diverse were
attainted of High Treason before that time, which could not have been done,
had he not been King. And we know that upon the death of any of our Kings, The
right heir to the Kingdom is King before he is crowned.
his Successor i^ immediately proclaimed King; to show that he has his
Kingdom by descent, and not by the people at his Coronation; whose consent is
then asked, Why the peoples consent is asked.
not because they have any power to deny their consent, or refuse him for their
King; but that the King having their assent, may with greater security and
confidence rely upon their loyalty.

Israel had full power and authority to make war and conclude peace, to call
the greatest Assemblies, as Moses, Joshua, David, Iehosaphat, and the rest of
the Kings did; to place and displace the greatest Officers of State; as Solomon
placed Abiathar in Sadoc's room, 2. Chron 19.11
and Iehosaphat appointed Amariah and Zebadiah rulers of the greatest affairs:
and had all the Militia of the Kingdom in their hands; The absolute authority
of the Kings of England. Coke 7. rep. fol 25. 6. P^lyd. Virgil. lib. 11. Speed.
St^w, etc.
so the Kings of England have the like; for,

1. He only can lawfully proclaim war, as I showed before; and he only can
conclude peace.

2. There is no Assembly that can lawfully meet but by his Authority; and as
the Parliament was first devised and instituted by the King, as all our
Historians write in the life of Hen. 1. so they cannot meet but by the Kings
Writ.

3. All Laws, Customs, and Franchises are granted and confirmed unto the
people by the King. Rot. Claus. 1. R. 2. n. 44.

Smith de repub. Angl. l. 2. c. 4. etc. 5.
4. All the Officers of the Realm, whether Spiritual or Temporal, are chosen
and established by him; as the highest immediately by himself, and the
inferior by an authority derived from him.

The absurdities of them that deny the Militia to the King.
5. He has the sole power of ordering and disposing all the Castles, Forts, and
strong Holds; and all the Ports, Havens, and all other parts of the Militia of
this Kingdom: or otherwise it would follow, that the King had power to
proclaim war, but not to be able to maintain it; and that he is bound to
defend his Subjects, but is denied the means to protect them; which is such an
absurdity, as cannot be answered by all the House of Commons.

6. The Kings of Israel were unto their people their honor, their Sovereigns,
their life, and the very breath of their nostrils, as themselves acknowledge;
and so the Kings of England are the life, the head, and the authority of all
things that be done in the Realm of England; Smith de Repub. l. 2. Cambden
Britan: p. 132.
supremam potestatem and merum imperium apud nos habentes, nec in Imperii
clientela sunt, nec investituram ab alio accipientes, nec praeter Deum
superiorem agnoscentes; and their Subjects are bound by oath to maintain the
Kings Sovereignty, in all causes, and over all persons, as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil; and that not only as they are singularly considered, but over all
collectively represented in the body politic; for by sundry, diverse, old
authentic Histories and Chronicles, it is manifestly declared and expressed,
that this Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been accepted in the
world, In the P^eface to a Sta^. 24. Hen. 8. c. 12.
governed by one supreme Head and King, having the dignity and royal estate
of the Imperial Crown of the same; unto whom a body politic, compact of all
sorts and degrees of people, divided in terms and by names of spiritualty and
temporalty, have been bounden and owen to bear next to God a natural and
humble obedience.

3. As the duty of every one of the Kings of Israel was to be Custos utriusque
tabulae, to keep the Law of God, and to have a special care of his Religion;
and then to do justice and judgment, according to the Law of nature, and to
observe all the judicial Laws of that Kingdom; so are the Kings of England
obliged to discharge the same duties.

1. To have the chiefest care to defend the faith of Christ, The duty of the
Kings of England.
and to preserve the honor of Gods Church, as I showed before.

2. To maintain common right, according to the rules and dictates of nature.
And

3. To see the particular Laws and Statutes of his own Kingdom well observed
amongst his people.

To all which the King is bound, not only virtute officii, in respect of his
office, but also vinculo juramenti, in respect of his oath, which enjoyneth him
to guide his actions, not according to the desires of an unbridled will, but
according to the ties of these established Laws; neither do our Divines give
any further liberty to any King, but if he fails in these he does offend in
his duty.

4. As the Kings of Israel were accountable for their actions unto none, but
only unto God, and therefore King David after he had committed both murder and
adultery, says unto God, Psalm. 51.4.
Tibi soli peccavi; as if he had said, none can call me to any account for what
I have done but thou alone; and we never read that either the people did call,
or that the Prophets persuaded them to call any of their most idolatrous,
tyrannical, or wicked Kings to any account for their idolatry, The kings of
England accountable for their actions only to God.
tyranny, or wickedness; even so the Kings of England are accountable to none
but to God.

1. Because they have their Crown immediately from God, first gave it to the
Conqueror through his sword, and since to the succeding Kings, Smith de repub.
l. 1. c. 9.
by the ordinary means of hereditary succession.

oath which he takes at his Coronation binds him only before God, who alone
can both judge him, and punish him if he forgets it.

condition, promise, or limitation, either in that Oath, or in any other
Covenant or compact that the King makes with the people, either at his
Coronation, or at any other time, that he should be accomptable, or that they
should question and censure him for any thing that he should do.

testimony of many famous Lawyers justify the same truth; for Bracton says,
if the King refuse to do what is just, satis erit ei ad paenam quod Dominum
expectet ultonem, the Lord will be his avenger, which will be punishment enough
for him; Bracton fol 34. a. b. apud Lincol anno 1301.
but of the Kings grants and actions, nec privatae personae, nec justiciarii
debent disputare. And Walsingham makes mention of a Letter written from the
Parliament to the Bishop of Rome, wherein they say, that certum and directum
Dominium a prima institutione regni Angliae ad Regem pertinuit, the certain
and direct Dominion of this Kingdom from the very first institution thereof
has belonged unto the King, who by reason of the arbitrary or free preeminence
of the royal dignity and custom observed in all ages, Ex libera praeminentia.
ought not to answer before any Judge, either Ecclesiastical or Secular. Ergo
neither before the Pope, nor Parliament, nor Presbytery.

5. Because the constant custom and practice of this Kingdom Parliament at
any time sought to censure their King, and either to depose him, or to punish
him for any of all his actions; save only those that were called in the
troublesome and irregular times of our unfortunate Princes, No legitimate and
just Parliament did ever question the Kings of England for their actions.
and were swayed by those that were the heads of the most powerful Faction, to
conclude most horrid and unjustifiable Acts, to the very shame of their
judicial authorities; as those factious Parliaments in the times of Hen. 3.
King John, Rich. 2. and Hen. 4. and others, whose acts in the judgment of all
good authors, are not to be drawn into examples, when as they deposed their
King for those pretended faults, whereof not the worst of them but is fairly
answered, and all 33 of them proved to be no way sufficient to depose him, by
that excellent Civilian Heningus Arnisaeus. Heningus c. 4. p. 93.


And therefore seeing the institution of our Kings is not only by Gods Law,
but also by our own Laws, Customs, and practice, thus agreeable to the
Scripture Kings, they ought to be as sacred and as inviolable to us, as the
Kings of Israel were to the Jews; and as reverently honored and obeyed by us,
as both the Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul, advise us to honor and obey
the King.

CHAP. V. Shows, how the Heathens honored their Kings; how Christ exhibited
all due honor unto Heathen and wicked Kings; how he carried himself before
Pilate; and how all the good Primitive Christians behaved themselves toward
their Heathen persecuting Emperors. 2. The Heathens. Persa quidem olim aliquid
coeleste atque divinum in regilus inesse statuebant. Osor. de Instit. regis. l.
4. p. 106.

2. WE find that not only the Jews, that were the people of God, a royal
Priesthood, that had the Oracles of God, and therefore no wonder that they were
so conformable in their obedience to the will of God; but the Gentiles also
that knew not God, knew this by the light of nature, that they were bound to
yield all honor unto their Kings. For Quintus Curtius tells us, that the
Persians had such a divine estimation and love unto their King, that Alexander
could not persuade them either for fear or reward, to tell him where their
King was gone, or to reveal any of his intentions, or to do any other thing
that might any ways prejudice the life, Justin. l. 4.
or the affairs of their King. And Justin tells us, that the Sicilians did
bear so great a respect unto the last Will and Testament of Anaxilaus their
deceased King, that they disdained not to obey a slave, whom he had appointed
Regent, during the minority of his son, Herodet. l. 8.
And Herodotus says, that when Xerxes fled from Greece in a vessel that was
so full of men of war, What great respect men in former times did bear unto
their kings.
that it was impossible for him to be saved, without casting some part of them
into the Sea; he said unto them, O ye men of Persia, let some among you
testify that he has care of his King, whose safety is in your disposition;
then the Nobility which accompanied him, having adored him, did cast themselves
into the Sea, till the vessel was unburthened, and the King preserved. And I
fear these Pagans will rise in judgment to condemn our Nobility, that seek
the destruction of their King. And the Macedonians had such a reverent opinion
of their King, that being foiled in war, before they returned again to the
battle they fetched their cradle, wherein their young King lay, and set him
in the midst of the Camp, as supposing that their former misfortune proceeded,
Justin. l. 7.
because they neglected to take with them the good augure of their Kings
presence. And Boemus Aubanus speaking of the Egyptian Kings, says, that they
have so much good will and love from all men, Aubanus de Africa. l 1. p. 39.
Reges divinos, Jove genitos, a Jove nutritos, Homerus and ^esi^dus appellarunt.
ut non solum sacerdotibus, sed etiam singulis Aegyptiis major regis quam
uxorum filiorumque, aut aliorum principum salutis inesset cura; that not only
the Priests, but also all the Egyptians have a greater care of the safety of
their King, then of their wives or children, or any other Princes of the Land.
And the same Author describing the manner how the Tartars create their King;
says, the Princes, Dukes, Barons, and all the people meet, then they place him
that is to be their King on a Throne of gold, and prostrating themselves upon
the ground, they cry with an unanimous and loud voice, Rogamus, volumus and
praecipimus ut domineris nobis, We entreat you and beseech you to reign over
us; and he answers, if you would have this of me, it is necessary that you
should be obedient to do whatsoever I shall command you; when I call you, to
come; whethersoever I shall send you, to go; whomsoever I shall command you to
kill, to do it immediately without fear; and to commit the whole Kingdom into
my hands: then they do all answer, we are willing to do all this. And then he
says again, therefore from henceforth, oris mei sermo gladius meus erit, the
word of my mouth shall be the sword of my power: then all the people do
applaud him. And a little after he says, in ejus manibus seu potestate omnia
sunt, Aubanus l. 2. p. 141.
all things are in his hands and power: no man dare say, this is mine, or that
is his: no one man may dwell in any part of the Land, but in that which is
assigned unto him by the King. Nomini licet imperatoris verba mutare, nemini
latae ab illo sententiae qualicunque modo contraire; and no man dares alter the
Kings words, nor gainsay his sentence whatsoever it is. And we read that the
Turk is as absolute in his Dominions, and as readily obeyed in his commands as
the Tartar; and yet these Subjects learn this duty of honor and obedience
unto their Kings only by the light of nature; and if grace and the Gospel
has made us free from this slavish subjection, should we not be thankful
unto our God, and be contented with that liberty which he has given us; but
because we have so much, we will have more: And as the Poet says, Like
Subjects armed, the more their Princes gave, They this advantage took the more
to crave. Lucan. lib. 1.
and seeing God has delivered us from the rage of tyrannous Kings, we will
free our selves from all government, and disobey the commands of the most
clement Princes? We may remember the fable of the Frogs, when they prayed unto
Jupiter to have a King, and what was the success thereof; -- omnia dat qui
justa negat: and he that undutifully denies his due obedience, may unwillingly
be forced to undue subjection; as the Israelites, not contented with just
Samuel, shall be put under an unjust Saul. So God may justly deal with us for
our injustice toward our King, to deny that honor unto him which God
commanded to be given, and the very Heathens have not detained from their
Kings. But

3. Christians.
3. Lest with Saint Paul we should be blamed (though unjustly) for bringing the
uncircumcised Greeks into the Temple, for alleging the disorderly practice of
blind Heathens to be a pattern for these zealous Christians; (which thing,
notwithstanding our Savior did, when he preferred Sodom and Gomorrah before
Capernaum; Matthew. 11.21.
yea Tyrus and Sydon before Corazin and Bethsaida:) we cannot want the example
of good Christians, and a multitude of most holy Martyrs, to shame the practice
of these profane hypocrites. For

1. Christ h^mselfe exhibited all du^ honor unto wicked Kings.
1. Christ himself, the author and the finisher of our faith, never left any
plainer mark of his religion, then to propagate the fame by patience; as on
the other side, there cannot be a more suspicious sign of a false religion,
then to enlarge it and protect it by violence: and therefore when the
Inhabitants of a certain Samaritane village refused to admit Christ and his
Disciples into their Town, Luke 9.54.
and so renounced him and his religion; James and John, two principal members
of his Court, remembering what Elias did in the like case, 1. Reg. 18. 2. Reg. 1.
asked if they should not command fire to consume them, as Elias did? that is,
if they should not use their best endeavors, and be confident of Gods
assistance, to destroy those profane rejecters of Christ, and refusers of his
religion? Our Savior, though ever meek, yet now moved at this their
unchristian thought, rebuked them with that sharpness, as he did Saint Peter,
when he committed the like error, Matthew. 16.23.
and said, You know not what manner of spirit you are of: as if he had said,
you understand not the difference betwixt the profession of Elias, and my
religion; for he was such a zelot, that jure zelotarum, and the extraordinary
instinct of Gods Spirit that was in him, might at that time (when the Jews
were governed by a (...), as Josephus says, and God presiding as it were their
King amongst them, and interposing rules by his Oracles, and other particular
directions, that should oblige and warrant them, as well as their standing Law)
do this or the like act, though not authorized by any ordinary Law; and those
actions thus performed, are as just and as legal as any other that proceed
legally from the authority of the supreme Magistrate; but that dispensation of
the Prophets is now ended, and the profession of my Disciples must be far
otherwise; for I do not authorize my servants to pretend to the spirit of
Elias, or to do as Phineas and others, extraordinary men among the Jews, have
done, but they must learn of me to be meek and lowly in heart, Matthew. 11.29.
and rather to suffer wrong of others, then to offer the least injury unto
their meanest neighbor, much less to resist their supreme Magistrate.

And when Christ was apprehended, How Christ carried himself before Pilate and
the Highpriests.
not by any legal power of the supreme Magistrate, but by the rude servants of
the High Priests; and Saint Peter, as zealous for his Master as our Zealots are
for their Religion, drew his sword and smote off Malchus eat, a most
justifiable and commendable act, a man would think, to defend Christ, and in
him all Christianity; our Savior bids him put up his sword, and he adds a
reason most considerable to all Christians; for all they that take the sword
shall perish by the sword: that is, all they that without lawful authority
take the sword, to defend me and my religion with the sword, they deserve to
suffer by the sword; and it is very well observed by the Author, Page 6.
of resisting the lawful Magistrate upon color of religion, that the two
parallel places quoted in the margent of our Bibles, are very pertinent to this
purpose; for that Law concerning the effusion of blood, Genesis 9.6.
being not any prohibition to the legal cutting off of Malefactors, is
notwithstanding urged against S. Peter, to show that his shedding of blood in
defense of religion was altogether illegal, and prohibited by that Law: and
the other place (where immediately after these words, Revel. 13.10.
He that kills with the sword must be killed with the sword; the Holy Ghost
adjoyneth, here is the patience and the faith of the Saints:) does most
clearly show, that all forcible resistance is inconsistent with the religion
of the Saints; because their faith must be ever accompanied with their
patience; and it is contrary to their profession to save themselves by any
violent opposition of them that have the lawful authority.

But that example which is unparalled, is the suffering of Christ under
Pontius Pilate; for the whole course of their proceeding against Christ was
illegal, when as no Law can be found to justify the delivering up of an
innocent person to the will of his accusers, John 19.16.
as Pilate did our Savior Christ; and our Savior had ability and strength
enough to have defended himself; for he might have commanded more then 12
Legions of Angels to assist him; yet our Savior acknowledging the legal power
of Pilate to proceed against him, John 19.11.
that it was given him from above, makes no resistance either to maintain his
doctrine or to preserve his life, but in all things submits himself to their
illegal proceedings, and gives unto the Magistrates all the honor that was
due unto their places: and you know the rule, Omnis Christi actio debet esse
nostra instructio, we ought to follow his example.

And therefore not only Christ, but also all good Christians have imitated him
in this point; for the Apostles prayed for their persecuting Tyrants, exhorted
all their followers to honor even the Pagan Kings, and most sharpl^ reproved
all that spoke evil of authority, much more would they say against them, that
commit evil, and proceed in all wickedness against authority. How the
Primitive Christians behaved themselves toward their Heathen persecutors.
And Tertullian speaking of the behavior of the Primitive Christians toward
the Heathen Emperors, and their cruel persecutors, says, that because they
knew them to be appointed by God, they did love and reverence them, and wish
them safe with all the Roman Empire; yea they honored the Emperor, and
worshipped him as a man second from God, and solo Deo minorem, and inferior
only unto God; and in his Apologetico he says, Deus est solus in cujus solius
potestate sunt reges, a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi, super omnes homines
ante omnes Deos; God alone is he by whose power Kings are preserved, which are
second from him, first after him, above all men, and before all gods; that is,
all other Magistrates that the Scripture calls Gods. So Justin Martyr,
Minutius Felix, Nazianzen, (which also wrote against the vices of Julian) S.
Augustine, and others of the prime Fathers of the Church have set down, how
the Primitive Christians and godly Martyrs, that suffered all kind of most
barbarous cruelty at the hands of their Heathen Magistrates, did
notwithstanding pray for them and honor them, and neither derogated from their
authority, nor any ways resisted their insolency. Beda p. 15.
And Johannes Beda, Advocate in the Court of Parliament of Paris, says, that
the Protestants of France in the midst of torments have blessed their King, by
whom they were so severely entreated; and in the midst of fires and massacres
have published their confession in these words: Artic. 39. and 40. confess
eccles. Gal. refor.
For this cause he (that is God) put the sword into the Magistrates hand, that
he may repress the sins committed, not only against the second table of
Gods Commandments, but also against the first: We must therefore for his sake
not only endure that Superiors rule over us, but also honor and esteem of
them with all reverence, holding them for his Lieutenants and Officers, to whom
he has given in commission to execute a lawful and a holy function: We
therefore hold that we must obey their Laws and Statutes, pay Tributes,
Imposts, and other duties, and bear the yoke of subjection with a good and
free will, although they were Infidels.

Ob. But against this patience of the Saints, wisdom of these good
Christians, it is objected by Goodwin and others of his Sect, that either they
wanted strength to resist, or wanted knowledge of their strength, or of their
privilege and power, which God granted them to defend themselves and their
religion; or were overmuch transported with an ambitious desire of Martyrdom,
or by some other misguiding spirit were utterly misled to an unnecessary
patience; and therefore we having strength enough, as we conceive, to subdue
the King and all his strength, and being wiser in our generation then all the
generation of those fathers, as being guided by a more unerring spirit, we have
no reason to pray for patience, but rather to render vengeance, both to the
King and to all his adherents.

Sol. This unchristian censure, Sol.
and this false imputation laid upon these holy Fathers, by these stabborne
Rebels, and proud Enthusiasts, are so mildly and so learnedly answered by the
Author of resisting the lawful Magistrate upon color of religion, Where they
are fully answered.
that more need not be said to stop the mouths of all ignorant gainsayers.

Therefore seeing that by the institution of Kings, by the precept of God, and
by the practice of all wise men and good Christians, Heathen Kings and wicked
Tyrants are to be loved, honored, and obeyed; it is a most hateful thing to
God and man, to see men professing themselves Christians, (but are indeed like
those in the Revel, Revel. 2 9.
which say they are Jews and are not) in steed of honoring, transcendently to
hate, and most violently to persecute their own most Chr^stian and most
gracious King; a sin so infinitely sinful, that I do not wonder to see the
greatness of Gods anger to power all the plagues that we suffer upon this
Nation; but I do rather admire and adore his wonted clemency and patience,
that he has not all this while either sent forth his fire and lightning from
Heaven, as he did upon Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19.24. Numb. 16.31.
to consume them, or cause the earth to swallow them, as it did Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, for this their rebellion against their King; or that he has not
showred down far greater plagues, and more miserable calamities then
hitherto we have suffered; because we have suffered these Antichristian Rebels
to proceed so far, and have with the Merozites neglected all this while to
add our strength to assist the Lords Anointed, Judges 5.23.
to reduce his seduced Subjects to their obedience, and to impose condign
punishments upon the seducers and the ringleaders of this unnatural and most
horrible Rebellion.

CHAP. VI. Shows the two chiefest duties of all Christian Kings; to whom the
charge and preservation of Religion is committed; three several opinions; the
strange speeches of the Disciplinarians against Kings are showed; and Viretus
his scandalous reasons are answered; the double service of all Christian Kings,
2. Christian Kings are to have double honor in respect of their double duty.
and how the Heathen Kings and Emperors had the charge of Religion.
2. AS all Kings are to be honored in the foresaid respects, so all Christian
Kings are to have a double honor, in respect of the double charge and duty
that is laid upon them: As

1. To preserve true religion, and to defend the faith of

2. To preserve their Subjects from all foreign adversaries, civil
dissentions, to govern them according to the rules of justice and equity,
which all other Kings are bound to do; but neither did, nor can do it so
fully and so faithfully as the Christian Kings; because no Law, either Solons,
Lycurgus, Pompilius, or any other Greek or Latin; nor any Politic, Plato,
Aristotle, Machiavil, or whom you will, old or new, can so perfectly set down,
and so fairly declare, quid justum, and quid honestum, as the Law of Christ
has done; and therefore, seeing omnis honos praesupponit onus, the honor is
but the reward of labor, and that this labor or duty of Kings to maintain
true religion, well performed, and faithfully discharged, brings most glory
unto God, and the greatest honor to all Kings; when it is more to be, with
Constantine, a nursing father to Gods Church, then it is to be with Alexander
the sole Monarch of the known world; I will first treat of their charge and
care, and the power that God has given them to defend the faith, and to
preserve true religion. And

1. 1. Care of Kings to preserve true Religion. Aug. de utilitate credendi cap.
9.
Religion (faith a learned Divine) without authority is no Religion; for as
Saint Augustine says, no true Religion can be received by any means without
some weighty force of authority: therefore if that Religion, whereby thou
hopest to be saved, has no authority to ground it self upon; or if that
authority, whereby thy Religion is settled, be mis-placed in him that has no
authority at all, what hope of salvation remaining in that Religion can thou
conceive? but it is concluded on all sides, that the right authority of
preserving true religion must reside in him, and proceed from him, by whose
supreme power and government it is to be enacted and forced upon us: To whom
the charge of preserving religion is committed.
and therefore now the question is, and it is very much questioned, to whom the
supreme government of our Religion ought rightly to be attributed; 3 Opinions.
whereof I find three several resolutions.

1. Papisticall, which leans too much on the right hand. 2. Anabaptisticall,
which bends twice as much on the left hand. 3. Orthodoxall of the
Protestants, that ascribe the same to him, on whom God himself has conferred
it.
Rome makes the Pope solely to have the supreme government of our Christian
Religion, is most apparent out of all their writings; Vnde saepe objiciunt
dictum ^l^su ad Constantium: Tibi Deus impertum commisit, nobis qu^ sunt
ecclesiastica concredidit. Sed h^c intelligitur de executione officij, non de
gubernatione ecclesiae. Sicut ibi manifestum est, cum dicitur ne que fai est
nobis in terris imperium tenere, neque tibi thymiamatum and so^rorum potestatem
habere. (i e.) in pradicatione Evangelij, and administratione Sacramentorum and
similibus.
and you may see what a large book our Countryman Stapleton wrote against
Master Horn Bishop of Winchester to justify the same. And Sanders to disprove
the right of Kings, says, Fatemur personas Episcoporum, qui in toto orb
fuerunt, Romano Imperatori subjectas fuisse, quoniam Rex praeest hominibus
Christianis, verum non quia sunt Chrstiani, sed quia sunt homines, episcopis
etiam ea ex part rex praeesset. So Master Harding says, that the office of a
King in it self is all one every where, not only among the Christian Princes,
but also among the Heathen; so that a Christian King has no more to do in
deciding Church matters, or meddling with any point of Religion then a Heathen.
And so Fekenham, and all the brood of Jesuits, do with all violence and
virulencie labor to disprove the Princes authority and supremacy in
Ecclesiastical causes, and the points of our Religion, and to transfer the
same wholly unto the Pope and his Cardinals. Neither do I wonder so much, that
the Pope having so universally gained, and so long continued this power, and
retained this government from the right owners, should employ all his
Hierarchy to maintain that usurped authority, which he held with so much
advantage to his Episcopal See, (though with no small prejudice to the Church
of Christ, when, the Emperors being busied with other affairs, and leaving
this care of religion and government of the Church to the Pope, the Pope to the
Bishops the Bishops to their Suffragans, and the Suffragans to the Monks,
whose authority being little, their knowledge less, and their honesty least of
all, all things were ruled with greater corruption and less truth then they
ought to be) so long as possibly he should be able to possess it.

But at last, when the light of the Gospel shined, and Christian Princes had
the leisure to look, and the heart to take hold upon their right, the learned
men (opposing themselves against the Popes usurped jurisdiction) have soundly
proved the Sovereign authority of Christian Kings in the government of the
Church; that, not only in other Kingdoms, but also here in England, this
power was annexed by diverse Laws unto the interest of the Crown, and the
lawful right of the King: and I am persuaded (says that Reverend Archbishop
Bancroft) had it not been that new adversaries did arise, Survey of Discip. c.
22. p. 2^1
and opposed themselves in this matter, the Papists before this time had been
utterly subdued; for the Devil seeing himself so like to lose the field, How
the Devil raised instruments to hinder the reformation,
stirred up in the bosom of Reformation a flock of violent and seditious men,
that pretending a great deal of hate to Popery, have notwithstanding joined
themselves, like Sampsons Foxes, with the worst of Papists, in the worst and
most pernicious Doctrines that ever Papist taught, to rob Kings of their sacred
and divine right, and to deprive the Church of Christ of the truth of all those
points, that do most specially concern her government and governors: and
though in the fury of their wild ^eale they do no less maliciously then
falsely cast upon the soundest Protestants the aspersion of Popery and
Malignancie, yet I hope to make it plain unto my reader, that themselves are
the Papists indeed, or worse then Papists both to the Church and State: For

2. As the whole College of Cardinals, Of the Anabaptists and Puritans.
and all the Schools Jesuits, do most stiffely defend this usurped authority
of the Pope, which, as I said, may be with the less admiration, because of the
Princes concession, and their own long possession of it; so on the other side
there are sprung up of late a certain generation of Vipers, the brood of
Anabaptists and Brownists, that do most violently strive not to detain what
they have unjustly obtained, but a degree far worse, to pull the sword out of
their Prince his hand, and to place authority on them which have neither right
to own it, Where the P^ritans place the authority to maintain religion. 1. In
the Presbytery.
nor discretion to use it; and that is, either 1. A Consistory of Presbyters:
or, 2. A Parliament of Lay men.
For

1. These new Adversaries of this Truth, that would most impudently take away
from Christian Princes the supreme and immediate authority, under Christ, in
all Ecclesiastical Callings and Causes, will needs place the same in
themselves, and a Consistorian company of their own Faction: a whole Volume
would not contain their absurdities, falsities, and blasphemies that they have
uttered about this point. I will only give you a taste of what some of the
chief of them have belebed forth against the Divine Truth of God's Word and
the sacred Majesty of Kings. Calvin in Amos, cap. 7.
Master Calvin, a man otherwise of much worth, and worthy to be honored, yet
in this point transported with his own passion, calls those Blasphemers, that
did call King Henry the Eighth the Supreme Head of this Church of England:
Stap^^. cont. ^^dorn. l, 1. p. 22.
and Stapleton says, that he handled the King himself with such villainy and
with so spiteful words, as he never handled the Pope more spitefully; and all
for this Title of Supremacy in Church causes: and in his 54. Epist. to
Myconius, he terms them profane spirits and mad men, that persuaded the
Magistrates of Geneva, not to deprive themselves of that authority which God
had given them: Viretus is more virulent; for he resembles them not to mad
men, (as Calvin did) but to white devils, because they stand in defense of the
Kings authority; and he says, they are false Christians, though they cover
themselves with the cloak of the Gospel, How Viretus would prove the temporal
Pope (as he calls the King) worse then the spiritual Pope.
affirming that the putting of all authority and power into the Civil
Magistrates hands, and making them Masters of the Church, is nothing else but
the changing of the Popedom, from the Spiritual Pope into a Temporal Pope,
who (as it is to be feared) will prove worse and more tyrannous than the
Spiritual Pope, which he labors to confirm by these three reasons:

Spiritual Pope had not the Sword in his own hand, to punish men with death,
but was fain to crave the aid of the Secular power, which the Temporal Pope
needs not do.

2. Because the old Spiritual Popes had some regard in their Councels, Synods,
and ancient Canons; but the new Secular Popes will do what they list without
respect of any Ecclesiastical Order, be it right or wrong.

3. Because the Romish Popes were most commonly very learned, but it happens
oftentimes that the Regal Popes have neither learning nor knowledge in divine
matters; and yet these shall be they that shall command Ministers and Preachers
what they list; and to make this assertion good, he affirms that he saw in
some places some Christian Princes, under the title of Reformation, to have in
10 or 20 years usurped more tyranny over the Churches in their Dominions,
then ever the Pope and his adherents did in 600 years.

All which reasons are but mere fopperies, Viretus his scandalous reasons
answered.
blown up by the black Devil, to blast the beauty of this truth; for we
speak not of the abuse of any Prince, to justify the same against any one,
but of his right, that cannot be the cause of any wrong; and it cannot be
denied but an illiterate Prince may prove a singular advancer of all learning,
as Bishop Wickham was no great Scholar, yet was he a most excellent instrument
to produce abundance of famous Clerks in this Church; and the King rules his
Church by those Laws, which through his royal authority are made with the
advice of his greatest Divines, as hereafter I shall show, unto you: yet these
spurious and specious pretexts may serve, like clouds, to hide the light from
the eyes of the simple. So Cartwright also, T. C. l. 2. p. 411
that was our English firebrand, and his Disciples teach, as Harding had done
before, that Kings and Princes do hold their Kingdoms and Dominions under
Christ, as he is the Son of God only, before all worlds, coequall with the
father, and not as he is Mediator and Governor of the Church: and therefore
the Christian Kings have no more to do with the Church government, then the
Heathen Princes: so Travers says, that the Heathen Princes being converted to
the faith, receive no more, nor any further increase of their power, whereby
they may deal in Church causes, then they had before; so the whole pack of
the Disciplinarians are all of the same mind, and do hold that all Kings,
as well Heathen as Christian, receiving but one Commission and equal authority
immediately from God, have no more to do with Church causes, the one sort then
the other. And I am ashamed to set down the railing and the scurrilous
speeches of Anthony Gilby against Hen. 8. Gilby in his admonition. p. 69. Knox
in his exh^ta i^n to the Nobility of Scotland, fol. 77.
and of Knox, Whittingham, and others, against the truth of the Kings lawful
right and authority in all Ecclesiastical causes. For, were it so, as
Cartwright, Travers, and the rest of that crew do avouch, that Kings by being
Christians receive no more authority over Christ his Church, then they had
before Which is most false.
; yet this will appear most evident to all understanding men, that all Kings,
as well the Heathens as the Christians, are in the first place to see that their
people do religiously observe the worship of that God which they adore: and
therefore much more should Christian Princes have a care to preserve the
religion of Jesus Christ.

The Gentile Kings preservers of religion.
For it cannot be denied, but that all Kings ought to preserve their Kingdoms;
and all Kingdoms are preserved by the same means, by which they were first
established; and they are established by obedience and good manners: neither
shall you find any thing that can beget obedience and good manners, but Laws
and Religion; and Religion does naturally beget obedience unto the Laws;
therefore most of those Kings that gave Laws were originally Priests; Synes.
ep. 126. Vide Amiss. part. 2. page 14. Ad magnas r^spubl. utilitates retinetur
religio in civitatibus. Cicero de divin. l. 2.
and, as Synesius says, (...); a Priest and a Prince was all one with them;
when the Kings, to preserve their Laws inviolable, and to keep their people
in obedience that they might be happy, became Priests, and exercised the duties
of Religion, offering sacrifices unto their gods, and discharging the other
offices of the Priestly function (as our factious Priests could willingly take
upon them the offices of the King;) or if some of them were not Priests (as all
were not Lawmakers) yet all of them preserved Religion as the only
preservation of their Laws, and the happiness of their Kingdoms, which they
saw could not continue without Religion. But

2. In the Parliament.
2. The wisdom of our grave Prelates, and the learning of our religious
Clergy having stopped the course of this violent stream, and hindered the
translation of this right of Kings, unto their newborn Presbytery and late
erected Synods: There sprang up another generation out of the dregs of the
former, that because they would be sure to be bad enough, out of their envy
unto Kings, and malice unto the Church (that the one does not advance their
unworthiness, and the other does not bear with their undutifulnesse) will
needs transfer this right of ruling Gods Church unto a Parliament of Laymen;
the King shall be denuded of what God has given him: and the people shall be
endued with what God and all good men have ever denied them. I deny not but the
Parliament men, as they are most noble and worthy Gentlemen, so many of them
may be very learned, and not a few of them most religious; and I honor the
Parliament rightly discharging their duties, Hugo de Sancto Vict. lib. 2. de
sacr. fid. par. 2. cap. 3. Laicis Christianis fidelibus terrena possidere
conceditur, clericis vero tantum spirituali^ committuntur; quae autem ill^
spiritualia sunt subjicit. c. 5. dicent; omnis ecclesiastica administratio in
tribus consistit, in sacramentis, in ordinibus, in praeceptis. Ergo, Laici
nihil juris habent in legibus and praeceptis condendis ecclesiasticit.
as much as their modesty can desire, or their merit deserve; neither do I
gainsay, but as they are pious men, and the greatest Council of our King, so
they may propose things, and request such and such Laws to be enacted, such
abuses to be redressed; and such a reformation to be effected, as they think
befitting for Gods Church; but for Aarons seed and the Tribe of Levi, to be
directed and commanded out of the Parliament chair, how to perform the
service of the Tabernacle, and for Lay men to determine the Articles of faith,
to make Canons for Churchmen, to condemn heresies and define verities, and to
have the chief power for the government of Gods Church, as our Faction now
challenges, and their Preachers ascribe unto them, is such a violation of the
right of Kings, such a derogation to the Clergy, and so prejudicial to the
Church of Christ, as I never found the like usurpation of this right, to the
eradication of the true religion, in any age; for seeing that, as the Proverb
goes, Quod medicorum est promittunt medici, and tractant fabrilia fabri; what
Papist or Athiest will be ever converted to profess that religion, which shall
be truly, what now they allege falsely unto us, a Parliamentary religion, or
a religion made by Lay men, with the advice of a few that they choose e faece
Cleri? I must seriously profess what I have often bewailed, to see Nadab and
Abihu offering strange fires upon Gods Altar, to see the sacred offices of the
Priests so presumptuously usurped by the Laity, and to see the children of the
Church, nay, the servants of the Church to prescribe Laws unto their Masters;
and I did ever fear it to be an argument, not only of a corrupted, but also
of a decaying State, when Moses chair should be set in the Parliament House,
and the Doctors of the Church should never sit thereon: therefore I wish that
the Arc may be brought back from the Philistines, and restored to the
Priests, to be placed in Shilo where it should be; and that the care of the
Arc, which King David undertook, may not be taken out of his hands by his
people; but that he may have the honor of that service, which God has imposed
upon him. For

3. Opinion. Of the O^thodox. Quia religio est ex potioribus reipublica
partibus: ut a^t Aristot. Polit. l. 7. c. 8. and ipsa sola custodit hominum
inter se societate^: ut ait L^ctant. de ira Dei, cap. 12. Veritura Troia
perdidit primum Deos.
3. As nothing is dearer to understanding, righteous, and religious Kings, then
the increase and maintenance of true religion, and the enlargement of the
Church of Christ throughout all their Dominions, so they have at all times
employed their studies to this end; because it is an infallible maxim, even
among the Politicians, that the prosperity of any Kingdom flourishes for no
longer time, then the care of religion and the prosperity of the Church is
maintained by them among their people: as we see Troy was soon lost, when they
lost their Palladium, so it is the truest sign of a declining and a decaying
State, to see the Clergy despised, and Religion disgraced: and therefore the
provision for the safety of the Church, the public enjoying of the Word of
God, the form of Service, the manner of Government, and the honor and
maintenance of the Clergy are all the duties of a most Christian King, which
the King of Heaven has imposed upon him for the happiness and prosperity of
his Kingdom; and whosoever derive the authority of this charge, either in a
blind obedience to the Sea of Rome, as the Jesuits do, or out of their too
much zeal and affection to a new Consistory, as the late Presbyterians did, or
to a Lay Parliament, as our upstart Anabaptists and Brownists do, are most
unjust usurpers of the Kings right, which is not only ascribed unto him and
warranted by the Word of God, but is also confirmed to the Princes of this Land
by several Acts of Parliament, Therefore the Tyrians ch^y^^d their gods, lest
if they fled they should be destroyed.
to have the supremacy in all causes and over all persons, as well in the
Ecclesiastical as in the Civil government; which being so, they are exempted
thereby from all inforcement of any domestical or foreign power, and freed
from the penalties of all those Laws, both Ecclesiastical and Civil,
whereunto all their Subjects, Clergy and Laity, Q. Curtius de rebus Alexand.
Joh. Beda, p. 22, 23.
and all inferior Persons, and the superior Nobility within their Kingdoms,
are obliged by our Laws and Statutes; (as hereafter I shall more fully
declare.)

Therefore it behooves all Kings (and especially our King at this time)
seriously to consider, what prejudice they shall create unto themselves and
their just authority, if they should yield themselves inferior to their
Subjects, ( aggregative, or repraesentative, or how you will) or liable to the
penal Laws, (for so they may be soon dethroned by the unstable affection and
weak judgment of discontented people) or subject to the jurisdiction of Lay
Elders, and the excommunication of a tyrannous Consistory, who denounceing him,
tanquam Ethnicum, Matthew. 18.17.
may soon add, a stranger shall not reign over thee, Deuteronomy. 17.15.
and so depose him from all government. For seeing all attempts are most
violent, that have their beginning and strength from zeal unto religion, be
the same true or false, and from the false most of all, and those are ever the
most dangerous whose ringleaders are most base, (as the servile war under
Spartacus was most pernicious unto the Romans) there can be nothing of greater
use, or more profitable, either for the safety of the King, How necessary it is
for Kings to retain their just rights in their hands.
the peace of the Church, and the quiet state of the Kingdom, then for the
Prince, the King, to retain the Militia, and to keep that power and authority
which the Laws of God and of our Land have granted to, and intayled upon him,
in his own hands unclipped and unshaken: for when the multitude shall be
unbridled, and the rights of the Kings are brandished in their hands, we shall
assuredly taste, and I fear in too great a measure (as experience now shows)
of those miserable evils, which uncontrouled ignorance, furious zeal, false
hypocrisy, and the merciless cruelty of the giddy-headed people, and
discontented Peers shall bring upon us and our Prince.

But to make it manifest unto the world, what power and authority God has
granted unto Kings, for the government of the Church, and the preservation of
his true religion; we find them the worst men, at all times and in all places,
that mislike their government, The Kings that maintain true religion make
their Kingdoms happy.
and reject their authority; and we see those Churches most happy, and those
Kingdoms most flourishing, which God has blessed with religious Kings, as the
State of the Church of Judaea makes it plain, when David, Ezechias, Josias,
and the other virtuous Kings restored the religion, and purified that service,
which the idolatry of others their predecessors had corrupted; and we know
that as Moses, Exodus 14.31. Numb. 12.7, 8, Deuteronomy. 34.5. Josh. 1.1, 2.
so Kings are called the servants of God in a more special manner then all
others are: that is, not only because they serve the Lord in the government of
the Common wealth, but especially because he vouchsafes to use their service
for the advancement of his Church, and the honor of his son Christ here on
earth: or to distribute their duties more particularly, we know the Lord
expects, The double service of all Christian Kings.
and so requires a double service from every Christian King.

1. The one common with all others, to serve him as they are his creatures and
Christians; and therefore to serve him as all other Christians are bound to
do. 2. The other proper and peculiar to them alone, to serve him as they are
Kings and Princes.
1. As they are Christians.
In the first respect, they are no more privileged to offend then other men;
but they are tied to the same obedience of Gods Laws, and are obliged to
perform as many virtuous actions, and to abstain from all vices, as well as
any other of their Subjects: and if they fail in either point, they shall be
called to the same account, and shall be judged with the same severity as the
meanest of their people: and therefore, Be wise O ye Kings, Psalm. 2.10.
be learned ye that are Judges of the earth; Serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice unto him with reverence; for with God there is no respect of persons,
Romans 2.11. Psalm. 149.8.
but if they do offend he will bind Kings in fetters, and their Nobles with
linkes of iron: and we dare not flatter you, to give you the least liberty to
neglect the strict service of the great God.

In the second respect, 2. As they are Christian Kings: and that is twofold.
the service of all Christian Kings and Princes has (as I told you before)
these two parts: 1. To protect the true religion, and to govern the Church of
Christ. 2. To preserve peace, and to govern the Commonwealth.
For

1. It is true indeed, that the Donatists of old, 1. To protect the Church.
the grand fathers of our new Sectaries, were wont to say, Quid Imperatori cum
Ecclesia? what have we to do with the Emperor, Aug. cont. lit. petil. l. 2.
or what has the Emperor to do with the Church? but to this Optatus
answers, that, Optat. Melivet. lib. 3.
Ille solito furore accensus in haec verba prorupit. Donatus out of his
accustomed madness burst forth into these mad terms; Prima omnium in republ.
functionum est, (...). Arist. l. 7. c. 8.
for it is a duty that lies upon all Princes, (because all, both Christians
and Pagans, ought to be religious, as, I showed to you before) not only to be
devout, but also to be the means to make all their Subjects (so far as they
can) to become devoted to Gods service, as the practice of those Heathens, that
had no other guide of their actions then the light of nature, does make it
plain; for Aristotle says, Aristot. Polit. l. 3. c. 10.
that Quae ad Deorum cultum pertinent, commissa sunt regibus, and
magistratibus, those things that pertain unto the worship of the gods are
committed to the care of Kings and civil Magistrates: and whatsoever their
religion was, (as indeed it was but mere Superstition) yet because
Superstition and Religion, hoc habent commune, do this in common: Vt faciant
animos humiles formidine divum. Therefore to make men better, the more humble
and more dutiful, the transgression thereof was deemed worthy to receive
punishment among the Pagans; and that punishment was appointed by them, that
had the principal authority to govern the Commonwealth; The chief^
M^gistrates of the Heathens had the charge of religion.
as the Athenian Magistrates condemned Socrates, (though he was a man wiser
then themselves, yet as they conceived very faulty) for his irreligion and
derision of their adored gods: And Tiberius would set up Christ among the Roman
gods (though the act added no honor unto Christ) without the authority and
against the will of the Senate; to show that the care of religion belonged unto
the Emperor, or chief Magistrate; and therefore as the Lord commanded the
Kings of Israel to write a copy of his Law in a book, Deuteronomy. 17, 18, 19.
and to take heed to all the words of that Law for to do them; that is, not
only as a private person, (for so every man was not to write it) but as King,
to reduce others to the obedience thereof; so the examples of the best Kings
both of Israel and Juda, and of the best Christian Emperors do make this
plain unto us; Josh. 24 23.
for Joshua caused all Israel to put away the strange gods that were among
them, The care of the good Kings of the Jews to preserve the true religion.
and to incline their hearts unto the Lord God of Israel; Manasses, after his
return from Babylon, took away the strange gods, and the Idols out of the
house of the Lord, and cast them all out of the City, and repaired the Altar
of the Lord, and commanded Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel. And what shall
I say of David, whose whole study was to further the service of God; and of
Iehosaphat, Asa, Josias, Ezechias, and others, that were rare patterns for
other Kings for the well government of Gods Church? and in the time of the
Gospel, Quod non tollit praecepta legis, sed perficit, which takes not away
the rules of nature, nor the precepts of the Law, but rather establishes the
one and perfecteth the other; because Christ came into the world, non ut
tolleret jura seculi, sed ut deleret peccata mundi, not to take away the rights
of the Nations, but to satisfy for the sins of the world; the best Christian
Emperors discharged the same duty, The care of the good Emperors to preserve
the true religion.
reformed the Church, abolished Idolatry, punished Heresy, and maintained
Piety: especially Constantine and Theodosius, that were most pious Princes, and
of much virtues, and became as the Prophet foretold us, Esaias 49.23.
nursing fathers unto Gods Church; for though they are most religious and best
in their religion, that are religious for conscience sake; yet there is a fear
from the hand of the Magistrate, that is able to restrain those men from many
outward evils, whom neither conscience nor religion could make honest:
therefore God committed the principal care of his Church to the Prince, and
principal Magistrate.

Who defended th^s truth.
And this is confirmed and thoroughly maintained by sundry notable men, as
Brentius against Asoto, Bishop Horn against Fekenham, Jewel against Harding,
and many other learned men, that have written against such other Papists and
Puritans, Anabaptists and Brownists, The Papists unawares confess this truth.
that have taken upon them to impugn it; yea, many of the Papists themselves
at unawares, do confess as much; for Osorius says, Omne regis officium in
religionis sanctissimae rationem conferendum; Osortus de relig. p. 21.
and munus ejus est bear rempubl. religione and pietate: all the office of a
King is to be conferred or employed for the regard and benefit of the most holy
religion, and his whole duty is to bless or make happy the Commonwealth with
religion and piety: Quod enim est aliud reipublicae principi munus assignatum,
quam ut rempubl. florentem atque beatam faciat? quod quidem nullo modo sine
egregia pietatis and religionis sanctitate perficitur. For though we confess
with Ignatius, that no man is equal to the Bishop in causes Ecclesiastical,
no not the King himself; that is, in such things as belong to his office, as
Whitaker says; Whitak. resp. Camp. p. 302.
because he only ought to see to holy things, that is, the instruction of the
people, the administration of the Sacraments, the use of the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and the like, matters of great weight, and exceeding the
Kings authority; The Kings authority over Bishops.
yet Kings are above Bishops in wealth, honor, power, government, and
majesty: and though they may not do any of the Episcopal duties, yet they
may and ought lawfully to admonish them of their duties, and restrain them
from evil, 1. Chron. 28.13. 2. Chron. 29. 1. Reg. 2.26.
and command them diligently to execute their office; and if they neglect the
same, they ought to reprove and punish them, as we read the good Kings of the
Jewish Church, and the godly Emperors As Martian. apud Binium, l. 2. p. 178.
Justinian. novil. 10. tit. 6. Theodos. jun. Evagr. l. 1. c. 12. Basil. in
Council. Constant. 8. act. 1. Binius tom. 3. p. 880.
of the Christian Church have ever done; and the Bishops themselves in sundry
Councels, have acknowledged the same power and authority to be due, and of
right belonging unto them: as at Mentz, anno 814. and anno 847. apud Binium,
tom. 3. p. 462. and 631. At Emerita in Portugal, anno 705. Bin. tom. 2. p.
1183. and therefore it is an ill consequent, to say, Princes have no authority
to preach, Ergo they have no authority to punish those that will not preach, or
that do preach false Doctrine.

This truth is likewise apparent, not only by the testimony of Scripture and
Fathers, but also by the evidence of plain reason; because the prosperity of
that Land which any King does govern, Reason confirms, that Kings should
take care of religion.
without a principal care of religion, decays and degenerateth into Wars,
Dearthes, Plagues and Pestilence, and abundance of other miseries, that are the
lamentable effects and consequences of the neglect of religion, and contempt of
the Ministers of Gods Church; which I believe is no small cause of these great
troubles that we now suffer; because our God, Psalm. 35.27.
that takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, cannot endure that
either his service should be neglected, or his servants abused.

CHAP. VII. Shows the three things necessary for all Kings that would
preserve true Religion; how the King may attain to the knowledge of things
that pertain to Religion; by his Bishops and Chaplains, and the calling of
Synods; the unlawfulness of the new Synod; the Kings power and authority to
govern the Church; and how both the old and new Disciplinarians and Sectaries
rob the King of this power.
THerefore seeing this should be the greatest care, that brings the greatest
honor to a Christian Prince, to promote the true religion; it is requisite
that we should consider those things that are most necessary to a Christian
King, for the religious performance of this duty: And they are Three things
necessary for a King to preserve the Church and true Religion.
1. A will to perform it. 2. An understanding to go about it. 3. A power to
effect it.
And these three must be inseparable in the Prince that maintains true
religion. For

1. Our knowledge and our power without a willing mind does want motion.

2. Our will and power without knowledge shall never be able to move right. And

3. Our will and knowledge without ability can never prevail to produce any
effect. Therefore Kings and Princes ought to labor to be furnished with these
three special graces.

The first is a good will to preserve the purity of Gods service, 1. A willing
mind to do it.
not only in his House, but also throughout all his Kingdom: and this, as all
other graces are, must be acquired by our faithful prayers, and that in a more
special manner for Kings and Princes then for any other; and it is wrought in
them by outward instruction, and the often predication of Gods Word, and the
inward inspiration of Gods Spirit.

The second is knowledge, 2. Understanding to kn^w what is to be reformed, and
what to be retained.
which is not much less necessary then the former; because not to run right
is no better then not to run at all, and men were as good to do nothing, as
to do amiss; and therefore true knowledge is most requisite for that King
that will maintain true religion: and this should be not only in general,
and by others, but as much as possible he can in particulars, and of himself;
that himself might be assured what were fit to be reformed, and what warranted
to be maintained in Gods service; for so Moses commands the chief Princes to
be exercised in Gods Law day and night: because this would be a special means
to beatifie or make happy both the Church and Commonwealth: The Kings neglect
of religion and the Church, is the destruction of the Commonwealth.
As the neglect thereof brought ignorance unto the Church, and ruin to the
Roman Empire; for as in Augustus time learning flourished, and in Constantines
time piety was much embraced; because these Emperors were such themselves: so
when the Kings, whose examples most men are apt to follow, either busied with
secular affairs, or neglecting to understand the truth of things, and the
state of the Church, do leave this care unto others, then others imitating
their neglect, do rule all things with great corruption, and as little truth;
whereby errors and blindness will overspread the Church; and pride,
covetousness, and ambition will replenish the Commonwealth; and these vices,
like the tares that grow up in Gods field to suffocate the pure Wheat, will at
last choke up all virtue and piety both in Church and State.

Therefore to prevent this mischief, the King, on whom God has laid the care
of these things, ought himself (what he can) to learn and find out the true
state of things: and because it is far unbefitting the honor, and inconsistent
with the charge of great Princes, (whose other affairs will not permit them)
to be always poring at their books, as if they were such critiques, as
intended to exceed all others in the theorick learning, like Archimedes, that
was in his study drawing forth his Mathematical figures, when the City was
sacked, and his enemies pulling down the house about his ears; How Kings may
attain unto the knowledge of religion, and understand the state of the Church,
and how to govern the same.
therefore it is wisdom in them to imitate the discreet examples of other
wise Kings, and religious Emperors, in following the means that God has
left, and using the power and authority that he has given them, to attain
unto more knowledge, and to be better instructed in any religious matter, then
themselves could possibly attain unto by their own greatest study: and that
is,

1. To call able Clergymen about them.
1. As Alexander had his Aristotle ready to inform him in any Philosophical
doubt, and Augustus his prime Orators, Poets, and Historians to instruct him in
all affairs; so God has granted this power unto his Kings, to call those
Bishops and command such Chaplains to reside about them, as shall be able to
inform them in any truth of Divinity, and so direct them in the best form of
government of Gods Church; and these Chaplains should be well approved, both
for their learning and their honesty; for to be learned without honesty, as
many are, is to be witty to do evil, which is most pernicious, and does often
times make a private gain by a public loss; or an advantage to themselves
by the detriment of the Church: and to be honest without knowledge, How they
should be qualified.
or to have knowledge without experience, especially in such places of
eminency, and for the affairs of importance, may be as dangerous; when their
want of skill may counsel to do matters of much hurt: but when both are met
together in one person, that man is a fit Subject to do good service both to
God and the King: and the King may be assured there cannot be a better
furtherance to assist him for the well ordering of Gods Church, then the grave
advice and directions of such instruments, as it appears by that memorable
example of King Ioas, (left to be remembered by all Kings) who, whilst the wise
and religious Priest Jehoiada assisted and directed him, had all things
successful and happy to his whole Kingdom; but after Jehoiada's death, 2.
Reg. 12.1.
the King destitute of such a Chaplain to attend, and such a Priest to
counsel him, all things came speedily to great ruin.

Therefore I dare boldly avouch it, they are enemies unto Kings, and the
underminers of Gods Church, and such instruments as I am not able to express
their wickedness, that would exclude such Jehoiada's from the Kings counsel;
for was not Saul a wicked King, and Ahab little better? yet Saul would have
Samuel to direct him, though he followed not his direction; and Ahab would ask
counsel of Micaiah, though he rejected the same to his own destruction: and
King David, 1. Reg. 22.16.
though never so wise and so great a Prophet, and Josias, and Ezechias, and all
the rest of the good Kings, had always the Priests and the men of God to be
their Counselors, and followed their directions, especially in Church causes,
as the oracles of God: Mar. 6.20.
so wicked Herod disdained not to hear John the Baptist, and to be reformed by
him in many things; and happy had he been had he done it in all things. And if
you read Eusebius (which is called Pamphilus, for the great love he bare to
that his noble Patron) and Socrates, and the rest of the Ecclesiastical
Historians, or the Histories of our own Land, you shall find that the best
Kings and greatest Emperors had the best Divines, and the most reverend
Bishops to be their chiefest Counselors, and to be employed by them in their
weightiest affairs. How then has the Devil now prevailed to exclude them
from all Counsels, and as much as in him lies, from the sight of Princes, when
he makes it a suspicion of much evil if they do but talk together? How has
he bewitched the Nobility to yield to be deprived of their Chaplains? Is it
not to keep them (that have not time to study, and to find out truth
themselves) still in the ignorance of things; and to none other end, then to
overthrow the true religion, and to bring Kings and Princes to confusion?

2. When the King sees cause, 2. To call Synods to discuss and conclude the
harder things.
God has given him power and authority to call Synods and Councels, and to
assemble the best men, the most moderate and most learned, to determine of
those things together, which a fewer number could not so well, or at least not
so authoritatively conclude upon: for so Constantine the Great called the great
Council of Nice, to suppress the Heresy of Arius. Theodosius called the
Council of Ephesus in the case of Nestorius: Valentinian and Martian called
the Council of Calcedon against Eutyches: Justinian called the Council of
Constantinople against Severus, that renewed the Heresy of Eutyches:
Constantine the Fifth called the sixth Synod against the Monothelites; and so
did many others in the like cases: God having fully granted this right and
authority unto them, for their better information in any point of religion, and
the government of the Church.

And therefore they that deny this power unto Kings, or assume this authority
unto themselves, whether Popes or Parliament, out of the Kings hand, they may
as well take his eyes out of his head; because this is one of the best helps
that God has left unto Kings, to assist and direct them in the chiefest part
of their royal government: The unparalled presumption of the Faction to call
a Synod without the King.
how presumptuous then and injurious unto our King, and prejudicial to the
Church of Christ, was the faction of this Parliament, without the Kings leave,
and contrary to his command, to undertake the nomination of such a pack of
Schismatic Divines for such a Synod, as might finally determine such points
of faith and discipline, as themselves best liked of, let all the Christian
world, that as yet never saw the like president, be the Judge; and tell us what
shall be the religion of that Church, where the Devil shall have the power to
prompt worldlings to nominate his prime Chaplains, Socinians, Brownists,
Anabaptists, and the refuse of all the refractary Clergy, The quality of the
Synod call men.
(that seem learned in nothing but in the contradiction of learning, and
justifying Rebellion against their King and the Church) to compose the Articles
of our faith, and to frame a new government of our Church? I am even ashamed
that so glorious a Kingdom should ever breed so base a Faction, that durst
ever presume to be so audacious; and I am sorry that I should be so unhappy to
live to see such an unparalled boldness in any Clergy, that the like cannot
be found in any Ecclesiastical History, from the first birth of Christ's
Church to this very day, unless our Sectaries can produce it from some of the
Vtopian Kingdoms, that are so far Southward In terra Incognita, beyond the
Torrid Zone, that we (whose zeal is not so fiery, but are of the colder
spirits) could not yet perfectly learn the true method of their Anarchicall
government: or if our Lawyers can show us the like president that ever
Parliament called a Synod contrary to the Kings Proclamation, I shall rest
beholding to them, produce it if they can. credat Judaeus apella; non ego.

The third thing requisite to a King for the preservation of true religion, and
the government of Gods Church, 3: An authority and power to guide the Church,
and to uphold the true religion.
is power and authority to defend it; for though the Prince should be never so
religious, never so desirous to defend the faith, and never so well able in his
understanding, and so well furnished with knowledge to set down what Service
and Ceremonies should be used; yet if he has not power and ability, which do
arise from his right and just authority to do it, and to put the same in
execution, all the rest are but fruitless embryoes, like those potentials,
that are never reduced into actions; Psalm. 129.6.
or like the grass upon the house top, that withers before it be plucked up.

But to let you see, that Kings and Princes should have this power and
authority in all Ecclesiastical causes, and over all Ecclesiastical persons,
we find that all Ages and all Laws have warranted them to do the same; 1.
Reg. 2.27. and 35. Jerem. 26.
for Solomon displaced Abiathar, and placed Zadoc in his room; Jeremy's case
was heard by the King of Israel; Theodosius and Valentinian made a Decree, that
all those should be deposed, which were infected with the impiety of Nestorius;
How all Kings and Emperors exercised this power over the Church.
and Justinian deposed Sylverius and Vigilius: and many other Kings and
Emperors did the like; and not only the Law of God, whereof the King is the
prime keeper, and the keeper of both Tables, but also the Statutes of our Land
do give unto our King the nomination of Bishops, and some other elective
dignities in the Church, the custody of the Bishops Temporalties during the
vacation, the Patronage Paramount, or right to present by the last lapse; and
many other furtherances and preservatives of religion are in terminis
terminantibus, deputed by our Laws unto the King; and for his care and charge
thereof, they have settled upon him our first fruits, Tenths, Subsidies, and all
other contributions of the Ecclesiastical persons, which the Pope received
while he usurped the government of this Church; these things being due to him
that had the supreme power for the government.

And therefore seeing the examples of all good Kings in the Old Testament, and
of the Christian Kings and Emperors in the New Testament, and all Laws both
of God and man, (excepting those Laws of the Pontificials, that are made
against the Law of God,) and all Divines, excepting the Jesuits and their
sworn Brethren the Presbyterians, do most justly ascribe this right and power
unto Kings; Cass^^ de ^^ca^^, l. 1. ^. ^.
I may truly say with Cassianus, that there is no place of audience left for
them, by whom obedience is not yielded to that which all have agreed upon; nor
any excuse for those Subjects that assist not their Sovereign to enable him to
discharge this great charge that is laid upon him.

What then shall we say to them that pull this power, and tear this
prerogative out of the Kings hand, and place it in the hands of mad men, P^l.
65.7. How the Disciplir. (...) the King of this right.
as the Prophet epithets the madness of the people? for that furious Knox
belcheth forth this unsavory Doctrine, That the Commonalty may lawfully require
of their King to have true Preachers; and if he be negligent, they themselves
may justly provide them, Knox to the Commonalty, fol. 49, 50, 5^.
maintain them, defend them against all that oppose them, and detain the
profits of the Church Livings from the other sort of Ministers; a point fully
practiced by the English Scotizers of these days: and as if this Doctrine were
not seditious enough, and abundantly sufficient to move Rebellion, Goodman
publishes that horrible tenet unto the world, that it is lawful to kill
wicked Kings: which most dangerous and more damnable Doctrine, Deane
Whittingham affirms to be the tenet of the best and most learned of them that
were our Disciplinarians.

What true religion teaches us.
But when as true religion does command us to obey our Kings, whatsoever their
religion is, aut agendo, aut patiendo, either in suffering with patience
whatsoever they do impose, or in doing with obedience whatsoever they do
command, Religion can be no warrant for those actions, which must remain as
the everlasting blemishes of that religion, which either commanded or approved
of their doing; I am sure all wise men will detest these Doctrines of Devils;
and seeing it is an infallible rule, that good deserves then to be accounted
evil, when it cease to be well done, it is apparent that it is no more
lawful for private and inferior persons to usurp the Princes power, and
violently to remove Idolatry, or to cause any reformation, then it is for the
Church of Rome by invasion or treason, to establish the Doctrine of that See in
this or any other foreign Kingdom; because both are performed by the like
usurped authority.

Yet these were the opinions and practices of former times, The old
Disciplinarians.
when Buchanan, Knox, Cartwright, Goodman, Gilby, Penry, Fenner, Martyn,
Travers, Throgmorton, Philips, Nicholls, and the rest of those introducers of
Outlandish and Genevian Discipline, first broached these uncouth and
unsufferable tenets in our Land, in the Realm of England and Scotland; and
truly if their opinions had not dispersed themselves, like poison, throughout
all the veins of this Kingdom, and infected many of our Nobility, and as many
of the greatest Cities of this Kingdom, (as it appears by this late
unparall^'d rebellion) these and the rest of the traiterous authors of those
unsavory books, which they published, and those damnable tenets which they
most ignorantly held, and maliciously taught unto the people, should have slept
in silence; their hallowed and sanctified Treason should have remained
untouched, and their memorial should have perished with them.

But seeing, as Saint Chrysostom says of the Heretics of his time, that
although in age they were younger, yet in malice they were equal to the
ancient Heretics; and as the brood of Serpents, though they are of less
stature, Our rebellious Sectaries far worse then all the former
Disciplinarians.
yet in their poison no less dangerous then their dammes; so no more have our
new Sectaries, our upstart Anabaptists, any less wickedness then their first
begetters; nay, we find it true, that as the Poet says, Aetas parentum pejor
avis
Tulit nos nequiores. --
These young cubbes prove worse then the old foxes; for if you compare the
whelps with the wolves, our latter Schismatickes with their former Masters, I
doubt not but you shall find less learning and more villainy, less honesty
and more subtilty, hypocrisy and treachery in Doctor Burges, Master Marshall,
^^se, Goodwin, Burrowes, Calamy, Perne, Hill, Cheynell, and the rest of our
giddy-headed Incendiaries, then can be found in all the seditious Pamphlets of
the former Disciplinarians, or of them that were hanged (as Penry) for their
treasons: for these men do not only (as Sidonius says of the like) aperte
invidere, (...) ^p^s^.
abjecte fingere, and serviliter superbiro, openly envy the state of the
Bishops, basely forge lies against them, and servilely swell with the pride of
their own conceited sanctity and app^^ ^ut ignorance; but they have also most
impudently (even (...) their Pulpits) slandered the footsteps of Gods
Anointed, and to brought the abomination of their transgression to stand in
the holy place; they have with Achan troubled Israel, and tormented the whole
Land; yea, these three Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland; and for
inciting, provoking, and encouraging simple, ignorant, poor, discontented and
seditious Sectaries, For which their intolerable villainies, if I be not
deceived in my judgment, they of all others, and above all the Rebels in the
Kingdom, deserve the greatest and severest punishment; God of Heaven give them
the grace to repent.
to be Rebels and Traitors against their own most gracious King; they have not
only with Jerusalem justified Samaria, Sodom and Gomorrah, but they have
justified all the Samaritanes, all the Sodomites, all the Schismatics,
Heretics, Rebels, and Traitors, Papists and Atheists, and all that went before
them, Judas himself in many circumstances not excepted; and that which makes
their doings the more evil, and the more exceedingly wicked, is, that they
make religion to be the warrant for their evil doings, the packe-horse to
carry, and the cloak to cover all their treacheries: and thereby they drew the
greater multitudes of poor Zelots to be their followers.

And therefore seeing it is not only the honor, but also the duty, as of all
other Kings, so likewise of our King, to be as the Princes of our Land are
justly styled, the Defenders of the Faith; and that not only in regard of
enemies abroad, but also in respect of those far worse enemies, which desire
alteration at home, it behooves the King to look to these homebred enemies of
the Church; and seeing the King, though never so willing for his piety and
religion, What Gods faithful servants, and the Kings loyal Subjects must do
in these times. 1. To justify the Kings right.
never so able for his knowledge and understanding, yet without strength and
power to effect what he desires, cannot defend the faith, and maintain the
true religion, from the violence of Sectaries and Traitors within his Kingdom;
it behooves us all to do these two things.

1. To justify the Kings (...), his authority and right to be the supreme
governor and defender of the Church, and of Gods true religion and service,
both in respect of Doctrine and Discipline; and that none else, Pope or
Parliament, has any power at all herein, but what they have derivatively from
him: which I hope we have sufficiently proved.

2. 2 To assist Him against the Rebels.
To submit our selves unto our King and to add our strength, force, and power
to enable his power to discharge this duty against all the Innovators of our
religion, and the enemies of our peace, for the honor of God, and the
happiness of this Church and Commonwealth: for that power which is called the
Kings power, and is granted and given to him of God, is not only that heroicke
virtue of fortitude, which God planteth in the hearts of most noble Princes,
(as he has most graciously done it in abundant measure in our most gracious
King) but it is the collected and united power and strength of all his
Subjects, which the Lord has commanded us to join and submit it for the
assistance of the Kings power, against all those that shall oppose it; and if
we refuse or neglect the same, then questionless whatsoever mischief,
idolatry, barbarity, or superstition shall take root in the Church, and
whatsoever oppression and wickedness shall impair the Commonwealth, Heaven
will free His Majesty, and the wrath of God, in no small measure, must
undoubtedly light upon us and our posterity; even as Debora says of them, that
refused to assist Barac against his enemies, Curse ye Meroz, Judge. 5.23.
curse bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not forth to help
the Lord against the mighty.

CHAP. VIII. Shows it is the right of Kings to make Ecclesiastical Laws and
Canons, proved by many authorities and examples; that the good Kings and
Emperors made such Laws by the advice of their Bishops and Clergy, and not
of their Lay Counselors; how our late Canons came to be annulled; that it is
the Kings right to admit his Bishops and Prelates to be of his Council, and to
delegate secular authority, or civil jurisdiction unto them; proved by the
examples of the Heathens, Jews, and Christians.
OUt of all this that has been spoken, it is more then manifest, that the King
ought to have the supreme power over Gods Church, and the government thereof,
and the greatest care to preserve true religion throughout all his Dominions:
this is his duty, and this is his honor, that God has committed not a people,
but his people, and the members of his Son under his charge. For the
performance of which charge, it is requisite for us to know, that God has
granted unto him, among other rights, Two special rights and prerogatives of
the King, for the government of the Church.
these two special prerogatives.

1. That he may and ought to make Laws, Orders, Canons, and Decrees, for the
well governing of Gods Church. 2. That he may, when he sees cause, lawfully
and justly grant tolerations and dispensations of his own Laws and Decrees,
as he pleases. For
1. To make Laws and Canons.
1. Not only Solomon and Jehosaphat gave commandment, and prescribed unto the
chief Priests and Levites, what form and order they should observe in their
Ecclesiastical causes, and method of serving God; but also Constantine,
Theodosius, Justinian, and all the Christian Emperors that were careful of
Gods service did the like; and therefore, when the Donatists alleged, that
secular Princes had nothing to do to meddle in matters of religion, and in
causes Ecclesiastical, S. Augustine in his second Epistle against Gaudentius,
says, Aug. l. 2. c. 26
I have already proved that it appertained to the Kings charge, that the
Ninivites should pacify Gods wrath; and therefore the Kings that are of
Christ's Church do judge most truly, that it belongs to their charge, to see
that men rebel not without punishment against the same; Idem ep. 48. and ep.
50. and Bonifa^.
because God does inspire it into the minds of Kings, that they should procure
the Commandments of the Lord to be performed in all their Kingdoms; for they
are commanded to serve the Lord in fear; and how do they serve the Lord as
Kings, but in making Laws for Christ? as man he serves him by living
faithfully, So they are called the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws.
but as King he serves him in making Laws that shall command just things, and
forbid the contrary, which they could not do if they were not Kings: And by
the example of the King of Ninive, Darius, Nebuchadnezzar, and others, which
were but figures and prophesies that fore-shewed the power, duty, and service
that Christian Kings should owe and perform in like sort to the furtherance of
Christ's religion, in the time of the New Testament, when all Kings shall fall
down and worship Christ, Psalm. 72.11.
and all Nations shall do him service, he proves, Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l.
2. c. 92.
that the Christian Kings and Princes should make Laws and Decrees for the
furtherance of Gods service, Idem in l. de 12 abus. grad. grad. 2.
even as Nebuchadnezzar had done in his time. And upon the words of the
Apostle, that the King bears not the sword in vain, he proves against
Petilian, that the power and authority of the Princes, which the Apostle
treats of in that place, is given unto them, to make sharp penal Laws to
further true religion, and to suppress all Heresies and Schisms.

And so accordingly we find the good Emperors and Kings have ever done; The
good Emperors have made Laws for the government of the Church.
for Constantine caused the idolatrous religions to be suppressed, and the true
knowledge of Christ to be preached and planted amongst his people, and made
many wholesome Laws and godly Constitutions, to restrain the sacrificing unto
Idols, and all other devilish and superstitious south-sayings, and to cause
the true service of God to be rightly administered in every place, says
Eusebius. Eusebius. in vita Constable. l. 2. and 3.
And in another place he says, that the same Constantine gave injunctions to
the chief Ministers of the Churches, that they should make special
supplication to God for him; and he enjoined all his Subjects that they should
keep holy certain days dedicated to Christ, and the Sabbath or Saturday
(which was then wont to be kept holy, and as yet not abrogated by any Law among
the Christians;) he gave a Law to the Ruler of every Nation, that they should
celebrate the Sunday, Idem de vita Constant. l. 1. and 3. and 4. c. 18.
or the Lords day in like sort; and so for the days that were dedicated to the
memory of the Martyrs, and other festival times; and all such things were done
according to the ordinance of the Emperor.

Niceph. in prafation. Eccles. hist.
Nicephorus writing of the excellent virtues of Andronicus, son to Immanuel
Palaeologus, and comparing him to Constantine the Great, says, thou have
restored the Catholic Church, being troubled with new opinions, to the old
State, thou have banished all unlawful and impure doctrine, thou have
established the truth, and have made Laws and Constitutions for the same.

Sozomenus l. 3. c. 17.
Sozomen speaking of Constantines sons, says, the Princes also concurred to
the increase of these things, (...), showing their good affections to the
Churches, no less then their father did, and honoring the Clergy their
servants with singular promotions and immunities, both confirming their fathers
Laws, and making also new Laws of their own, against such as went about to
sacrifice and to worship Idols, or by any other means fell to the Greekish or
Heathenish superstitions.

Theodoret tells us, that Valentinian at the Synod in Illirico, did not only
confirm the true faith by his royal assent, but made also many godly and
sharp Laws, as well for the maintenance of the truth of Christ his doctrine,
as also touching many other causes Ecclesiastical, Theodor. l. 4. c. 5, 6, and
7.
and, as ratifying those things that were done by the Bishops, (...), he sent
abroad to them that doubted thereof.

Distinct. 79. (...) d^^.
Honorius at the request of Boniface the first, made a Law, whereby it might
appear what was to be done, when two Popes were chosen at once by the
indiscretion of the Electors.

Martianus also made a Statute, to cut off and put away all manner of
contention about the true faith and religion in the Council of Calcedon.

The Emperor Justinus made a Law, that the Churches of Heretics should be
consecrated to the Catholic religion, says Martinus Poenitentiarius. And who
knows not of the many Laws and Decrees that Justinian made in Ecclesiastical
causes for the furtherance of the true religion? for in the beginning of the
Constitutions collected in the Code of Justinian, the first 13 titles are all
filled with Laws for to rule the Church; where it forbids the Bishops to
reiterate baptism, L. 1. tit. 5. L. 1. tit. 7. Novel. 123. c. 10. Novel. 58.
Novel. 137 c. 6.
to paint or grave on earth the Image of our Savior. And in the Novels the
Emperor ordains Laws, of the creation and consecration of Bishops; that
Synods shall be annually held; that the holy mysteries should not be celebrated
in private houses; that the Bishops should speak aloud when they celebrate the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist; and that the holy Bible should be
translated into the vulgar tongue, and the like.

And not only these and the rest of the godly Emperors that succeeded them,
but also Ariamirus, Wambanus, Richaredus, and diverse other Kings of Spain did
in like manner: And Charlemaine, who approved not the decisions of the Greekish
Synod, wrote a book against the same Entitled, A Treatise of Charlemaigne
against the Greekish Synod touching Images.
, whereby the King maintained himself in possession, to make Laws for the
Church (says Johannes Beda) of which Laws there are many in a book, called
The capitulary Decrees of Charles the Great; who as Pepin his predecessor had
done in the City of Bourges, so did he also assemble many Councels in diverse
places of his Kingdoms, as at Mayens, at Tours, at Reins, at Chaalons, at
Arles, and the sixth, most famous of all, at Francfort, where himself was
present in person, and condemned the error of Felician; and so other Kings of
France, and the Kings of our own Kingdom of England, both before and after
the Conquest, (as Master Fox plentifully records) did make many Laws and
Constitutions for the government of Gods Church.

But as Dioclesian, The saying of Dioclesian.
that was neither the best nor the happiest governor, said most truly of the
civil government, that there was nothing harder then to rule well That is, to
rule the Commonwealth.
, so it is much harder to govern the Church of Christ; therefore as there
cannot be an argument of greater wisdom in a Prince, nor any thing of greater
safety and felicity to the Commonwealth, then for him to make choice of a wise
Council to assist him in his most weighty affairs, Tacitus Annal. lib. 12.
says Cornelius Tacitus: So all religious Kings must do the like in the
government of the Church, and the making of their Laws for that government;
for God, out of his great mercy to them, and no less desire to have his people
religiously governed, left such men to be their supporters, their helpers and
advicers in the performance of these duties: and I pray you whom did Kings
choose for this business, but whom God had ordained for that purpose? for you
may observe, that although those Christian Kings and Emperors made their Laws,
as having the supremacy and the chiefest care of Gods religion committed by God
into their hands; yet they did never make them, that ever I could read, with
the advice, counsel, or direction of any of their Peers, or Lay Subjects;
but, as David had Nathan and Gad, The good Kings and Emperors made their
Laws for the government of the Church, only by the advice of their Clergy.
Nebuchadnezzar had Daniel, and the rest of the Jewish Kings and Heathens had
their Prophets only and Priests to direct them in all matters of religion; so
those Christian Kings and Princes took their Bishops and their Clergy only
to be their counselors and directors in all Church causes, as it appears out
of all the forecited Authors, and all the Histories that do write thereof:
and Justinian published this Law, that when any Ecclesiastical cause or matter
was moved, his Lay officers should not intermeddle with it, A good Law of
Justinian.
but should suffer the Bishops to end the same according to the Canons: the
words are, Si Ecclesiasticum negotium sit, nullam communionem habento civiles
magistratus cum ea disceptatione, Constit. 123.
sed religiosissimi Episcopi secundum sacros canones negotio finem imponunto.
For the good Emperors knew full well that the Lay Senate neither understood
what to determine in the points of faith, and the government of Christ's
Church, nor was ever willing to do any great good, or any special favor unto
the Shepherds of Christ's flock, and the teachers of the true religion;
because the Son of God had foretold it, that the world should hate us, John.
15.19.
that secular men and Lay Senators should commonly oppose, cross, and show all
the spite they can unto the Clergy, of whom our Savior says, Matthew. 10.16.
Behold I send you forth, (...), as sheep in the midst of wolves. Whence this,
(...), great distance between their dispositions being observed, it grew into a
Proverb, that Laici semper infesti sunt Clericis. How the Laity love the
Clergy.
And Doctor Meriton in a Sermon before King James, observed this as one of the
good favors the Clergy of England found from our Parliaments since the
reformation, (when many men first began to be translated from the seat of the
scornful to sit in Moses chair, A very memorable act. Anno 39. Eliz. cap. 4.
and to prescribe Laws for Christ his Spouse) to make an Act, that all
wandering beggars after their correction by the Constable, should be brought to
the Minister of the Parish, to have their names registered in a book, (and the
Constable used to give to the Minister 2d for his pains for every one so
registered) but if he refused or neglected to do it, the Statute says he
should be punished 5* for every one that should be so omitted; where, besides
the honorable office, I will not say to make the Minister of Christ a Bedle of
the beggars, but a Register of the vagrants; you see the punishment of one
neglect amounts to the reward of thirty labors: therefore all the Christian
Emperors and the wisest Kings, considering this great charge that God had laid
upon them, to make wholesome Laws and Constitutions for the government of his
Church, and seeing the inclinations of the Laity, would never permit any of
these Lay Elders, and the Citizens of the world, to usurp this authority, to
be the composers, contrivers, or assistants in concluding of any
Ecclesiastical Law, That the Laity should have no interest in making Laws for
the Church.
until the fences of Gods vineyard were pulled down, and the wild Boar out
of the forest, the audacious presumption of the unruly Commonalty ventured
either to govern the Church, or to subdue their Prince; since which
incroachment upon the rights of Kings, it has never succeeded well with the
Church of Christ; and I dare boldly say it, and fidenter quia fideliter, and
the more boldly because most truly: the more authority they shall gain herein,
the less glory shall Christ have from the service of his Church; and therefore
Be wise o ye Kings. And consider how any new Canons are to be made by our
Statute, 25. Hen. 8.

Ob. But then it may be demanded, if this be so, that the Laity has no right
in making Laws and Decrees for the government of Gods Church, but that it
belongs wholly unto the King to do it, with the advice of his Bishops and the
rest of his Clergy; then how came the Parliament to annull those Canons that
were so made by the King and Clergy, because they had no vote nor consent in
confirming of them?

Sol.
Sol. Truly I cannot answer to this Objection, unless I should tell you what
the Poet says, Dum furor in cursu, currenti cede furori,
Difficiles aditus impetus omnis habet.
They were furiously bent against them; and you know, furor arma ministrat: and
dum regnant arma silent leges, all Laws must sleep while Arms prevail:
Besides, you may find those Canons, as if they had been prophetically made,
foresaw the increasing strength of Anabaptisme, Brownisme, Puritanisme, most
likely to subvert true Protestanisme, and therefore were as equally directed
against these Sectaries of the left hand, as against the Papists on the right
hand; and I think the whole Kingdom now finds and feels the strength of
that virulent Faction; and therefore what wonder that they should seek to
break all those Canons to pieces, and batter them down with their mighty
Ordinances, for seeking to subdue their invincible errors; or else, because
(as they say) the Ecclesiastical State is not an independent society, but a
member of the whole the Parliament was not so to be excluded, as that their
advice and approbation should not be required, to make them obligatory to the
rest of the Subjects of the whole Kingdom, which claim this privilege, to be
tied to the observation of no humane Laws, that themselves by their
representatives have not consented unto.

2. To grant dispensations of his own Laws.
2. As the King is entrusted by God to make Laws for the government of the
Church of Christ, so it is a rule without question, that ejus est dispensare
and absolvere, cujus est condere; he has the like power to dispense with whom
he pleases, and to absolve him that transgresses, as he has to oblige them:
therefore our Church being for reformation the most famous throughout all the
parts of the Christian world, and our King having so just an authority to do
the same, it is a most impudent scandal, full of all malice and ignorance, not
to be endured by any well-affected Christian, that the new brood of the old
Anabaptists do lay upon our Church and State, that they did very unreasonably
and unconscionably by their Laws grant Dispensations both for Pluralities and
Non-residency, The scandal of the malicious ignorants against the worthier
Clergy.
only to further the corrupt desires of some few, to the infinite wrong of the
whole Clergy, besides the hazard of many thousands of souls, the intolerable
dishonor of Gods truth, and the exceeding disadvantage of Christ his Church:
for, seeing God has principally committed, and primarily commanded the care of
his Church and Service unto Kings, who are therefore to make Laws and Orders
for the well governing of the same, I shall make it most evident, that they
may, as they have ever done, most lawfully and more beneficially, both for Gods
Church, and also for the Commonwealth, do these three things.

1. Three special points handled.
To grant that grace and favor unto their Bishops and other Ecclesiastical
persons, as to admit them of their counsel, and to undertake secular authority
and civil jurisdiction.

2. To allow dispensations of Pluralities and Non-residency, which they may
most justly and most wisely do, without any transgression of the Law of God.

3. To give tolerations (where they see cause) of many things prohibited by
their Law, to dispense with the transgressions, and to remit the fault of the
transgressors. For

1. Though the world relapsed from the true light, 1. Point.
and declined from the sincere religion to most detestable superstition; yet
there remained in the people certain impressions of the divine truth, that
there was a God, The great respect of the Clergy in former ages.
and that this God was religiously to be worshipped; and those men that taught
the worship of that God, how fowly soever they did mistake it, Sarawa, l. 2. c.
2. p. 103.
were had in singular account and supereminent authority among all Nations: and
as Saravia says, 1. Among the Gentiles.
they were compeeres with Kings in their government, so that nothing was done
without their counsel and consent; and as Theseus was the first that Cives
Atticos e pagis in urbem compulit, Osor. p. 231.
and put the difference betwixt Nobles, De tota Syria and Palestina refert
Dion. l. 37. quod rex summi Pontificis nomen habeat.
Husbandmen, and Artificers; so the Priests were always selected out of the
noblest families, and were ever in all their public counsels, as the Divines
sat among the Athenians, and the South-sayers sat with the King among the
Lacedaemonians in all their weightiest consultations: And Strabo tells us,
Strabo lib. 12.
that the Priests of Bellona, which were in Pontus and Cappadocia, Apud Tertul.
advers. Valent. Hermetem legimus appellar^ and Max. sacerdotem, and maximum
regem.
(for that Goddess was honored in both places) were regarded with the
greatest honor next to the King himself: and the Romans that were both
wealthy, warlike, and wise, did almost nothing without the advice and counsel
of their Priests. I will omit what Valerius Maximus sets down of their care
of religion, and their great respect unto their Priests and religious persons;
and I will refer you only to what Tully writes of this point, Cicero l. 2.
de legibus. Diotogenes apud Stob. dicit. (...). Aethiopes reges suos deligebant
ex numero sacerdotum. Diodor. l. 3. c 1. Totus Vespas. Pontificatum maximum
ideo sese professus est accipere, ut puras servaret manus. Sueton. in Tito. c.
9. In Aritia regnum erat concretum cum sacerdotio Diana. ut innuit Ovid. Ecce
suburbana templum nemorale Dianae, Partaque per gladios regna nocente manu. De
art amandi, lib. 1. and Strabo l. 5.
where he says, that the greatest and the worthiest thing in their
Commonwealth was the privilege and pre-eminence of the Divines, which was
joined with the greatest authority; for they dismissed the companies and the
Councels of the chiefest Empires and the greatest Potentates, when they were
proposed; they restrained them when they were concluded; they ceased from the
affairs which they had in hand, if but one Divine did say the contrary: they
appointed that the Consuls should depose themselves from their Magistracy; and
it was in their entire power, either to give leave or not to give leave, to
deal with the people, or not to deal; to repeal Laws not lawfully made, and
to suffer nothing to be done by the Magistrate in peace or war without their
leave or authority: this was their Law; (though I believe it was not always
observed by their proud Consuls, and unruly Magistrates.) Cicero de not.
deorum, l. 2.

In like manner Caesar writes of the Gauls and Britons, that they had two
sorts of men in singular honor; the one was their Druides or Divines, the
other was their Soldiers or men of war; and he faith, that their Druides
determined of all controversies (in a manner) both private and public; and if
there were any crime committed, any murder attempted, if any controversy
about inheritance, or the bounds of lands did arise, they also did set down
their Decree, and appointed the penalty: and whosoever rejected their order, or
refused their judgment, they excommunicated him from all society, and he was
then deemed of all men as an ungodly and a most graceless person. Thus did
they, that had but the twilight of corrupted nature to direct them, judge those
that were most conversant with the mind and will of the gods, to be the
fittest Counselors and Judges of the actions of men: and I fear these
children of nature will rise in judgment, to condemn many of them that
profess themselves to be the sons of grace, for coming so short of them in
this point.

2. The Jews also which received the oracles of God, 2. Among the Jews.
were enjoined by God to yield unto their Priests the dispensation both of
divine and humane Laws; and the Lord enacted it by an irrevocable Law, that
the judgment of the High Priest should be observed as sacred and inviolable in
all controversies: and if any man refused to submit himself unto it, Deuteronomy. 17.
his death must make recompense for his contumacy. And Josephus says, Si
judices nesciunt de rebus ad se delatis pronunciare, integram causam in urbem
sanctam mittent, and convenientes Pontifex and Propheta and Senatus, quod visum
sit pronuncient: Joseph. contra App. lib 2.
and in his second book against Appian he says, Sacerdotes inspectores
omnium, judices controversiarum, punitores damnatorum constituti sunt a Moyse:
the Priests were appointed by Moses to be the lookers into all things, the
Judges of controversies, and the punishers of the condemned. And they were of
that high esteem among the Jews, that the royal blood disdained not to match
in marriages with the Priests, as Iehojada married the daughter of King
Iehoram, 2. Chron. 22 11
and in the vacancie of Kings they had all the affairs of the Kingdom in their
administration; and when they became tributaries unto the Romans after
Aristobulus, the royal government was often annexed to the Priesthood: and S.
Paul argues from hence, 2. Cor. 3.7, 8, 9.
that if the administration of death was glorious, how shall not the
ministration of the spirit be rather glorious? for if the ministration of
condemnation be glory, much more does the ministration of righteousness exceed
in glory; or otherwise it were very strange, that the Ministers of the Gospel
should be deemed more base and contemptible, because their calling is far
more glorious and excellent; yea, so excellent, Esaias 52.7.
that to all good Christians the Prophet demands, quam speciosi pedes eorum?

Priests employed in secular affairs.
And for the discharging of secular employments, we have not only the example
of the Priests and Prophets of the Old Testament, 1. Among the Jews. Psalm.
99.6.
but we have also the testimony and the practice of many godly Bishops and
Fathers of the Church of Christ, under the New Testament, to justify this
truth. For

Priests and Prophets among the Jews exercised secular jurisdiction.
1. Not only Moses and Aaron that were both the Priests of the most high God,
and the chief Judges in all secular causes, but also Joseph had his
jurisdiction over the Egyptians, Daniel had his Lieutenancie over the
Babylonians, and Nehemias was a great Courtier among the Persians: and yet
these secular employments were no hinderance to them in the divine worship and
service of God. So Ely and Samuel both, were both Judges and Priests together:
and the most religious Princes, David, Solomon, Iehosaphat, and others, used
the Priests and Levites at their command in the civil government of their
Dominions; for when David caused all the Levites to be numbered from 30 years
old and upward, and that they were found to be 38 thousand; he appointed 24
thousand of them to be overseers of the works for the house of the Lord, and
he ordained the other six thousand to be Judges and Rulers in all Israel; 2.
Chron. 23.4.
and so did Iehosaphat likewise 2. Chron. 19.11. The place explained.
; for though the last verse of the said chapter seems to put a difference
betwixt the Civil matters and the Ecclesiastical affairs; yet it is rightly
answered by Saravia, that this error rises from a misconceived opinion of
their government, as if it were the same with the government of some of our
reformed Churches, which was nothing less; for if you compare this place with
the 26. chap. of the 1. Chron. verse. the 29, Sigonius legit, super opera ^^^a
ad regis officia pertinent. l. 6. p. 315.
30, and 32. you may easily find, that the Kings service, or the affairs of
the King, does not signify the civil matters, or the politic affairs of
the Kingdom, over which Amarias here, and Hashabia and his brethren there (1.
Chron. 26.30.) were appointed the chief Rulers; 1. Sam. c. 8.
but it signifies those things which pertained to the Kings right, betwixt him
and his subjects, (as those things that were described by Samuel, and were
retained, and perhaps augmented, either by the consent of the people, or the
incroachment of the succeeding Kings, as the special rights of the Kings) over
which Zebadias the son of Ismael was appointed by Iehosaphat to be the Ruler;
and the business of the Lord is fully set down, verse. 10. to be not only the
Church affairs, but all the affairs of the Kingdom, between blood and
blood, Verse. 10.
between Law and Commandment, Statutes and judgments, over which the Priests
and Levites were appointed the ordinary Judges, and the Interpreters of the
Law, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical; for the Lord says plainly, Ezech
44.23. Vide locum. Sigon. ait; and circa judicium sanguinis ipse insistent.
that every question and controversy shall be determined according to the
censure of the Priests; which certainly he would never have so prescribed, nor
these holy men have thus executed them, if these two functions had been so
averse and contrary the one to the other, that they could never be exercised
together by the same man.

2. In the Primitive times under the Gospel, Salmeron says, 2. In the
Primitive Church. Salmer. tract. 18. in parabol. hominis divitis. lo. 16. number.
1.
that in the time of S. Augustine, as himself teaches, Episcopi litibus
Christianorum vacare solebant, the Bishops had so much leisure, that they were
wont to judge of the quarrels of Christians; yet they did not so spend their
time in judging their contentions, that they neglected their Preaching and
Episcopal function: and now that they do judge in civil causes, consuetudine
Ecclesiae introductum est, ut peceata caverentur. And Bellarmine says, Non
pugnat cum verbo Dei, Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 9.
ut unus homo sit Princeps Ecclesiasticus and politicus simul; it is not
against the Word of God, that the same man should be an Ecclesiastical and a
Secular Prince together, when as the same man may both govern his Episcopacie
and his Principality. And therefore we read of diverse men that were both the
Princes and the Bishops of the same Cities: as the Archbishop of Collen, Ments,
Theod. l. 2. c. 30.
Triers, and other German Princes, Henr. of Huntington, Hist. Angl.
that are both Ecclesiastical Pastors, and great secular Princes. And Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury was for a long while Viceroy of this Kingdom: And so
Leo 9. Julius 2. Philip, Archbishop of York. Adelboldus. Innocent 2.
Collenutius and Blondus, and many others, famous and most worthy Bishops, both
of this Island and of other Kingdoms, have undertaken and exercised both the
Functions. And Saint Paul recommendeth secular businesses and judgments unto
the Pastors of the Church, Aug. tom. 3. de operib. Monach. c. 29.
as S. Augustine testifies at large; where he says, I call the Lord Jesus a
witness to my soul, that for so much as concerns my commodity, I had rather
work every day with my hands, and to reserve the other hours free to read,
pray, and exercise my self in Scriptures, then to sustain the tumultuous
perplexities of other men's causes in determining secular controversies by
judgment, or taking them up by arbitrament; to which troubles the Apostle has
appointed us, not of his own will, but of his that spoke in him. And as this
excellent Father, that wrote so many worthy volumes, did notwithstanding employ
no small part of his time in these troublesome affairs, so S. Ambrose twice
undertook an honorable Embassy for Valentinian the Emperor unto the Tyrant
Maximus. Socrat. Eccl. hist. lib. 7.
And Marutha Bishop of Mesopotamia was sent by the Roman Emperor, an
Ambassador to the King of Persia, in which employment he has abundantly
benefited both the Church and the Emperor: And we read of diverse famous men
that undertook diverse functions, and yet neither confounded their offices, nor
neglected their duties; for Spiridion was an husbandman, and a Bishop of the
Church; a Pastor of sheep, and a feeder of souls; and yet none of the ancient
Fathers, that we read of, either envyed his Farm, or blamed his neglect in
his Bishopric; but they admired his simplicity, and commended his sanctity:
they were not of the spirit of our hypocritical Saints. Theodor. lib. 4.^.13.
And Theodoret writes, that one James Bishop of Nisib, was both a Bishop and a
Captain of the same City, which by the help of his God he manfully preserved
against Sapor King of Persia. And Eusebius Bishop of Samosis, managing himself
with all warlike abiliments, ranged along throughout all Syria, Phaenicia, and
Palaestina; and as he passed, erected Churches, and ordained Priests and
Deacons, and performed such other Ecclesiastical pensions, as pertained to his
office in all places: and I fear me the iniquity of our time will now call
upon all Bishops, that are able, to do the like; to preach unto our people,
and to fight against Gods enemies, (that have long labored to overthrow his
Church) as we read of some Bishops of this Kingdom that have been driven to
do the like: and if these men might do these things without blame, as they
did, why may not the same man be both a Bishop and the Kings Counselor? both a
Preacher in the Pulpit, and a Justice of the Peace on the Bench? and yet the
callings not confounded, though the same man be called to both offices; for you
know the office of a Lawyer is different from the office of a Physician, and
the office of a Physician as different from the duty of a Divine; and yet, as
Saint Luke was an excellent Physician, and a heavenly Evangelist; and S. Paul
as good a Lawyer, as he was a Preacher, (for he was bred at the feet of
Gamaliel) as was Master Calvin too, as good a Civilian as he was a Divine, (for
that was his first profession;) so the same man may, as in many places they
do, and that without blame, both play the part of a Physician to cure the
body, and of a Divine to instruct the soul; and therefore why not of a Lawyer?
when as the Preachers duty, next to the teaching of the faith in Christ, is to
persuade men to live according to the rules of Justice; and Justice we cannot
understand without the knowledge of the Laws, both of God and man; and if he
be obliged to know the Law, why should he be thought an unfit man to judge
according to the Law? But

CHAP. IX. Shows a full answer to four special Objections that are made
against the Civil jurisdictions of Ecclesiastical persons; their abilities to
discharge these offices, and desire to benefit the Commonwealth; why some
Councels inhibited these offices unto Bishops; that the King may give titles of
honor unto his Clergy; of this title, Lord, not unfitly given to the Bishops,
proved; the objections against it answered; six special reasons why the King
should confer honors and favors upon his Bishops and Clergy.
office of a Preacher requires the whole man, and where the whole man is not
sufficient to discharge one duty, 2. Cor. 2.16.
for (...)? then certainly one man is never able to supply two charges.

Sol.
I answer, that this indefinite censure is uncertainly true, and most certainly
false, as I have proved unto you before, by many examples of most holy men,
that discharged two offices with great applause, and no very great difficulty
to themselves; for though S. Matthew could not return to his trade of
Publican, because that a continued attendance on a secular business, would
have taken him from his Apostolate, and prove an impediment to his Evangelique
ministration; yet S. Peter might return to his nets, as he did, without blame;
because that a temporary employment, and no constant secession, can be no
hinderance to our Clericall office; No man is always able to do the same
thing.
when there is no man that can so wholly addict himself to any kind of art,
trade, or faculty, but that he must sometimes interchangeably afford himself
leisure, either for his recreation, Vt quemvis animo possit sufferre laborem;
or the recollection of strength and abilities to discharge his office, by the
undertaking of some other exercise, which is to many men their chiefest
recreation; as you see, the husband-mans change of labor does still enable him
to continue in labor; and the Courtier cannot always wait in the same
posture, nor the Scribe always write, nor the Divine always study; but there
must be an exchange of his actions, Change of labor is a kind of recreation.
for the better performance of his chiefest employment: and that time, which
either some Gentlemen, Citizens, or Courtiers spend in playing, hawking, or
hunting, only for their recreation, the better to enable them to discharge
their offices; why may not the Divine employ it in the performance of any other
duty, different, but not destructive or contradictory to his more special
function? especially considering that the discharging of those good duties, to
give counsel, to do justice, to relieve the distressed, and the like, are
more acceptable recreations unto them (as it was meat and drink to Christ to
do his fathers will) then the other forenamed exercises are or can be to any
others; and considering also, John 4.34.
that where the Bishop or Pastor has great affairs and much charge, he may
have great helps and much aid to assist him. You will allow us an hour for
our recreation, why will you not allow us that hour to do justice?

2. If you say they are spiritual men, and therefore cannot temporal State
and Commonwealth.

I answer, that as now the Commonwealth is the Church, Sol. 1 The ability of
the Clergy to manage civil affairs.
and the Church is the Commonwealth, and have as good interest therein, and
better we hope then many of the Commonwealth have in the Church; and they
should be as able to understand what is beneficial to the Commonwealth as any
other; for Ignatius says, Ignat. epist. ad Ephesians. (...).
that Kings ought to be served by wise men, and by those that are of great
understanding, (...), and not to be attended upon by weak and simple men; and
if Kings must be served by such men, then certainly the service of God is not
to be performed by Weavers and Tailors, and others like Jeroboams Priests; but
it will require men of great abilities, learning, and understanding in all
businesses whatsoever, such as are indeed well able to discourse De quolibet
ente: And they have very unprofitably consumed themselves with their time in
their head pain vigils, and heartbreaking studies, in traversing over all the
Commonwealths of the world; The Clergy of better ab lities to benefit the
Commonwealth, th^n many others that now sw^y it.
if they have learned nothing, whereby they may benefit their own
Commonwealth, or do understand less what belongs unto the good of their
Country, especially in matters of equity and right, then illiterate Burgesses
and mere Chapmen; for if you read but the books of the Prophets, you shall
find how plentiful they are in the precepts of peace, in the policies of
war, and in the best counsels for all things which concern the good of the
Commonwealth: and do not the Divines read the Histories of all or most other
Commonwealths? how else shall they be enabled to propose unto their people the
example of Gods justice upon the wicked, and his bounty and favor unto the
observers of his Laws, throughout all ages, and in all places of this world?
and will you deprive the King of the assistance of such instruments for the
government of his people, The employment of the Bishops in civil affairs, is
the good of the Commonwealth.
that are stronger then any one man can rule, and would quickly despise Heaven,
and destroy the earth, if their consciences were not awed with religion? or
would you damme up the channels of those benefits that should flow from them to
the Commonwealth? for it is not the addition of any honor to the calling of a
Bishop, but the Kings interest, and the peoples good that is aimed at, when we
assert the capacity of the Clergy to discharge the offices of the most public
affairs; Petrus Blesensis, ep. 84.
because, as Petrus Blesensis says, it is the office of the Bishops to
instruct the King to righteousness, to be a rule of Sanctity and sobriety unto
the Court, to mix the influences of Religion with the designs of State, and
to restrain the malignity of the ill-disposed people; and all histories do
relate unto us, that when pious Bishops were employed in the Kings Counsels,
the rigor of the laws was abated, equity introduced, the cry of the poor
respected, their necessities releived, the liberties of the Church preserved,
pride depressed, religion increased, the devotion of the Laity multiplied, the
peace of the Kingdom flourished, and the tribunals were made more just and
merciful, then now they be.

And therefore the sacred histories do record of purpose, how the people of
God never adventured upon any action of weight and moment, before they had well
consulted with the Priests and Prophets, as you see in the example of Ahab, No
Nation attempted any great matter without the advice of their Priests.
that was none of the best Kings, yet would not omit this good duty: and such
was the custom of all other Countries, wheresoever there was any religion or
reverence of God; Quae enim est respub. ubi ecclesiastici primum non habeant
locum in comitiis and publicis de salute reipub. deliberationibus? for which is
that Commonwealth, where the Ecclesiastical persons had not the first place
in all meetings and public consultations about the welfare of the
Commonwealth? as in Germany the three spiritual Electors are the first; in
France the three Ecclesiastical persons were the first of all the Peers; in
England (till this unhappy time) the two Archbishops, and in Poland as many,
were wont to have the chiefest place; and not unworthily, quia aequum est, Apud
Eusebius. Paphilum, l. 11.
antestent in concilio qui antestant prudentia, nec videtur novisse res
humanas, nisi qui divinas cognitas habet; Strabo l. 4. Caesar de bello Gallico,
lib. 6.
as the Indian said unto Socrates: and therefore the Chaldeans, the Egyptians,
the Grecians, the Romans, the French, and the Britons, thought it always
ominous to attempt any notable thing in the Commonwealth, without the sad and
sage advice of their Priests and Prophets; for they knew the neglect of God was
never left without due revenge; and though their false gods were no gods, yet
the true God was found to have been a sharp revenger of the contempt of the
false gods; because that to them they were proposed for the true gods, and they
believed them so to be; as Lactantius shows: and therefore all antiquity that
bare any reverence to any Deity, showed all reverence and respect unto the
teachers of his religion; but now men desire to throw learning over the Bar,
because it should not discover the ignorance of the Bench; or rather piety is
excluded, because it should not reprove their iniquity: And the Clergy must not
sit on the seat of judgment, that the Laity may do injustice without
control; or perhaps revenge themselves upon their Ministers on the Bench, for
reproving their vices in the Church: so the Devil gains whatsoever piety
loses by their depression.

2. As the Clergymen are as able, 2. The desire of the Clergy to do good to
the State.
so they are as willing and as careful to provide for the good of the State,
as any other; for themselves are members of the Commonwealth, and they are
appointed by God to be watchmen and overseers, to fore tell what mischiefs or
felicities are like to ensue, and to admonish as well the Prince as the people
of such things, as are to be avoided and to be performed; which they cannot
do, if they be strangers from the conscience, and excluded from the conference
of such things that are to be done in the Commonwealth.

The Church of Christ and a Chrisitan commonwealth sail together.
Therefore, seeing the good of the Commonwealth is their own good, and the
good of the Church is the good of the Common wealth, when a Christian
Commonwealth and the Church of Christ are embarked in the same vessel, and do
sail together with the same success, aiming both at the same Port; and God
has commanded his Ministers to be no less solicitous for the one, then the
other: it is incredible to think that a godly Minister should have less care
of the Commonwealth, then the best of our common Burgo-masters; and it is
impossible to conceive any true reason, why the Bishops and Pastors above all
others, should be excommunicated out of their assemblies, and excluded from
their Parliaments, and other civil Courts; when it does most chiefly concern
them, to see unto the welfare of their flock, not only in such things as
concern the safety of their souls, A miserable thing, that the Ministers of
the Gospel should be made more slaves, then the basest calling in the world.
but also in all other things that may pertain, either to the security of
their bodies, or the quietness of their estates; because this is a thing
utterly against the equal right of all Subjects, that the Ministers of the
Gospel, being Subjects unto the King, and Citizens of the Commonwealth,
should have nothing to do in the government thereof, but must be governed, not
as strangers, that may have admission, but as slaves, with an impossibility to
be received into the civil administration of any matter: and their exclusion
is as prejudicial to the King and Kingdom, as it is injurious unto the
Clergy; when they must be deprived of the grave advice and faithful service of
so learned and religious assistants for the government of the people, as the
reverend Bishops and devout Doctors have ever been.

Canon of the Apostles, the seventh Canon of the Council of Calcedon, Act. 15.
S. Cyprian punished Geminius Faustinus for undertaking the Executorship of
Geminius Victor. ep. 66. Sol.
and S. Cyprian in his Epistle to the Priests of Furnam, do forbid these
things in Ecclesiastical persons; and so many Fathers have accordingly refused
these civil employments and jurisdictions.

I answer briefly, that while the Emperors were Heathens, and neither the
Kings nor their Kingdoms Christian, but their counsels were often held for
wicked ends, private gain, or privy deceit, for bloody murders, or horrid
treasons; the Clergy were inhibited, and the godly Bishops were ashamed to sit
in such ungodly assemblies, that would neither be converted to Christ, nor
reformed from their sins; and so now, when the Puritan faction prevailed in
our Parliament, and our Sectaries disdained in their counsels, to take the
council of Religion, and resolved to banish God from their assemblies, Good to
be excluded from the counsel of the wicked.
to make the Church and Churchmen a public scorn unto the wicked, and the
Commonwealth a private gain to every broken Citizen, and every needy varlet;
I say happy are those Bishops that are excluded, and well it is for those
Ministers that are furthest off from such godless and irreligious, not
Parliament, but Parracides; even as the Psalmist testifies. Psalm. 1.1.
Blessed is the man that has not sat in the seat of the scornful; and
therefore if they had not been excluded, I am sure, that as the case now
stands, they would have seceded themselves.

But when the civil Magistrates became Christians, and the Christians
consulted with God in all their actions, then it was no indecorum for the
servants of Christ to be seen in the Congregation of Saints, and to sit as
Judges among gods, where the judgment shall pass for the glory of God; The
giving of Caesar's due does not hinder us to give to God his due.
neither is it any prejudice to our holy calling, to give unto Caesar those
things that are Caesars's, and that we owe unto him, as our service and our
counsel, and whatsoever else lies in us to do for the good of the
Commonwealth: as we are his Subjects and the Tenants of the Commonwealth: nor
do the rendering of these things to Caesar any ways hinder us to give unto
God the things that are God's, and that we owe to God, as our prayers and our
care over Gods flock, as we are Christians and Bishops over the Church of
Christ; but the same man, if he will be faithful, may justly perform both
duties, without giving over or neglecting either. And when our men shall
return to God, and take him along with them into their counsels, and desire
the assistance of his servants, (as I hope they will have the grace to do) I
assure my self the Reverend Bishops will not refuse to do them service.

Emperors were good Christians, when the Council of Calcedon put out their
Canons.

Sol.
I answer, the Emperors were, but all Kings were not: besides, that Canon
cleares it self; for it shows that Clergymen did at that time undertake
secular employments, Propter luera turpia, ministerium Dei parvi pendentes, for
gain, neglecting their duty; and therefore the Council forbade all
Clergymen, negotiis secularibus se immiscere; because the Apostle says, 2.
Tim. 2.4.
(...); no man that warreth intangleth or insnareth himself with the affairs
of this life: and so, neither the Apostle nor the Council does absolutely
forbid all secular affairs, as inconsistent with this function; Council.
Arelat. Can. 14. The words of the Canon explained.
but as the Council of Arles says, Clericus turpis lucri gratia aliquod genus
negotiationis non exerceat, so they forbid all Clerks to meddle with any
business for the love of gain, and filthy lucre, that might ensnare him to
neglect his duty: or as the Canon of the Apostle says, (...), a Bishop should
not assume unto himself, or seek after worldly cares, but if either necessity
or authority impose them on him, I see not how he can refuse them; because
there is no absolute prohibition of such employments in any place, but as it
might be a hinderance to discharge his office: or otherwise S. Paul's
Tent-making was as much against the calling of an Apostle, as the sitting in a
secular tribunal is against the office of a Bishop; because there is no reason
we should deny that benefit to a public necessitated community, which we will
yield to a private personal necessity.

The Presbyterians will be the directors of all affairs.
And so indeed these very men that cry out against our Bishops, and other grave
Prelates of the Church, for the least meddling in these civil affairs, do not
only suffer their own Preachers to strain at a gnat, but also to swallow a
Camel, when M. Henderson, Marshall, Case and the rest of their new inspired
Prophets shall sit as Presidents in all their Counsels, and Committees of their
chiefest affairs and consultations, either about War or Peace, or of any
other civil cognizance; how those things can be answered, to deny that to us,
which they themselves do practice, I cannot understand, when as the light of
nature tells us.

Quod tibi vis fieri, mihi fac, quod non, mihi noli:
Sic potes in terris vivere jure poli. Vnde Baldus jubet, ut quis in alios non
aliter judicet, quam in se judicari vellet.

And therefore when as there is no politic Philosophy, no imperial
constitution, nor any humane invention, that does or can so strictly bind the
consciences of men unto subjection and true obedience, as the Doctrine of the
Gospel; and no man can persuade the people so much unto it, as the Preachers
of Gods word, (as it appears by this Rebellion, persuaded by the false
Preachers) because the Principles of Philosophy, and the Laws of many nations
do permit many things to be done against tyrants, which the Religion of Christ
and the true Bishops of Gods Church do flatly inhibit; How requisite it is for
Kings to delegate civil affairs unto their Clergy.
it is very requisite and necessary for all Christian Kings, both for the glory
of God, their own safety, and the happiness of the Common wealth, to defend
this their own right, and the right of the Clergy, to call them into their
Parliaments and Counsels, and to demise certain civil causes and affairs to
the gravest Bishops, and the wisest of the ministers; and not to suffer those
Rebellions Anabaptists and Brownists, that have so disloyally labored to pull
off the Crown from their Kings head, to bury all the glory of the Church in
the dust, to bring the true Religion into a scorn, and to deprive the King of
the right, which is so necessary for his safety, and so useful for the
government of his people, that is, the service of his Clergy in all civil
Courts and Councels

And as it is the Kings right to call whom he pleases into his Parliaments and
Counsels, That it is the Kings right to give titles of honor to whom he
pleases,
and to delegate whom he will to discharge the office of a Civil or
Ecclesiastical magistrate, or both, wheresoever he appoints, within his Real^^
and Dominions: so it is primarily in his power and authority and his regal
right, to give titles of honor and dignity to those officers and magistrates
whom he chooses; for, though the Barbarians acknowledge no other distinction
of Persons, but of Master and Servants, which was the first punishment for the
first contempt of our Superiors; Genesis 9.25.
therefore their Kings do reign and domineere over their Subjects, as Masters
do over their servants; Saravia c. 28. p. 194.
and the Fathers of families have the same authority over their Wives and
Children, as over their slaves and vassals,* and the Muscovites at this day do
rule after this manner; neither is the great Empire of the Turk much unlike
this government; and generally all the Eastern Kingdoms were ever of this
kind, and kept this rule over all the Nations whom they Conq^ered; and many of
them do still retain it to these very times. Yet our Western Kings, whom
charity has taught better and made them milder, and especially the Kings of
this Island, The mild government of our Kings.
which in the sweetness of government exceeded all other Kings, (as holding it
their chiefest glory to have a free people subject unto them, and thinking it
more Honorable to command over a free then a servile nation,) have conferred
upon their subjects many titles of great honor, which the Learned Gentleman M.
Seldom has most Learnedly treated of: and therefore I might well be silent in
this point, (and not to write Iliads after Homer) if this title of Lord, given
by His Majesty unto our Bishops, (for none but he has any right to give it)
did not require that I should say something thereof: Of the title of Lord:
touching which, you must observe that this name dominus is of diverse
significations, and is derived a domo, as Zanchius observes, where every man
is a Lord of that house and possession which he holds; and it has relation
also to a servant; so that this name is ordinarily given among the Latinists to
any man that is able to keep servants: and so it must needs appear, how great
is the malice, I cannot lay the ignorance, (when every schoolboy knows it) of
those Sectaries that deny this title to be consistent with the calling of a
Bishop, which indeed cannot be denied to any man of any ordinary esteem.

But they will say, that it signifies also rule and authority, and so, as it
is a title of rule and Dominion, it is the invention of Antichrist, the
donation of the Devil, and forbidden by our Savior, where he says, (...):
Luke 22.25. (...). Mat. 16.30.
that is, in effect, be not you called gracious Lords or benefactors (which is
the proper signification of (...):) therefore these titles of honor are not
fit for the Preachers of the Gospel, to puff them up with pride, and to make
them swell above their brethren.

It is answered, That there is a double rule or dominion.
that if our Saviors words be rightly understood, and his meaning not
maliciously perverted, neither the authority of the Bishops, nor the title of
their honor is forbidden; for as (...) is a title of dominion, so it is fit to
be ascribed to them, unto whom the Lord and author of all rule and dominion,
has committed any rule or government over his People; and our Savior
forbids not the same; because you may find that there is a double rule and
dominion; the one just and approved, the other tyrannical and disallowed; and
the tyrannical rule, or, as S. Peter says (...), 1 Pe^ 5.3. (...).
the domineering authourity over Gods inheritance, both Christ and his Apostles
do forbid; but the just rule and dominion they deny not; because they must do
it, (...), as the son of man does it; so the manner of their rule, (...); as
the Kings of the nations rule with tyranny he prohibiteth; but as the servants
of Christ ought to rule with charity not with austerity, with humility and not
with insolency, he denies not; and so he denies not the name of Lord, as it
is a title of honor and reverence given unto them by the King, and ascribed by
their people; but he forbids an ambitious aspiring to it, and a proud
carriage, and deporment in it; yet it may be so with you, (...) as it is with
the son of man, whom no man can exceed in humility; and yet in his greatest
humility, he says, ye call me (...), Master and Lord: (...), and ye say well,
for so I am: John 13.13. And therefore he forbad not this title no otherwise
then he forbad them to be called Fathers, Doctors, and Masters; and I hope you
will confess he does not inhibit the Children to call them Fathers that begat
them, nor forbid us to call them Doctors, unto whom the Lord himself has
given the name, (...), of Doctors in his Church, Ephe. 4.11. otherwise we must
know why S. Paul does call himself the Doctor of the Gentiles, 1 Timothy 2.7. and
why does the Law command us to honor our Father and our Mother, if we may call
no man Father.

But Christ coming not to diminish the power of Princes, nor to make it
unlawful for Christian Kings to honor his servants, which the heathen Princes
did to the servants of God, as Nebucchadnezzar preferred Daniel among the
Babylonians, and Darius advanced Mordecai among the Persians, nor to deny that
honor unto his sevants, which their own honest demerits, and the bounty of
their gracious Princes do confer upon them; What Christ forbids to his
Ministers.
it is apparent, that it is not the condition of these names, but the ambition
of these titles and the abuse of their authourity is forbidden by our Savior
Christ; For, as Elias and Elizaeus in the old Test. suffered themselves with no
breach of humility to be called Lords, 3. Reg. 18.1.
as where Abdias, a great officer of King Ahab says, art not thou my Lord
Elias? and the Shunamite called Elizaeus Lord. 4. Reg. 4.16. So in the new
Test. Paul. and Barnabas that rent their clothes when the people ascribed unto
them more then humane honor; yet refused not the name of Lords, Act. 16.30.
(...).
when it was given them by the keeper of the prison, that said, Lords, what
shall I do to be saved? which title certainly they would never have endured, if
this honor might not be yielded, and this title received by the Ministers of
the Gospel; and S. Peter tells us, that Christian women, if they imitate Sarah
(that obeyed Abraham (...).
) whom he propounds to them as a pattern, may, and should call their
husbands, though mean mechanics, Lords; or else he proposes this example to
no purpose; and therefore me thinks they should be ashamed, to think this
honor may be afforded to poor Tradesmen, and to deny it to those eminent
pillars, and chief governors of Gods Church. And as the Script. gives, not
only others the like eminent, and more significant titles of honor unto the
governors of the Church, (as when it says they are (...), presidents; (...),
rulers; (...) and (...), Princes; as where the Psalmist says, in steed of thy
Fathers, thou shall have children, whom thou may make Princes in all lands,
Origin ho. 19. in Math Hier. in Psalm. 45.16.
which the best interpreters do expound of the Apostles and Bishops, that are
called the Princes of Gods Church, but also gives and allows this very title
of Lord unto them, as I showed before; so the fathers of the Primitive Church
did usually ascribe the same one to another, as S. Hierome writing to S. Aug.
says, Domine vere sancte, Sozom. lib. 3. c. 23.
and the Letters sent to Julius Bishop of Rome had their superscription, (...),
to our most blessed Lord. And Nazian. says, Nazian. in ep. ad gr. Nyssen.
let no man speak any untruth of me, nor (...) of the Lords the Bishops: and in
all antiquity as Theodoret shows, Theodor. l. 1. c. 4. and 5. l. c. 9.
this title of Lord is most frequently ascribed unto the Bishops: S.
Chrysostom in Psalm. 13. as he is cited by Baronius, Anno 58. n. 2. says that
Heretics have learned of the Devil to deny the due titles of honor unto
their Bishops; neither is it strange, that he which would have no Bishops,
should deny all honor unto the Bishops; but they can be contented to
transfer this honor, though to cover their hypocrisy in another title, that
shall be as Emperor instead of King, from the Episcopacie to the Presbytery; so
that indeed it is not the honor which they hate, but the Persons of the
Bishops that are honored;

Therefore, though for mine own particular, I do so much undervalue the vanity
of all titles, that were it not the duty of the people to give it, more then
the desire of the Bishops to have it, I should have spared all this discourse;
yet seeing it is the right of Kings to bestow honors, and it is an argument of
their love to Christ, to honor them that honor God, to magnify the order of
their Religion, and to account the chief Ministers of the Gospel among the
chief States of the Land, I could not pass it over in silence, but show you
how it belongs to him to give this honor to whom he will; and because this
dignity cannot be given to all that are in the same order, it is wisely
provided by the King, that the whole order or Ministry should be honored in
those few, The whole order honored in few.
whose learning and wisdom he has had most use and experience of, or is
otherwise well informed thereof; and it is no small wonder unto me, that any
learned man should be so blinded with this error, as any ways to oppose this
truth, or that any Christian should be like the sons of Jacob, so transported
with envy, when they see any of their brethren made more honorable then
themselves, for they ought to think themselves honored in the honor of their
brethren; but that pride is such a beast, that thinks himself the most
worthy, and envy is such a monster, that cannot endure any happiness to any
other.

When the Lord Bishops are down, the Lords Te^por^ll shall not continue long;
for as Geneva put away their Bishop, that Prince; so the Cantons and Switzers
put away all Lords. A just judgment of God, that they which will have no
s^irituall Lords should not be any temporal Lords, but should be as little
regarded by their creatures, as they regard the serv^nts of their Creator.
And that which makes me wonder most of all, is to see those Lords, whose
honors scarce saw the age of a man, and some pretending great loyalty to His
Majesty, and wishing happiness to His Posterity, so far yiedling to the
mis-guided Faction, to darken the glory of Gods Church, and to undervalue
Christ's Ministers, as to obliterate that dignity, and raze out those titles
which are inherent to the Ministry from the foundation of the Church, and are
ascribed unto the Bishops by the same Majesty that honored them; and for some
by-respect and private ends to persuade the King, to desert the Church, to
leave the Prelates in the suds, their honor to be laid and buried in the dust,
and their revenues to be devoured by the enemies of all godliness.

But do these men think that blessings come from God, or that this is the way
for God to bless the King, or themselves, or this Kingdom, to vilify those
that honor God, and of whom Christ directly says, He that receives you
receives me, and he that despises you despises me? for alas, who were more
favored, protected, and blessed by God, then Constantine, Theodosius, and the
rest of those good Emperors and Kings, that gave most immunities, and
conferred most dignities upon the Bishops and Prelates of Gods Church? because
that hereby they testified their love to Christ himself; and did not God
withdraw his favor and protection from those Kings and potentates that
neglected to protect his servants? therefore they cannot wish well unto the
King, Six special reasons, way the King should confer his favo^^s and honor
upon the Bi^hops.
that wish him to give way to denude the Church, and to desert the defense of
the Bishops. For, besides many other reasons, we find six special arguments
proving that our King, rather then any King in Europe, should uphold his
Clergy, and confer his favors and honors upon them, I say n^^ (...) then upon
his nobility, for that would procure hatred unto the King, envy unto them, and
ruin unto all, but as well as upon any other State in this Kingdom. As

1. Not only the relation betwixt them and ^^ei^ Prince, as faithful
Subjects, and be their Sovereign King, but as he is the Lords Anointed, and
the Defender of that faith which they teach and publish unto his people; for
this anointing of him by God for this and superinduceth a brotherhood betwixt
the King and the Bishops, Rex inunctus non est merus Laicus, Gutmerus, tit.
12.. 9.
and makes him quasi unus ex nobis, and the chief guide and guardian of the
Clergy; because that hereby he is mixta personae, more then a mere Layman, and
has an Ecclesiastical supreme government, as well as the civil, and ut oleo
sancto uncti sunt, spiritualis jurisdictionis caepaces sunt, as it was said in
the time of Edw. 3. 33. Edw. 3. tit. Aid le Roy.
and therefore as in relation to the temporalty, the King is supremus
justitiarius totius Angliae; so in respect to the spiritualty, he is as
Constantine styled himself in the Council of Nice, (...), as the chief
Christian Bishop among his Bishops.

2. Our Bishops and Clergy are truer and faithfuller Subjects France and
Spain, and other Popish States and Dominions, are not simply Subjects unto
their Kings, but deny civil obedience unto their Prince, where canonical
obedience commands the contrary; and you see how the Presbytery not only deny
their just allegiance, but incite the people to unjust rebellion; but the
Bishops and their Clergy renounce all obedience to any other Potentate, and
anathematize as utterly unlawful all resistance against our lawful
Sovereign; and in this hearty adherence to His Majesty, as they are wholly
his, so they do expect favor from none, but only from his Highness; and yet
Philip the second of Spain, notwithstanding he had but half the obedience of
his Clergy, adviced his son Philip the third to stick fast unto his Bishops,
even a^ he had done before him; therefore our King that has his Bishops so
totally faithful unto him, has more reason to succor them, that they be not
made the object of contemps unto the vulgar.

constantly and most really, to their power, the most beneficial state to the
Crown, both in ordinary and extraordinary revenues of all others; for though
their means is much impaired, and their charges increased in many things; yet
if you consider their first fruits the first year, their Tenths every year,
Subsidies most years, and all other due and necessary payments to the King. I
may boldly say, that computatis computandis, no state in England of double
their revenue scarce renders half^ their payments; and now in the Kings
necessity for the defense of Church and Crown, Or else they are much too blame,
and f^rie unworthy to be B shops.
I hope my Brethren the Bishops, and all the rest of the loyal Clergy, will
rather empty themselves of all they have, and put it to His Majesty's hands,
then suffer him to want what lies in them, during all the time of these
occasions.

labors in Gods service, continually praying for blessings upon the head of
His Majesty, and his posterity; and next under God relying only upon His
favor and protection.

charge upon all Christian Kings, to be our nursing fathers, Esaias 49.33.
and to defend the faith that we preach, which cannot be done when the Bishops
and Prelates are not protected; and God has promised to bless them, so long
as they discharge this duty, and has threatened to forsake them when they
forsake his Church, and leave the same as a prey to the adversaries of the
Gospel.

pious and a gracious King, at his Coronation promised and engaged himself to
do all this that is desired of him. And as for these and other reasons His
Majesty should, so we do acknowledge with all thankfulness that He has and
does His best endeavor to discharge this whole duty, Quia non plus vale^t ad
dejiciendum terrena mala, quam ad erigendum divina tutela: Cypr.
and do believe with all confidence, that maug^e all open opposition, and all
secret insinuation against us. He will in like manner continue His grace and
favor unto the Church and Church governors unto the end: And if any,
whosoever they be, how great or how powerful soever, either in Kingdom or in
Court, shall seek to alienate the Kings heart, or diminish His affection and
furtherance to protect and promote the publishers of the Gospel, (which we are
confident all their malice cannot do, because the God of Heaven, that has
built his Church upon a rock, and will not turn away his face from his
Anointed, will so bless our King, that it shall never be with Him as it was
with Zedechia, when it was not in his power to save Gods Prophet, but said unto
his Princes, Jerem. 28.5.
Behold he is in your hand, for the King is not he that can do any thing
against you;) yet as Mordecai said to Hester, God will send enlargement and
deliverance unto his Church, Hester 4.14.
and they and their fathers houses that are against it, shall be destroyed;
because, as S. Peter says, we have forsaken all to become his servants, that
otherwise might have served Kings with the like honor that they do, and we
have left the world to build up his Church, we put our trust under the shadow
of his wings, and being in trouble we do cry unto the Lord, and therefore he
will hear our cry and will help us, and we shall never be confounded. Amen.

CHAP. X. Shows that it is the Kings right to grant Dispensations for
Pluralities and Non-residency; what Dispensation is; reasons for it, to
tolerate diverse Sects or sorts of religions; the four special sorts of false
professors; S. Augustines reasons for the toleration of the Jews; toleration
of Papists and of Puritans; and which of them deserve best to be tolerated
among the Protestants; and how any Sect is to be tolerated.
2. WHereas the Anabaptists and Brownists of our time, 2. That the King may
lawfully grant his d^spensation for Pluralities and Non-residency.
with what conscience I know not, cry out that our Kings by their Laws do
unreasonably and unconscionably grant dispensations both for Pluralities and
Non-residency, only to further the corrupt desire of some few aspiring
Prelates, to the infinite wrong of the whole Clergy, the intolerable dishonor
of our religion, the exceeding prejudice of Gods Church, and the lamentable
hazard of many thousand souls.

I say, that the Pluralities and Non-residency granted by the King, and
warranted by the Laws of this Land, may find sufficient reasons to justify
them; ^n anno 112.
for if you consider the first limitation of Benefices, In anno 636.
that either Euaristus Bishop of Rome, or Dionysius (as others think) did
first assign the precincts of Parishes, The first distribution of Parishes.
and appointed a certain compass to every Presbyter: and in this Kingdom
Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury was the first that did the like, appointing
the Pastoral charge, and the portion of means accrewing from that compass,
to this or that particular person; whereas before, for many years they had no
particular charge assigned, nor any Benefice allotted them, but had their
Canonical pensions and dividents given them by the Bishop out of the common
stock of the Church, according as the Bishop saw their several deserts; for
at first the greater Cities only had their standing Pastors, and then the
Country Villages imitating the Cities, to allow maintenance according to the
abilities of the inhabitants, had men of lesser learning appointed for those
places.

^iu^ autic^ and Non residency no transgression of Gods Law.
Therefore this limitation of particular Parishes, being merely positive, and an
humane constitution, it cannot be the transgression of a divine ordinance to
have more Parishes then one, or to be absent from that one which is allotted to
him, when he is dispensed with by the Law maker to do the same; for as it is
not lawful without a dispensation to do either, because we are to obey every
ordinance of the higher power for the Lords sake; so for the higher power to
dispense with both, is most agreeable to reason and Gods truth; Gods Law
admits an interpretation, not a dispensation of it.
for all our Laws are either divine, or humane: and in the divine Law, though
we allow of interpretation, quia non sermoni res, sed rei sermo debet esse
subjectus, because the words must be applied to the matter, else we may fall
into the heresy of those; that as Alfonsus de Castro says, held it unlawful
upon any occasion to swear; because our Savior says, swear not at all: yet
no man, King nor Pope, has power to grant any dispensation for the least
breach of the least precept of Gods Law: he cannot dispense with the doing of
that which God forbids to be done, nor with the omitting of that which God
commands; but in all humane Laws so far as they are merely positive and
humane, Man's Law may be dispensed with.
it is in the power of their makers to dispense with them; and so quicquid fit
dispensatione superioris, non fit contra praeceptum superioris, and he sins
neither against the Law, nor against his own conscience, because he is
delivered from the obligation of that Law by the same authority, whereby he
stood bound unto it.

And as he that is dispensed with is free from all sin, so the King which is
the dispenser is as free from all fault, as having full right and power to
grant His dispensations. For seeing that all humane Laws are the conclusions
of the Law of nature, or the evidences of humane reason, showing what things
are most beneficial to any society, either the Church or Commonwealth; and
that experience teaches us, our reason grows often from an imperfection to
be more perfect, when time produces more light unto us, we cannot in reason
deny an abrogation and dispensation to all humane Laws, which therefore ought
not to be like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, that might not be changed;
and so Saint Augustine says, Aug. de libero arbit. l. 1.
Lex humana quamvis justa sit, commutari tamen pro tempore just potest, any
humane Law, though it be never so just, yet for the time, as occasion
requires, may be justly changed: and dispensatio est juris communis relaxatio
facta cum causae cognitione ab eo qui jus habet dispensandi; Dispensation what
it is.
and as the Civilians say, a dispensation is the relaxation of common right,
granted upon the knowledge of the cause, by him that has the power of
dispensing; or as the etymology of the word bears, dispensare est diversa
pensare, The reward of learning and virtue, how to be rendered.
to dispense is to render different rewards: and the reward of learning, or of
any other virtue, either in the civil or the ecclesiastical person, being to
be rendered (as one says) not by an Arithmeticall, but a Geometrical
proportion; and the division of Parishes being (as I said before) a positive,
humane Law, it cannot be denied but the giver of honor, and the bestower of
rewards, which is the King, has the sole power and right to dispose how much
shall be given to this or that particular person.

Law of the King, which is made by the advice of his whole Parliament, has
already determined what portion is sit for every one, and what service is
required from him.

Sol.
I answer, that the voice of equity and justice tells us, that a general Law
does never derogate from a special privilege, or that a privilege is not
opposite to the principles of common right, and where the Law it self gives
this privilege (as our Law does it yet) envy it self can never deny this
right unto the King, to grant his dispensation whenever he sees occasion;
and where the Law is tacit and says nothing of any privilege, yet seeing in
all Laws, as in all other actions, the end is the mark that is aimed at, The
end of every Law is chiefly to be respected.
and this end is no other then the public good of any society, for which the
Law is made; if the King, which is the sole Lawmakers, so, as I showed in my
Discovery of Mysteries, sees this public good better procured by granting
dispensations to some particular men, does he not perform thereby what the Law
intends, and no ways break the Law of common right? as if a man's absence
from his proper Cure should be more beneficial to the whole Church, then his
residence upon his Charge could possibly be, Reasons of dispensations.
(as when his absence may be either for the recovery of his health, or to
discharge the Kings Embassage, or to do his best to confute Heretics, or to
pacify Schisms, or to consult about the Church affairs, or some other urgent
cause that the Law never dreamt of when it was in making) shall not the King
(whom the Laws have entrusted with the examination of these things, and to
whom the principal care of religion and the charge of all the people is
committed by God himself, and the power of executing his own Laws) have
power to grant his dispensations for the same?

Certainly, they that would persuade the world that all Laws must have such
force, that all dispensations are transgressions of them, (as if general rules
should have no exceptions) would manacle the Kings hands, and bind his power
in the chains of their crooked wills, that he should not be able to do that
good, which God, and right, and Law it self do give him leave; and their envy
toward other men's grace, How God does diversely bestow his gifts.
is a great deal more, then either the grace of humility, or the love of truth
in them; for does not God give five talents to some of his servants, when he
gives but one to some others? Matthew. 25.15
and did not Joseph make Benjamins mess five times so much as any of his
brethrens? and have not some Lords 6, or 8, Genesis 43.34.
or 10 thousand pounds a year, and some very good men in the Commonwealth,
and perhaps higher in Gods favor, not ten pounds a year? and shall not the
King double the reward of them that deserve it in the Church of God? or shall
he be so curbed and manacled, that he shall neither alter nor dispense with his
own Law, though it be for the greater glory unto God, and the greater benefit
both to the Church and Commonwealth?

Besides, who can deny, but that some men's merits, virtue, pains, and
learning, are more worthy of two Benefices, then many others are of one? and
when in his younger time he is possessed of a small Benefice, he may perchance
afterward, when his years deserve better, far easier obtain another little
one to keep with it, then get (what I dare assure you, he would desire much
rather For who would not rather choose one Living of a 100l a year, then two of
50l a piece.
) one Living of equal value to them both: and shall the unlearned zeal of an
envious mind so far prejudice a worthy man, that the Kings lawful right
shall be censured, and his power questioned and clipped, or traduced by this
ignorant Zelot? I will bless my self from them, and maintain it before all
the world, that the Kings dispensations for Pluralities, Non-residency, and the
like Privileges, not repugnant to common right, are not against Law; nor the
giving or taking of them upon just causes against conscience: but what the
violence of this viperous brood proclaims an intolerable offense, we dare
warrant both with good reason and true Divinity to be no sin, no fault at
all, but an undoubted portion of the Kings right, for the greater benefit both
of the Church and State, and the greater glory unto God himself.

And therefore (most gracious King) we humbly desire your Majesty, The Authors
Petition to His Majesty.
suffer not these children of Apollyon to pull this flower out of your royal
Crown, to abridge you of your just right of granting dispensations for
Pluralities and Non-residency (which the Laws of your Land do yet allow you)
and which they labor to annull, to darken the glory of Gods Church, and to
bring your Clergy, by depriving them of their means and honor into contempt;
lest that, when by one and one, they have robbed you of all your rights, they
will fairly salute you, as the Jews did Christ, Hail King of the Jews, when
God knows they hated him, and stripped him of all power, (I speak not of his
Divinity) either to govern them, or to save himself.

^
3. As the King has right and power to grant his dispensations both of grace
and of justice, of grace when it is merely of the Kings Princely favor, as in
legitimations and the like, and of justice when the King finds a just cause
to grant it; so likewise it is in the Kings power and right to remit any
offense, (that is, the m^lct or penalty) and to absolve the offender from any
or all the transgressions of his own Laws; from the transgression of Gods
Law, neither King, nor Pope, nor Priest, nor any other can formally remit the
fault, and absolve transgressors, but as God is the Lawgiver, so God alone
must be the forgiver of the offense; Mar. 2.7.
so the Jews say, who can forgive sins but God only? Yet, as God which gives
the Law can lawfully remit the sin, and forgive the breach of the Law, so the
King which makes these positive Laws cannot be denied this power, As David
pardoned Absolon, and Solomon Abtathar.
to pardon when he sees cause, or is so pleased, the offenders of his Laws;
as you see they do many times grant their pardons for the most heinous faults
and capital crimes, as treasons, Christ bids that the tares should grow.
Matthew. 13.30. And the Apostle says, (...). there must be heresies: therefore
there must be a toleration of diverse Sects. 1 Cor. 11.19.
murders, felonies, and the like: And if they may grant their pardons for the
breach of the Law, and remit the mulct imposed for the transgression thereof,
it is strange if they should not have right to dispense with whom they please,
when they see cause, from the bond of the Law: and therefore we are to discuss
how far the King (in these Laws of the Church) may give exemptions and
tolerations unto them* whose consciences cannot submit themselves to the
observation of the established Laws; for seeing all men are not of the same
faith, nor do profess the same religion; and it is the nature of all men to
dislike that which themselves will not profess, and if opportunity serve to
root out that which they dislike; it is requisite it should be showed how far
a prudent and a pious Prince may grant a toleration (the Law in terminis not
forbidding it) unto any of these Sects that may be commorant within his
Kingdoms.

Touching which, I say that besides dissembling hypocrites, and profane
worldlings, that have no faith, nor any other religion, but the shadow of that
religion, whatsoever it is, which is professed wheresoever they are, Four
special sorts of false Professors. 1. Jews.
there may be in any Kingdom Jews, Turks, Papists, Puritans, and the like;
or to call them otherwise, Idolaters, Heretics, Schismatiques, etc. And

1. For the Jews, though they have many things in their religion, which will
ever alienate them from the Papists, yet they have free leave to use their
ancient Ceremonies in Rome, Whitak. against Campian. translated by Master
Stock, p. 311.
says Doctor Whitaker; and it is well known, that many pious Princes have
permitted them to dwell, and to exercise their own religion in this Kingdom;
the old Jurie in London is so called, because it was allotted for their abode;
and the Laws of many Christian Emperors have in like sort permitted them to
do the like in their Dominions, With what cautions the Jews are to be
suffered. Deuteronomy. 7.3. Exodus 23.32. Doctor Covell, c. 14. p. 199.
but with those cautions and limitations that Moses prescribed unto the Jews,
to be observed with the Heathens and Idolaters that dwelt amongst them; that
is, neither to make marriages with them, nor to communicate with them in their
religion. And S. Augustine is reported to be so favorable toward them, that
he alleges several reasons for their toleration. As

1. 1. Reason for their toleration.
That above and before others they had the promise of salvation; and therefore
though some of the branches be cut off, and the case of the rest be most
lamentable, yet not altogether desperate and incurable, Romans 11.24, 25
if we consider what the Apostle sets down, of their conversion and
re-unition unto the good right olive tree.

2. That the Prophet David speaking of them, made that Slay them not, O Lord,
Psalm. 59.11.
lest my people forget it, but scatter them abroad among the Heathen, and put
them down, O Lord, our defense, for many excellent ends; as first, that their
being scattered among the Christians, might show both the Clemency and severity
of God, toward us mercy and clemency, and toward them justice and severity,
which may likewise happen unto us if we take not heed, as the Apostle bids us,
Romans 11.20. We may not force the Jews to believe.
Be not high-minded but fear: and secondly, that being among the Christians,
they might the sooner at all times by their charity and prayers be reduced, the
more willingly to embrace the faith of Christ, when as unwillingly we may
neither compel them, nor take their children to be baptized from them. And
therefore as the Princes of this Realm, for diverse causes hurtful to their
State, have banished them out of their Dominions, so if they see good cause to
permit them (as time may change the condition of things) they may do, as by
their counsel they shall be advised, either the one or the other, to receive
them or reject them without offense; because we find no special precept or
direction in Gods Word either to banish or to cherish them in any Kingdom.

2 Turks.
2 For the Turks, the reasons are not much unlike, though something different,
and in my judgment no less tolerable then the other, because somewhat nearer
to the Christian faith; therefore I leave them to the Laws of each Kingdom,
to do as the wisdom of the Prince shall think fit.

3. Papists.
3 For the Papists the case is far otherwise with them, then either with the
Turks or Jews; because,

1 They profess the same faith, quoad essentialia the same Creedes, the same
Gospel, and the same Christ as we do.

2 It is not denied by the best of our Divines, but that they together with us
do constitute the same Catholic Church of Christ, though they be sick and
corrupted, yet not dead; and we strong and sound, yet not unspotted members of
the same; as I have more fully showed in my book of the true Church.

3. Popist.
3 It is not agreed upon by all our Divines, that they are idolaters, though
they be in great errors, and implunged in many superstitions; because every
Church in error, though never so dangerous, is not so desperate as that Church
which is Idolatrous; or be it granted, (which some of our Protestants will not
admit) that they were Idolaters; Carol. Sigon. l. 5. c. 11. p. 174.
yet seeing not only seven special sort of heresies, as 1 the Sadduces. 2 the
Scribes. 3 the Pharisees. The Hemero-baptists, such as baptized themselves every
day. 5 The Osseni, which Josephus calls Essai. 6 The Nazarites. And 7 the
Herodians; whereof some denied the resurrection, and the being of Angels and
spirits; but also Idolaters and heathens, that knew not God, but worshipped the
Devil instead of God, were not inhibited to dwell and inhabit among the Jews
(of whose Religion notwithstanding God was as careful to preserve the purity
of it, and as jealous to keep them from Idolatry, as of any Nation that then
or ever after lived upon the earth) it is no question, but if it please the
King, permission may be granted them to exercise their own religion, not
publicly and autoritative, equally with the Protestant, but quietly, and so as
I have showed in my Grand Rebellion; Grand Rebel. c. 1. p. 5. and 6.
for I am not of their faith, which hold it more safe, and less dangerous to
be conversant with the Turks or Jews, and to have more neerenesse with them,
then with an Idolatrous Church that professes Christ; because, that where the
greater distance is from the true religion, there the lesser familiarity and
neerenesse should be in conversation, and the greater distance in communion;
therefore as the wrath of God was kindled against the Israelites, because they
had the Jews, their own brethren, The least familiarity in conversation,
where there is greatest distance from truth.
in greater detestation then the Idumeant or the Egyptians, whose idolatry must
needs be far greater, and their Religion far worse, in their own
judgment, then that of the Jews; so we may fear the like anger from God, if
we will be so partial in our judgment, and so transported with disaffection,
as to prefer a blasphemous Turk, or an impious Jewe before those men, though
ignorantly idolatrous, that do with all fear and reverence worship the same
God, and adore the name of Christ as we do.

And we read that the Emperor Justinus, a right Catholic Prince, as Bishop
Horn calls him, Bishop Horn against Fekenham. Justinius gave a toleration to
the Arians.
at the request of Theodoricke King of Italy, granted license that the Arians,
which denied the Deity of our Savior Christ, and were the worst of Heretics,
and therefore worse then any Papist, should be restored, and suffered to live
after their own orders; and Pope John, for the peace and quietness of the
Catholic Church, requested him most humbly so to do, which he did for fear
of Theodoric, that otherwise threatened the Catholics should not live.

success that that befell to King David's house for Solomon's permission of
diverse religions, to be divided into two parts, and the best ten Tribes for two
to be given unto a stranger; and the principal care of a pious Prince, being
to preserve pure religion, Deuteronomy. 17, 18, 19.
which is soon infected by Idolatrous neighbors, do rather disprove all
toleration, then any ways connive with them that are of a different religion:
and if we read the Oration of the league to the King of France, wherein that
Orator numbereth their victories, and innumerable successes, whilst they had
but one religion, and their miseries, and ill fortunes when they fostered two
religions, it will appear how far they were from allowing a toleration of
any more then one religion in one Kingdom.

Sol. The true cause of renting Solomon's Kingdom. Ps. 106.35.
Yet to this it may be easily answered, that Solomon's Kingdom was not rent from
his posterity for his permission of idolaters to dwell in his Kingdom, which
the Law of God did not forbid; but for that fault which his father taxed the
Jews with, they were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works, for
his commixtion of alliances with strangers and the corruption of true religion,
by his marrying of so many idolatrous wives, and so becoming idolatrous
himself, and thereby inducing his subjects the Israelites to be the like: and
for the Oration of the league, there is in that brave Orator want of Logic,
and ignoratio eleuchi, non causae ut causae, for you know what the Poet says
-- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat:
and we must not judge of true causes by the various success of things; and I
may say, it was not the professing of one religion, but the sincere serving of
God in that true religion, which brought to them, and will bring to others,
prosperous success against the infidels: neither was it the permitting of two
religions, or to speak more properly, the diversity of opinions in the same
religion, but their emulation and hatred one against another, their pride and
ambition, and many other consequences of private discords might be the just
causes of their misfortunes.

4. For the Puritans, Brownists, Anabaptists, Heretics, 4. Puritans.
and Schismatickes, that are deemed neither Infidels nor Idolaters, but do
obstinately err in some points of faith, as the Arians, that denied the
Divinity of Christ, and the Nestorians that denied repentance to them which
sinned after baptism, and the like pernicious heresies, though not all alike
dangerous; or do make a Schism or a rent in the Church of Christ, as the
Donatists did in Saint Augustines time, and the Anabaptists, and Puritans do in
our days; I say these are not to be esteemed and expelled as deadly enemies;
but to be suffered and respected as weak friends, if they proceed not to be
turbulent and malicious, who then may prove to be more dangerous, both to
Church and State, then any of the former sort that profess their religion with
Peace and quietness: What wrong Professors are chiefly to be suffered.
for it is not the Profession of this or that religion, but the malice and
wickedness of the professer, that is the bane and poison of the Church wherein
it rests: for what is diversity of opinions in the Church of God, but tares
among the wheat? and our Savior shows, that the tares should not be plucked
up, Matthew. 13.29.
but suffered to grow with the wheat; to teach us, that in respect of external
communion, and civil conversation, Why to be suffered; either for the exercise
of the godly, or in hope to convert the ungodly.
all sorts of Professors may live together, though in respect of our spiritual
communion and exercise of our religion, the Heretic shall be cast forth, and
be unto me tanquam Ethnicus and Publicanus, with whom notwithstanding I may
converse, as our Savior did, with hope that I may convert them unto him; which
could never be done, if they should be quite excluded our company, and banished
from all holy society.

And therefore as the prudent Prince sees the disposition, and observes the
conversation of any Faction, and the turbulency of any Sect, so he knows best
how to advice with his counsel to grant his toleration to them that best
deserve it, not so much in respect of the meli^rity of their religion, as their
peaceable and harmless habitation among their neighbors without railing
against their faith, or rebelling against their Prince.

And thus, as the case now stands, I see not any Sect, or any sort of
Professors, that for turbulency of spirit, madness of zeal, and violency of
hatred and persecution to the true Protestants, are more dangerous to the true
religion, and deserve loss favor from their pious Prince then these
Anabaptists, Brownists, and Puritans, that have so maliciously plotted, and so
rebelliously prosecuted their damnable designs, to the utter ruin both of
Church and State. Doctor Covell, cap. 15. p. 212. His description of the
Puritans.
Doctor Covell long ago, when they were not half so bad as they be now,
says, they pretend gravity, reprehend severely, speak gloriously, and all in
hypocrisy; they daily invent new opinions, and run from error to error;
their wilfulness they account constancy, their deserved punishment
persecution, their mouths are ever open to speak evil; And to confirm this
description, read what King JAMES writes of them in his Basilicon Doron. p.
160. and 161. and in the History of the conference at Hampton Court in anno
603. p. 81, 82.
they give neither reverence nor titles to any in place above them; in one
word, the Church cannot fear a more dangerous and fatal enemy to her peace
and happiness, a greater cloud to the light of the Gospel, a stronger hand to
pull in barbarism and poverty into all our Land, a more furious monster to
breed contempt and disobedience in all estates, a more fretting canker to the
very marrow and sinews of this Church and Kingdom, then this beast, who is
proud without learning, presumptuous without authority, zealous without
knowledge, holy without religion, and in brief a most dangerous and malicious
hypocrite, and were therefore banished from amongst us in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, but now deserve it far better, being more dangerous, because far
more numerous Huc usque.
; and therefore I cannot say with S. Bernard, Aut corrigendi ne percant, aut
coercendi ne perimant; for in our judgment they are incorrigible, and in their
own opinion they are invincible, having by lies and frauds gathered so much
wealth, and united such strength together, Our factious Puritans bitterer
against Kings then the Jesuits.
that, except the Lord himself had been on our side, and made our very
enemies the Papists to become our friends, and to hazard their lives and
fortunes, according to their duty, to preserve the Crown and Dignity of their
King, as God most wisely disposes of things, when he produces light out of
darkness, and against their wills support our true Protestant religion from
being quite defaced by these merciless enemies, we might well fear what
destruction would have come upon us.

And therefore considering the bitter writings of their Prophets, old and new,
being fuller of gall and venom against Christian Kings, then can be found in
the books of the Jesuits; and considering the wicked practices, and this
unparalleled rebellion of these new Proselytes, and the loyalty of those that
heretofore received least favor from the Church, and not much from the State:
Tell me I pray you which of these deserve best to be suffered in a Protestant
Church? they that maliciously seek her ruin, or they that unwillingly support
her from falling? for my self, I will ever be of the true Protestant faith;
yet for this loyalty of the Papists unto their King, I will ever be in charity,
and rest in the same hope, though not in the same faith, with them: and I doubt
not but His Majesty will think well of their fidelity.

But as S. Bernard says, Non est meae humilitatis dictitare vobis, it is not
for me to prescribe who are most capable of grace, or who best deserves the
Kings favor, when his Princely grace presupposes a sufficient merit, but in
humility to set down mine own opinion in this point of toleration, with
submission to the judgment of this Church: wherein also I humbly desire my
reader not to mistake me, as if I meant such a public and legal toleration,
as might breed a greater distraction in a Kingdom, then the wisdom of the
State could well master, and raise more spirits then they could lay down;
Grand Rebellion, p. 5^ 6.
but such as I have expressed in my Grand Rebellion; that is, a favorable
connivence to enjoy their own consciences, so long as they live in peace and
amity with their neighbors, but without any public exercise of their
religion, which can produce nothing else but discord, distraction, and
destruction to that Kingdom, where two religions are professed in Aequilibrio,
with the same privileges and authority.

These and many more are the rights of Kings, granted them by God for the
government of his Church, which they are to look unto, and to protect in all
her rights, service, maintenance, ordinances, governors, and the like, if they
look that God should bless and protect them in their ways, dignities, and
dues; because it is their duties and the first charge that God lays upon
them, Esaias 49.23.
to be nursing fathers unto his Church: for God knew the Church should have
many enemies; and intus est equus Trojanus, and they are the worst that are
nearest unto Kings, and do with Judas kiss, with fair words, and
Machiavilian counsels, betray both Church and King, and in the end destroy
themselves; for who deceived Absolon, though rightly, but his own Counselor?
who betrayed Ahab, and that most wickedly, but his lying Parasites? and who
overthrew Rehoboam, and that foolishly, but his young favorites Which thing is
purposely set down in the holy Scripture, to be a cave (...) for all Kings,
not to rely too much upon young Counselors; not that wisdom and prudence are
intayled to old age, and inseparable from gray hairs, or divorced from green
heads; but because commonly experience is the fruitful mother of these fair
issues, and the multitude of years teaches wisdom; for otherwise there may
be delirium senectutis, the dotage of old age, as well as vanitas juventutis;
the folly of youth; and as Elihu says, Great men are not always wise, neither
do the aged understand judgment: but as Solomon says, Wisdom, even in
youth, is the gray hairs, and an undefiled life is the old age; as we see,
young Joseph was the wisest in all Egypt: Solomon, Daniel, and Titus, how wise
how learned, and how religious were they in their younger years? So Alexander,
Haniball, Scipio, in the feats of war; Lucan, Mirandula, Keckerman, and
abundance more in all humane learning, that were but Neophuti annis, yet were
egregij virtutibus, young in years, yet very admirable for their worth. And
Princes do most wisely, when they make such election; especially when they are
enforced to call men to places of labor and industry, they must have some
regard to the bodies, as well as to the minds of their servants, and choose men
of younger years, though not to be their favorites, but their confidents,
according to the French distinction; as His Majesty has lately made choice of
one noble servant, who is (as Nazianzen speaks) (...): gray in the mind,
though yellow in the head, and supplying in all manner of excellent parts, what
may be conceived wanting in years, whose name, so much already catched at by
envy, I shall ever reverence, though now I purposely pass it over in silence.
? and whom may the Church fear most of all, but her dissembling friends, that
are in most favor with Kings, and therefore seduce them soonest, insensibly to
wound the Care, and neglect the Charge that is laid upon them; because, as S.
Bernard says, Long plus nocet falsus Catholicus, quam si apertus appareret
haereticus; those eare-wigs are most pernicious, whose counsels seem to be
most specious, when they are but as the spirit of darkness, appearing like an
Angel of light, when they say, God indeed must be served, and the Word must be
preached, but whether Bishop or no Bishop, whether in a sumptuous Church or
private house, whether by an esteemed Clergy, or a poor mean Ministry, in
this manner or in another fashion, it skilleth not much; Kings may well enough
give way to spare that cost, to lessen that revenue, and to pull down these
Cathedrals, especially to give content unto the people, and to defray the
expensive charge of the Commonwealth.

But these counsels will not excuse Kings in the day of their account;
therefore let them take heed of such Counselors; and when they hear them
begin to speak against the Church, though they be-guild their beginnings never
so slily, let them either stop their ears with the Cockatrice, Psalm. 58.5.
that will not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely; or
let them answer, as our Savior answered their grand instructor, Matthew. 4.10.
Vade Satana, non tentabis; for it is most true, that, Qui deliberat, jam
desivit; he that listens to them is half corrupted by them; and so they may
prove destructive both to themselves, and to their posterity; for as nothing
establishes the Throne of Kings surer, then obedience to God; so nothing is
more dangerous then rebellion against God, with whom there is no respect of
persons; Romans 2.11.
for he expects, that as he made Kings his Vicegerents, so they should fear
him, preserve the right of his Church, uphold his service, defend his servants,
and do all that he commandes them entirely, without taking the least libert^
^or fear of the people, to dispense with any omission of his h^nour, or
suffering the hedges of his Vineyard, the governors of his Church, to be
trodden down and torn in pieces, that the beasts of the field may destroy the
grapes, and defile the service of our God.

Therefore to conclude this point, let all Kings do their best to hinder their
people to corrupt the Covenant of Levi, Malath. 2.^.
which is a Covenant of Salt, that is, to endure for ever; let them remember
Moses prayer; Bless Lord his substance, Deuteronomy. 33.11.
and accept the work of his hands; smite through the loins of them that rise
against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again; and let them
always consider, Psalm. 35.27.
that God takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants.

CHAP. XI. Shows where the Protestants, Papists, and Puritans, do place
Sovereignty; who first taught the deposing of Kings; the Puritans tenet worse
then the Jesuits; Kings authority immediately from God; the twofold royalty in
a King; the words of the Apostle vindicated from false glosses; the testimony
of the Fathers and Romanists for the Sovereignty of Kings; the two things that
show the difficulty of government; what a miraculous thing it is; and that God
himself is the governor of the people.
2. The duty of the King in the government of the Commonwealth.
2. HAving set down some particulars of the Kings right in the government of
Gods Church, it rests that I should show some part of his right and duty to
serve God, as he is a King, in the government of the Commonwealth; touching
which, for our more orderly proceeding, I will distribute my whole discourse
into these five heads. Five points handled.


1. To justify his right to govern the people. 2. To show the difficulty of
this government. 3. To set down the assistants that are to help him in the
performance of this duty. 4. To distinguish the chiefest parts of this
government. 5. To declare the end for which this government is ordained of
God.
1. Point. 1. Where the Protestants place Sovereignty.
1. We say that the Kings Sovereignty or royal power to govern the people, is
independent from all creatures solely from God, who has immediately conferred
the same upon him; and this we are able to make good, with abundance both of
divine and humane proofs: and yet we find the same adversaries of this truth
(though with a far less show of reason) that we met withal about the
government of Gods Church. For

2. In whom the Papists do place Sovereignty.
2. They that are infatuated with the cup of Babylon, the Canonists and some
Jesuits do constantly aver, that summum imperium, the primary supreme
power of this government is in the Pope, (...), absolutely and directly, The
Pope's sad Message to Hen. 3. Imp. Quem meritum investivimus quare immeritum
non devest^amus? quia ad quem pertinet institutio, ad eundem pertinet
destitutio.
as he is the Vicar of Christ, who has all power given him both in Heaven and
earth; from whom it is immediately derived unto his Vicar, and from him to all
Kings, mediately by subordination unto him: so Baronius, Carerius, and others.
But Bellarmine and the rest of the more moderate Jesuists say, that this
imperium in reges, the Popes power over all Kings and States is but indirectum
dominium, a power by consequent and indirectly, in ordine ad bonum spirituale,
as the civil State has relation to religion; and this great Cardinal, lest
he should seem sine ratione insanire, does (as the Heretics did in
Tertullians time) Caedem Scripturarum facere ad materiam suam, allege 22
places of Scripture mis-interpreted, to confirm his indirect Divinity; and as
Potiphars wife, he produces very honest apparel, but to prove a very bad
cause; and therefore attributing to the Pope by the greatness of his learning,
and the excellency of his wit, more then he could justify with a good
conscience, he was so far from satisfying the then Pope, that he was well
nigh resolved to condemn all his works for this one opinion: and Carerius
undertook his confutation ex professo, Carerius, lib. 1. cap. 5.
and taxes him so bitterly, that he puts him inter impios haereticos, which
he needed not to have done; because the difference is only in the expression,
when the Pope by this indirect power may take occasion to king and unking whom
he pleases, and do what he will in all Christian States.

3. 3. Where the Puritans place the Sovereignty. Majestas regia sita est magis
in populo, quam in persona regis. Parsons in Do^^ man.
The Anabaptists and Puritans either deny all government, with the
Fratricelli, and all superiority by the title of Christianity, as the Author of
the Tract of Schism and Schismatics; or do say that originally it
proceeds, and habitually resideth in the people, but is cumulatively and
communicatively derived from them unto the King; and therefore the people (not
denuding themselves of their first interest, but still retaining the same in
the collective body, that is, in themselves suppletive, if the King in their
judgment be defective in the administration, or neglect the performance of his
duty) may question their King for his mis-government, dethrone him if they see
cause, and resuming the collated power into their own hands again, may
transfer it to any other whom they please.

Which opinion, if it were true, would make miserable the condition of all
Kings; and I believe they first learned it from the Sorbonists, The Sorbonists
first taught the deposing of Kings, and why.
who to subject the Pope to the community of the faithful, say, that the
chief spiritual power was first committed by Christ unto them, and they to
preserve the unity of the Church remitted the same communicatively unto the
Pope, but suppletively, (not privatively, or habitually devesting themselves
thereof) retaining the same still in themselves, if the Pope failed in the
faith of the Church; and therefore he was not only censurable, but also
deposable by the Council, if he became an heretic, or apostated from the
religion of Christ; and to make this both the more plausible and probable, they
alleged how Kings were thus eligible, Buchan. de jure regni. p. 75. and 91.
and likewise deposable by the community of the people; for out of this
Buchanan says, Romani Pontifices long regum omnium condition superiores,
legum tamen poenis haud eximuntur; sed and eos, quanquam sacrosanctos
Christianis omnibus semper habitos, Synodus Basiliensis communi ordinum
consensu senatui sacerdotum obnoxios esse pronunciavit: that is, in brief, the
Popes are deprivable by the Counsel; So are Kings by the community of the
people: and so both the Papist and the Puritan do agree to depose their
Kings, and as the Poet says, Claudian de 4. Consul. Honorii
Ausus uterque nefas, domini respersus uterque,
Insontis jugulo. --
never a barrel better herring; both alike friends to Kings.

But to this Blacvodaeus answers most truly, that although the Pope should be
deprivable by the counsel, (which I am sure neither Pope nor Jesuit will
allow) yet for diverse different reasons betwixt the examples, Kings are not
deposable by their Subjects; especially if you consider the great difference
betwixt the Church of Christ, that is guided by the Spirit of God, and the
representation thereof in the flower of her Clergy, Blac v. cap. 23. p. 304.
and a giddyheaded multitude, that is led by their unruly and unreasonable
passions, and are represented by those, that either basely bought their Votes,
as the Consulls and other great men did the votes of the people of Rome, or
that their partial and most ignorant affection, oftentimes without judgment,
have made choice of: ex quo sequitur, ut non sit eadem populi potestas in
regem, quae in pontificem est Ecclesiae: So that the reason is far unlike.

But, though the Sorbonists, to justify their former tenet, The Puritans
opinion worse then the Jesuits in two respects
were the first broachers of this unjust opinion of the deposition of Kings by
the people, from whence the Jesuits, to subject the King unto the Pope, sucked
it afterward: Yet in two maine respects I find this tenet, as it is held by the
Puritanes, far worse then the doctrine of the Jesuits.

1. Because some of them say that the people may not restrain once transmitted
unto the King: when the Law of justice does not permit, that Covenants should
be repealed, or a donation granted should be revoked, though it were never so
prejudicial to the donor: and Bellarmine makes this good by the example of the
soldiers, Bellar. in tract: cont. Pat. Paul.
that had power to accept or reject their Emperor before he was created, but
being once elected they had no coactive power over him: whereas all the
Puritanes will make and unmake, promise and break, do and undo at their
pleasure.

2. Because the Jesuits permit not the people nor any Peers Pope, as an
indifferent judge deputed by Christ, shall approve of the cause; and our
Sectaries depresse Kings so far, as to submit them to the weak judgment and
extravagant power of the people, who to day cry to Gideon, reign thou and thy
son over us for ever, and to morrow join with the base son of Ierubbaal
and the Sichemites to kill 70 of the Children of Gideon, Judges 91
and to create Abimilech to be their King.

But, though the Anti-Cavalier takes it ill, Our Opinion proved. Anti-Cav. in
Os Ossor. p. 25.
that I should affirm that the Kings power and right unto his government is
immediately from God; yet if he would believe learned authors, he might find
enough of this judgment; for the sublime power and authority that resideth in
earthly Potentates, is not a derivation or collection of humane power scattered
among many, and gathered into one head, but a power immediately granted by God
to his Vicegerents So acknowledged by Act of Parliament, 25 H. 8. c. 12. 28. c.
10.
, quam nunquam fuisse populo demandatam legimus, which God never communicated
to any multitudes of men, Dt Sarav. fol. 175. Bellar. de L^cis, cap. 6. and 8.
says Saravia.

And Bellarmine himself against the Anabaptists confuteth their error, that
denied the power and authority of Kings to be immediately from God; I. From
Script. Sap. 6. Esaias 45. Hierom. 27. Dan. 2. Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2. II. from the
Council of Constans. Sess. 8. and 15. III. from S. Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 5.
c. 21. where he says, non tribuamus dandi regni potestatem nisi Deo vero;
which gives felicity in the kingdom of heaven only to the godly, but the
earthly Kingdoms he gives both to the godly and to the wicked; nam qui dedit
Mario, ipse and Caesari, qui Augusto ipse and Neroni, Idem de Romans Pont. l. 5.
c. 3. Irvinus de jure regni. c. 2. p. 40.
qui Vespasianis, vel patri vel filio, suavissimis, imperatoribus, ipse and
Domitiano crudelissimo, qui Constantino Christiano, ipse and Apostatae Iuliano;
And IV. it is proved from the confession of the Popes of Rome, as Leo. ep. 38.
and 43. Gelasius epist. ad Anastasium. Greg. l. 2. epist. 61. Nicholaus epist.
ad Michaelem: out of all which says Irvinus, it is apparent, all and every
King non multitudini aut hominibus sed Deo soli, regum regi, quicquid juris
habent acceptum far; And he might consider that a thing may be said to be
immediately from God diverse ways, as specially.

1 (...), absque ullo signo creato. 2 (...) cum aliquo actu conjuncto.
that is,

1. Solely from God and no other; presupposing nothing praevious to the
obtaining of it; So Moses and Joshua had their authority from God.

Heningus fuse, c. 1. p. 4 and 5. de distinct. duplici jurisdict. Sive
electione sive postulatione, vel successione, vel belli jure Princept fiat,
Principitamen facto divinitus potesta^data est Cunerus, c. 5. de ^ffic. Princip.
2. Jointly with an interposed act of some other instrument, as the Apostolical
power of Matthias was immediately from God, though his constitution was from
the Apostles; so Kings though some of them be after a sort elected by men; yet
as our Savior says to Pilate, that his power was from above, though he was
deputed by Caesar; So may they be said to have their authority immediately from
God; though they should be some ways deputed by men: for we must distinguish
betwixt the sovereignty, the Subject, and the collation of the Sovereignty to
the Subject; the Sovereignty is immediately from God, the Subject is from it is
natural causes, and the unition of the Sovereignty to the Subject is likewise
immediately from God, not only approving but appointing the same, in all the
Kings of his ordination: or to speak with the Schools, we must distinguish
betwixt deputationem personae, and collationem potestatis, the designation of
the person, which is sometimes done by men, and that is where the King is
elective, and the donation of the power which is proper only unto God; for so
the Psalmist says, God has spoken once and twice; Psalm. 62.11.
I have also heard the same, that power belongs unto God: and the Apostle
says, Romans 13.2.
the powers that are, are ordained of God, which is to be understood of the
regal, or Monarchical power; because Saint Paul's (...), higher powers are
interpreted by Saint Peter, 2. Pet. 2.13.
to be (...), Kings that are supreme; where Saint Peter makes an excellent
distinction betwixt the superior and the inferior Magistrates; Saint Peter's
description betwixt the King and the inferior Magistrates. A two fold royalty
in a King. 1 Merum imperium.
the superior is that which Saint Paul says is ordained of God, and the
inferiors are they which St Peter calls (...) such as are sent by the King;
for the better explanation of which place, you must know that in every King or
supreme Magistrate, we may conceive a double royalty.

The 1 is merum imperium, or regni potestas, summa and plenissima; and this
(...), this fullness of power, and independent of any creature, and immediately
received of God, which the Civilians call jus regis, or munus regni, is in the
person of the King indivisible, not to be imparted by the King to any creature;
because he cannot divest himself, divide this power, or alienate the same to
any subject, no not to his own son, How the King cannot do unjustly.
without renouncing or dividing his Kingdom; and by this the Civilians say,
the King may govern sine certa lege, sine certo jure, sed non fine aequitate
and justitia, without Law, but not without equity: whereupon it is a rule in
the Common Law, hoc unum rex potest facere, quod non potest injuste agere. 2
Imperium dispositi vum.
which is to be applied to this inseparable regality of the King; and has
been often alleged by other Parliaments to justify the King from all blame.
The 2 is, imperium dispositivum, or jus gubernandi vel jurisdictio the right of
governing, or jurisdiction and distribution of justice; and this may be derived
and delegated from the King, legatis vitalitiis, either for term of life, or
during the Kings pleasure. But how?, not privative, when the King does not
denude himself thereof, but cumulative and executive, to execute the same, How
the King delegates his power to his inferior Magistrates.
as the Kings Instruments for the preservation of peace and the administration
of justice, as it appears in their patent; and this subordinate power is not
inherent in their persons, but only committed unto them for the execution of
some office: because that when the supreme power is present, the power of the
inferior officers is silent, it is in nubibus, fled into the clouds, and like
the light of the moon and stars vanishing, whenever the Sun appears; for
Kings, when they do transfer any actual power to the subalternate Officers,
retain the habitual power still in their own hands, which upon any emeregent
occasion they may actually resume to themselves again, which they could not
do, if they parted with the habit and form of this despoticall power of
government, that they have immediately received from God.

The words of the Apostles vindicated from the false glosses of the S^ctaries.
Romans 13.3.
And, as the Scriptures make it plain, that the Kings right and power to
govern is immediately from God, so they make it as plain, that it is the
greatest right and most eminent highest power that is on earth; for though the
cavillers at this power translate the words of Saint Paul (...), not
potestatibus sublimioribus or supremis, but potestatibus superexcellentibus,
and say that the word or particle (...) where S. Peter bids us submit our
selves to the King, (...), as to the chief, intends a resemblance only, and
not a real demonstration to prove the King to be the chief; Yet the malice of
these men, and the falsehood of these glosses will appear, if you consider that
the word, (...) habens se super alios, or (...) joined with (...) to the powers
that are ordained of God, must needs signify not any subordinate power, but
the supremest power on earth; because the other powers are directly said by
Saint Peter to be sent by the King, 1 Pet. 2.13.
and the article (...) does as really express the matter there, as in John
1.14. where the Evangelist says, and we beheld his glory (...), The testimony
of the Fathers for the Sovereignty of Kings.
as the glory of the only begotten Son of God. And I hope our Sectaries will
not be so impudent, as to say that this signifies but a resemblance of the Son
of God.

But to make this point more plain, you shall hear what the fathers and the
learned say; for,

I told you before, Tertullian says of Kings and Emperors, Tertul. ad Scap.
and in apologe^. c. 30. I^en. advers haeres. Valent. l. 5. c. 20. Optat. contr.
^armen l. 3. (...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. orat. 40. orat. 2. Aug. de civit. Dei. l.
5. c. 21. Q Curtin^ l. 9.
inde potestas, unde and spiritus, and he is solo Deo minor, inferior to none
but God. Saint Chrysostom says, he has no peer on earth, but is the top of
all men living. Athanasius says, there is none above the Emperor, but only
God that made the Emperor. Saint Cyrill in a Sermon upon that text, I am the
vine, commends the answer of a King, (whom Quintus Curtius affirms to be
Alexander,) that being shot, and his Subjects would have him bound to pull out
the arrow, said, non decet vinciri Regem, Bern. Tractat. de pass. Dom. c. 4. it
becomes not Kings to be bound, because none is superior unto them: Agapetus, a
Deacon of Constantine, says as much; and because it is a rule in the Civil
Law, testem quem quis inducit pro se tenetur recipere contra sese: the
testimony of our adversaries is most convictive; therefore I beseech you hear
what they say; for Rosellus a great Catholic says, it is heretical to
affirm, that the universal administration of the temporal affairs is or
must be in the Pope, when the King has no superior on earth, but the Creator
of heaven and earth. Caninus also says, that the Apostle, Romans 13. spoke of
the Regal and secular power, Cassani Catal. glor. mundi p. 8. considers 28.
Card. Cusan. concord. Cathol. l. 3. c. 5. Vide Arnis. p. 5. de did. dupl.
iurisdict.
and not of the Ecclesiastical; and Cassanaeus says, that Kings are the
highest and most paramount secular power and authority that ever God appointed
on earth, and denies that either the old or the new Testament makes any mention
of an Emperor: and juris utriusque testimonia manifest declarant imperialem
dignitatem and potestatem immediate a filio Dei ab antiquo processisse, said
Philip King of France, in Constit de potest. elect. Imperat. Irvin. p. 33, 34,
35. quoteth many authors to confirm the same truth: Lombard, Gratian,
Melancton, Cranmer, Tyndall, and abundance more without number do likewise most
peremptorily affirm, that the Kings power is the supreme power on earth: and
as the mirror of our time, the Bishop of Winchester, observes, the Scripture
testifies, that their Throne, their Crown, their Sword, their Scepter, their
Judgment, their Royalty, their power, their Charge, their Person, and all in
them are of God, from God, and by God; to show how sacred they are, and ought
to be unto us all; and so the very Heathens teaching sounder Divinity then our
Sectaries thought, Homer. Plutarch. Ovid Fast. l. 5. Quia a love nutriti and ab
eo regnum adeptisunt. Scapula in verbo (...).
and said, that Kings were (...), and (...), the Ministers of God, and not the
servants of the people.

Good God! what shall we say then to those children of Adam, that will not
only with Adam be content to be like God, but with Antichrist, this (...),
Many headed beast.
as Plato calls them, will exalt themselves above all that is called God?
They will divest the King, and invest themselves with his right; and therefore,

2. The difficulty of government.
2. This shows how difficult a thing it is to rule and govern this unruly,
aspiring, and ambitious multitude: for the fuller understanding of which
difficult duty, Osorius says, that two things are to be considered. 2 Things
showing the difficulty of government.


1. Suscepti muneris amplitudo, the greatness of the charge, which is of that
weight, that we can scarce think of a greater in all our life; the care of
Church and Commonwealth, and to rule millions of men far and near.

2. Gubernandorum qualitas, the quality and conditions of those men that are to
be governed; which (if there were nothing else to prove it) will sufficiently
show the difficulty of their government; for if it be a very hard thing to
govern a man's self, how much harder is it to govern such a multitude of mad
men? Cicero. Tusc. 3. and de sinibus lib. 2. Plutarch. in Alc^biad.
for Cicero says, the multitude is the greatest teacher of error, the
unjustest judge of dignity, being without counsel, without reason, without
judgment; and Plutarch calls them possimam veritatis interpretem, whereunto
agrees the answer of that Pope, who being demanded what was furthest from
truth, answered, populi sententia, the opinion of the people; and as they are
the weakest for judgment, so they are most instable in their resolutions; to
day crying Hosanna, and to morrow Crucifige; this is the nature of the people,
of whom these our Sectaries are the very dregs, Osorius his description of the
factious Puritans, most plainly seen verified in our Rebels.
the worst and the basest of all: I must crave leave to set down what Osorius
says of them long ago, and you may find that this rebellion proves his words
most true: for he says, the desire and end of this faction is too much
liberty, then which nothing can be more averse to the office and government of
Kings; for it is the duty of a King to cut off all heinous offenses with just
punishments, the unbridled people desires to be free from all fear of
punishment; the King is the Minister of the Law, the Keeper of it, and the
avenger of the transgression thereof, the people as much as possibly they can,
with an impetuous temerity, pulls down all Laws; the King labors to
preserve peace and quietness, the people with an untameable lust turmoileth
and troubles the peace of all men: lastly, the King thinks not fit to
distribute rewards and compensations indifferently to all men alike, but the
people desire to have all difference of worth and dignity taken away, and
infima summis permisceri, and to make the basest equal with the best, whence
it happens so, that they hate all Princes, and especially all Kings, quos
immani odio persequuntur, whom they persecute with a deadly hate; for they
cannot endure any excellency or dignity: and to that end they use all
endeavor, ut principes interimant, vel saltem in turbam conjiciant, either
utterly to take away and destroy their Princes, or to implunge them into a
world of troubles; which thing at first does not appear, but when the
multitude of furious men has gathered strength, then at last their impudent
boldness, being confirmed by daily impunity, breaks forth to the destruction
of the royal Majesty. Osorius in op. Regina Elizabethae prafin. l. de relig.
And a little after he says, add to these things the abolition of Laws, the
contempt of Rule, the hatred of royal Majesty, and the cruel lying in wait,
which they most impiously and nefariously do endeavor, for their Princes: add
also their clandestine and secret discourses, where their confederacies are
made for the extirpation of their Kings, and to plot with unspeakable mischief
the death of them, whose health and safety they ought most heartily to pray to
God for: and then he adds, cum immodica libertatis cupiditate rapiantur,
leges oderunt, judicia detestantur, regum majestatem extinctam cupiunt, Pagina
24. and 25.
ut licentius and impunius queant per omnia libidinum genera vagari; and this
is most manifest (says he) all their endeavors aim at this end, that Princes
being taken away, they may have an uncontrollable leave and liberty to commit
all kind of villainies; and to that purpose they have poisoned some Kings, and
killed others with the sword, Revera mihi videtur esse ar^ artium, hominem
regere, qui certe est inter omnes animantes maxim and moribus vartus, and
voluntate diversus. Nazian. in Apol.
and to root out all rule, Consilia plena sceleris inierunt, they are full of
all wicked counsels.

And therefore this being the condition of the people, as the Scripture shows
plainly in the Jews, by their continual rebellions and murmurings against
Moses and Aaron; and we see it as plainly in our own time, when our people
has confirmed all that this Bishop said; it is not an easy matter to govern
such an unruly people: But we find that the rod of government is a miraculous
rod, that being in Moses hand was a fair wand, but cast unto the ground turned
to be an ugly and a poisonous Serpent; to show that the people, being subject
to the hand of government, is a goodly thing, and a glorious society; A people
well governed very glorious.
but let loose out of the Princes hands, they are as Serpents, crooked,
wriggled, versipellis, and as full as may be of all deadly poison: and the
Prophet David makes the ruling of the people to be as great a miracle, as to
appease the raging of the Seas; and therefore he ascribes this government to be
the proper work of God, Psalm. 65.7.
when speaking unto God, he says, Thou rulest the rage of the Seas, the noise
of his waves, and the madness of the people; God is the governor, and Kings
are but Gods instruments. Psalm. 77.20.
for Kings are but Gods instruments, and God himself is the ruler of his
people, even as the same King David shows, saying still to God, Tu deduicisti
populum tuum, Thou leadest thy people like sheep by the hands of Moses and
Aaron; God was the leader, and they were but the hands by which he led them;
for where God has not a hand in the government of the people, it is impossible
for the best and most politic heads to do it: and this Solomon knew ^ull
well, when God bade him ask what he should give him, and he said, Thou have
made me King, (he does not say the people has made me) and I know not how to
go out or in; that is, to govern them: 1 Reg. 3.7.9.
therefore I pray thee, give thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy
people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge
this thy so great a people? that is, what one man is able to govern an
innumerous multitude of men? Thou therefore must be the governor, and I am but
thine instrument; and that I may be a fit instrument to do thy work, I desire
thee to give me a docible heart.

Wherefore, O you Subjects without obedience, They that reject their King,
reject God.
and you Divines without Divinity, how dare you put any instruments into Gods
hands, and refuse, nay reject the instrument that he chooses, for the
performance of his own work, to rule the people? you may as well refuse God
himself, even as God says unto Samuel, They have not rejected thee, 1 Samuel
8.7.
but they have rejected me; so you that do rebel and cast away your King that
God has chosen, as his hand to guide you, (...). Luke 10.16.
and his instrument to govern you, I pronounce it to all the world you have
rebelled against God, and you have cast away your God; for the rule of Christ
must stand infallible, he that rejects (or despises) him that is sent,
rejects him that sent him.

CHAP. XII. Shows the assistants of Kings in their government; to whom the
choice of inferior Magistrates belongs; the power of the subordinate
officers; neither Peers nor Parliament can have supremacy; the Sectaries
chiefest argument out of Bracton answered; our Laws prove all Sovereignty to
be in the King; the two chief parts of the regal government; the four
properties of a just War; and how the Parliamentary Faction transgress in
every property.
3. SEeing it is so hard and difficult a matter, 3. The assistance that God
allows unto Kings to help them in their government, of two sorts.
ars artium guberuare populum, the Mistress of all Sciences, and the most
dangerous of all faculties to govern the people, that Saturninus said truly to
them that put on his Kingly ornaments, they knew not what an evil it was to
rule, because of the many dangers that hang over the rulers heads, which under
the seeming show of a Crown of gold, do wear indeed a Crown of thorns;
therefore, ut raro eminentes viros non magnis adjutoribus ad gubernandam
fortunam suam usus invenies, says Paterculus; as great men, of a wealthy and
vast estate, are seldom without great counsel to assist them to govern, and
to dispose of that great fortune; so Kings having a great charge laid upon
them, are not only permitted, but advised and counseled by God, to have 1.
Wise Counellors.
1. Faithful and wise Counselors to direct them 2. Subordinate Magistrates to
assist them
in the government of the people.

Tacit. annal. lib. 2.
1. Tacitus (as I said before) says, There cannot be an argument of greater
wisdom in a Prince, nor any thing of greater safety to the Commonwealth,
then for him to make choice of a wise and religious Counsel; because the most
weighty labors of the Prince do stand in need of the greatest helps:
therefore Agamemnon had his Nestor and Chalcas; ^^s. Hali. ^. ^ib. 2.
Augustus had Mecoenas and Agrippa, two wise Counselors, to direct him in all
his affairs; David had Nathan, Gad, Achitophell, and Hushai; and
Nebuchadnezzar had Daniel, Shadrac, Meshac, and Abednego: and so all other
Kings in all Nations do choose the wisest men, that they conceive, to be their
Counselors.

^. Subordinate Magistrates.
2. For subordinate Magistrates, Jethro's counsel unto Moses, and Moses
harkening unto him, as to a wise and faithful Counselor, makes it plain, how
necessary it is for the supreme Magistrate to choose such assistants, as may
bear with him some part of the great burden of government. Thus far it is
agreed upon on all sides, but the difference betwixt us and our new
State-Divines, consists in these two points.

A twofold difference.
1. About the choice 2. About the power
of these officers. For

1. About the choice of inferior Magistrates and Officers.
1. We say that by the Law of nature, every master has right to choose his own
servants; this is Lex gentium, ever practiced among all Nations; why then
should not the King make choice of his own Counselors and Servants? they will
say, because he is the servant of the Commonwealth: But how is that? I hope
none otherwise then the Minister is the servant of the Church, (...). 2. Cor.
4.5.
for Christ his sake; and shall he therefore that is your King, lose the
privileges of a common Subject? Besides, has not God committed the charge of
his people into the Kings hand, Exodus 18.^1.
and will he not require an account of him of their government? how then shall
he give an account to God when the government is taken out of his hands, and
subordinate officers and servants put upon him? I am sure, when the 70 grand
Senators of Israel, the great Sanhedrim of the Jews were to be chosen; Jethro
says unto Moses, Thou shall provide out of the people able men; mark I pray
you, thou and not the people, shall provide them; neither shall you find it
otherwise in any History: Pharaoh, and not his people, Genesis 41.41.
made Joseph ruler over all the land of Egypt. Nebuchadnezzar, and not his
people, made Daniel ruler over the whole Province of Babylon: Dan. 2.48.
and Darius set over his Kingdom a hundred and twenty Princes, Cap. 6.1, 2.
and made Daniel the first of the three presidents that were over all these.
And what shall I say of Ahashuerus, All Kings choose their own Officers.
and all other Kings, Heathens, Jews, or Christians, that ever kept this
power, to choose their own servants, Counselors, and Officers, except they
were infant Kings, in their nonage, and so not able to choose them.

But you will say that our Histories tell you, how Rich. 2. Edw. 2. and others
of our Kings, had their Officers appointed, and themselves committed unto
Guardians by the Parliament; therefore why may not our Parliament do the like
in case of maladministration?

I answer, that I speak of the right of Kings, Sol. 2. Reg. 19.37.
and not justify the wrongs done to Kings. Adramelech and Sharezer killed
Sennacherib their own father; is it therefore lawful for other children so to
do? Why should we therefore allege those things, Qua insolentia populari,
quae vi, quae furore, non ad imitationem exemplo proponenda, sed justo legum
supplicio vindicanda sunt; which should rather have been revenged by the just
punishment of the Law, then proposed to be imitated by the example?

Therefore I say, that whosoever abridgeth the King of this power, robs him
of that right which God and nature has allowed him: whereby you may judge how
justly the Parliamentary faction would have dealt herein with our King, by
forcing Counselors and great Officers upon him; but I hope you see it is the
Kings right to choose his Servants, Officers, and Counselors; what manner of
men he should choose, Jethro sets down. And I have most fully described the
qualities and conditions that they should be endued withal in my True Church.
True Church. lib 6. c. 4. etc.


2. Difference, about the power of the subordinate Magistrates.
2. As our Sectaries differ much from the true Divines, about the choice, so
they differ much more about the power of these subordinate Officers, and
inferior Magistrates; for we say, they are always to be obedient to the
supreme power; or otherwise, ejus est deponere, cujus est constituere, he can
displace them that has appointed them; or if you say no, because I cited you a
place out of Bellarmine, where he says, the Soldiers had power to refuse
their Emperor while he was in fieri, to be elected; but not when he was in
facto, fully chosen and made Emperor; so the King has power to choose them,
but not to displace them. I answer briefly, that in creating or constituting
our inferiors, we may; but our superior we may not: because inferiors, in
the judgment of all men, have no jurisdiction over their superiors. And
therefore elective Kings are not deposeable in a Monarchical government, None
can depose him in whom the supreme Majesty resideth.
where the supreme power resides in the Monarch; though perhaps the Kings of
Lacedemon might be justly deposed, because by the constitution of their
Kingdom, the supreme power was not in their Kings, but in their Ephori.

But our new Sectaries out of Junius Brutus, Burcher, Althusius, R nox and
Cartwright, teach very devoutly, but most falsely, that in case of defailance
to do his duty, they may with the Tribunes of Rome, or the Demarchi at Athens,
censure and depose him too, if they see just cause for the same.

Bla^vod. l. 33. p. 285.
To confute which blasphemous doctrine against God, and so pernicious and
dangerous to this State, though others have done it very excellently well
already, and I have formerly showed the absurdity of it in my Grand Rebellion;
Grand Rebellion, c. 7. p. 52.
yet, because all books come not to every hand, I will say somewhat of it in
this place. If these Counselors, Magistrates, Parliament, call them what you
will, have any power and authority, it must be either subordinate, coordinate,
or supreme.

1. If subordinate, 1. Subordinate officers can have no power over their
superiors.
I told you before they can have no power over their superior, because all
inferior Magistrates are Magistrates only, in respect of those that are under
their jurisdiction; because to them they represent the King, and supply the
office of the King; but in reference to the King, they are but private persons
and Subjects, that can challenge no jurisdiction over him.

2. If they be supreme, then S. Peter is much mistaken, 2. That neither Peers
nor Parliament can have the supremacy. None above the King at any time.
to say the King is supreme; and they do ill to disclaim this supremacy, when
in all their Petitions, (not disjunctively, but as they are an united body)
they say, Your Majesty's humble Subjects the Lords and Commons in Parliament:
and besides, they are perjured that deny it, after they have taken the Oath of
supremacy, where every one says, I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in
my conscience, that the Kings Highness is the only supreme Governor of this
Realm, etc. But this is further, and so fully proved out of Bracton, the
nature of all the Subjects tenures, and the constitution of this government, by
the Author of The unlawfulness of Subjects taking up Arms against their
Sovereign, that more needs not be spoken to any rational man. Yet because
this point is of such great concernement, and the chiefest argument they have
out of Bracton, is, The Sectaries chiefest argument out of Bracton fully
answered.
that he says, Rex habet superiorem, legem, curiam suam, comites, Barons;
quia comites dicuntur, quasi socii regis, and qui habet socium habet magistrum;
and ideo si rex fuerit sine fraeno, id est, sine lege, debent ei fraenum
ponere, nisi ipsimet fuerint cum rege sine fraeno: and all this makes just
nothing in the world for them, if they had the honesty or the learning to
understand it right; for what is above the King? the Law, and the Court of
Earls and Barons; but how are they above him? as the Preacher is above the
King, when he preaches unto him; or the Physician when he gives him Physic;
or the Pilot when he sayleth by Sea; that is, quoad rationem consulendi, non
cogendi, they have superioritatem directivam, non coactivam; for so the teacher
is above him that is taught, How the Law and the Court of Barons is above the
King.
and the Counselor above him that is counseled; that is, by way of advice,
but not by way of command; and to show you that this is Bractons true meaning;
I pray you consider his words; Comites dicuntur quasi soc^i, they are as his
fellows or Peers, not simply, but quasi: and if they were simply so, yet they
are but socii, not superiors; and what can socii do? not command, for par in
parem non habet potestatem, that is, praecipiendi; otherwise, you must
confess, habet potestatem consulendi: therefore Bracton adds, qui habet
socium habet magistrum, that is, a teacher, not a commander; and to make this
yet more plain, he adds, Si Rex fuerit sini fraeno, id est, sine lege, if the
King be without a bridle, that is, says he, (lest you should mistake what he
means by the bridle, and think he means force and arms) the Law; they ought
to put this bridle unto him, that is, to press him with this Law, and still to
show him his duty, even as we do both to King and people, saying, this is the
Law, this should bridle you; but here is not a word of commanding, much less
of forcing the King; not a word of superiority, nor yet simply of equality; and
therefore I must say, hoc argumentum nihil adrhombum: these do abuse every
author.

3. That neither ^eeres nor Parliament are coordinate with the King.
3. If their (...), (I speak not of (...), their natural strength and power)
but of their right and authority, be coordinate and equal with the Kings
authority, then (whether given by God (which they cannot prove) or by the
people) there must be duo summa imperia, two supreme powers, (which the
Philosophers say cannot be; Omnesque Philosophi and jurisconsulit ponunt summum
in eo terum genere quod dividi non possit. Lactant. l. 1. c. 3. (...). Marc.
3.24.
nam quod summum est unum est, from whence they prove the unity of the
Godhead, that there can be but one God) and if this supreme power be divided
betwixt King and Parliament, you know what the Poet says, -- Omnisque potestas,
Impatiens consortis erit, --
Or you may remember what our Savior says, If a Kingdom be divided against
it self it cannot stand; and therefore when Tiberius, out of his wonted
subtilty, desired the Senate to appoint a colleague and partner with him, for
the better administration of the Empire; Asinius Gallus, that was desirous
enough of their Pristine liberty, yet understanding well with what mind the
subtle fox spoke, (only to descry his ill willers) after some jests answered
seriously, (...) (...), that government must not be divided; because you can
never have any happiness where the power is equally divided in two parts, when
according to the well known axiom to every one, Par in parem non habet
potestatem. The Case of our Affairs. p. 19, 20.
But to make the matter clear, and to show that the Sovereignty is inseperably
inherent in the person of His Majesty, we have the whole current of our very
Acts of Parliament acknowledging it in these very terms, Our Sovereign Lord
the King; The Laws of our Land acknowledge all Sovereignty in the King.
and the Parliament, 25. Hen. 8. says, this your Graces Realm, recognizing no
superior under God, but your Grace, etc. And the Parliament 16. Rich. 2.5.
affirms the Crown of England to have been so free at all times, that it
has been in no earthly subjection, but immediately to God, in all things
touching the regality of the said Crown, and to none other. And in the 2^. of
Hen. 5. the Parliament declares, that it belongs to the Kings regality, to
grant or deny what Petitions in Parliament he pleases: and so indeed
whatsoever authority is in the constant practice of the Kingdom, or in the
known and published Laws and Statutes, it concludes the Sovereignty to be
fixed in the King, and all the Subjects virtually united in the representative
body of the Parliament, to be obliged in obedience and allegiance to the
individual person of the King: and I doubt not but our learned Lawyers can
find much more proof then I do, out of their Law to this purpose. And
therefore seeing diverse supreme powers are not compatible in one State, nor
allowable in our State; the conceit of a mixed Monarchy is but a fopperie, to
prove the distribution of the supreme power into two sorts of governors,
equally endued with the same power; because the supreme power, being but one,
must be placed in one sort of governors, either in one numericall man, as it
is in Monarchy; or in one specificall kind of men, as the optimates, (...).
as it is in Aristocracie; or in the people, as in Democracie; but if by a
mixed Monarchy you mean that this supreme power is not simply absolute, quoad
omnia, but a government limited and regulated, (...), we will not much quarrel
with our Sectaries; because His Majesty has promised, and we are sure he will
perform it, to govern his people according to the Laws of this Land.

They deserve not to live in the Kingdom that diminish the supremacy of the
King.
And therefore they that would rob the King of this right, and give any part of
his supreme power to the Parliament, or to any of all his inferior
Magistrates, deserve as well to be expelled the Kingdom, as Plato would have
Homer to be banished, for bringing in the Gods fighting and disagreeing among
themselves; when as Ovid, out of him, says, Jupiter in Trojam, pro Troja
stabat Apollo: Because, as the Civilians say, Natural vitium est negligi, quod
communiter possidetur, utque se nihil habere putet qui totum non habeat, and
fuam partem corrumpi patiatur, dum invidet alienae: and therefore the same
Homer treating of our humane government, Nec multos regnare bonum, rex unicus
esto. Arist. Metaph. lib. 12.
says, (...),
(...): --
which Aristotle does so infinitely commend, where he disputes, (...); and so
does Plato and all the wise Philosophers that followed after: Statius Thebaid.
lib. 1.
because, as the Poet says, -- Summo dulcius unum
Stare loco: sociisque comes discordia regnis.
And, as our own most lamentable experience shows, what abundance of
miseries happened unto our selves by this renting of the Kings power, and
placing it in the hands of the Parliament, and his own inferior officers: and
as those sad Tragedies of Etheocles and Polynices, Numitor and Amulius, Romulus
and Remus, Antoninus and Geta, and almost infinite more, do make it manifest to
all the world.

. The two chiefest parts of the regal government; the four properties of a
just war; and how the Parliamentary faction transgress in every property.
4. The chiefest parts of the Regal government, which are two.
4. HAving spoken of those assistants, that should further and not hinder the
King in the Commonwealth, it rests that I should now speak of the chiefest
parts of this government: when Moses killed the Egyptian that wronged the
Israelite, and the next day said unto the Hebrew, that did injure his fellow,
Exodus 2.14.
Wherefore smitest thou him? the oppressor answered, Who made thee a Prince
and a Judge over us? 1. Sam. 8.20.
and the people say unto Samuel, we will have a King over us, that our King may
judge us, and go out before us and fight our battles. 2. Sam. 5.2.
Out of which two places, we find two special parts of the Kings government.

1. Principatum bellorum; the charge of the wars; Sigon. l. 7. c. 1.
in respect whereof the Kings were called Captains, as the Lord said unto
Samuel concerning Saul, Vnges eum ducem, 1. Sam. 9.16.
thou shall anoint him to be Captain over my people Israel.

2. Curam judiciorum, the care of all judgments; in respect whereof David, and
Solomon, 1. Reg. 3.9. Psalm. 72.2.
and the other Kings are said to judge the people.

So Arnisaeus says, Arnisaeus de jure Majest. l. 2. c. 1. p. 214.
Majestatis potestas omnis consistit vel in defendenda repub. vel in regenda,
all the power of royalty consists either in defending or in governing the
Common wealth, according as Homer describes a perfect King: Homer Iliad g.
(...).

And so you see the two principal parts of the Kings government are the
Offices 1. Of a Captain in the time of War. 1. Ducis in bello gerendo. 2.
Iudicis in jure reddendo. 1. Part. In the time of War. Ordo ille naturalis
mortalium paci accommodatus hoc poscit, ut suscipiendi belli autoritas atque
consilium apud principes sit. Aug. cont. Faust. l 22. and Arnis. l. 2. c. 5. p.
345. Plato de legib. lib. 2. Arnisaus lib. 2. cap. 5. p. 345. Luc. 14.31. Verse.
32.
2. Of a Judge in the time of Peace.


1. Then it is the proper right of the King, and of none but the King, or he
that has the regal and supreme power, to make war, and to conclude peace;
for Plato in his Commonwealth ordained, that, Si quis pacem vel bellum secerit
cum aliquibus, (...). and the Julian Law adjudgeth him guilty of High Treason,
Qui injussu principis bellum gesserit, delectumve habuerit, exercitum vel
comparaverit, that either makes War, or raises an Army without his Kings
command.

And to this part of the regal government, which consists in the Militia in
Arms, for the defense of the Kingdom, pertains, 1. The proclaiming of
War, which our Savior properly ascribes unto the right of Kings, when he
says, not what State or Commonwealth, but What King going to war with
another King, etc? 2. The concluding of Peace, which our Savior ascribes also
unto the King, in the same place. 3. The making of leagues and confederacies
with other foreign States. Aristot. polit. l. 7. c. 8.
4. The sending and receiving of Ambassadors. 5. To raise Arms, and the like,
which the Laws of God and of all Nations justify to be the proper right of
Kings, Arnis. l. 2. c. 1.
and to belong only unto the supreme Majesty.

Judges 11.11.
But then you will say, did not the Judges, Moses, Joshua, Gedion, Jephta,
Barac, Sampson, and the rest make war, and yet they were no Kings? Why then
may not the Nobles make war, as well as Kings? I answer, that they do indeed
make war, and a miserable wretched war; but I speak of a just war, and
so I say that none but the King, or he that has the Kings power can do it;
for though the Judges assumed not the name of Kings nor Captains, sed a
potiore part vocati sunt judices, but from the sweetest part of the royal
government were termed Judges; yet they had the full power, and ducendi and
judicandi populum, both of war and peace, says Sigonius: and so the men of
Gilead said unto Jephthe, veni and esto princeps noster; and they made him
their head by an inviolable covenant. Deuteronomy. 33.5.
And of Moses it is plainly said, He was King in Jesurun; and when there was no
Judge, it is said, there was no King in Israel: Judges 17.6.18.1.19.1.
for I stand not about words, when some were called Kings, for the honor of
the people, and yet had no more power then Subjects, as the Kings of Sparta;
and others had not the name of Kings, and yet had the full power of Kings; as
the Dictator, and the Emperor, and the great Duke of Muscovie, and the like.

But, when a war is undertaken by any Prince, how shall we know which party
is in the right? for to make an unjust war, cannot be said to be the right of
any King: yet, as the Poet says, Lucan lib. 1.
-- Quis justius induit arma
Scire nefas, summo se judice quisque tuetur.
Every one pretends his cause is just, he fights for God, for the truth of the
Gospel, the faith of Christ, and the liberty and Laws of his Country: how
then shall those poor men, that hazard their lives and their fortunes, yea,
and souls too, if they war on the wrong side, understand the truth of this
great, doubtful, and dangerous point?

I answer, all the Divines that I read of, speaking of war, Dambo ^ d in
praxi criminal. cap. 82.
do concur with what Dumbauderius writes of this point, that there must be
four properties of a just war.

1. A just cause. Four properties of a just War.
2. A right intention. 3. Meet Members. 4. The Kings authority.
Sine qua est laesa Majestas, without which authority the Warriors are all
Traitors. And I would to God our Rebels would lay their hands upon their
hearts, and seriously examine these four points in this present War.

1. What cause have they to take Arms against their King, 1. A just causes
and to kill and murder so many thousands of their own Brethren? they will
answer, that they do it for the defense of their Liberty, Laws, and Religion;
but how truly, let God himself be the Judge; for His Majesty has promised
and protested they shall enjoy all these fully and freely, without any manner
of diminution: and we know that never any rebellion was raised, but these very
causes were still pretended. And therefore

2. Consider with what intent they do all this? 2. A right intention.
and I doubt not but you shall find foul weeds under this fair cloak; for
under the shadow of liberty and property, they took the liberty to rob all the
Kings loyal Subjects that they could reach, of all or most of their estates,
and to keep them fast in prison; because they would not consent to their
lawless liberty, and to be Rebels with them against their conscience. And
under the pretense of Laws they aimed not to have the old Laws well kept,
which was never denied them, but to have such new ones made, as might quite rob
the King of all his rights, and transfer the same unto themselves and their
friends; so he should be like the King of Sparta, a royal slave; What Laws
and Religion the Rebels would feign have
and they should be like the Ephori, ruling and commanding Subjects: And for
the religion, you may know by their new Synod, which are a Synod not of Saints,
but of Rebels, what religion they would feign have, not that which was professed
in Q. Elizabeth's times, that was established by the Laws, justified by the
pains, and confirmed by the blood of so many worthy men and faithful Martyrs,
but, a new religion first hatched in Amsterdam, then nourished in New England,
and now to be transplanted into this Kingdom.

3. Meet Members.
3. Who are the persons that are employed in this war? he first of all, that
is the more disloyal, because he was a person of honor, that had so much
honor conferred upon him by His Majesty, and so much trust reposed in him,
and would notwithstanding prove so unthankful, as to kick with his heels
against his Master; and so follow, whom you know, passibus aequis, whose
example, any other man, that were not robbed of his understanding, would make a
remora to retain him from rebellion: and what are the other heads, but a
company either of poor, needy, Who the Rebels are, and what manner of persons
they be.
and mean conditioned Lords and Gentlemen, or discontented Peers that are
misled, or such factious Sectaries, whose blind zeal and furious malice are
able to hurry them headlong to perpetrate any mischeife? for their Captains
and their Officers, I believe they fight neither for the Anabaptists creed, nor
against the Roman faith, nor to overthrow our Protestant Church, but for their
pay; for which, though they cannot be justified to take their hire for such ill
service, to rebel against their King, and to murder their innocent brethren;
Yet are they not so bad as their grand Masters; and for their common Soldiers,
I assure my self many of them fight against their wills, many seduced by their
false Prophets, others enticed by their factious Masters, and most of them
compelled to kill their brethren against their wills; and therefore in some
places, though their number trebled the Kings; yet they had rather run away
then fight; and what a miserable and deplorable case is this, when so many
poor souls shall be driven unto the Devil by Preachers and Parliament
against their wills?

4. The supreme authority.
4. If you consider qua authoritate, by what authority they wage this war?
they will answer by the Authority of Parliament, and that is just none at all;
because the Parliament has not the supreme authority, without which the war
is not public, nor can it be justified: for a war is then justifiable, when
there is no legal way to end the controversy by prohibiting farther appeals,
which cannot be, but only betwixt independent States and several Princes,
Albericus Gentilis de jure belli l, 1. c. 2.
that have the supreme power in their own hands, and are not liable to the
censure of any Court; which power the Parliament cannot challenge; because they
are or should be the Kings lawful Subjects: and therefore cannot be his
lawful enemies: but they will say, Master Goodwin, Burroughes, and all the
rest of our good men, zealous brethren, Subjects can never make a lawful war
against their king.
and powerful Preachers do continually cry out in our ears, it is bellum
sanctum, a most just and holy war, a war for the Gospel and for our Laws
and Liberties, wherein whosoever dies he shall he crowned a Martyr.

I answer, that for their reward, they shall be indeed as Saint Augustine says
of the like, Martyrs stultae Philosophiae, when every one of them may be
indicted at the bar of Gods justice for a felo de se, a Malefactor guilty of
his own untimely death: Res dura ac plena pericli est, regale occidisse genus.
and for their good Orators that persuade them to this wickedness, I pray you
consider well what they are: men of no worth, rebellious against the Church,
rebels against the King, factious Schismatiques, of no faith, of no learning,
In what condition their Preachers are; and of what worth.
that have already forfeited their estates, if they have any, and their lives
unto the King^ and will any man that is wise, hazard his estate, his life and
his soul to follow the persuasions of these men? my life is as dear to me,
as the Earl of Essex his head is to him, and my soul deerer; and I dare
engage them both, that if all the Doctors in both Universities, and all the
Divines within the Kingdom of England, were gathered together to give their
judgment of this war, there could not be found one of ten, it may be as I
believe not one of twenty that durst upon his conscience say, this war is
lawful upon the Parliament side; It is contrary to the doctrine of all the
Protestant Church, for Subjects to resist their king.
for though these Locusts, that is the German, Scottish, and the English
Puritan, agreeing with the Roman Jesuit ever since the reformation, harped
upon this string, and retained this serpentine poison within their bosom,
still spitting it forth against all States, as you may see by their books; Yet
I must tell you plainly, this doctrine of Subjects taking up arms against
their lawful King, is point blanke and directly against the received doctrine
of the Church of England: and against the tenet of all true Protestants:
Paraeus in Romans 13. Boucher: l. 2. c. 2. Keckerm. Syst. pol. c. 32. ^un. Brut.
q. 2. p. 56. Bellar. de l^^c. c. 6 Suar. d^f. fid. cathol. c. 3.
and therefore Andreas Rivetus Professor at Leyden writing against a Jesuit,
that cast this aspersion upon the Protestants, that they jumpe with them in
this doctrine of warring against, and deposing Kings, says, that no Protestant
does maintain that damnable doctrine, and that rashness of Knox and Buchanan,
is to be ascribed praefervido Scotorum ingenio and ad audendum prompto. Juell
and Bilson and all the Doctors of our Church are of the same mind: and
Lichfield says, no Orthodox father did by word or writing teach any
resistance, for the space of a thousand years: and Doctor Field says,
^ichfield. l. 4. c ^9. 19. ^ield l. 5. c. 30
that all the worthy fathers and Bishops of the Church persuaded themselves,
that they owed all duty unto their Kings, though they were Heretics and
Infidells; and the Homilies of the Church of England, allowed by authority, do
plainly and peremptorily condemn all Subjects warring against their King for
Rebels and Traitors, that do resist the ordinance of God and procure unto
themselves damnation: and truly I believe most of their own consciences tell
them so; and they that think otherwise, I would have them to consider, that if
they were at a banquet, where twenty should aver such a dish to be full of
poison, for every one that would warrant it good, would thou venture to eat
it, and hazard thy life in such a case? O then consider what it is to hazard
thy soul upon the like terms. So you see the justness of the war on the
Parliament side. But

1. On the Kings side, it cannot be denied, but his cause is most just; for his
own defense, for the maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, that is
established by our Laws, and for the rights of the Church and the just
liberties and property of all his loyal Subjects: this he testifies in all
his Declarations: and this we know in our own consciences to be true; and
therefore

2. As His Majesty professes, so we believe him, that he never intended
otherwise by this war, but to protect us, and our Religion, and to maintain
his own just and unquestionable rights, which these Rebels would most
unjustly wrest out of his hands, and under the show of humble Petitioners to
become at last proud Commanders; for as one says, -- They whom no denial can
withstand,
Seem but to ask, while they indeed command. 3. His Assistants learned,
honest, and religious.



3. For the persons that war with him, they are the chiefest of the Nobility;
all the best Gentry, that hazard their lives, not for filthy lucre; for, the
Kings Revenues, being so unjustly detained from him, they are feign to supply
his necessities, and to bear their own charges; and the poor common Soldiers
are nothing wanting to do their best endeavors; neither need they to fear
any thing; because

4. The King has a just right, to give them full power and authority to do
execution upon these Rebels, as I have proved unto you before. 4. His
authority sacred and unquestionable.


And therefore the result of all is, that the Parliament side (under the
pretense of Religion, fighting if not for the Crown, yet certainly for the
full power and authority of the King, who shall have the ordering of the
Militia, that is, What the pretended Parliament is;
who shall have the government of this Kingdom, which is all one as who shall
be the King, they or King CHARLES, and which is the very question that they
would now decide by the sword) in taking away our goods, are thieves and
robbers; in killing their brethren, are bloody murderers; and in resisting
their King, are rebellious traitors; that as the Apostle says, purchase to
themselves damnation; when (as the Prophet Esaias speaks of the like Rebels)
being hardly bestead and hungry, Esaias. 8.21.22.
(as I believe thousands of them are in London, and other rebellious Cities)
they shall fret themselves, and curse their King and their God, and look
upward (as I fear many of them do, curse the King with their tongues, and God
in their hearts) and they shall look unto the earth: and behold trouble and
darkness, dimnesse and anguish, and they shall be driven to darkness even to
utter darkness, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew.
8.12.
if by a true repentance they do not betimes rent their hearts and forsake
their fearful sins.

And the Kings side, in this war, doing no further then the King gives
Commission, do no more then what God commands; and therefore, living, they
shall be accounted Loyal Subjects worthy of honor; and dying, they shall be
sure to be everlastingly rewarded.

CHAP. XIII. Shows how the first government of Kings was arbitrary; the
places of Moses, Deuteronomy. 17. and of Samuel, 1. Sam. 8. discussed; whether Ahab
offended in desiring Naboths Vineyard, and wherein; why absolute power was
granted unto Kings; and how the diversities of government came up.
2. Part of the regal government in the time of peace.
2. HAving thus showed you Potestatem ducendi, the Kings right and power of
making war, it rests that I should speak De potestate judicandi, of his
power and right of judgeing and governing his people in the time of peace;
touching which we find none denying his right, but all the difference is about
the manner: where

Master Seldom in his titles of Honor. p. 15.
1. I find Master Seldom rejecting, as ridiculous, the testimony of Justine,
which says, Populus nullis legibus tenebatur, sed arbitria regum pro legibus
erant; That the first government of Kings was arbitrary.
the people were kept under by no Laws, but the will of their Kings was all
the Law they had; but as oportet mendacem esse memorem, so it behooves him that
opposes the truth to be very subtle, and very mindful of his own discourse;
otherwise a meaner Scholar, having such advantage as the truth to assist him,
may easily get the victory; for, though he goes about to consute the reason
that some allege, for the denial of those times to be governed by any Law,
because the word (...) is not to be found in all Homer, Homer. (...) in hymnis
ad Apoll.
but wheresoever he speaks of Justice, he expresses the same by the word
Themis, and says, that this is false, which he proves from Homers (...), and
his (...); and shows that there were Laws before Homers time, from Talus his
Laws that were written in brass in the Isle of Crete; Joseph. advers. Appion.
l. 5.
yet all this may be answered, and Justines opinion prove most true; for Talus
his time must needs be uncertain, Plutarch in lib. de Hero.
and by (...), Homer means the just measure of riming, but never uses (...);
for the set Law of living; besides, there were many ages, and many Kings before
Homers time; and before Talus, Minos, Radamantus, or any other Lawmakers that
you read of; Moses was the first that I find, either giving Laws, or
inventing Letters; and yet there were many Kings before Moses; Genesis 14.1, 2.
nine Kings named in one Chapter, and what Laws had they to govern their
people besides their own wills? and therefore Master Seldom, vi veritatis
victus, confesses that in the first times, in the beginning of States, there
were no Laws but the arbitrements of Princes, as Pomponius speaks: and page
4. Pompon. de origin juris, ff. l. 1. 2.
he says, the people, seeing the inconveniences of popular rule, chose one
Monarch, under whose arbitrary rule their happy quiet should be preserved;
Josephus regnu^ appellat imperium summum unius hominis, non ex lege, sed ex
arbitrio imperanti^. Antiquit. l. 4.
where also you may observe his great mistake, in making the Monarchy to
spring out of the Democracie; when as I have proved before, the Monarchical
government was many hundred of years before we hear mention of any other
form of government: but in any government, Doctor Saravia says, and he says
most truly, Quisquis summum obtinet imperium, sive is sit unus rex, sive pauci
nobiles, vel ipse populus universus, supra omnes leges sunt; Saravia de
imperand. author. l. 2. c. 3.
ratio haec est, quod nemo sibi ferat legem, sed subditis suis, se legibus nemo
adstringit: huc accedit and illa ratio, quod neque suis legibus teneri possit
(scil. rex) cum nemo sit scipso superior, Barclaius l. 3. c. 16.
nemo a seipso cogi possit, and leges a superiore tantum sciscantur, dentu^rque
inferioribus.

And so Arnisaeus says, and proves at large, Arnis. l. c. c. 3^ p. 49, 50.
Majestatis essentiam consistere in summa and absoluta potestate, that the
being of Majesty and Sovereignty consists in the highest and most absolute
power. Irvinus cap. 4. p. 64, 65
And Irvinus alleges many testimonies out of Aristotle, Cicero, Vlpian, Dio,
Constant. Harmenopolus, and others, to prove that Rex legibus non subjicitur.

And to make it yet more clear, that the Kings power to rule his people was
arbitrary; Sigonius says most truly, that the power of governing the people
was given by God unto Moses before the Law was given; and therefore he called
the people to counsel, and without either Judges or Magistrates, jura eisdem
reddidit, he administered justice, and did right to every one of them: So Joshua
exercised the same right, and the Judges after him; and after the Judges
succeeded the Kings, quorum potestas atque autoritas multo major, ut quae non
tam a legibus quam ab arbitrio and voluntate regis profecta sit, Sigon. de rep.
Heb. l. 7. c. 3. Hoc arbitrarium impertum expressit Deus. 1. Sam. 8. and David.
Ps. 11. Reges eos in v^rga ferrea.
whose power and authority was far greater, as proceeding, not so much from
the Laws, as from the arbitrament and the will of the King, says Sigonius:
for they understood the power of a King in Aristotle's sense, Qui solutus
legibus plenissimo jure regnaret, who being freed from the Laws, or not tied
to Laws, might govern with a plenary right. And so Saul judged Israel, and
had altogether the arbitrary power both of life and death; Idem ibidem.
and quodam modo superior legibus fuit, and was after a sort above the Law,
undertaking and making war, pro arbitratu suo, according to his own will.
And in his sixth book he says, the Jews had three great Courts or Assemblies.

Cap. 2.
1. Their Council, which contained that company, that handled those things
especially, which concerned the State of the whole Commonwealth; as war,
peace, provision, institution of Laws, creation of Magistrates, and the like.

Cap. 3.
2. Their Synagogue, or the meeting of the whole Congregation or people, which
no man might convocate, but he which had the chief rule, as Moses, Joshua, the
Judges, and the Kings.

Cap. 4. Numb. 15. Plenum regnum vocatur quo cuncta rex sua voluntate gerit.
Idem.
3. Their standing Senate, which was appointed of God to be of the 70 Elders;
whereof he says, that although this was always standing for consultation; yet
we must understand that the Kings, which had the Commonwealth in their own
power, and were not obnoxious to the Laws, made Decrees of themselves, without
the authority of the Senate, ut qui cum summo imperio essent, as men that were
endued with the chiefest rule and command: And we find that the King judged
the people two manner of ways.

1. Alone. 2. Together with the Elders and Priests.
For it is said, that Absolon, when any man came to the King for judgment,
wished that he were made Judge in the Land, 2. Sam. 15.2, 6:
and he did in this manner to all Israel that came to the King for judgment:
and when the people demanded a King instead of Samuel to reign over them, and
God said, 1. Sam. 8.7.
They had cast him off from being their King; he signifies most plainly, that
while the Judges ruled, which had their chiefest authority from the Law, God
reigned over them; because his Law did rule them; but the rule and government
being translated unto Kings, God reigned no longer over them; Quia non penes
legem Dei, sed penes voluntatem unius hominis summa rerum autoritas esset
futura; because now all authority, and all things were not in the power of the
Law, but in the power of one man's arbitrary will.

But, seeing we are fallen upon the peoples desire of a King, let us examine
what right God says belongs unto him; and because that place, 1. Sam. 8. is
contradicted by another, Deuteronomy. 17. as it seems, we will examine both places,
and see if Moses does any ways cross Samuel: Deuteronomy. 17.14. usque ad finem.
and truly I may say of these two places, that, as S. Aug. says in the like
case, alii atque alii, aliud atque aliud opinati sunt; for some learned men
say, that Moses sets down to the King, legem regendi, the Law by which he
should govern the people, without wronging them; and Samuel sets down to
the people legem parendi, the Law by which they should obey the King, without
resisting him whatsoever he should do to them; And other Divines say, Haec est
potestas legitima, non tyrannica, nec violenta: Spalat. tom. 2. fol. 251.
and ideo quando rex propria negotia non possit expedire per proprias res ac
servos, G. Ocham. tract. 2. l. 2. c. 25.
possit pro negotiis propriis tollere res and servos aliorum: and isto modo
dicebat Deus quod pertinebat ad jus regis, this is the lawful and just right
of the King. Therefore to find out the truth, let us a little more narrowly
discuss both places. And

1. In the words of Moses, there I observe two special things.

1. The charge of the people. 2. The charge of the King. 1. Popular election
utterly forbidden.

1. The people are commanded very strictly, in any wise, says the Text, to
make choice of no King of their own heads, but, to accept of him whom the Lord
did choose.

2. The Kings charge.
2. The King is commanded to write out the Law, to study it, and to practice it;
and he is forbidden to do four special things, which are 1. Not to bring the
people back into Egypt, nor to provide the means to bring them, by multiplying
his horses. 2. Not to marry many wives that might entice him, as they did
Solomon, unto Idolatry. 3. Not to hoord up too much riches. 4. Not to tyrannize
over his Brethren.


Joseph. Anti. quit. l. 4.
And Josephus to the same purpose says, Si regis cupiditas vos incesserit, is
ex eadem gente sit, curam omnino gora^ justitiae and allarum virtutum, caveat
vero ne plus legibus aut Deo sapiat, nihil autem agat sine Pontificis, Senator
umque sententia, (which Moses has not) neque nuptiis multis utatur, nec copiam
pecuniarum equorumque sectetur, quibus partis superleges superbia efferatur,
that is, to be a Tyrant.

2. The words of Samuel are set down, 1. Sam. 8.11. to the 18. Rex Iacobus in
his true Law of free Monarchs.
verse, whereof I confess there are several expositions; some making the same
a prophetical prediction of what some of their Kings would do, contrary to
what they should do, as it was expressed by Moses. So King James himself
takes it; others take it Grammatically, for the true right of a King, that may
do all this, and yet no way contradict those precepts forecited by Moses; to
confirm which supposition, they say, 1. The phrase here used must bear it
out; for as the Hebrew word signifies, as Pagninus notes, Morem, aut modum,
aut consuetudinem, and many other things, as the place and the matter to be
expressed do require; (because every equivocall word of various signification
is not to be taken alike in all places, but is to be interpreted secundum
materiam subjectam) yet the Septuagine that should know both the propriety of
the word, and the meaning of the Holy Ghost in that place, as well as any
other, translate the word to signify (...); and we know the Greek word (...),
(...).
which the Septuagint uses, and jus, which the Latin uses, is never taken in
the worser sense, Apparet nomen juris significa^e hic potestatem jure
concessam. Arnisaeus c. 1. p. 216.
the Scripture never using to call vices by the names of virtues, or to give a
right to any one to exercise tyranny, which then might be better termed jus
laironis, because an unjust tyrant is no better then an open thief. 2. There
is nothing here set down by Samuel, that is simply forbidden by the Law of
God, but that any, the very best Kings may do, as the occasions shall require;
for being a King, he must have the royalty of his house supported, and the
necessities of his war supplied: and you may read in Herodotus how Dioces,
after he was chosen King, had all things granted unto him, that were needful
to express his royal state and magnificence; and here is nothing else in the
text; for if you mark it, the Prophet says not, he should kill their sons,
nor ravish their wives, nor yet take their daughters to be his Concubines,
which are the properties of a tyrant Instat terribilis vivis, mortentibus
hae^^^, Virginibus raeptor, thalamis obscanus adulter. Divitibusque dies, and
nox metuenda nar^ti^^ Quis uis vel locuples, pulchra vel conjuge notus, Crimini
pulsatur falso; si crimina desunt, Accitus conviva perit; mors nulla refugit
Artificem -- Claudian. de bello Gildon. Bilson diff. fol. 356.
; but he should take them to support his state, and to maintain his war,
which, as his necessities require, is lawful for him to do; so that it is not
the doing of those things, but the motives that cause the King to do them; or
the manner of doing them, that do make it either an unjust tyranny, or the just
right of a King; for as Doctor Bilson says, Kings may justly command the goods
and bodies of all their Subjects, in the time both of war and peace, for any
public necessity or utility. And Hugo de Sancto Victore says, Nunquam
possessiones a regin potestate ita elongari possunt, quin si ratio postulaverit
and necessitas, and illis ipsa potestas debeat patrocinium, and illis ipsa
possessiones debeant in necessitate obsequium. And so most Authors say, the
Subjects ought to supply the Kings necessities, and he may justly demand what
is requisite and necessary for his public occasions; and who shall judge of
that necessity but his own conscience? and God shall judge that conscience,
which does unjustly demand what he has no reason to require; because the
greatness of his authority gives him no right to transcend the rules of
equity, whereof both God and his conscience will be the impartial Judges. And
therefore in Deuteronomy. Modus describitur, res non prohibetur; and in Samuel, Jus
ponitur, and ratio subintelligitur; for many things may be prohibited in some
respect, that in other respects may be allowed; and many things lawful in some
ways, which other ways may be most sinful; as it is most lawful to drink,
ad satietatem, but not ad ebrietatem, and many other the like things: so it is
lawful for the King to do all that Samuel says, ad supplendam reipubl.
necessitatem, and supportandam regiam majestatem, but not ad satisfaciendum suo
fastui, luxui, lucro, vanitati, aut carnali voluptati; which is the thing that
Moses forbids: So that in brief the meaning is, if the Subjects should be
unwilling to do what Samuel says, then the King, when just necessity
requires, may for these lawful ends lawfully assume them. And if he takes
them any other way, or for any other end then so, habet Deum judicem
conscientiae, and ultorem injustitiae.

Ahab did not offend in taking away Naboths vineyard, if Samuel did properly
describe the right of Kings.

Ahab sinned in desiring Naboths vineyard, neither do I find that the Prophet
blames him for that desire; there is not a word of that in the text, but for
killing Naboth, and then taking possession; for this he might not do, the
other he might do, so he do it to a right end, and in the right manner;
wherein he failed,

Ahabs sins.
1. In being so discontented for his denial, because his conscience, telling
him, that he had no such urgent necessity, whereby he could take it; and Naboth
being unwilling to sell it, he should have been satisfied.

2. In suffering his wife, whom he knew to be so wicked, to proceed in her
unjust course against Naboth.

3. In going down to take possession, when he knew that by his wifes wicked
practice the poor man was unjustly murdered, Naboths fault.
when he should have rather questioned the fact, and have punished the
murderers.

Lex posterior derogat priori, specialis generali: and ceremonialia atque
forensia cedunt moralibus.
And yet Ahabs sin does not excuse Naboths fault, both in the denial of the
Kings right, if the King had a just necessity to use it; and also for his
uncivil answer unto the King, far unlike the answer of Arauna to King David,
but nearer like the answer of Naball, which the Holy Ghost seems to take
notice of, when after he had said, The Lord forbid it me, which was rather a
Prayer and postulation that God would forbid it, as we say, absit, when we
hear of any displeasing likelihood, then any declaration of any inhibition of
God to sell it, who never denied them leave to sell it until the year of
redemption, the Prophet tells us in the next verse, 1. Reg. 21.4. Which very
answer seems to be the cause, why Ahab was so much displeased.
that Naboth said, I will not give thee the inheritance of my father.

But whether this speech of Samuel shows the just right of a King what he
might do, or his power what he would do, what belongs to him of equity, or
what his practice would be by tyranny, I will not determine: but I say, that
although it should not be a just rule for him to command, yet it is a certain
rule for them to obey; and though it should not excuse the King from sin, yet
it wholly disables and disavowes the peoples resisting their King; because in
all this the Prophet allows them none other remedy, but to cry out unto the
Lord: The Kings absolute power not given him to enable him for oppression, but
to retain his Subjects from rebellion.
for seeing God has given him directum dominium, and absolutum imperium,
though he should fail of his duty, which God requires, and do that wrong
unto the people, which God forbids; yet he is solutus legibus, free from all
Laws, quoad coactionem, in respect of any coaction from the people, but not
quoad obligationem, in respect of obedience to God by his obligation; for
though Kings had this plenitudinem potestatis, to rule and govern their
people, as the father of the family rules his household, or the Pilot directs
his Ship, secundum liberum arbitrium, according to his own arbitrary will; yet
that will was to rule and to guide all his actions, according to the strict Law
of common equity and justice, as I have often showed unto you.

But though this arbitrary rule continued long and very general; for Diodorus
Siculus says, Diodor. Siculus, l. 2. c. 3.
that excepting the Kings of Egypt, that were indeed very strictly tied to live
according to law, all other Kings infinita licentia ac voluntate sua pro lege
regnabant, ruled as they listed themselves; Boemus Aubanus tamen asserit
voluntatem regum Aegypti, pro lege esse.
Yet at last corruption so prevailed, that either the Kings abusing their
power, or the people refusing to yield their obedience, caused this arbitrary
rule to be abridged and limited within the bounds of laws, whereby the Kings
promised and obliged themselves to govern their people according to the rules
of those established laws; for though the supreme Majesty be free from laws,
sponte tamen iis accommodare potest, the King may of his own accord yield to
observe the same; and as the German Poet says, -- Nihil, ut verum fatear,
magis esse decorum
German. vates de rebus Frid. l. 8.
Aut regale puto, quam legis iure solutum
Sponte tamen legi sese supponere regem.
and according to the diversities of those laws, so are the diversities of
government, among the several Kingdoms of the earth; for I speak not of any
Popular or Aristocraticall state; How diversities of government came up.
therefore as some Kings are more restrained by their laws then some others,
so are their powers the less absolute; and yet all of them being absolute
Kings and free Monarchs, are excepted from any account of their actions to any
inferior jurisdiction; because then they had not been Monarchs, but of Kings
had made themselves Subjects.

Thus you see, that rule which formerly was arbitrary is now become limited,
but limited by their own laws and with their own wills, and none otherwise:
for I showed you elsewhere, that the Legistative power resided allways in the
King, even as Virgil says, Virgil. Aeneid l.
-- Gaudet regno Troianus Acestes,
Indicitque forum, and patribus dare jura vocatis.
And as that mirror of all learned Kings says, King Fergus came to Scotland
before any Statutes, or Parliament, or Laws were made; Rex Iacobus in the true
law of free Monarchs, page 201.
and you may easily find it, that Kings were the makers of the Laws, and not
the Laws the makers of Kings; for the Laws are but craved by the Subjects and
made only by him at their rogation, and with their advice: so he gives the Law
to them, but takes none from them; and by their own Laws Kings have limited
and abridged their own Right and power, which God and nature have conferred
upon them, some more, some less, according as their grants were unto their
people.

. The extent of the grants of Kings; what they may, and what they may not
grant; what our Kings have not granted, in seven special prerogatives; and
what they have granted unto their people.
ANd here I would have you to consider these two points, Two things
considerable about the privileged grants of Kings. 1. The extent of the grants
of kings.
concerning these grants of Kings unto their Subjects.

1. Of the extent of these grants, 2. Of the Kings obligation to observe them.
for

1. It is certain that the people, always desirous of liberty, though that
liberty should produce their ruin, are notwithstanding like the daughters of
the Horse-leeche, still crying unto their Kings, give, give, give us liberties
and privileges more and more; and if they may have their wills, Prove. 30.15.
they are never satisfied, Till Kings by giving, give themselves away,
And even that power, which should deny, betray.


For the concessions, and giving away of their right to govern, That it is to
the prejudice of government to grant too many privileges to the people.
is the weakening of their government: and the more privileges they give, the
less power they have to rule: and then the more unruly will their Subjects be:
and therefore the people being herein like the horses the Poets faigne to be in
Phoebus chariot, proud and stomackefull, Kings should remember the grave advice
the father gave unto Phaeton: Parce puer stimulis, sed fortius utere loris:
Ovid. Met. l. 1.

Sponte su^ properant, labor est inhibere volantes.


They must be strongly bridled, and restrained, or they will soon destroy both
horse and rider, both themselves and their Governors: Yet many Kings,
Constrained gifts not worthy of thanks.
either forcibly compelled by their unruly Subjects, (when they might think,
and therefore not yield, that, Who gives constrained, but his own fear
reviles,
Not thank't, but scorned, nor are they gifts, but spoils.)


Or else (as some intruding usurping Kings have done) to retain their unjustly
gained crowns, without opposition, or as others, out of their Princely
clemency and facility, to gain the more love and affection, What moved Kings
to grant so many privileges to their Subjects.
and as they conceived, the greater obligation from their Subjects, have many
times, to the prejudice of themselves and their posterity, to the diminution of
the rights of government, and often to the great damage of the Commonwealth,
given away and released the execution of many parts of that right, which
originally most justly belonged unto them, and tied themselves by promises and
oaths to observe those laws, which they made for the exemption of their
Subjects.

Majora jura inseperabilia a Majestate, neque^nt indulgeri subditis, and ita
cohaerent ossibus, and ab illo seperari, si ne illius destructione, non
possunt. Paris. de puteo. Arnisaus l. 2. c. 2. de jure ma. Blacvod. c. 7. page
75. Things that the King cannot grant.
But there be some things, which the King cannot grant, as to transfer the
right of succession to any other then the right heir, to whom it does justly
belong: quia non jam haereditas est, sed proprium adeuntis patrimonium, cujus
ei pleno jure dominium acquiritur, non a Patre, non a populo, sed a lege --:
Because he has this right unto the Crown, not from his father, nor from the
people, but from the Law of the Land, and from God himself, which appointed
him for the same, says the Civilian: and therefore that vulgar saying is not
absurd, nunquam mori regem: that the King never dies: for as soon as ever the
one parts with this life, the other immediately without expecting the consem
either of Peers or people, does by a just and plenary right succeed, not only
as his fathers heir, but as the lawful governor of the people, and as the
Lord of the whole Kingdom, not by any option of any men, but by the condition
of his birth, and the donation of his God; and therefore the resignation of the
crown by King John unto the Pope was but a fiction, that could infer no
diminution of the right of his successor: because no King can give away this
right from him, T^ings that the King should not grant.
whom God has designed for it.

And there be some things, which no Christian King should grant away, as any of
those things, that being granted, may prejudice the Church of God, and depresse
the glory of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; as the giving way for the diminution
of the just revenues of the Church, the profanation of things consecrated to
Gods service, and the suppression of any of the divine callings of the Gospel,
which are Bishops, Priests and Deacons; because all Kings are bound to honor
God, and to hinder all those things, whereby he is dishonored, either in
respect of things, persons, or places.

And there be some things which the Kings of this realm have never granted
away, Things that Kings have not granted away.
but have still retained them in their own hands, as inviolable prerogatives
and characteristicall Symboles and Properties of their Supremacy, and the
relics of their pristine right, as in the time of peace, those two special
parts of the government of the Commonwealth, which do consist.

1. About the Laws. 1. About the Laws.
2. About the Magistrates.
The 1. whereof, says Arnisaeus, contains these particulars, that is, to
make Laws, to create Nobility, and give titles of dignity, to legitimate the
ill begotten, to grant Privileges, to restore Offenders to their lost repute,
to pardon the transgressors, and the like. 1. Ius legislati^ vum. Johan. Beda.
page 25.


1. Then it is the right of the King jura dare, to give Laws unto his people;
for though (as I said before) the Subjects in Parliament may treat of Laws,
and entreat the King to approve of them that they propose unto him; yet they
are no Laws, and carry with them no binding force, till the King gives his
consent; and therefore out of Parliament, The power of making Laws is in the
king.
you see the Kings Proclamation has vim et vigorem legis, the full force and
strength of a law; to show unto us, that the power of making laws was never
yielded out of the Kings hands; The case of our affairs, page 11. Stat. West.
1.3. E. 1.3. and 6. and 42. Stat. of Merch. 13. E. 1. Westminster. 3.18. E. 1.1.
Stat. of Waste. 20. E. 1. of appeal. 28. E. 1.1. E. 2.1. and all the titles
and acts of our Parliaments.
nor can it indeed be parted with, except be part with His Majesty and
Sovereignty; for the limiting of his own power, by his voluntary concession of
such favors unto his people, not to make any Laws without their consent, does
no way diminish his Sovereignty, or lessen his own right and authority; but as
a man that yeildeth himself to be bound by some others, has the use of his
strength taken from him, but none of his natural strength it self is
lessened, (and much less is any part of it transferred to them that bound
him;) but that whenever his bonds are loosened, he can work again by virtue
of his own natural strength, and not by any received strength from his
loosers; so the natural right and interest of the Sovereignty, being solely in
the King; and the Peers and Commons, by the Kings voluntary concession, being
only interessed in the office of restraining his power, for the more regular
working of the true legitimate Sovereignty, it cannot be denied, but in
whatsoever the Peers and Commons do remit the restraint, by yiedling their
consent to the point proposed, the King works and acts therein absolutely
by the power of his own inherent Sovereignty; and all acts and laws so
passing do virtually proceed from the King, How the same acts may be said to
be the acts of the king and of the Parliament.
as from the true and proper efficient author thereof: and may notwithstanding
be said to be the acts of the whole Court, because the three estates contribute
their power of remitting the restraint, and yiedling their assent, as well as
the King uses his unrestrained power.

And therefore Suarez says, that as condere legem unus est ex praecipu^s
actibus gubernationis reipublicae, ita praecipuam and superiorem requirit
potestatem, Suarez. l. 1. c. 8. n. 8.
to make Laws is one of the chiefest acts of the government of a
Commonwealth; so it requires the chiefest and supremest power and authority;
quae quidem potestas legislativa primario in Deo est, which legislative power
is primarily in God, and is communicated unto Kings (says he) per quandam
participationem, according to the saying of the wise man, Sap^ 6.
Hear O ye Kings, because power is given unto you of the Lord. Aug. in Johan.
tract. 6.
And Saint Augustine calls Jura humana jura imperatoru^, quia ipsa jura
humana per imperatores: all humane laws are the laws of Emperors or Kings;
because they are made by them; and the Holy Ghost speaking of the Kings of
Judah, says, Genesis 49.10.
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Law giver from between his
feet; to teach us, that whosoever swayeth the Scepter has the right to be the
Lawmakers, which is one of the prime prerogatives of Sovereignty. 2. Ius
nobilitandi.


2. Jus nobilitandi, the right of appointing the principal Officers of State;
to cry up any of all His Subjects, whom the King will honor, as Pharaoh did
Joseph, and Ahasuerus did Haman and Mordecai and to give them titles of honor,
per codicillos honorarios, aut per diplomata sua, as to make Dukes, Marquesses,
Barons, Knights, etc. does belong only unto the King, that has only the
supreme Majesty.

But if the Dukes, Earls, It is the Doctrine of the Anabaptists and Puritans,
that there should be no Degrees of Schools, nor titles of honor among men.
and Barons be so pliable to the Puritan faction, to put down the spiritual
Lords, I doubt that e're long the King shall have but few Nobility; when not
only the Mechanics and Rusticks will all cry out against this Lordlinesse,
and say, as they did in the rebellion of Jacke Cade and Wat Tyler.

When Adam delv'd, and Eve span,
Who was then the Gentleman?
And why should we now endure so many titles of vanity, and so many vain
honors to vapor it over us? but the Puritan Clergy also, seeing themselves
deprived of their due honor, and made all equal, all as base as Jeroboams
Priests, will be apt enough to blow up this conceit, and to put it into the
Creed of all the vulgar, that God made us all equal, and to be Lords is but to
be tyrants over their Brethen; and the Presbytery, whose pride could not obey
the authority of their Bishops, will not abide the superiority of any Lords;
but if they cannot Lord it themselves, will be sure to take away the Lordship
from all others.

And therefore if the Nobility be not wiser, then to lay our honors in the
dust, (as I see some about His Majesty, that would feign be the Priests to
bury it, which mere policy, though they wanted piety, should prohibit) they
shall find that Jam tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. Virgil. Aenei^.
l. 1.
When our Cottages are burnt, their next Palaces shall not escape the fire;
but through our sides their Honors shall be killed, and buried without honor.

3. Jus legitimandi, 3. Ius legitimandi.
the right of legitimation belongs unto the King, without which legitimation
the Lawyers tell us, that as the world now stands, a mighty emolument would
happen unto the Crown, if the King granted not this grace to them that want it.

4. Jus appellationes recipiendi, 4. Ius appellationes recipiendi.
the right of taking notice of causes, and of judging the same by the last
appeal definitively, does always belong to the supreme Majesty; because that
as Saint Paul appealed unto Caesar, Act. 25.11.
so the last appeal is to the highest Sovereign, from whom there lies none
appeal, but only to him that shall judge all the Judges of the earth.

5. Honores restituendi.
5. Jus restituendi in integrum, the right to restore men attainted, or
banished, or condemned to death, unto their Country, wealth, and honor, is
likewise a part of the royal right: So Osorius says, Osorius de rebu^ Imman.
p. 6.
that Immanuel King of Portugal restored James son of Fernandus, and his
brother Dionysius, and others, unto their forfeited honors; and so not only
the Scripture shows how David pardoned Absolon and Shimei, 1. Reg. 2.26.
two wicked Rebels, and Solomon pardoned Abiathar that were all worthy of
death; Veniam criminosis indulgere.
but also Saint Augustine speaking of other Kings and Emperors, says,
judicibus statuendum est ne liceat in reum datam sententiam revocare, the
Judges may not pardon a man condemned to death; numquid and ipse Imperator sub
hac lege erit? but shall not the Emperor or King pardon him? are they likewise
under this Law of restraint? by no means: Nam ipsi soli licet revocare
sententiam, and reum mortis absolvere, and ipsi ignoscere; for he and he alone,
that is, the Emperor or King, may revoke the sentence, and absolve him that is
guilty of death. And so our King according to this his undeniable right, Our
Kings unparal^ll'd clemency and pretty toward the Rebels,
has most graciously, and not seldom, offered his pardon unto these
intolerable Rebels, a pardon not to be paralleled in any History, nor to be
believed, unless we had seen it, that a man could be so far inclined to
clemency and mercy, as to remit such transcendent impiety, which will render
them the more odious both to God and man; and their names the more infamous to
all posterity, that after they had filled themselves with all kind of
wickedness, with incredible transgressions, they should be found contemners of
so favorable a pardon.

But though it be the Kings right to pardon faults, and to restore offenders;
yet herein all Princes should take great heed (especially when they have power
to take revenge, for sometimes the sinners may be like the sons of Zervia, 2.
Sam. 3.39.
too strong for David) how they pardon those great crimes that are committed to
the dishonor of God, and do so far provoke him to anger, as to plague both
the doers and the sufferers of them; because, that although they be soluti
legibus suis, not bound to their own Laws, Arnisaus l. 11 c. 3. page 69.
yet they are not soluti ratione and praeceptis divinis, but they are bound to
observe Gods Laws, and to punish the transgressors of his Commandments; or if
they do not when they can do it, they shall render a strict account to God
for all their omissions, as they may see it in the example of King Saul. 1.
Sam. 15.9.


6. Jus convocandi, the right of calling Synods, Parliaments, 6. Jus convocandi
Synodos, Parliamenta, etc.
Dyets, and the like, were the rights of the Kings of Israel, and are the just
Prerogatives of the Kings of England, howsoever this faction of the Parliament
has sought to wrest it, as they do all other rights out of the Kings hands, by
their presumption to call their Schismatic Synod; to which they have no more
color of right, then to call a Parliament.

7. Jus excudendi, the right of coining money, 7. Ius monetas excudendi.
to give it value, to stamp his arms or his image upon it, (as our Savior
says, Whose Image and superscription is this? Matthew. 22.20.
and they say to him Caesar's) is the proper right of Caesar, the prerogative of
the King.

The second sort of the Kings right is circa magistratus, 2. About the
Magistrates.
and contains, jurisdiction, rule, creation of officers, appointing of
circuits, provinces, judgments, censures, institution of Schools and
Colleges, collation of dignities, receiving of fidelities, and abundance more;
whereof I intend not to speak at this time, but refer my Reader to
Arnisaeus, Arnis. l 2. c. 2.
de jure Majestatis, if he desires to be informed of these particulars.

And as these and the like are jura Regalia, the rights of Majesty in the time
of peace; so when peace cannot continue, it does properly belong unto the King,
and to none else, but to him that has the Sovereignty, whose right it is
alone, to make war, either to succor his allies, or to revenge great
injuries, or for any the like just causes; and, as he sees cause, to conclude
Peace, to send Ambassadors, to negotiate with foreign States, and the like,
are the rights of Kings, and the indeleble characters of Sovereignty, which
whosoever violateth, and endeavors to purloine them from the King, does with
Prometheus steal fire from Heaven, which the Gods would not suffer (as the
Poets faigne) to go unrevenged.

And these things (so far as I can find) the King never parted with them
unto his Subjects; and therefore whosoever pretends to an inderived power to
do any of these, and exempteth himself from the Kings right herein, ^oh. Beda
p. 26.
resists the ordinance of God, and is guilty of High Treason, what pretext
soever he brings, says the Advocate of Paris.

Ita etiam reges Egypti quibus voluntas pro lege est, legum tamen instituta in
cogendis pecunus quotidianoque victu sequebantur. Aubanus. What things kings
have granted.
And there be some things which our Kings have granted unto their Subjects, and
restrained themselves from their full right; as the use of that power, which
makes new Laws, or repeales the old, or lays any tax or sums of moneys
upon his Subjects, without the consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament;
and it may be some other particulars, which the Lawyers know better then I.

And all these Privileges of the Subjects are but limitations and restrictions
of the Kings right, made by themselves unto their people; and therefore where
the Law cannot be produced, to confirm such and such Liberties and Privileges
granted unto them, I say there the Kings power is absolute, and the Subject
ought not in such cases to determine any thing to the disadvantage of the King:
because all these Liberties that we have, are enjoyed by virtue of the Kings
grant, as you may see in the ratification of Magna Charta; where the King
says, We have granted and given all these Liberties.

9. Hen 3.
But I could never see it produced, where the King granted unto his Subjects
that they might force him, and compel him with a strong hand, by an Army of
Soldiers to do what they will, or else to take away either his Crown or his
Life; this Privilege was never granted, because this deprives the King of his
supremacy, and puts him in the condition of a Subject, and would ever prove an
occasion of rebellion, when the people upon every discontent would take Arms
against their King.

And therefore this present resistance is a mere usurpation of the Kings
right, a rebellion against his Laws, an High Treason against his person, and a
resistance of the ordinance of God, which heap of deadly sins can bring none
other fruit then damnation, says the Apostle.

CHAP. XIV. Shows the Kings grants unto his people to be of three sorts.
Which ought to be observed: the Act of excluding the Bishops out of Parliament
discussed: the Kings Oath at his Coronation: how it obliges him: and how
Statutes have been procured and repealed.
2. 2. The Kings obligation to observe his grants.
WE are to consider how far the King is obliged to observe his promise, and
to make good these Liberties and Privileges unto his Subjects; where I speak
not how far the fathers grant may oblige the son, or the predecessor his
successor, Peter de la Primandas says, Laws annexed to the Crown the Prince
cannot so abrogate them, but his Successor may disanull whatsoever he has done
in prejudice of them. p. 597.
who cannot be deprived of his right dominion by any act of his precedessors;
but for the rights of his dominion, how far precedent grants, and the custom
of their continuance, with the desuetude and non-claime of his right, may
strengthen them unto the Subject, and oblige the successors to observe them, I
leave it unto the Lawyers and Civilians to dispute: but I am here to discuss
how far the King, that has promised and taken his oath to observe his Laws,
and make good all privileges granted to his Subjects, is bound in conscience
to keep and observe them: Touching which, you must understand that these
grants of immunities and favors are of three special kinds.

1. Of grace. 2. By fraud. 3. Through fear.
For,

1. The King that has his full right, 1. All grants of grace ought to be
observed.
either by conquest or succession over his people, to govern them as a most
absolute Monarch, and out of his mere grace and favor, to sweeten the
subjection of his people, and to bind them with the greater love and affection
to his obedience, does minuere sua jura, restrain his absolute right, bestow
liberties upon his people, and take his oath for their security, that he will
observe them, is bound in all conscience to perform them, and can never be
freed from injustice before God and man, if he transgress them; Quia volenti
non fit injuria, because they do him no injury, when he does voluntarily,
either totally resign, or in some particularity diminish his own right; The
true Law of free Monarchs, p. 203.
but after he has thus firmly done it, he can never justly go from it: and
therefore King James says, that a King which governs not by his Laws, can
neither be accountable to God for his administration, nor have a happy and
established reign; because it cannot be, but that the people seeing their King
failing of his duty, will be always murmuring and defective in their fidelity.
And

Yet the Kings breach of oath does neither forfeit his right, nor warrant their
disloyalty: because another man's sin does no way lessen mine offense, and
neither God nor the King granted this privilege unto Subjects, to rebel and
take Arms against their Sovereign, when they pretend he has broken his
promise.

2. Grants obtained through fraud; which to be observed.
2. When the King, through the subtle persuasions of his people, that pretend
one thing and intend another, shall be seduced to grant those things that are
full of inconveniences; as our King was over reached, and no better then merely
cheated by the faction of this Parliament, to grant the continuance of it, till
it should be dissolved with the consent of both Houses, and the like Laws that
are procured by mere fraud, that soonest over-reacheth the best meaning Kings.
I answer with the old Proverb, Caveat emptor, he ought to have been as wise
to prevent them, as they were subtle to circumvent him; and therefore, Josh.
9.20.
as Joshua, being deceived by the Gibeonites, could not alter his promise, nor
break his league with them, lest wrath should fall upon him, so no more should
any other King break promise in the like case.

Psalm. 15.5.
But you must observe, that the Psalmist says, The good man which shall dwell
in the Tabernacle of the Lord, is he that swears unto his neighbor and
disappointeth him not, though it were to his own hinderance: mark, though it
were to his own hinderance never so much, Quicquid fit dolo malo, annullat
factum and imponit poenam, summa Angel.
he must perform it; but what if he has promised and sworn that which will
be to the great dishonor of God, to the hinderance of thousands of others, and
it may be to the ruin of a whole Kingdom which is a great deal more then his
own hinderance, is a King bound, or is any man else obliged to perform such a
promise, or to keep such an oath? to tell you mine own judgment, I think he
ought not to perform it; and our own Law tells us what grants soever are
obtained from the King, under the broad Seal by fraud and deceit, those grants
are void in Law; therefore, seeing the act for the perpetuity of this
Parliament was obtained, dolo pessimo, to the great dishonor of God, and the
ruin both of Church and State, when their pretense was very good; though the
goodness of his Majesty in the tenderness of his conscience was still loath
to allow himself the liberty to dissolve it, until he had other juster and
more clear causes to pronounce it no Parliament, as the abusing of his grant,
to the raising of an Army, and the upholding of a Rebellion against their
Sovereign; yet I believe he might safely have done it long agone, without the
least violation of Gods Law, when their evil intentions were openly discovered
by those Armies which they raised. For I doubt not to affirm it, with the
Author of The sacred Prerogative of Christian Kings, p. 144. if any good
Prince, or his royal Ancestors have been cheated out of their sacred right by
fraud or force, he may at the fittest opportunity, when God in his wise
providence offers the occasion, resume it, especially when the Subjects do
abuse the Kings concessions, to the damage of Sovereignty, so that it redounds
also to the prejudice either of the Church or Commonwealth.

3. When the King, through fear, 3. Grants gotten by force not to be observed.
not such as the Parliaments fear is, who were afraid where no fear was, and
were frighted with dreams and causeless jealousies; but that fear, which is
real, and not little, but such as may fall in fortem and constantem virum,
does pass any Law, especially that is prejudicial to the Church, and
injurious to many of his Subjects; I say, that when he shall be freed from that
fear, he is not only freed from the obligation of that Law, but he is also
obliged to do his uttermost endeavor to annull the same: it is true that his
fear may justly free him from all blame at the passing of it, as the fear of
the thief may clear me from all fault in delivering my purse unto him;
because these are no voluntary acts; and all acts are adjudged good or evil
according to the disposition of the will; the same being like the golden bridle
that Minerva was said to put upon Pegasus to guide him and to turn him as she
pleased: The will must never consent to forced acts that are unlawful. His
Majesty's answer to the Petition of the Lords and Commons, 16. Iuli^. p. 8.
but when his fear is past, and God has delivered him from the insurrection
of wicked doers, if his will gives consent to what before he did unwilling, who
can free the greatest Monarch from this fault?

Therefore His Majesty confessing (which we that saw the whole proceedings of
those tumultuous routs, that affrighted all the good Protestants and the Loyal
Subjects, do know that it could not be otherwise) that he was driven out of
London for fear of his life; I conclude that the act of excluding the Bishops
out of Parliament, being past after his flight out of London can be no free,
nor just, nor lawful act; and the King when he is more fully informed of many
particulars about this act, that is so prejudicial to the Church of Christ,
and so injurious to all his servants, the Clergy, whose rights and privileges
the King promised and swear at His Coronation to maintain,

Page 31.
But this is answered by the answerer to Doctor Fern, that he is no more bound
to defend the rights of the Clergy by his oath, then the rest of the laws
formerly enacted, whereof any may be abrogated without perjury, when they are
desired to be annulled by the Kingdom.

Sol. His Majesty's answer to the remonstrance or declaration of the Lords and
Commons 26. of May. 1642.
To which I say, that as His Majesty confesses, there are two special
questions demanded of the King at his Coronation.

1, Sir, Will you grant and keep, and by your oath confirm to the people of
England, the laws and customs to them granted by the Kings of England, your
lawful and religious predecessors?

And the King answers, I grant and promise to keep them.

2. After such questions, as concern all the commonalty of this Kingdom, both
Clergy and Laity, as they are his Subjects, one of the Bishops reads this
admonition to the King before the people with a loud voice;

Our Lord and King, we beseech you to pardon and to grant, and to preserve unto
us and to the Churches committed to our charge all Canonical privileges, and
due law and justice, and that you would protect and defend us, as every good
King in His Kingdom ought to be the protector and defendor of the Bishops, and
the Churches under their government.

And the King answers,

With a willing and devout heart I promise and grant my pardon, and that I will
preserve and maintain to you and the Churches committed to your charge, all
Canonical Privileges, and due law and justice, and that I will be your
protector and defender to my power by the assistance of God, as every good King
in His Kingdom, in right, ought to protect and defend the Bishops and Churches
under their Government.

Then the King laying his hand upon the book, says, The Kings oath at His
Coronation two fold.
the things which I have before promised, I shall perform and keep, so help
me God, and the contents of this Book.

Where I beseech all men to observe, that here is a two fold promise, and so a
two fold oath.

1. The one to all the Commonalty and people of England, The frst part of the
oath. Populo Anglicano. Vide D. p. 165.
Clergy and Laity; and so whatsoever he promises, may by the consent of the
parties, to whom the right was transferred, be remitted and altered by the
representative body in Parliament, quia volenti non fit injuria; and the rule
holds good, quibus modis contrabitur contractus, iisdem dissolvitur; and
therefore as any compact or contract is made good and binding, so it may be
made void and dissolved, mutuo contrahentium assensu; by the mutual assent of
both parties; that is, any compact, where God has not a special interest in
the contract, as he has in the conjugall contract betwixt man and wife, and
the politic covenant betwixt the King and His Subjects; Contracts wherein God
is interessed can not be dissolved without God.
which therefore cannot be dissolved by the consent of the parties until God,
who has the chiefest hand in the contract, gives his assent to the
dissolution; and so, when things are dedicated for the service of God, or
Privileges granted for his honor; neither donor nor receiver, can alienate
the gift or annull that Privilege without the leave and consent of God, that
was the principal party in the concession, as it appears in the example of
Ananias, and is confirmed by all Casuists.

2. The other part of the oath is made to the Clergy in particular; and so also
with their consent, The second part of ^he oath. Clericis Ecclesiasticis. D. p.
165.
some things I confess, may perhaps be revoked, but without their consent, not
any thing can be altered, in my understanding, without injustice; for with what
equity can the Laity vote away the rights of the Clergy, when the Clergy d^e
absolutely deny their assent? just as if the Clergy should give away the lands
of the Laity; or as if I had lent the King ten thousand pounds, upon the
public assurance of King and both Houses, to be repaid again; and they
without mine assent, shall vote the remission of this debt, for some great
benefit, that they conceive redounding to the common wealth; The party to whom,
the bond is m^de must release the bonds.
by which vote I should believe my self to be no better then merely cheated;
or as if the Parliament without the assent of the Londoners, should pass an
act, that all the money which they lent, should be remitted for the releiving
of the State; I doubt not but they would conclude that act very unjust; and so
is this act against the Bishops; because the Kings obligation to a particular
body, personal or politic, cannot be dispensed with by the representative
Kingdom without the releasement of that body, to whom the King is obliged.

For I find that all the Casuists will tell you, that juramentum promissorium
ita obligat, ut invito creditore, non potest in melius commutari; quia aliter
iustitia and veritas non servarentur inter homines: Suarez. de iuramento
promiss l. 2. c. 12 n. 14.
and it is their common tenet, that it cannot be dispensed with, quia per
promissum acquiritur jus ei cui fit promissio, and utilitas unius non sufficit
ut alter suo jure privetur, the benefit of others must not deprive me of my
right; This point is so clear, that neither Scholar, nor any man of reason or
conscience will deny it.

Therefore to persuade the King that is bound by his oath, to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Church and Clergy, to cast out the Bishops out of
their rights, or to take away their lands, without their own consent (whom the
King by his oath has obliged himself to protect;) I can not see how they can
do it without great iniquity, or His Majesty consent to it, and be innocent,
when he is fully informed of the rights of his Clergy; whereas otherwise the
most religious Prince may be subject to mistakings, and so nesciently admit
that, which willingly he would never have granted: And if they can not persuade
him to do this without iniquity, how dare they go about to force and compel
him against conscience, to commit this and such other horrible impiety* but I
assure my self that God, who has blessed our King, and preserved him hitherto
without blame, as being forced to what he did, or not thoroughly understanding
what was our right, the Bishops being imprisoned and not suffered to inform
him nor to answer for themselves, will still arm His Majesty with that
resolution, as shall never yield to their impetuousnesse, to transcend the
limits of his own most upright conscience.

Yet still it is urged, they were excluded by act of Parliament, unjust, as
being done by the wisdom of the whole State, and the King should not desire
it to be altered.

I answer that all Parliaments are not always guided by an unerring spirit,
Sol.
The case of our affairs. p. 17.
but were many times swayed by the heads of the most powerful faction, which
are instances rather of their unsteady weakness, then of their just power;
when forsaking the guidance of their lawful head, they suffered themselves to
be lead by popular pretenders, as when Canut^s prevailed by his arms, he could
have a Parliament to resolve, that his title to the Crown was the best; when
Hen. 4. How powerful factions have procured Parliaments to do most unjust
things.
had an army of 60000 men, he could have a Parliament to depose Rich. 2. and
confer the Crown upon himself; when Edw. Duke of York grew powerful, he
could have a Parliament to determine the reign of Hen. 6. and leave him only
the name of King, for his life, but give the very Kingdom unto the Duke, under
the names of protector and regent; and then he could procure the Parliament to
declare that Hen. 4. Hen. 5. and Hen. 6. were but Kings de facto, non de iure;
so Rich. the 3. Turba tremen^ sequitur fortunam, ut semper and odit damnato^.
Iuven. Satyra. 10.
as mere an usurper as any, could notwithstanding procure a Parliament, to
declare him a lawful King. and Hen. 7. could procure the forementioned acts,
that were made in favor of Edw. 4. and Rich. 3. to be annulled; and Hen. 8.
could have a Parliament to justify and authorize his divorces, and Queen
Elizab. could have a Parliament to make it high treason for any man to say,
that the Queen could not by Act of Parliament bind and dispose the rights and
titles, When Kings were most powerful, they could get the Parliaments to yield
to what Statutes they thought best; when the Lords or faction were most
powerful, they forced their Kings to make what Statutes they liked best.
which any person whatsoever might have unto the Crown: when as we know, it
was adjudged in Hen. 7. that no Act of Parliament, nor yet an Attainder by
Parliament, can disable the right heir to the Crown; because the descent of
the Crown upon him purges all disabilities whatsoever, and makes him every way
capable thereof.

Thus, as the Parliaments, when they were most prevalent, caused their Kings
unwillingly to yield many things against right; so the Kings, growing most
powerful, prevailed to work the Parliament to consent to very unjust
conclusions: and therefore it is inconsequent to say, this exclusion must be
just, because it is past by an Act of Parliament.

And therefore, as in the 15 year of Edw. 3. the King being unwillingly drawn
to consent to certain Articles, The Case of our aff^ires. p. 20.
prejudicial to the Crown, and to promise to seal the Statute thereupon
made, lest otherwise his affairs in hand might have been ruinated, (which we
conceive to be just in like manner now, the King very unwillingly drawn to
pass this Act for the exclusion of the Clergy, which is most prejudicial both
to the Crown and the Church, and a mighty dishonor unto God himself, lest
otherwise more mischief might have followed, when he hoped that this would
have appeased the fury of that prevalent faction, which now the Kingdom sees
it did not.) Another Statute was made the same year, Statutes unwillingly
procured from the King, repealed.
reciting the former matter, that was enacted, in these words; It seemed to the
said Earls, Barons, and other wise men, that since the Statute did not of our
free will proceed, the same to be void, and ought not to have the name, nor
strength of a statute, and therefore by their counsel and assent, we have
decreed the said Statute to be void, etc. So I hope our Earls and Barons, and
the rest, will be so wise and so just, both to the King and to the Church, that
seeing this Statute proceeded not of the Kings free will, as I believe their
own conscience knows, and do presume His Majesty will acknowledge, they
likewise will consent, that the King may make it void again.

. Certain quaeres discussed, but not resolved; the end for which God ordained
Kings; the praise of a just rule; Kings ought to be more just then all others
in three respects; and what should most especially move them to rule their
people justly.
ANd here I must further crave leave, to be resolved in certain Quaeres and
doubts, wherein I would very gladly be satisfied; for, seeing, as I told you
before, there are some rights of royalty, which are inseperabilia a majestate,
which the King ought not, and which indeed he cannot grant away; as there be
some things which he may forgo, though he need not; I demand,

1. Whether any positive Act, Statute, or Law, that is, either ex diametro, or
ex obliquo, either directly, or by consequent, or any other way contradictory,
or transgressive to the Law of God, ought to be kept and observed; wherein I
believe, and constantly maintain that it ought not: and I say further, that by
the Word of God, not any Lay men, be they never so noble, never so learned, and
never so many; but the Clergy, be they never so poor, and never so much
dis-esteemed, ought to be the resolvers of this point, what is repugnant and
what consonant to the Law of God; Malach. 2.7.
because the Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and the people must seek
the Law at his mouth; therefore it may be conceived no Statute can be rightly
made, that is, not assented to and approved (as all our former Statutes were)
by the Bishops, that are the chiefest of the Clergy, to be no ways contrary to
the Law of God.

2. Whether the King, that is an absolute Monarch, to whom charge and
government of his people, can without offense to God, change this form of
government, from a Monarchical to an Aristocraticall, or a Democraticall form
of government; which may be believed he cannot; because, though as I showed out
of Saint Augustine, the worser form, invented by man, may lawfully be changed
into a better: yet the best, which is only and primarily ordained by God,
cannot be changed into a worser without offense.

power, authority, and right, which God has given him, and without which he
cannot govern and protect his people, that God has committed under his
charge; wherein it may be conceived he cannot; because God must discharge him
from the charge that he imposed upon him, before he can be freed and excused
from it; but, as the Bishop, on whom the Lord has laid the charge of souls,
cannot lay aside this charge when he pleases; so no more can the King lay
aside the charge of the government, nor part with that power and right
Otherwise then by substitution. Rege absente, and durante beneplacito; or,
quamdiu se been gesser^nt sub stituti.
whereby he is enabled to govern them, and without which he cannot govern
them, until God, that laid this charge upon him, and gave him full power and
authority to do it, by some undeniable dispensation gives him his Writ of ease
to discharge him.

4. Whether such an Act or Statute, which disinableth any King to dissolve his
Diet, Council, Assembly, or Parliament, inableth some subtle faction of his
Subjects, in some sort, to countermand their King, be not derogatory to the
inseparable right of Majesty, destructive to the power of government, and
prejudicial to all the loyal Subjects, and therefore void of it self, The
Act for the indissolubility of any Parliament believed by many, to be of it
self void.
and not to be observed; because such an act ought not to have been concluded:
wherein I leave the resolution to be determined by the Judges and the Bishops
of this Land, and I will only crave leave to set down what may be thought
herein, viz. that such an Act or Statute is clearly and absolutely void.

sort, and in some kind, to change the fundamental constitution and
government of his Kingdom, from an absolute Monarchy to another species and
form of government, either Aristocraticall, or Democraticall, or some other
form, emergent out of all these, such as we know not how to term it, and such
as was never known from the beginning of the world: a mixture indeed, which, I
told you before, no absolute King can be thought to do without offense,
unless he can prove his license from God to do the same.

2. Because that hereby he may be said to denude himself of depriving himself
of this power, to disinable, himself to discharge that duty, which God does
necessarily require at his hands; that is, to govern his people, by protecting
the innocent, and punishing the wrong doer; and when God shall call the King to
an account, why he did not thus govern his people, and defend those poor
Subjects that were loyal and faithful both to God and their King, according
to the charge that he laid upon him, and the right and power which he gave him
to discharge it: It may be feared, it will be no sufficient answer for any King
to say, but I have so laid away that power, and parted with that right unto my
Lords and Commons, that I could not do it; for it may be asked, where does God
require him, or when did he authorize him to divest himself of that authority
wherewith he endued him? how then can he do it, to the undoing of many people,
without an assured leave from God? therefore, as that Act which was made
unrepealable, was adjudged no Act, but immediately void, because it was
destructive to the very power of Parliament Which may repeal their own Acts,
but not destroy their just power, nor themselves, as it seems the the Act of
excluding the Bishops does, and takes away as it were the soul of the
Parliament.
, and if any act should be made to destroy common right, or to hinder the
public service of God, or to disinable the right heir to enjoy the Crown,
or the like, those Acts are void of themselves; so any Statute that disinableth
the Kings government must needs be void ipso facto; as I have partly showed in
my Discovery of Mysteries. p. 32.

3. Because it may be believed no King would ever grant such an Act, unless he
were either subtly deceived and seduced, or forcibly compelled thereunto, for
fear of some inavoidable extremity, which (according to all outward
appearance) concessions of such unspeakable disadvantages; as a man gives away
his sword when he sees his life in danger, if he deliver it not: Therefore the
premises considered.

5. The Quaere is, whether any King should be bound and obliged such grants,
and make good such Acts, In all these Quaries I conclude nothing whatsoever I
believe.
as are thus fraudulently obtained, or forcibly wrested from him, and are thus
contradictory to Gods will, thus prejudicial to the power of government, and
thus destructive to his Subjects; which for the foresaid reasons is by many
men believed he is not; but, as this right was unduly procured from him, so
when God inableth him, he may justly acquire it, and reassume it, without any
offense to God, or the least reluctancie to his own conscience.

And if this Act, that has passed in our Parliament, makes it immediately to
be no Parliament As I know not whether it does or no^; neither will I determine
it.
, as being now another form of government, which the Divines hold, ought not
to be effected; then certainly all Acts that passed since are no Acts, but are
void and invalid of themselves.

Or be it granted, that the Act for the perpetuity of Parliament does not
annull the Parliament; yet it is doubted by many, whether the Parliament may
not themselves, without the Kings pronouncing it void or dissolved, make it no
Parliament; when of Counselors for the King, Quid prodest tibi nomen usurpare
altonum, and vocari quod ^on ei?
they become Traitors unto the King; and of Patriots, that should protect the
Commonwealth, they become Parricides and Catilines unto the same; because
these duties, being as the soul, the life, and the end of Parliaments, when
these are changed, to be the bane and death of King and Kingdom, it is doubted
how it can be a Parliament, any more then a dead carcass that is deprived of
his soul, can be said to be a man; for the circumstances and ceremonies of
times, places, and the like, are not essentialia Parliamenti, but as
accidentia; quae possunt adesse and abesse sine interitu subjecti, and may be
ad been esse, but are as Punctillio's in respect of the end and essence of a
Parliament.

And therefore, as God promises infallibly to do a thing, for example, Psalm.
89.34. 1. Sam. 2.30.
that He will not fail David; his seed shall endure for ever: and of Eli, he
said indeed, that his house and the house of his father should walk before him
for ever; yet this unchangeable God, when the change is wrought in David, or
his seed, or in Eli his house, David does immediately say, Thou have abhorred
and forsaken thine Anointed, Psalm. 89 37.
and art displeased at him; and of his promise to Eli, God says in the same
place, now be it far from me; 1. Sam. 2.30.
so it may be conceived, that when any Parliament changes its nature, fails
in its very being, and of a preservative becomes a poison, both to the King and
Kingdom; I should never acknowledge Judas after he betrayed his master, and
resolved to persist in his wickedness to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ, no
more then I should take the Temple of Jerusalem to be the house of God, so long
as it continued the den of thieves.
the King and Kingdom may then, without any change in themselves, or failing
of their former promises, justly say, they are no Parliament; but, as the
Romans said unto a worthy Patriot, that had formerly saved them from the
Senones, and at last became an enemy to the State, We did honor thee as our
deliverer, when thou did save us from the Senones, sed jam nobis es quasi
unus ex Senonibus; so may we say of any Parliament, that turns to be the
destruction of a Commonwealth; that it is but a shadow, and no substance; a
den of thieves and no Parliament of Counselors: And I assure my self much
more may be spoken, and many inanswerable arguments may be produced to confirm
this to be most true: so I have set down what I conceive to be true about the
Kings grants and concessions unto his people, and his obligations to observe
them.

And if His Majesty (whom I unfainedly love, and heartily honor, and in whose
service, as I have most willingly spent my slender fortunes, so I shall as
readily hazard my dearest life) be offended with me for setting down any of
these things, that my conscience tells me to be true, and needful to be known,
and my duty to declare them; I must answer in all humility, and with all
reverence, that, remembering what Lucian says, (...), many men shunning the
smoke fell into the fire; and that Job says, Timentes pruinam, opprimentur a
nive, which S. Gregory moralizeth of them, that fearing the frost of man's
anger, which they may tread under foot, shall be overwhelmed with the snow of
Gods vengeance, that falls from Heaven, and cannot be avoided; I had rather
suffer the anger of any mortal man, then endure the wrath of the great God;
for now I have freed my soul, let what will come of my body: I will fear God,
and honor my King.

5. 5. The end for which God ordained Kings.
We are to consider the end for which God ordained the King to rule and govern
his people; and that is, to preserve justice and to maintain peace throughout
all the parts of his dominions; for as the Subjects may neither murmr not
resist their Sovereign, at any time, for any cause, so the King must not do
any wrong or injustice to his meanest Subject; neither do we press the
obedience of the Subjects to give license unto the King to use them as he
lists; but we tell Kings their duties, as well as we do to the Subjects, and
that is, to do justice unto the afflicted, and to execute true judgment among
all his people: Psalm. 82.3. Z^char. 7.9.
for as Plato says, (...). all men cry out with one mouth how beautiful a
thing is temperance and righteousness; Cicero calls her the Lady and
Mistress of all virtues: and Pindarus says, Cicero offic. l. 3.
that (...), a golden eye and a golden countenance are always to be seen in
the face of justice, and that Jupiter Soter dwells together with Themis;
whereby he would give us to understand, regem servatorem esse iustum; ^indar.
apud Athan. Cl. Alexand. Strom. l. 5.
that a King must preserve his people by justice, as Clemens Alexand.
expounds it; because as Theognis page 431. says (...), justice is that
virtue, which comprehends all virtues in it self; and therefore Solomon says,
that the Kings throne is established by righteousness: Prove. 16.12.
and justice exalts a Nation, making it to flourish and famous; and injustice
destroys the people, when a Kingdom is translated from nation to nation
because of unrighteousness; Injustice destroys Kingdoms.
the same being as it was said of Carthage fuller of sins then of people; as
you see the Monarchy of the Assyrians was translated unto the Medes and
Persians, and the most famous republ. of the Romans was spoiled, when
forgetting their pristine honesty, they became unjust, Lucan. l. 1.
-- Mensuraque juris
Vis erat. --


And the law was measured by strength, and he had the best right which was most
powerful: and so the ancient nation of the Britons came to utter ruin and
destruction, propter avaritiam principum, injustitiam judicum, negligentiam
episcoporum, and luxuriam populi, says Gildas.

Ezechiel. ^3.11. and 18.32.
And therefore God, that desires not the death of a sinner, much less the
ruin of any nation, would have us to seek for justice, and to live uprightly
one among another; but as the sheep that are without a shepherd, wander where
they list, so as you read often in the book of Judges, when the people were
without a King, there was no justice amongst them, but every man did that which
was right in his own eyes: therefore to prevent oppressions and wrongs,
Judges. 17.6.
God out of his infinite love and favor unto mankind, from the beginning of
the world, called and appointed Kings to be his vicegerents, to judge the
earth, Dan. 2.21, 37 1. Chron. 2 84 1. Sam. ^0.1. 1. Reg. 19.15. Romans 13.4.
Tertull. ad Scap. c. 2. Optat. cont. Parmen. l. 3. p. 8 5. Auson. in mon^syll.
Et id possumus quod iure possumu^. Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. hom. 2. Ambros.
apol. pro Davide. c. 4. etc. 10. Aug. de civit l. 4. c. 33. Greg. epis. l. 2,
ep. 110. Author libelli cui inscriptio, brevis narratio quomodo Hen. 4. etc.
Bellar. de laic. c 5. Rhem. anno. 1. Pet. 2.23. ^ De la Cerda in Virgil. l. 11.
p. 560. etc. Herod. l. 2. Plut. in vit. Cicero. 2. orat. in Anton. Ovid Mei. 6.
Suet. de act. c. ^.
and to see that the poor and the fatherless have right; for besides many
other places that might be alleged, the Spirit of God says directly, ego
dixi Dii estis, and by me Kings do reign, that is, by my appointment, by my
direction, and by my protection, they do, and shall rule and reign over my
people, as Tertull, Optat. S Chrysostom. S. Ambrose. S. Aug. S. Gregory, and the
rest of the most Orthodox fathers have ever taught and maintained; and
therefore this is not inventum humanum, as the Puritanes have dreamed, and the
Popes flatterers have maintained, but it is an ordination of God, that we have
Kings given unto us, not to domineere and to satisfy their untamed wills, and
sensual appetites, but to administer justice and judgment unto their people,
and so to guide them to live in all peace and tranquillity; for as Auson says,
Qui recte faciet, non qui dominatur erit rex.

And therefore Plinius Secundus in his panegyricks says, ut faelicitatis est
posse quantum velis, sic magnitudinis est velle quantum possis, and bonitatis
facere quantum justum: as it is a great felicity to be able to do what we
will, so it is a most heroicke resolution, to will no more but what we should,
and to do nothing but what is just; Claudian says to Honorius.

Nec tibi quid liceat, sed quid fecisse decebit.
Occurrat, mentemque domet respectus honesti.
and so Homer says, that Sarpedon preserved Licia, (...) through justice and
fortitude; whereupon the old Scholiast cites the words of Aeschilus (...) that
virtue and justice are ever coupled together; and Dio: Chrysostom. faith (...) he
is the best of men, that is the most valiant and most just; Orat. 2. and
Herodian says of Pertinax, that he was both loved and feared of the
Barbarians, as well for the remembrance of his virtues in former battles, as
also (...). because that wittingly or willingly he never did injustice to any
man at time. Plutarch ascribes these virtues to Lucullus, and to Paulus
Aemilius; Cicero says the like of Pompey, Ovid of Erictheus; Suetonius of
Octavius, Augustus his father; Virgil of Aeneas; Krantius of Fronto King of the
Danes; and of our late King James of famous and ever blessed memory, we may
truly say, -- Cui pudor and justitiae soror
Incorrupta fides, nudaque veritas,


Quando ullum invenient parem? Horat. l. 1, od. 26. Neither need I blush to
apply the same to our present King.

So you see how Justice exalts a nation, commends the doers of it, and
crowns them with all honor, and as the Poet says, (...). he that works
justly shall have God himself for his Coadiutor.

But here you must observe that, which indeed is most true; (...),
(...).


He is not a just man that does no hurt, but he that is able to do hurt, Who
rightly termed just
and will not do it, that can be unjust and will not be: for it is no great
matter to see a poor man that has no ability, to do no wrong; but it is hard
to use power right, even in the meanest office; and therefore this is that,
that is to be urged, to be then most just, when we have most power to offend,
which most properly does belong to all Kings and Princes, to put them in mind
of their duties, to what end God has made them Kings; for they are but base
flatterers, quibus omnia principum honesta atque inhonesta laudare mos est,
Tacit. annal. l. 3. Plut. in Apotheg. Eustach. ad Iliad. b. Salust. in Orat.
^as. cont. Catil.
that will commend all the doings of Princes, be they good or bad; and which
say, (...), all things are honest and just that Kings do, as that flattering
Sycophant said to Antigonus; or like those, Chirodicai; (...), who think
justice lies not in the Laws, but in their hands; because as Caesar says, in
maxima fortuna minima licentia est, the higher their places are, the more
righteous they ought to be, and the less liberty of sinning is left unto them:
and that in respect 1. of God. 2. of others. 3. of themselves. For

1. Where God has conferred much honor, Kings ought to be more just, then all
other^ in 3 respects.
there he expects much equity, and the more goodness, where he bestowed the
more grace: ideo deteriores estis, quia meliores esse debetis? and will men
therefore be the more sinful, Luke 12.48. Salvian. de Provid. l. 4.
because they ought to be the more righteous?

2. All men's eyes are upon the Prince; and as Seneca says of the royal
Palace, Perlucet omne regiae vitium domus; the houses of Kings are like
glasses, and every man may look through them: so their actions can no more be
hid, then the City that is placed upon an hill; but their least and lightest
acts are soon seen.

3. Their places are as slippery as they are lofty, when (as one says) height
it self makes men's brains to swim; Seneca in Agamemn. 2.1.
and nunquam solido stetit superba foelicitas, and proud insolency never stood
sure for any certain space; for, as God has made them gods, so he can unmake
them at his pleasure; Aug. ho. 14.
and as S. Augustine says, Quod contulit immerentibus, tollit male merentibus,
and quod illo donante fit nostrum, nobis superbientibus fit alienum; what God
has freely bestowed upon you without desert, he may justly take away from you
for your evil deserts; and what is ours through Gods gift, may be made another
man's through our own pride; and not only so, but as he has heaped honors
upon their heads, that they might honor him; so, if they neglect him, he can
power contempt upon Princes, Job 12.21.
and cast dirt in their faces, and make them a very scorn to those that
formerly they thought unworthy to eat with the dogs of their flock; and then,
Quanto gradus altior, Job 30.1.
^anto casus gravior, the higher they were exalted, the more will be their
grief when they are dejected; as it was with those Kings, that being wont to
be carried in their royal Charets, were forced like horses to draw Sesostris
Coach; Quia m^serrimum est suisse felicem; because it is a most wretched thing
to have been happy, and not to be; or as the Poet says, Ovidius Trist. l. 3.
Eleg. 4.
Qui cadit in plano, vix hoc tamen evenit unquam,
Sic cadit ut tacta surgere possit h^mo;
At miser Elpenor, tecto dilapsus ab alto
Occurrit regi, flebilis umbra su^.
And therefore all Kings should be ever mindful of the words of King David, 2.
Sam. 23.3.
He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God; and all
these things that I have set down should move all Kings and Princes to set
their minds upon righteousness, Psalm. 58.1.
to judge the thing that is right, and to live, to reign and rule according to
the straight rule of the Law; What should move all Kings to rule justly
according to Laws.
that so carrying them justly and worthily in their places, the poor people
may truly say of them, Certe Deus est in illis, they may well be called Gods,
because God is in them: and if these things will not, nor cannot move them to
be as mindful of their duty, as well as they are mindful of their excellency,
then let them remember what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 149.8.
He will bind Kings with fetters, and their Nobles with linkes of iron; and let
them meditate upon the words of King Solomon, where he says unto them all,
Hear O ye Kings, and understand, learn ye that be Judges of the ends of the
earth; give ear, you that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of
Nations; for power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the Highest,
who shall try your works, and search out your counsels; because, being
Ministers of his Kingdoms, you have not judged aright, nor kept the Law, nor
walked after the counsel of God; horribly and speedily shall he come upon you;
for a sharp judgment shall be to them that are in high places; for mercy will
soon pardon the meanest, but mighty men shall be mightily tormented; Sap. 6.
usque ad verse. 9.
for he that is Lord over all shall fear no man's person, neither shall he
stand in awe of any man's greatness; for he has made the small and the great,
and cares for all alike; but a sore trial shall come upon the mighty. Heb.
10.31.
And the Apostle says, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God; which things should make their ears to tingle, and their hearts to
tremble, whenever they step aside out of Gods Commandments. And thus we set
down the charge of Kings, and the strict account that they must render unto
God, how they have discharged the same; whereby you see we flatter them not in
their greatness, but tell them as well what they should be, as what they are;
and press not only obedience unto the people, but also equity and justice
unto the Prince; that both doing their duty, both may be happy.

CHAP. XV. Shows the honor due to the King. 1. Fear. 2. An high esteem of
our King; how highly the Heathens esteemed of their Kings; the Marriage of
obedience and authority; the Rebellion of the Nobility how heinous. 3.
Obedience, fourefold; diverse kinds of Monarchs; and how an absolute Monarch
may limit himself.
2 I Have showed you the person that we are commanded to honor, the King; 2
The honor that is due to the King.
I am now to show you the honor that is due unto him, not only by the customs
of all Nations, but also by the Commandment of God himself. Where first of
all you must observe, that the Apostle uses the same word here to express our
duty to our King, as the holy Ghost does to express our duty to our father and
mother; for there it is said, (...); and here S. Peter says (...): to show
indeed that the King -- urbi pater est urbique maritus; is the common Father of
us all, and therefore is to have the same honor that is due to our father and
mother; The same that is due to our Father and Mother.
and I have fully showed the particulars of that honor upon that fifth
commandment. I will insist upon some few points in this place, and as the
ascent to Solomon's throne was, per sex gradus, by six special steps, so I
will set you down six main branches of this honor, that are typified in the
six ensigns or emblems of Royal Majesty; for 1 The Sword exacteth fear, Six
special branches of the honor due to the King.
and the word (...) signifies as much. 2 The Crown imports honor, because
it is of pure gold. 3 The Scepter requires obedience, because that rules us.
4 The Throne deserves Tribute, that his Royalty may be maintained. 5 His Person
meriteth defense, because he is the Defender of us all. 6 His charge calls
for our Prayers that he may be enabled to discharge it.


1. Fear.
1. Kings are called Gods, and all the Royal Ensigns and Acts of Kings are
ascribed to God, as their Crown is of God, whereupon they are called (...),
Psalm. 21.3.
crowned of God; their sword is of God, Psalm. 18.39. Judge. 7 17. Exodus
4.20.17.9.
whereupon the Psalmist says, thou have girded me with strength unto the
battle; their Scepter is the Scepter of God, for so Moses rod, which signifies
a Scepter as well as a rod, is called the rod of God; their throne is the
throne of God, and their judgment is the judgment of God; 1. Chron. 19 21.
and you know how often we are commanded in the Scripture to fear God; and the
Poet says, 2. Chron. 19.6.
primus in orb Deos fecit timor; and where there is no fear of God, Sap.
17.12.
there is no belief, that there is a God; for fear is the betraying of the
succors which reason offers; and when we have no reason to expect succor,
our reason tells us, that we should fear, that is, the punishment which we
deserved for those evils, which deprived us of our succors; and therefore
this fear of the punishment, The want of fear the cause of all mischief.
does often times keep us from those evils; even as the Scripture says, timor
Domini expellit peccatum; and the want of this fear is the cause of all
mischief, as the Prophet David shows, when after he enumerated, Romans 3.13.
the most horrible sins of the wicked, that their throat was an open
sepulcher:, P. 14.
the poison of aspes under their lips, their mouth full of cursing and
bitterness, and their feet swift to shed blood, V. 7.
he adds this as the cause of all, that there was no fear of God before
their eyes: And truly this is the cause of all our calamities, that we fear
not our King; for if we feared him, we durst not Rebel and revile him as we
do.

Why men do so little fear God and the King. Eccles. 5 6.
But what is the reason that we do so little fear either God or the King? the
son of Syrach shows, it is their great mercy and clemency; this, which
works love in all good natures, produces boldness, impudency, and Rebellion
in all froward dispositions, who therefore sin because God is merciful, and
will Rebel against their King, because they know he is pitiful and mild,
and will grant them pardon, as they believe, if they cannot prevail; which is
nothing else, but like spiders, to suck poison out of those sweet flowers, from
whence the bees do gather honey; but let them not deceive themselves; for debet
amor laesus irasci, love too much provoked will wax most angry, and patientia
laesa fit furor; and therefore the son of Syrach says, Eccles. 5.5, 6.
concerning propitiation be not without fear, and say not his mercy is great;
for mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation rests upon sinners: so
though our King be as the Kings of Israel, a merciful minded man, most mild
and clement; yet now when he sees how these Rebels have abused his goodness
and his patience, to the great sufferance of his best Subjects, he can draw his
sword, and make it drunk in the blood of the ungodly, that have so
transcendently abused both the mercies of God, and the goodness of the King.
When diverse people had Rebelled against Tarquin, What Tarquin did to Rebels.
and his son had surprised many of their chief leaders, he sent unto his
father to know what he should do with them, the King being in his field,
paused a while, and then summ^ Papavera carpsit, with his staff chopped off the
heads of diverse weeds and thistles, and gave the messenger none other answer,
but go, and tell my son what J am doing; and his Son, understanding his
meaning, did with them, as Tarquin did with the Poppies; so many Kings would
have done with these Rebels, not out of any love to shed blood, but out of a
desire to preserve Peace, not for any natural inclination to diminish their
Nobility by their decollation, but from an earnest endeavor to suppress the
community from unnatural Rebellion, ut poena in paucos, metus ad omnes, that
the punishment of some might have bred fear in the rest: and that fear of the
King in them might keep his good Subjects from fear of being undone by them.
But all the World sees our King is more merciful, What effects the Kings
clemency wrought.
and has sought all this while to draw them with the cords of love, which has
bred more troubles to himself, more afflictions to us, and made them the more
cruel, and by their Oaths and Protestations, Leagues and Covenants, to do
their best to bring the King and all his loyal Subjects into fear, if they
may not have their own desires. But we are not afraid of these Bug bears;
because we know this has been the practice of all Rebels to link themselves
together with Leagues and Covenants, as in the conjuration of Cateline; and the
Holy league in France, and the like; and many such Covenants and Leagues have
been made with Hell, to the utter destruction of the makers; as when more then
forty men vowed very solemnly (and they intended to do it very cunningly) that
they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul; Act. 23.12.
for so they might be without meat till the day of judgment, if they would
keep their Oath: and so these Covenanteers may undo themselves by such
hardening their faces in their wickedness; The Rebels Covenants show they are
grown desperate.
because this shows they are grown desperate, and are come to that pass,
that they have little hope to preserve their lives, but by the hazarding of
their souls; as if they thought the Devil, for the good service they desire
to do Him, to overthrow the Church, to destroy thousand souls, may perchance
do them this favor, to preserve their lives for a time, to bring to pass so
great a work; whereas we know, the Church is built upon a Rock, and God has
promised to defend his anointed, so that all the power of hell shall never
prevail against any of these.

Wherefore to conclude this point, seeing God has put a sword into the hand of
the King, Romans 13.4.
and the King bears not the sword in vain, but though it be long in the
sheath, he can draw it out when He will, and recompense the abuse of His
lenity, with the sharpness of severity, let us fear; or if you would not
fear, do well, V. 3.
says the Apostle, return from your Rebellion, and from all your wicked
ways, and you may yet find grace; because you have both a merciful God, and a
gracious King.

2. To have an high and good esteem of our King, and to make others to have
the like. 2. Sam. 15.6.
2. As we are to fear, so we are to reverence our King, that is, to have an
high esteem of His Majesty, and to manifest the same in our terms, speeches
and communications accordingly, to gain the love of the rest of His Subjects
toward Him; and not as Absolon did, by cunning and sinister expressions, to
steal away the hearts and affections of His People; for to make mention of him
either in our prayers or Sermons, or in any other familiar talk, so, as if he
were a friend to Popery, an Enemy to the Gospel, and careless of Justice, and
the like, (as too many of our Sectaries most falsely and most maliciously have
done) is rather to vilify and disgrace him, to work an odium against him, and
a tediousness of him, then to procure an honorable esteem and reverence of
him; Cassiodorus says, stipendium tyranno penditur, praedicatio non nisi bono
Principi; Tribute is due to Tyrants, and ought to be paid unto them; but honor
and reverence much more to a good Prince; and the spirit of God bids us, bless
them that persecute us, and our Savior says, Romans 12.14.
bless them that curse you, that is, speak well of Tyrants that oppress us,
Matthew. 5.44.
and speak not ill of them that speak ill of you; especially if they be your
Magistrates or your King, whom (...) you are commanded to honor, even with the
same word (...) (therefore no doubt, The fifth Commandment is the most
obliging of all the Commandments of the second Table. Ephesians. 6.2. How the
heathens honored their Kings. C. Tacitus. lib. 14.
but with the same honor) as we are commanded to honor our Father, and our
Mother; because the King is our Political Father; and is therefore commanded
to be reverenced by this precept, which (as the Divines observe) is of greater
moment and more obliging, then any of the rest of the Commandments of the
second Table, not only because it keeps the first place of all these
precepts, but is also the first Commandment with promise, as the Apostle
observes.

And not only the Scriptures command us thus to honor and to reverence our
King, but the very Heathens also did so reverence them, that they did adore the
Statues and Images of their Kings and Caesar's, as Tacitus reports; and it was
Treason for any man to pull away, or violate them, that fled unto them for
sanctuary; yea, it was capital for a man, that had the Image of his Prince
stamped in silver, or engraven in a Ring, to go to any unclean or unseemly
place; and therefore Seneca says, Seneca de benefic. l. 30.
that under the Empire of Tiberius, a certain Noble man was accused of Treason,
for moving his hand, The reason of their reverence.
that had on his finger a Ring, whereon was engraven the portraiture of the
Prince, unto his privy parts when he did Urine; and the reason of this great
reverence, which they bare unto their Princes was, that they believed there was
in Kings (...), some divine thing, which above the reach of man, was ingraffed
in them, and could not be derived from them; for so Raderus tells us, Raderus
Comment. in Quint. curt.
that this divine Majesty, or celestial spark, was so eminent in the
countenance of Alexander, that it did not only terrify his enemies, but also
moved his best Commanders and greatest Peers to obey his commands: and the
like is reported of Scipio Africanus: and I find the Macedonians had a law,
that (besides the Traitors) condemned to death five of their next Kinsfolks, A
Macedoninian law.
that were convicted of conspiracy against their King; and a Gentleman of
Normandy, confessing to his Friar, how such a thought came once in his mind, to
have killed King Francis the first, A gentleman hanged for his thought.
but repenting of his intention, he resolved never to do it; the Friar
absolved him of his sin, but told the King thereof, and he sent him to his
Parliament, who condemned and executed him for his thought. Philip the first of
Spain, seeing a Falcon killing an Eagle, commanded his head to be wrung of;
saying, let none presume above their Sovereign; and in the reign of Henry
fourth of England, one was hanged, drawn, and quartered, in Cheapside London,
for jesting with his son, that if he did learn well he would make him heir
of the Crown, meaning his own house, that had the Sign of the Crown, to
prove the Proverb true, non est bonum ludere cum sanctis, it is not safe
jesting with Kings and Crowns, and it is less safe to resist them if you will
believe wise Solomon. And I have read of another King, that passing over a
river, his Crown fell into the water, one of his watermen lept in, and dived
to the bottom, and taking up the Crown put it upon his head, that it might
not hinder his swimming, and so brought it to the King again, who rewarded him
well for his pains, but caused his head to be chopped of for presuming to wear
his Crown. And all this is but an inanswerable argument to condemn our
Rebels, that neither reverence the Majesty of their King, nor respect the
commandment of their God.

3. Obedience.
3. Obedience is another principal part of that honor which we owe unto the
King; and this obedience of the inferiors joined with the direction of the
superiors, The marriage of obedience and authority and the issue.
do make any state most successful; but when these are divorced, then
nothing goes right in that Commonwealth; for so the Sages of Greece expressed
it by the marriage that Jupiter made between (...) and (...), Aescylus.
whose child, brought forth betwixt them, was (...); All must be obedient.
to show unto us, that when authority is married to obedience, and obedience
proves a dutiful and good wife to authority, the fruit of that match will be
happiness to the whole Kingdom.

And therefore if we would be happy, we must be obedient, and our obedience
must be universal, in all things in the Lord. Iussa sequi tam velle mihi quam
posse necesse est. Lucan. l. 1.
So the people say unto Joshua, all that thou command us, Josh. 1.16.
we will do: and all must do it, the greater as well as the lesser, the noble
man as well as the mean man, yea rather then the mean man; for though
rebellion in any one, is as the sin of witchcraft, yet in a vulgar man it may
admit of vulgar apologies; but in a man of quality, in noble men in Courtiers,
Noble men's Rebellion more abominable to God and man, then any other.
bred in the Kings house, in the Kings service, and raised by the Kings favor,
it is Morbus complicatus, a decompound sin, a transcendent ingratitude, and
unexpressable iniquity, the example more spreading, and the infection more
contagious, because more conspicuous; and the giddy attempts of an unguided
multitude, are but, as Cardinal Farnesius says, like the Beech tree without
his top, soon withered and vanishing into nothing without leaders, when they
become a burden unto themselves, and a prey unto others; therefore the
contradiction of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, that were so eminent in the
congregation, was a sin so odious unto God, that he would have destroyed all
Israel for their sake, as now he punishes all England for the sins of those
noble men, that have rebelled against their King, and were always like Sejanus
as wayward pleased as opposed. And therefore St Paul says, that (...), Romans
13.1.
every soul must be subject to the higher power, and he says, (...), you must
needs be subject, or be obedient, Romans 13.5.
and he presses this obedience with many arguments, Obedience pressed by a
three fold argument.
as

1. From Gods ordinance, because God has set them over us, and commanded us to
be obedient unto them, and therefore whosoever resists them, warreth against
God.

2. From man's Conscience, which tells us, that he is the minister of God,
(...), for good, Romans 13.4.
and therefore virtutis amore, if we have any love to goodness, we ought to
obey our King.

3. For fear of vengeance, v. 4.
because he bears not the sword in vain, but is, (...), a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil; How we ought to behave our selves
toward wicked Kings.
therefore this obedience to our King, is not (...), a thing of indifferency
but of necessity; for be our King, for his religion, Impious, for his
government, unjust, and for life, licentious, as cruel as Nero, as profane as
Julian, and as wicked as Heliogabalus; yet the Subjects must obey him, the
Bishops must admonish him, the counsel must advise him, and all must pray for
him, but no mortal man, that is his Subject, has either leave to resist him,
or license to reject him: unless they reject the ordinance of God, Ardua res
homini est mortali vincere numen. Why God sends evil Kings.
and so fight against God; and you know, (...), it is hard to vanquish God.

It is truly said by a learned Bishop, si bonus est Princeps, nutritor est
tuus, if thy King be good he is thy nursing Father, and it is a great
happiness to his Subjects, sin malus est tentator est tuus, but if he be
evil, he is either for the punishment of thy sins, or for the trial of thy
faith; and therefore receive thy punishment with patience, or thy trial
without resistance; and Aquin. says, tollenda est culpa and cessabit
tyrannorum plaga, do thou take away thy sins, and God will soon take away
thy punishment; otherwise, as for our sins, we do often suffer droughts,
floods, unseasonable weather, sicknesses, plagues, and many other evils of
nature, ita luxum and avaritiam dominantium tolerare debemus; so when God
sets up hypocrites or tyrants to reign over us, to be the scourges of his
wrath, and the rods of his fury, we must not struggle against God, but rest
contented to endure the vices of our rulers, as a just punishment of our
wickedness, says Cornelius Tacitus Et Michael Palatinus Hungariae dicebat,
rege coronato, etiamsi bos esset, nobis obtemperandum est. Bonsin. dec. 4. lib.
3. Four kinds of obedience. 1. Romans 12.1. 1. Sam. 15.22.


But here you must observe, that there are diverse kinds of obedience;
especially, 1. Coacta. 2. Caeca. 3. Simulata. 4. Ordinata.
1. Forced. 2. Foolish. 3. Feigned. 4. Well ordered.


1. The first is a forced and compelled obedience, merely for fear of wrath,
as Children learn, or Slaves do their duty for fear of the rod; and this is
better then resistance, though nothing like to that obedience, which S. Paul
calls (...); because this voluntary, and not extorted obedience, is that,
which is better then sacrifice.

2. The second is a blind obedience, 2. Blind obedience.
such as the young youths, that being commanded by their Abbat, to carry a
basket of figgs, and other Iuncates unto a solitary Monk or Hermit that lived
in his cave, and loosing their way in that unfrequented wilderness, chose
rather to dye in the desert then taste of those acates that they had in their
Basket; and such obedience is most frequent in the proselites of Rome, who will
do whatsoever they are commanded by their superiors, though both they and
their superiors do thereby commit never so great a wickedness: Where
notwithstanding I must confess, that this blind obedience is far better,
both for Church and State, then a proud resistance, when as the one produces
nothing but some particular inconveniences, and the other proceeds to an
universal destruction.

3. The third is an hypocritical and dissembled obedience, 3 Hypocritical
obedience.
that is, an obedience for a time, till they see their time to do mischief,
which is the worst of all obedience, and therefore most hateful both to God
and Man; because it is but eatenus, usque dum vires suppetunt, until they have
the opportunity, and have gotten sufficient strength, to shake off their
subjection, and to maintain their Rebellion; The obedience of our Rebels.
and this was the obedience of all our Rebels, our Sectaries and Puritans here
in England, who would also face us down, but most falsely, that it was the
obedience of the Primitive Christians; for so the grand impostor Io. Goodwin,
in his Anticavalierisme, says, they were only obedient to those persecuting
Tyrants, because as yet they wanted strength, and were not able to resist them;
but O thou enemy of all goodness, that so hate to become a Martyr for thy
God, that was martyred for thee, is it not enough for thee to play the
dissembling hypocrite thy self, but thou must tax those holy Martyrs, those
true Saints, that reign with Christ in Heaven, The Author more out of patience
for the wrong offered to the Martyrs then for his own abuse.
of hypocrisy and disobedience in their hearts, to the Ordinance of God? I
could willingly bear with any aspersion thou should cast in my face, but I
am out of patience, though sorry that I am so transported, to see such false and
scandalous imputations, so unjustly laid upon such holy Saints; yet this you
must do to countenance your Rebellion, to get the Rhetoric of the Devil to
belly Heaven it self; and therefore what wonder is it, that you should belly
your King on earth, when you dare thus belly the martyrs that are in Heaven.

4. The obedience of the Saints two ^^ld
4. The fourth is a voluntary, hearty and well ordered obedience, which is, the
obedience of the Saints, and is also Two fold 1. Active. 2. Passive.
for

1. Active obedience.
1. The Saints knowing the will of God, that they should obey their King, and
those that are sent of him, they do willingly yield obedience to their
superiors; and no marvel; because there cannot be a surer argument of an evil
man, then in a Church reformed, and a Kingdom lawfully governed, to resist
authority, and to disobey them that should rule over us, especially him, whom
God immediately has appointed to be this vicegerent, his substitute, and the
supreme Monarch of his Dominions here on earth; for all other things, both in
heaven and earth, do observe that Law, which their maker has appointed for
them, when, as the Psalmist says, he has given them a Law which shall not be
broken; therefore this must needs be a great reproof, and a mighty shame to
those men, that being Subjects unto their King, and to be ruled by his Laws,
will notwithstanding disobey the King, and transgress those Laws, that are
made for their safety, and resist that authority, which they are bound to obey;
only because their weak heads, or false hearts, do account the commandment
of the King to be against right, and what themselves do to be most holy and
just.

Ob. Diverse kinds of Monarchies.
But our City Prophets will say, that although the King be the supreme Monarch,
whom we are commanded to obey; yet there are diverse kinds of Monarchies or
Regal governments; as usurped, lawful, by conquest, by inheritance, by
election; and these are either absolute, as were the Eastern Kings, and the
Roman Emperors, or limited and mixed; which they term a Political Monarchy,
where the King or Monarch can do nothing alone, but with the assistance and
direction of his Nobility and Parliament; or if he does attempt to bring any
exorbitancies to the Commonwealth, or deny those things that are necessary for
the preservation thereof, they may lawfully resist him in the one, and compel
him to the other; to which I answer.

1. As God himself, which is most absolute, Sol. Absolute Monarchs may limit
themselves.
and liberrimum agens, may notwithstanding limit himself and his own power, as
he does, when he promises and swears that he will not fail David, and that
the unrepentant Rebels should never enter into his rest; so the Monarch may
limit himself in some points of his administration; and yet this limitation
neither transferreth any power of sovereignty unto the Parliament, nor denies
the Monarch to be absolute, nor admits of any resistance against him; for

1. This is a mere gull, to seduce the people, I cannot devise words to
express this new devised government.
that cannot distinguish the point of a needle; just like the Papist, that
says he is a Roman Catholic; that is, a particular universal, a black white,
a polumonarcha, a many one governor, when we say he is a Monarch, joined in
his government with the Parliament; for he can be no Monarch or supreme King
and Sovereign, that has any sharers with him or above him in the government.

2. There is no Monarch that can be said to be simply absolute, but only God;
yet where there is no superior, but the sovereignty residing in the King, he
may be said to be an absolute Monarch (...), 1. because there is none on earth
that can control him, 2 Because he is free and absolute in all such things,
wherein he is not expressly limited: and therefore

3. Seeing no Monarch or Sovereign is so absolute, No Monarch so Absolute but
some way limited.
but that he is some way limited, either by the Law of God, or the rules of
nature, or of his own concessions and grants unto his people, or else by the
compact that he makes with them, if he be an elective King, and so admitted
unto his Kingdom: there is no reason they should resist their King, for
transgressing the limitations of one kind more then the other: or if any, no
doubt but he that transcendeth the limits of Gods Law, or goes against the
common rules of nature, ought rather to be resisted, then he that observes not
his own voluntary concessions: but themselves, perceiving how peremptorily the
Apostle speaks against resistance of the Heathen Emperors that then ruled,
do confess that absolute Monarchs ought not to be resisted; (wherein also
they are mistaken, because the histories tell us, those Emperors were not so
absolute as our Kings, till the time of Vespasian, when the lex Regia
transferred all the power of the People upon the Emperor, No Monarch ought to
be resisted.
Vlpian de constit. Principis: therefore indeed, no Monarch ought to be
resisted, whatsoever limitations he has granted unto his Subjects.

And the resisters of authority might understand, if their more malicious then
blind leaders would give them leave, that this virtue of obedience to the
supreme power makes good things unlawful, when we are forbidden to do them,
as the eating of the forbidden tree was to Adam, and the holding up of the Arc
was to Vzza: and it makes evil things to be good and lawful, when they are
commanded to be done, as the killing of Isaac (if he had done it) had been
commendable in Abraham, and the smiting of the Prophet was very laudable in him
that smote him, when the Prophet commanded him to do it: and therefore Adam
and Vzza were punished with death, because they did those lawful good things,
which they were forbidden to do; Rebels should well consider these things.
and the others were recompensed with blessings, because they did and were
ready to do those evil things, that they were commanded to do; when as he
that refused to smite the Prophet, 1. Reg. 20.38.
being commanded to do it, was destroyed by a Lion, because he did it not;
whereby you see, that things forbidden, when they are commanded, and e contra,
cannot be omitted without sin.

Ob. Mandatum imperantis ^ollit peccatum obedientis. Aug. Sol.
You will say it is true, when it is done by God, whose injunction or
prohibition, his precept or his forbidding to do it, or not to do it, makes
all things lawful or unlawful.

I answer, that we cannot think our selves obedient to God, whilst we are
disobedient to him, whom God has commanded us to obey; and therefore, if we
will obey God, we must obey the King; because God has commanded us to obey
him; and being to obey him, non attendit verus obediens quale fit quod
praecipitur, sed hoc solo contentus quia praecipitur, he that is truly obedient
to him, whom God commanded us to obey, never regards, what it is that is
commanded, (so it be not simply evil, for then as the Apostle says, it is
better to obey God then man, were he the greatest Monarch in the World,) but he
considers, and is therewith satisfied, that it is commanded, Bernard in l. de
praecept. and dispensat.
and therefore does it, says St Bernard, in l. de praecept. and dispensat,

CHAP. XVI. Shows the answer to some objections against the obeying of our
Sovereign Magistrate; all actions of three kinds; how our Consciences may be
reformed; of our passive obedience to the Magistrates; and of the Kings
concessions, how to be taken.
But against this our sectaries and Rebels will object, conscience, which is
vinculum, accusator, testis and judex, their bond, their accuser, their
witness and their judge, against whom they can say nothing, and from whom they
cannot appeal, unless it be to a severer Judge, will not give them leave to
obey, to do many things, that the King requires to be done; and who can blame
them for obeying their conscience rather then any King?

I confess that it is naturally ingraffed in the hearts of all men, that no
evil is to be done, and reason, Sol.
according to that measure of knowledge, which every man has, tells us, what
is good, and what is evil; then conscience concludes what is to be done, and
what not to be done. quia conscientia est applicatio notitiae nostrae ad actum
particularem, because our conscience is the application of our knowledge to
some particular act, says Aquinas. Thom. 2. Sent. did. 14. art. 4. Conscience
a witness,
And this application of our knowledge to that act considers,

1. De praeteritis, of things past, whether such a thing be done or not done,
and so our conscience is a witness that cannot err.

2. De praesentibus factis, of our present actions, Conscience a Judge,
whether the fact done be good or evil, just or unjust, so our conscience is a
judge according to the measure of our knowledge.

3. De futuris faciendis, of future acts that are to be done, Conscience a
follower of reason.
whether they ought to be done, or left undone.

But because our conscience springs from our reason, and our reason may be
clouded and obscured by a double error. Reason obscured two ways. 1. way.
John. 16.2.


1. A false assumption, when we take those things to be good or true, which are
indeed evil or false, as they that think they do God good service, when they
kill his servants, even as the Rebels do at this very day, and that they
please God when they disobey their King.

2. way. The Rebels offend both ways.
2. A false application, or a false conclusion from a true assumption; as,
because I am commanded, to love God above all things, therefore I am to hate
all things but God; or because, it is better to obey God then man; therefore I
must not obey the commands of any man.

So our conscience may be poisoned in like manner with the same errors; and
being so misguided, they ought not to bind us, but we ought rather to reform
them; for that, which truly should bind the conscience, What should bind our
conscience.
is not our judgment, but Gods precept, that either commands or forbids
such and such actions to be done, or not done.

And you know, that all actions are either, 1. good. 2. evil. 3. indifferent.
1. The good, God commands us to do them. All actions of three sorts.
2. The evil he flatly forbids them to be done: and 3. The indifferent he
wholly leaves to the power of the Magistrate, to make them either lawful or
unlawful, good or bad, as he pleases.


And therefore, for the first two sorts of actions, because thy conscience has
Gods precept to direct thee, Pride blinds many men.
if thy reason, either through ignorance, or the strength of thine own fancy,
(which often happens to proud Spirits) does not mislead thee, to call good
evil, and evil good, it is safer for thee to follow the dictamen of thine
own conscience, then the command of the greatest potentate; Act. 5.29.
for in all such cases, it is better to obey God then man.

We are too inquisitive of many things.
But in all the other things, that are indifferent of themselves, the precept of
the King, or any other our lawful superior, makes them to become necessary
unto the Subject; because the command of the superior Magistrate does bind
more then the conscience of the inferior Subject can do; for though the
conscience, rightly guided by reason, is the Judge of those things, which are
either directly forbidden or commanded; yet in the other things, that are
indifferent, the Magistrate is the more immediate Judge under God, which has
given him power, The Magistrate the immediate judge of indifferen things.
either to command them to be done, or to forbid them; and therefore the
Subject, having the command of his King, (whom God commands us to obey) for
his warrant in things of this nature, either to do such things, or to leave
such things undone, his duty is not to examine the reason of the command, but
to perform what he sees commanded; for so S. August. says, that although
Julian was an Idolater, an Apostata, an Infidel; yet, milites fideles
servierunt imperatori infideli; but when it came to the cause of Christ, they
acknowledged none, but him that was in Heaven; when he would have them to
worship Idols, they preferred God before him; when he said, lead forth your
Armies, and go against such a Nation, August. in Psa. 124. Camperator. 11. q. 1.
they presently obeyed him; they distinguished betwixt their eternal and their
temporal Lord, and tamen subditi erant propter aeternum etiam domino
temporalit and they never examined the Iustnes of the war; because in all
such cases, mandatum imperantis tollit culpam servientis, the fault must only
rest upon the commander. And therefore, Our reason and judgment misguided
seven ways. How our conscience may be reformed.
as our reason and Judgment may be blinded in all actions, either with
ignorance, negligence, pride, inordinate affection, faintnes, perplexity, or
self love, so may our conscience too, when it erroniously concludes upon what
our reason falsely assumeth; and then, as I said before, our conscience is
rather to be reformed then obeyed; and if we be desirous, we may thus redress
it.

1. If it be of ignorance, let us say with Iehoshaphat, 1. From ignorance. 2.
Chron. 20.12. 2. From negligence. John 3.1.
we know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee; and let us seek to
them that can inform us, the Orthodox not the Sectaries, which will rather
corrupt us then direct us.

2. If it be of negligence, let us come without partiality or prejudice (as
Nicodemus did to Christ) to those that for knowledge are well able, and for
honesty are most willing, to instruct us.

3. From Pride.
3. If it be of pride, let us pray to God for humility, and submit our selves
one to another, especially to them that have more learning then our selves, and
have that charge over us; for he that praises himself is not allowed, 2. Cor.
10.18.
but he whom the Lord praises; and singularity has been the original of all
heresies and not the least occasion of the troubles of these times, and the
rebellion of our Sectaries.

4. From inordinate affection.
4. If it be from inordinate affection, quum id sanctum quod volumus, when every
one makes what he loves to be lawful, and his own ways to be just, let us
hearken to sound reason and prefer truth before our own affections; or
otherwise perit omne iudicium, Seneca.
cum res transit in affectum, there can be no true judgment of things, when we
are transported with our partial affections.

5. From faintness.
5. If it be from faintness, let us be scrupulous where we have cause, lest we
should think it lawful to swallow a Camel, because we are able to streane a
gnat; and let us not be afraid, where no fear is, and think those things
sinful that are most lawful; A heavy judgment upon this Nation by mistaking
sins. 6. From perplexity.
which is a heavy judgment of God upon the wicked, and has now lighted very
sore upon many of the Inhabitants of this land, who think it Popery to say,
God bless you, and judge it idolatry to see a Cross in Cheap Side.

6. If it be of perplexity, when a man is close, as he conceives, betwixt two
sins, where he sees himself unable, though never so willing, to avoid both,
let him peccare in tutiorem partem, which though it takes not away the sin,
yet it will make the fault to be the less sin; as the casting away of the
corn, which is the gift of God and the sustenance of man's life, is an
unthankful abuse of Gods creature; Act. 27.38.
yet as S. Paul caused the same to be cast into the Sea for the safeguard of
their lives; so must we do the like, when occasion makes it necessary; as now,
rather to kill our enemies the Rebels, though we should think it to be ill,
then suffer them to wrong our King, and to destroy both Church and Kingdom;
because that of two things, which we conceive evil, When things are to be
judged inevitable.
and are not both evitable, the choice of the lesser, to avoid the greater, is
not evil; but they are then to be judged inevitable, when there is no apparent
ordinary way to avoid them, Hooker Eccles. pol. l 5. p. 15.
because that where counsel and advice do bear rule, we may not presume of
Gods extraordinary power, without extraordinary warrant, says iuditious Mr
Hooker.

7. If it be of too much humility, 7. From too much humility.
which is an error of less danger, yet by no means to be fostered, lest by
gathering strength it proves most pernicious, they should pray to God to
preserve them from too much fear; Multos in summa periculamisit, venturi timor
ipse mali. Lucan. l 7.
for though (as S. Gregory says) bonarum mentium est, ibi culpas agnoscere,
ubi culpa non est, yet (as J said before) it is a heavy Judgment, and a want
of Gods grace, to be afraid where no fear is, and it makes men to commit many
sins many times for fear of sin.

And thus having rectified our conscience in the understanding of all these
things, we are bound, by the commandment of God, to be obedient unto the
commands of our King; for it is a paradox to say, Christians are free from the
Laws of men; Act. 15.20. Romans 13.2.3. 1. Peter 2.13.
because it was a human law, touching things strangled and blood: and the
Apostles do exact our obedience unto human laws, even the Laws of Heathen
and Idolatrous Emperors: and therefore, being bound to obey them, they cannot
be freed in conscience, from the Religion of them: and so Dr Whitaker says,
that as the Laws of God must be simply obeyed, without any difference of time,
place, and circumstance; so must the Laws of men be obeyed, as the
circumstances do require; for example, he that is a Roman and lives at Rome,
must obey the Roman Laws; and he says, that the authority of the Magistrate,
which is sacred and holy, cannot with any good conscience be contemned; because
it is the commandment of God, that we should obey them; Whitaker contra Camp.
p. 258. Ob.
and this (says he) does bind the conscience, when, (as the Apostle says) he
is to be obeyed for conscience sake.

But you will say, what if the King forbids me to do what God commands, as
the high Priest did to the Apostles, or commands me to do what God
forbids, as Julian did unto the Christians, and Nebuchadnezzar to the three
children?

We have often answered, that in such a case, Sol.
it is better to obey God then man; for it is sometimes lawful not to obey,
Act. 5.25.
but it is never lawful to resist.

force and violence to do what God forbids us to do, if he play's the Tyrant,
violates our Laws, and corrupts the true Religion, with Idolatry and
superstition? may we not then, as our forefathers did heretofore unto
Chilperick King of France, and to Richard the second of this Kingdom, and
others, bridle them and Depose them too, if they will not be ruled by their
Great Council, the Parliament?

I. ^^gus ^^^saeus de ^^thor. princi. (...) Pop.
I answer, first, Non spectandum quid factum sit, sed quid fieri debuerit, we
are not so much to regard what has been done, as what ought to have been done,
as Arnisaeus proves at large, and shows most excellently, with a full answer
to all the articles, that were alleged against those Kings, how unjustly they
were handled and deposed contrary to all right; and I wish that book were
translated into English. 2. Of our passive obed.
2. I say that when our active obedience cannot be yielded, our passive
obedience must be used; for were our Kings as Tyrannical as Nero, as
Idolatrous as Manasses, as wicked as Achab, and as Profane as Julian; yet we
may not resist, when as Arnisaeus proves by many many examples, Id^m. cap. 3.
p. 68.
that the Rebellion of Subjects against their King does overthrow the order of
nature; and Justinian says, quis est tantae autoritatis, ut nolentem principem
possit coarctare? but in such a case, we must do as all the Saints did before
us: not as the Heathens, which thought them worthy of divine honor, Cicero pro
Milone. Seneca in Hercul. fur.
which did kill a Tyrant, and said with Seneca, victima haud ulla amplior
Potest, magisque opima mactari Iovi
Quam Rex iniquus. --
But, Christ and his Apostles suffered, but never resisted the lawful
Magistrate.
as Christ himself suffered under Pontius Pilate, a most wicked Magistrate,
and registered in the breviary of our Faith, that we might never forget our
duty, rather to suffer then to resist the authority that is from Heaven; and as
Saint Ambrose answered the Emperor, that would have his Church delivered to
the Arians, I shall never be willing to leave it, coactus repugnare non novi,
if I be compelled I have not learned to resist. I can grieve and weep and sigh,
and against the Arms and Gotish Soldiers, my tears are my weapons, for those
are the Bulworkes of the Priest, who in any other manner neither can, neither
ought he to resist: so must all Christians rather by suffering death, then by
resisting our King to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

But it is objected by our Sectaries, Ob. The Author of the Treatise of
Monarchy, p. 31. Sol. The Law provides that the King should not be circumvented
and wronged.
that His Majesty confesses there is a power Legally placed in the two houses,
more then sufficient to prevent and restrain the power of Tyranny.

I answer, first, when it pleased the King of His grace, to restrain His own
power of making Laws, to the consent of Peers and Commons, that by this
Regulating of the same, it might be purged from all destructive exorbitances,
the very Law it self, being tender of the legitimate rights of the King, and
considering the Person of the Sovereign to be single, and his power
counterpoysed by the opposite wisdom of the two Houses, allowed him to swear
unto himself a body of Council of State, and Counselors at Law, and the
Judges also to advise him and inform him so, that as he should not do any
wrong, by reason of the restraining Votes of the Houses, so he might not
receive any wrong by the incroachment of the Parliament upon his right: The
Kings concessions very large.
and the King, being driven away from his learned Council, and forced to make
the defense of his rights by writing, it is no wonder, if his concessions and
Promises, as well in this point, as in other things, especially in that,
concerning the Act of excluding the Clergy, were more then was due to them, or
then he needed to grant, or then he ought to observe, being to the dishonor of
God, and the prejudice of his Church; when as nothing in Parliament, where the
wrong may be perpetual, should be extracted from him, but what he should well
consider of with the advice of his Counsel, and what he should freely grant;
and whatsoever is otherwise done, is ill done, to the great disadvantage of the
King, and his Posterity, and the unjust enlarging of their power more then is
due unto them; yet

2. I say, D. Fern in his reply to sever. treat. p. 32
if these words of His Majesty's be rightly weighed, they give no color of
resisting Tyranny by any forcible arms; but as D. Fern says most truly of
Legal, Moral, and Parliamentary restraint; for the words are, there is a
power legally placed in the Houses, that is, the Law has placed a power in
them; but you shall never find any Law, that any King has granted, whereby
himself might be resisted and subdued by open force and violence: Roffensis de
potest. Papae 291. Eophan to ^ythag l. De Regno apud stabaeum. fol. 335.
for as Roffensis says, Regis suo solius judicio reservavit Deus, qui stans in
Synagoga deorum dijudicat eos; God has reserved Kings to his own judgment:
and the Heathen man could say, as, Stobaeus testifies, primum Dei, deinde
Regis est ut nulli subjiciatur, (...), first it is the privilege of God, next
of the King, to be subject unto none; because the Regal power properly is
unaccountable to any man, A principle tenet of the Essaei. And some think, that
the Commonwealth is happier under a Tyrant, that will keep the^ in awe, then
under too mild a Prince, upon whose clemency, they will presume to Rebel.
Iere. 27.5, 6. A memorable place against resisting Tyrants.
as Suidas says; and Josephus says, that the holiest men, that ever were
among the Hebrews, (called essaei, or esseni, that is the true practisers of
the Law of God,) maintained, that sovereign Princes, whatsoever they were,
ought to be inviolable to their Subjects; for they saw there was scarce any
thing more usual in the holy Scripture, then the prohibition of resistance, or
refusal of obedience to the Prince, whether he were Jew or Pagan, mild or
tyrannical, good or bad; as to instance one place for all, where the Lord
says, J have made the earth, the man and the beast that are upon the ground,
by my great power, and have given it to whom it seemed meet unto me; and now I
have given all those Lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon
my Servant, (and he was both a Heathen, an Idolater, and a mighty Tyrant) and
all Nations shall serve him and his son, and his sons son; and it shall
come to pass, that the Nation and Kingdom, which will not serve the same
Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon, and that will not put their necks under the
yoke of the King of Babylon, that Nation will I punish (says the Lord) with
the Sword, and with the Famine, and with the Pestilence, until I have consumed
them by his hands: therefore hearken not ye unto your Prophets, nor to your
Diviners, -- which speak unto you, saying, you shall not serve the King of
Babylon, for they prophesy a lie unto you; which he repeateth again and again,
they prophesy a lie unto you, that you should perish; and may not I apply these
words to our very time? God says I have given this Kingdom unto King Charles,
(which is a mild, just and most pious King) and they that will say, nolumus
hunc regnare super nos, I will destroy them by his hand; therefore, o ye
seduced Londoners, believe not your false Prophets, nay, hearken not to your
diviners, your Anabaptists and Brownists that preach lies, and lies upon lies,
unto you, that you should perish; for God has not sent them, though they
multiply their lies in his name: therefore why will you dye, why will you
destroy your selves, and your posterity, by refusing to submit your selves to
mine ordinance? and what should God say more unto you to hinder your
destruction? and it was concluded by a whole Council, that, si quis potestati
regiae, quae non est (test Apostolo) nisi a deo, Council. Meldens. apud Roffen.
l. 2. c. 5. de potest. papae. Ob.
contumaci and afflato spiritu obtemperare irre fragabiliter noluerit,
anathematizetur. Whosoever resists the Kings Power, and with a proud spirit
will not obey him, let him be accursed.

But then you will say, this is strange doctrine, that wholly takes away the
liberty of the Subject, if they may not resist regal tyranny.

I think there is no good Subject, Sol.
that loves his Sovereign that will speak against a just and lawful liberty,
when it is a far greater honor unto any King, to rule over a free and
gentile Subjects, then over base and turkish slaves; but as under the shadow
and pretense of Christian liberty, Many evils to lurk under fair shows.
many carnal men have rooted out of their hearts all christianity; so many
Rebellious and aspiring minds have, under these colorable titles of the
liberty of the Subjects, and suppressing tyranny, shaked of the yoke of all
true obedience, and dashed the rights of government all to pieces; therefore,
as the law of God and the rules of his own conscience, should keep every
Christian King from exercising any unjust tyranny over his Subjects; so, if men
will transcend the rules of due obedience, the Kings Power and Authority should
keep them from transgressing the limits of their just liberty: but this
unlawfulness of resisting our lawful King, I have fully proved in my Grand
Rebellion, and it is so excellently well done by many others, that I shall but
acta agere to say any more of it.

CHAP. XVII. Shows how tribute is due to the King; for six special reasons
to be paid; the condition of a lawful tribute; that we should not be niggards
to assist the King; that we should defend the Kings Person; the wealth and
Pride of London, the cause of all the miseries of this Kingdom; and how we
ought to pray for our King.
4. TRibute is another right and part of that honor, which we owe unto our
King. The great charge of Princes.
Negotia enim infinita sustinet, equabile ius omnibus administrat, periculum a
republica, cum necessitas postulat, armis and virtute propulsat, bonis pramia
pro dignitate constituit, improbos suppliciorum acerbitate coercet, patriam
denique universam, and ab externis hostibus, and ab intestinis fraudibus tutam
vigilantia sua praestat: haec quidem munera aut opere tuetur, aut quoties opus
fuerit, tuenda suscipit; qui autem existimat haec tam multa munera sine maximis
sumptibus sustineri posse, mentis expers est, atque vitae communis ignarus: and
idcirco hoc, quod and communi more receptum est, ut reges populi sumptibus
alantur, non est humano tantum iure, sed etiam divino vallatum: Osorius de
rebus Emanuel. lib. 12. p. 386.
says Eloquent Osorius. For he undergoeth infinite affairs; he administreth
equal right to all his people; he expels and keeps away from the
Commonwealth all dangers, when necessity requires, both with arms and
prowess; he appoints rewards to the good and faithful according to their
deserts; he restrains the wicked with the sharpness and severity of
punishments; and he preserves his Country and Kingdom safe by his care and
watchfulness, both from Foreign foes and intestine frauds; and these
offices he discharges indeed, and undertaketh to discharge them as often as
any need requires; And he that thinks that all these things, so many and so
great affairs, can be discharged without great cost and charge, is void of
understanding and ignorant of the common course of life; and therefore this
thing, which is received by a common custom, that Kings should be assisted,
and their royalty maintained, by the public charge of the people, is not only
allowed by humane law, but is also confirmed by the divine right.

Men should therefore consider that the occasions of Kings are very great;
abroad, for intelligence, and correspondency with Foreign States, that we may
reap the fruit of other Nations, vent our own commodities to our best
advantage, and be guarded, secured, and preserved from all our outward enemies;
and at home, to support a due State answerable to his place, to maintain the
public justice and judgments of the whole Kingdom, and a hundred such like
occasions, that every private man cannot perceive: and think you that these
things can be done without means, without money? if you still pour out and not
pour in, your bottle will be soon empty, and the Ocean sea would be soon dried
up, if the Rivers did not still supply the same: and therefore not only
Deioces, that I spoke of before, when he was elected King of the Medes, caused
them to build him a most stately Palace, and the famous City of Ecbatana, and
to give him a goodly band of select men, for the safeguard of his Person, and
to provide all other things fitting for the Majesty of a King, and all the
other Kings of the Gentiles did the like, as well they might, if it be true,
that some of them thought, Quicquid habet locuples, quicquid custodit avarus,
Gunterus.

Jure quidem nostrum est, populo concedimus usum.
But also Solomon, 1. Reg. 12.4.
and all the rest of the Kings of Israel required no small aid and tribute
from their Subjects; for though Tertull. out of Deuteronomy. 23.17. reads it, Tertull.
to. 3. de pudicit. c. 9. Pamel. in Tertull.
there shall not be (...), vectigal pendens, a payer of tribute of the sons
of Israel; yet Pamelius well observes it, that these words are not in the
original, but are taken by him out of the septuagint, which also says not of
the sons, but (...), of the daughters of Israel, that is, ex impudicitia and
lupanaribus, for their dishonesty, as it is said in the next verse, Deuteronomy. 23.18.
that the hire of a whore and the price of a dog are an abominat^on unto the
Lord; Aug. de Civit. dei. l. 10. c. 9.
and so S. Aug. uses the word Teletae, for those unchaste sacrifices wherewith
such women did oblige themselves; and so does Theodoret likewise: but that the
Jews paid tribute, it is manifest out of 1. Sam. 17.24. where this reward is
promised to him that killed Goliath, 1. Sam. 17.25. in vulgata editione.
that his fathers house should be absque tributo, free from all tribute in
Israel; therefore certainly they paid tribute, and to make it yet more plain,
Solomon appointed Jeroboam, super tributa universae domus Joseph, 2. reg. 11.28.
says the vulgar lat. over all the charge or burden of the house of Joseph,
(that is, of the tribe of Ephraim and Manasses) as our translation reads it;
Barrad to 2. l. 5. c. 21. p. 34^.
and he appointed Adoniram the son of Abda over the tribute. 1. Reg. 4.6.

Yea, though the Jews were the people of God, and thought themselves free and
no ways obliged to be taxed by Foreign Princes, that were Ethnicks: yet
after Pompey took their City, they paid tribute to the Romans; Josephus. l. 15.
c.. 8
and our Savior bids us not only to obey, but also to render unto Caesar what
is Caesar's, that is (not determining the quota pars, how much, as he does the
tenth unto the Priest) but indefinitely, some part of our goods, for subsidies,
imposts, aids, loanes, or call it by what name you will; and rather then
himself would omit this duty, though he never wrought any other miracle about
money; yet herein, when he had never a penny, Barrad. to 2. l. 10. c. 32. p. 317.
he would create money in the mouth of a fish, as S. Hierome and the interlin.
gloss do think, and command the fish to pay tribute both for himself and his
Apostle. Therefore we should render unto Caesar what is Caesar's; that is,
(...), which the Greeks take promiscuously, though the Civilians distinguish
them, de solo and fundo, de bonis mobilibus, and de mercibus, of our grounds,
of our goods, of our merchandise, we ought to pay subsidies, aid and tribute
unto our King; and that not sparingly nor by way of benevolence, as if it were
in our power, to do it, or not to do it, sed ex debito, but as his due, iure
divino, and regula iustitiae; as his proper importance annexed unto his Crown;
for I take it infallibly true, which Suarez faith, Suarez. de leg. l. 5. c. 17.
n. 3. fol. 316.
acceptationem populi non esse conditionem necessariam tributi ex vi iuris
naturalis aut gentium, neque ex iure communi: quia obligatio pendendi tributum
ita naturalis est principi and per se orta ex ratione iustitiae, ut non possit
quis excusari propter apparentem iniustitiam vel nimium gravamen; Tribute due
to the King.
the consent of the people is not any necessary condition of tribute; because
the obligation of paying it is so natural, springing out of the reason of
justice, that none can be excused for any apparent injustice or grievance: and
therefore the Parliaments, that are the highest representations of any
Kingdom, do not contribute any right unto Kings to challenge tribute, but do
determine the quota pars, and to further the more equal imposing and
collecting of that, which is due unto Kings by natural and original justice,
as a part of that proper inheritance which is annexed unto their Crowns.

And therefore, our Savior does not say, give unto Caesar, but (...), Math. 22.
the same word which S. Paul uses, when he bids us to pay our debts, and to
owe nothing to any man, saying, (...), Romans 13. Latimer in Mat. 22.21.
pay to every man that which you owe: and Father Latimer says, if we deny him
tribute, custom, subsidy, tallage, taxes, and the like aid and support, we are
no better then Thieves, and steal the Kings dues from him; Navar. apud Suarez.
de legibus fol. 300. fol. 311.
because the Law testifies tributa esse maxim naturalia, and prae se far
justitiam, quia exiguntur de rebus propriis: and Suarez says, penditur
tributum adsustentationem principis, and ad satisfaciendum naturali obligationi
in dando stipendium iustum laboranti in nostram utilitatem; tribute is most
natural and just to be paid to the King for our own good: therefore Christ
pleading for the right of Caesar, that was a Tyrant, says not, give unto him,
quia petit, because he demands it, but pay unto him, quae illius sunt, the
things that are his, and are due unto him, even as due as the hirelings wages,
which we are commanded not to detain for one night; Deuteronomy. 24.15.
because this is a part of that reward and wages, which God allows him for
all his pains and cares, that he takes to see Justice administered in the time
of Peace, and to protect us from our enemies in the time of War; which makes
the life of Kings to be but a kind of splendid misery, wearing may times, with
Christ, a Crown of Thorns, a Crown full of cares, while we lap our heads in
beds of down; and therefore it is not only undutifulnesse to deny him, or
unthankefulnesse, not to requite the great good that he does unto us, but it is
also a great injustice, (especially if we consider that as Ocham says, Qui est
Dominus aliquarum personarum est Dominus rerum ad easdem personas spectantium;
omnia quae sunt in regno sunt regis, quoad potestatem utendi eis pro bono
communi, Ocha. tract. 2. l. 2. c. 22. and 25.) to detain that right from him,
which God commands us to pay unto him, and that indeed for our own good; as
Menenius Agrippa most wittily showed unto he People of Rome when they murmured
and mutined for these axes, that whatsoever the stomach received, either from
the ^and or mouth, it was all for the benefit of the whole body; so whatsoever
the King receives from the People, it is for the ^enefit of the people, and it
is like the waters that the Sea recei^eth from the Rivers, which is visibly
seen passing into the O^ean, but invisibly runs, through the veins of the
earth, into ^he rivers again; so does all that the King receives from the
People, return some way or other unto the People again.

And there be six special reasons why, or to what end we should pay these
dues unto the King.

Six reasons for which we pay Tribute unto the King.
1. For the Honor of His Majesty. 2. For the security of His Person. 3. For the
protection of his Kingdom. 4. For the succor of His confederates. 5. For the
securing of our 1. Goods. 2. Estates. 3. Lives.
6. For the propagating of the Gospel, and defense of our Religion.
But for the further clearing of this point, you must know that every just and
Lawful tribute must have these three essential conditions that are
proprietates constitutivae.

Three conditions of every lawful Tribute.
1. Legitima potestas, that is, the Kings power to require it. 2. Iusta causa,
an urgent necessity; or need of it. 3. Debita portio, a due proportion,
according to the Kings necessities, and the peoples abilities, that he be not
left in need, nor the people overcharged. For
As the Subjects are thus bound to supply the necessities of their King, so the
King is not to over-charge his Subjects; for the King should be the Sheapheard
of his People, as David calls himself, and Homer terms all good Kings, and
not the devourer of his people, Kings should not overcharge their Subjects.
as Achilles calls Agamemnon for the unreasonable taxes that he laid upon
them therefore good Kings have been very sparing in this point; for Darius,
inquiring of the governors of his Provinces, whether the tributes imposed upon
them were not too excessive, and they answering, that they thought them very
moderate, he commanded that they should raise but the one half thereof, A
worthy speech of Lewis 9.
(which had Rehoboam bin so wise to do, he had not lost ten parts of his
Kingdom;) and Lewis the ninth of France, which they say was the first that
raised a tax in that Kingdom, directing his Speech to his son Philip, and
causing the words to be left in his Testament, which is yet to be found
Registered in the chamber of accounts, said, be devout in the service of God,
have a pitiful heart toward the poor, and comfort them with thy good deeds,
observe the good Laws of thy Kingdom, take no taxes nor benevolences of thy
Subjects, unless urgent necessity, and evident commodity force thee to it, and
then upon a just cause, and not usually; if thou do otherwise, thou shall
not be accounted a King, but a Tyrant; and it is one of the gracious apothegmes
of our late noble and never to be forgotten Sovereign, King James his golden
apothegme, Basilicon doron. l. 2. p. 99.
worthy to be written in letters of gold, where speaking to his son, he
says, enrich not your self with exactions from your Subjects, but think the
riches of your Subjects your best treasures: and Arta^er. said, it was a great
deal more seemlier for the Majesty of a King, to give, then to take by
polling, to cloth then to uncloath, which belongs to Thieves, not to
Princes, unless they will stain their names: for as Apollonius says, that
gold, which is taken by Tyranny is far baser then any iron; because it is
wetted with the tears of the poor Subjects; and therefore Peter de la
Primauday, says, they are unworthy of the title of Prince, that lending their
ears to such as invent new ways to get moneys from their Subjects, and having
against all humanity, Pet. de la primauday: cap. 60. p. 670.
spoiled them of their goods, do either miserably consume them upon their
pleasures, or prodigally bestow them upon undeserving flatterers, that fat
themselves by the overthrow of others.

And therefore it behooves all Kings to consider, that all men's goods are
theirs only quoad tuitionem, and defentionem, and their Subjects quoad
possessionem and proprietatem; as you may see, Genesis 47.46.
where Joseph bought all the Land of the Egyptians for King Pharaoh, and then
let it them again in Fee farm, to give the King the fifth part of the fruit of
it; and as you may conclude it from the eight Commandment, which says, as
well to the King as to the Subject, thou shall not steal; for if all be his,
he cannot be said to steal it; and if this precept concerns not Kings, then
have they but nine Commandments; and therefore, be wise, o ye Kings, and
remember what Saint Augustine says, remota justitia quid sunt Regna nisi
Latrocinia? for though you may justly demand Tribute and Taxes, yet you must
have just occasions to use them, and you must take but a just proportion, or
else they may come uniustly unto you.

But who shall be the Judges of the Kings just occasions? in many Kingdoms his
conscience; as the Roman consuls imposed what taxes they thought meet upon the
Provinces they subdued; so Marc. Antonius being in Asia, doubled their Tax,
and laid a second charge upon the People, which was very unreasonable, The
saying of Hebreas to M. Antonius.
as Hebreas told him, saying, if thou will have power to lay upon us two taxes
in one year, thou must have also power to give us two Summers and two
Autumnes, two Harvests and two Vintages; and yet if our King do thus
unreasonably tax us with more then we are able to bear, we may reason with
him, Kings herein not to be resisted.
as Hebreas did with M. Antony, refell his arguments, and repel his
oppressions according to the course of Law, but we may not in any case with the
Sword make any resistance, either actual or habitual, against him.

Judges of the Kings occasions, and we know not his necessities; and therefore
we cannot determine what is Just and unjust.

right, yet the inferior not only may rightly render it without offense unto
his conscience, but also ought to pay it without resistance unto the
Magistrate; for if the Jews were not free, and the Romans had no right to
demand Tribute of them, yet by our Saviors question unto S. Peter, and his
replication unto the Apostles answer, it is apparent, that our Savior was most
free, and was no way bound to pay any thing unto the Romans, not only qua deus,
as Hesselius says, but also as he was a man, Hesselius in Matthew. 18. Barrad.
10 2. l. 10. c. 32. p. 718.
as Barradius more truly proves; yet lest he should offend them, as he says,
tributum solvit quia voluit, he does most willingly discharge it; to teach us,
that we may and ought justly and without any scruple of conscience pay that,
which may be uniustly demanded; and the best Authors, that I have read, are of
the same judgment; Greg. Tholos. l. 26. de repub. c 5. n. 25.
we have no other remedy but to cry to God, who can judge them for their
injustice; and non caret modis, quibus possit, quando voluerit, huiusmodi
principes tollere vel emendare.

But, though in most of the Eastern Countries, the Kings imposed upon their
Subjects, what taxes and tributes pleased themselves, as Augustus taxed all the
world, as much as he would, at his own pleasure, Osor. de rebus. Emanuel. l.
12. p. 386.
and Charles the fifth (says Osorius) praeter pecunias quibus illum hispani
juverant, immania tributa populis imperavit, besides those monyes, wherewith
the Spaniards assisted him, laid most heavy taxes upon the people; which is
indeed a branch of the absolute right of Kings, and was originally practiced by
most of them; yet here with us, our Kings out of grace and favor unto their
people, What the Kings of England promised to their Subjects.
granted such a privilege unto their Subjects, and divested themselves of this
right, to lay no impositions or taxes upon their Subjects, without the consent
of their three States convened in the two Houses of Parliament; and this
Princely concession, being truly observed, may procure a great deal of love
and peace unto the King, and as much tranquillity and happiness unto the
people. Neither do I think that he loves his King, but am sure that he hates
his Country, that would persuade him for all the wealth of the Kingdom, to
violate his own grant and faith herein; but, as our Kings granted this favor,
to impose no taxes without the consent of his Parliament; so his Parliament in
all duty, ought always with all thankfulness, to acknowledge this special
grace, and in requital thereof most fully to supply his wants and support his
necessities, That we should not be nigg^rds to assist our King.
whenever he acquaints them therewith.

And therefore we ought not to be like those hide-bound Sectaries, and
close-fisted Puritans and Brownists, that are so miserably covetous, and
extreme niggards, that when the King makes known his wants and demands his
due, (for it is still his due, though he granted not to cesse it without their
consent) for his royal supportation and the safety of his Kingdom, they will
find a hundred excuses to deny him, but never a penny to give him out of all
their wealth; and this is the cause of our misery, and may prove as fatal to
us, as it has been to the Constantinopolitans; whose churlishness and
niggardliness toward their Emperor, was the chiefest cause of the loss of
that great Empire, and to make the Turk sit in Christ his Chair, to have
Mahomet adored where the Gospel was formerly published, How Constant. was
lost, and what the Turk then said.
by as many famous Fathers, as now England has Preachers; for the Emperor
foreseeing the Siege, made many motions for contributions, toward the
repairing of the walls, and continue the military charge; but the Subjects
drew back and pleaded want, until it was too late, and the City lost; for
though the enemy having a long time besieged it, was intended to give over the
Siege, and to be gone; yet tidings and intelligence being given him, that the
Soldiers within the Town, were grown very thin and discontented for want of
their pay, the enemy returned, and in a short space took the City: and there
found, in private men's hands, such infinite store of gold and all manner of
treasure, (the hundred part whereof would have paid all the Soldiers, kept out
the enemy, and preserved them all) that the Turk, seeing the baseness of the
Citizens, so foolishly hiding their wealth, and denying just aid unto their
Emperor, stood amazed, and lifting up his hands to heaven, lamented their
folly, and asked what they meant, that having such a store of wealth, they
would suffer themselves to be thus destroyed, only for want of wit or of grace
to use it? and thence grew the Proverb among the Turks unto this day, when
one becomes very rich, you have been at the Siege of Constantinople. And I
pray God it may not so fall out with us for our covetousness, that we prove
not Lucans speech to be true: omnia dat, qui iusta negat, to loose all unjustly
unto strangers, unto rebels, because we deny what is just unto our King. But I
will conclude this point with the Poet, Astra deo nil majus habent, nil Caesare
^erra,
Sic Caesar terras ut deus astra regit.
Imperium regis Caesar, deus astra gubernat,
Caesar honor suo dignus, amore deus.
Dignus amore deus, dignus quoque Caesar honor est,
Alter enim terras, alter and astra regit.
Cum deus in caelis, Caesar regat omna terris,
Censum Caesaribus solvite, vota deo.


5. 5. Defense of the Kings Person.
Defense of his Person is another principal part of that honor, which we owe
unto our King. And the very heathens did think their lives well bestowed for
their Gods, their family, and the father of the Country; how much more willing
should the Christians be, to hazard their lives in defense of their King, which
is, quasi unus e december millibus, 2. Sam. 21.17. Lament. 2.4. Ps. 78.71.72. vide
hos. 3.4. c. 10. 3. and Lament. 2.9.
worth ten thousands of us, being, as the Scripture terms him, the light of
Israel, and the breath of our nostrills, the head of his Subjects, the
shepherd and Pastor of the people, and as the word (...) imports (...), the
foundation of the people, without which they must all fall unto the ground; for
where there is no governor all must perish, and there will be no Priest, no
Prince, no Religion, no Nobility, no good, but anarchy and confusion, and the
destruction of all things. And if we ought to lay down our lives for the
brethren, as S. John says, 1. John. 3.16.
how much rather ought we to do it for our King? it is recorded in our annals,
to his eternal praise, that Sir Hubert Syncler at the Siege of Bridgenorth,
seeing an arrow that was shot at his Master, Nulla gens ita sollicita est
circare ge^ suum sicut apes, unde rege incolumi omnibus men's una est, and
quando nequit volare, sert ipsum turba apum; and si moritur moriuntur and ipsae.
King Henry the second, stepped betwixt the shaft and his Sovereign, and
receiving the arrow into his body, was therewith shot through to death, that he
might preserve the life of his King, which otherwise had been slain in his
stead. So Turnbull had his name for killing a Bull, that had otherwise slain
one of the Kings of Scotland; and we read that when David was assailed by a
mighty Giant, named Ishibibenob, which was of the sons of Rapha, the head of
whose spear weighed three hundred shekells of brass, Abishai the son of
Zervia, with the danger of his own life runs in, succors the King, and kills
the Philistim. 2. Sam. 21.17. and so all other good Subjects have had a
special care to preserve the lives of their Kings, whom they loved better then
their own Parents, yea then their wives or children, or their own lives, as
it appears by the foresaid examples and abundance of the like, that you may
find in the histories of the heathens: for they had not learnt the new divinity
of our time, to destroy the King for the good of his Subjects, but they
thought, as it is most true, that salus regis est salus populi, and they
believed, as all good Christians do, that Vna salus nobis, nullam sperare
salutem,
Principe calcato, sublato iure coronae;
because as S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Tim. ^.8. Aug. to. 9. tract. 6.
in Johan.
(...), their safety is our security, and as S. August. says, si tollis iura
Imperatorum, quis audet dicere mea est illa villa, if you take away the
government of Kings, who dares say, haec mea sunt, this or that is mine, as
now. God knows, since these Rebels have abused our King, we can say nothing
is our own; our houses, goods, lives and liberties are at the disposing of
them that are strongest; what then shall we say of those Subjects that strive
with all their wit, wealth and strength to destroy their King? and if you ask
me why? I must answer, as Aristides was banished out of Athens, iustus, quia
iustus, so must our King be killed, if these men could do it with their Ca^non
Bullets, because he is too good to reign over them; who deserved, not a pious
David, nor a wise Solomon to rule over them, but a foolish Rehoboam, that would
whip them with Scorpions, or such a one as would rule them with a rod of iron,
Psa. 2.9.
and break them in pieces like a potters vessel: for had our King been, not
Caesar Augustus, but Augustus severus, so severe as Henry. 8. or some other
more unmercifull Princes, these rebels durst as well eat their own flesh, as
thus to devour the flesh and bones of the Kings loyal Subjects, and seek the
death of the King himself.

For it is most certain of the vulgar people, and of ill bred natures, that
ungentes pungunt, pungentes molliter ungunt; and therefore though the manifold
offers of Peace, and the unparalleld promising of Pardons to most obstinate
rebels, do infinitely commend the piety and declare the mildness of a most
clement Prince, and the refusal thereof betray the ungrateful stubbornenesse
of graceless Subjects to all posterity; yet, when the hairy scalpe of such as
still go on in their wickedness, will not so easily be rubbed off, I should
say to every King, put your trust in Gods assistance; and as the Holy Ghost
says to the King of Kings, Gird thee with thy sword upon thy thigh, Psalm. 45.3.
O thou most mighty; ride on with thine honor, and let thy right hand teach
thee terrible things: and those thine enemies that would not thou should
reign over them, cause them to be brought, and let them be slain before thee,
Luke 19.27.
so shall thou be a ruler in the midst of thine enemies; and some think that
it were but just if our King, though he be never so loath, should now at last
turn the leaf, and follow the example of God himself, (who when his children
regard not his grace, and set at naught all his counsels, will laugh at their
calamity, Prove. 1.16, 17.
and mock when their destruction comes as a whirle-winde) and should make
London as Jerusalem, and as other the like rebellious Cities, (that the Lord
in his just revenge of their iniquity has suffered to be destroyed, and to be
made an heap of stones: The wealth and pride of the City of London have
brought this misery and calamity upon all the Kingdom of England.
) because the Londoners have showed themselves in many things worse then the
Jews, and for rebellion have justified all the Cities of the world: or if the
King will not do this, though I dare not say of them, as Antoninus, after he
had heard the confession of a miserable covetous wretch, said unto him, Deus
miscreatur tui, si vult, and condonet tibi peccata tua, quod non credo, and
perducat te in vitam aeternam quod est impossible; yet seeing their sins are
so intolerable among men, and so abominable in the sight of God, it is much
feared, that (...), Romans 2.5.
after their hard hearts, which cannot repent, they will still proceed to heap
upon themselves the heavy wrath of God, till there be no remedy to preserve
them from utter ruin and destruction; though from my heart I wish them more
grace, and pray to Almighty God, that -- Nullum sit in omine pondus; Or if this
cannot be, that they may escape that damnation, Romans 13.2.
which the Apostle threatens to all them that resist this ordinance of God.

6. 6. Prayers for the King.
The last but not the least part of that honor which is due to our King, is
our prayers to God for him; and as the other duty was to be performed by the
practice of all good Subjects, A^n^sae^^ c. 2. p. 38.
so is this to be observed by the precept of the Apostle, who though the Kings
were Ethnicks and Tyrants, yet commands us to pray for them; and that you may
know what manner of prayer the Christians made for their persecuting Kings.
Tertul. ad Scap^ta Marcus Aurelius Christianarum nalitum erationibus ad D^^m
fa^^is ^^bres and vt ^^eriam in expeditione G^rm^nt^a ^^p^travit.
Tertullian that lived under the Emperor Severus, says in the behalf of all
the Church, Omnibus Imperatoribus precamur vitam prolixam, imperium securum,
domum tutam, exercuus fortes, senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem quietum,
and quaecunque hominis and Caesaris vota sunt; and I fear me our Rebels pray
for none of these things to a most Christian King: Nam orare pro aliquo and in
exitium ejus machinari, annon haec sunt sibi contraria? for to pray for ones
health and long life, and to do our best to work his destruction.

Non been convenient -- can never proceed from a true heart, but as the
uncharitable Papists prayed for the success of the Gunpowder Plot, (which was
a Treason sine exemplo, quia crudelis sine modo) saying, Gentem auferto persidam
Credentium de finibus,
Vt Christo preces debitas
Persolvamus alacriter.
So the practice of these Rebels makes us believe their prayer is, Regem
auferto persidum
Credentium de finibus, I am ashamed to set dow^e how the factious and
malicious Preach^rs of the rebellious Cities, either neglect to pray at all, o^
pray most seditiously and unchristianly for their own Liege Lord, and gracious
King; and therefore the curse of Judas lights upon them, that their prayer is
turned into sin, which should make them pray, that Judas his end should not
fall unto them.
etc.


But we that desire to follow the Apostles Precept, considering the greatness
of his cares and charge that he does undergo, and the multitude of dangers
that he is liable to, will most heartily pray to God both in our Morning and
our Evening Prayers, both at our sitting and at our rising from our meat, Vt
vivat Rex, exurgat Deus, and dissipentur inimici; that God would give his
Angels charge over him to preserve him in all his ways, that he dash not his
foot against a stone: that his enemies may be clothed with shame, and that he
may flourish as the ^^^li^, that he may reign long and happily here, and
reign for ever in Heaven: this shall be my prayer for ever.

CHAP. XVIII. The persons that ought to honor the King; and the recapitulation
of 21 wickednesses of the Rebels, and the faction of the pretended Parliament.
3. HAving seen the Person that is to be honored, 3. The persons that must
honor the King.
and the honor that is due unto him, we are now to consider in the last place,
who are to honor him, included in this word (...), honor ye him; which being
unlimited and indefinite, is equivalent to an universal; and so S. Paul does
more plainly express it, saying, (...), Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; which is an Hebrew ideome, or
Synecdochicall speech, signifying the whole man; the word (...) being usually
taken in Scripture pro toto composito, for the whole man composed of body and
soul, as where it is said, Genesis 46.26, 27. Act. 2.
that Jacob went down into Egypt with 70 souls; and S. Peter by one Sermon
converted 3000 souls: and the abstract word (...) is here taken (...), to show
that our subjection, obedience, and honor, which we are to ascribe unto our
King, must be not as hypocrites render it in show, from the teeth outward, but
really and indeed ex animo from our souls and the bottom of our hearts, as
Aquinas glosseth it: and the concrete (...) added unto it, makes it the more
energeticall, to show that all mortal men, none excepted, are obliged, to do
this honor, and to yield this subjection unto their King: for, seeing every
man, both spiritual and temporal; and every sex, both man and woman; and
every degree of men, young and old, rich and poor, one with another, has an
immortal soul, as well as a mortal body, it must needs follow, that all,
cujuscunque gradus, sexus, and conditionis, are obliged both in soul and body
to honor and obey their King.

And yet it is strange to see how many men can exempt themselves and grant a
dispensation unto their souls for the performance of this duty; for the Pope
will be freed, The Pope and his Clergy would be freed from the subjection of
Kings.
because he has a power above all powers, to depose Kings, and to dispose of
their Kingdoms at his pleasure; and the Popish Clergy will perform no duty
unto their King, because their function is spiritual; but to all these I may
truly say, as our Savior does to the leaud servant, ex ore tuo, out of the
Fathers whom they acknowledge, and out of their own Authors they are confuted;
for S. Chrysostom says, that whether he be an Apostle, or Evangelist, or
Prophet, Seu quisquis tandem fuerit, or whosoever else he be, Pope, Cardinal,
or Deacon, he is commanded to be subject to the higher power; and that you may
see what power he means, he points out the same by the symbol, that is, of
him that carries the sword, which you know must be the secular Prince, and not
the spiritual Pope; and so not only Euthym. Theophylact. Oecumenius, and
other Greek Commentators do avouch, but also those Epistles, which are
recorded by Binius, and quoted by the Bishop of Durham, as Leo 1. ep. 26. and
35. Simplicius 1. ep. 4. Felix 3. ep. 2. Anastasius 1. ep. 78. Pelagius 1. ep.
16. Martinus 1. ep. 3. Agatho 1. ep. ad Herac. Hadrian. 1. ep. ad Constant. do
make this most manifest unto us; Espens. in Tit. 3.1. Digres. 10. p. 5. 13.
Paris. 1568.
and therefore Espencaeus, convinced by such a cloud of witnesses, confesses
very honestly, that the Apostle here, Docet omnes credentes mundi potestatibus
esse subjectos, nempe, sive Apostolus, sive Evangelista, etc. ut tenet
Chrysostom. Euthym. and qui non Graeci?

The wickednesses of the pretended Parliament showed by their actions.
And as the Popelings will be free, so the Presbyterians, and the faction of
this Parliament will be as free as they; and (because every wickedness
labors to exceed that which preceded) these do not agree with the
Catholics (as Herod and Pilate did, to crucify Christ) in the same
conclusion and tenet of exemption, but they will go a note beyond Ela, and
surmount both Jesuit and Pope; and therefore they not only dishonor and
disobey their King, but they have violated and incroached upon all his rights,
and assumed the same into their own hands; for, to recapitulate some of their
choycest wickednesses:

Rome and the Jesuits teach, in Aphorismis confessariorum, ex Doctorum
sententiis collectis, p. 249. that Rex potest per rempublicam privari ob
tyrannidem, and si non faciat officium suum, and cum est causa aliqua justa,
and eligi alius a majore part populi: which falsehood their own Divines
confute, when Royard says, Rege constituto, Royard in dom. 1. advent. They
teach the deposition of Kings.
non potest populus jugum subjectionis repellere: so these men maintain that
diabolical tenet, that the Regal power is primarily in the collective body,
and derived to the King cumulative, not privative; and therefore upon the Kings
neglect or maladministration, it comes back again to the collective body,
in whom it resideth suppletive, to discharge the royal duty when the King
fails to do the same; and then the King so falling from his right, they may
refuse obedience, and if they see cause (which they can soon do) they may
depose him from his office; which impudent falsehood I have fully consuted in
this Treatise.

2. They say the Regal Majesty is a humane creature, or the men primarily,
and therefore may be deposed by men; when as Cunerus could say, Sive electione,
sive postulatione, vel successione, vel belli jure princeps fiat, principi
tamen facto divinitus potestas adest: and therefore they have no power to take
away that which God has given him.

3. They have with Nadab and Abihu adventured to offer strange fire upon Gods
Altar, and with Vzza to lay their profane hands upon Gods holy Arc; they have
rejected the Laws that the King with the advice and consultation of all his
learned Clergy has made Though now I reckon not this among their wickednesses.
, and they themselves sit in Moses chair, and have undertaken to reform the
Church, to make Laws, and compose Articles of our faith, with the advice of a
few factious men, that were never esteemed otherwise then faex Cleri, not
worthy to be the Curates of those worthy Divines, whose feet they hurt in the
stocks, and send the iron into their souls.

4. They have cast out all the Bishops, and all the faithful How they
persecute the Bishops and the best of the Clergy.
that might further the Gospel, and administer justice unto the people; they
do rob them of their means, and count sacrilege to be no sin; and in very
deed, they have persecuted the worthiest Clergy, in many particulars, far
worse then ever Julian, that wicked Apostata, did; the Lord of Heaven give us
patience to endure it, and suffer us not for fear of any villainy, or
calamity, to be dejected, and so fall away from his truth.

called and continued an Assembly, which the Pope would not do without the
Emperors leave, contrary to the Kings command; which is a mere and mighty
usurpation of the Regal right.

Revenues, Castles, Forts, Towns, Ships, and all that they could lay hand on,
and do in a hostile manner with all violence, detain them from him, but what
he gains by his sword, to this very day.

fought against him, shot at his sacred Person, and sought most Barbarously to
kill him, under the color to preserve him; which is the finest piece of
Logic that ever was read.

rayled at him; slandered him, and most apparently and falsely belyed him, and
laid to his charge the things which we his Majesty's Subjects and Servants that
attend Him do know, that He neither did, nor knew.

encouraged and countenanced their ignorant brazen-faced Chaplains most
uncivilly to rail at Gods Anointed in the Pulpit; and so they brought the
abomination, not of desolation, but of most horrible transgression into the
holy place, and made Moses chair the seat of raylers.

tax the Subjects at their pleasure, and have raised infinite sums of money,
and no man but themselves knows how they have disposed, or what they have done
therewith.

Apprentices, they send out their Warrants and their Edicts, without and
against the Kings authority, which are but nugae, and the minims of their
doings.

negative voice in making Laws, but they may conclude them and make them
obligatory without the Kings approbation or ratification; and that they may do
any thing conducible to the good of the Church and Commonwealth, any Law,
Statute, or provision

What they say of their Covenants.
13. They are not ashamed to teach (as they do practice) that it is lawful for
them to make Covenants, Combinations and Confederacies of mutual defense and
offense against any person whatsoever, whom themselves judge malignant, not
excepting the King himself; and they say, that it were better for them to
renounce their Baptism, then to forsake their Covenant, which they believe
will be more advantageous to the Kingdom, then all the Privileges that are
granted in Magna Chartae, or the Statutes that have been made ever since.

14. They jeered at the Kings Proclamations, trampled his Declarations under
feet, and incountred the same with rebellious Protestations.

15. They persuade the people to give no ear to any discourse Accommodation,
or conclusion for any peace; To what they l^ken the Kings pardons.
and say, that the King is not to be trusted; that he will perform no promise
that he makes, either in his Proclamations or Declarations; and therefore that
the Kings Pardons may be likened to a buckler of glass, or a staff of reed,
on which there is no trust, no committing themselves to the defense of any such
pardon. So we may say with the Poet, Nos juvat alma quies, gens haec fern bella
minatur;
Et quoties pacem poscimus, arma crepat.


16. They teach the Doctrine of coercion, dedignifying, degrading, Kings,
Whence they learned their Divinity.
when they deem them unworthy of that dignity; and their arguments and reasons
they collect and produce out of Dolman. Bellarm. Suarez, and the Magazine of
the most rigid Jesuits.

17. They have so barbarously, so irreverently, and so profanely
Service-Booke, that it would loath your ears to hear, and transcend modesty
to tell you how they have dealt with it; and they threatened, that if the
Ministers would read it, they should never read book again.

18. They do agree with the worst of Papists, the Jesuits, many of the worst
points of doctrine that they teach; How contrary to Christ's doctrine, Matthew.
13.29. they would ^o^^ out ^ll Papists.
and yet being not well able to understand their tenets, they hate Papists so
much, that they would root them out of their very being; they would destroy all
the Irish that are Papists, and drive all Papists out of England, out of the
world, that the name of Papists should be no more in remembrance; and contrary
to all reason, divinity, and humanity, they would force and compel every man
to profess the religion that they are of, though some of them (as their
independents) as far on the other side, would have every man to have liberty
to profess what religion himself likes best.

ingratefully and disloyally injured a most loving wife, and their own most
gracious Queen, for showing Her love, How they have wronged the Queen, the
Nobility, Clergy, Gentry, and Commons of this Land.
and discharging Her duty to Her husband: They have imprisoned and barbarously
used some of the Nobility, most of the Clergy, and abundance of the Gentry, and
others of the best account of the common Subjects of this Kingdom; they have
plundered and robbed many thousands of men; they have killed and murdered as
many; they have made our Cities dens of thieves, our Churches prisons, and all
the Land Acheldama's, fields of blood; they multiplied the number of Widows,
Orphans, and Thieves without number throughout the Land, and they filled the
whole Kingdom with miseries, lamentations, and woes; and they have done so
many mischiefs, as, if I should set them all down, would fill up another
volume: And

enough, to fill up the measure of their iniquity, How they labored to call in
the Scots.
they spared neither pains nor cost to call in the Scots to assist them, to
perpetuate the war, to fill our Kingdom with strangers, and to make our
calamities everlasting: so they fell from evil to worse, from discontent to
schism, from schism to open rebellion, and their rebellion more wicked then
any rebels that we can read of in any History; which is the just judgment of
God upon them, that they which rebelliously run out of the communion of Gods
Church, should most desperately run out of their own wits; and refusing to
be guarded by the heavenly Angels, should give themselves to be guided by the
infernal Devils; which made a merry fellow, at the enumeration of their
abominable and indeed innumerable wickednesses, to say, Hell was never better
then it is now, The speech of a merry companion.
because he thought the Devils were all in London, or otherwise it were
impossible that the Citizens which have received so many gracious offers of
pardons from His Majesty, and promises of other favors, should still continue
so wicked as they are, so gulled and seduced by this Parliament faction, that
non suadebis, etiamsi persuaseris; because, as S. Augustine says, impia men's
nolit intellectum, and they love to cozen and cheat their own souls by new
painting these old sins, and calling their faction faith, their madness
zeal, and their horrid rebellion fighting for religion; but as the Poet says,
-- Non tanti est civilia bella movere. Whatsoever pretenses move them to it,
this remedy will increase their miseries; for, if God be no more merciful to
us then their sin deserves, it may end here in an universal destruction, and
hereafter in their eternal damnation: for does not all the world see how God
scourges us with the rod of our own furious madness, 2. Chron. 20.23.
and like as it befell the Ammonites and Moabites, that fighting against the
Israelites, did help to destroy one another; so we, striving not against
Israel, but as we pretend, both against the Edomites, against falsehood, do
utterly destroy our selves: Exemploque pari ruit Anglica turba, suoque
Mart cadunt coesi per mutua vulnera fratres.
And we that did keep our enemies in awe shall be now destroyed by the sons
of our own mother; but I confess our Land abounds with sins, and our sins
have justly deserved this heavy punishment to light upon us; yet I beseech our
God to chastise us with his own hands, and let us not fall under the swords of
the uncircumcised Philistines, that are a people much more wicked then our
selves; and if he will let our souls live, we shall praise his name.

21. When they had most fraudulently gotten His Majesty to pass an Act (which
though really intended, yet to many men seems a very strange Act) to refer
the managing of the affairs of Ireland to the Parliament of England, How they
intended to get all Ireland to themselves.
then they took that course to root out all the Papists, Irish, English,
British, and indeed all the inhabitants of Ireland except their own
brotherhood, (for they could have soon discried the mark of the beast in all
the rest) which they thought would be most effectual to further their design,
and to bring the whole Kingdom of Ireland to be inherited by their own
faction; that is, to sell all the lands of the Rebels to themselves, (for they
knew none else would buy it at that time, and in that manner as they
determined) and when they had thus locked the door, and stopped the way of all
relief unto the distressed Protestants of that Kingdom, they might sing,
Dimidium toti qui been coepit habet; For they had settled Scotland, and they had
now grasped Ireland, and held it fast in Vulcans net; and therefore now it
might stay, till they could reduce England (to make a perfect work in all the
three Kingdoms) to the same form of government both in Church and State, as
they projected for the other; and because they would have some places of
entrance into Ireland, and hinder the Rebels to possess the whole Kingdom,
How they blinded the people by their proceedings.
and also blind the eyes of the ignorant, not to perceive their plot, but to
keep them still in some hope of redress, they sent such a party over (and the
Scots must be the most considerable part) as might keep their own design on
foot, and yet yield not an inch of any comfort to the spoiled and expelled
Protestant; for they left that party which they sent thither, rather as a prey
to their enemies, (as having neither clothes, meat, nor money) then enabled by
these acoutrements to subdue the Rebels; as it is better and more fully
declared by the Letter of the State of Ireland to the House of Commons, then I
can relate unto you.

What the Author saw in Ireland.
And I being in Ireland, seeing the deplorable state of that Kingdom, the
miserable distress of the mangled, sterved; and naked Protestants; the little
children calling and crying for bread, and none to give it them; many worthy
Ministers beging, or dying for want in the streets, and the poor barefooted
and hunger bitten Soldier lamenting his hard fortune, to be transplanted out
of Gods blessing into the warm sun; from plenty and prosperity, to be left
as the traveller betwixt Jerusalem and Hierico, half dead, betwixt merciless
rebels and more unmercifull friends; neither wholly to be destroyed, nor yet to
be relieved, was much troubled and perplexed at these sad aspects; and being
entrusted by the Bishops my Brethren of that Kingdom, to agitate the cause of
the Church for our relief here in England; and to that end having a Letter
unto His Majesty, and a Remonstrance of our distressed condition, though with
the great hazard of my life at Sea, How used as soon as ever he came to h^^
house.
yet I arrived by Gods great blessing in England, and before I had been two
days at home, my house was surrounded with a Troop of Armed Souldies, they
entered in, seized upon my person, searched every room and every corner with a
candle, not leaving the bed-straw whereon my children lay unsearched; they
took all my papers and all the money they found in my house, (even my servants
money) to the sum of 40 l, and carried all with me their poor Prisoner to
Northhampton; and now I thought it was but an ill exchange, to escape the Sea,
and to fall into the fire; to shun the Lion, and to meet a Bear; to eschew the
Rebels in Ireland, and to fall into the hands of Traitors in England; and I
knew not why, but only that I had often preached at Towcester, (where being
requested by Master Lockwood to supply the place, How a precise Churchwarden
would have hindered a Bishop to preach.
the precise Churchwardens very peremptorily told me I should not do it,
because I was a royalist, and spoke against the Parliament; to whom I replied,
that he had no such authority to hinder a Bishop to Preach, and bade him look
to mend his glasse-windowes, that were all full of holes, where the faces of
the pictures were plucked out) and in other Churches thereabouts, that they
should so honor and obey their King, as God commands us; for which refusal
to be admonished, I believe they are now (and perhaps will be more) hereafter
sufficiently punished.

But the Committee there finding in me no cause worthy of death or of bonds,
(Gods providence so mercifully watching over me, that it stopped their eyes,
that they looked not on my Grand Rebellion, which they had in their hands, and
would no doubt have utterly undone me, had they but espied the Capital title)
that I was dismissed, and I confess courteously used by Sir John Norwich.

Then afterward when time served I repaired to His Majesty, and having
delivered my Letters, I spoke to Him and drew a Petition, (and I think I was
the first that petitioned in this kind, I do not repent it, neither am I
ashamed to confess it) and got some hands unto it, (as that worthy and noble
Gentleman Colonel Oneale can bear witness, the sum whereof was that, the
Parliament having betrayed the trust that was reposed in them, wholly deserted
our relief, and giving us none other comfort then what I expressed in my
Discovery of Mysteries, c. 12. p. 24.
his Majesty would be pleased to consider, that we were his Loyal Subjects,
and that the care of us was committed by God to him, not to his Parliament, who
had left us in a worse condition then the Rebels had made us: and therefore, as
he justly required our faith and allegiance, so we humbly be sought him, that
he would graciously vouchsafe unto us his princely care and assistance, some
ways to relieve us, otherwise then by leaving us still in their hands, till we
and our families, in the languishing expectation of our redress, should
finally and irrecoverably perish, while these crafty Merchants, thus bought and
sold us, and under the pretense of reformation used all their endeavors to
bring both Kingdoms to destruction.

CHAP. XIX. Shows how the Rebellious faction have transgressed all the ten
Commandments of the Law, and the new Commandment of the Gospel; how they
have committed the seven deadly sins; and the four crying sins; and the
three most destructive sins to the soul of man, and how their Ordinances are
made against all laws, 1. They adore and put their trust in that creature. Ps.
74. v. 4.7.8. (...)? Quis tibi in mentem dolorem imposuit ut haec perficias
magni Dei ore relicto?
equity and conscience.
22 THey have, in no small measure, transgressed all the commandments of God,
the ten commandments of the law, and the new commandment of the Gospel. for

1. The factious Rebels have other gods besides the God of Israel, when they
adore the creatures, and ascribe the incommunirable attributes of the creator
unto their Parliament, by calling it omnipotent, infallible, invincible, and
most blessed Parliament, as some of them have most blasphemously termed it; for
which blasphemies, no doubt, but as we by their Declarations and Ordinances
know they are not infallible, so God, I fear me, by their destruction will
show they are neither blessed nor invincible.

2. They not only make an idol of their Parliament, 21 How they have abused
Gods house.
but are so far from making to themselves any graven image, that they destroy
all images, and are just such as the Prophet David speaks of, which have done
evil in Gods Sanctuary, and have broken down all the carved work thereof
with axes and hammers, that have set fire upon his holy places, and have
defiled the dwelling place of Gods name, even unto the ground: for it is almost
incredible how barbarously, worse then any Turks or Jews, they have broken
down those rare and sweet instruments of Music, the Organs of our Churches,
and have defaced those excellent pieces of work, that, to the honor of God,
were made and set up in the windows of our Churches in Canterbury, Winchester,
Lincoln and the other Cathedrals, by the best Artists in Christendom: which
is a most horrible fact, no ways commanded in this precept, and an irreparable
loss to us and our posterity; and therefore the Prophet David calls these
defacers of such carved and painted works, set up in his house, the
adversaryes and enemies of God, verse. 4, and 5. and verse. 11. foolish people,
verse. 19, and 23. the haters of God, verse. 24. and the blasphemers of his name,
verse. 11. for none but such would have done such Prophanations as is done in
Gods house: but let them take heed lest the Prophets prayer should light upon
them, lift up thy feet O God that thou may utterly destroy every one of
these enemies, which has done this evil in thy Sanctuary.

3. For swearing not vainly but falsely, most wickedly, Ps 74. v. 4. 3. How
they forswear themselves; (...). Menand. perjurium est, nequiter decipere
credentem. Aug. 4 How they profaned the Sabbath.
and for-swearing themselves over and over, again and again, and having more
dispensations and absolutions for their perjuries by their holy Prophets then
ever the Popes gave for adulteries, it is incredible to think, and impossible
to number the heads of these transgressions; and therefore if you believe that
God was in earnest when he gave this precept, you may be assured he will not
hold them guiltless that are such transgressors of it.

4. For the day wherein we should serve our God in his Church most reverently,
some of them worship him more unmannerly, then some of those blind Indians,
that worship the Devil himself, and others of them muster their men, plunder
their neighbors, and murder their brethren, which they believe to be the best
way to sanctify the Sabbath: and for which resting from their work, thus
religiously to serve the Lord, let them take heed, left God should swear in
his wrath, that they shall never enter into his rest.

5. How they curse their Fathers and Mothers.
5. They curse their Father and their Mother that their days may be long in the
Land, which their pretended Parliament has promised to give them; for the King
is the Prince and Principal Father of us all; and the Prophet says of such
men, they shall curse their King and their God; Esaias 8.21.
and the Bishops are their Fathers too, and they have cursed them, long agone;
and I fear they will not cease to curse them, till their curses fall upon
their own heads: and for all other bonds of duty, and relations of Wives unto
their Husbands; Children unto their Parents; Servants unto their Masters: they
are Preached asunder, to make way for the liberty of the Subject, to Rebel by
authority against his Sovereign.

6. How many they have murdered.
6. Whereas God says, thou shall do no murder, they gave that first
commission, though they had not the least color of any authority to give it,
to kill, slay and destroy; and it is most lamentable to consider, how many
thousands they have murdered, and how they are thought worthy of the greatest
honor and the best reward, that have killed most of Gods faithful servants,
and the Kings loyal Subjects.

1. How they loosened the reins to all lust ho^ font deri. vata clades in
patriam populumque fluxit. Horat. car. l. 3.
7. For adulteries, Fornications and all Uncleanness, they may now freely do
it, lust may flow like the river, whose banks are broken down, when they have
overthrowen those courts of Justice, and were never at rest till they had most
violently suppressed the power and execution of all Ecclesiastical censures,
that were the chiefest bars and hindrances of these unlawful lusts.

8. How they are like Argivi fures. (...).
8. For stealing, they have changed the name but not the nature of it: for under
the pretense of preserving to us the propriety of our goods, they have not
stolen, but plundered away, that is robbed us of all our goods, and carried
them into those Rebellious Towns, that are now the dens of these thieves, and
are stronger in their wickedness then the hills of the robbers: and that which
makes this sin most sinful, Ps. 94.12.
is, that it is established by a Law.

9. They have justified the Cretans, 9. How they belyed all sorts of good men.
Quomodo Deus pater genuit filium veritatem nempe; sic diabolus lapsus genuit
quasi filium mendaciu^. Aug. super Ioh. Habac. 2.9.
and proved themselves the right bastard sons of the father of lies, filling
all and every corner of this Kingdom with palpable, intolerable, and
incredible lies, slanders, and false witnesse-bearing against God, against his
Anointed, against the Church, and against all the reverend governors of the
Church, all religious Protestants, and all the loyal Subjects of this Nation,
that the Angels do now blush, and the Devils do laugh and rejoice, to see
they are so fruitful in begetting so many children so perfectly formed, and so
completely perfected in their own image and likeness; and if ever the saying
of Gildas was true, they have proved it now: Moris continui gentis erat, sicut
and nunc est, Gildas de excidio Britan.
ut infirma esset ad retundenda hostium tela, and fortis ad civilia bella:
infirma, inquam; ad exequenda pacis ac veritatis insignia, and fortis ad
scelera and mendacia.

10. They have coveted an evil covetousness, 10. The extent of their
covetousness.
when they coveted all evil unto themselves; not only their neighbors
houses, goods, and lands, and all that are theirs, but also the patrimony of
the Church, the revenues of the Clergy, and all the rights and prerogatives of
the King, to be intayled upon themselves and their faction, that so they and
theirs might be both Kings, and Priests, and all, not to God, but to themselves
and their fellow Rebels in the government of this Kingdom.

And as they have thus transgressed all the old Commandments of the Law, How
they transgressed the new Commandment of the Gospel. Genesis 4.9.
so they come no ways short in transgressing the new Commandment of the
Gospel: for their love to their brethren is now turned to perfect hatred, when
they say not with Cain, am I my brothers keeper? but with Apollyon, I will be
the destroyer of my brethren; neither will I sell them, as the brethren of
Joseph did him unto the Egyptians, but I will send them if I can possible
quick to hell; let those Loyal subjects, that have been unexpectedly
murdered, and those many many thousands, that have been plundered of all their
Estates, testify to the world the love of these men unto their brethren, who
have felt more cruelty and barbarity and less charity from these holy Saints,
then could be expected from Jews, Turks and Pagans.

23. How they have committed the 7 deadly sins. Romans 6.23.
23. Though every sin deserves the wrath of God, as the Apostle says in
general, the reward of sin is death, be it little or be it great; yet
because some sins do more provoke the wrath of God, and do sooner produce
this deadly fruit then other sins; the Divines have observed 7 special
sins, which they term the 7 deadly sins: and these also you may find
committed in the highest degree by these factious Rebels: For

1. Their Pride. Quid juvat o homines tanto turgescere fastu? Nam ut ait
Comteus. (...).
1. Pride, which is an high conceit of a man's own worth, far beyond his just
deserts, and therefore, beleiving himself to be inferior to none, scorns to
be subject unto any, is the Father that produces, and the nurse that
cherishes all rebellion: and our Parliamentary faction, together with the
Assembly of their Divines, thinking themselves holyer then the Saints, and
wiser then their Brethren, have therefore made this unnatarall war to destroy
us all, because we will not subscribe with them to destroy both Church and
State: this is the fruit of pride, but the punishment is, to be resisted by
God, who throws damnation upon their heads, because they resist the ordinance
of God.

2. Their Covetousness. Sacrilegia minuta puniuntur, magna jam in triumphis
feruntur. Sense. ep. 87.
2. Pride cannot subsist without means, therefore covetousness must support
it; and I showed you before how covetous these rebels are, not of any good, but
of our goods, and of our lives, that they may enjoy our lands, even the lands
of the Church, that they may take the houses of God in possession: which may
prove to them like Aurum Tholosanum, or as Midas gold, that was the destruction
of that covetous wretch.

3 Their Luxury. Certa quidem tantis causa est manifesta ruinis, Luxuria nimi
um libera facta via est, Propert. eleg. 11. l. 3.
3. Their luxury and lust must needs proceed from fullness and pride: and I
believe it is not unknown to many how these Rebels spend their time in
revelling and feasting, chambering and wantonness, which though never so
secretly done by them in the night, yet are they publicly seen in the day,
and seen to their shame, if they could be ashamed of any thing.

4. How envy has possessed their souls, it is almost beyond all sense to
consider it; they envy that any man should be King and themselves Subjects,
that any man should be a Bishop and themselves Priests, 4. Their Envy.
or that any man should be rich and themselves not so wealthy; therefore they
will needs pull down what themselves cannot reach unto.

5. If Epicurus were now living, 5. Their Gluttony and drunkenness.
or Sardanapalus came to these men's feasts, they might think themselves the
teachers of sobriety, and the masters of abstinency, in comparison of these new
gulists, who make a God of their bellies, and fare deliciously every day, that
they can get it, more deliciously then Dives; it is incredible to consider what
they devour in delicates, and how the Sisters teachers eat more good meat, and
drink better wines then the gravest Bishops.

6. They are, as the Psalmist says, 6. Their wrath and malice.
wrathfully displeased at us, and I know not whether their envy at our
happiness, or their wrath and anger that we do live, is the greater; yet
thanks be to God, Vivere nos dices, salvos tamen esse negamus. And God I hope
will preserve us still, notwithstanding all their malice.

7. For their sloth, 7. Their Sloth.
I was a while musing how these factious rebels could any ways be guilty of
this lazy sin; for, as the Devil is never at rest, but goes about
continually like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; and he says,
Job. 1. (...). Luke 16.8.
he compasses the earth to and fro: so these children of this world, being
wiser in their generation then the children of light, are as diligent as their
father, they imagine mischief upon their beds, and are a great deal more
watchful, and more painful to do evil, to serve the Devil, to go to
Hell, then the faithful servants of God are to go to Heaven; witness all the
victories and successes that they had by this war, in the night, not by any
manhood, but by taking the Kings Soldiers careless in their beds: yet,
notwithstanding all this diligence to do wickedness, they are as lazy as any
stuggard, and as slow as the snayle to any goodness: they are asleep in
evil, and are dead in trespasses and sins, and cannot be awakened to any
service of God.

24. 24. How they have grievously committed the four crying sins.
The Scripture makes mention of four crying sins that do continually cry
to God for vengeance against the sinners; Clamitat ad coelum vex sanguinis, and
Sodomorum,
Vox oppressorum, merces retenta laborum.
And they are not free from any of these. For

1. How they have shed abundance of innocent blood.
1. As the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 79.2, 3. so they have done; and the streams
of blood, that, since the beginning of this unnatural war, they have most
unjustly caused to be spilt, and do flow like the rivers of waters over the
face of this now unhappy Land, do with Abels blood continually cry against
them, and cannot choose but pull down vengeance upon their heads, Psalm. 9.12.
when God shall come to make inquisition for blood: and therefore though Pacem
nos poscimus omnes, we all cry for peace, and the Kings clemency still
proclaims pardon; yet seeing it is God that makes wars to cease, and the
Prophet says, how can the sword be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a
charge against Ashkelon? Jer. 47.7. as the bloody sin of Saul upon the poor
Gibeonites, never left crying for vengeance, until it was expiated by blood,
even by the blood of seven of his sons; so I fear me the much blood that
these rebels spilt, and the blood of so many innocents that they caused to be
slain, can never be expiated, and the wrath of God appeased, until an
atonement be made by blood, even a judiciarie sentence of death against some
of the head rebels; for it is the voice of God, that whosoever sheddeth man's
blood; that is, without due authority, by man shall his blood be shed, that is,
by the due course of Law, and the power of the Magistrate, that bears not the
sword in vain, but is bound to punish murders, and the unlawful putting of
innocents to death, with the sentence of a just death.

this rebellion be concluded with the like peace, by a general pardon, as the
other in Ireland is like to be?

Sol.
I answer, the case is not alike, because they had some show of reason, and were
provoked by the faction and emissaries of this Parliament; but our rebels had
not the least colorable cause, nor were provoked by any, but their own bloody
desire to root out Gods service and servants, when they had almost all things
that they desired, I am sure more then should have been granted unto them; and
therefore in these and in many other respects that I could, but am ashamed to
set down, I deem this rebellion of our English, and the invasion of the
Scots, ten times more odious, then the insurrection of the Irish.

2. The iniquity of Sodom was Pride, fullness of bread, Ezech. 16.49. 2. The
sins of Sodom among them.
abundance of idleness, and contempt of the poor; and I have already showed
how all these do rule and reign in them.

3. For oppression, 3. Their oppression.
let their ordinances to take away our goods, without any color of justice,
and their actions, to make good their ordinances, to take away our states, and
deprive us of our liberties, be well examined, and the world shall then see
whether they be oppressors, or I a transgressor for affirming it.

4. For retaining of wages, 4. The detaining of the wages of Gods servants.
letting pass their Soldiers that deserve not pay, for fighting so disloyally
a^^inst their King, and transgressing so undutifully the Commandment of God,
which so precisely bids them to honor the King, I would feign know by what
authority, or law, excepting their own lawless Ordinances, have they detained
and alienated the wages, means, and maintenance of those faithful Pastors,
whom they sent away; and caused them to fly and wander like Pilgrims, from
place to place, without any means or subsistence? O let them never think that
these things can be buried in oblivion, but that the sighs and groans of
those faithful servants of Christ do continually cry, 25. How they are filled
with the most destructive sins against their souls. And if I should parallel
the wickednesses of this pretended Parliament with the Sicilian Vespers, the
Massacre of Par^s, and the Gunpowder Treason, it would exceed them all.
and cry aloud in the ears of God for vengeance to be powered down upon the
heads of these their persecutors, which cannot escape, Cum surrexerit ad
judicandum Deus.

25. As there be three Theological graces that build up and complete a
Christian soul, Faith, Hope, and Charity; so there be three maine vices that
do poison and kill every soul, Infidelity, Presumption, Philauty; and three
others that are destructive to all Christianity, Profaneness, Impudency, and
Sacrilege: The time will not give me leave to tell you how they are chayned
about with these linkes of sin, and how indeed they are, as the Apostle
says, filled with all unrighteousness. The works that they do can
sufficiently testify what they are. God forgive them the evil that they have
done, and give them grace to repent in time, that they may not perish
everlastingly, Amen.

2. The wicked Ordinances o^ the pretended Parliament.
2. Having treated a little of the wicked practices and abominable actions of
the Puritan Faction of this Parliament; I should, according as I intended, set
down some of their unjust, impious, and diabolical Ordinances; which I find
to be so many as would fill up a whole Volume, and the poison of their
wickedness having swelled my Book to such a bulk already, I must therefore,
crave leave, to transmit the displaying of these dismal tragedies to some
other scene; only I must remember, which I believe will never be forgotten,
while any wickedness can be remembered; and that is,

1. Their bloody ordinance.
1. Their bloody Ordinance to kill and slay, while we were all in peace, and all
praying for the Houses of Parliament.

2. Their sacrilegious ordinance.
2. Their sacr^^^gious Ordinance of taking away not the twentieth part, nor the
tenth, nor yet nine parts of ten, but all and every part of the goods and
revenues of the Bishops, Deanes, and Prebends; and let them now, in their
old age, after they have wasted their strength, and consumed their years with
toylesome labors and indefatigable pains, in the Church of God, to save their
souls, either dig for bread, or beg for alms, or like out-worne jades,
die in a ditch; their care for these men was to leave them not one penny to
relieve themselves while they lived; and I believe the prophanest Pagan, (it
may be) the Devil himself, could not show greater malice, or inflict a
severer censure upon the Clergy, then these zealous Christians have ordained;
because such a miserable life must needs prove far worse then a glorious death,
Jerem. Lament. 4.5. and c. 1.11.
when as Jeremiah says, they that did feed delicately, must stand desolate in
the streets, and they that were brought up in scarlet, must embrace dunghills;
they must sigh and seek their bread, and give their pleasant things for meat
to releeve their souls.

3. Their unrighteous ordinances.
3. Their unrighteous Ordinance, and ordinances, to take away what part they
pleased of their neighbors goods, and all from them whom they deemed
Malignants; and I had almost said, that God him self, which is Lord of all,
could not more justly take them, then these men have unjustly decreed to take
them from us.

4. Their impious, odious and abominable Ordinance, 4. Their impious ordinance.
to compel men by Oaths and Covenants to give themselves unto the Devil, and
to go to Hell in despite of their teeth; and that which makes me wonder most
of all is, that their Synod or Assembly has prefixed an exhortation to
persuade silly souls to take that wicked Covenant; and to cast a mist before
their eyes, that they may not only let down little gnats, but also swallow
this great camel, they would justify the doing thereof by a twofold example.

The first of the Jews in Ezra's time, Ezra. 10.5. and 8. Nehem. 9.38.10.1.
that made a Covenant to serve the Lord, and to put away their strange Wives,
according to the law.

The second of Christians, and indeed of most christian Kings and Princes, that
is, of Queen Elizabeth's assisting the Hollanders against the King of Spain,
and of King Charles assisting the Rochellers against the King of France.

To both which examples, and all other things that are contained either in the
Covenant it self, or the exhortation of the Assembly thereunto annexed, I do
understand, there shall be a full and a perfect answer made by one that has
undertaken the same ex professo; yet give me leave in the interim to say this
much,

First, touching Covenants and Vows, it is plain enough, 1. What Vows and
Covenants are allowable.
that although the superior may with Ezra cause the inferior to Vow or swear
the performance of his duty, that he is bound by the law of God and nature to
perform; so Abraham caused his servant to swear fidelity, when he sent him
for Isaack's Wife. And so the King may cause his Subjects to take the Oath of
their Allegiance; Genesis 24.3.
and the lawful General cause his Soldiers to swear their fidelity unto him;
yet the inferior subject can not swear, or if he swears he ought not to
observe it, when be does it contrary to the command of him, that has command
over him; Numb. 30. per totum.
as you may see in Numb. 30. throughout. -- Therefore, as children may not vow
any thing, though it be never so lawful, contrary to their fathers command, or
if they do, they ought not to keep it; so no more may any Subject Vow, or
make a Covenant, contrary to their Kings command; or if they do, they ought
not to observe it, and they are, as you see, absolved by God himself.

Ezra and the Jews did it, contrary to the command of Artaxerxes, Sol.
that was then their King; I answer, that it is most false; for,

Ezra was the Priest, Nehem. 8.2. and 9. and the chief Prince, that was then
over them, and Nehemiah had his authority from the King, and he was the
Tirshatha, that is, their governor, says the Text, Nehem. 10.1. and therefore
they might lawfully cause them to take that Covenant.

leave, and a large commission from Artaxerxes to do all that they did; as you
may see See Ezra. 7.11.22. etc.
; neither can you find any syllable that Artaxerxes forbad them to do this in
any place.

Ezra and his people, and Nehemiah's, was to do those things that they had
covenanted before to do, For so the text says, Let it be done according to
the Law. Ezra. 10.3.
which God had expressly commanded them to do, and which they could not omit,
though they had not covenanted to do it, without great offense; so if our
covenanters swear they will serve God, and be loyal unto their King, as they
vowed in their baptism, they shall never find me to speak against them; but
to propose a lawful Covenant, to do those things that God commands, and is
made with the leave and commission of the supreme Prince, to justify an
unlawful Covenant, to do those things that were never done before, never
commanded by God, but forbidden both by God, and especially by the King, in the
expressest terms and most energeticall manner that might be, is such a piece
of Divinity as I never read the like, and such an argument, a dissimili, that
never scholar produced the like.

2. The examples of Queen Elizabeth and King Charles answered.
2. For the examples of Queen Elizabeth and King Charles, assisting Subjects for
their Religion sake, against their lawful Princes, two things may be said; the
one in Divinity, the other in Policy,

1. By way of Divinity.
First, for Divinity, I say, vivendum est praeceptis, non exemplis, we have the
sure word of God to teach us, what we should do, and no examples, unless they
be either commended or allowed in Gods word, ought to be any infallible
pattern for us to follow;

Secondly, for Policy, 2. By way of Policy.
which may be justified to be without iniquity, I doubt not, but those men,
which knew the secrets of State, and were privy to the causes of their
actions, are able to justify the proceedings of these Princes in their
assistance, which perhaps they did not so much simply in respect of their
Religion; as of some other State policy, which we, that are so far from the
helm, have no reason to pry unto;

Besides, you may know that neither King Charles nor Queen Elizabeth were
Subjects to the other Kings, but were every way their equal, if not more, and
independent Princes. And to bring the actions of such absolute Monarchs, the
one against the other, How wickedly they deceive the simple people.
to justify the actions of Subjects against their Sovereign, is such Logic;
as the other example was divinity; Queen Elizabeth did so against the King of
Spain; ergo, any Subject may do so against his King; or rather Queen Elizabeth
did that, which for ought we know, was most lawful to be done against the King
of Spain; ergo, the Earl of Essex may do that, which we do know to be most
unlawful against King Charles: This is the doctrine that they teach their
Proselytes, but that they give this poison in a golden cup, and hide their
falsehood under a show of truth; but I hope ere long, you shall have these
things more fully manifested unto you.

CAP. XX. Shows, how the rebellious Faction forswore themselves; what trust
is to be given to them; how we may recover our peace and prosperity; how they
have unkingd the Lords anointed; and for whom they have exchanged him; and the
conclusion of the whole.
ANd now, having committed all these things, and much more wickedness then I,
though I had the tongue of Angels, can express, I am persuaded many of them,
seeing the miraculous mercies of our God in protecting and assisting His
Majesty, far beyond their thoughts and imaginations, do begin to think on
peace and accommodation, which they presuming on the Kings lenity made sure to
themselves, whenever they pleased; and indeed, dulce nomen paci^; and the
feet of them that bring tidings of peace, are more specious then the fairest
countenance of aurora, Esaias 52.7.
then the sweet face of Helen; Psalm. 85.10. Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 2. etc.
But seeing righteousness and peace have kissed each other, and the Apostle
joyneth grace and peace always together; as two dear friends says S. Aug. so
dear, that si amicam pacis non amaveris neque te amabit pax ipsa: and these
men are filled with all unrighteousness, and have trampled the grace of God
and their King under feet, and having sworn, and forsworn themselves over and
over, as, at their baptism, that they would keep Gods commandments, whereof
this is one, to be obedient unto our Kings, at their admittance to any office
to bear faith and true alleagiance to His Majesty, Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13.
at the beginning of this last Parliament, to maintain the Kings just rights
and all the privileges of Parliament, How the Rebels swore and forswore
themselves.
together with the liberty and property of the Subjects; and yet immediately to
forget their faith, to break all these oaths, and to make shipwreck of their
conscience, to drive the Bishops out of their House, which is one of the first
and most fundamental privileges of the Parliament, they being the first of
the three Estates of this Kingdom, to take away, not some, but all the Kings
rights out of his hands, and to make him no King indeed, to take away all our
goods, our liberties, and our lives at their pleasure, and then to assure the
Devil they would be faithful unto him, Holland and Bedford showed what trust
is to be given them.
which were thus faithless unto God, to swear again, and make a solemn
Covenant with Hell, they would never repent them of their wickedness, but
continue constant in his service, till they have rooted out whom they deemed to
be Malignants; though the King, who is wise as the Angel of God, that has the
Kings heart in his hand, and turns it like the rivers of waters, Proverb.
21.1.
where he pleases, knows best what to do, as God directs him; yet for
mine own part, No trust to be given to liars and perjurers. 2 Samuel 20.20, 16.
either in peace, or war, I would never trust such faithless perjured
creatures for a straw; and seeing that to spare transcendent wickedness is to
increase wickedness, and to encourage others to the like Rebellion, upon the
like hope of pardon, if they failed of their intention, if our great Metropolis
of London partake not rather of the wise spirit of the men of Abel, then of the
obstinacy of the men of Gibe^h, and deliver not unto the King the chief of
those rebels that rose up against him, I fear that Gods wrath will not be
turned away, Judge. 20.
but his hand will be stretched out still, until he has fulfilled his
determined visitation upon this Land, and consummated all with their deplorable
destruction, How the King desired the good of the Rebels.
even as he did those obstinate men of Gibeah and Benjamin; for though the
King, beyond the clemency of a man, and the expectation of any rebel, has
most christianly labored, that they would accept of their pardon, and save
themselves and their posterity; yet their wickedness, (being so exceeding
great, beyond all that I can find in any history, rebellion it self being
like the sin of witchcraft, the rebellion of Christians far worse, and a
rebellion against a most christian pious Prince worst of all; and such a
rebellion ingendered by pride, fostered by lies, augmented by perjury,
continued by cruelty, refusing all clemency, The unspeakeable greatness of
their sins.
despising all piety, and contemning God their Savior, when they make him
(with reverence be it spoken, which is so irreverently done by them) the very
pack-horse to bear all their wickedness, being a degree beyond all degrees of
comparison,) has so provoked the wrath of God against this Nation, that I
fear his justice will not suffer their hearts, that can not repent, to accept
and embrace their own happiness, till they be purged with the floods of
repentant tears, or destroyed with the streams of Gods fearful vengeance:
which I heartily beseech Almighty God may (by the grace of Christ, working true
repentance in them for themselves, and reducing them to the right way) be
averted from them. And the best way that I conceive to avert it, to appease
Gods wrath, and to turn away his judgments from us, is, H^w we may recover
the peace and prosper ty of this land.
to return back the same way as we proceeded hitherto; to make up the breaches
of the Church, to restore the Liturgy and the service of our God to its former
purity, to repeal that Act, which is made to the prejudice of the Bishops and
Servants of God, that they may be reduced to their pristine dignity, to recall
all Ordinances that are made contrary to Law, and derogatory to the Kings
right, and to be heartily sorry that these unjust Acts and Ordinances were ever
done, and more sorry that they were not sooner undone; and then God will turn
his face toward us, he will heal the bleeding wounds of our land, and he will
power down his benefits upon us; but till we do these things, I do assure my
self, and (I believe) you shall find it, that his wrath shall not be turned
away, but his hand will be stretched out still and still, until we either do
these things, or be destroyed for not doing them.

Thus it is manifest to all the World, that as it was often spoken by our
sharp and eagle sighted Sovereign, King James his speech made true by the
Rebels.
King James of ever blessed memory, no Bishop no King: so now (I hope) the
dull-eyd owl, that lodges in the desert, sees it verifyed, by this
Parliament; for they had no sooner got out the Bishops, but presently they laid
violent hands upon the Crown, seized upon the Kings Castles, shut him out of
all his Towns, dispossessed him of his own houses, took away all his ships,
detayned all his revenues, vilified all his Declarations, nullified his
Proclamations, How the Rebels have unkingd our King.
hindered his Commmissions, imprisoned his faithful Subjects, killed his
servants, and at Edgehill and Newbury did all that ever they could, to take
away his life; and now by their last great ordinance for their counterfeit
Seal, they pronounce all honors, pardons, grants commissions and whatsoever
else His Majesty passes under his Seal, to be invalid, void, and of none
effect; and if this be not to make King Charles no King, I know not what it is
to be a King: so they have unkingd him sine strepitu; and as the Prophet says,
they have set up Kings, but not by me; they have made Princes, and I knew it
not; but whom have they made Kings? even themselves, who, in one word, Hos. ^.4.
do, and have now exercised all or most of the regal power; and their
Ordinances shall be as firm as any Statutes: and what are they, that have thus
dis-robed King Charles, and exalted themselves like the Pope, as if they were
(...), What kings they would have to rule us.
the great Antichrist, above all that are called Gods? truly none other then
king Pym, king Say, king Faction; or to say the truth most truly, and to call a
spade a spade, king perjurers, king murderers, king traitors; Which S. Peter
never bade us honor.
and I am sorry that I should join so high an office, so sacred a thing as
King to such wicked persons, as I have showed them to be; And what a royal
exchange would the Rebels of this kingdom make? just such as the Israelites
made, The Rebels brave exchange.
when they turned their glory into the similitude of a Calfe that eats hay,
and said, these be thy Gods, o Israel, Psalm. 146.20.
which brought thee out of the land of Egypt; for now, after they have changed
their lawful King for unlawful Tyrants, Judge. 9.15.
and taken Jothams bramble for the cedar of Lebanon, the Devils instruments
for Gods anointed, they may justly say, these be thy Kings o Londoners, o
Rebels, that brought thee out of a land that flowed with milk and honey, out
of those houses that were filled with all manner of store, into a land of
misery, into houses of sorrow, that are filled with wailings, lamentations, and
woes, when we see the faithful City is become an harlot, our gold dross, and
our happiness turned to continual heaviness.

But, as the Rutilians, considering what fruit they should reap by that
miserable war, wherein they were so far engaged, cried out at last,
Scilicet ut Turno contingat regia conjux; Vi^gil. Aeneid. l. 12.

Nos animae viles, inhumata, infletaque turba
Sternamur campis --
we undo our selves, our wives, and our children, to gain a wife for Turnus:
so our seduced men may say, we engage our selves to die like dogs, that these
rebels may live like kings, who themselves sit at ease while others endure all
woes, and do grow rich by making all the kingdom poor: and therefore, o
England, -- quae tanta licentia ferri? -- lugebit patria multos, when as the
Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3.13.
evil men and seducers wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived; for
God is not mocked, but whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap; for,
Gal. 6.7.
though we for our sins may justly suffer these, and many other more miseries;
we do confess it: yet the whole world may be assured, that these rebels, The
Rebels sure to be destr^yed.
the generation of vipers being but the rod of Gods fury, to correct the
offenses of his children, such seeds of wickedness as they sow, Contemptrix
superum, savaque avidissima cadis, and violenta fuit; scires e sanguine natam.
can produce none other harvest, then ruin and destruction to all these
usurping kings and traitors, who think to please God by doing good service
unto the Devil, and to go to Heaven for their good intention, after they are
carried into Hell for their horrid Rebellion.

God Almighty grant them more grace, and our King more care to beware of them,
and, when God does grant him rest with David, 2 Samuel 7.1.
on every side round about him, to restore his Bishops and Clergy to their
pristine station, that when these bramble rods are burnt, and these rebels
fallen, the King and the Bishops may still stand like Moses and Aaron to guide
and govern Gods people committed to their charge.

And thus I have showed thee, o man, some of the sacred rights of royal
Majesty, granted by God in his holy Scriptures, practiced by Kings from the
beginning of the world, yielded by all nations, that had none other guide, but
the light of nature to direct them; I have also showed thee how the people,
greedy of liberty and licenciousnesse, have like the true children of old Adam,
that could not long endure the sweet yoke of his Creator, strived and strugled
to withdraw their necks from that subjection (which their condition required,
and their frowardness necessitated to be imposed upon them) and thereby have
either graciously gained such love and favor from many pious and most clement
Princes, as for the sweetning of their well merited subjection, to grant them
many immunities and privileges, or have most rebelliously incroached upon
these rights of Kings, wresting many liberties out of the hands of government,
and forcibly retaining them to their own advantage, sometimes to the overthrow
of the royal Government (as Junius Brutus and his associates did the Kings of
Rome) sometimes to the diminution of the dimidium if not more then half his
right, (as the Ephori did to the Kings of Lacedemon,) but always to the great
prejudice of the King, and the greater mischief to the Commonwealth; because
both reason and experience has found it always true, that the regal
government, or Monarchical State, though it might sometimes happen to prove
tyrannical, is far more acceptable unto God, as being his own prime and
proper ordinance, most agreeable unto nature, and more profitable unto all men,
then either the Aristocraticall or Popular government, either has, or possibly
can be; for, as it is most true, that prastat sub malo principe esse, quam sub
nullo, it is better to live under an ill governor, then where there is no
government; so praestat sub uno tyranno vivere, quam sub mill, it is better to
be under the command of one tyrant then of a thousand, as we are now under
these Rebels: who being not faex Romuli, the worst of the Nobility, but faex
populi, the dreggs of the people, indigent Mechanics, and their Wives
captivated Citizens, together with the rabble of seduced Sectaries, have so
disloyally incroached upon the rights of our King, and so rebelliously usurped
the same, to the utter subversion both of Church and Kingdom, if God himself,
who has the hearts of all Kings in his hand, and turns the same, wheresoever
he pleases, had not most graciously strengthened his Majesty with a most
singular and heroic resolution, assisted with perfect health from the
beginning of their insurrection to this very day, to the admiration of his
enemies, and the exceeding joy and comfort of his faithful Subjects, and with
the best aid and furtherance of his chiefest Nobility, of all his learned and
religious Clergy, his grave and honest Lawyers, and the truly worthy Gentry of
his whole Kingdom, to withstand their most treacherous, impious, barbarous,
and I know not how to express the wickedness of their most horrid attempts:
so thou have before thee life and death, fire and water, good and evil.

And therefore, I hope that this will move us (which have our eyes open, to
behold the great blessings, and the many almost miraculous deliverances and
favors of God unto his Majesty, and to consider the most horrible destruction
that this war has brought upon us) to fear God and to honor our King, to
hate the Rebels and to love all loyal Subjects; to do our uttermost
endeavor to quench this devouring flame, and to that end, with hand and heart,
and with our fortunes and with the hazard of our lives (which, as our Savior
says, shall be saved if they be lost) to assist his Majesty to subdue these
Rebels, Luke 9.24.
to reduce the Kingdom to its pristine government, and the Church to her
former dignity, that so we may have, through the mercy of God, peace and
plenty, love and unity, faith and true religion, and all other happiness
remaineing with us, to the comfort of our King and the glory of our God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord; To whom with his father, and the holy spirit, be
all honor, thanks, praise, and dominion for ever and ever, Amen, Amen.

Iehovae liberatoni.
FINIS.

