By the King and Queen, A PROCLAMATION*
Mary R.

WHereas Their Majesty's have received Information that the Persons herein
after particularly Named, have Conspired together, and with diverse other
dissaffected Persons, to Disturb and Destroy Their Government, and for that
Purpose have Abetted and Adhered to Their Majesty's Enemies: For which Cause
several Warrants for High Treason have lately been Issued out against them; but
they have Withdrawn themselves from their usual Places of Abode, and are fled
from Justice* Their Majesty's have therefore thought fit (by the Advice of
Their Privy Council) to Issue this Their Royal Proclamation, and Their
Majesty's do hereby Command and Require all Their Loving Subjects to Discover,
Take and Apprehend Robert Earl of Scarsdale, Edward Henry Earl of Litchfield,
Edward Lord Griffin, Charles Earl of Newburgh, Charles Earl of Middleton,
Charles Earl of Dunmore, Lord Forbes, Eldest Son of the Earl of ^ranard, James
Griffin Esquire Sir John Fenwick, Sir Theophilus Oglethorpe, Sir Andrew Forrester,
Colonel Henry Slingsby, James Graham Esquire Orby, Second Son of Sir Thomas Orby,
Deceased; Colonel Edward Sackvile, Oliver St. George, Esquire Son of Sir Oliver
St. George; Major Thomas S^aper, Charles Adderley Esquire David Lloid Esquire George
Porter Esquire Son of Thomas Porter Esquire Deceased, and Edward Stafford Esquire wherever
they may be found; and to Carry them before the next Justice of Peace, or Chief
Magistrate, who is hereby Required to Commit them to the next Goal, there to
Remain until they be thence Delivered by due Course of Law. And Their
Majesty's do hereby Require the said Justice, or other Magistrate, immediately to
give Notice thereof to Them, or Their Privy Council. And Their Majesty's do
hereby Publish and Declare to all Persons that shall Conceal the Persons above
Named, or any of them, or be Aiding and Assisting in the Concealing of them, or
Furthering their Escape, that they shall be Proceeded against for such their
Offense with the utmost Severity according to Law.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Ninth Day of May, 1692. In the Fourth Year
of Our Reign. God save King William and Queen Mary.
Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, by the Heir of Andrew Anderson
Printer to their most Excellent Majesty's, 1692.


