His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Thursday
the 22th day of October, 1691.

monogram of 'W' (William) superimposed on 'M' (Mary) RR
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, by the Heir of Andrew
Anderson, Printer to Their Most Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1691.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Have Appointed this Meeting of the Parliament, as soon as ever the Affairs
abroad would admit of My Return into England, that you might have the more time
to Consider of the Best and most Effectual Ways and Means for the carrying on
of the War against France this next Year.

I am willing to hope, that the good Success, with which it has pleased God to
bless My Arms in Ireland this Summer, will not only be agreat Encouragement to
you to proceed the more cheerfully in this Work, but will be looked upon by you
as an Earnest of future Successes, Which your timely Assistance to Me, may, by
Gods blessing, procure to Us all. And as I do not doubt, but you will take care
to Pay the Arrears of that Army, which has been so Deserving, and so
Prosperous in the Reducement of Ireland to a peaceable Condition; So I do
assure you, there shall no Care be wanting on my Part, to keep that Kingdom as
far as it is possible, from being burdensome to England for the future.

My Lords and Gentlemen, France will as necessarily require, that We should
Maintain a very Considerable Army, ready upon all Occasions, not only to Defend
Our Selves from any Insult, but also to Annoy the Common Enemy, where it may be
most Sensible to them; And I do not see how it is possible to do this, with
less then Sixty five thousand Men.

I shall only add, That by the Vigor and Dispatch of your Counsels and
Assistance to Me in this Session of Parliament, you have now an Opportunity in
your Hands, which, if neglected, you can never reasonably hope to see again,
not only to Establish the future Quiet and Prosperity of these Kingdoms, but
the Peace and Security of all Europe.

FINIS.

