A SERMON AGAINST LUKWARMENESSE in RELIGION.

PREACHED AT SAINT MARY'S in OXFORD, the Sixth of September, 1640.

By HENRY WILKINSON, Batchelour in Divinity of Magdalen Hall.

Printed by order from the House of Commons.

LONDON. Printed by John Beale, for Humphrey Robinson, and are to be sold at
the Sign of the three Pigeons in Paul's Churchyard, 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE house of Commons, assembled in Parliament.
I Should never have presumed to prefixe the name of this Honorable House to my
Sermon, had I not been encouraged thereto, both by your protection and
approbation. For though it was my hard lot to be suspended for preaching of it,
(how justly you have seen) yet it was my happiness to have been released by
you. As for the entertainment and usage which both I and my Sermon have found
from some, I wholly pass them over in silence, let it suffice that by the
Vindiciae of this Honorable Court, I was freed from the censure imposed on me,
and by your Imprimatur, it is now become publici juris. Plinius Secundus in his
Epistle to Vespasian says, that many things seem very precious for this very
reason quia templis sunt dicata: and we know how that the Goats hair and
Badgers skins though of small value in themselves, yet did contract a reverent
esteem; being once dedicated to the Sanctuary. So this Sermon, which (that I
may use the Epigrammatists word to Domician) from you has received vitam id
est famam, and which now casts it self at your tribunal, rejoicing to bear
your Cognizance, may for this very reason, because of your name which is
praesidium and dulce decus meum, find better acceptance, and a greater
estimate, then it can challenge by any merit of its own.

The only tribute which I can return, is to beseech Almighty God that he
would be pleased to vouchsafe the gracious influence of his holy Spirit unto
you, whereby the success of your councels may be as happy, as the hopes, and
expectations be great: Let the beauty of the Lord be upon you, and establish
the Work of your hands upon us: This is the earnest prayer of

Your most humble Servant, HENRY WILKINSON.

REVEL. 3. 16. So then because thou art Lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I
will spew thee out of my Mouth.
THese words are the words of Christ to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea,
who though he direct his speech chiefly to the Ministers of that Church, (for
so some understand the word Angel to involve the whole company of Ministers)
yet it is to be understood as having relation to the people committed to their
charge, which appears from that speech so often repeated; He that has an
Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

Here in these words is a Fault detected, and a Judgment denounced, and the
reason why that judgment is threatened against that Fault: The sin is
Lukewarmenesse in Religion, the judgment is spewing out of the mouth of
Christ, and the reason, why this judgment is threatened against this Fault, it
may be drawn from the sin it self, viz. Lukewarmenesse, for many sins
carry their judgments in their foreheads: Now Gods speech here is by way of
similitude, taken from Meat, and the Stomach: it is observed, how that those
meats, which are either hot or cold are better kept in the stomach by reason of
the abounding quality of heat, and coldness; which stir the stomach to
embrace them more kindly, and more easily to digest them. But lukewarm meats
by reason of their middle temper, as they do not move sufficiently the sense
at their first entrance, so being in the stomach, they lie unconcocted, and at
length are vomitted up again: Here then we may see the greatness of the sin
by the grievousnesse of the punishment: He says, he will spew them out of his
Mouth: this intimates, he cannot abide them any longer, he nauseates them, as
the stomach does meats, which it can neither endure, nor retain; it intimates
also the loathsome filthy condition of such a people, how that he will never
have respect unto such a people, or such a person: for without all doubt God
will not look at his vomit any more: what less to be endured in the stomach,
than indigested meat? What less to be embraced, than vomit? What more to be
loathed?

Let us now see what is meant by those three words in the text, (...), and
(...): First he is said to be Frigidus, cold for matter of Religion, who is not
at all moved to see good duties neglected, the Ordinances of God despised, or
the honor of God abused: who though perhaps he be a Christian, yet he is
indifferent, for the entertaining of any Religion, as well as the true.
Secondly, he is said to be Fervidus, hot, who is (...) fervent in spirit, as
it was said of Apollos, Act. 18. 25. To which fervency of Spirit we are
exhorted in Romans 12. 11. Such a one has his heart warmed with the love of
Christ, by which he boyles (as it were like seething water) with a desire of
doing good, or with indignation to vindicate the honor of Christ: But thirdly,
he is Tepidus, lukewarm, that does partake of both extremes, and is of a
middle temper betwixt both, and as God complains of Ephraim, Hos. 7. 8. that
he was a Cake not turned, baked on one side and dough on the other, betwixt
roasted and raw, he abstaines from foul and enormous sins, and so he gains
the repute of a civil honest Man: he labors to keep a fair correspondence
on both sides, and to that purpose, he does apply himself to several Humors.

My purpose now is to show you the best and worst of Christians: the worst is
the lukewarm professor, who seems better than he is; the best is the zealous
professor, who is better than he seems; as for him that is stark cold, I
shall speak of him only by way of comparison to the lukewarm. And therefore,
First I will show reasons why this lukewarm Christian should be in the worst
condition. Secondly, I will discover that sin, by comparing it with the virtue
in the Text, included in (...), in the handling of which I shall show the
nature and condition of true zeal. Thirdly, I will take a view of diverse
Laodicaean professors, with their fallacies and impostures.

Why this Lukewarm condition is the worst.
the worst, it appears, not only from that fearful judgment expressed, by
spewing out of Gods Mouth, to which they lie exposed, which are of it; but also
from the wish, which Christ makes in the verse before my Text; I would (says
he) thou were either hot or cold (v. 15.) I would thou were either what thou
do make a show off, or else, that thou did not make a show of what thou art
not.

Tepiditas if it be not the best, yet it comes nearer the best, than that which
is quite cold.

Answ. What ever may be said of moral virtues, that they consist in the
middle, yet I am sure, that this kind of Mediocrity has no place here: For our
love to God, and zeal to the truth can never be too intense, nor do I see how
any virtue in its formal reason can be too much intended, or admit of an
excess; for a man cannot be said to be Nimis liberalis, though he may be said
to be Nimius in largitione: Then whereas it is said, that Tepor comes nearer
heat, than coldness; and so it is the better temper; I answer, it does not
follow in this business of Religion: for every sin is by so much the greater,
by how much the more grace has abounded: now where there is tepor, it is a
sign that the heat of grace has somewhat thawed the coldness of their
hearts, which is another reason, Chorazin and Bethsaida are in far worse state,
than Tire and Sidon, Mat. 11. 21, 22. Though they were most Idolatrous Cities.
So also the condemnation of Capernaum shall be far more heavy than Sodom's
or Gomorrah's, because they never had the means offered, as had the former. As
for those that are lukewarm, they have been in the Sunshine of the Gospel,
many of them have had common illumination, and tasted of the heavenly gift, and
have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word
of God, and of the powers of the World to come, if these fall away, it is
impossible to renew them again unto repentance, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. So also that
ground, which after it has drank in the Rain, yet brings forth briars and
thorns, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned, in
the same Chapter. So it is here, he which has been vouchsafed so much grace,
as to know his Masters will, and yet does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes. As for those that never came to the knowledge of the principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, nor have not arived so far as a temporary faith, they are
in a far better case than those other: For he which comes so far as to be
convinced in his understanding of the goodness and equity of true Religion,
and is persuaded of the excellency of it, and likewise has some conflicts in
his conscience concerning the profession of it, yet for all this he is in
Aequilibrio, he is in suspense, whether he should go through all
difficulties, whether he should withstand all oppositions in his profession, he
is that double-minded man, that Saint James speaks of, that is unstable in all
his ways; let not such a one expect to receive any thing at the hands of God,
Jam. 1. 7, 8. They are like him that received the seed into stony places, for
such a man hears the Word, and anon receives it, and that with joy; yet he
has not root in himself, but endures for a while: For when tribulation and
persecution come for the Word, he is offended at it; or else he is like him
that received it among thorns, in whom the cares of this World, and the
deceitfulness of riches choke the Word, Mat. 13. 20, 21. As for those men,
that go so far, as to make some outward profession of it, but yet dare not in
all points go through with it; they betray the cause and make shipwreck of
the faith: God speaks plainly by his Prophet, If God be God, then follow
him; if Baal be God, then follow him: This middle way, this halting between
two opinions is sure to be wrong; the extremes both are sure to be better, and
one is sure to be right.

have but a part, when they expect the whole. For whilst he performs some
duties and that (as he would seem) out of conscience; those that make no
conscience of any duty, count him a Puritan; and whilst he does these
services to God but feynedly, God counts him an Hypocrite: Such kind of men are
they amongst us, that are neither found Protestants, nor downright Papists:
one side dares not, the other side will not trust them; but neither loves them
truly. It is just with them, as it was with Servilius in Rome: for the
Historian speaking of P. Servilius, and Appius, says thus: Servilius medium se
gerendo, nec plebis vetuit odium, nec apud patres gratiam inijt: He neither
avoided the hatred of the Commons of Rome, nor did he gain the favor of the
Senate: But Appius carrying himself basely, but not indifferently, Patribus
mire fuit gratus, was in high favor with the Senate. Wherefore the advice of
Suetonius is very good: Quando non effugias, quin alterum habiturus sic
inimicum, aut socium jacienda tunc est alea, alterutri adhaerendu^ est: When it
cannot be avoided but that either thou shall have each of them thy friend or
thy confederate, cast thy dice and adhere to one. He speaks it of a war
between two Princes; it holds good here: Wherefore that state which does engage
me in the hatred of both sides, must needs be the worst; but by joining to
neither, I gain the hatred and envy of both: So that mere politic respects,
(which commonly work most with our moderate men,) should dissuade them from
this temper: if they did but consult their own safety, they would betake
themselves to one extreme. But it is the policy of those men not to engage
themselves far in any matters of Religion by a manifest and open Declaration
of their opinion, or publishing their intentions, because then they must either
go through stoutly, or fall shamefully: these men that thus hover betwixt the
Balances, have not courage enough, and resolution to commend them to any side,
as to gain the favor of it: But as Fabius Valens Captain to Velleius, when
he heard of the revolting of the Navy at Ravenna, being in suspense what way to
take, Tacitus says thus of him; Utrumque consilium aspernatus est, he rejected
that council which should have engaged him on one side, et quod inter
ancipitia deterrimum est, nec ausus est satis, nec providit: And which in
doubtful cases is worst of all, he neither had courage enough to go through
with his business, nor wisdom enough to provide for his own safety. It is
just so with these men: they have not courage enough to embarke themselves
heartily on one side, nor providence enough to prevent the hatred of both.

veram si incipias, neque gnaviter perficias, nihilo plus agas (...).
quam si operam des, uteum ratione insantas. He that begins and does not finish
he does little better than discover a reasonable madness. As for him that is
quite cold in his Religion, as he takes no pains in the service of God, so he
scarce looks for any reward: We shall have many lukewarm Professors, that
go very far in the profession of Religion, and are very strict in the
outward performance of holy duties, so that it may be said, of some of them,
as it was of him in the Gospel, they are not far from the Kingdom of Heaven;
and yet for want of going further, and advancing forward, and pressing toward
the mark of the high calling, they fall short of the goal: for when the
righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and
does according to all the abominations of the wicked, shall he live? in his
trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in
them shall he dye, Ezekiel. 18. 24. As enterprises especially if weighty, should
never be rashly attempted: so if they be once began, they should be prosecuted
with diligence, that so they may be dispatched with success. These lukewarm
men are like miserable Chapmen, that have a good mind to buy a bargain, but
are loath to go to the price of it: now he that bids five hundred pound for
that which is worth a thousand pound, shall go without it, as well as he that
bids nothing: In this business we should be like the Merchant in the Gospel,
that sold all that be had, to buy the Jewel of rich price. Christ is a jewel
infinitely beyond all that we can give, and therefore we cannot offer less,
then our whole selves, all our services, and performances, all our labors and
endeavors: These lukewarm Men can be content to afford Christ a cap and a
knee, but they will not give him their heart, nay they are very scrupulous in
mint and rue, and very exact in the Ceremony; and (as if Religion were a
Comedy) they will in voice, and gesture act divine duties, though in their
hears they renounce; and in their lives deny the parts they play: Give me
leave to interrogate: Why have these men gone so far, as to get a form of
godliness, but will not go one step further, as to show the power of it? Why
will they take so much pains to personate, and act a Christian, and not to be
one? Why did they taste of heavenly mysteries, and not digest them? Why do
they take on them the title of Christ's soldiers, and go into the field and
endure some skirmishes, and yet resolve not to march on, and to fight the good
fight, and finish their course? This is to take a great deal of pains to no
purpose. Ye did run well (says the Apostle) who did hinder you that you
should not obey the truth? Gal. 15. 7. Have ye suffered so many things in
vain? Gal. 3. 4. Were it nor far better to be either hot, (that is) having
enflamed affections, and ardent zeal to the truth, by which a man goes on with
courage and resolution, continues with patience and constancy, and ends with
honor; and so receives the crown of his labors, and guerdon of his patience?
or else to be cold, securely pursuing irreligious affections, without denying
ones self the pleasure of any sin, by the interruption of holy duties? But
these tepid men who make some kind of conscience of praying, but pray fainly,
they take pains to be denied: Qui timide rogat, docet negare: He that prays
fainly, begs a denial; those that do the work of God, but do it
negligently, labor for a curse; for cursed is every one that does the work of
the Lord negligently. He that serves God with a ceremony and complement only,
his service shall be recompensed with that answer, Isay 1. 12. Who has
required this at your hand, to tread my Court? The truth is, these men take
pains to aggrauate their own condemnation: For, if Religion be a good cause,
why do these men go so coldly about it? and if it be a bad, why do not they
wholly disclaim it? For better it were either to be cold, and such a one who as
he has no piety, so he makes no show of any; or else to be hot (that is)
zealous, truly such as he professes himself to be; far better it is to be
one of the former, then to counterfeit a person which he is not, and so (as
Diogenes said to Antipater, who being a vicious man, yet did use to wear a
white cloak, the ensign of innocence) virtutis stragulam pudefacere, to put
honesty to an open shame.

In the next place I will make a further discovery of the greatness of this
sin, by comparing it with its contrary virtue, which is included in (...), in
the Text, which is rendered hot, and is interpreted in the 19. verse. by zealous:
I will now show what true zeal is, by which lukewarmenesse will appear in its
proper colors.

Zeal is a mixed Affection of love an anger, What zeal is.
by which a man is stirred up to the profession of true Religion, by doing what
good he can to promote it, and opposing any ill, that may hinder it: It has
respect both to good and its contrary, and produces effects both of love and
hatred; of love to the former, and hatred to the contrary: now this hatred
against sin, if it cannot conquer it, yet it begets an inward grief, and
vexation of heart for evils cannot reform. Thus David did not only keep gods
law himself, but he shed abundance of tears because others did not keep Gods
Law, Psalm. 119. 136. Jeremiah wished his head was a fountain of tears, that
he might weep for the sins of the people, Jer. 9. 1. Thus Nehemiah was most
zealous in the reforming of the abuses of Gods worship, Chap. 13. Thus did the
zeal of Phineas appear in executing the judgment speedily, Numb. 25. I might
instance in Moses, our Savior, and in Paul, who were in a manner transported
with sacred zeal.

Jehu? Do we not see many by their too much heat have become Phaeton's, and
Incendiaries to Church and State, and set al in combustion? It is not for every
one to be carried to Heaven in a fiery Chariot with Elijah. Methinks a
moderation might serve, there may very well be an abatement of this heat, it
may remit of its degrees, and be brought to an equal temper: for do we not
see in our bodies, how overmuch heat enflames the blood, and distempers the
cucrasy of the whole?

Answ. There is no question but there is much discretion to be used in the
managing of our zeal: but discretion does not abate the heat of love, but
direct it: prudence does not remit our diligence and zeal, but guide it. It is
not the duty of prudence to cast water to quench or cool this affection: He
which is in a right course and goes slowly, is not moderate, but idle: for we
must not go, but run the ways of Gods commandments: Besides, if we look but
upon good dnties, or upon good men, we shall find something extraordinary,
which commends them to God, you shall have ever something to execude: Prayer is
said to prevail, if it be fervent, Jam. 5. 16. We must love God, but it must
be with all our heart: it is not every faith, but faith working by love, that
is accepted: there is a work of faith, a labor of love, a patience of hope, 1
These. 1. 3. Christ will have none to follow him, but him that will lay down
his life for him. The Apostle exhorting the Corinthians to Heavenly, and
spiritual graces, uses the word (...), desire spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 14. 1.
(...), covet earnestly the best gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 31. it is not a lazy vote,
but an earnest coveting of them, which obtaines those things at the hands of
God, so it is not the profession of Religion God looks at, but the earnest
zealous profession: and Christ is said to have dyed to purify to himself, a
peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. It is not the opus
operatum, that he delights in, for then he would never have said to the men of
Judah, When you spread forth your Is. 1. 15.
hands, I will hide mine eyes, and when you make many prayers, I will not
hear; likewise in that Chapter he refuses all their services; for when men
perform good duties, doing them with a kind of reluctance God refuses them. A
Boy learnes his book, but he does it rather for fear of his Master, than for
love of learning: So it is commonly with men, they do religious exercises, but
they do them as a task imposed which they are loath to omit, but they are
glad when they are done. Then look upon Christ and his Saints, you shall still
find something superlative in them; we should be always looking upon Christ
as the author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. 2. What ever was in him, was
most absolute; you shall always find his servants endeavoring to express
him as near to the life as possibly they can: Others may seek to enter and
fail, but we must strive; you shall find Jacob wrestling till day break, Genesis
32. 24. And Habakuk watching, Hab. 2. 1. to see what the Lord would say unto
him: It was not an ordinary zeal, that made David to pray, and praise the Lord
so often in a day, or Daniel to fast so frequently, or Paul to take so much
pains to beat down his body, to keep it in subjection: It was more then
ordinary love to Christ that made Peter and John speak what they had heard,
and seen concerning him, Acts 4. or that made them rejoice, that they were
counted worthy to suffer for his Name, Chap. 5. It was a strong faith that made
those, Heb. 11. 35. rather to choose to be tortured, than to accept deliverance
when it was offered, suffering far more willingly, than the Adversary could
inflict cruelly: There is no thinking of a Mediocrity, when we look upon
Christ the Archetypum, and his Saints taking out the lessen he has set them,
and imitating his Copy.



Symptoms of true zeal.
discovery of the truth of zeal, and first; and knowledge, so that his zeal
does quicken his knowledge, and his knowledge does guide his zeal, is like a
ship well ballasted, that sails with a prosperous gale: Knowledge without
zeal puffes a man up, and zeal without knowledge is like the Devil in the
possessed,, which casts him sometimes into the fire, and sometimes into the
water: such was the zeal of Paul before his conversion; such was the zeal of
the Jews of whom Saint Paul speaks, Romans 10. 2. that they had a zeal, but
not according to knowledge. Then true zeal has ever sanctity as its fruit;
for as zeal without knowledge is frantic, so without knowledge it is
hypocritical.

James and John when they would needs have fire commanded from Heaven, to
consume those that denied entertainment to our Savior; were rebuked for their
zeal, by our Savior, Luke 9. Thus many do undertake a good cause, rather out
of faction and humor, or out of hatred to a person, than love to CHRIST or
zeal to the truth.

Jehu to have out stripped Josiah in vindicating the honor of God, and yet what
Jehu did, it is thought was rather out of some respects of his own, for
establishing the Crown on his own head, or for revenge, or the like; for it
is said of Jehu, 2 Kings 10. 31. that Jehu took no heed to walk in the Law of
the Lord God of Israel with all his heart, for he departed not from the sins
of Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin: this is it that deceives many, they
think that they be truly zealous, because they do good duties frequently, and
perhaps willingly, whereas indeed they do them, but not to a right end, but
for some colaterall respects. For a command of God may concur with
selferespects of our own: for it is Gods command that we should hear the word
preached, and that we should pray; but in performance of both these duties, we
may have selfe-respects of our own: for we may come to hear the Preacher, as
they in the Gospel did come to hear our Savior, to entrap him in his speech;
and to inform against him: or we may come to hear him, as Saint Augustine did
to hear Saint Ambrose, for his eloquence: or we may come to hear him, as some
scoffers use to do, to laugh at him: And we may pray as the Pharisees did, to
get a good opinion of men, or to satisfy local statutes, or out of custom,
fashion, or to comply with men: but he does a good duty zealously, who will do
it when all selfe-respects be laid aside; when a man will hear the Word,
though he be reproached, and pray with Daniel, though he be in danger of his
life: He that can do a duty when there is nothing to encourage to the duty,
when it is left naked; nay, when it is discountenanced, discouraged, punished,
it is an evident sign, that it was the zeal to the end that carried him
through all the difficulties in the passage.

to no encounters, but it is increased by opposition, just like heat
surrounded with cold it recollects it forces, and at length breaks forth with
greater violence: Such was Nehemiahs zeal, Chap. 6. he would not fly, though
it were to save his life: What? shall such a man as I fly? Julian the Apostate
knew well enough the constitution of the Christians zeal, and therefore at
length he would not vouchsafe them the honor of an opposition: for he knew
well, that their zeal was such, as that it would triumph over all
difficulties; but he took a far more dangerous course, for he sought by
flattery, and fair promises to draw them to Paganism. Wherefore a Christian
should always say thus: Shall I that am a Christian, shall I deny my cause?
Shall I betray my faith because it finds many persecutours? Shall I alter my
judgment, because some men are of a contrary mind? Shall I change my opinion,
because Hoc Ithacus velit? Shall I remit of my diligence, and strictness of
life, for fear of a srowne, or stroke of abloquie? These be base and unworthy
respects far below a Christians: And it is certain, that they which stand in
so much awe of men, are not recti in curia with God: for zeal if it be
disengaged, it is so bold as to attempt good environed with difficulties. It
was zeal thus tempered, that lived in the hearts of those primitive
Christians, who were mirrours in their time, astonishments to their
adversaries, and examples of wisdom and fortitude to all posterity: of whom
Sulpitious Severus speaking, says thus of them, Lib. 2. Multo avidius tunc
martyria gloriosis mortibus quaerebant, quam nunc Episcopatus pravis
ambitionibus appetuntur: They did seek more greedily after Martyrdom, than
some did ambitiously after Bishoprics: It was this zeal, that caused Ignatius
Antioch so earnestly desire death, saying (...): Oh that I might enjoy those
wild beasts prepared for my death! Let all the torments of the World come upon
me, so that I may enjoy Christ. Let but our lukewarm professor compare his
condition and temper with this which I have now described, and then he may see
how far short he falls of his duty though he seems to go beyond it.

In the next place I come to take a survey of diverse sorts of Christians, some
of which will come within the compass of this judgment of my Text.

First there is the idle, lazy, and negligent professor, who takes himself to
be as good as he should be, because he is not so bad as other men, just like
the Pharisees, who says, Lord, I am not as other men; I am no extortioner, no
drunkard no adulterer, etc. And I would we could all say so truly: thus whilst
they measure themselves by the irregularities of others; they never come to
know the rectitude of virtue, or their own deformities: Their goodness much
consists in negatives, and they take themselves to be good enough, because they
be not stark naught; the best that you can say of them, is that which Tacitus
said of Galba, that he was magis extra vitia, quam cum virtutibus, they are
rather not notoriously ill, than very good: But if this negative goodness
would serve the turn, than that abjurgation in the Gospel, was unseasonable:
Why stand ye here idle? these men were doing no hurt, but it is hurt enough
that they were doing no good: Meroz was cursed, and that bitterly Judges 5. 23.
because they came not out to help the Lord against the mighty: It is not
sufficient to do the people of God no hurt, but we must do them good, we
must engage our selves in Christ's quarrel: for he that is a Neuter or
Indifferent, he is an enemy: he that is not with me, (says Christ) he is
against me. It is not this lazy professing of Christ, or the title of a
Christian, that will serve the turn, but the zealous profession is that that
he looks at: A tree if it be barren or unfruitful is cast out of the garden,
as well as bryer, and Thorns, nor will it suffice to bring forth leaves but no
fruit: for the figtree was cursed, that had leaves but no fruit: So that the
glorious show of a formal profession will not serve the turn: this is to
bring forth leaves but no fruit: Let but those men consider whether there be
the same mind in them, as there was in Christ, Philippians 2. 5. which should
be in us all. Let them but consider, whether Christ would content himself with
a negative goodness, whether he would stand still and say nothing, when he
should see good duties neglected, zealous professions reviled, and men live in
sensuality and carnal lusts. Let them also consider how that God complains,
Jer. 9. not of those that set themselves against the truth, but that there was
no man had courage for the truth. I make no question but John Baptist had kept
his head on his shoulders, if he could have been contented to have said
nothing concerning the incestuous marriage of Herod with his brother Philips
wife: I doubt not but that Mordecai might have had the favor both of Naman and
the King, if so be he would have bowed his knee. Both Daniel and Paul had
escaped imprisonment, if they could but have held their tongues: But to the
silent, when Gods glory suffers; is to be accessory. Those in Heb. 11. that
wandered up and down in Sheepskins, and goatskins, being destitute, afflicted
and tormented, I doubt not, but if they would have contented themselves with
this negative kind of goodness, they might have gone in better clothes, and
found better usage. But those were such as were ready to fulfill the whole Law
of God, not only in not doing ill, but in doing good, though they were sure to
be evil entreated: Let but such men as count their lives dear unto them, when
they see Religion lie a bleeding, holiness of life become a Byword, zealous
professors reproached, and men separated from all imitable qualities advanced,
Haeresies favored, and truth withheld in unrighteousness; let these I say,
that count their lives, liberty or goods dear unto them, consider how that the
fearful are put in the forefront of all those that have their parts in the
Lake which burns with fire and brimstone; Revel. 21. 8. Let them remember
likewise, why our Savior says, Mat. 16. 25. He that will thus say his life,
shall loose it. How far are these Men from counting it all joy, when they
fall into diverse temptations? Jam. 1. 2.



Answ. We will grant all this, now is the time of trial; for remember what our
Savior says, Mar. 8. 31. He that is ashamed of me, and my words in an evil
and adulterous generation (it is an evil and adulterous generation, that puts
a man upon his trial) of him will I be ashamed.



Answ. This was just Elijah's case: He knew of none that did worship the God of
Israel but himself: Let us never give God cause to complain, as once he did,
Ezekiel. 22. 30. I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and
stand in the gap before me, for the Land, that I should not destroy it, but I
found none: Where is the courage and constancy of Saint Basil, who for his
constant and bold defending the truth against the Arrian Haerisie, being
threatened death by Valence the Emperor, answered (...). Oh that I might dye
for the truth! But when they saw that threatening would do no good, they then
sought by flattery to corrupt him; but he told them, that he was not so to be
wrought upon, he was resolved neither for fear, nor flattery to betray either
a good cause, or a good conscience: The true trial of a Christians love and
zeal to the truth, is when ones goods, or his credit, or his life comes
incompetition, when once it comes to this, that a man must leave all and follow
Christ, it is to be feared, that many who have far less to lose, then the
rich man in the Gospel, will go away far more sad: When once it comes to
this; that if you stick to Christ in such a cause, you shall be turned out of
the Synagogue; when once it comes to turning out, it is also to be feared, that
many who did believe in Christ as those did, John 12. 42, 43. yet will not dare
to confess him, but will with them rather choose the praise of men, than of
God. You would think the lukewarm professor to be a very good Christian,
till he come to his trial; and then he discovers himself what he is: for
doubtless that man that has his heart fixed on any sin, he will dispense
with his Religion, when once it comes to cross him in it: Some men have their
Herodias, their Dalilah; others have their honorable Lords, they must be all
pleased: others have great livings, those must be kept. Pilate was very
unwilling to deliver Christ to the fury of the Jews to be crudified; and yet
for fear of Caesar says one Evangelist, and to content the people says
another, for fear of Caesar, and the satisfaction of the People (two potent
arguments) he delivers him to be crucified: Their is no discovering of a
lukewarm Professor, till he be put upon some Critical point, and then he
will do as those did, John 6. 66. they will go back and walk no more with
Christ: they can be contented to follow Christ: but when once it comes to take
up the Cross and follow him; Oh then they are offended: They will be accounted
professors of the Gospel, as it is a Gospel of peace, and as it brings glad
tidings, and promises Salvation: but when it comes to be made good, that
whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12.
When once it comes to be fulfilled in them, the World will hate them, then
Christ becomes a stumbling-blocke; then Religion becomes a scandal: These men
would serve God, but they would serve as good cheap as they could, and with as
little pains as may be: For if it come to a matter of cost, then have they a
quorsum perditio haec? to what purpose is all this cost? if of pains, O then
Durus est hic sermo, this is a hard saying, who can bear it? Let but these men
compare their zeal to Christ, with the zeal and love that men usually bestow
on their ordinary impolyments, and they shall find themselves much outstript:
We see how that men ordinarily can be content to rise early, and late to take
rest, and eat the bread of sorrow; and yet the lukewarm Christian will not
deprive himself of the least contentment and satisfaction, he will by no
means defraud his Genius in any thing: We see men fast tied to their private
interests, being in a manner captivated to their own employments, and yet it
is a kind of bondage, and abridgement of liberty to devote ones self to the
service of Christ: Let them look upon sinners in the prosecution of their
lusts; and let them blush to be outgone by them: When any sin is enshrined in
thy heart, with what facility does it command all the faculties, as its
vassals, and yet with what difficulty and reluctance has God any service?
Sinful objects do insinuate themselves with admirations and satisfactions,
attracting the desires and inclinations after them: They enter into their play,
their serious business, their sleep, their actions, they take up their
discourse, replenish their memory, inflame their desires: And behold how little
these lukewarm men are affected with spiritual objects! Thus can men be
content to nourish fevers, and burning coals in their bosom, but cannot
endure a spark of zeal: How far are such men from being transported with an
holy ecstasy, with the Spouse in the Canticles! How far from being sick with
love, from being ravished with the beauty of Christ? Lord, what showers of
tears can they bestow upon any transitory loss, but not a drop that they
spare for the loss of our Beloved! What ardent desires, what flames can they
send after their sins, and how dull, how sluggish in seekeing him whom our
soul should love! Let but these lazy negligent Christians consider this and
be ashamed.

Peter they draw the sword, when it were far fitter it were in the scabbard.
To what purpose is it, either to bestow much hatred, or much love about matters
not worthy our consideration? What is this, but to call for a sword to kill a
fly, or to make a mountain of a molehill? far better it were to reserve our
hottest zeal for greatest matters: for why should we put our whole strength to
that which may be blown away with a blast, or moved with a finger?

Peter, should be said to them; surely thou also art one of them: they can be
contented to be professors, but they would not be accounted Galilaeans: Those
words which the blind man spoke to the Pharisees, stumble many a man, Will ye
also be his Disciples? His Disciples they would be, but they would not have
much notice taken of them: But those words of the Pharisees, when once they
came to be ignominiously interrogated, they do not only stumble many, but
make them fall too. What? are ye also deceived? Do any of the Rulers or
Pharisees believe on him? When once it comes thus to be said by some kind of
men: What? are ye also deceived? are you led away by such men in such a cause?
I took you to have had more discretion: do you see any of the great Doctors
of your Mind? Such words as these do for ever stop the mouths of those (who
with Agrippa were almost persuaded) for ever opening in such a cause again.

Matthiavel, which he is resolved that the rules of Christianity shall never
cross, because he will make these stoop to them: He is fixed in this, he will
never do any thing or speak any thing which may enterfeire with his hopes or
prejudice his preferments, and that he will make the best use of his Religion
(that is to say) the best advantage. Few or none can tell, what to make of this
man, nor do I believe he knows what religion he is of himself: But
questionless all sides are deceived in him, if they take him to be wholly
theirs. I found this man in the clouds, and there I leave him.

Since there be so many deceits and impostures in our profession, it concerns
us to examine of what temper we are: We must feel our own pulse, and try how
it beats; we should see whether our zeal be such as God will accept: For we
see that many set out of Egypt, and travel well on their journey, yet never
come to the Land of Canaan: many that set their faces to Sion and Jerusalem,
yet never arrive there; many that set out of the Port with a fair gale, yet
make Shipwreck before they come to the Haven: many, who with Orpah leave Moab
with a resolution never to return again, yet Naomi alleging some worldly
reason, they do go back: few with Ruth outstand all difficulties in the
passage.

Wherefore let us set before our eyes the examples of the best, and let us be
animated and encouraged by them: and the examples of the worst of Apostates,
and let us be warned by them; and then let us set before us our own selves,
and see whether we have not done our best at first: If thou be advanced from
some low condition to some dignity, which should ever be the seat of Virtue,
then try whether thy edge to Religion be not blunted, whether thy zeal be not
abated, and whether as thou have outstrip thy equals in place, so thou do in
merit: For if the change in thee be such as it was in Galba, of whom it was
said, that he was thought to be omnium consens^ dignus temperio, nisi
imperasset, worthy of the Empire till he had it, then I must needs say that he
has purchased his preferment at too dear a rate, that paid his honesty to get
it: But if it may be said of thee, as it was of Vespasian, that he was mutatus
in melius, made better by his Empire, if thy heart be for humility lower, and
zeal hotter, then it was before, if thy advancement prove the vantage ground,
rather to exalt thy virtues then thy self; then may thou assure thy self
of the love and favor of God, as well as thou have honor of men: But if it
fall out contrary, men will be apt to think that thou had less of the
Ballast and more of the fail, and that thou madst more have, then good speed
to thy preferment.

It is a shrewd singe of a lukewarm temper, when men make some conscience of
performing holy duties, but they do them as if they were about some other
business: When they come to Gods sanctuary without solemnity and preparation
to meet the Lord, when they hear the Word without affection and reverence,
when they pray without fervency and intention; nay, when they can without any
regreat omit these duties to satisfy their lusts, when they can omit the will
of God and do their own, when men take offense at their brethren because of
their strictness and severity of life, When we see men halting betwixt Christ
and Baal, endeavoring to reconcile betwixt Rome, and the reformed Churches,
joyniug the Ephod and the Teraphin, and setting up the Arc and Dagon together;
When we hear the language of Canaan, and the language of Ashdod, both proceed
out of the same mouth, as it was in Nehemiahs time, Chap. 13. 24. When we see
silver become dross, and wine mixed with water, as God complains, Isa. 1. 22.
When we see the holy oyntement of pure myrthe, Exodus 30. to be compounded; and
the Lamps of the Tabernacle that should burn clear to be choked and
suffocated with gross vapors, and the fine flower to be mixed with branne;
and those that should handle the word (...), as of sincerity, do (...)
sophisticate the word, 2 Cor. 2. 17. When we see men yoaking of the Ox and the
Ass together, and wearing linen, and woollen garments, using the name of
Jebi, and the name of Baali, which is forbidden, Hos. 2. 17. When we see men
professing true Religion, and the service of one God, dividing themselves, some
betwixt God and Mammon; others betwixt God and their belly; a third, betwixt
God and some adored Hellen; a fourth betwixt God and his Mecaenas; a fifth,
betwixt God and the world. When we see a divorce made, where there should be an
inseparable union (that is) betwixt God and the heart, and an union made, where
there should be an eternal divorce (that is) betwixt the heart and the
creature; when we see a mixture in these things which should be most simple and
pure; when the Mint and the Cummin are more stood upon, than the greater things
of the Law, and men are more scrupulous in observing the traditions of the
Elders, then the Doctrine of Christ, being most superstitious in things not
commanded, and yet most negligent in things necessary, ambitiously seeking
after the charge of souls, and yet most negligent in looking to their charg,
crying out, Templum Domini, Templum Domini, nothing caring for the Lord of the
Temple; When we see pictures preferred before their Prototypes, and Saints days
honored above his day, that is the Lord of Saints; When we see men bowing the
knee to Christ, and yet crucifying him in their lives, professing to know God,
but in their works denying him; When a heat of professing is turned into a
heat of disputing; and matters of faith are made matters of controversy, and
discourse of Religion has almost turned out the practice of it; When we see
old Haereticks revived, and exploded errors new dressed; When we see brainsick
fancies are broached and embraced for Truth, and novelty has turned out
Antiquity; When I say such things as these do occur either in a Church or
person; when we see such Symptoms as these, it will be no hard matter to
guess at the temper and constitution.

I should in the next place come to speak of the judgment; The occasion of
these words was the report that the Scots had taken New Castle.
but I fear that this part of my Text is taken out of my hands, and is already
begun to be put in execution: I fear, I may too truly say, as Jeremy did,
that the Lord has opened his Armory, and brought forth the weapons of his
indignation, Jer. 50. 25. God grant that part of Ezekiels Prophecy, Chap. 23.
33. be not begun to be fulfilled in us: thou shall be filled with drunkenness
and sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and desolation. But for my part I had
rather be an Evangelist to bring glad tidings, then a Faecialis, to denounce
Gods judgments: Wherefore in the last place consider how grievous this sin
is, and how dreadful is its punishment, and tremble at the one, and abhor
the other. If therebe but a spark of zeal, let us blow it into a flame: If
zeal be languid, or the heat remiss, let us double and intend it: For it is
the heat of love and a heart replenished with flames, and it is zeal as strong
as death, and most intense affections; it is a soul ravished with love and an
heart transported with an holy extacy, that Christ delights in. What ever we
render unto him, it must be total and it must be superlative: if we love him,
we must love nothing else; he will have no rivals in our afflictions: if we
serve him we must serve him alone; he will have no partners in his worship. He
that offers less then all to him, who infinitely deserves more than all that we
can offer, he undervalues him. He therefore that gives to Christ the halt the
lame and the blind; a halting heart, lame affections, and blind devotion: He
that thinks his lukewarm love, his languid zeal, or his faint performance
will serve the turn, he offers the greatest contempt, and the highest
indignity to the Son of God. Wherefore let us beseech Almighty God, that he
would be pleased to put his holy Spirit into our hearts, to animate and
quicken our souls by the powerful working of the Holy Ghost, that so we may
serve him with ardent zeal, strong affections, and love enflamed, always
going on with courage and resolution, continuing with patience and constancy,
that so we may end with glory, Amen.

FINIS.

