modern book plate WG


THE SAINTS TRAVEL TO THE LAND OF CANAAN.

WHEREIN IS DISCOVERED Seventeen false Rests below the spiritual Coming of
Christ in the Saints.

Together with a brief Discovery of what the Coming of Christ in the spirit is;
who is the alone Rest and Center of Spirits.

By R. WILKINSON.

A Member of the Army.

Arise ye and depart, for this is not your Rest, because it is poluted; it
shall destroy you, with a sore destruction, Mic. 2. 10. There remains
therefore a Rest to the People of God, Heb. 4. 9. London, printed for Giles
Calvert, at the black spread-Eagle at the west end of Paul's. 1648.

To the Reader.
FRIEND and Christian Reader, It is the property of Divine truth after it is
manifest in the spirit, to inflame a soul with it, and to swallow up the
spirit in the glory of it; so as it is as impossible for a soul to enjoy Truth
and not to declare it, as for a man to carry fire in his bosom or mouth, and
not be burned. Saints are mightily constrained after they enjoy Truth, from the
fire of Love, to declare it. Now I having had sad experience of the ways of my
own heart, how I have constantly Rested below God, and so have fallen short of
his glory. This being my condition for a long time, though in every particular
seeming to me to be God, and of God, and in it my condition happy; where I was
continually running from mauntain to hill, because I knew not the true Rest.
But at last it pleased the Father of spirits to reveal himself, and by the same
to make them manifest. Whereupon I have had much wrastlings in my own spirit,
about putting the same out to public view; but at last was forced to break
through much opposition in my own heart, and to put it out in this imperfect
Form: That if it be the wisdom of God in the same, others by me may learn to
beware: yet I would not have been without the experience of the same, seeing it
is the will of God now to dissolve it. Wherefore Christian Reader, I shall
commend these ensuing particulars to thee, and thee to the wisdom of the
Spirit, whereby thou may judge of the same in love.

First, If thou can close with the substance of my discourse, and after
finding some circumstances which are either contrary to thee, or obstructive to
thy principles; yet do not fly out into bitterness of spirit, against what
thou judge truth, neither against that which thou judge no truth; but
receive the one, and let the other alone, until God reveal the same unto thee;
lest thou be found calling light darkness and darkness light, and speaking
evil of things thou know not; but in meekness judge, and Rest.

Secondly, If thou have not passed through these, or all these Rests or
Dispensations, or have not as yet attained to many things herein expressed; yet
let them have thy charitable thoughts, and do not as the most do, fly out
against them as Errors, because they are not either within their reach as to
high for them, or because they are contrary to their present principles, and so
would unbottom them; or because they are not according to what they have been
taught, or is experienced in them: But judge of them in love; and where any
thing is above thy experience, I wish thou may be silent in it, and wait to
know it, if it be of God: and if it be to low for thee, let it receive
encouragement from thee, as thou have passed to thy estate through these
Administrations. Thirdly, Christian Reader, pass by any infirmity thou see,
either in expression, form or method: look upon them to be a discourse of
experience, more to edify, then to please the fancy, by curiosity of words in
man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. 4.

Fourthly, Do not judge me to deny any thing which I do not here affirm,
because I am speaking spiritual things within: But look upon it as a
spiritual, and inward discourse; holding out the two great Mysteries, viz. The
Mystery of Christ made manifest in the Spirit within man: and the Mystery of
the creature to himself. Do not think I am going about to destroy the low
workings of God, I am not: Neither be much daunted if God hereby lets thee
behold the face of self and false Rests, so as it brings thee to a loss: But
believe it, thy greatest loss may in time become thy greatest gain: For that
which moves me to write these few lines is, that if it be the will of God,
Creatures may see the many false ways and Rests below God: That Creatures may
not live short of his glory as I have done.

Therefore I shall desire that I may not be mistaken, either in my intentions
or expressions, and therefore shall commend this farther to the Reader; First,
To take off a scruple which may lie upon many, whether I do deny these
seventeene Rests to be dispensations of God, and the way God leads men into
their spiritual Rest, which is Christ's Coming in the Spirit: That I may clear
this, and make farther way; I acknowledge, it is Gods way to lead Creatures
through these particulars: But the corruption of self, and the
deceiveablenesse thereof, will-resemble the leadings of God, and so will labor
to live, and keep the soul to Rest short of God; and man in going after the
ways of his own heart, may seem to be led by God: But in these particulars I
labor to drive on two things, The first to discover unto men, what the way of
man's heart is, when it will deceive, and what glory it will appear to the
Creature in, until God undeceive it: so that I am first to undeceive
Creatures, in their unsound confidence, concluding their estates to be so high
that they are at Rest in God, when they are covered with a covering, but not of
the Spirit. And though the heart be putting God in the forefront of its
actings, yet it is but Jehues deceit and treachery of spirit. Secondly, I
labor to un-deceive it, that though it has attained any, or all these
seventeen, and have not had an appearance of Christ spiritually in them, so
that they know when, and how, and what Christ infallibly was, that still that
soul is but yet in a changeable condition: And it may as well be Satan's
transformings in him, as any dispensation of God to him: and to let the
Creature know, that though he have passed through all this, yet he wants one
thing to be his Rest and Center; which when it comes, will discover the truth
of all these Dispensations: and if they be of God, they shall be dissolved, if
they be of self or Satan, they shall be destroyed: So that to unbottom
Creatures, That they live not upon vanity and lies, and that they may not Rest
before the true appearance of Christ in the Spirit, I have set forth these
imperfect lines. Farther, I would not have any think that I deny Scriptures,
Ordinances, Christ's coming in the flesh, Kingdom after death, or any thing
here I have inserted to be false Rests: But that I aim at, is to set all
things in its proper place, and to bring souls to see the true Center; that
they may not miss the one thing necessary, while they are acting beyond their
line; in which actings themselves may become cast-awayes: and that men may
know, That neither Scriptures, or Christ in the flesh, Oridnances, or Members
of Churches, or the Kingdom after death, or the form of Words in the Letter,
or Promises, is the Rest of Saints; But He who is the sum and substance of
all, viz. Christ in the Spirit Coming in us, to be Life, Glory, Light and
Happiness to us; and so an hope of glory in us. This is the Rest of Saints.
But Christian Reader, God now in these days is discovering the false Coverings
of creatures, and so stripping them naked; God is bringing men to see this
great Mystery of self in all its glory: He is annihilating Creatures, and
bringing them to a spiritual death: He is laying low mountains, and
un-bottoming and un-resting Creatures: Men's lofty looks He is abasing* yea, He
is bringing men who have been Stars, and something in their own, and others
eyes, even to a loss and silence, confusion and darkness; That now their
light is darkness, their wisdom folly, their life death, their enlargements
and self-actings hedged up, and they cannot find out any of their former
Paths; so that now they are made to wait in silence, as well as the Author of
this Book was forced to do; and it may be the Wisdom of God, that this
particular shall be an instrument of good, as well in this, as it has been
before i^ came in this public view, to many souls, in another manner and
method; so that I shall leave them, to receive at thy hands what Censure the
Wisdom of God pleases to cause or permit, wishing thy exceeding happiness in
the Spirit.

Thine in Truth Revealed. R. W.

Several Rests of Creatures Discovered, and laid open, below the Coming of
Christ in the Spirit, who is the alone Rest of Saints.
THE first Rest which we shall speak of is, Civility, or a common restraint of
the Creature from the committing of gross evils: looked upon by the party to
be Reformation. This condition or dispensation, speaks deceiveable Peace to
many a spirit; upon the which seeming good, which pretends to follow this
state, the creature rests and is satisfied. But the reason thereof partly
flows from these following grounds.

1. From comparing himself with others: that is looking upon the grosnesse of
men's actions abroad in the World: as namely, swearing and drunkenness, and the
height of all prophanes many spirits live in, where they are in the same
condion, Drinking up iniquity as if they were drinking up water: and in these
particulars he being restrained, and more civillized then these, he blesses
himself in his present condition, and Rests satisfied with it, as though in it
he did enjoy much of God.

2. It flows from comparing his condition present, with what it was: The more
grosser his condition was before, the higher it works him into conceit, with
the happiness of its present condition. Thus not seeing the purity of God, and
the deceitfulnes of its own spirit within; he comparing himself with himself is
deceived, and so rests satisfied.

3. It flows from the consideration of the greatness of love (he had before
being restrained) to those gross evils he is restrained from; together with
the greatness of the power, which he calls the divine power of God, which thus
restraines him: and thus he reasons, If God did not highly love me, I should
never have received such a power from him as to shake off, and not only so, but
to have and obhorre those gross sins I so decrly loved, both in my self and
others; and now the very practice of them, being as he conceives, hated by him,
ads weight to his thus reasoning out the Love of God. Another thing which ads
weight is, his often praying against such particular sins as yet remains
unsubdued; and afterward these being subdued (he looks upon acceptance with
God in this being) he looks upon it as an answer of prayer; and so in the
same, he reasons out love in this condition.

4. It flows from the seeming sorrow, which arises continually, upon the view
of his former condition; which works a seeming repentance and reformation; and
from the sorrow he has for his former condition; now having a work of
Reformation, he Rests under the notion of happiness; yet not all this time
brought home to see the grosnesse of his heart within; but merely washing the
outside, Luke 11. 39. and being a whited wall, glorious without, it is all he
looks for, or seeks after. But Satan and man's heart will suffer the creature to
act so far, and propound such ways to himself, as in the same to bring the
soul into a state of security, where it may rest under the consideration of
being happy; and not without some visible ground, apparent both to the creature
thus deceived, and the World who are not spiritual discoverers: But alas what
is it for any to be instruments to pull down, or to be restrainers from
Idolatry without, when indeed there is remaining the cause of all Idolatry of
spirit within: To be outwardly drunk no more, and yet to be drunk with the high
conceits of himself, which is neither with wine nor strong drink? its worse
for a man to have the branches broken down, before the root be pulled up: for a
man to be seemingly a Saint, and a devil within, in this estate there is no
sure Rest: but thus it is most commonly with men, they conclude they are happy,
if they have but the least appearance of it in a visible restraining of them
from gross evils: and in this they appear to themselves and others men
reformed; and so new creatures, when indeed they are still in their blood,
though they have escaped the common pollutions of the World, through a general
knowledge of Christ, which is no sure cause of Rest, until there be a
particular knowledge of him, by which the creature is cleansed from all
pollutions both of flesh and spirit, which makes the heart upright before God,
from this inward knowledge of God, which carries up the spirit of a spiritual
man into God, where he comes to be truly centred up in God: so that the heart
and Satan, being deceitful, as to suffer the creature to escape the common
pollutions of the World, so that it may but there keep the Creature.

And seeing in this estate of darkness none can truly judge of its condition
aright, until the true light come in, which makes all things manifest: Then it
behooves souls in this estate, though to themselves never so seemingly
glorious, not to Rest satisfied with, or content it self in it, as though it
did enjoy God, in the same manifested; but to wait for a higher dispensation;
and then the truth of this dispensation shall be discovered, whether it be of
God or man; if of God, it shall be dispelled by a higher; if of man or Satan,
it shall be destroyed: So that to Rest upon this estate, though attained from
God; though it should prove a dispensation of God, it would be a Rest much
below the Center of the soul which is God.

The Second false Rest.
THe second Rest most commonly of Souls, after a common restraining the
Creature from gross evils, is a work seeming to the Creature something higher:
and that is in obedience unto what the Law of God requires.

The first is, A negative Obedience from something. The second, is an
affirmative Obedience to something; and this seems to the Creature to go beyond
the other, and so become a surer foundation of Rest: when indeed it is all one
with the other, and still short of the true Rest: And here comes it to pass,
that in this dispensation man has no longer peace, then he acts suitable to the
Law; break the Law, and it breaks the neck of the Souls peace: Keep it, and it
keeps the Soul in peace.

And secondly, in this condition it comes to pass, that the Creature is wholly
cast down, and begins to question all he has, yea, the very foundation of all:
when in the least manner he does transgress. But still the soul is in a very
low and empty dispensation: but man's obedience to the Law (wherein he intends
by his obedience to it, to get happiness and life from it) flows from these
particulars following.

1. From a convincement of his misery out of God, in which he sees a want of
God; upon which he runs unto the Law, being convinced by it, to see what is
required of it. He now resolves, makes Covenants, Vows, renewes them often,
and purposes to do what the Law requires: To this end he falls aboard of
praying, reading, keeping Sabbath, and spends nights and days in laboring to
attain to what the Law requires. And

1. The Law requiring, as the principal part of it, Love. Now this is the
daily complaint of such a soul in this dispensation: Oh that I could love God,
then I could believe God loved me: then it being the principal part of the
Law, I could believe it were fulfilled, either in me or for me; then should I
enjoy peace, and Rest in my spirit; not knowing that our love to God flows
from the manifestations of Gods love in us; not considering that the Law is
fulfilled by another; not knowing that peace and Rest flows from the
enjoyments of God; and not from suitable Quallifications to the Law of God: but
now, when the soul has, as he conceives, got so much love to God, as partly
the Law of God requires; it Rests, concluding this, That love to God is an
infallible Token of Love from God: Yet not knowing that the way to judge aright
of my love to God, is from the enjoyments of Love from God: And here lies the
great deceit of many spirits. Again, The Law requires Sabbath keeping, and many
such like comands are required: The soul cries, Oh that I could keep the
Sabbath. Oh that my heart could keep close with God upon that day: and here
the soul labors to bring his heart into that frame, not to think his own
thoughts or speak his own words; whereupon he sets a praying in the morning,
and exercises himself in all duties agreeable to the day: now if he keep the
day so exact, as he thinks the Law requires, he Rests with much peace: but if
he be dead, and cold, and unprofitable in these Dispensations he employes
himself in, then he can have no peace all the week, but is mourning and
grieving he has broke the Law: and here is partly the frame of such a spirit.

And the second cause of his thus actings is, from an apprehension of wrath,
and a condemning conscience, and hell within, it would do any thing to assuage
the wrath and fire of hell in his own conscience: What would not a soul do
or attempt, to remove the same, being at present too heavy for the soul to
bear: now it would do any thing to stop the mouth of a condemning
conscience, though it will pretend what it does is for no such matter: but the
flatterings of the heart, and the gloss it puts upon the actions of the
Creature in this Dispensation.

Now the soul not discerning satisfaction given to God by another: it labors
therefore to satisfy God for the breach it has made betwixt it and God:
though I say the heart here will gloss its actions, and say to the contrary.
But now it seeing a breach, this breach must be made up before there can be
peace: Now the soul not seeing the breach made up by Christ, he labors to
make up the breach by his actual obedience to the Law of God: And therefore is
it that men teach this Principle: The way to attain Grace and favor with God
is, by such a humiliation or sorrow as they call God: And here they prove
Egyptian Taskmasters, to set the Creature upon doing, when he has no straw to
work withal, Exodus: 5. 13, 14. And this is usual with Creatures in this
Dispensation, when they see themselves in bondage, to get freedom by doing.

And so comes it to pass many break prison before they be set free by the
Spirit: As for instance, when the soul can find such a Qualification in him,
or such a frame of Spirit in him, as the Law requires, having a long time
labored for it, he judges himself to be set free by Christ, when it is but a
conceited freedom, as an effect of his obedience: and not as an effect of the
obedience of Christ revealed to him in the Spirit. And in this particular the
Creature is like a horse that is fallen into a bogmire: he labors to plunge
himself out lest he perish there, and indeed plunges himself faster in, and
brings himself into a nigher way of perishing: Thus the Creature seeing
himself fal^^ into misery and bondage, he labors and plunges to free
himself, until he plunges himself into higher bondage: and as the horse will
not give over, and lie still until he has wearied himself, no more will the
soul cease acting to free himself, until he be wearied and worn out of
breath: And then he shall be forced to wait until He who delivers Saints out
of the pit where no water is, come and deliver this Spirit out of his slavery
and bondage. And also in an estate of darkness the like, the Creature labors
for light, and being encompassed about with pits on every side, and being in
darkness, he will not stay until the Light come, or the day dawn; but at last
for want of a Guide, which is the Spirit, he falls into the pit, where he lies
more sadder then ever. John 16. 15.

These are the common, though sad effects of those who run before God leads
them: and either the Creature Rests after he has attained qualifications
suitable to the Law, or else brought up into a higher obedience to the Law: or
he remains sensibly miserable of the greater misery in it then before: which
though it be more sadder to the apprehension, yet it is the way of God in the
Creature, thus to frustrate the expectation of the Creature in its laboring to
work happiness for it self, until happiness be revealed within it.

The Third cause is, from the principle of Nature; and here the Covenant of
works is most suitable to the principles of Nature: Nature would always be
doing, though in its doing, it instead of acting to God, is acting from God:
For it is impossible that man can truly act ^o God, before there be an acting
of God in him. So that man cannot ascend up to God, before there be a
descending of God into the soul; which Descendings I call a real
manifestation of life within man, which is God; being a Fountain breaks forth
again from man unto God: And before that, though souls act never so
gloriously, yet they are but Adams running away from God, and from the
principles of Nature, clothing themselves, Genesis 3. 8. Which in time, though man
Rest upon it, proves self Righteousness, or a Righteousness according to the
Law, and not the Righteo usnesse of God by faith; and so his Rest and peace
shall be taken from him, and destroyed in him.

4. The cause from which his thus acting flows, is from self-love; and this
will go beyond any thing formerly mentioned. Self-love in the gaining of its
own ends, will think nothing too difficult to attempt, nothing too dear to
part withal, unless the things we are now speaking of, which is man's self.
When a man is swallowed up with self, instead of being swallowed up with God:
whatsoever the Creature is put upon, when swallowed up with God: this Creature
thus led forth out of self-love, will resemble the same, if not go beyond it:
nothing that stands in the way of the Creature thus possessed, is too dear to
it, or too hard to attempt it. Put Jehu upon pulling down Idols, it made him
very zealous, it made the Scribes and Pharisees give alms, and spend
themselves, and suffer theirs to be spent, to attain their ends: It will put a
man upon fasting much, praying often; yea, if it be to hazard life or liberty,
it is free, if it may but accomplish its own ends: which is most commonly from
a convicted happiness or glory, either inward from God, or outward from man:
Self sees a promise of life and happiness handed out in the Law to those that
keep it: as namely, Do this and live: it never considers what it could do,
and now can do: but now it labors to try what may be done that an undone
soul may be made happy: Oh the consideration of happiness does so affect a
soul convinced of the want of it; that as the love of God enjoyed, does draw
out that soul that enjoyes it too much for God: so this soul possessed with
the love of self, does draw out the Creature; not out of himself, yet to do
or act any thing, that may procure happiness to it self: Also self-love in
this particular, would not freely have all from God, nor would it be beholding
to God for all: then it should have nothing to glory in but God: Witness those
cryings out. Must the Creature do nothing; must he not take pains with his
own heart to prepare it for God? Must not the Creature seek, and knock, and
pray, and be prepared for Christ? Not considering it must be a mere passive;
Go through the sufferings of Christ, or rather to have fellowship with him in
his sufferings: that is, to be subject to the will of God, and to suffer God to
dispose, order, or burn up in the Creatures spirits as he pleases; only the
soul to be a patient in the workings out of life, until he can act from the
enjoyments of it: The Lords way is to destroy, or burn up all the Creatures
preparations for God, and all that stuff the Creature has within him, or
attained by him; and strips the Creature naked of all, either in him or done by
him: and brings him as an empty soul to him who is the fountain of life; and
to be revealed in him. Now to take away an objection, which is, that the
Creature must labor, though not for life, yet for a manifestation of life. To
this I answer; That the life whereby man acts to God, is by the power of life
revealed from God; for before it be rerevealed, man is dead; it is the
revealing of life into man, which gives life to man: So that man can neither
truly act for life, or the manifestation of it, before man be made alive by it,
which is not before the manifestation of Christ, which is life to the soul.
Secondly, That as mercy and love was prepared freely of God in Christ without
the Creature; so it is to be revealed freely by Christ in the Creature: and
after it be revealed in man: It is that grace which is in man, acts out from
man unto God. That occasioned these words from Paul, Yet not I, but the grace
of God which was with me, 1. Cor. 15. 10. Then let these following particulars
be considered of.

1. That man who does obey God, though his obedience be never so seemingly
glorious; yet if he Rest upon, and be satisfied with it, he Rests below the
true Rest, which is God. For though the Creature yields obedience to the Law,
or any other Truth, as the Truth requires: yet he is not to Rest upon it,
though it be of, and from the Lord; it being flowne from that which is to be
the souls Rest.

2. That soul who being convinced of the want of, and its misery without God;
and from this labors to get God, by acting to God, though his action be never
so glorious, it being to get his person acceptable, from the glory of his
action, and Rests here conceiving the acceptance of his person from the glory
of his action, that man's Rest and Conception is false.

This was the reason why Abels Sacrifice was acceptable, and Cains was not,
because Abels person was acceptable, and Cains was not; for Cains action was as
seemingly glorious as Abels was. But the acceptance of an action must flow
from the acceptance of a person. It is not, nor cannot be, that any man's
person can be accepted with God, from the glory of any of the Creatures actings
to God. Then it should be of works, and man has something to boast of.
Neither is my obedience to God a true evidence of my enjoyment of God, and
acceptance with God. For the young man in the Gospel, who was nigh to the
Kingdom of God, did yield obedience to the commands of God; and yet he wanted
that one thing necessary, which was to be the Rest of his soul.

3. That the Resting upon any obedience to God performed in the exactest manner
by the Creature, will bring nothing but death and sorrow to the creature in due
time: When man kindles a fire, and Warmes himself in the sparks thereof: God
upbraids the creature thus by telling him, his end should be to lie down in
sorrow. That is, When God comes to appear upon any soul in love, he burns up
all these false Rests the creature has been making for it self. That is,
What the creature draws comfort from to himself, if it be from the glory of
any action: that is, for a man to kind^e a fire, and warm himself in the
sparks or fire he himself has kindled. Isai. 50. 10. 11.

Now God at last brings the creature to see the vanity of all his own actions;
and upon this there is nothing but death to what he has been living upon, and
sorrow annexed for his thus living upon it, and Resting in it.

Therefore confider; No acting forth of the creature to God, before the
creature receive a divine power from God, is acceptable with God; for God
accepts of no obedience, but either that which he did by Christ for us, or by
Christ in us.

Now a man may do great things by a power of Nature, which I call a power of
God in its dispensation: Which power, or from which power, a man acts in a way
to God: that is, seemingly to God and for God; but in conclusion proves not so;
now God approving of no action by us, unless it be from the fountain of
himself in us.

And seeing our actings to God are changable, and may seem to perish though
never so rare: It is no sure Rest for any soul: only he who is unchangable in
us, must be revealed to us, before any true Rest can be received by us.

Now the condition of a Soul in these low dispensations is like unto a man
affrighted by an enemy, and being so he labors to preserve himself from death
by him; he runs to secure himself; at last he finds to his apprehension a
place of Rest and safety, he being almost weary; afterward it appears not so
to be, but his adversary pursues him, so that he is not safe; and so from place
to place he runs to get shelter, he finding none, he is forced to yield himself
up to the mercy of his adversary, So it is with a Soul seeing God to be his
enemy, he flies as Adam did, thinking to secure himself, and cover himself;
but God pursues the Soul and finds him out, where the Soul not finding any
safe Rest, yields himself freely with trembling and fear up unto God, to be at
the mercy of God.

God (a^ I may say) pursues a Soul; and when it would be Resting upon any
thing below himself, he drives it from its station, and so man runs from Rest
to Rest, and every Rest he makes is more glorious then another: But God speaks
unto the Soul, as he did to the Apostles, Arise, let us go hence, John 14. 31.
as if he should say, You would be Resting in this condition, but it is not a
condition of Rest and safety, I will bring you higher, and that shall be when I
will discover my self in the Spirit, that you shall not Rest upon my flesh as I
am in a shape; but upon me as I will be transfigured before you, or rather in
you in the Spirit: So as now Arise, and go up, that is, higher. So also is God
most commonly saying to such Souls, Arise, this is not your Rest, Mic 2. 10.
if thou stay here it shall destroy thee with an utter destruction. Therefore to
conclude, This man runs from mountain to hill, and forgets his Resting place,
until God hedgeth up his ways, and makes the soul at length Rest in himself.

The third false Rest.
THe next Rest of a Soul below the true Rest is, The excellency of Gift, which
do so mightily adorn the Creature, as thereby the Creature is led into high
conceits of the glory and excellency of its condition. The first Part or Gift
we shall speak of is Knowledge.

Multiplicity of knowledge, is such a rare Part, as makes a man seem much like
a Saint: not carnal in the matters of the world, but spiritual, conceived in
the matters of God: and this does mightily puff up the Creature. And indeed
much knowledge attained in the notion, unless it be experimental, there is an
impossibility to keep the soul from Resting in it, or being puffed up with it, And

First of all I shall discover, how most commonly the Soul attains this. The
first is, from a quick apprehension in the understanding of things, which is a
common gift in nature; which is a ready way to attain much knowledge, together
with an enlaged capacity, that he can receive and keep what he apprehends, so
as he comes to gather in knowledge apace into the notion; so as the Soul
glories the most in the improvement of that gift or part in which he does the
most excel. This Creature he is very fluent in discoursing of the best things,
and will be always delighting the most, in arguing of those things he has the
most knowledge in: and he being very gallant in discourse, gathers knowledge in
every thing he undertakes; and here he glories to overcome any with argument.
Or,

Secondly, To be adored, or had in high estimation for this his knowledge. And
this applanding of him, makes his estimation of the glory of ^his own condition
to be heightened; and here he looks upon himself to be a Saint in glory; he
having these parts of knowledge, makes him as often argue against truth as for
it, that others may see the wit and knowledge he has; and by strength of wit
be able to speak of higher things, then those who sweetly enjoy God: Yea, for
parts of knowledge goes beyond, and by all is preferred before them. Now having
thus attained knowledge in the head, though he do not experience the same, he
Rests satisfied in his condition.

Secondly, Knowledge which man Rests upon, is a knowledge got by pains and
diligence of things without him. That which is got by much pains, the Creatures
is more apt to Rest upon: so as for the notionary knowledge of the Scripture he
exceeds. He is mightily fluent in the letter, and is able to speak much from
the same; and this does furnish him so, as now he makes it his glory to speak
of, and know much of the letter, though it is without him, and not experienced
in him. But alas, what is it for any man to know much in this nature, and there
Rest. This is but the shell of Truth; the Substance is, Truth in us,
experienced by us.

To read Truth in the letter without me and to know it there, is a
dispensation; but to know it by the Spirit within me, must be a higher
dispensation, and the Dispensation of Rest. For what is it for any man to get
all the Scriptures into memory to furnish him with knowledge, able to dispute
or preach; yet unless he know the same within himself, it is but a poor Rest:
yet thus it is, men by abundance of pains and diligence in the Scriptures and
in books, do get abundance of knowledge, and after it is gotten, they Rest
upon the same; as though it were to enjoy the manifestation of God, to enjoy
much knowledge: here they abuse a dispensation of God, and transform it into
another use then ever God ordained it for: So that though a man have never so
much knowledge, yet though his knowledge be according to, or attained in the
Scriptures, if he Rest there, before he has got it in the heart by experience;
as he has got it in the head for discourse, his Rest is much below the
substance of Truth. For no man is to Rest in any thing without him so known,
until it be within him; and then he Rests not in God because declared in
Scripture; but upon God because revealed and experienced in him, and so is
fully known by him.

The third way whereby this Knowledge comes to be attained is, from the
declarings of the experiences of others; he by the same stores himself with
points of experience, as well as points of Judgment: and here he can speak all
manner of Languages, as well as those that enjoy truth in them; so that he can
speak of points of judgment with those that are for that discourse; and points
of experience, with those that are for that; having a form of both in his
understanding, and from that is able to make out himself, as those who sweetly
in the power of Truth enjoy God: But for this latter, he has but stolen the
word from his Neighbor; he has got his experience to discourse of. And this
is the great deceit of men's spirits in our days: for when they hear of a
precious high Truth of God which they never heard of before, they either oppose
it, or else they get the form of it into their notion or understanding, and the
next upportunity they have, they declare it ^^ their own: whereas though they
were convinced of the truth of it, yet they were to wait for the enjoyment of
the power of it in themselves; and that it might be sealed by the Spirit in
them (1 Cor. 4. 19, 20.) But many conceive, if they can but remember a truth,
though they have it not in the power of it in themselves, that the very
believing of it and assenting to it, is the experience of it: And these are
those who have a form of God, or the truth in their understandings, and wan^
the power of that truth in their Spirits. Amd so many a soul Rests in this very
part of knowledge. Now the Reasons of a souls resting here, are partly these
following.

First, From a Comparison made in his own spirit with others that are in lower
dispensations, or weaker in knowledge or discourse then himself: but especially
Professors, who live in high thoughts of their estates: and he thus comparing
his condition with theirs, and seeing it so far excel theirs; makes his
conclusion, If their condition be happy, then mine is much more, in respect of
what I have enjoyed more then they: I am not any way inferior to any almost:
surely I am in a happy estate if any.

The second Reason follows, from the high estimation others have of him;
especially men of the rarest abilities and solidest judgments, and this adds
fuel to his fire of conceit, and makes his Rest the more glorious. And this is
the reason that if at any time the approbation of those -- cease to be what it
was -- that it occasions much distraction and want of peace within himself:
for when part of a man's cause of Rest and peace is taken away, no marvel then
if part of his Rest and peace go along with it. Whereas he that Rests in God,
is freed in the Spirit, and is as Mount Zion which can not be moved: Psalm 125.
2. Let man's apprehensions cease, or increase, he is not lifted up by the one,
or cast down by the other; but he has a continual testimony within himself,
which abides for ever.

The third Cause or Reason of his Resting upon the gifts of knowledge, is from
want of a right information of judgment, in the difference betwixt a form of
truth in the understanding, and the power of truth in the heart, not opposite
to the other: for though man's knowing God in general or from heresay, be a
dispensation of God, and good in its place, yet it is not to be Rested upon, as
though the soul had in this a real enjoyment of God. Now a man may know a
thing in general, and may believe in it, assent to it and obey it, and make a
large profession of it: yet if he enjoy not God in that very thing, it is but a
dispensation below the power of Truth. So that we see here, that men may get
things into the head, before they be in the life and power of them in the
heart, which if Rested upon, brings with it a dangerous consequence. As

1. It is the way to a high security, and such a security, being but carnal,
as is not without ground. It is the way in the second place, to a self-glorying
and creature exalting, and to the displacing of God.

Thirdly, It is the way to fall into all manner of loosnesse, under pretense of
freedom and knowledge of truth; and that it is no sin, though it do this or
that: For no marvel when a man has no more then a form of God in the head, and
wants the power of God in the heart; then that soul falls into a carnal
loosnesse, whereby truth is evil spoken of; and the party thus doing justifying
his action by his hardness of spirit, which by it he is brought into. And this
is the reason why many when they have received high notions and do hold them
forth, do walk very unlike Truth, is because they have it but in the head, and
want the power of it in the heart. They have it from others, or some other way,
and not from God; and so they cannot stand in the day of temptation, and so
return like a Sow to the wallowing in the mire. 2 Pet. 2. 22.

Again a Soul is further established in this condition, from the daily growth
and increase in knowledge; he daily growing in knowledge, is daily more
established on his own bottomes, though not so thought by himself. This daily
increase of knowledge in himself, the benefit that sometimes is redounded to
others, by that does increase the flame, and adds fuel to the fire of this
false Rest.

The second excellent Part or Gift upon which men Rest is, Prayer: and this is
made an Idol of by such parties who Rest upon it. But first of all when a man
sets his face toward God, it would gladly pray, but wanting this proper Gift,
it uses forms; but after it sees the vanity of that dispensation and the
emptines of it, it now would gladly pray in the Spirit; and continually is
complaining for want of matter to express; In conclusion it attaines matter to
express, and in the attaining matter does much abuse the same: but the means
most commonly wherein it does attain it is, first, by often frequenting
private and public meetings where it steals away the expressions of others;
and when it sees one man enlarged, it is made to admire that part in them and
cry out, O if I could pray as such a one can, then I should be at Rest, and
enjoy much peace. It presses forwards and by pains and diligence, it attains
that enlargement, as that now it excels others, and is now admired by them, who
before was admired by it; so as now the poor Creature can speak three or four
hours in prayers; and can hardly comprehend himself within the space of one
hour; and here lies the deceit of the heart, that here the Soul makes his
Rest; and this to be a sure evidence of his interest in God. But alas, how
blind and unsound this present evidence is, let Scripture and experience
testify: for alas, a hypocrite, or one who at all knows not God, may excel in
the seeming glory of this Part; yea, excel those that live in the highest
enjoyments of God: and here many souls make this dispensation a mere Idol,
they draw all their peace and comfort from it: for if in this part the Creature
excel, he will be the oftener using of it, living most upon it: draw most
comfort from it, and glory the most in it: for if ever the Creature be
straightened in this particular, he begins to droop and be sad, and full of
trouble: but if either in public or private he be enlarged much again, he is
mightily refreshed and lifted up.

And secondly, If at any time he cannot have those common opportunities or set
times, then al his peace is gone; and it is because his peace is grounded upon
his often praying, and his great enlargement in so doing, and indeed the souls
blindness lies here: for the Creature takes his enlargement to be a
manifestation, or evidence of the presence of God. Now a man may pray long and
often, and excel all in external form, and yet have none of the presence of
God manifested at all in the same: neither is a straightning of the Creature in
expression, to be any cause of sorrow or trouble, if God be manifest: neither
is it an evidence of his not being manifested within. So here partly lies the
ground of a souls thus Resting, or taking satisfaction or peace to his spirit,
in this dispensation.

Now I would not be mistaken, that I am speaking against this form or
dispensation; when a man is not commanded by the form, but he is commanded from
a power within, so as he commands it, and uses the same according to the end
for which it was appointed. For I look upon the same as to be a dispensation
of God: But I look upon the Resting in it, or having peace by it, to be a
corruption of a man's own heart, and a deceit thereof.

First. Therefore I commend these things following to be considered of all.

That though a man should be never so glorious, or admirable in this particular
dispensation, so as in the same he may be able to speak a whole day together,
yet his heart in this may deceive him, and if it do not, yet it is no safe
Rest, or cause of peace, or satisfaction; or there is no safety in the
excellents part, that can be received, but they take their wings and flee away;
and here is not that in them, which men conceive.

Secondly, Man may have these parts in the glory of them, and yet have no
fellowship or commmnion with God in them: and so they may be rather snares them
sure Rests: Nay, if it were so, as many souls does enjoy God in them, or rather
communion with God in the same, yet it is neither the duty, or enlargement
which is or ought to be the Rest: but God made manifest in the same.

The third Part or Gift is, Humility. And this sometimes comes some of these
ways following.

1. Either from an instinct or property in nature. O^

2. From a self-reasoning. Or

3. From resembling the truth of Humility, that is in another. Or

4. From, or as an effect of the enjoyment of God.

First, It is in many, who in the least have no divine workings of God in them,
any way made manifest: yet they are excellent in this very particular; which
makes them very lovely in the eyes of all men so that a little of God will be
seen in such a Creature but merely without the manifestation of grace: such
Soul does appear to be gracious; such a spirit as this ^ can hardly be given
to passion; but full of meekness and love, and moderation: and yet this
parties gifts a^ common or natural to him. He cannot be almo^ otherwise, this
disposition is so natural. But others b^ nature are of a turbulent spirit and
full of pride an^ choler, which makes him to become odious to all and
hererupon when he becomes odious to himself he falls in the second place to
reason thus. O how lovely do others appear to me! how humble and low are they!
What a proud spirit am I of! How am hated and become almost odious to all! I
will go se if I can help this carriage of mine. Now this Soul one looks to
take away the effects, though the cause abid^ and here he labors to frame his
speeches, and his jesture and actions, and so by much pains gets a form of
humility; and now carries himself very sweetly toward all, so that now there
is a strong change wrought in this person, so that he is admired by all, and
chiefly by himself; who was of such a high carriage, and of a proud and
turbulent spirit, and now he is of a calm and quiet spirit; this appears to be
a great change, and so judging of it, he is highly exalted in his opinion of
himself, and conceives he has enjoyed abundance of grace from God, that has
thus humbled him: when indeed he has it but in the form of it, not in the
power: having the branches and effects taken away; for the present in the
outward expression of it, but transformed into another shape: and that's more
inward, making of him more spiritually proud, and so have high conceits of the
happiness of his condition, and so Rests.

Secondly, It reasons thus, God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble, 1 Pet. 5. 5. Now in his highness of carriage, or turbulency of spirit,
he looks upon his condition as to be resisted of God; whereupon he prays and
uses what means he can to restrain himself; says he, It may be I may be I
may come to get a better temper of spirit, whereby I may not become both odious
to God and man: Now I say at last, he attaines a form or shape of what he does
desire: and Rests satisfied in the receiving of it: Though I say, he is
outwardly but transformed into another likeness: the cause yet remaining,
which of the two consider the effects that follow, as namely, Security, or
lukewarmnes; or fullness and self conceitednesse; and so false Restings are of
as dangerous a consequence as the other.

Thirdly, Humility is by resembling of such property of words and actions in an
other, as is most lovely in the eyes of himself and others: and here lies a
sad d^ceit, when men do only resemble the words or carriages of another, which
it may be in that party flows from a principle or power of God in him; and by
a resembling of him, and getting into his form, think their condition is the
happier, and so glory in it more then before: so that though his Humility flow
from a divine work in him; yet the others is but shaped out of what is
expressed, by or from him: and here lies much danger, especially if man Rest in
the same.

The fourth way whereby humility comes most commonly to be attained. And the
way indeed, is from the enjoyment of God, thereby man comes not only to have
the effects or branches cut off, but the cause or root of the same taken away.
So as now man has it not in the form or shape, but in power and substance and
now man is truly what he seems to be; but not before: whereby as the Creature
is humbled, so God is exalted: and this is the Creatures joy, though not hi^
Rest wholly: This humility now is the effect of Go^ enjoyed, whereby man is
made to partake of Gods nature; and this nature breaks out into these
particula^ effects: but now this very effect of humility, though i^ be from the
enjoyment of God, yet it is not the Re^^ of a Saint; but the cause, which is
God.

The next part is the gift of Utterance, which is the many have that knows not
God; and many have no^ which sweetly enjoy him. So that man who is free^
carried forth to utter or make known any thing h^ conceives is truth; yet there
is neither cause of trusting to it, or Resting in it; neither is there cause
why a Soul should the more glory in the enjoyment of it, ^ be troubled in the
want of it.

The last part or Gift we shall speak of is, Memory This part of Memory, is
that which does most sweet^ adorn man in the visible making of it forth; and ^
makes man much adored for it. It is,

1. Away to grow very profitable in respect of him that has it; and
beneficial to them for whom he imployes it: as namely, In that dispensation of
hearing, after which the party which enjoyes this Part, is able to repeat or
declare almost verbatim what he has heard; this makes him very profitable in
what he hears, in respect of gathering knowledge: and beneficial to others
from the improvement of the same. This is the reason why two Ministers so
professing of themselves, studying their matter, the one brings it in a piece
of paper, and the other in the same method or form, though in his
understanding; because the one excels the other in this Part of Memory; and
this makes the one more esteemed then the other, and the one to appear more
weak then the other. But alas, though all these were in one man, in a higher
strain then I have declared; yet they all were but a poor Rest, or cause of joy
or contentment to any heart: and truly when God appears so as to manifest
himself, the Soul shall see the weakness and folly of his spirit, to be
satisfied in the whole, not to be any cause of Rest, though they were
dispensations of God, and were freely given by God: For all these may be in a
very hipocrite, or in a mere natural man.

First of all to conclude this Rest.

1. It is an abuse of a Gift, and an affront put upon the Giver, to make it
either cause of Rest, or an evidence of a true enjoyment of God.

2. That Soul most commonly, who is not led in the Spirit, either to behold God
or enjoy him, to be the Rests of spirits, is most usual -- -- and it can
hardly be prevented, to Rest upon such Rests as we have declared: but consider
that must be ^he Rest of any who fees or enjoyes not one manifested to him to
be above it. Man must have some Rest, either true or false. But that must be
the safe Rest, the which no hipocrite does attain^, nor can enjoy, which is God
manifested in the Spirit, further why should any man place his Rest upon any
thing, which will come to nothing, or is given to change? Or why should we make
that the ground of our happiness, which is but a tallent given to be improved;
which may be taken away at the Owners pleasure; being given only to be
improved, and then man's Rest and peace cease: and in this particular does the
folly of man's heart appear, in abusing the end of every dispensation, as of
this of Parts: As,

First, The abuse of Parts lies in the boasting and glorying in the gift, and
not in him who gives it: And also in this, to make them his Rest.

2. For a man so to glory in them, as to make a gain of them, and prove them
for to get honor and preferment, and glory in the world. This I fear was
partly the end of Simon Magus, in defiring the gifts of God. Alas all gifts are
empty without God be manifested in them; and poor contentment do they afford,
to him that Rests in them. And here men are setting them in Gods place, and
laboring to dispossess God, who is or ought to be the satisfaction of the
heart: And this is another abuse of Parts. A world of deceit lies in man's heart
about gif^s or parts if abused.

First, They will not make forth themselves, unless it be where they be
honored, or else they labor for the same by the improvement of them, being
the most free where it is the most applauded; and the most straitened and weary
of that place where it is not adored and exalted, and set up above the proper
station of the creature; being much cheered when exalted, and much cast down
when rejected, or at least not so applauded as he requires or expects here is
man much abusing Parts and setting them in Gods stead: in the which man shall
be brought to a loss, when God does manifest himself in that heart.

The fourth false Rest.
THe next Rest in order to this, is Zeal for the truth. Zeal in the matters of
God is that which the most gothrough, before the manifestations of God; yet
though it be good in its place, and a dispensation to be owned, yet it is but a
deceitful Rest. We know the cry of him in the Scripture, who was Resting and
glorying in his Zeal for God; when he cried, come see my Zeal for the Lord of
hosts. So we know many men's zeal goes before their knowledge of God in the
spirit. We hear of a zealous Saul who was mad of zeal in persecuting the Church
Act. 22. 3. and out of conceit he did God good service, Rested satisfied.

We know the Scribes and Pharisees who were the most Zealous for Sabbaths, and
prayer, and other points of Worship; yet they make it their Rest: but come to
our days, and see if we swarm not of the same, only seeming professors of
God, who are very Zealous for the same things; and from their very Zeal, are
made to Rest with high thoughts of their condition. But how far this zeal
(which is most commonly led with more affection then Judgment) will bring man
into a form of Truth.

First, It will lead man into a whole conformity to what it does conceive to
be truth; that it shall, according to what it has, serve God in all good
conscience; Acts 23. 1. and according to the Law, to be unblamable and
untaxable: Then his conversation shall be very strict, in the observation of
what the Law requires, and he shall act the same with much vehemence of
spirit, taking all opportunities for the doing of the same.

Secondly, It will carry the soul on to suffer cheerfully what he may meet
withal in this very particular.

Thirdly, he may by Zeal afflict his body sore, 1 Co. 13. 3. with fasting, and
mourning, under pretense, the one to honor and obey God; the other for
dishonor brought to God: So as he may be almost spent in body, and spirit, and
estate, in prosecuting the things of God according to his light. Farther, he
may out of Zeal come to Gospel precepts, and may be Zealous for that light in
external forms which is there required to be obeyed; so as he may gather
Churches, and may suffer much, in the conforming to, and practicing with so
much vehemence, the Ordinances commonly practiced by the Churches in the
Apostles and our days: so as his Zeal may lead him out to teaching and helping
forward that work, studying night and day to find out matter to furnish
himself for edification: so as for pains in the Churches, and for Zeal to
observe the severity of those forms, and any thing required to be practiced
in the said Churches; so as now it will have commun^on in Ordinances, with none
but those of his own stamp and judgment; being mightily carried forth to judge
and pity those, who are opposers of that light: Now this soul through Zeal may
go thus far, yea, to act up to the highest things the Scriptures do require
in matters of visible practice, and yet be not at all taught in the Spirit,
neither got into the life and power of what he does profess; but merely
zealous for shadows and wants the power; so as he is commanded by the form,
and not the form by the power dwelling within him. Now grant farther, That
such a soul did act in truth according to this dispensation, yet
notwithstanding in this particular, there were no cause of Rest: for nothing
visibly seen, flowing from the Creature, ought to be its Rest; but some
invisible flowings into the Creature, which is being and substance from which
and unto which, a Soul through Zeal for God acts: Also a Creature thus
zealous, Rests not at home; but reformes abroad also, beginning with his own
family, and so goes abroad to others, and labors for a reformation, and
practices the same with much Zeal; so as he can not endure the visible
appearance of any sin in himself or others. He may help with much Zeal the
purging of Cities and Nations, of drunkenness or swearing, or any open
profaneness: he may be for punishing of evil doers in this particular with much
severity, and seeming to be much troubled at the neglect of it; he may rejoice
much in this practice, and may help forward this work in a Nation very much,
and yet this no Rest at all: also he may be zealous, yea, mad of Zeal for the
worship of his God in reference unto others, not only taking all opportunities
to inform them in the same; but using all Coercive powers for confirming them
thereunto; so as he may be an instrument to bring families and most part of
Cities into this outward conformity to the matters of worship; and here he
looks upon an action done of great moment and weight, and partly makes this an
evidence of his true enjoyment of God, by Reason of his zeal for God, and the
effect thereby produced, which is the good of many. Now the cause of a Souls
thus Resting, partly flows from want of the information in judgment, of the
great deceit of the heart, in putting man by zeal upon such public actions,
and then to cause it to Rest: and further, it conceiving it is Zeal for God,
and from a principle of God; not being acquainted with a Pharisaicall Zeal, to
be se^n of men, or to get a name amongst men, or that Zeal which men have but
not according to knowledge; or the Zeal Paul had before conversion, which
excels both: for vehemence and downrightnesse, is the Zeal of many a Professor,
who are at Rest in our days.

Now a poor Creature because he is made to suffer freely, and to hazard life
and liberty in the prosecution of his Zeal, he is much puffed up under these
considerations.

1. That now this is a suffering with and for Christ, and therefore he shall
reign with him, and enjoy much from him.

2. That this is a parting with all for Christ, and a great point of
self-denial, and so an evidence of a disciple of Christ; when indeed the Soul
is in himself, and has not at all attained that estate to forsake himself.
Therefore let every heart, though never so Zealous for God, take notice, that
his heart may deceive him in his Zeal and his affection may blind his
judgment, and so it proves blind zeal. Or

Secondly, Consider, that though it be such Zeal as is good and to be approved
of in it is dispensation, yet not at all to be Rested upon, nor to be an
evidence of any true enjoyment of God, though he pretend God in the forefront
as Jehu did.

The fifth false Rest.
THe next Rest of a Soul, though I might not have spoken of it, because I have
partly given it forth; yet that things may be the more opened, its the
Creatures Righteousness or sanctification, and outward holiness, wherein both
in carriage and words, he does most sweetly in probability, savor of high
enjoyments of God. This is to be a testimony of the same to others, though not
to himself; yet notwithstanding his Rest is to him a high evidence of the true
and real possessings of God, when alas, it is continually a vanishing Rest and
evidence; and when the Creature stands in need of it, it is taking its wings
and flying away, and proves a miserable comforter in the saddest straits of a
Soul.

But first, Let us consider, that true holiness of a person, made manifest in
actions, flows from the justification of a Soul made manifest in the Spirit;
so that the truest holiness, or outward sanctification, does wholly flow as an
effect of Justification made manifest: As for instance, The Fountain and the
streams: The streams are an effect of the Fountain, flowing from the
abundance contained in the same: so it is with God made manifest in the heart,
he being the Ocean or Fountain comprehending all streams within himself; does
issue out of himself those streams of Sanctification or holiness in
conversation from himself thus abiding in the Creature. So that a man may have
the latter in as high a manner, though not in truth, as he that has God truly
manifest; and no way to be discerned but by the light of truth dwelling within,
which makes the truth or falsehood of such things in this nature manifest; and
before the same enjoyed, the Creature is in darkness, and it is as possible
for a man to see twenty miles in a very dark night, as for a man really to
judge of the truth or falsehood of his own condition before this light come in
from God, which expels those clouds, as the shining of the Sun does the
clouds; and here lies the darkness of a heart when it is made to see the want
of God, it looks into the frame and disposition of men's spirits abroad, who are
under a name of profession, and being much affected with them, and drawn out in
love to them, it gets into such relations or society; and it sees abundance of
holiness flow from their conversations; now it being away to reprove that
party, not having the same conversation in holiness of walking, or power
against corruption, it cries out, O that I were so holy in conversation as such
a one is: O that I had such and such a power against corruption as they have;
and could be always discovering of good things as they are; or could have my
mind fixed upon heavenly things as they have. O how heavenly does such a one
walk: and this is his construction or application: O if I could be but so, I
should then be at peace and Rest; then I should think my condition happy; but
alas here is such abundance of carnal mindedness, and of corruption in my
conversation; and a weariness in things that are good: here the Creature takes
up a daily complaint, and to every Saint is making his condition known, and
cannot Rest quiet, until he have resembled or attained such a measure of
knowledgee to discourse of God, and so much power against corruption, as to
walk in conversation like those, whose conversation did convict him and ashame
him.

Now having attained so much in show, and that now his affections seem to be
bent upon good things; that now God is his meditation and his continual
ponder: that now when its thus, the Creature has much peace, sometimes upon
the view of the same: and when it cannot walk thus, it has neither Peace nor
Rest. Now here the Creatures heart deceives him, and makes him Rest upon that
which may be in truth, and not in truth, or upon that which is given to change,
and abides not one and the same for ever. Now all this a man may have, and yet
have nothing manifest in truth: and though it might be said, that these are
true in there place, yet not appointed for Rests: but for effects of that which
was in truth within: for he that says, he dwells in him, ought even so to walk
as he has walked.

Now holiness in the highest degree, as it flows out from man, is but an
especial effect of the dwelling of the Spirit of God, or an effect of his Rest
in him; not to be a Rest, but to manifest to others, that he dwells and Rests in
God: For to me, that Soul who Rests and dwells in God, must have his
conversation, but especially, his inward walking like God: for to others that
look upon a Saint thus pretending to dwell, must judge of the same by that
fruit that flows from him in one kind or another: though it is not to be a
testimony to himself, who thus lives; he having another testimony which
speaks, or evidences Peace (1 John 5. 10.) upon more sure grounds; yea, and
lets the Creature see a ground or place of Rest, going as far beyond this, as
the streams are short of the Fountain, and the body of the Sun beyond the
least glimpse or shining thereof. Man I may say, who is Resting in peace and
quietness of spirit from these visible branches, if they be true, is one who
still hangs upon the outside of the Arc: and like the Pharisees, Resting
with glorious outsides, and washing of the outside of Cup^; more to be seen of
men, or justified before God, then to be as an effect of that truth within,
made forth for the glory of God. The one of these ends did Cain act for, and
the other end did the Scribes and Pharisees act for: so that a house builded
upon such a foundation as this, seems to be as glorious as that which was
builded upon the Rock, but it was not so safe; for with every blast and storm
that comes against such a spirit it falls into its former state it was, in
before thus builded: so were the devout Women, and golden Sepulchers, and
whited walls, builded upon such considerations as these they were outwardly
holy, and seemingly pure; but were within full of deadly poison, and were put
for outward glory, not adorned with the Spirit: so it is very likely that the
said Spirit, that Rests upon this seeming, though thought by himself true
holiness; is a Soul altogether full of deadly poison and deceit, which in
time may be discovered, and then the Creature shall see another Rest more sure
and safe then this, and shall lose by it, yet Love shall save him, though it be
a fire for to burn up what of this Rest was of himself: so that I say such a
souls foundation of Rest, shall fade as Solomon in all his glory.

First, Then this Spirit thus Resting, is away to keep it below true assurance;
for in this Rest, there can flow no true cause or ground to the Creature to be
assured thereby.

Secondly, For a man to Rest here, it will be but to make a house, which ere
long it may be God will batter about his ears; and so prove labor in vain, as
many can speak by sad experience.

Thirdly, Whatsoever flows from a man pretended to God, before there be an
inward revelation in that man of God, and makes the same a true evidence of his
enjoying this God thus revealed, and so Rests: his thus doing is but his own
righteousness, and not the righteousness of Jesus Christ, revealed by faith.

Fourthly, That the party thus acting, does go no farther then a point of
bodily exercise; for what a man does in point of holiness, pretending for God,
and after does own it as a true evidence, or any causeof Rest, as God. To me
it appears, and in the judgment of Scriptures; that man's action is but bodily
exercise: for nothing is, or ought to be, either Rest, or evidence of the true
enjoyment of God in me; which is any way done by, or acted from me; but
something in the which I am a passive, and no active; in which must be
something of God, coming in from God, which does give a testimony of truth to
me, and reveals the true Rest in me: And if I Rest otherwise, my Rest is not
that which I take it to be. So that it is alone the power or glory of something
coming to me, and not the actings of that to God from me; which is all the
hearts Rest of a Saint.

But there lies so much deceit in the heart, Jer. 17. 9, 10. that the Truth
must be known, by undeniable testimony in man, before the makings of it fotrh,
can in truth be discerned: but as I said before, man lies in darkness until
there be something in the soul which is a clear light, giving the creature to
know Truth from truths Testimony: for any action of deceit from the heart to
God, as so pretended, will not be without reason and ground, yea, and Evidence
proved to be true by the heart: but still this Light, which is God within, is
that which discovers man to himself; yea, the winding of deceits in the heart,
though never so cunningly acted by the heart.

The Sixth false Rest.
THe next Rest is deep Humiliations, and strange castings down of spirit;
wherein the creature is made to go through sad torments of spirit, and has
gone through a hell in his own Conscience; he having passed through many sad
dangers, and having been ready to Destroy himself, or lay violent hands upon
himself; and daily mourning under the apprehension of these particulars
following,

First, Under the apprehension of an angry and revenging God, looking upon him
as one ready to destroy him, and altogether unsatisfied concerning him, but
expects the speedy execution of vengeance and wrath to be powered down upon him
without measure: here the soul lies tortred continually ready to despair of
any hopes of recovery; yet trying if he can get such a measure of humiliation,
as will Answer the greatness of the evils committed against God, which did
procure it.

Secondly, He lies mourning under the apprehension of a condemning Conscience:
Looking upon him self thus, That if his heart Condemn him, how much more will
God who knows all things.

Thirdly, under the view of those gross evils committed against God; wherein
sin flows in apace in the view of it; and they are Laid in order before the
souls eyes, Psalm 50. 21. which are so loathsome to him, under this
consideration, that they have brought him into a condition of misery,
damnation, wrath and slavery for ever; unless he can get so much deep
afflictings of spirit, he looks upon himself as altogether incapable of
enjoying mercy. Whereupon he falls a mourning and greeving, fearing continually
destruction, until it be got into such an estate of breakings of spirit, as it
thinks answers the greatness of its evils: and when it has done thus It makes a
Rest upon it, and counts it an evidence of its acceptance with God; not knowing
that its heart may deceive it; and though it pretends thus to do, yet it may be
out of fear, and for false ends, to get salvation and not from love, or
salvation Revealed to it; but only it is broken because it has brought misery
upon it self.

Secondly, If it be of God, then it is made to see the vanity of its Rest here;
and to wait for the enjoyment of him alone, who can apply a remedy to its
wounded spirit; but if false, it looks upon such deep humiliation to be a Cure
to it; or an assured Testimony of the love of God toward it: here it is put
upon fasting and starving the body, taking revenge upon it self: Who has been
a cause of bringing it into this extreme misery, until it has almost
destroyed it is body with pining, and afflicting of it? When indeed this is not
a Sacrifice which God much delights in, if man Rest in it: For to afflict a
man's soul, and to houl upon h^^ Bed, and to Fast; yet may all this be
Hipocriticall, and forced from the creature under the notion of destruction
without it, or a way to attain grace and favor by it.

Now true Soul-breakings, flows from Love-meltings; The Love, Majesty and
Glory of God, being discovered to man, do truly break man so, that he does not
Rest upon his brokennesse, but upon him who by love brake it.

The proud Pharisees did exceed in this, and many others who made it their
Rest, and blessed them selves in so doing; and said, they fasted so often, and
wept to much, and were so and so afflicted; when indeed they lived upon it, and
gloryed and Rested in the same.

I know though it might be confessed, this is the way of God; yet it is not to
be a Rest to any man: For man is not able to judge of any Truth until the Light
break in upon him; which makes all things manifest: and then shall man judge
righteous judgment.

The heart will persuade man he acts from love, when he does not so; and he
humbles not himself to be seen of men, or to get salvation; or the removal of
a condemning conscience; or to stop the mouth of conscience; or to get a frame
of spirit, that God might manifest mercy; when indeed the heart is altogether,
it may be, deceiving of it: and yet not able to judge of the same, by reason of
that night of darkness that lies upon it, wherein it is kept in the clouds.

Now the cause of the creatures Rest in this particular lies here.

First, In those many deliverances wrought out for him in this condition; as if
the Children of Israel should have been satisfied and Rested, after God had
brought them out of the Land of Egypt; or that after they were brought through
the Red Sea, they should have made that their Rest; evidencing thereby that God
would bring them into the Land of Canaan: when though God had delivered them,
yet afterward he did destroy them. So with many which God has wrought
strangely with in this particular, in delivering them from strong temptations,
and making them to see much of power, yet afterward they do not wait for the
enjoyment of the promise; but murmur against God, and fall at last upon making
a God to themselves, of the glory of their wisdom, and strength, and natural
parts and light; and they fall down and worship the same, as though this was
that God who did deliver them: and so Rest satisfied, believing they are
worshipping and enjoying the true God.

Secondly, The creature reasons thus, Surely it is God which does discover sin
unto me; for if Satan should discover it, it were the way to destroy his own
kingdom; therefore my sight of sin, and my sorrow and mourning for it, and
those deep afflictions which I have had for sin, must needs be of God: and
surely it is both love from God, and love to God, that does thus break my
heart. It may be so, and not so; but though it be God discovering, yet it is no
ground for any soul to Rest satisfied with, or to be an evidence of real
enjoying of God; because that it is a dispensation which passes away, when a
higher dispensation of God appears, then would man's Rest be disolved, and not
be an everlasting Rest: But Saints Rest is that which cannot be dissolved, but
it is an everlasting Rest to him that is Centred in it.

The Seventh false Rest.
THe next Rest is that which many live upon; is the Notion of Free Grace,
though they have no manifestation of it in particular to their own spirits; and
here the very apprehensions of it, being formerly opposed by it, now being
convinced of the truth of the same, not from any enjoyment or pouring forth of
the Spirit; only he has his understanding enlightened, and his judgment
convinced; either by seeing it to be a truth in Scripture, or from hearing it
preached by others; or from the undeniablenesse of the truth of it in it self;
he is made to assent unto it as a truth; and never matters, nor understands it
must be particularly witnessed to be his truth, from the same Revealed within
him: But he not understanding this, he sees now only, the emptiness of man's
doing, and the vanity of putting the creature to act to get Love or Life from
God: And so that only, now all the creatures acting to God, must be from Gods
acting into the creature: so that now he is an enemy to that before he wasa
special friend of, viz. his own righteousness: and that he is now gone as far
in an extreme on the other, to Rest satisfied only with a Notionary knowledge
of this said truth: Also he sees in this that nothing but a Christ can, or will
do good to spirits, and yet knows not this Christ within himself.

Now some times man only getting a Notion of this Truth in the head, comes in
the end to much looseness and fleshly walking, 2. Gal. 17. and can put it off
with a very fairer slight,

First, God is free in his dispensation, man can do nothing unless power be
given unto him: I did such and such a particular, because of the Woman; that
is, by reason of such weakness I am yoked with all: or if God did intend I
should not have committed these sins he would have given me power against them;
and I shall admire free grace the more; and I shall love the more, the more is
forgiven me. So though he has no manifestation of God at all for the pardon of
sin, yet he lives continually in this stream, believing free grace is a Truth:
this is to have it manifest; when the creature sins, to believe it is freely
pardoned upon the Cross; when indeed now it sleeps in security and loosnesse:
And the reason partly of its loosnesse, and yet of its security is,

First, he has got but the light of it; that is to say, such a light as does
discover a truth in this to him; yet he wants the life and being of the thing
made nanifest. So it comes to pass he professes this particular, yet he does
not possess the same in the nature of it: so he has a name that he lives,
and yet is dead: so that he has it in the head, but wants it in the heart; he
has got a form of it in his understanding, whereby he can discourse of it and
declare it to others, yet he wants the power of this said truth in the heart
within him: and when a man has the form, figure, or likeness of a thing, and
wants the power, glory, or being of the thing: no marvel then if a soul in a
time of straits, come to fall short of what he does prosesse in his practice;
he not being able to stand, wanting the foundation that he should be formed
upon, and the power of the same which should keep him upon that being or
foundation.

Also it may be he has this truth taught him by man, and not from the
teachings of God within: Now grace in the heart appearing, does Teach man to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and Godly
in this present world.

But there is a cunning deceit in the heart, that in some does (if possible can
be) prevent the same; and it reasons thus, I see this Truth is spoken against
by most; and that those that are for Free Grace are such men as walk very
loosly; and as soon as ever they believe this, that they are no more like the
men they were before, but walk they care not how: but says the soul that
would make it a peaceable and honorable Rest, least they should say so of me,
I will walk alittle more wisely then they do: And here before men he walks
very like Truth, though there be a heart within him not upright in what he
does; and partly it is to get a good name amongst men; for such as walk loosly
that profess God, they are hardly esteemed of any: the world hates them for
their judgment; the other cannot favor them for their loose practice: Here
they will labor to apply a remedy to this disease, in reference to one p^rty,
and that is the Saints: They will amongst Saints I say, carry themselves like
them, and resemble them in their practice; as the Magicians did Moses: Yet this
is not from a divine principle of love, but for some other end, or from another
principle. Again, Some walk like Truth, because they make it a Testimony of
Gods dwelling in them; for, says the Scriptures, He that says he abides in
him, ought himself also so to walk even as he walked: 1. John 2. 6. Now says
the creature, if I should walk loosly it would appear to my self and all, That
God dwelt not in me: but now by my outward (and he thinks inward, though he be
deceived) conformity to Truth, I may make it an evidence of my dwelling in
Truth: and such a man as this must needs curb himself of those things that
another swallows; because it is his ground of peace and Rest.

Again, A man may shun loosnesse, that has but the notions of free grace;
because it is the way to make Disciples, and get the affections of men to
applaude and admire what flows from him, so as he is mightilys esteemed, yea,
instrumental to dispense those truth that dwell not in him; so as it may be
he is an instrument of begetting sons like unto himself; that is, to believe
Free grace is a truth, and to be convinced of it, and despise working, which is
opposite to it; and here they both sit down and Rest: Not knowing the manner of
Gods dealings with the creature, which is most commonly to enlighten or
convince man of a truth, and set the heart a waiting for it, before he gives
him an enjoyment of it. As for instance, He first convince^ man of a Divine
fullness in God, and a supply given from God to be dispensed by Christ to the
sons of men; whereupon the creatures spirit is set a waiting for it, and at
last comes to enjoy it: So in Free grace when God represents this truth, to let
man see he is Free in all his dispensations; man being thereby convinced of it,
his heart is set a waiting for the enjoyment of the same within him, which he
sees in God above him; that is above his reach of enjoying: and so he does not
let him Rest though he see a truth, until he comes to have the manifestation of
it within him, and in the power and life of it, enjoyed by him.

So as the general knowledge of Free grace, before it be known particularly in
the creature, by the manifestation of it from God, will be no secure Rest or
satisfaction for any soul.

First, The creature in this condition may receive it with much joy, as
witness them, Mat. 13. 20. yet be short of having the power.

This truth is very pleasant to many, especially to those that have been the
greatest workers for Grace; whereupn their delight is much taken up either in
hearing, reading, or discourse that tends to the declaring of this truth; and
it is a dispensation of God in some men, but not a Rest unto them.

Now men who are made to Rest here, may have high notions of this Truth; and
may be more able to speak of it, then those who have enjoyed it in a gene^al
manner: but come to the particular workings of it in the soul, and many proves
shallow there; only they declare it as they see it, to be a Scripture truth;
But he that Enjoyes, sees it to be an Experimental and a Scripture Truth. Now
some men have learned what he believes, and Rests upon it only from report; or
men declaring their experiences, or what the Scripture does relate of others;
but have not any Teachings of God, what it says (according to the Scriptures)
in them by Experience: And here sometimes, man is not completely furnished to
declare this Truth: But one who does enjoy Truth within, does a little discern
where such a soul is; to wit, have heard, and from hearing do declare; and yet
not brought into the Kingdom of Truth, to see and experience it with in
himself. Further, Man may daily increase in the Notionary knowledge of this
Truth, wherein he may appear a Tall Cedar in his own eyes and in the eyes of
others; and grow up into high Notions and Light, and is able to speak of very
high and glorious lights; yet if he here Rest, it may prove in conclusion but a
feeding upon wind and husks.

Furthermore, In this knowledge of Truth may man solace and refresh his spirits
continually, in the apprehension of the same; and yet it is but seeming, not
real satisfaction or refreshment; if he there Rest trusting to it, to be God
himself, for want of information of the difference betwixt what is a Truth in
it self, seen so by me, and a Truth mine, manifested within me; not knowing
the footsteps of truth without man, from the footsteps of truth within man:
not knowing a difference betwixt the deceit of the heart in its deceivable
workings, making glorious Rests of that which is none; and Truth nakedly
discovered from, or by God in the heart, with its End, and Testimony: so as the
creature is not satisfied with any thing, though it be a truth, without him;
until he find the very being of that Truth within him.

Therefore whosoever he be that reads these few lines, Let him beware of these
things following.

First, that he judge not that to be a place of Rest to his spirits, which is
but in show, not enjoyed in substance; nor absolutely pass sentence of any
thing, until there be a Divine light within which makes it manifest: Yea,
though they may come so far as to be convinced of the truth of Free grace, and
of the transcendent Excellency of Christ in God; yet Rest not until thou sinde
it in thy soul manifest from God, then shall thonseal it to be a Truth: yea,
thou shall have it fealed up for Truths, by the Spirit of GOD within thee: Also
to take notice, I do not despise, nor condemn this dispensation not to be of
God, first to see by Scriptures these to be Truths: But I here labor to
unbottom, and to un-center any soul, who merely Rests in the Notion of them.

Thirdly, To beware of condenming these things, because they have no Experience
of them; or because they come nigh them; or because if they be Truths, they
have nothing left them; but wait until they see a Light within, to discover
the truth or fallacy of them, to them; Jer. 17. 9. and if so be they see not
the deceit of their hearts, or those false Rests in them, we are speaking of;
yet do not condemn them, who have both seen and known them, as though they
sought to destroy the foundation of God in Saints* but look upon me as one
owning any dispensation of God, in its place proper to it.

The Eight false Rest.
THE Next Rest we desire to speak of, in order to this, is the Knowledge of
Christ in the flesh; Either considered, as he is declared in Types and Figures
under the Law, or as he assumed Nature upon him; and so consequently dyed at
Jerusalem.

Now for the first, In reference to Types and Figures, which at this time are
the dispensation of Ordinances, either practiced before, or since his Coming:
How many in our days are they that merely Rests upon such shadows; some
practicing of such Types as heldforth Christ to come; some in those that were
practiced after his Coming; and here they satisfy themselves. As instance the
cry of most, We enjoy the pure Ordinances of Christ; we are Members of the
Church of Christ; we are partakers of those outward privileges purchased by
Christ: Instance the peace and comfort they enjoy in them, the glorying and the
high conceit they have of themselves above others that do not practice with,
or enjoy them; witness their deadness, flatnesse when they want them, and
their life and peace in the enjoying of them: witness their binding up in
them; and their whole Experience contained in this particular: When I was
employed in such an Ordinance, I was filled with joy; or I was made to be
satisfied with the seeing of God in it; when the poor Creature it may be,
knows not what God in all, or any thing is; but if it be enlarged, or have
some particular ^^shes of comfort, it makes that to be the presence of God;
and merely under these fleshly practices or carnal relations do many Rest
satisfied.

But Secondly, To Rest upon Christ come in the flesh, is to Rest upon the
believing the report the Scripture gives concerning him; as being borne of a
Virgin, and suffering, and being buried, and the like: and if they believe
this, and can but hear enough of the Letter preached to this purpose, they
Rest; as believing such a particular to be true: and that is all that is
required of them to salvation: and indeed so it is, and something more.

But Thirdly, To Rest upon Christ come in the flesh, is to believe from the
Letter of the Scripture, without any powerful manifestation of the spirit: that
this, Christ who did according to Scripture dye at Jerusalem, dyed for them:
And here many satisfy themselves, with very high conceits of their condition;
and here alone men Rest upon the bare Figure: As if men under the Law should
have made Circumcision, and the enjoying of Sacrifices (in that common manner
they were performed) to be a ground of Rest; and so contented themselves in the
use thereof, as conceiving themselves to be made happy, by the Type and Figure;
and not by that which was Typified out in the same. So concerning Christ's dying
at Jerusalem, it was a Figure of the spiritual death of the creature with
Christ; and also of his resurrection.

Now when we come to be buried with him, into his death, Romans 6. 4, 5. and also
come to be with him raised up from death, that is, into the clear enjoyments of
God, where we are made to live in the Godhead, from it living in us ( John 14.
17.) then do we fully understand and know this Christ, and this eternal Life,
and not merely for a man to conceive, because the Sriptures do declare, that
this Christ is come, and the Creature assenting to the whole history, and
believing of it, that this is the knowledge* of Christ, which is eternal life;
for unless the Creature know him so to be to him, that is eternal life to
him. Col. 3. 3, 4. that as the Scriptures do declare him so to be in the
knowledge of him; so the Creature finds it true within himself, from the
experience of him in his own soul: his knowledge is but carnal, not living,
spiritual knowledge; for that man that Rests upon him, as he is declared in
Scripture; before he be revealed within his soul, both that man's Rest and
knowledge is but carnal and fleshly; for we see that all men almost in
England, or in any place where the Gospel is but published, do believe that he
is crucified and is risen; and this they know from the testimony of Scripture:
but does every man know the mind and mystery of truth? Does God reveal it to
every one? Can any know the mind of God in these particulars, either by the
History or any other way; but by the Spirit of God? then it must he, that
before this Christ come to be spiritually known, he must be spiritually
revealed within man's heart (1 Cor. 2. 10. Gal. 1. 16.) So that to hear of a
Christ, and not to enjoy him, from being revealed within, is but very unfafe
and unsound knowledge to Rest upon; and that which brings not along with it
eternal Life, as witness, 1 John 1. 1, 2. He clearly expresses, that this
Christ which is eternal life, was made manifest unto them, and was their
knowledge of, from which knowledge, they had fellowship and communion with him:
1 John 1. 3.

This knowledge is spiritual, and according to Scripture spiritually revealed,
before it be truly and experimentally known, now the Sriptures do not reveal
Christ within any man, neither do say the yto any particular soul, thou such
a one, Christ died for thee: but it is the same spirit which did declare the
Scriptures, which must reveal what this Christ is.

Secondly, What the mystery of God in his so coming; or what mystery God did
hold out, in the figure which was his fleshly coming too and for thee in
particular.

And lastly, Thou must do as he did, pass from death to life; and after being
buried with him, before thou live in the Kingdom of heaven with him, or indeed
know what that Kingdom or place is, which men carnally conceive to be above
the Skies, though the spiritual knower of him, knows it in another place: Now
what is it for a man to fill his head full of the history, concerning the birth
and death of Christ, unless this Jesus a Savior, or this Christ which is the
light and glory of God, be discovered and revealed within him, suitable to that
precious Testimony, of Paul's knowledge of this Christ. Gal. 1. 16. where he
speaks of this Christ to be revealed within him: for Christ as he was in the
flesh, cannot be revealed; but Christ as he is in the Spirit; or Christ as he
is the great design of God, typified out in the flesh, and revealed in the
Spirit; either as a light, or as life; or as he is the breath of God, or as he
is the clear manifestation of God, wherein man comes to know him to be his
Jesus, that is, his Savior, or inward deliverer; or wherein man clearly
beholds, The Father in him, and he in the Father, John 24. 11. which cannot be
discerned as he was in the flesh; but as he is in the Spirit: 1 Pet. 3. 8. that
being a figure thereof: we see this knowledge the Apostles wanted, when they
said, Lord show us the Father: John 14. 8. they having no more knowledge of
Christ, but as he was in the flesh: they knew not that the Father was in him,
and he in the Father: John 14. 11. upon this knowledge were they Resting, when
they said, Lord it is good for us to be here: Mat. 17. 4. when they would have
been making Tabernacles of Rest, before Christ did transfigure himself within:
but Christ bids them, Arise let us go hence, as if he should say, This is not
a proper Rest for you: John 14. 31. It is a very low dispensation: go, I will
discover my glory to you by transfiguring my self within you; then shall you
see partly the mystery of my self; then shall you more spiritually understand
and know me.

And also sometimes the carnal and fleshly knowledge; the Apostles had then,
put them upon carnal conceptions, as in these phrases expressed, When will thou restore the Kingdom to Israel? And many more expressions; as desiring
fire might come from above; where Christ tells them, they knew not of what
spirit they were: the one place tells them they looked upon him as to be one who
was to have a great power in the World, namely, To be an earthly King, to live
in outward pomp and glory; the other does signify, they understood not the
great design of God in his coming: so as they in this dispensation were very
low, as many are in our days; and would gladly have been Resting in the
knowledge they had, which was Christ in the flesh, that was known by them, and
declared and preached by them also; but still they remaining under the clouds,
and ignorant of the mystery of Christ, in reverence to his coming in the
Spirit: yet God was daily leading them to behold their ignorance; and more into
the Mystery of Jesus.

So that though men pretend to escape the common pollutions of the World, by
such a knowledge of Christ in the flesh, yet it is not a secure estate; but a
low dispensation, which will dissolve in a higher appearance of God. Therefore
though men both know and believe that there was a Christ crucified in the
flesh, yet let them not Rest, until they know it in Spirit: Then shall a man
see Christ daily crucified before his eyes.

First, In him. Secondly, By him. Thirdly, For him.
And fourthly, Crucifying of him: That he shall say with Paul, from experience,
I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me* Gal. 2. 20. then shall the soul know both what it is to be crucified,
by or with Christ, and also what this Christ is, that lives within him, which
is become life unto him; then he shall know it is not flesh, but Spirit and
life that lives in him: neither shall he be satisfied with hearing of his dea^
at Jerusalem: but with experiencing partly the mystery now made manifest in
him, and so comes to be known by him; then shall he say, Though I have known
Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth* know I him no more: 2 Cor. 5. 16.
Being he knows him in the new Creation, being made to see and discern in the
Spirit; and so behold Christ in the vision of God (Hab 2. 3. which is so far
from being beheld before, as a true crucified estate as indeed there is nothing
but darkness and rebellion in the heart to such an estate; only the soul
living and rejoicing in some carnal conception of God and Christ, and yet the
heart is empty of his light and glory; and indeed running from the Fountain to
the streams, and from the substance to the shadow or figure: as I might
plainly lay open how all the actions of Christ in the flesh attributed to him
are but real Types and figures, and shadows of either good things to come, or
to be revealed in souls: I clearly see that sometimes he spoke in Mystery; and
sometimes, yea, altogether he acted in Mystery; as holding forth what he did in
his coming in the soul, being a more glorious dispensation then that under the
Law; as the coming of him in the Spirit, is from his coming in the flesh: so
that what miracles and acts, transcendently acted by him above all that was
made and is experienced by those in the Spirit, who enjoy him, who discovers
all, as namely, his raising Lazarus; and at the marriage, turning water into
wine; and his healing sick, and opening eyes; and so all passages flowing from
him of this nature, were bu^ figures still of what he did and would do in and
for souls: and so not only in matters of doing; but also in matters of
sufferings, they are real figures of the same truth substantially experienced
in Saints; both place, persons, condemnation, Cross, death, ^buriall; his
agony, or withdrawing before; his grave and resurrection; his not ascending
immediately after his death to his Father; but afterward ascended in the
fullness of time: All these in every particular, are known in the true and
spiritual sense of them, by those that have had fellowship with him in his
death and Resurrection, and so has passed from death to life, and now is risen
within, and dwells with him in Heaven, and so is swallowed up in the Godhead,
and is rose in the Fathers glory, and now is filled with the Spirit; this time
is the time of knowledge, and this is wisdoms time, wherein he comes to be
satisfaction to them, and also is justified by them: this is the time, when
they sing nothing but praise and glory to the Lamb, who does not only deserve
to open the Book ( Rev. 5. 9.) and the Seals thereof^, but has opened the
Book and discover to the soul the Cabinet and storehouse of the glorious
Mystery of the Father and Christ; into which City of glory and light the soul
is made to enter, and Rest, and live for ever; that now all things are become
new: Rev. 21. 5. to, and with such a soul the very Kingdom of God and the
mystery thereof is opened ( Rev. 10. 7.) and now the Tabernacle of God is with
man: Rev. 21. 3. and now this glorious mystery Christ, is manifested in life
and power, and become the hope of the complete glory and fullness thereof, (
Col. 1. 27.) to be made manifest, when it is made capable to comprehend it,
from being comprehended by it, and swallowed up in it; then shall this heart
dote no more upon shadows or broken Cisterns, or figures of good things to
come; but he shall be gathered up into God and Christ, and shall possess them
in the fullness of them.

The ninth false Rest.
THe next Rest in order to this is, visible Church communion; or the relations
under this notion: O this I may say, is one of the Idols of Israel, and I may
say, as God was a saying once; Come and see, yea, behold what the Children of
Israel is doing in the dark* O the darkness of such Souls, who Rest in and
under such dispensation; truly if I should speak the naked truth, and nakedly
discover every false Rest: I never in my own experience did find more grosser
darkness sease upon my spirit, then did sease upon my spirit under this
dispensation.

Secondly, Never more false Laodicean security.

Thirdly, Never more pride and self conceitednesse then at that present; ready
to judge every one that were not in relation, in reference to Church communion,
to be no Saints.

2. Looking more at the practice of Ordinances, and being members of Churches,
then at the real experience of such a soul.

3. More longing after the increase of members, then of their living in the
Spirit which were members.

4. Judging every one, if they were but in and under such Relations, to be
Saints, though they had little, yea, indeed no experience of God at all;
refusing communion with such, being not of my judgment, though they knew what
communion in the Spirit was: and closed, yea, joined with those who were
ignorant of it; because they were Church members. This having been mine, and
still are many mores at thispresent; what Church are they of? Are they
Baptized? What judgment are they of? Which does argue, both an Idolizing of,
and Resting upon, these poor dispensations of babes and Children.

It has been with me, and I fear has been and is still with many more, a
coldness of love to those, yea, a condemning also, because they have or do
not close with us in every particular, in matters of Judgment, or forms of
worship; though the parties live in very high enjoyments of God, and are passed
these childrens and babes dispensations: and all this testifies, a Resting upon
our forms and manner of worship: as for instance, An Independent, so called,
and an Anabaptist, and so many more; as the godly Presbyterian and others under
diverse distinctions of forms; how bitter they are one against another; what a
distance they stand one from another; witness their preaching and printing,
and in the same their bitterness; Instance their refusal to here or join one
with another; witness their crosnesse of spirit; what a smell of false
principles this of Rests appears withal; and truly argues much deceit, and
unpossessed like with God.

If one either has attained higher; or live in the use of Ordinances, waiting
for the real enjoyment of God, being lower; why should that heart who has
either enjoyed more or less of God, have such an unlikenesse of any thing of
God in him: seeing God is love, and he that dwells in the lowest enjoyment of
God, dwells in Love: but truly the being bound to forms, or bound up in forms,
and the using of them before we be led unto them by God, occasions all this
Resting in, and condemning of all that do not in all things walk up into, and
in the use of these forms and Church relations, which the letter of the
Scriptures owns to be a dispensation of God.

But Secondly, As this is the cause of, and does much savor to be occasioned,
either by our being bound up in them, or falsely led out to them: so also it is
occasioned by the want of a divine principle within; whereby that principle of
God might command our forms and Church relations; and not forms and Church
relations command the sou^e; so as the Soul only seeing something in the
letter, wanting a divine light within, to discover unto him, either the time,
place, manner or end; by this it comes to pass why he is dark in and Rest
upon, and is commanded by, and so bound up in the form repuired in the letter;
being ignorant of truth in the Spirit: but to come more fully to the thing in
hand: This, in my judgment was the Rest of the Church of Laodicea, (Rev. 3.
17.) in her concluded riches; yea, in her insensible poverty: and thus it
prevails with many a heart.

First, When especially the Soul has been much under the Law, and hampred by
the Law, and so kept in a cloud from the view of Gospel truths; and now come
to see a clear truth in that which he so much opposed, he is so taken up with
it, as he has no peace until he falls in obeying of it, and so gathers peace,
comfort and Rest in the same; thinking it is now got into a very high estate;
and the very name of a member of a Church, together with the greatness of the
love of God in bringing this Creature to believe and obey, who was dark,
opposite, yea, a despiser of the same: this does help forward his Rest in this
particular.

Secondly, It considers and reasons with it self, now I am got into the
communion of Saints, and enjoy now their society; which before it wanted
fellowship with; and also from consideration of the purity of the Ordinances it
now enjoyes.

It before was alive in the use of corrupted Ordinances, now it enjoyes them in
the purity of them; before in and amongst a mixed people; or he had fellowship
with devils (1 Cor. 10. 20.) now with Saints: but truly though this be a
Laodicea condition, yet it is a false Rest, for there is no true Rest, either
in the purest Ordinances, or visible relations, for these a man may enjoy, and
be ignorant of the enjoyment of God in them, as the woeful experience of many
will seal unto, and testify the truth of whatwe are speaking of.

Thirdly, Another cause of Rest in these relations, flows from his continual
growth in Gospel light, and his increase and growth of knowledge; and most
commonly the whole bent of such a spirit, is taken up with laboring after the
knowledge of points of judgment, and with matters nice and curious, things
which most commonly pleases the fancy and understanding; and to know such
things it is his continual study, and end of all his labor: when still he
wants the life and power of Christ in his heart; neither does he know him, but
either by his profession or by hear-saies; not in any true way of experience.

Fourthly, Another cause flows from his conceived peace and comfort he enjoyes
in the same: and thus he reasons, before I had no peace, either in conscience
within me, or from Ordinances practiced by me; but now I enjoy much peace in my
condition; when indeed he may have stopped the mouth of conscience, and his peace
come in from a false ground not spoken from God; but drawn forth or Imagined in
his particular practice. Many a soul feeds upon an imaginary peace, when it is
ignorant of peace truly manifested in the heart: and in this most commonly do
the affections blind and bribe the judgment, and so peace remains only in
the imagination, and not enjoyed by any powerful manifestation. But if men's
hearts in Church relations may so utterly be deceived, then it stands in need
of these ensuing cautions. 1. Beware of making thy being a member of any
Church, to be either evidence to thee, or ground of peace in thee: neither let
any conceive better of their conditions because they are in visible
fellowships: and neither let their joy or peace be the more; unless they do
uprightly enjoy more of the discoveries of God to them then they did before.

2. Beware that thou think not thy outward uniting in a visible manner with
Saints, is a uniting thy spirit more unto God, or God uniting himself more to
thee: or that for or in thy present practice, thou art got the nigher to God;
lest thou Rest more secure in thy present condition then before: for carnal
security does most commonly follow the most of men in those dispensations.

3. Beware thou go not before God lead thee: for most commonly when God
leads man into forms, when he forsakes them, he leads them out of them into
that dispensation God will appear in: therefore beware that thou be not led by
thy own imaginations; then thou shall not be left in and bound up in forms,
but shall continue in them so long as God continues in the same.

But many who live and make a God of their forms; they neither know when God
leads or not leads; when God is present or not present, its all one if they can
enjoy the desire of their hearts, and that which speaks peace to them, namely,
Their forms and Church relations: It is to them, yea, its life and happiness
in them. But in the next place observe;

Though God do own all or the most forms and administrations, yet it is but
for a time, until a higher dispensation appear, or the substance of that form
be enjoyed, and then God departs from it, and seldom or never appears in that
form any more; especially if the soul be caught up into God: for as the old
Testament forms, which were of Gods own appointment, and God was in them for
the time they were to be used, so also they were to cease.

1. When the substance thereof was come. Heb, 5. 18.

2. When a more glorious administration was and did appear; then did God both
depart from them, and dis-own them; and they no where to be practiced after
these two did appear: So it is with new Testament forms, they have and had
their time, and yet have when God will and does appear in them; yet it is but
until God appear in a higher dispensation, and bring the soul into a higher
administration; then do all shadows and whatsoever is Gospel administration
cease to that particular soul, in the use of them what they were before; I
would not be mistaken, I do not say they cease to all and every person
whatsoever; but to such a soul as is in this dispensation, namely, he who is
caught up with God, and carried by God out of the form; God ceasing to appear
to that particular soul in that form: the Lamb leading the soul gently out of
one dispensation into another, until he be wholly swallowed up with God.

Secondly, Such a soul as can truly say, the substance of such a form is come
in the Spirit, and enjoyes the same within him; for there are some forms and
administrations, which holds forth Christ in the Spirit to come: now such
ceases to be in the use of them at his coming: as those old Testament forms
did hold forth as we say, Christ's coming in the flesh; which was both the
substance of those forms, and a more glorious administration of God: so it was
in the decrease of John, and the increase of this more higher and glorious
administration: so it shall be in Christ his coming in the Spirit into every
souls heart: then these forms that Christ appeared in, in the flesh, shall
cease in his coming in the Spirit.

Now some Gospel forms do cease to none, but to such as have enjoyed the
enjoyment of Christ in the Spirit. For as Christ led the Apostles from the
Tabernacle condition in his transfiguration; so he will when he appears
transfiguring himself in every heart; as the Apostles, so every heart shall
cease to make any form, yea, the New Testament forms, Tabernacles to dwell in
for ever; as many makes them now in our days: also there are administrations
which hold out Christ already come. Which

1. Is not to be practiced before.

2. It is to be practiced after his coming. As I shall name one especially. It
is the administration of Praise, which is alone the work of those that are
Redeemed, and have the Scales of the vision of God opened, and are caught up
with God into Heaven, to sing songs to Zions God in Zions language, by Zions
spirit, in that holiest of holies, which is the place of Zion, and those
brought into the Godhead to sing Praise: but now God in this condition is
departed from them, to this heart, not to every one; being seen and enjoyed in
these forms which do hold forth his thus coming into the heart: now none but
those who do enjoy God in a more glorious dispensation, are to cease acting in
those dispensations or forms he yet continues his presence to them in: for as
God did cease, and did not appear in the forms of the old Testament, and they
were no more to be used after the substance thereof was come, and God appear in
a more glorious administration: so will God depart and cease to be seen in new
Testament forms or administrations; when both the substance of them is come,
and a higher dispensation do appear, leadind the heart out of them to a more
glorious and immediate enjoyment of himself: This is to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes: This is to hear a voice behind man saying, This is the
way walk in it: Isaiah 30. 1. And to be led by a pillar of fire (Number. 9. 16,
17, 18.) and sometimes by a Cloud to man's spiritual Rest: and not to stand in
and under one administration all ones days, and to be in one place for ever:
But to find God leading daily from one form into another, until he bring the
soul into the perfect enjoyment of him, who is the glory and substance of all
forms: this, for the want whereof, makes many to make them their Tabernacles
and Rest, yea, their home; yea, their God, peace and happiness; which if they
be taken away, their God is gone, and their peace have taken its wings and
flown away: this is the reason why many in Church relations have a name they
live, and yet are dead; that is, they have a name of Saints and Christians, but
they want the nature of them; they have a profession, but want a possession:
This is the reason why many come to have a burning up in their spirits, and are
brought to a daily loss, they run faster into forms and Church relations then
God did lead them; therefore in them God leaves them; for this reason the
expectations of many are frustrated, which causes nothing but death and
sorrow, when they have longed and pressed out after forms; and being members of
Congregations, and the enjoyment of pure Ordinances, thinking to find so much
in them, and to conceive so much from them; and when they come there behold
nothing but dryness and emptiness, and the want of God, and so have suffered
loss. This is partly the reason of all the rents and breaches in all Churches
Congregated; and why they cannot stand, is because they were not led by God
into these forms; neither did they see God clearly go before them; but some by
affection, some by misinformation, and some out of zeal; so that now very
little of God appears, either in their coming in, continuing with, or parting
from; thus being bound up in forms and living in them, and doting too much
upon them, and rejoicing too much in them; and judgeing all that speaks not
for them, or joins not with them: yea, this is the reason why we are devouring
one another, because we all do not look for and expect that the glorious
appearance of God will lead each man out of his dispensation and form, though
never so low to drink into one Spirit.

Let him that is so much either bent for forms, or wholly against them; beware
that he do not so dote upon them, as to neglect the Summum bonum, the chiefest
good: and let every heart that is against forms, beware of these ensuing things.

1. That his living above forms, be not a pretense of his own, and no true and
real thing; for many are mightily deceived in this very particular thing; they
live so high, as they live above all forms and Ordinances in the Spirit; when
alas they are yet living in a form of knowledge, scraped up either from their
own industry, or else got from hearing others report their experiences or
apprehensions; and he presently conceiving it to be a truth, conceives it to be
his truth, and so falls off, crying out and judging all those, that live yet out
of conscince in the use of forms; not enjoying higher makings forth of God,
and yet he has but got a notion of this into his understnading, and yet is
ignorant of living or enjoying God in the Spirit.

2. Let them beware of as great an evil on the right hand as on the left, and
that is, That they be not living upon an imaginary God, and not the true: for
it is the way of the Creature to give so much way to his fancy and imagination;
that whatever it proposes to be God, it lives upon and rejoices in, and
brings the Soul into deep and carnal security, with high imaginations of
himself, being able to apprehend and discourse of deep and high things; and
yet want the life and power of any one of them.

3. Beware of Judging (if thou be broke off from forms) those that thou have
left behind thee in the use there of. Confidering that God is in all forms of
his own appoinment, and that their dispensations may be of God; and that they
shall there abide but their appointed reason. And therefore let thy carriage to
them and thy judgment of them, be as much as possible may be without offense
unto them, and for the winning of them; and that when God sees a higher
dispensation fit for them, he will lead them into it: only my soul desires
they may not be so glued to them as to live in them; and not to wait for a
higher dispensation from God, only in the want thereof, they are in the use
thereof, God owning and appearing unto them in them; so that I could wish, the
wisdom of God may appear so in the hearts of those, who do pretend thus high
to live in God; that it may truly appear to themselves and to others; God led
them into the same and not themselves. I have experienced both the contrary
evils, and therefore I speak; so that if God be love, as in his dispensation
God is so to him that knows it not, then it must break forth from us, if it be
living in us: to look upon children and babes with a tender eye and respect; so
as judgment may pass away; and the spirit of burning, which is Love, may
appear amongst us.

Thirdly, As others are under men's Teachings, so look thou be under the
Teachings of the Vision of God (Heb. 2. 3.) and that thou speak or pretend to
enjoy no more then is taught within thee by the Vision of God; for in the want
thereof, sad experiences testifies, we Peecing and patching Religion and high
notions together, and make it their delight and joy. Oh the teachings of God
do open the very heart and the secrets of the sealed Book, and believe it, to
live wholly above all in God: It is to live such a transcendent life, as is
better and sooner spoken then enjoyed and known in truth: for there must be
such a death within men, and a passing from death to lise by man, that indeed
men may hear of the thing, and get it into their imaginations; but to enjoy it
in the true and real manifestations thereof, many in this shall in their
conceits be brought to loss: for to have the Scales of the Eternal
brightness and glory of God opened in the appearance of the Vision in a man's
heart; to have the very splendour and glory of the divine Being Revealed within
man; and to be wholly caught up in the whole out of all things, so as the soul
is wholly swallowed up with God in all things; so that now neither eye has
seen, nor care has heard, neither by man's heart can be imagined, the depths of
the life, glory and enjoyment of such a heart; yet it is his common meat; and
teaching of the Spirit within him; so that no man^ teaching can reveal the life
and center of such a heart; but it is better experienced then can be declared,
it is so transcendent a life and being. Yea, further, for any man to live so in
God, as he enjoyes God in all, and sees God the life and being of all; yea, it
is not his judgment, but he finds all these things effectually within him.
For a man may be of the judgment concerning living wholly in God to be the
only Life; and yet not to know this from the experience of the visions
teaching within himself. Now it is no benefit for any to be of this and that
judgment, unless he live in the clear enjoyment of the truth he is convinced
of in his judgment and understanding: here is the glory of a Saint indeed, not
to know a truth because it is the judgment of any, neither because it is his
own judgment; but that he have within him the truth teaching of it to him,
from the life and power of it in him. So he knows the Sun to be the Sun, not
from hear-saies; but he sees the life and glory of it, having his eyes opened
to behold it, and finds* by experience the heat and powerful operation of the
same upon him, as well as upon the earth. So with Saints, they do not receive
their Life, Light or experience of God living in a Saint, from hearing of it,
but God breaks forth in their spirit, and so gives them the fight of the
glory, light and splendour of God within themselves: So soul beware thou be not
overcome so with hear-saies as to rest satisfied with the mere notion of God
and truths, and yet be at this time but a blazing star, who shall fall and
cease to be, what thou at present both to thy self and others seems to be;
only for a time thou may by this notionary light in thy understanding and
judgment be a blazing star to discover what thou have for the deceit of thy
self and others: and yet it is not the light of the being of truth in thee; but
a borrowed light got from others, or in thy imagination, or conception, which
shall suddenly perish; and then thou shall be left in the dark, as a man in the
Clouds, reserved for the great day. Oh, to be Taught of God is a Jewel; it will
teach Truth, and not lie.

Therefore in the last place, It is worth waiting for, though thou wait in
silence and in death, until thou do enjoy it; lest thou pretend to have that
thou have not, and to enjoy that thou enjoyest not; for in so doing thou shall
go with a lie in thy Right hand; and shelter thy self under vanity and lies.

Yet I would not be mistaken, that either I am against forms in their time and
place, and manner; neither that I deny that a soul may attain to such a
glorious enjoyment of God as must, yea all forms and shadows may fly away
and be dissolved, though not destroyed; and the person, form, and use thereof,
shall be swallowed up with glory.

But I defire to compose the great difference that lies in men's seize,
when they all cannot speak one thing, or enjoy God in one dispensation; then
they fall one condemning another, ^o as they cannot make out for good of each
other, that which they enjoy of God in their present dispensations.

Secondly, To unbottom the one of Resting in, and living upon; or making his
everlasting Tabernacle in those Shadows: and the other, to be that in an
especial manner, which both in word and action, he seems to be: and that he
do not pretend to live in God above all forms, when indeed he neither lives in
God, nor knows what it is to be led by God, out of the same into that which is
truly sweet, if the soul were led into that he pretends to enjoy.

The Tenth false Rest.
THe next Rest which in order we shall speak of is, a Sutability to the
external letter, or some quallified frame wherein this Creature takes his
joyful Rest in the view thereof.

Indeed when a man is wounded, yea, deadly unless there be speedy help, in
this condition, the Creature will be willing to enjoy any Surgeon for the
Cure thereof: yea, him that but pretend fair, and by his skill do give some
ease therein at present, and hopes for the future, though this party do it but
to serve his own ends, not from any principle of good to the party who is the
patient; yet he being ignorant of his fair pretenses, he heales up his wounds,
though falsely, and afterward the wound breaks forth again, to the greater
damage to the party. Thus it is with a poor, distressed, wounded, helpless
heart; whom it may be, God is a preparing for mercy; he lying in such a
desperate condition, would gladly have his wound Cured by God; but there coming
a pretended Physician into the heart, speaks like God; appearing to the
Creature to be God; and to heal in the same way God heales Souls; yet the
soul being ignorant, accepts of it and freely entertaines it; whereby it comes
to have a time of peace and Rest: only because he apprehends his desperate
wound to be cured. And thus souls do in a time of straights, accepts of those
proffers; when in another condition he would not; but at present, necessity
putting the soul upon it: Now souls that live under the sight of the want of
God, would in the sight thereof, be in a way to attain God; seeks and presses
to know in this case what to do; at last it looks upon the Scriptures (in this
case) to be the only Teacher; whereupon he gives himself to a diligent
searching of the same; where he meets withal some places how the Saints were
formerly quallified, and these preparations they had within them; whereupon he
sets a laboring with his own heart to bring it into such an estate of
mourning, humiliation, or repentance, with hungring after God; as also loathing
fin, and having a weariness and burden under it; and when he has thus done,
he runs to Scriptures, and seeing his condition suitable to that, he makes
Scriptures the ground of his faith, and so cures his wounds by it, and so
draws peace and comfort from it.

Now the creature being ignorant of any other work, he wrests from this
Scripture influence, as is pretended, and from thence concludes his enjoyment
of God; and that now from some persuasions of spirit, concludes it to be the
witness of the Spirit; when indeed the creatures heart in this case is not
upright, and he being in darkness is not able otherwise to judge of himself,
or his condition; neither of his heart which do tell him, that this his
sutability is upright: but the soul wanting the manifestation of light, he is
not able to pass true sentence upon the same, but Rests and man makes his
habitation here: and though he pretends to make Scripture the ground of his
thus believing, yet it is his quallifications and sutability to Scriptures
which is the ground of his thus Resting and believing.

Or Secondly, That which in this case the soul is most established in is, when
it may be a Creature is in some sad condition, a Scripture is cast in
immediately upon the soul, un-sough-out, or labored for; and this suitable to
the souls condition; from which there is joy and peace: yea, sometimes the
heart is so ravished with it, and so over come by it, as indeed it is hardly able
to express its joy and peace; yea, sometimes the heart is so overcome, as it
cannot express it, or hardly knows for the present where it is: But here lies
the Angellike design sometimes of Satan, to come in the same manner, and with
the same effects to deceive, that God comes in with to save, and so transformes
himself into Gods shape: And one of the cheifest ways he has, is to apply
himself in such a way of working like God, as he may the most prevail with
the soul; and resemble God, and so keep the soul much below God. Now
Scripture way Satan thinking is most like Gods way, of any other; especially
when he brings in Scriptures suitable to the condition of the party: and so that
he may cause the soul to believe, that at such a time God was pleased to
manifest himself, by casting in such a Scripture so suitable; so as now his
transformed work is the more surer, seeing it has such a foundation as this:
yet this he does of purpose to deceive.

Thirdly, Man's own Memory or fancy being upon some serious meditation, may in
the same manner and way bring, and represent before the soul such a Scripture:
and here lies most of the deceit of the fancy and and imagination thus to
work: this way, there coming in a Scripture into the thoughts of such a souls
fancy and imagination to drive on his own Design, makes it as it were a nose
of wax to apply it to what use or way he please; yet he will make it the
ground of his imagination and fancy: and so man this way, comes to Rest upon a
deceit and fiction, and not upon any ground in the glorious manifestation of
God.

Now Scriptures it is true, do display in a Mystery, most Precious things;
which if a soul did enjoy them, their thus enjoying of the Truth there
displayed, would be a Rest unto them: but so long as a man reads Truth in the
letter without him, until he can read it in the Spirit within him, there is
little cause of Rest to such a heart. As Instance, For a man to be overwhelmed
in gross darkness, and in this darkness, the soul not able to behold the
glory of God: Now from his reading in Scriptures, he sees God there expressed
to be a Light, and to be full of Glory; yet notwithstanding from the fight of
this in Scripture, though he want this light within him, and his darkness to
be expel^ed out of him; yet he Rests with the fight of this in the Scriptures
satisfied, as though God were become light and glory in him, and had expelled
all darkness out of him; and he carried up to behold it truly and live in it:
so that that I drive at is to unbottome any soul of making a nose of wax upon
the letter: and because Christ says in an upbraiding way, Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think to have Eternal life; so many now think to
have this Eternal life in the Scriptures, or in searching of them; when indeed
they are but a Testimony or a Record to set forth in a Mystery what Eternal
life is: And because the Scriptures say, that weary souls are to come to
Christ for ease and Rest, therefore, every soul who in his own fancy and
imaginations, does judge himself to be weary, may come to Christ; and so by his
being weary, there is way opened for his coming to him.

For First, It may be the heart may be weary of sin, because it brings
judgment or condemnation.

Or Secondly, It may be weary because of his long travel to, and waiting for
Christ.

Thirdly, It may be weary because it can no longer abide in these dispensations
of Gods leading.

Fourthly, It may be weary because God comes not in his time, and reward it for
its breathing after, and working to attain God or Christ.

Now the soul being falsely led out by his own heart, he instead of coming to
Christ, only Rests upon his bare apprehension of this in the letter, from his
sutability to it in his own spirit; and here he feeds and remains with ease,
comfort and peace in his own spirit; and this he makes his Tabernacle: Though
it be true that Scriptures were given to be a visible testimony or declaration
of God or Christ, according to which God works in man, yet they were never
given to be an inward Testimony, or a Rest unto man; but the Truth of the
letter must be both Revealed, Known and Judged of by the Spirit; and not the
Spirit, especially in Internals, by the External letter; neither
qualifications in man suitable to the letter in man's apprehension, is a ground
of faith or Rest, without an inward Testimony and Manifestation by the Spirit
of the Truth of these qualifications.

The Eleventh false Rest.
THE next Rest in order to this, upon which men Center their spirits, and makes
their Tabernacles, is the use and applycation of the conceived and imagined
extent of Christ's death; which being so fully declared in the letter without
any more, they believe it upon this Testimony; and here is the ground of their
joy, peace assurance and Rest.

Now I shall not go about to speak evil of any point of judgment, in
reference to any particular factions, but to come to lay open my own
experience, and false Rests; which in so doing I may come to lay open a way,
whereby those that are led by the same deceit, may come to see it in
themselves, and so may from sad experience, seal to the Truth of what we are
saying: for many who have gone through this dispensation, and have believed
this to be a Truth, when now alas they see, that they were both ignorant of
what this Christ was, or what was meant by his death; wanting the knowledge of
it in themselves; now the terrors of death have, or do sease upon them; and
instead of being joy and peace unto them, it has produced death and sorrow in
them.

But first of all, This soul who is thus Resting upon Christ's dying for all, he
sees the Scriptures says, He gave himself a ransom for all; The conclusion
is this, of such a spirit, If for all, then for me; and this he believes: and
this says he, is the ground of true faith; when he is altogether decived. For
the ground of faith is something out of the Creature, in God, before time,
revealed and made manifest from God to the soul in time; upon which the soul
builds his faith, Rests upon it, and is kept unto all time in the glory and
splendour of it: but the soul wanting this in a particular way of discovery, he
makes the other the ground of his confidence for refreshment, peace, safety and
happiness: and he concludes,

First, That no true faith can be but this.

Secondly, that none have any ground to believe but upon this ground.

When the poor heart is altogether ignorant in his own breast, of the manner
of Gods coming to reveal Truth; yea, himself in his Son by his Spirit: whereas
now man's ground of his happiness lies not in a misunderstood Scripture without
him, but in a right discerned, revealed, and known God within him.

Thirdly, This soul daily increases in the assurance of this his Rest, by his
daily study, pains and diligence wherein he fills his head with so much of the
Scriptures, as indeed he makes it so glorious, as it Conquers his spirits, and
many more; into a follacing himself in this very particular, when indeed he is
missing the cheesest good, which is the life of him, who puts an end of all
controversy to all such disputes, when he comes to appear in the Spirit; But
alas, before no marvel though the poor soul be running from mountain to
hill, though he forgets him who is the Resting place of Zion.

Therefore Soul, Thou that make thy habitation amongst the briers and
thorns, and barren mountains, Arise, these are not thy Rest, they are from a
corrupted judgment, and therefore are corrupted, and if thou stay here they
shall destroy thee with an utter destruction: all are not proper Rests which
are dispensations and manners of Gods leadings; but the pure promise of Rest is
neither in any thing, before in Death and Resurrection, but in the ascendings
of the heart and spirit of a Creature into God, by the descendings of God into
the Creature; which did raise him from death and the grave, and now has opened
the Heavens to him by receiving of him into glory: for as Christ did not make
his Rest and abode in any carnal or fleshly dispensation, though in the same
he did enjoy the Father; so no heart is to make that his Rest which Christ did
not make.

Every heart so long as it lives below the glory of God, so as it is not
glorified with God; is a heart centring himself in a dispensation which shall
be dissolved: For both man in the dispensation of Christ in the flesh, or in a
crucified, buried, or raised Soul, is not to abide but in a glorified ascended
soul into God; where the life is the unchangeable glory and splendour of God,
dwelling in man, glorifying of man, in which is the life and center of man,
truly and unchangeably centred.

The Twelfth false Rest.
THe next Rest in order to this is, a closing with and drawing comfort from the
promises expressed in the Letter of the Scriptures: This closing thus with, and
applying the benefit of promises; the whole life, center, comfort, cause of
joy, peace, duties, diligence, what not, to many a soul (and from hence when
many comes to declare their manifestation of God, all they have to say is) at
such a time a promise was made forth unto them, or cast into their thoughts, by
which they apprehend God, and closed with it, and from thence did draw comfort
and peace from it; and this is all the experience of God that is manifested to
them, or that they have: This causes abundance of Rest and security to many a
heart, and luls them a sleep which is most commonly Satan's way to apply
himself to such a cure; for to cause a soul to Rest below God; as is suitable
to a Souls condition; so he brought in a promise to Christ: He has given his
Angels charge over thee; etc. Mat. 4. 6. Here he came to apply himself suitable
to the condition of Christ. O when once a soul is brought into a Pinnacle
condition, wherein he is brought to see the glory of much, then Satan lobours
to cause the heart to fall down and worship him; he coming smoothly, and
bringing the Promises of God a long with him, to back the truth of what he
does: and here after the soul is betrayed by represented glory in a promise
merely cast in from Satan; wherein the soul falls down, and worships the very
cunning working, and the high exalting of Satan: and in this condition he is
brought to see and apprehend high things, and is brought into a Pinnacle to
behold almost the glory of every thing, made over by Satan to the Creature in a
promise upon the souls submitting to him; and upon this Pinnacle he sets him,
that is, he causes him to Rest: and so the poor heart being not wise in the
Spirit, is deceived and betrayed; though the actions, knowledge, light, joy,
Rest of this soul be glorious and for God in his own eyes; yet it is but
Satan's transforming himself into an Angel of light, resembling or coming in
and working in the Creatures heart, in the gloriests manner and shape God
works in.

But Secondly, Others being wounded in Spirit, and weary in soul, for the want
of any glimpse of God; leaving no means un-attained, to get his soul cured and
unburthened; and having Rested upon many false props before, and being
unbottomed of them; he tries this particular, it being of a higher nature, and
more likely to speak peace unto him, viz. a running to Scripture, to find out
some particular promises suitable to his condition; and having found out some
suitable Promises, either presently seems to speak to him from a sutablenesse in
him; so it may be, being a conditional Promise, or else the soul meditates a
while upon it, and it runs much in his thoughts, and at last he closes with it,
strikes this load and burden of his spirit, here he draws comfort and peace
from it; yea, it may be so much as indeed the soul is mightily overcome in his
spirits with joy, and can do nothing but rejoice; upon which he Rests, builds
his faith as he calls it, and so concludes it to be a manifestation of God.

I will not deny but God may make these ways if in truth, cause of support
unto a soul in his traveling toward his Rest: But for a soul to strike
sail, cast Anchor, and have all the waves in his heart stayed, and his very
weariness of spirit, at this present put to a period, is as if the children of
Israel had stayed either beyond the red Sea, or when God gave them Manna,
before they came to enjoy a real possession of the land of promise: though God
did this either to refresh their spirits and so to under-prop them; or else to
give them it at the desire and repining of their spirits, to see how they would
use it, or abuse it. Now this being a description of a Saints Spiritual
travel, though God should cause a glimps of glory or heavenly Manna to refresh
a heart, to be given to a soul in the view of a Promise, yet for a soul to
Rest in this, and make it his habitation, it smells too much of man's deceit and
abuse of every dispensation, and a daubing up his spirit with untempered
mortar, and so hatches Cockatrice Eggs, and weaves the Spiders Web; so that
it is but a kindling of a fire, and man warming himself in his own sparks;
whose conclusion shall be death and sorrow; and before ever the creature know
what true Rest is, by sweet experience, he must be brought to a death in all
these.

But from my own experience of the fallacy of my own heart, and the contrariety
of the false Rests that I have gone through; I make bold to propose these ensuing
particulars to such a heart; not intending to weaken the workings of God in any
poor heart, though under low Administration; but only to discover the nakedness
of man in the way of his own heart.

And First of all, When did the Lord manifest himself to thy soul, and give
thee a particular right unto, and interest in this promise; the application of
which thou make thy Rest?

Secondly, How was God Revealed to thy heart in this promise? Or whether is it
not the great necessity thou have of it, that makes thee fly to the promise;
and suck sweetness, life, comfort, and Rest from it? Or is it God in Christ
clearly Revealed unto thee in the same? For it was necessity, that made many
run to the Ark, and hang upon the outsides thereof, though none but those that
were within were saved. Scribes and Pharisees did challenge a propriety in God,
and all external privileges; but it was but from a sutablenesse of holiness,
they had to the promise; and not Revelation of God in them, discovering the
Truth the of God to them.

Thirdly, What inward Testimony of God have thou for thy great joy, peace,
Rest? And what is thy inward Evidence, that witnesses the truth of what thou
enjoyest? For every one that believes, has a Testimony within himself, 1.
Joh. 5. 10. And every heart that has ever seen the appearance of God within
him, has found a lively Testimony coming along with that Manifestation of God;
which is the only proof of the truth of what he enjoys, and not any
Qualifications, nor outward Testimony either of man, or from man, 1 John 3. 24.

Fourthly, How was peace in this particular enjoyed by thee? Was it from some
inward Voice of God, or discovery of the same? Or was it from such a suitable
form of words to thy condition; either cast in, or found out in searching? Or
was it from a clear Manifestation of the glory of God in thee, suitable to those
forms of words in the Scriptures without thee; whereby the form of words came
to be made good to thee: so that thy comfort, peace, satisfaction, or Rest, do
not flow from the form of words, as thou see them in Scripture without thee;
but from the enjoyments of God within thee, suitable to that without thee?

Fifthly, What glorious power of God was made out in thy spirit, in thy thus
closing with Promises? Thy thus closing may seem to be done in power, but the
spiritual Coming of Christ in the manifestation of his glory, is so great, as
indeed it is not ordinary, but extraordinary, in the heart of him that knows
his coming.

A Promise Closed with before Christ come in the Spirit, may seem to be done in
glory and power; by reason it may be, he could not before believe, nor live in
that freedom or joy he now lives in; but the coming of Christ in the Spirit,
does so far surmount that, as indeed the other appears nothing, when this is
come, Ephesians. 1. 19. Mat. 24. 30.

Sixthly, Whether is it the Manifesting of God to thee, that gives thee a right
to the Promise, and from this thou closest with God? Or is it that sutablenesse
in thee to the words of the promise, that gives thee a being whereby thou
closest with it? If it be the latter, it is not right: For all Promises are in
Christ Yea, and Amen. And He is the ALL in them; and if he be revealed, he
gives a being to them: yea, to the creature to live in that being, as He is the
ALL in them. So that the substance of every promise must come into the soul,
and be Revealed in it, before the form of words can truly pronounce comfort,
peace, life, happiness or Rest to it: So as his Rest is not upon the form of
words, as in Letter expressed, but upon the Being of it; which is God manifest.

Now many a heart does feed, upon husks, outsides, and external forms of
words; and falls short of being caught up into his glory, and so Resting in the
being of all Truth. Here it comes to pass, that the Creature makes every thing
a God; and will shape and form out God according to its imaginations; and so
labors to dispossess God, and to set up its own shape in Gods stead.

Now Promises, whether they be sought, or cast in, they are to be no Rest unto
any heart: for the words of the promise are like unto a figure or type, it
testifies something to be given to the Sons of men; but when a soul is in the
possession of those things, then it does not rejoice upon the words holding out
the thing; but upon the substance of the thing possessed in the heart: but many
on the contrary hand, for the want of this, runs after conditional promises;
and when it sees not the condition of the promises performed in it, he
labors after a sutablenesse to them; before not daring to apply them: but when
he has got his heart into such a frame, as he imagines to be suitable to the
condition thereof, he Rests there; applying life and comfort from it;
concluding he has a right unto it from this particular: But if at any time he
break the condition, his peace is gone; because the cause of his peace, was
his exact performance of the condition of the promise.

Secondly, But some are higher then this, and they see a vanity in this; and
they look upon Christ as the perfermer of the condition; and if he can but
believe, Christ has done it, and then he has a right unto the fame;
whereupon he uses means to get his judgment convinced of this, that Christ
died for him; and in Conclusion, he gets himself convinced of the same, and
here Rests Concluding the promises are his, because Christ in his: when indeed
both the ground of his conclusion and confidence is false: and so he comes to
be deceived.

Thirdly, Another, that Rests upon promises before Christ's spiritual Coming,
is when a man has layne in sad darkness and bondage, and has a long time
waited for a discovery of God, and at last some apprehensions of Christ comes
into his understanding; whereupon he stands convinced in his own judgment
that Christ is his: Whereupon he for the greater increase of his Rest,
Comfort, and Peace, runs to promises and applies them, as having a right to
them in his own apprehensions by Jesus Christ: Here is that which begets the
strongest confidence, that Christ is come in the Spirit; which works that joy
and peace, the soul thinks shall never be taken from him; whereas after a while
man is not so quick fighted, nor so clear enlightened, but it suddenly lies in
the grave, as that which must vanish in the spiritual appearance of Christ in
the heart.

Now this is the great design of Satan, to keep the poor creature on the
outsides, the husks; and would have the Creature wholly to live below the
glory of Truth; which is the coming of Christ in the Spirit of glory: But
hearts truly principled before Gods appearance, are made to wait for him, from
a great power of himself; not in any of these things to Rest, before they in
the glory of the Spirit come to Enjoy him. Mat. 25. 10.

The thirteenth false Rest.
THE next Rest in order to this, Is great, strange, and excellent flashes of
God (so I term them) and as they the most appear; yet they may be true, or
false, resembled, or real.

First, We shall speak of Flashes of light in the understanding: And neither
touch them as they are true, or false.

1. If they be but flashes, they are no real manisestations of Christ in the
Spirit: and therefore in the first place, They are not of a Witnessing nature,
they bring no real Testimony of God along with them; but leaves the creature
dark and empty, in and of this particular; but Christ's coming in the Spirit is
not without a Witness, which is both unresistible and satisfactorye but
flashes whether they are of God, distinct, or opposite; they have no Testimony
of the Spirit, to witness the truth of God to man, by the Spirit within man:
as man is below under the dispensation of a flash, whether true or false.

So secondly, They are not of a powerful Nature; they are very weak in
comparison of the power of Christ coming in the Spirit.

For first, They do not dispossess Satan of his habitation; whereas the coming
of Christ in the Spirit does Mat. 12. 28, 29.

Secondly, They do not dispossess the Creature of living in himfelf; or they
do not carry up the Creature into the glory of God in the Spirit; they being of
too low a nature, no more then flashes in a dark night, can bring the Creature
into the beholdings of, and living in the glory of the Sun: so that they are
not complete Revelations of glory; neither powerful in effecting the same
work, which is accomplished in the coming of Christ in glory.

3. They do not satisfy the heart of any; they may seemingly give contentment
for the present; yet the spirit not altogether satisfied: whereas the coming of
Christ in the glory of the Spirit, does fill and satisfy the heart of any in
whom he appears: Mal. 3. 10. Mat. 5. 6. yea, his coming causes a running over
of the souls Cup: yea, it is uncontainable; man's capacity not being able to
receive or comprehend the same: for the want of this satisfaction, power or
witness of the Truth of Christ's coming, he being but under a flash, he runs
to Ministers and men of experience, to hear their judgment, being not
satisfied in himself; and according to their approbation and judgment, he most
commonly receives the more or less satisfaction; and so rests: whereas if it
be Christ's coming in the Spirit, a soul need not run to any Creature in the
World to be satisfied in the Truth of what is discovered; for HE comes with a
Satisfactory Witness; which does answer all objections, and satisfy all doubts
in the heart, which may arise: yea, If men instead of approving, do deny it to
be Truth; yet the souls Testimony within it self does bear up his spirit,
that he is able to say, All men belie the Truth, Romans 8. 16. he not in the
least being daunted in his assurance thereof; though it be opposed by man or
devil: neither can such a heart be shaken, if all the men of the World should
arise against the same, coming to disprove it, Prove. 10. 25. 30. Also he that
runs to any visible external Witness, pretending Christ is come in the
Spirit, is a creature altogether ignorant of his said coming; and lives much
below such a coming: for to me this is an infallible Truth, that if any man
pretend Christ is come into him in the Spirit, and yet wants an inward
Testimony or Witness for it; and so is forced to make use of visible
Testators, he is a man plainly wanting the enjoyment of the same; for God in
such a case never leaves himself without a sure, satisfactory, unresistible and
undeniable testimony; which indeed the Creature who wants the same, may well
make use of others. But flashes if they be deceiveable, pretends to come in
with a witness; and therefore many calls this a witness; they being persuaded
of the truth of what it enjoyes: But this is as much below the witness of the
spiritual coming of Christ as the light of the stars, is below the light of
the Sun. How many under a state of flashes (which I may say is almost the last
Card Satan can play in a soul to deceive him in his transformings) do live
in most great joy, light, notions, or pretended liberty; thinking from a mere
perswafion they have within them, they live in very high enjoyments, and do
believe they have a witness of the Spirit within them, for the truth of what
they believe; when indeed it is but a formed imagination, and a Card played
gallantly by Satan, to keep the Creature below the enjoyment of God in the
Spirit, and to live in freedom and Rest; when not in truth and in the Lord.
Further this is the reason partly of many ups and downs in the heart, whereby
the Creature is one day believing, and another day doubting, because it is not
living in the enjoyment of Christ in the Spirit; but may be is under some
flashes, and so it comes to pass that it is unsettled and unfixed in God.

Fourthly, Flashes are of no long continuance, they are not of an enduring
nature; for they presently appear, are presently gone; and so though the
Creature had a great deal of light and joy; yet when the flash comes to be
taken away, away goes all the Creatures joy and light, and he is left in the
clouds of darkness and sorrow again. Whereas when Christ comes in the Spirit
it is not so, then all sorrow and mourning shall flee away, ( Isa. 60. 19, 20.)
and the darkness of the Creature shall be expelled; and God shall become unto
the soul an everlasting lights Rev. 21. 3. 24. so that God and the Lamb shall
live in his heart, and be sight and glory to him; so as his Sun shall never go
down, but he shall live in the light of God, and the Lamb for ever and ever

For his coming in the Spirit, is after the Resurrection of a soul out of the
grave, whereby he is carried up in the light and glory of God, from the
descendings of that light and glory from God; so as there is a living in the
light God lives in; and a swallowing up in the fame glory God is swallowed up
withal: but a flash leaves in its withdrawing the Creature in the same it
found him in, if not worse: for a flash of light or joy, is like a flash of
light in the Sky; upon the darkest night it appears to be the greater the
greater the darkness is: So upon a dark soul, when its possessed with much
darkness, the least flash that can appear in that is very great and admirable;
so that the heart being no otherwise able to judge, looks upon it as a
manifestation of God, yea, may be a very glorious one: yet it is not so, and at
last is taken away, and the Creatures hopes and expectations is frustrated.
Whereas to such a soul as lives in the day natural or spiritual, hardly can
discern or take notice of such a flash or light, because it is so much
inferior to the light and glory of the Sun, and day; which now is appeared and
shines either within him or without him.

These flashes in the first place, if they be of Satan, the very end thereof is
to lull the creature asleep in the bed of security, and there is no resting of
the same by any poor creature: For

First, It works and comes in suitable to the Creatures necessities, pretending
redress for the same.

Secondly, It comes with a glorious resembled form or shape God works in; and
so it becomes a transformed Satan, and not a transfigured Christ.

Thirdly, It is not able to discern the same by reason of the absence of the
true light which makes all things manifest, Ephesians. 5. 13. yea, the very
transforming of Satan.

Fourthly, Flashes in this nature do come with furniture to back the truth of
what it does declare or speak; if there be any jealousies arise in the heart,
as sometimes there is, yet it does furnish him with strength to manage the
entertainment of it, and his joy and peace from it: and here Satan plays his
parts for if the heart be of an opinion, that it is possible for a soul to
doubt after he has enjoyed a manifestation of God, then he will put a Creature
upon doubting, to make good that false, un-sound, and un-experienced principle
of men; that the truest faith is accompanied with the greatest doubtings; and
here the heart is still deluded, and kept in strong persuasions of the truth of
his flash.

2. If the heart be of that judgment, that it is impossible that a soul can
doubt again after he has enjoyed a manifestation of God; then Satan will
transform himself into a capacity of confirming the creature in laboring in
all transformed actions, to confirm the creature in his assurance of the truth
of what he enjoyes; and so upon all occasions adds to what he has done; and
so the poor Creature Rests satisfied in and upon what the Creature calls his
manifestations of God: now flashes that usually attend a Creature that is truly
enlightened by God, though not fully possessed with God, yet he being waiting
for the coming of Christ in the Spirit, is sometimes attended with flashes or
light of joy: but they if from God, most commonly have these ensuing effects

1. They do underprop and support a weary fainting spirit, in his spiritual
travel to his land of Rest, so as he is made to wait with free submission to
God until it enjoy an appearance of God in the Spirit.

2. Instead of causing a man to Rest, they declare against it; and do discover
the vanity to it of many other Rests it has been Resting upon below the
enjoyment of God in the Spirit; so that it is so far from it, as it, as it is
an Angel appearing, unto whom man would gladly fall down and worship ( Rev.
19. 10. and 22. 8.) yet it says to the Creature, as the Angel said to John,
Worship me not: so says the Flash, Rest not upon me; I am but as a Messenger
from God; I am not the Dispensation of God appearing in the Spirit; I am in the
form of an Angel, I am not the God upon whom thou must Rest and worship.

3. Flashes from God, begets a higher breathing in the soul, and a greater
dis-satisfaction in the soul until it come to enjoy an appearance of God in
the Spirit of glory: it is so far from causing a soul to Rest, as indeed it
works a contrary frame of spirit, which is, a restlesnesse in the heart,
until it come to enjoy that which in the flash is represented to it: also if
so be that there has been any with-drawings back of the heart from seeking
after God; this Flash does mightily stir up the heart of that Creature from
that principle of the contrary nature, namely, a breathing after, and a
restless satisfaction, until it come to p^^sesse God in the Spirit of glory.

The fourteenth false Rest.
THe next Rest in order to this which partly the Creature passes through, is
the appearance of God in forms and administrations, under which the Creature
is mightily ellevated in his Spirits; as Johah was with his Gourd which God
gave him; which works a great displeasure in the heart; when God would have
the Creature brought into a higher dispensation of God. Administrations I must
confess are appointed by God, and in the same he usually appears in a low
manner; so as he sometimes does give the Creature much refreshment in the use
thereof; but not to be the Souls Rest, as though this were a full
manifestation of God in the Spirit; but to set the heart in a frame to see by
this, the great glory that shall be revealed unto him, in the Coming of Christ
in the Spirit: for thus it works, If God be so glorious in a glimpse of
himself, in a form, how much greater will be the appearance of himself in the
spirit; which instead of Rest, thus working, it is made to have a higher
breathing in its spirits after the Rest, which he sees afterward to be
enjoyed from God: so that the heart is led by God through those many
dispensations of God, to see beyond them; Rest to be enjoyed from God, which
cannot be enjoyed in these low Administrations, under which he breaths and
lives: but others, they instead of this, Rest highly satisfied in their
spirits, making it their glory and Rest of spirit to be an enjoyer of those
Administrations, and appearances of flashes in the same; making it the ground
of all their Rest: yea, making it their God of Rest. As though the Children of
Israel should have said, Here will we Rest, as believing we are in the Land of
Canaan; when God led them under, and through those many Administrations by
appearing in the form of a Cloud of Fire; for I look upon this to be the very
symptom of this manner of Rest, we are a speaking of. I do not condemn the
Children of Israel, for their following the leadings of God in those
Administrations: neither do I condemn any man who is in the use of forms;
seeing God led them in, and unto the same; and that it is that which supports
their spirits; namely, their seeing and apprehending God in such a form as the
soul is employed in; with these provisoes: Namely,

First, The not Resting here.

Secondly, The not conceiving this to be the enjoyment of a Saints Rest, but
his way to go, or to be led in his traveling toward the Land.

Thirdly, His expecting of, and waiting for the Coming of Christ in the Spirit;
which shall swallow up, and go beyond his present sight of God in forms;
whereby he shall come to possess the same in that manner as is more glorious
then his fight, which shall never be more taken away, or changed into another
form: But when a Saint who pretends to see the appearance of GOD, does Rest
here; concluding this is the true Rest, and the appearance of God in the
Spirit; and so does not only cease waiting for another Coming, but opposes and
speaks against it; This is a false Rest, and not to be owned as of God: For
the many dispensations Christ went through, before and after his death, yet his
Rest was not in the same; but was a waiting after he was to have passed
through these Administrations and Dispensations of God, to enjoy a higher then
all these; which was his Ascending into the glory of God in the Spirit, and to
make this his habitation and Rest: and to be as a stranger and pilgrim in all
the other Administrations in the flesh; in which he did enjoy many appearances
of God: yet he passed through them all, and at last was made to enjoy his
Rest: which was the glorious enjoyment of God, after his ascension into God
far beyond all forms and Administrations: yea, beyond the Manifestations of
God in the measure thereof: And so Rest in the same glory which is to be every
believers Rest: for the Rest of Christ, is the same Rest of every Believer: and
the same glory he Rests and breathes in, is to be the Rest and breathing place
of every Believer. And as Christ cannot, nor shall never be changed into any
other form, then now He lives, Rests and breaths in; so shall it be with
every heart, who shall be truly centred upon God: He shall never be changed
into any other form, Rest, or glory then he is in, when he comes to be truly
stated in his living everlasting Rest; below which he is not to be looked upon
either by himfelfe or others to be in any true substantial Rest: yea, though
this do work much peace and joy in the heart of such a party, to see the
appearance of God in forms and administrations: yet though a soul may delight
here under some considerations; yet to make this his Rest and habitation, is to
live in and upon Jonahs Gourd: or as if the Children of Isr ael should have
rested in the wilderness, when God did refresh them with Manna; and so in the
same have made their habitation short of the Land of Canaan: for God appearing
in the form of a Cloud, or Pillar of fire, was not for this end, that they
might make their habitation there. No more is the appearance of God in any
Gospei form, but to be as that spiritual leading into a place where God shall
appear in more fuller glory; and shall no more change his form but shall
appear always in the same glory in and to the spirit of such a Creature: So
that what changeable form God is pleased to appear in to us, is to be no Rest
or habitation of us; but to be led into higher enjoyments, or after higher
enjoyments of God, by the fight and appearance of him, though in a low or very
mean manner in the form discovered. For the end partly why Christ appeared in
diverse forms to his Apostles, and so to many now; is because he would not have
any Rest in or upon his form, or appearance: but that they might be, as he
was, dying to all these, and waiting for his ascending into God; where he might
be for ever swallowed up with the light and glory of God, and there to make his
and all Saints habitation and Rest.

The fifteenth false Rest.
THe next Rest which I shall speak of is, The Gospel Faith of Jesus Christ (as
men calls it) which indeed has some ground of Rest, both from Scripture and
reason, as they think.

Men in our days have given distinctions of Faith, as namely, Historical,
Temporal, and Saving. But leaving the two former, I come to the latter, and
shall un bosom my sad experience of deceit in the same.

1. Concerning this Saving Gospel Faith. I own their is a Faith, which in
Scripture is termed Saving: yet that which men calls both believing and saving,
I find not to be so.

And first of all, men calls true Faith, A dependence upon Christ, or believing
Christ dyed for them according to the Scripture. Now Faith is neither a
dependancy upon Christ, or believing according to our common exposition, that
Christ dyed for us; these, if they be so in the heart, as a Creature does
conceive, yet they are but the effects and fruits of Faith, in its spiritual
act, upon or toward God; but this many make their Rest and shelter; that if
they can but believe, Christ dyed for them at Jerusalem; and that thus
believing they can go out of themselves; that is, only deny their own
righteousness, and believe that Christ is theirs, and that he dyed for them,
this is a Rest sufficient: when indeed the poor heart, is both ignorant what
Faith is, and what going out of himself is. For never can a creature go out of
himself to Christ or God, before* there be a clear manifestation of God in the
heart. Now the Creature who is thus Resting upon his believing in Christ; is
altogether ignorant of any manifestation of God to him or in him. For Faith is
a supernatural and divine light of God communicated to the soul, by the
Spirit of God; which after this manifestation of light, the creature comes to
see and behold the glory of God; by which Faith he is made to believe; yea,
which believing is an effect or act of the said Faith, upon or toward the same
God which is revealed.

Now in the first place, Believing is not Faith; but an effect thereof.

Secondly, Beleeying is an act of God in us to himselfes and so no Rest.

Thirdly, Nothing which flows forth from man to God, is to be a Rest. No act
whatsoever is to be a Rest as it is purely exercised in man though of God: but
man's Rest, is to be One who acts all in man, who is God. Many men are thinking
highly of themselves; because the Scriptures declare a Christ crucified for
man; and they are made to believe he was so for them, and so are made to deny
their own works of doings, and to depend only upon this Christ; ^ which
indeed the poor hearts be ignorant of, and know him not, neither have any
manifestation of Jesus Christ in them, in any particular way; but only from
their own imaginations and fancies; they still confidently believe that this
Christ is theirs, and he dyed for them; and here they Rest, and make their
habitation; concluding this to be Faith, and the knowledge of Christ; which
indeed if such a Spirit knew what Faith were, or the knowledge of Christ were;
this would be dissolved, if not destroyed; and it would find it is faith and
knowledge, to be an un-sound and nn-safe Rest to be centred upon. So that I say
that that is not Faith, or believing which men so calls: and if so, it were no
ground to Rest upon.

For, In the first place, A man must truly know within himself what Faith is,
before man can truly believe.

Secondly, He must also know what this Christ is he believes in, before he can
depend upon him and believe truly in him.

Thirdly, There must be a clear manifestation of God or Christ in man, before
there can be any true knowledge particularly of him by man.

Fourthly, Christ's dying at Jerusalem shall then be known to the heart in a
more spiritual manner then ever: And the workings of that death, shall be
found in that heart, to be such as formerly it did not conceive of.

Fifthly, He shall know that dependency upon Christ, and his former believing in
Christ, the truth of which he has formerly tried by visible signs and marks,
is now made to be a fancy, not Faith; and an effect of darkness, not of light.
And now he finds another dependency, and believing in him, flowing from
another ground then before he knew; and that the matter he Rested upon in his
own imagination, which he before called a Christ dying for him, is now changed;
being it was but his carnal conceptions, and fleshly teachings and actings:
and now he is made to see the spiritual sense; and so to judge of the truth of
an ever dying, yet ever living, transfigured, glorified Christ: so as now he is
making his habitation, not amongst the beasts of the field, in his former
fancies and fleshly teachings; but in the spiritual heavens, where lives all
Just men, made perfect; and all perfect men, made to live by, or in the life of
God or Christ; so as he is changed into glory: and his Rest is made glorious.

Sixthly, When this is come to pass, men shall know really the Mystery of
Faith; and why it is called a Mystery: and that same spirit shall know a
difference betwixt the Mystery of Faith discovered to the Conscience, coming as
it were from God, and the keeping and exercising of the Mystery of that Faith
in a pure Conscience to God: and that believing is not Faith, as it purely
comes from God, discovering it self, and the Mystery thereof to the
Conscience: But it is the exercise of that said Mystery of Faith by God, in
Conscience to God. So that the Mystery of faith in it self is one thing, and
believing and dependency upon Christ (if true) is another thing. But the effect
or exercise of the Mysteriousnesse of faith in a conscience which is pure, to
or upon a God that is pure.

Seventhly, Men may believe Christ died for them, and from this believing may
practice such things as are required by him: yea, may have much peace and joy
in the same: And in this his own works, he may abh^rre and detest, not setting
them up with Christ: and this he may do from a Scripture, notionary knowledge,
only got in the head, where he is swallowed up with his conception of his
enjoyment of Christ and God by believing; and so may live in a way of
Dependency upon Christ, as he is declared and set forth to dye for man at
Jerusalem; from which knowledge, believing, and dependency, there is begotten
much deadness and security, in which he may suffer and rejoice, he may dye and
live in it; exalting God much in word, and seeming actions: and yet all this
time ignorant of the ground and Mystery of faith; yea, ignorant of the
knowledge of Christ, which begets the true exercise, and living by faith: Yet
if this which I now say were true, yet it were to low an Element for any
spiritual heart to make his habitation or Rest; but in this same they are to
be as men of hope, 2. These. 3. 5. waiting for, and hasting unto the Coming of
Christ in the Clouds, 1. These. 4. 17. where they shall enjoy and have a
Dispensation of Glory; and so shall be for ever with the Lord* for the Mystery
of faith is the pure sight of an un-known, un-seen God, Isa. 33. 17. and the
pure sight of God in this great Mystery is from the pure enjoyment of God, is
the Kingdom of heaven and glory, and this must be within, and enjoyed by every
spiritull heart.

This is the place of safety, where Saints Treasure lies, and where they are
to make their Rest, habitation and abode, Col. 3. 1. This safe Rest is not
procured by, neither is it a dependency upon one, a heard of Christ; but it is
a carrying up of a spiritual, crucified Spirit, into a glorious God; who was,
and now is made manifest, to live with, to Rest upon, and to have a habitation
in, for Ever and for Ever: And here the spirit remains in safety and in glory,
triumphing in him, and being swallowed up with him, is carried up into the
light and life of God; knowing him in all things, enjoying him in all things;
seeing him to be the light and life of all things; being now gathered up into
his will, is wholly disposed by him; and therein with God is satisfied, and so
Rests: whereas men's believing is very unsound; and if it were not, yet its very
unsafe, being given to change: And being it is but some exercise of something
in man, yet it being but an effect, it is not to be a Rest; but man is rather
to be carried above it, after the possession of him who can give Rest, and ease
all heavy loades and burdens of the creature, Mat. 11. 28. 29.

The sixteenth false Rest.
THe next Rest we in order shall speak of, Is the great Experiences many have
of deliverances given them by God, from inward and outward streights; making
them evidences of his love, and matter enough to conclude safety, Rest and
happiness; and in this particular there is some gloss, and seeming cause; as
afterward shall be produced.

And first of all, we will come to spiritual deliverances, as

First, Inward conflicts of spirit; occasioned either by a discovery of the
want of God, or of a souls misery without God; which occasioneth condemnation
and apprehensions of wrath, and so sorrow, mourning and grief of spirit; in
which condition the soul lies as in hell, being filled with horror and fear:
and looking upon God as nothing but a revenging and tormenting God: in which
torments of spirit he lies groaning and mourning before God; being swallowed up
in darkness, and bondage, attempting all means to get freedom and liberty,
from this his sad, woeful and miserable estate: wherein souls sometimes get
deliverance one of these three ways.

1. Either from extraordinary pains and diligence wherein he thinks if he
could but do this or that, or attain so much humiliation or mourning or
repentance, then he should be happy and in freedom: whereupon in conclusion he
attaines (in his own apprehension) that which before he desired: which stopping
of the mouth of conscience, and a breaking prison before God deliver, together
with a conceit of a Cure applied by God; when indeed it is a curing the wound
of such a soul falsely; which in time will break forth to the greater damage of
the party.

Or secondly, It is freed by some cunning Sophister of Satan, either
immediately by himself, wherein he labors to apply a false remedy, thinking
to put the soul thereby into a state of security: or else mediately, by his
instruments in the Ministry; wherein they come to daub with untempered mortar,
and so speaks peace to man, before God speak peace within man; and so does as
the Lord says, Heal up the wound of the daughter of his People falsely; and
from this have many poor hearts been mistaken, when at any time they have been
in and under such torments of spirit; they have not rested until they have run
unto Ministers, to see what they will say; some of them putting them upon
doing, some of them applying cures to them: and here a poor heart thinks to
be satisfied; where he never Rests, but runs from one to another, from
creature to creature, seeing if he can get any thing from them, sometimes
coming away with much peace, other times coming away with a lesson of doing;
and by these means comes souls sometimes to have their deliverances, and for a
space Rests until it break forth again.

The third way wherein many others attain deliverances, is from God: As the
children of Israel from their land of bondage, tyranny and taskmasters; which
though God himself did free them, yet notwithstanding was not to be their Rest,
but to be their first step toward their Rest: So though God do sweetly deliver
a Soul from, and out of this trouble and perplexity of spirit, yet it is not to
be a Rest unto him, or to be a habitation for him to dwell in; but to be as it
were the first step to his Rest.

Now some men's deliverances are of God, and some of themselves, and some of
Satan; but none of these are to be rested upon as they are deliverances,
seeing they may be true or false: which until a higher dispensation of God
cannot in^allibly be discerned.

Secondly, A Soul may be delivered from a resolved self Murder or
Destruction, when temptation does violently attend that way; yet not
withstanding though he be abundantly preserved by God in his inward straight;
wherein Satan would have him become his own executioner; yet it is not any
sufficient Center for any spirit.

Or thirdly, If it be a deliverance of the creature from the wrath to come,
presently lying in the apprehension of the creature; yet not to be a Rest, or
any cause thereof.

Fourthly, If it be a deliverance of the creature from some violent corruption
or lust within him; so as now God has as it were freed his spirit from that
Lordly power of inward corruption, so as now he is freed from sin, which
formerly has both dishonored God, dishonored Truth, and taken away his
peace. Now sometimes when this comes to be subdued, and the soul delivered from
the same, he Rests upon it; and concludes from it great cause of safety and
security; and as an infallible Testimony of Gods love; and here he makes his
center, when indeed the heart cannot have true Rest in any deliverances wrought
for it by God, but must be carried up above the same into the Deliverer, who is
God; so as in inwards, so in outward, be it of what nature or quallity
soever: yet many after the receipt hereof wax the more secure, make a God of
their deliverances ct so Rest upon them: with which though they were in love,
yet they are not given for that end; no more then God delivering the Children
of Israel at the Red Sea, should afterward be a stop unto them, and a center
for them, before they came into the land of Promise: Or that deliverance of
Daniel, or of the Three Children, or of Jonah, none of these were to be a
cause, either of Security or Center; but to be rather accompanied by God, to
put their spirits out of themselves after him, who was to be a Rest unto them,
and a Deliverer of them: so that the common, or special deliverances of God,
in these cases are abused, and the end thereof dealt deceitfully with; and they
are made that which God did not appoint them to be, viz. Rests; and that which
satisfies the creature with the receipt thereof. yet in the second place, I do
not deny this to be one of Gods dispensations; and the way he deals with
spirits both to discover themselves, with the vanity and misery attending the
same; where man's heart is made a heart of misery, preparing for mercy; this
being the way to Rest and peace, happiness and glory; when God comes in the
first place to free the soul from this his deliverance, though it be of God
still: as the other is the way to happiness, so his deliverance the way to
rest; that is the way to make the heart enter into it, and be centred in it:
For though the Rest in this deliverance be discovered; yet it may be long,
before such a heart do enter into it: as David says plainly, return unto thy
Rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. Now though God
may have dealt bountifully with a soul, yet that soul may not be returned,
nor centred in his true and proper Rest, though it be in a further work then
deliverance inward or outward.

So that in the first place, many hearts it may be, have been in deep distress
of Spirit, in the pit where no water is, and now are it may be in such a
condition as they are at great freedom and live in much joy; yet such a heart
it may be freed in his own sense and yet intended by God, to be brought into
his former bondage and misery; because his wound is falsely cured; and having
not been willing to wait Gods time, is fallen thereby into carnal and unsafe
security* therefore souls had need beware of false deliverances.

2. Satan that Spirit of deceit, may drive on his design in this particular; to
have a soul delivered by deceit; seeing before he could not prevent the cause
of the sense of his misery; and seeing he could not prevent that, he labors to
deceive the Creature by proposing, and working deliverance for it, before God
deliver it: the heart being willing to embrace and to have deliverance before
his time.

3. If this be not, but that God goes forwards, to make such a heart a heart of
misery, and so prepare it for mercy, and work admirable diliverances for it,
both within and without; yet notwithstanding it is not sufficient the soul
Rest here; but such a heart is to wait for a higher dispensation of God, this
being Gods leading way thereto.

The seventeenth and last false Rest.
THE next and last Rest which we shall speak of is, by some waited for, and
by others pretended to be received: to wit, The extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit, whereby both worship without and God within, is confirmed, and in their
apprehension sealed up for truth.

Now for my own part, I look upon both either in the condition of waiting for
it; or in the pretense of the receiving of it, to be un-sound, or an un-safe
principle,

1. In a waiting way, there are, who are waiting to have the Spirit powered
down, in such a manner as they shall be able to do miracles, and visibly to
cast out devils. But I think this is a mere mistake; for those casting out of
devils and visible powers given to the Apostles and Saints, was given only as a
dispensation of God, in that administration the Apostles lived in; and not to
be any dispensation intended to be given to any other, after that
administration was confirmed and settled.

2. Those visible powers were given them for the confirmation of the Gospel in
a visible form, to s^ale the truth of that form of words, which was to be
left unto all ages. Now if we had new Scriptures to write, and a new Gospel to
declare; then I confess for the establishment of the same; it would be
necessary to have the same confirmed by visible miracles and powers. But

3. It was given to be a figure of the glorious manner of the workings of God
in the soul; and the casting out of devils and curing sick, opening eyes, and
the like ( Isa. 26. 12. Phil. 2. 13.) these were to demonstrate unto us, that
as the coming of Christ in the form of flesh, was attended with these signs
and miracles; so the coming of him in the Spirit; should be attended with
inward signs and miracles; to wit, internal and divine powers, the casting
out of the many devils within; the opening of the eyes of the understanding,
and the curing the wounds of the soul ( Luke 24. 45. Ephesians. 1. 18. Isa. 60. 1.
John 5. 25.) the opening man's ears to hear the voice of Christ within; to have
a dead Lazarus soul raised up in the Spirit.

Now the Rest, was but as figures, though real, of what God did hold forth
should accompany the second coming of Christ in the heart, Mal. 3. 2. Mat. 25.
12, 13. And if souls did wait for this, their expectations should not be so
much frustrated as it is in the other, and shall be. And as for the great
miracles that shall be wrought, must be within, and felt by souls, when Christ
appears in the heart: So that these external powers, shall be turned into
these sayings, The coming of Christ shall be with power and great glory: Mat.
24. 30. Now men are deceived I fear, who seek for his coming in any carnal
or fleshly way; or that he will make that to be the powrings down of the
Spirit, to wit, the casting out of devils, etc.

But it shall be more spiritual and heavenly; even the power of the Spirit
within, to consume men's lusts and self, and to cast out all those spirits of
deceit, which internally do lodge within the Creature: so that the letter
which was confirmed by outward Signs after Christ appeared in the form of
flesh; shall in the mystery thereof be confirmed to and in us, by the internal
workings and miracles, which shall attend Christ's spiritual coming in the
Soul, and that in the Spirit. Now I say, that neither do men's waitings, appear
to be that which men conceive them to be; nor if they did enjoy that at the
last which they wait for, it would not prove that to them, nor give that
content, peace, joy, and cause of Rest in them, nor assurance to them, which
they expect from it, and think to attain when they come to attain it. I wish
that men would turn the wheel, into the waiting for the inward coming of
these things in a more spiritual manner. For my own part, I think they would
enjoy more quietness in their spirits for the present, and more settlement and
Rest, peace and safety in them for the future, when it comes to be experienced:
But I think I may say thus much to such spirits; that I think when they enjoy
that they wait for, viz. the powrings out of the spirti, from which to enjoy
power to work outward miracles; it will be in the enjoyment thereof. But I
should be sorry, to live without the enjoyment of God to that day; and I am
confident all such souls shall be weary before they see the same enjoyed by
them.

But Secondly, To all such as have the same in pretense; I do not see how they
can make them any safe Rests; seeing that Saul and many others did go as far
in the gifts of Prophecy, or any other gift of the Spirit, a^ any almost who
did sweetly enjoy God, and that was the cause why those words were spoken, They
shall say in that day, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast
out devils, etc. Mat. 7. 22, 23. Yet see the reply of Christ, he did not own
them in the same; though they did make it their Rest before, and their plea
then; yet it was nothing, but that which proved both un-sound and un-safe for
them.

Secondly, The workings of Antichrist and the mystery of iniquity does work
withal deceivablenesse, doing great wonders in the eyes of the world; yet alas
it is, both for the deceiving of the party who has it, and for the deceiving
of the parties who believe it; witness the work of the Magicians, who when
they acted the same things Moses did; yet the parties who acted, and the
parties who believed the same, were both deceived: so though there were any in
our days, who could do the same work, that they or Judas did, yea, greater
then they did, yet the parties might be reprobates and cast-awaies: and
however, they may be suddenly taken away, and therefore unsafe for any soul
to Rest thereon: It must be the power of God within, and those inward miracles,
which God works as the effect of his coming; viz. The casting out of the
devils within; and bringing down mountains of pride and self; and exalting of
his Christ in the soul, so as the soul is un-bottomed of all his false props,
and carried wholly out of himself, above himself into the power and majesty
of that Christ exalted, to live by and in that same power and glory, by which
God lives in the heart: So that I say, to look for outward powers in this case,
as I and many more have done: or if they were enjoyed, to make them their
Rests, both are to me un-sound; and every party as well as my self, shall
find the evil, and un-soundnesse thereof.

Now having discovered as many false Rests as at present I am free to discover,
I shall in the next place show how difficult it is, and how hard it goes with
the creature, to part with these his false Rests; which are false but in
reference to his Resting and abusing the end for which such a dispensation was
given.

The Soul being in the first place, as I may say, established upon them, making
them his God, be they forms or what they will, when it seems to be taken
away, he being brought to a nonplus in his spirit: He cries, They have taken
away my God, What must I do? So that there arises as it were a storm within
this creature, which begets a spirit of discontent in the creature: Witness
the same in Jonah's, Gourd which God had given him, yet being abused in the end
for which it was given; in the taking of it away, there was a spirit of
murmuring and discontent. And thus it is always, when creatures would be
Resting upon any thing below God; when God seems to take it away from the
creature; The more the soul was glued to it, and Rested upon it, and made a God
of it; the more difficult and hard it goes with the creature to part with the
same; yea, the more discontent does arise in that heart.

First then, It arises from the abuse of our being glued to any
Administration, so as not to use it to that end for which it was appointed.

Secondly, The cause partly of this arises sometimes from the greatness of
the loss it works in the creature, in being to part with the same; as many
souls it may be have spent the glory of their age and strength, to patch up a
Religion of their own, and have taken much pains to accomplish the same. It
may be has been twenty years a professor, and has all this time been
laboring to patch up a Rest, and having got one, in one moment God rases the
foundation thereof: this works such a loss in the soul, as indeed to have
many a glorious gift burned up; yea, many a glorious day of joy, twenty years
profession in one moment laid in the dust; and now to deny it self in all his
pains, and parts of wisdom and knowledge: This must needs go hard and be
very difficult with a poor heart, to part with all: And the Creature will have
many shifts and puttings off before he will be made freely to part wi^h all,
and to deny himself in all.

The condition of such a soul, is like a man that all his days has been
taking pains night and day, to comprehend some estate; and when he has got
such an estate, he falls a building, and makes great buildings; and when he has
furnished the same, takes delight in it, and sets his heart upon it; and
behold, when he is solacing himself in what he has got and done: In a moment
there is a fire consumes the same to the dust; which being beheldby the party,
he is amazed, and much perplexed in his spirit; upon which occasion in some it
begets death, in others discontentednesse and murmurings; yea, repinings of
spirit, so as it is not only a day of sorrow, but it continues so: And this
parties loss being exceeding great, and his expectation frustrated, he is now
at a nonplus, not knowing what to do: So it is with a heart after God either
has given gifts, or something below himself, or for the which the creature
has been laboring all his days; and at last, having attained so much, as now
he Rests with the Church of Laodicea, in a conceited happiness: When God comes
to burn down this house, the soul has been all his days building, though
upon (it may be) a false foundation, he lays the Creature and his work in
the dust; so as now the soul is stripped naked of all his conceited holiness, or
righteousness and happiness; upon which fight the creature is wrought into an
amazment and astonishment of spirit, wondering what God is a doing with him In
this said condition, which works death, and sorrow, and the grave, and nothing
but discontentednesse before; and a laboring to stand, and not to part with
the same, until he be forced to it by an unresistible power: the soul before
is crying, what must I be stripped naked of all? What is all my praying, fasting,
mourning and the like, all taken from me; so as now I have nothing to Rest
upon: Must I part with all? Oh, especially this creatures riches is hard to
part with, as it was with the young man who wanted all things, in the want of
one thing; who notwithstanding had enough of the World, and I fear, too much
of this we are speaking of; for he was nigh the Kingdom of heaven, yet to
part with all for a Christ, Oh how loath he was: Oh this parting with all goes
hard, makes many sorrowful either in respect of outward or inward riches: It
is most commonly this inward riches which is the life of most professors in our
days, until God unbottome them of their professions, and forms, and selfdoings
and fullness: and the most that are destroyed in our Land, I fear are in this
particular: when poor creatures are so glued to themselves, or forms, or their
own righteousness and self-riches, that indeed they live upon the same; and
make a life out of it, and a God upon it: and so dwell, as though they were in
heaven; when indeed they are neither in the way to it, nor possessed with it:
But if ever God appear either to them or in them, God will unveile them so, as
indeed though they have been professors never so long, and in the same are
become rich in their own eyes, and in the eyes of others, yet I believe God
will burn it up, and bring them to a loss; and make their high and lofty
spirits lie in the dust; as he has done with many in their condition.

I look that the greatest losers in our days, shall be the longest and tallest
professors; though in their losing, it may for the future tend to their
greatest game: yea, Englands professors shall ere long, cry out of their inward
losses, more then their outward losses: and they shall be stripped more naked in
matter of spirituals, then ever they were of temporals; though in the loss of
both it may be accompanied with little freedom, but rather unwillingness at
present, and repinings of spirit, though at the last they may be delivered from
their straits, and be clothed with the Sun, and then shall trample the Moon
under their feet; I do not speak of professors in reference to any particular
faction; but I speak of all under what denomination or title soever, that are
professing God, before they be possessed with him; who are storing up inward
riches, but not of the Spirit, and Rest upon it, as though it were of God;
which when God makes it manifest by the day, according to that Scripture, 1
Cor. 3. 3. etc. it burns and is consumed, either because it was not of God, or
else because it was Rested upon below God: So that now to be brought out of the
Creature and all its own fullness, or self actings, are so contrary to it, and
so for the annihilating of it; so that indeed man in and of himself will oppose
God, and stand out against this work of annihilation: to have a Creature who
before was rich in and of himself, or from some administration of God, below
the enjoyment of God in the same, and according to which, and for the want of
which, the Creature makes his habitation below Heaven; though he lives as an
Angel, yet as miserable as any devil, in reference to his want of God in a way
of enjoyment; it being thus with a poor heart, that to part with his false Rest
is so hard and difficult; How then comes the soul to see them to be false, in
reference to his Resting upon them, though they may be true as they are an
administration of God, I say, how comes the soul to see them to be false, and
so either willing to have them either dissolved, if they be administrations of
God, or burned and consumed, if they be of the Creature? In answer to this, we
will say both ways in Scripture and experience. And

First, God makes them known to the Creature, and him willing at last, to part
with them, by discovering unto him, the emptiness of these dispensations,
wherein he is made to see the non-satisfaction and un-safenesse thereof, if
continued in by the Creature; as thus, either by discovering unto a soul, the
want of his presence in it, wherein it appears to be truly empty; or else by
frustrating the Creatures expectation, in the not enjoying that from these
things but in conceit; which it did expect to find in them, and receive from
them; and herein God hedges up the souls ways with thorns; so that now it
cannot find that comfort and refreshment in those things which formerly it
Rested upon and drew comfort from; now God making them empty and vain to the
heart, it is forced to cry out as Solomon, of the vanity thereof; and to say
with them in the 24. of Isa. 16. verse, Our leanness, our leanness; so as now
he is made willing to submit to the burnings up of his expectation, by seeing
the vanity of his conceptions in them.

Secondly, By representing to the understanding a more excellent Rest and
center for his spirit, both sure and safe; this begets a breathing after the
enjoyment of that Rest which it is made to see without it, not as yet enjoyed
by it ( Isa. 11. 10. and 13. 16. and 28. 8.) this same makes the soul willing
to forgo the one, that he may enjoy the other: For as Canaan was discovered to
the Children of Israel to be more excellent and glorious then that place of
Egypt was, wherein they were in bondage; which made them at their departure
from it, to be willing to part with the Garlic and fleshpots: so it is with a
soul in this case, the more the glorious Rest of Christ is represented to any
soul, the more it does discover false Rests, and the more it does unbottome
every Creature thereof.

Thirdly, They are discovered too and un-bottomed off these Rests, by the
departure of God from any administration; so as the soul desires not to Rest,
where God is departed: for if it has been thus with the Creature, that the
cause of its Rest has been the appearance of God, in such an administration or
dispensation; yet if now he see clearly that God is departed from it, he Rests
no longer; being the ground why he Rested was and is taken away or removed: for
as God promised to be in, and appear to his People, in the Temple, and in the
Administrations under the Law; yet not for everlasting continuance; but that
afterward he did intend to withdraw his presence from them, and so to disanull
the use thereof: so in any dispensation of God below his spiritual appearance
in the foul, he intends to appear at such a time as himself has appointed,
in the use of the same; but afterward to withdraw himself from it, for some
end best known to himself.

Now this is that I say, Gods departing and ceasing to appear in a
Dispensation or an Administration, Is that which both discovers the Resting
therein to be false, and is a further means to un-bottome the spirit of a man
for making of it his Rest any longer: for that Soul that is led into any
Administration by God, in the which God appears; when God withdraws from it,
and cease to appear any more in it, the Soul does the like also.

And in this he follows the Lamb where ever he goes, Rev. 14. 4. So that I
say, It is the departure of God from any condition, (which if the creature has
been made sensible of it) does represent the making a habitation in it, and the
Resting upon it, is both below God, and contrary to him; so as in the same he
is made willing to part with, and to see when God is known to be departed from,
the vanity of making any thing his Rest though given of God, until God do
everlastingly appear within man, carrying up the soul and spirit of man into
himself.

Fourthly, The next way God discovers these to be false Rests, and makes the
creature willing to part with the same, Is by appearing in a more glorious
Administration to the Creature; and this is the reason why Christ comfort
his Disciples, when the form of the flesh was to be taken away, by telling of
them He must go away, or else the Comforter would not come, Joh. 16. 7. As if
he should say, unless I depart in the form of flesh, or in this outward
Dispensation, you cannot enjoy me in a more gloriou^ Dispensation of the
Spirit within you; which should for ever abide with you: It is the Substance of
what God intends to make manifest in your spirits.

I am but in this fleshly dispensation a figure, and therefore I must depart,
that I may more gloriously appear within you; and lead you into all Truth,
more glorious then yet you see or understand. It was so with John and Christ in
the flesh; as John did decrease, so Christ did increase, Joh. 3. 30. It was
indeed the increasing of Christ in the fleshly Administration, that made John
in his Administration decrease: for the dispensation of God in the flesh of
Christ, was more glorious then the dispensation of John; so that in spirituals
there is a giving way to a superior or more glorious Administration, by an
inseriour or less glorious dispensation: for the more of God appears in any
form, the more glorious is that form: now God did more appear in Christ's
form then in John's; which made John decrease and give way unto the
dispensation of Christ: from whence I observe, That no man is to forsake any
dispensation, so long as God appears in it, and makes it a living
dispensation: for the Apostles were not to cease walking with, or to depart
from Christ in the flesh, un^il God was departed from it; and ceased according
to it or by it: but all the Apostles were to continue in that dispensation, so
long as it was a living dispensation.

So it was with the dispensations under the Law; they were to continue in them
so long as God appeared in them and continued with them: So shall souls follow
as God leads; As the Children of Israel were to abide in any place, so long as
God abode in it: So we; And as they did move, when God moved from it, so are we
until we are in our perfect Rest, Number. 9. 17. 18. Heb. 4. 9. For it is the
presence of God in a particular thing, which is both to be a souls Leader,
Exo. 34. 14, 15. and his cause of stay in the use of any dispensation: So it
was with Moses, Unless thy presence go along with us, carry us not hence.

It has been, and still ought to be, That Saints removing out of one condition
into another, or from one Administration or Dispensation into another, has
been by the presence of God, either going, or removed from such a Dispensation:
So that there may be a folly in this particular; for any man to cease acting in
forms, or in such an Administration as God has brought him into, and truly
appeared in, until there be a clear departure of GOD in the same, leading it
into a more glorious Administration.

Secondly, God seldom does depart from one Administration, until he appears
in a more glorious manner in another: As God did not depart from the
Administration of the Law, until he appeared more glorious in the
Administration of the Gospel.

So it is now, That there can be no expelling clouds but by Light, so there can
be no other way to take off a soul truly from the use of any sorme, until God
appear in a more higher dispensation. For as the appearance of Christ in the
flesh was the sum and substance of the forms of the Law, and was not to be
disanulled before the substance came, Heb. 8. 1. Col. 2. 17. so it is now: The
sum and substance of all Forms and Administrations, is Christ in the Spirit;
and until the Substance of them be come perfectly into every heart, there can
be no true cessation of that heart in Forms or Administrations, which are
Gospel Forms or Administrations.

So that God departing sometimes from an Administration, and appearing more
glorious in another, either within or without; is that which both unbottoms the
soul of Resting in it, and that which makes the creature willing to part with
it. For the want of this the Jews not beholding Christ, the sum and
substance of the Law, Come in a more glorious Administration, they were
unwilling to cease acting in their former Administrations; the Veil being not
taken away, 2. Cor. 3. 14. whereby they had been made to see the Substance of
those Forms, established completely in a Christ, Col. 2. 10.

But lastly, The chiefest and onlyest way why the creature comes to be willing
to be most free to part with, and to have a discovery of all dispensations
below the appearance of God in the Spirit to be no Rest, Is by the glorious
manifestation of God in the Soul; whereby,

First of all, He appears as a glorious Light within man. And this Light,

1. Expels all the Clouds from off, or out of the Creature; which kept the
Creature from beholding a real difference betwixt a true Rest and a false: So
long as man is without this, no marvel then, though he be not able to discern
whether his Rests be true or false: But now when God speaks in a Soul, Arise,
soul, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the LORD is Risen upon
thee, Isa. 60. 1, 2. Then this true Light shining into the Soul, it makes
manifest all things; whereas the Soul before had a Veil upon him, and a Cloud
over him; but now the glory of God is Risen in such a creatures heart, whereby
he is made able to judge by the light of God dwelling in him.

Secondly, As it does discover what is fallacy; so it reveals what is truth: it
advances Truth in the soul, though the soul before was ignorant, what
difference there was betwixt the appearance of God in forms without him, and
the appearance of God in the Spirit within him: of the difference betwixt a
transformed rest resembled, and a true Rest in the Spirit manifested: of the
end of all forms and administations, with God appearing in them, without the
creature, before the substance of the same be come in the glory of the Spirit
within. Now this true Light makes all manifest ( John 3. 21.) and is a clear
evidencing light within man; discovering Him who only must be the center and
Rest of the soul; which before it heard of, but now comes to see and
experience the same. This Light removes all obstructions out of the Creature;
and makes his judgment act according to this Light within him; so that it is a
Light not only expelling clouds; but clearly demonstrates a real difference
betwixt Truth and Falsehood; so as now he is made to see, the place God has set
every administration or dispensation in, with the time, place and end.

Thirdly, This Light makes not only manifest things as they are, John 3. 21.
and so takes the soul off from them: But it does dissolve all those
administrations the Creature has had without him, by the glory of God in the
Spirit within him: so as the breakings of the day does dissolve the
dispensation of the night; so does the dawning of the day in the heart of a
Saint, dissolve, not destroy, any of those administrations or dispensations of
God, in which God did in some measure appear to the Creature: for as the night
is of God as well as the day; yet the day does dissolve the dispensation of the
night: So though many men's dispensations were of God; yet notwithstanding when
God appears, they are dissolved and do not now appear; because a more
gloriouser manifestation of God within man has appeared.

Fourthly, Yea, this manifestation of God in the Spirit does swallow up all
other dispensations; so as now they are gathered up into the substance thereof,
who before did send them forth; as the light of the Stars and the light of
the Moon, are borrowed lights, or lights inferior to, and sent out from the
Sun; and when the glory of the Sun appears, they all appear bodily and
substantially in the Sun: and as it is that the light dwells in the fullness
of it in the Sun, and all lights are borrowed from or occasioned by it; and
that light is that which swallows up all other, when it comes to appear; So it
is with God appearing in the Spirit; he appears as the fullness and the
substance, or body of all other lights, ( Col. 2. 17.) which are true, though
sent by God, in their dispensation, to accomplish his own design: yet when God
breaks into all souls in the glory of the Spirit, this shining of God into
the soul (2 Cor. 3. 8. and 4. 6. and 3. 10.) does swallow up all his former
appearances in any dispensation below this; and gives way and submits, and so
gathers up and meets completely in the body and substance of them ( Col. 2. 10.
17. Tit. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 4. 14.) which is God truly appearing in the Spirit of
fullness and glory, this makes the heart free to part with any thing, though
never so dear to it, which is obstructive to, and keeps the soul from any
enjoyment of this glorious dispensation; yea, this is that dispensation, which
does destroy all administrations, or forms, or dispensations that are not of
God; what is of God before, shall be swallowed up in it; what is of man, self
or Satan shall be destroyed by it: 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.) This is that which truly
discovers to the soul all his false Rests, though never so seemingly glorious;
yea, though they be of Satan's transformings, or of selfs resemblings; yet it
lays them all in the dust, and unvailes them to the Creature; so as they
appear in their colors and place; which sometimes works a mighty indignation
in the heart, against the ways of his own heart (1 Cor. 7. 11.) when his
lewdness is discovered unto him, so as he is not only made free to part with
the same: but he is brought out of love with himself, for Resting upon the
same, so much below God or Christ. Again, in the manifestation of God, there is
satisfaction; Peace and Rest possesses the Creature in stead of the other;
this peace dispossesseth the other peace; this satisfaction makes nothing the
other; whatsoever objection or dis-satisfaction was before, or does arise
since, now they are all fully answered, and the soul completely satisfied; so
as now he is brought out of a dunghill, into a palace; from a mean condition
into a glorious, to wit, even to live by the breathings of divine Truth in him;
so as now he lives, because God lives and is satisfied with the flowings in of
God, and eats of that which God eats of, viz. Love, Glory, and happiness.
Nay further there is fullness in this satisfaction; he fills the soul with
himself, and how can then this soul do any other, but be free and willing to
part with any other seeming fullness or good, when now he is filled with him
that fills all in all, in all things. Ephesians. 1. 23. So as the waters cover the
Sea, Isa. 11. 9. so is the soul truly ( pro tempore) filled with God until he
assuage it, or seem to be departed from it; or else enlarge the capacity of the
Creature with more of himself: now seeing that God comes in with such a
fullness into the heart in this dispensation; it must needs discover the
emptiness and vanity of his other Rests, and cause a sweet willingness to
part with the one, and embrace the other.

And lastly* It comes in power: which day of Gods power ( Ps. 110. 3.) makes
the Creature willing to part with any darling, though never so dear and near to
him, both freely, cordially, and with much simplicity of spirit; whatsoever the
day of God in its light and glory does discover to the soul not to be of
himself, this the day of his Power does accomplish the same to the full in the
soul; yea, though it ^e the life of a soul; yea, though it were its God and
happiness in it, yet they all are nothing, when God and it stands in
competition in the soul, whether of them should be advanced.

3ly. Christ made manifest in a heart, and his spiritual coming into the same,
is like unto a fire which burns up and consumes al things that are in the soul
of his own, which keep the Creature below God; therefore says the Scripture,
Who may abide the day of his coming, or stand when he appears? And he shows
the reason thereof, for he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap: to
refiners fire he is compared: the appearance of Christ in the love of the
Spirit, is like refiners fire, to refine and purify, yea, to burn up and
consume in souls, what is not of the Spirit, and so to bring the creature to a
loss, though in the fame salvation shall be made manifest, as according to the
1 Cor. 3. 13, 14. where says he, if any man's work abide, which he has built
thereupon, he shall receive a reward: but if it burn, the creature shall lose
thereby, yet he must be saved, yet it must be by this fire, which did consume
and burn up his hay and stubble: now as man's work shall be revealed by fire; so
if it be not of God it shall be destroyed by the same: which fire is love,
which is God: and thus when he brings a soul, by his appearing, into the
greatest loss, then is he bringing a soul into the greatest gain: so that
that which proves destruction of his false Rests; is that which brings him to
the true Rest; and so though it be a losing for the present, yet his greatest
loss becomes his greatest gain

Now I know there is many Rests that are destroyed or dissolved, before this
day of his coming; and as there is one taken away, the soul finds and seeks
after another; and runs from mountain to hill, to get ease of a tormenting
spirit; so as man passes through many Rests, most commonly before this day:
but now it may be the Creature has such glorious resembled Rests, that it can
not be found out before the day of Gods thus appearing, then these seeming
Rests are they which are discovered, upon the appearance of himself in the
soul: But some souls pass through more then we have spoken of; some through
fewer; according as God keeps the soul, and alone becomes the leader of him:
yet many souls that are come thus high, have found them by sad experience, and
others have found some of them, and others more; yet it is sometimes Gods way
to permit the Creature to run out after the ways of his own heart; and at last
to hed^e up his ways ( Hos. 2. 6.) where many souls lies at this day in the
wilderness, not knowing what to do; being non-plust in their own spirits:
not knowing what God is a doing, nor what he will do; what they must do; sit
still they cannot; act they cannot, but in their old Road.

Having showed the many Rests Souls pass through and the difficulty of parting
with them; together with the ways and means God wakes the heart willing; that
now he may enjoy that true and unchangeable Rest of souls; which shall be the
next we shall speak of; and that is, What this true Rest is; which the spirits
of a spiritual man must be centred.

The first description of true Rest.
AND first of all, that Rest of Saints, or the description thereof: It is
something lying naturally out of the Creature or above it, not of it self
attained by it; But revealed and made manifest in it, who is the Rest; which
alone is God or Christ.

First, Christ it is clear, he lives out of the Creature: for he lay in the
heart of God ( John 1. 18.) before we had a being, and is discovered and
revealed by God within us, when we have a being, which was purposed by God to
be revealed from God; and therein to be a center and Rest to that heart who
does enjoy it.

Secondly, It cannot be attained by the Creature; his abilities falling short
of the doing of any such work: but he was the purpose of Love, freely intended
by God before time; and as freely without the Creature comes to be made
manifest by God in the Creature in time: For it is nothing which the Creature
of himself can attain; which as a sure Rest in the Creature will remain; but
it will fail the soul and prove a broken Reed.

The second description of true Rest.
SEcondly, It is an unchangeable and unalterable Being, seen by the soul after
it is revealed to him, which cannot be shaken after the Creature is centred in
it; wherein the Creaure is carried out of himself, above himself, to Rest
securely above all fears.

First, Christ the eternal Being of Spirits, God in God, only God, he it is
that is an unchangeable Being, ( Isa. 9. 6. Heb. 13. 8. Mal. 3. 6.) which
alters not, neither is given to change; for he was yesterday, that is before
time; he is to day, that is in time; the same he is for ever, that is unto all
time: Heb. 13. 8. Now if we look upon Christ as Saints Rest, we must not
consider him as he was in any form or shape, for so he altered and changed
into diverse forms and shapes: But we are to consider him as he is God,
Eternal, Blessed: yea, as he is the power of all powers; and so he is the
foundation and Rest of Saints: For as he was in the flesh, he was not to be a
Rest, but as he was in the Spirit, so he is Rest, both unchangeable and
unalterable, In whom there is no variableness, neither shadow of turning,
James 1. 17. So that now Saints knowledge of him, and their Rest in him, is
sure and abides: And this is that which heightens their assurance, to see and
know that the Rest of their souls is an unalterable Rest: that though
dispensations change, and he in those dispensations, yet the Center of his
soul abides for ever, and he kept unshaken in it; because he Rests and Lives in
and upon an unshaken, unchangeable Center.

Now shall the disquieted and molested soul live in peace, safety, and
quietness, and none now can make it in this case afraid; but it lives above
all fears and torments; being kept safe in this Divine Spirit and power, where
there is neither cause of jealousy or fear; but being they are removed, and
the creature firmly established, so that all storms do not molest him, and all
temptations do not un-rest him; but he lives Triumphant above them, Triumphing
upon them, by that power in which he is Centred.

The Third Description of true Rest.
THirdly, It is an unexpressible glorious Center or Being, wholly taking up the
Creature with it, and giving the soul full contentment in it.

First, It is an unexpressible glorious Center; the Lord promising in Isaiah,
that he would accomplish a glorious work, in silling the hearts of his People
with the knowledge of himself, he Centers all in this, To him shall the
Gentiles seek, and his Rest shall be glorious, Isa. 11. 10. Yea, the Rest of
Saints is the very Substance of his glory; which glory is Christ, when he
comes to be manifested in his Saints, and to be admired by them, 2: These* 1.
9, 10.

Secondly, It wholly takes up the Creature who is Centred in it; so as now the
soul or spirit is wholly swallowed up of God; and unexpressibly overcome is
such a soul: The glory of God, which is Christ, is that which swallows up men's
spirits; and the more it appears in them, the more it overcomes them: so as
now they are taken up in their spirits, being gathered up into it, with nothing
else but it: So as now the souls delight, joy, solace, is now alone in nothing
but in him, who is become a glorious Center to him.

Thirdly, The Rest of Saints gives Saints full contentment: the full
satisfaction of Saints lies in living and Resting completely in this glory,
which truly is Christ; so as man sometimes is lost in the greatness of it* The
least manifestation of this glory, does fill the creatures capacity; so that
until the capacity be enlarged with more of God, it can desire no farther
enjoyment or discovery of it: so as now his spirit is filled with glory. And
that which makes it the more satisfactory, is the Centring of the spirit up in
it. Now Christ in the Spirit becoming a Saints Rest, all other seeming glories
(which before the soul was sheltred under and lived upon) are now vanished and
decayed; and the greatness of this glory, which is the Vision of God; yea, the
manifestation of his glory in man, takes up man into it, to live wholly in it;
and so to remain in complete satisfaction and contentment of spirit: for a
great part of a souls Rest consists in this very particular, to wit, the
gloriousness thereof together with the swallowing up of the creature with it,
and the giving the spirit a complete contentment in it: for it would be in time
a place of weariness, unless it were a place giving the creature full
contentment.

Secondly, It would be no place for Saints to delight and solace themselves in,
unless they could be wholly taken up, and seallowed up with that which of
necessity must be enjoyed from it; and unless it did exceed all glory that
could be imagined, it could be no Rest for the spirit of a spiritual man: So
that it must be an unexpressible glory swallowing up of men's spirits with it;
and giving that spirit complete satisfaction and contentment in it.

The fourth description of true Rest.
IN the fourth place, This Rest is a carrying forth of the Creature, out of the
creature, into the place where he had his first Being, to live for ever in him,
who is now become his manifested Being.

First, before we speak of the Rest it self we will observe,

That there is no true Rest for the creature in himself; for if man either
Rest in his pure naturals, or upon any refined property in himself, he Rests
out of his proper Element: I mean, as he is a spiritual man: yea, It is both
unsafe and unsound so to do: neither can man with any solid delight, or true
contentment, Rest in or upon any, either pure naturals, or refined properties
or parts within himself, though man could attain to his first principles and
purity, yet if he Rested upon them, he would live below the true Center of
Spirits: for indeed the Rest and proper being of all spirits, especially those
that are renewed, is the Eternal Word of God: which Word is Christ, who made
all things in the World of nothing, into which nothing they are to return: But
the spirits of men, or especially that renewed spirit of Saints, that came down
from the Father of spirits, who begot this spirit in them, not by flesh, but by
himself in his spiritual breathings and actings in the Creature; which spirit
of man cannot live in any true element, neither can it live satisfied, until
it come into its proper and original Being, from whence it came: for every
thing is in its right place, when it is returned into its original, and place
from whence it was derived; so that the spirit returns to God that gave it
Eccl. 12. 7. and the flesh of the man into the dust from whence it was derived:
so that man as he is carnal and flesh, it cannot be possible that the spirit
of any should take much delight in the same, so as to make it the satisfying
Center: But yet after it is renewed, it may be compared to Noah's Dove, it sees
the Deluge, and looks abroad in the flesh; to the Mountain of former
self-actings, and pure naturals, yet it cannot rest in the same, neither can it
take any delight therein; but is made to return to the Arc Jesus Christ; who
though he is in the soul, yet above it; as the Arc above the water, so Christ
above the Creature, though within it, as the Deluge in the world: so that the
Creature as man, is no fit place for a renewed spirit to be centred up in; but
he must by divine power be brought out of himself, into that eternal being of
spirits, who is said to be above man, though in man, Ephesians. 4. 6. as the Arc
above the Deluge, though in the world.

Now man cannot truly Rest in himself. But

Secondly, The place into which the soul is carried, is and was the first
being of his spirits, and now manifested so to be to the Creature; which being
was Christ: this Christ was Gods eternal thoughts of Love, in which man had a
being, and now comes in time as a Being to be manifested in the Saints; so the
one was the unknown Being of Saints before time, where they lay in the Love and
heart of God, which nothing could remove them out of it: the other Rest, is the
known Rest and being of Saints made manifest unto them in time; which knowledge
begets a returning of spirit, who with much wea^inesse of spirit have been
waiting for such a day of Redemption ( Luke 21. 28.) that it might return into
its first original and being, and to be fully secured in its God, which before
it neither knew nor did experience: So that after the heart has a discovery of
this Being, it is like a Loadstone touching the Needle; the Needle can stand no
way but toward the North and South; so with the spirit of man, after it is
touched with his Being, and center manifested, it is not able to Rest in all
the glories or excellencies that can possibly be imagined, until it be
returned into its being: he is like a wicked man or man of this world, who
cannot act but in his element: and like a Fish whose element is in the water:
so with the spirit of man, he cannot act in his right sphere, until he come
into his first original Being, which is Christ in God, 2 Cor. 5. 19. so as now
it acts in God, and lives by God, and is taken up with God: and cannot live in
any thing else, not as a Saint.

So that the truest comparison that can be made of such a spirit, is the
Needle, and the Dove, which truly holds out this to us.

First, That Christ, the Arc is the center, and the sure being of the spirits
of Saints.

Secondly, There is no safety or true Rest for the believing spirit, but in
this Christ.

Thirdly, That it is impossible for any spirit who knows Christ truly to be
his Rest; being once touched by the divine and holy being of Saints, to Rest
below the same; though many things may transform-themselves selves within the
Creature like unto it, yet upon them he cannot Rest, no more then can the
Needle toward the East and West; but it is truly known by such a spirit not to
be his first being and original; and so disclaims it, as Christ did Satan in
his temptation: but is carried forth the more in vehemence of spirit, flying
continually without Rest, until he be got into the Arc, which was the place
from whence it came; and in truth it is of such a latitude, as all the world is
not able either to give Rest unto it, or produce true or full contentment in it.

The fifth decription of true Rest.
Fifthly, It is the centring up of a spiritual man in a spiritual place, not
made, nor created, but a being of himself, stands by himself, having his
dependency upon none else.

1. Here is the subject matter of Rest, and that is the spiritual part of man,
which is created again and born of the Spirit; John 3. 3. for first of all no
unclean spirit or thing shall come there; Rev. 21. 27. nothing shall enter into
it, but that which is become suitable to it: That which is borne of the Spirit
is, that which must enter into this Kingdom of Rest and peace.

Secondly, This spirituallity which is made in the Creature, is produced by God
possessed in the Creature: for as a carnal heart cannot live in God; no more
can God manifest himself in any unpure spirit; so as God before he manifest
himself to a Spirit, he makes it suitable to that glory, which shall i^ measure
be revealed unto it: So also before God give man Rest in himself, he sets man
of himself to live in himself: for no carnal mind or will can attain God,
before by God it be attained; and before God manifest to the heart the Creature
is attained by him, he works a glorious work of the New Birth in him; so that
if man were carried up into God (which is impossible before he be borne of God,
there is such a disproportion betwixt the purity and holiness of God, and the
corruption and carnalnesse of men's spirits, that the Rest of the soul o^u^ld be
no Rest; for there would be nothing but war and enmity: so that God always
pulls down mountains of flesh, pride, and self; and makes the crooked ways
of the heart plain, Luke 3. 5, 6. and brings down those false Rests and
Christ's in the Creature; and so after makes known a glorious Center to the
creature.

Now the spirits being made spiritual, by being Borne again, it is made
spiritually to judge, receive, and discern the Truth of this glorious and
spiritual Place, 1. Cor. 2. 15. which no man in the flesh, or by the flesh can
attain to, 1. Tim. 6. 16. whom never any man in the carnal mind has seen,
nor can see: So that man's Resting place, together with the subject Resting in
it, must be spiritual and of himself.

Now secondly, This place of Rest is Spiritual, so that man if he be in any
true Rest, It is not carnal forms or ordinances, which shall cease: Neither
is it the rarest Qualifications, or expressions of creatures; neither is it
glorious apprehensions or puffings up of flesh; no, our Rest is beyond these,
as far as the light of the Sun is from the Candle: He is an unexpressible
Spiritual Being, One who makes all things spiritual, that are spiritual, by
that spirituallity in the fullness of it that dwells in him: He is the express
Image of God, Heb. 1. 3. yea, he is God equal in Nature, though inferior in
place, operation or expression: He is One in all things; He is above all
things, and in him all things consist, Col. 1. 17. So he being the Fullness and
the Cause of spirituallity, He himself must needs be spiritual. So that any
soul Centred up in him, lives above all carnal Forms, Ordinances,
Qualifications, common holiness or fleshly puffings up, either in false
apprehensions, or in inward delusions; He is none of these, but is above
these, which is the spiritual man's Rest: And this spiritual Rest is nothing
but God, who is all and none besides him; who enjoyes all in himself, and we in
him; and by virtue of our being made, born, and begotten of him; we become One
with him, and of him: So that now being borne of him, it is impossible that the
Nature of God in us, can Rest or be satisfied but alone in him and by him, it
being of an everlasting and infinite nature: but now as it is infinite, and of
God in us, so it throws off all below God, and wholly and alone returns to him
and Rests in him.

Now thirdly, This Rest is not any thing Created, or depending upon any other
power but its own. Christ as he was in the flesh, is none of the Rest of
Saints: He is a Rest of them, as he becomes one with them in the Spirit; so as
he is one with God, and we with him; One in God, and we in him, 1. Cor. 6. 17.
Joh. 17. 21, 22, 23. Yea, very God, and we by him, 1. Cor. 8. 6. 15. 45. So
that He is a Spirit not made nor created, but making and creating all things
for and of himself, Col. 1. 16. Romans 11. 36. And all by him was created, not
as he was in any form or shape in the flesh without us, not so to be a Rest;
but as he is God made manifest in the Spirit within us: How ever men deem of
him, yet he is the Eternal Spirit, and the Father of all spirits, Heb. 9. 14.
though distinguished from the Father in diverse acts, shapes or forms, yet he
dwells substantially in the Godhead, and in whom dwells all the power and
fullness thereof, Col 1. 19. 2. 9. And though he might be in the form of flesh
as man, yet then he was in the power and fullness of God as God: So that he is
In, and Of Himself; and he that knows him aright, knows that saying.

And he that is experienced in that spiritual union and conjunction, will say,
That his Motion, Glory, Dependency, and all others that can be spoke of, dwells
substantially in him; and that by him now all things are both preserved and
kept, Heb. 1. 3. So as all other Rests below this, are none at all; but only
for them that know not this same Eternal Being.

But now this Christ, He being such a Mystery, and there being in the Earth
such dissension about him, To give true Definitions of him, I will in the next
place set forth what this Christ is, who is the Rest of Saints. We have in
short set forth Christ the Eternal Spirit, to be the Rest of Saints: not as
considered in any form of flesh, but as considered in the fullness of the
Spirit.

But what Christ is, in the fullness of the Spirit, that is the thing we are
to explain and clearly to distinguish.

Christ's Coming in the Spirit Discovered.
AND First of all, This Christ which is the Rest of Saints, He is the Eternal
Word of God, spoken in time within every Saint by God; upon which Internal,
yea, Eternal Word the Spirit is made to Rest. Joh. 1. 1. He is there called
the Word of God. He is the Word of God two ways.

First, He was the Word of God, as God either spoke when he said, Let us make
man, Genesis 1. 26. which was an expression of God concerning the First Creation,
and so all things were made by this Word of God, Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3. Or He was
that Word God promised should bruise the Serpents head; Genesis 3. 15. which word,
by God being spoken, was in time made flesh; as appears, John 1. 14. which
word being spoke of God, as it was so spoke: It was before this time in his
bosom to be declared in time; upon which word of God then we are to Rest; and
for the manifestation of which they were to wait.

But secondly, This word is more spiritual to us, when we enjoy the same word
within us, and the effect thereof upon us, then it was at that present: Now he
is the internal voice of God spoken within an undone soul, which does P^oduce
liberty, happiness, freedom, and all the Creature can imagine, after it is
spoken within him. For the word that was spoken at first, which word was from
the beginning, 1 John 1. 1. which word was spoken without and in time, because
the same flesh with us, was but figures of the excellency of that internal
Word, which God will speak within every Creature, which Word shall become
Christ within man, after it is spoken unto man; which Christ is a mystery to
every one who knows him not in this sense: but to prove this more fuller in
the 9. Chapter of the Rev. ver. 13. There he is in express terms called, The
Word of God; which expression I look upon to have special reference to this
particular we are speaking of, viz. The being the eternal or internal Voice
of God within every Creature: and indeed he is made manifest in every voice of
God in souls: and this Word in Scripture is often called the voice of Christ;
that is the Voice of God, which in name and nature is Christ: John 5 25. 28.
John 10. 3, 4. John 14. 11. For to look upon Jesus Christ as he is in the
Father, and so a Spirit, we are to look upon it, that all Voices that are
spoken from the Spirit within us, are voices of God, which for distinction sake
is termed Christ: for as he was in flesh, he was not this internal Word; for
the external Word of God, became a Christ in the flesh; John 1. 14 so does the
internal Word of God within us, become a saving Jesus to us; the one without
us, before our time in the figure, which was to pass away, and not to continue
in that form and shape for ever to us; and so not to be Rested upon; but the
Internal Word of God within us, is a dispensation of God which cannot be taken
away or destroyed, but abides for ever; so as in the 1 John 2. 14. I have
written unto you young men, because ye are strong; which strength was the
abiding of this Word within them; which Word was Christ, which they from God
had spoke within them. Now this Internal, external Word of the Spirit of
Christ, this Word is faithful and true; Rev 19. 11. 13. yea, unchangeable;
upon which the Saints Spirits do Rest and live.

2. This Christ is a clear manifestation of God within us: He was the
manifestation of God when he was in the figure, which was in the flesh, there
God was manifested in a mystery; which mystery was Christ: now as Christ
without us was God manifested in the flesh; so Christ within us, is God
manifested in the Spirit: This Christ within man, cannot be revealed in any
fleshly form, but he must be revealed as he is in the Spirit, one with the
Father; yea in the Father: So that when God clearly reveals himself in any
soul, this which is now revealed is nothing else but himself in Love handed out
by this Revelation Christ; so that in Scriptures He is called the vision of
God. Hab. 2. 2.

3. Here he is distinguished to be Gods Vision; which Vision is nothing else
but a clear manifestation of God within the Creature, formerly made clear to
the understanding of the Creature, to be unrevealed and enjoyed by it: So as
now it teaches the soul perfect and i^fallible Truth, after manifested to it:
for as* Christ in the fleshly form, was appointed to declare and reveal God to
us, and so Christ called Christ God, they being manifested in the same form:
So it is inward, the end of this term: Christ within you the hope of glory.
Coloss. 1. 27. was, because He was God clearly made manifest within them,
which had been a mystery hid, but now was made manifest to his Saints: So that
the great Mystery of heaven, is Christ, who is the clear manifestation of the
Father in the heart of Saints.

Again, we see it plainly declared in the 1. Joh. 1. 1. 2. For the Life was
manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and show unto you that
Eternal Life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us: here the
Apostle does plainly make manifest unto us That Eternal Life which was, Christ
in God, was in time manifested by God, which manifestation of Life was Jesus
Christ: So that He is termed sometimes to be of the Father, s^^etimes to come
down from him, sometimes to be the Father, and sometimes to be the Vision of
him, and many other expressions, there is given of him: from whence I note,
that most commonly every making forth of God in Mercy and Love to his Creatures
are commonly called Christ: for the difference betwixt the term of the Father
and the Son does not so much consist in Nature and Being, but in name and
working, or dispensation: all the acts of freedom and love and light are
called Christ in us, because it is a spiritual dispensation of God in mercy
and love to us. Now Christ as he is the clear discovery or discoverer of the
Father to us, so he becomes a Rest of peace and happiness in us; and so that
this Christ who in name is called the Manifestation of Love, ^is unchangeable
in reference to the being, and cause of this manifested Love which is Christ:
for if we consider him as the bosom love of God: He is not so Christ to us, or
in us, but as this comes to be manifest to us, which manifestation, or the
thing* manifest, is only Christ: for I look thus, that not only Christ as he
was in the flesh, was Christ only in that form, and no more, but what ever was
manifest, either by or in that form, was in Name, the Christ, and in Nature,
Christ in God: now Saints Rest is not in Christ, as manifested only in
distinction, but Christ is the Rest of Saints, as God has designed him for
that purpose, and so comes by God in Saints to be made manifest; carrying up
Saints to live in the full glory, power and splendour of that God who did make
manifest himself in this manifestation which is Christ: And no other way comes
souls truly to know the Father, either in love or mercy, but as the Father
does manifest himself, in this very particular Christ revealed in men's hearts,
in which men may see God clearly, and for the w^nt of which Philip was
ignorant, when he said to Christ, Joh. 14. 8. Lord show us the Father, and it
suffices us. They were ignorant what the Father and Christ were in the Spirit,
though Christ were with them in the flesh: and the reason was because Christ
within them, was not by God made manifest to them: therefore would they have
been making Tabernacles in such a low fleshly knowledge, where in Truth they
knew nothing of him, in relation to the Spirit, nor of that conjunction betwixt
him and the Father, that whenever Christ spiritually was made manifest, there
the Father was manifest also, because there was one undevideable nature and
being, in such cases betwixt the Father and the Son: So that the Saints Rest is
in this clear manifested; God within us, who in term and Truth is called
Christ: So that now as Christ's Center was in the Father, and now is to dwell in
the fullness of his Glory, so Saints being in him are carried by him to live
with him in the same glory and love; and to conclude this, when we can say from
experience that which Paul said in the Gal 1. 16. That when it pleased the
Father to reveal his Christ in him, then shall we know that the manifestation
of God to us, is ^he Revelation of Christ in us.

3. Christ spiritually discovered in men, and so known by them, and so
becoming Rest to them, is a clear light of God in the Creature, which light
and glory is only Christ: and thus he is often described in Scripture, not
only as he was a light in the flesh without us, prescribing rules of light to
us, but chi^ry, as he shall become the light and glory of God within us, for as
he was in the form of flesh, he was a mys^ery unknown; yea, he was not such a
light so as God intended him, because he was then but in the figure, holding
forth what he would work, and what he should be, when he was to come in the
glory of the spirit within men; for his being in the flesh was a very dark
dispensation: For even the Apostles, who were the most conversant with him, did
know little, and were very ignorant of the truth. So as indeed they thought he
was come to set up a Kingdom in the flesh, and that he would advance them in
some great place: as appears.

So that is was Gods great design which was held forth in that form of flesh,
which is the sum of that Scripture, where he is declared to be the light of the
Gentiles, and to be the Glory of the people Israel, Luke 2. 32. Now to prove it
by Scripture, that this Christ is in the spiritual coming and advancing in the
soul a glorious and Divine Light.

We see it very clear from that Scripture, in the 60. of Isa. 1, 2. Where the
Lord declares the manner of Christ's spiritual appearing in the soul: Arise,
shine, for thy Light is come, and the glory of the LORD is risen upon thee.
This same Scripture, though men do labor to deny it to be meant of Christ's
appearance in any particular soul, yet he that has found the appearance of
Christ within him, has found him fully making good these sayings. The matter
however that here is promised at the raising up of distressed spirits, is Light
and Glory; which light is God, appearing in a dispensation of light and glory,
the which dispensation is Christ in us, for he is both the light and glory of
God, and all things that are either spiritual, light or glory discovered is
Christ; for according to that Scripture, Rev. 21. 23. The glory of God did
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. As if he should say, when the
Lord comes to dwell spiritually, in the manifestation of glory within the
spirits of man, and so set up a Temple in the creature, according to the 22th
verse. Then shall all those lights, which before the soul has been guided
by, whether they were flashes or resembled light, now there shall be no need of
the same, but the glory of God now shall be there to enlighten the same: yea,
Christ shall be the light thereof, so that he shall be filled with true light;
whoever has the glorious appearance of Christ within him, he shall become a
complete light unto that soul: So as he shall not stand in need of any
inferior light, but they shall be dissolved, when the glory of the Sun does
appear; so that in such a soul to whom Christ is become in this manner a
light unto, he shall have no night there; according to that in the 22. of Rev.
5. verse. But the Lord shall fill such a soul with light, yea, he shall give
to such spirits Him, in whom there is no darkness, as in a spiritual
dispensation, and as he is termed in Joh. 1. 9. verse. He is here called, The
true Light, which lightneth every man that comes into the world. He is here
called true, in opposition to fallacy; as if he should lay open many false
lights in the world, and within men; yet he was come as a true light to
distinguish betwixt true and false: and so he is a distinguishing light in
every spirit who has recei^ed him: for though Satan has transformed himself
into an Angel of light in deceiving a creature, yet notwithstanding when this
true light appears in any heart, it does both discover it and destroy it;
according to that in the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. That though the mystery of
Iniquity and Antichrist be never so deceiveable and glorious in their workings
and transformings, both within and without the creature, yet Christ shall
reveal and destroy it with the spirit of his mouth, and the brightness o^ his
coming. And true it is, that Satan both ^n matter of forms without us, and
workings within us, is transforming himself now, if ever. And truly he, within
souls, works like God, and there is no known distinction betwixt his
transformings, and Christ's workings, until there be a true transfiguring of
Christ in the glory of the Spirit; and this does find out all the deceit both
of heart and Satan: for indeed there is no form, though never so glorious, but
he will transform himself in it; there is no working of the spirit within
man, but he will resemble it; so that none shall be able to know, whether it be
true or false, within him or without him, until this Christ shall appear in
light and glory, and shall make the same manifest; so as oftentimes his thus
appearing is compared to the rising of the Sun, and the dawning of the day,
which are degrees of distinguishing light, which does dissolve the imperfect
light of the Moon and Stars, and is a clear light of it self, to rule and
order, to unfold and discover the truth of every thing, which under the other
dispensations could not be discerned, and that is the reason that the Apostle
tells them, that they have a sure word of prophesy, whereunto they do well if
they take heed: And he tells them how long it was, until the day dawne, and the
day star arise in their hearts. This saying (until) prescribes and sets out
the limitation of time, and the accomplishing of the same, as if he should say,
there is a most glorious day to be enjoyed in Saints, which day shall appear;
but for your direction until that day, you have a sure word of prophesy, unto
which if God give you care thereof, may be as a rule unto you. It being a light
shining in a dark place, and though for the present you walk by the same, yet
Rest not there, but wait for the spiritual coming of Christ within you, which
in this word of prophesy* is held forth to you; and then when he comes, he
shall be a perfect light within, which light shall speak truth, and lead the
soul thereunto: but in the interim, Look to that sure word of prophesy, which
declares and makes manifest the truth thereof. This word of Prophesy was the
Scriptures; this day dawning, and day star arising, was the appearance of
Christ in the fullness of the spirit within them. So as he often in Scripture
is called, the bright Morning Star: and as concerning his spiritual coming,
he is sometimes termed under the notion of the day dawning, or breaking; as in
Cant. 2. 17. and in many others; only to show unto us, that the breaking in of
Christ into a heart, is like the breaking of the light into the earth, when the
day begins to appear, and the night is expired; as also the rising of the Sun;
to that purpose he is often called the Sun of Righteousness, which shall arise
and be seen in the hearts of men, so that we see this coming of Christ: yea,
himself is a true and glorious light of God in the spirits of Saints, so as he
makes all things manifest to such a heart, whether true or false; and this
light shall cloth every Saints spirit, and all inferior and transformed
lights shall be under such a souls feet, triumphing over them, seeing the
fallacy of them.

Then First, it is this light Christ, within the creature, who appears as
light, which does expel or dispell all those Clouds which are with creatures,
in whom he has not appeared: for as the Sun does expel the Clouds in the
appearance thereof, so Christ in his glorious shinings forth and breaking in
into every believing spirit, so as the creature before could not apprehend God
by reason of these clouds that lie upon the soul, now he apprehends him
clearly, the cause being by Christ taken away.

Secondly, By this light Christ does discover all the false Ways and Rests of
the creature, either in opposition to, or being below the true and substantial
way of Rest: so that this light Christ, in his divine Appearances within the
creature, does bring a day of loss upon many spirits; when it discovers unto
them the vanity of their spirits, in running after the ways of their own
hearts; and here they come to see the emptynesse of forms, or former flashes;
and now, it may be, all the souls knowledge and practice must lie in the dust,
and be unlearned: so as this light brings the creature out of love with his
own Ways; so that now he is free to be led according to the teachings of this
light.

Thirdly, This light, Christ, in its spiritual appearing in the creature, does
reveal and discover the Father in this light, Christ; so as the heart clearly
sees and knows the Father and the Spirit, the Son and the Spirit One, and the
Spirit to be both: so as this light, which in reference to name, is called and
termed Christ, yet it is God in this light, so that God is said to be light,
and in him is no darkness: The Father is the fountain of light, the Son is
the manifestation of light, or the light made manifest: now here the soul in
whom this true light does appear, does know God, and him thus sent into the
heart by Jesus Christ: So that Christ as he is the Rest of Saints, is a divine
revelation of light, in which light and glory, the creatures spirit solaces it
self, and rests with much delight in the same; and our of this form, after
enjoyed, will not Christ appear, but will be unto such a spirit an everlasting
light: that now as God lives in light, so the creature lives in light also,
which no creature in the flesh can attain to, who cannot be seen felt or heard,
in the flesh, in this dispensation, but he is above it consuming of it, and
continually advancing this light more and more in the creature; so as this
light comes to be advanced, and appear in greater fullness: so shall the
spirits who are centred in it be advanced by it; and the greater this light
does appear in fullness, the more perfect does the souls ^est appear, and the
more shall the spirits be filled with it.

Fourthly, in the fourth place this Spiritual Christ, or what he is in the
Spirit, when he comes to be the Rest of Saints. He is spiritual and divine
Life, without which no soul has spiritual or eternal life enjoyed by him:
for as a man without the soul is dead, so are all men, without Jesus Christ
within them, made manifest: so that John very fully lays open this truth. 1.
Joh. 1. 1. 2. for the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear
witness, and show unto yon that eternal life, which was with the Father, and
was manifested unto us. So that we see what the life of Saints is; for that
life which they here speak of was Christ: Secondly, we see the place where it
centers, before it is made manifest; and that is laid open to be in the Father.
Thirdly, the way whereby they knew it, and also to be theirs was twofold. First
by the manifestation of it. Secondly by opening the eyes of a souls
understan^^ng, whereby they come to see that life, which now to them is made
manifest: further he is the life of Saints spiritually considered. Coloss. 3.
3. 4. here he says, when Christ our life shall appear, then shall we also
appear with him in glory. So that he is here Saints life called, and more
fuller experienced in every heart, who has found him fully made manifest
within their spirits: again he is life of Saints, as he becomes the spiritual
resurrection of Saints: for before ever God bring any Creature into the
enjoyment of himself; he brings the Creature into a spiritual death, not in
the body, but in the spirit, and being laid in the grave alo^^: Christ as he is
the spiritual life of Saints, must be their resurrection, I mean the
resurrection of their spirits, from this spiritual death, as he is a
dispensation of life; and therefore it is written: Joh. 11. 25. I am the
resurrection, and the life, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live.

So that Christ as he is to become the spiritual life of Saints, proves an
inward resurrection to them in the manifestation of this their life; which
indeed Paul did experience, when he spoke these words. Gal 2. 20. I am
crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me. So that though Paul had been buried into Christ's death, yet notwithstanding
when Christ came to be manifested to him, then he proved a resurrection of life
in him; and by this life was Paul mad^ ^^ (...): for until Christ our life
comes to be manifest* we lie dead, void of any spiritual life or motion in us*
and this was figured out in the matter, of Lazarus death, when Christ came he
found him dead and buried, void of life, or motion; wherein at last the very
breath of Christ, breathed out in way of voice, Lazarus come forth, raised him
up, and gave life unto him. Ioh. 11. 43, 44. Two things are here spiritually
holden forth: First a spiritual death of Creatures when Christ comes to breath
upon them the breath of life. Secondly, by his thus coming, speaking, and
breathing occasions life; because his words are spirit and life thus spoken: So
that it is said, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and they that hear, shall live. Now in all this is
held forth unto us, The spiritual resurrection of all Saints by Jesus Christ,
coming in the spirit into them: so that though this particular be the least
looked after, yet it is of the highest concernment; and not that which most men
dote of so much after death. So that if we look upon our spiritual
resurrection, we shall see that the coming of Christ in the Spirit is a
manifestation of Spiritual life, which proves a spiritual life; which proves
a spiritual resurrection in such Creatures, and in time their Rest and Center:
Now he being the life of Saints: Then first, we may observe, That Saints life
is Jesus Christ. Though before they are making out of their own actings,
according to the law of works, do this and live, yet now they see that life is
destroyed, and the cause of all actions to God, flows from this life
principled in them: and though they are making a life out of enlargement, or
holiness in conversation, yet this is a life above it, unbottoming the
creature off from it, and centring the Creature in a stable and solid life:
Secondly, the Saints live, because Christ lives in them; for though before
their liv^ ^^re hid with God, yet they were not to live in (...) ^o themselves,
with joy and peace, until it (...) manifest from God in them: so that they are
made to live from the manifestation of life in them, whereby they come to know
it, and so to be made to live by it for ever: Cast a Saint into any condition,
he lives very sweetly, because he lives by the life of Christ in him: yea, he
lives sweetly with conten^ednesse, because Christ lives in him. So now to sum
up this Christ as he is a spiritual dispensation of God in the Spirit, is a
Spiritual life* by virtue of which life in Saints, are Saints swallowed up with
it, and so centred up in it: So that the center or rest of a Saint is eternal
and everlasting, which is Christ the spiritual life of God in us; by which
life the Creature does not only live to, but live to do. This life is the
motion of his spirit; so as by this life he does not only live, but lives to
it; so that the creatures spirits are wholly set apart to live to God: This
life is the living in the Spirit, and not in the flesh, hereby comes the life
of Saints to be a life of love, and a life of God, because they are not at Rest
from all their own labors, and now all things are acted in them, by that Spirit
of life, which is Christ dwelling in them: now Saints wholly live to God, by
the life of God in them, and thus are Saints centred up in God, or Christ;
because their spirits are carried up above the creature into life, which is
Christ in them, becoming spiritual and eternal life to them.

Fifthly, This spiritual Christ, as he comes from God, and is manifested by
God, and so known by us, and become Rest to us, he is spiritual redemption and
deliverance: Now to look upon Christ in the Spirit he cannot be manifested,
but he becomes a spiritual Jesus, that is, a Savior of spirits, for he was
not a Jesus as he was in the flesh, but he was a Jesus, as he was to come in
the Spirit; for the flesh could not do it: Yet it was a figure of that
spiritual salvation and liberty, which Christ is in the hearts of Saints: For
indeed Jesus Christ is salvation it self, and where he in power and glory there
is salvation; that is, he is a Savior, or a deliverer of the creature out of
that spiritual slavery, and bondage in which he lives: So as he is become
freedom and redemption to the heart; and therefore he is said to be made unto
us Wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, that is he is
manifest in us, and so is become a spiritual redemption to us: freeing us
spiritually from our inward bondage and slavery, both that bondage of self and
Satan, whereby we are made to live in spiritual freedom: and all this
freedom and deliverance is Christ in the spirit, as he is a spiritual
dispensation designed of God for the same purpose: though many souls do work
out their own salvation by their doing, whose salvation is false: others having
salvation from some false christ, which works and acts like this Christ; yet
the Son has set neither free; neither do they know that alone redemption
salvation and liberty, which is produced by Christ, living or appearing in any
heart; so that the spiritual Rest of saints is in and upon that salvation,
liberty and freedom, which they have in this Christ, who is become this unto
them: so that all heavy loads and yoaks are removed, all oppositions of spirit,
are taken off, and all the weariness of spirit removed; so that now the
spirits are set free, and can no more come into bondage; but Christ alone is
become salvation and liberty to him; so that the spirit does salace it self
and Rest in him, who is become freedom and salvation to him.

Sixthly, Christ the Rest of Saints spiritually known, is the wisdom of God in
creatures: the wisdom of God in Saints is, Jesus Christ; and there it is said,
He is made unto us wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30. So that it is the Wisdom of God,
which is Christ spiritually known, in which Saints Rest. Fot if they Rested in
the wisdom of the flesh, that should be destroyed, and so no safe Rest and
center for them: but the Wisdom of Christ does unbottome Saints from their own
wisdom, and establish himself, even the Wisdom of the God head in the
Creature, to be a Rest unto the Creature; whereas before the Soul and spirit
were not a Rest; being from its own wisdom, plotting and contriving, which way
to act and what to do, not from the Wisdom of God; but from the wisdom of
the flesh, only opposing and gainsaying this Wisdom; which when the Creature
could not bring about, what in his own wisdom he had contrived* he must needs
be perplexed, and so con^inue in all trouble; but now he is destroyed in that;
and he is made to Rest upon the Wisdom of God, Christ now taking the Creatures
place, and acting in the stead of the Creature; so that the soul is made to
walk in and by Wisdom; it is that Wisdom which is pute, peaceable and
undefiled. The Wisdom of the flesh is corrupted, but this is pure: The Wisdom
of the flesh has nothing in it but disquietnesse, both to the party in whom it
is, or in the Kingdom, Church or Family where ir is acted; and for this
reason, is occasioned all jarrings and tumults: But the Wisdom of God, which
is Jesus Christ, is peaeeable, it works abundance of peace and quietness in
the soul, Church or Nation, where it only is advanced; here is a quiet and
peaceable habitation, for Saints to Rest and live upon: we see Christ often in
Scripture called the Wisdom of God; and as 1 Cor. 1. 24. where the Apostle
declares Christ, in all that are saved, to be the Wisdom and power of God;
though this Wisdom be little esteemed of by the world, yet it is highly
precious in the esteem of Saints; as for instance that of the Proverbs 3. 15.
ver. where that Wisdom is precious, yea, more precious then Rubies; yea, he is
expressed to be an un-comparable comparison; so that this Wisdom of the
eternal Spirit, which is Christ in us, is desirable, and therefore above all
things: says the Scriptures, Get Wisdom, Prove. 4. 5. yea, there is a
happiness in the enjoyment of it; for it is the principal thing belongs to a
Saint: Pro. 4. 7. so that Saints are centred up in the Wisdom of God, and are
wholly delivered up into it, to be alone disposed by it: so that the spirit
lives in sweet quietness and Rest; the Creature being wholly made nothing in
his own Wisdom; and the Wisdom of God alone orders all things in him.

Seventhly, That which spiriturlly is called Christ in us, is that Peace which
is spoken by God to us, and received from God by us; in which Peace we live and
Rest; so that Saints are kept in the Peace of God, which is Christ; to this
purpose is the saying in the Ephesians. 2. 14. For he is our peace, who has made
both one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us. Here
the Apostle sets forth Christ to be the Peace of the Saints; for whatsoever
tends to peace in the Creatures spirits, that, I mean which truly tends to the
same, is Christ: for the soul before he appears in it, is like unto the ship
tossed with the waves and tempest; before Christ said unto the waves, Be still:
this is that Peace the Apostle desires the Saints may enjoy, which was the
Peace of God which passes all understanding, Phil. 4. 7. which was of ability
to keep their hearts in the knowledge and love of God; now this is that Saints
spiritual Christ, a Peace which is able to keep them in the love of God; and a
Peace which passes the understanding of the Creature; that is, a Peace which
the understanding of man can never find out or i^ able to reach under; yea,
all the understanding in the world is never able to find out such a Peace for
the Creature as this is: so that he is termed the prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6.
All the acts of Christ in the spirits of Believers, are Righteousness and
Peace. It is that Peace which the world cannot give; and such a Peace it is, as
they cannot take away: When God speaks Christ into a soul, which is Peace, in
which none can cause trouble in such a soul; because Christ is become the Peace
thereof: indeed men may speak Peace, and Ordinances may speak Peace; and false
Gods and Christ's may speak Peace; after which there may be trouble occasioned:
But after God speaks Peace, there can none cause trouble; but the soul lives
and is kept in the Peace of God, and none can make him afraid: therefore the
Prophet did utter these sayings: He shall be our Peace, when the Assyrians
comes into our Land. This Christ is the Peace of Saints in every condition: so
that they live in much freedom and joy, because the center and rest of their
spirits is peace.

And lastly, This Christ is Righteousness and holiness in the Saints, or
Sanctification; this not only by experience, but by Scripture may be proved:
The Apostle tells the Church of Corinth, That Christ of God was made unto them
wisdom and righteousness and sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. So
that Righteousness and sanctification Christ was made unto them so that
whatsoever is Righteousness in the Spirits of Saints, is Christ spiritually
dwelling in them; this is that righteousness that the Apostle desired to be
found in; this is that divine nature which the Saints are made partakers of; to
wit, Christ the Righteousness of God. This is agreeable to that saying
concerning Christ, And this is his Name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD
OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS: Jer. 23. 6. and Jer. 33. 16. He shall not only be called so
by them, but he really shall be made over so by God to them; so that the
Righteousness of God in us, is Jesus Christ made so by God to us, whereby he
becomes our Righteousness, a Righteousness which destroys all ours in the
flesh, and makes us-live in the righteousness of the Spirit: So that now
believers in this kind, shall not be found naked, but clothed with Christ
their righteousness, they shall not be condemned: for they shall be made stand
in the righteousness of another. And to be covered with the roabes of the Lamb,
made beautifully by Christ's beauty, and comely by his comeliness; so that the
same shall dwell in the spirits of Saints, that dwells in the Spirit of God; and
that shall be made a believers, to be employed for God and to God, now
believers who are made to Rest in Christ, are encompassed about with truth, and
righteousness, in which their spirits shall live with freedom and
unexpressible joy for ever.

And now as this Christ dwells in them, as a dispensation of God: so he carries
them up in their spirits to live and Rest completely in God; so as now they
live where Christ lives, which is in the bosom of God: so that the great
design of God in this Christ spiritually coming is wholly to gather up the
spirits of creatures into the Spirit, to live dwell or rest therein; and to
this purpose he is called, the Power of God: and indeed he is so a divine a
Power, come forth from God, to accomplish the great design of God in the
Spirits of Saints: and therefore Saints find sometimes that this Power works
in them mightily, and never ceases till it gathers up the creature wholly into
God, to Rest completely in him: So that to conclude all, when Saints are truly
at rest in God, then in the first place, the will of the creature shall be
centred up in the will of God: and so ^he will of God shall become the will of
the creature: so as the will shall cease to act any thing, but what is acted by
the Will of God: so that the Will of of Saints shall be gathered up into the
will of God: and their Will being centred up in his Will. Here shall it be
said, The creature has ceased from his own works as God did from his. Heb. 4.
10. and now his Will Rests in God; though before the Will was bent against God,
and would not be limited, but all things must be carried on according to the
Will of flesh; but now it acts so no more, but now with Christ, not my will,
but thy will be performed: so as now his will is at Rest, he wills nothing of
himself, it is carried on by the Will of God.

Secondly, The mind of the creature is centred in the mind of God, so that
creatures minds one thing with God, and the same Principal of truth is
possessed in the mind of God: So that now the mind is wholly made spiritual,
and none but God does possess it: So as now the mind does solace it self and
takes sweet contentment in God: whereas it may be a small time before God did
not dwell in the mind, but corruption or sin at that time; there was not such
solace in God, but rather in lust and sin; neither did the mind delight in God,
or rest upon him; whereas now being spiritually possessed with it, is sweetly
made to live above all in God, who is now become the ease and rest of the mind.

Thirdly, The affections of men are centred up in God, and wholly swallowed up
with him: So as now the creature lives in heaven; That is, with his affections
in the presence of God with great delight, and so he comes really to dwell with
God: nothing can come and take up this creatures affections, being they are
placed upon God, being made spiritual by God: So they act as God acts in them;
yea, the affections of the creature and Gods are made both one: so as they
wheel both from one principle, and by one and the same power. Love moves Gods
affection, if it can be so said, so it moves the creatures affection to God:
God is ravished with the creature, and the affections are ravished with God; he
delights on the one hand, and the creature on the other: So that Christ's and
Saints delight and joy are both one.

Fourthly, The Spirits of Saints are at Rest, because they are eased of all
heavy loades and burdens: Christ has given them Rest, who are eased and
unloadened of every yoke and burden: so as now his weariness is at an end,
and no more in his spirits, but all taken away, and his spirit lives in
complete liberty and freedom.

Fifthly, He is set free, and is at Rest whom God has made to cease from his
own works, and now God works all in and by his Spirit: That though he has bin
a long time, traveling toward Canaan, yet now he is got within the land. That
now God flows in npon his spirits with immediate feedings and refreshments,
and so now fully satisfies the heart with all things desirable and desired: so
as the Spirit lives in complete satisfaction in all things as he is sweetly
possessed with him, who is become all things to him, and by this acts no more
in himself, nor by himself, but now it is that he is dead thereunto: and is so
quickened in the Spirit, as that now the work of Gods Kingdom is made
exceeding glorious and is carried on exceeding gloriously: So that ^ot by arm
or strength of the creature, but by the Spirit: The creature being ceased from
all self-actings, this soul truly that Rest in God. Further he is at Rest in
God, who has truly passed through the state of inward resurrection, and now is
Ascended into God: for as Christ in his fleshly form was not at Rest, because
he was not ascended, so no more is the spirits of any spiritual man at Rest in
God, until after his spiritual resurrection he be ascended into God, to dwell
completely in God: for Christ coming in the manifestation of the Spirit begets
a resurrection in us, and the powerful effects of that life, begets an
ascension of our spirits into God: So that now the soul having ascended, can no
more descend into these low things which keeps below, and short of his Glory:
but when he appears in the Spirit within us, and discovers his glory to us, it
does so overcome the spirit, as indeed it is caught up with it, for ever to
live in it: for impossible it is that the spirits can live below God, which
occasioneth trouble and weariness, who has before truly lived in God, by the
virtue of God made manifest to live in them.

Secondly, It is impossible that any soul can live and Rest in God, and so
ascend into God, before there be a manifestation of the life of God in the
creature; for it is God descending in his appearance or manifestation in us;
That both begets a resurrection, and ascension of us, so that we ascend by
descending, and live and Rest in him by his being manifested to live and Rest
in us: so that in this particular the creatures life is swallowed up, and
gathered into the life of God: and as God continues living in them, they shall
continue living in him: and as God has taken up them to be an everlasting rest
for himself, so he has appointed and made himself an everlasting Rest unto
them: So that now they are ascended in their Spirits into God, and there
sweetly live in God. And lastly, he lives sweetly in God, and so Rests in him,
who has God in him, to be an everlasting light in him: So that his Sun never
goes down, nor Christ in him never ceases to shine forth in light and glory to
him: So as according to that saying: There shall be no night there, Rev 21. 25.
so also Revel. 22. 5. Though some think that this is a very high state; yet
experience and Scripture do testify, That it is a state enjoyed, or shall be
enjoyed, by all or most Saints in these our days. Isa. 60. 19. 20. We see the
Promise God makes with his people is this.

That the LORD shall be unto them an everlasting light, and God their complete
glory, Esa. 60. 19. yea, in the 20th* verse: Their sun shall no more go down,
neither their Moon withdraw it self: for the LORD shall be their everlasting
light, and the days of their mourning shall be ended.

Here we see that in the first place, there is a state that souls may be
clouded in, though they have precious workings of God upon them. Secondly, this
state is attended with mourning. Thirdly, there is a degree that is above
either; where there shall be neither withdrawing of light, or clouding, where
all mourning shall fly away; but the soul shall be filled with divine light,
and God shall never cause any more clouds to come upon such a soul, but his
light shall be everlasting, and the glory of God shall fill his spirits for
ever: so that God shall become the glory of such a spirit, in which glory the
spirit shall rest for ever: so that there is a fullness of glory to be enjoyed
in the spirits of the Saints. when God does dwell in them, and become a
dis^ensation of glory to them: I speak this in reference to the shallow
capacity of the creature, and that fullness of glory to satisfy the same in
every appearance of glory within the creature: so that now when saints come to
enjoy this dispensation from God it being an everlasting dispensation of God in
them, which cannot wax old or decay: so are they made to live unchangeable in
the same: And this is the stayed Rest of saints: For one thing there is in
this: That no soul can truly rest in any dispensation unless it be a
dispensation which abides for ever, and cannot be dissolved* so as his Rest
cannot be dissolved likewise, so that to Rest thus is stayedly sure, and
everlasting, unperishable, and undissolveable: and also he rests in God who
lives in everlasting joy and peace, so as nothing can disturb his peace, nor
dissolve his joy, so as to cause either to cease. For come what condition will
upon the body, yet his spirit is swallowed up with joy: he does not power upon
creatures as formerly he did: but now he lives by rejoicing, and rejoices by
living; Nothing without him is a trouble to him, such a trouble as touches his
spiritual joy: He receives always, praises, always and depends always, so
that his spirits are kept in everlasting joy and peace, and all sorrow and
mourning is flown away: no more sorrow of spirit is known by him, neither does
he experience any more spiritual pain within him, but in stead thereof is
established peace and joy for evermore.

FINIS.

