By the King, A PROCLAMATION, For a Public THANKSGIVING.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas it has pleased Almighty God in His Providence toward Us and Our
People, to Manifest His Power and Mercy, in Discovering and Delivering Us from
a Horrid and Barbarous Conspiracy of Papists, and other Traitorous Persons, to
Assassinate and Murder Our Royal Person, and from an Invasion intended by the
French upon this Kingdom, whereby not only the Destruction of Our Royal Person
was Plotted and Intended, but the Total Subversion of Our Government, and of
the Religion, Laws and Liberties of this Realm: And whereas the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, have by their humble Address besought Us
to Issue Our Royal Proclamation for Appointing a Day of Solemn Thanksgiving to
Almighty God, for Our happy Deliverance from the said Villainous and Barbarous
Conspiracy against Our Royal Person, and from the said intended Invasion: We
therefore Adoring the Divine Goodness, and duly Considering that such Great and
Public Blessings do call for Public and Solemn Acknowledgments, Have thought
fit (by the Advice of Our Privy Council) to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation,
hereby Appointing and Commanding, That a General Thanksgiving to Almighty God
for these His Mercies, be Observed throughout this Kingdom of England, Dominion
of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, on Thursday the Sixteenth Day of
April next. And for the better, and more orderly Solemnizing the same, We have
given Directions to the most Reverend the Archbishops, and Right Reverend the
Bishops of this Kingdom, to Compose a Form of Prayer Suitable to this Occasion,
to be Used in all Churches and Chapels, and other Places of Public Worship,
and to take Care for the timely Dispersing of the same throughout their
respective Dioceses. And We do strictly Charge and Command, That the said
Public Day of Thanksgiving be Religiously Observed by all Our Loving Subjects,
as they Tender the Favor of Almighty God, and upon Pain of suffering such
Punishment as We can justly Inflict upon all such who shall Contemn or Neglect
the same.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Twelfth Day of March, 1695/6. In the
Eighth Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695/6.


