TO THE KING'S MOST SACRED MAJESTY, Upon his Happy and Glorious RETURN An
endeavored POEM.

BY SAMVEL WILLS.

Cressa ne careat pulcra dies nota.

Horat. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for John Baker at the sign of the Peacock in
St. Paul's Churchyard 1660.

I.
COme, now the greater Muses all have done,
And with majestic steps measured the story,
Now Cowley, and the rest the race have run,
And in their way swallowed up all the glory,
I Will pump a rhyme or two come Muse, we will go,
Jove loves a true devotion though it be slow.
II.
Welcome Great Charles! Hark, how the British Isle
Bellow's the gallant Echo, every Sea
Changes his angry Frown into a smile,
And tells the enquiring winds it is Holyday.
Charles is returned, and every thing must be
Clothed with brisk and sweet serenity.
III.
Stay! speak of Charles, what venurous tongue dares say
What that important Name does signify?
Like the Philosopher; I Would ask a day,
Then ten, or more. So great a Majesty
Perplexes humane reason to define,
And like a Gulf, swallows up all the Line.
IV.
His high auspicious Birth did plainly show
That bounteous Heaven some mighty Prince designed:
Angels could scarce keep Counsel; big they grew,
Yet none durst venture to unload his mind.
Only one loving Star, in spite of the day
Came to us at noon, and told us where he lay.
I.
ALL England now one Aetna seems to be,
Beset with joyful Bonefires every where:
Like damned Enceladus benath't I see
The conquered Rump struggling to see what is here,
Heaves up the flaming Burden, but in vain,
It gives him breath to take it away again.
II.
Great Charles! That very Name when it reach our Land
Sounded deliverance and quick supply:
Dagon, our trembling Monster here did stand,
Amazed at the very thoughts of Majesty,
Cursing his ugly Tail, which marked him out
For one of Desolations branded Rout.
III.
Thus when the other Dagon did but see
The glorious dawning of the Ark, he fled;
And tumbling down with fatal piety,
Against the Threshold dashed his ugly head,
Glad that his Godship's ruins might but be
The Tomb of Him and his deformity.
IV.
Come heavy Muse, let us try if we can sing,
And scrue our frozen notes, until they meet,
As the fashion is, in verse we will meet the King,
Although we limping go with gowty feet.
What though we have no wit? Let Us blame the Fate,
That frighted's out of it in -- 48.
I.
WHat mean those gilded Streamers there so high,
Dancing like Lightning through the cheerful air,
As if they meant to sweep and brush the Sky
From all the misty Cobwebs that hang there.
See how Heaven decks his Azure Canopy
With shoals of stars, and bright serenity.
II.
Hark how the listening winds creep gently by,
And whisper Charles unto the crowded shore,
Old Time stands still, and quite forgets to fly,
Surpised with wonder, for he never before
In the whole worlds voluminous Book did see
So great, so good, so just a Majesty.
III.
Great is thy charge, O Sea; be true, and bring
Thy wealthy Burden to the longing Land;
Thy happy waves that bear so great a King
Are richer far than all the wealthy sand,
Though every grain were turned into a gem,
And both the wealthy Indies thrown to them.
IV.
See how the Deep levels his curled brow
To a smooth glassy plain, for Charles is there:
Not any churlish billow grumbles now,
But melts his sullen rage to quiet fear;
Each loyal wave crowds with his watery lip,
And dies in close embraces of the Ship.
V.
The scaly Dolphins mount their loyal heads,
And by the adored ship they stoutly swim,
Forgetting, all the while, their watery Beds;
And when their expectation spies but Him,
See how one laughing there cageol's another,
And whispers his content unto his brother.
VI.
And all those shell'd Inhabitants of the sand,
That never yet forsook the gloomy shore,
That cloistered up in Water, dwell of the Land,
They open their shops, and bring their sparkling store,
Such brisk eradiations with them came,
You Would swear the very Sea were choked in flame.
VII.
He Is come! See what a crowd surrounds the ship,
Men, Beasts and Birds; nothing did stay behind;
Each one preparing his obsequious lip
To give a faint expression of his mind:
Noah not half so well bethronged stood,
When he was King of the floating world in the flood,
I.
He Is come! 'twas when the might storms had called
The roaring Thunders out and cracking hail,
When the panting winds in the furrowed sea were stall'd,
And we no sign saw but the Scorpions Tail:
He like the Sun broke forth, and frighted They
Trembled to heaps, and sneaking sleer'd away.
II.
They sneakt away, and great Astraea came
To repossess her long-usurped seat,
And blushed (as well she might) with pious shame
To see her Courts reeking with bloody sweat.
When Justice dies at Court, then how can we
Obscurer Mortals look for equity?
III.
The fiercest Beasts meet Him, and shivering come
To do abeysance at his royal feet:
Their silent duties bid him welcome home,
So the great Nomenclator they did greet
With trembling reverence, when to him they came,
In Eden's groves each one to take a name.
IV.
The frolic Rocks pluck up their heavy feet,
And dance about; the aged nodding oak
Gets loose, and comes; fain would they build a street:
Thus when the sweet Orphean Harp but spoke,
The joylly woods and stones forgot that they
Were tied by the feet, and nimbly tript away.
I.
THen from the united Throng a mighty shout,
(Louder than any Thunders roaring voice)
With zealous acclamations burst out,
With so stupendous and great a voice,
That the amazed shades all fled for fear,
And let the willing day stay longer here.
II.
The sturdy sky throws the loud Echo back
To the low gloomy vaults of the silent earth;
The deep foundations of the rocks do crack,
The Infant springs struggle to find a Birth
That they may hope at least to kiss his feet,
And by that sacred Touch learn to be sweet.
III.
Down to the great Abyss the sacred Name,
The Name of Charles broke down, and with a voice,
Louder than all the Cries that rend the flame,
Lays a dumb silence upon every noise.
Then to all Hell defiance thrice he cries,
To Heaven's and Mine infernal enemies.
IV.
The started Furies drop their flaming whips,
And sweep the sweat from off their scalded brows,
Dangling their broyling tongues upon their lips,
Each mouth like a great burning Furnace shows;
Where Blasphemy with ragefull anger snarls
Both against the sacred Names of God and Charles.
I.
O mighty influence of great Charles his Name,
That makes the very Gates of Hell to shake,
The damned souls get strength against the flame,
And by that intermission Breath they take.
But stay (sad souls!) a Troop of Fiends comes there,
The Legions routed now from Westminster.
II.
King Satan comes, and with a surly brow
Examines every Face, they trembling stand,
Expecting all some sad tormenting blow,
Now staring here, and then of the other hand,
I Am come (said he) and that I might not fail
To come in State, look, I have brought my Tail.
III.
With that out of his scaly Bosom he
Plucked forth a Roll, scrall'd over with bloody Names:
My Rump of Agitatours, here they be,
He cried, the Heirs apparent of my Flames,
And justly too: they wrought the Tragedy
Of Charles, that mighty foe of Mine and Me.
I.
In Worc'ster's bloody Fields methinks I see,
What noble resolution filled his Heart,
What low account He made of Majesty:
So great Apollo acted once a part
IN the Trojan Camp, laying aside his Bays,
Decking a steely Helmet with his Roys.
II.
Methinks I see Cromwell's seduced crowds
Moving, like iron-statues, over the fields,
Whilst his proud Banners- kiss the gloomy clouds,
Each face of Brass supplies the want of sheilds;
Brass must those faces be, that dare defy
Heaven, and its great Lieutenant's Majesty.
III.
See how the enraged Horses tear the way,
And fling a cloud of dust about their ears,
A cloud so thick that't almost stifled day.
See how his foaming neck one proudly rears;
Another neighs, tossing his curled main,
And swiftly scours along the trembling plain.
IV.
What throngs of sharp'ned Pikes and Halberts there
March over the enraged Rebel's head so thick
And close, that the very winds entangled are,
And cannot get through them but are force't to stick:
Like some great wood upon a hill they show,
Where there is scarce room for' another tree to grow,
I.
MEan while the Royal souls themselves prepare,
Armed with innocence and loyalty:
Not any Breast is stained with guilty fear,
Rather than live with shame they choose to dye.
Charles is their noble val'rous pattern, they
Are taught by His, what face becomes the day.
II.
See here they sally out, and there they meet:
Hark how the thundering Drums torment the sky:
Here mangled arms and legs, there hands and feet,
Parted from their unwilling bodies fly.
The overflowing Brooks swell with a flood,
And stain their frighted banks with streams of blood.
III.
See where a wide-mouthed Canons burning load
Comes roaring out, wrapped up in raging flame,
And through the thickest crowds it cuts a road,
Scorning by all resistance to be tame.
Never did the trembling corn fall half so fast
Before the angry Mower's sharpest haste.
IV.
Torn limbs of men and horses smeared with gore,
In heaps do lie. There one does stumbling fall,
Snared in his fellow's bowels, over and over.
Thousands of New-created kindred, all
Mangled with gaping wounds do strew the Earth,
Mixing their blood at death, though not at Birth.
I.
BUt stay! who is he, that through the armed rout,
So unresistably does run? what is he
That deals so many deaths to those about:
See with what mighty force undaunted He
Does hew his passage through, whilst trembling they,
Cromwell's poor Sneakes, crowd up to make him way.
II.
It must be Charles, who (though he shrouded be
In a disguises humble privacy,)
Cannot contract his beams of Majesty,
No more than the other Sun can hidden lie
Under a dusky cloud at noon: for still
His Light all corners of the world must fill.
III.
It Is,it is the mighty Prince: there does he thrust
His slaughtering Arm into the stoutest troops,
See there he come, reeking with blood and dust,
Whilst every Object of his Fury stoops
To's angry sword's strong force; no blow does need
A second to assist its murdering speed.
IV.
Before Him still they fall, and still they fly,
(Tumbling in dying Heaps they stop his way)
Thousands of panting Corpse, that fain would dye,
Breath out their souls with curses of the day,
Gnawing the ground with rage; unwearied He
Send's thousands more to attend their destiny.
V.
Heaven smiled, and saw an easy victory
Following his mighty Arm: but thought it fit
That Charles (that glorious Name) should raised be
B' another Conquest, far more great than it,
Which, like strong Lightning without wound or smart,
Should leave the Body whole and melt the Heart.
VI.
Heaven sounded his Retreat, and ready He
Obeyed e'ne to his loss, and left the field:
Cromwell mistook it for a victory,
And thought it possible that Charles could yield:
Stay ragefull Tyrant, stay! Heaven thinks that He
Better deserv's to live than all thy Host and Thee.
I.
HE lives and GOD WITH HIM, His Exile's force
Could never create to Him so great a loss,
Though the frantic Commonwealth strove to divorce
King, Heaven and Him; whilst round their silver Cross
Run GOD WITH US, Heaven left them all for One
And rather chose to live with Charles alone.
II.
They Are all mistook that say his quiet Breast
Was clouded and disturbed with fretting care,
There always dwelt Serenity and rest,
As in the upper Region of the Air,
Above those stormy Passions, jealous fears,
Which scall'd our minds with grief, and eyes with tears.
II.
It Is true, a loving watch did always dwell
In his sweet Eye, which kindly still did bend
To poor distracted Albion, and did tell
His royal heart what Tyranyes did rend
His tottering Kingdoms; whilst we guiltless lay
Prisoners that feared, but not deserved the day.
VI.
Nor can I blame those crafty cares that wrought
Their Subtle selves into His royal mind,
Where they the mighty things that pass his thought
And his great soul's sublime productions find.
I Would wish my self transformed into a Care,
If, without Treason's guilt I might dwell there.
V.
Long may Thou live Great Prince, and still may be
A terror to thy Foes, as thou have been
To every vice that has assaulted Thee:
Whilst the discovered Plots of crafty Sin,
Though all contrived in deepest policy,
Are not more known than they are shunned by Thee.
VI.
Under thy potent Influence I trust
Some condescending Muse will visit me,
And lift my grovelling Fancy out of the dust,
Stretching my dwarfish Rimes to Poetry;
Then the first Theme divine, of which I Will sing
Shall be a Panegyric to the KING.
FINIS.

