Miranda, Stupenda. OR, THE WONDERFVLL and astonishing Mercies which the LORD
has wrought for ENGLAND, in subduing and captivating the pride, power and
policy of his enemies. PRESENTED IN A SERMON PREACHED July 21. 1646. Before the
honorable House of COMMONS in Margarets Church Westminster. being the day appointed
for Thanksgiving for the Surrender of OXFORD. By HENRY WILKINSON, B. D. Pastor
of Dunstans in the East, London, and one of the Assembly of Divines.

EXODUS 15. 11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods! who is like unto
thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders! LONDON:
Printed by T. B. for Christopher Meredith and Samuel Gellibrand in Paul's
Churchyard, 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
IT is impossible to travel in a great Road, or take his journey to a great
Emporium, but he must needs meet with passengers in his way; and therefore if I
have fallen in with the conceptions of others, I suppose I shall be no more
blamed then they, who writing of poverty or grief, or death, have made use of
Seneca or Plutarch. or they that have handled Politiques, have consulted with
Aristotle's maxims, or have borrowed of Thucidides, and Tacitus, and Polybius,
and Philip de Comines, and Lipsius and Guicciardine who have scattered
excellent notions concerning that subject; only herein I must crave pardon,
that treating on the same argument which others have handled, there is wanting
that skill and excellency in the handling of it: It was the unhappiness of
Silius Italicus to come after Virgil, and handle the same thing; and so also of
Grotius to treat of the same matter with Tacitus, and of Paulus Jovius to be
engaged in the subject with Titus Livius: Yet certainly it is so with the
choycest works of the best Divines, we may subscribe them as I find at the end
of diverse famous Authors, plurima desunt and multa desiderantur; and many have
been as happy in their supplements and additionals, and conjectanea, as the
Authors themselves in the main subject. You were pleased to call me to preach
upon the occasion of the rendition of Oxford, and also you have commanded me to
print the Sermon: had I all the learning of a University, I could as willingly
have laid it out in the behalf of that place, and upon this subject which I
have spent my thoughts upon as any other whatsoever. I have made bold to
propound some things to your consideration concerning Oxford, in order to the
reformation of it; which though perhaps they may seem to be but contemptible
and poor, and such as are never like to rise to any glorious perfection; yet
it is certain, that he that will build very high, must dig low for his
foundation; and let not any one despise the day of small things, for we know
there is no River navigable in the Fountain, nor any Country where the Sun
shines hot at the peeping of the day: Perhaps some things may seem strange,
but let not any one condemn me for this, because it is a case which never was
before you till now, and therefore we must not condemn that for ill which is
only extraordinary; this were to do as that Norwegian, who when he saw red
Roses first, he durst not handle them for fear of burning his fingers. There
be some will tell you, there is no such need of a reformation of the
University, and invent praises for it; but I look upon such as they that are
very partial, as he was that made the Preface to the University Statutes, who
speaking of Queen Mary's days, has his opranda temporum faelicitas for them;
or else A Book entitled, Essays of certain Paradoxes.
perhaps they have a mind to exercise their wits, as he did which invented
praises for Busyris, and made an Apologetique for Nero, and Encomiums or
Richard the third Joh. Done his Juvenilia.
and Julian the Apostate; or else perhaps they have a mind to imitate some
whose crimes are virtues with them, and paradoxes truths, who maintain the
most absurd things, and inconsistent with truth and piety, only as a specimen
of their wit, to show how they can put a kind of luster and beauty on a
monster. However some may Vid. Reformed Prince.
think meanly of this design of yours for the reformation of Oxford; yet I
think I may truly say of this what Balzac did of a great enterprise of the
French King, that the modesty of an oratory style does not beseem an action so
strange: Poets only have right to that, it appertains to their heroique
language; it is worthy of the enthusiasme of their pompous and figurative
descriptions; sure I am, there is scarce any thing more worthy all the
contributions which a Parliament can afford, then the settling of the University
upon the basis of learning and Religion. You have an opportunity of laying a
foundation, and of building too, which shall be beyond the reach of envy,
against which the gates of hell shall not prevail; but it shall be matter of
wonder and rejoicing to succeeding generations, who shall with triumphant
acclamations cry grace, grace, unto it: The Lord that has called you to work
for him, afford you the assistance of his most glorious power, the direction of
his infinite wisdom, and crown you with incomparable success here, and give
you an immarcessible crown of glory hereafter. So prays he who counts it his
happiness to be

Your humble Servant HENRY WILKINSON.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON, Preached before the honorable House of COMMONS, July
21. 1646. for the surrender of OXFORD.
NUMB. 23. 23. Surely there is no enhantment against Jacob, neither is there
any divination against Israel: According to this time it shall be said of
Jacob, and of Israel, what has God wrought?


THESE Words are part of the confession extorted out of the mouth of Balaam,
who was a Chaplain fit for Balak in that cursed design of his against the
Israelites, who was resolved if he could not flectere superos, Acheronta
movere: Now when this Witch had tried all his skill in the black Art, and
improved all his interest in the Devil, he is forced to break out into this
acknowledgment, Surely, etc.

In the words there is a Confession first; secondly, a Declaration. In the
Confession, there is his own sin employed; for it is as if he should have said,
If divinations, or enchantments, or spells, or witchcraft and conjuring in any
kind, could have brought down curses on Israel, they should have been cursed
with a vengeance: 2. In the confession there is a tacit acknowledgement of the
overruling hand of God, which was too hard for all the powers of darkness,
who preserved Israel, maugre all that the wit and strength of malice can do to
the contrary.

Secondly, in the Declaration there is set down what God had done for his
people, or what God might do, or may do, or would do; for the words have all
these versions, (...); our translation, What has God wrought? reaches the
Original: the Sept. (...). The Syriack. Quid operetur Deus. The Called. paraphr.
Quid operatus sit Deus.

The Samaritan pentat. is the same with our translat. Quid fecit Deus; and this
shall I follow.

In all which senses and versions, we may observe; first, the strangeness and
wonder of the things which God would work for his people: for as it was a very
strange thing in the eyes of Balaam, that by all his sorceries he was able to
do no mischief at that time; so according to that time for the future the
Lord would preserve as miraculously his servants: Secondly, you have the effect
that these wonders should work in the hearts of them that see them, and that is
admiration, a suitableness of affection to the greatness and wonder of the
things wrought by God for his people.

There be several Doctrines might be raised hence, but according to the two
generals, I will present two propositions only: The first is a Doctrine of it
self, but you may take it thus:

First, that all the sorceries, witchcraft and stratagems, contrived and
carried on by the wit and malice, and power of hell against the Church of God,
shall prove vain and succeslesse.

Secondly, the wonderful things which God has wrought and will work for his
Church and people, shall be, and also are matter of astonishment and wonder
unto all.

I shall insist at present on the latter of these two Doctrines, as being very
suitable to our condition in this Kingdom, which of late has been a theater
of wonders, so that we may call its name as Abraham did, Genesis 22. 14. of that
place where he was to offer Isaac, Jehovah jireh. In the handling of which I
shall propound, first, what things God has or will work; secondly, How?
thirdly, When? fourthly, Why? fifthly, The Uses which may be made of the
Doctrine.

First, What are the wonders that God has wrought? First, they be rare, they
be such as usually and frequently are 1. What are the wonders which God has
wrought?
not brought to pass; such things as happen rarely, are matter of wonder, and
draw the eyes of men to them, though they have natural causes; as Eclipses,
etc.

Secondly, Incognita, such things of which the world is not acquainted withal,
whose causes and ends men cannot reach unto, they being ultra captum.

Thirdly, Insperata, such things as are beyond ordinary hopes, so they are
ultra spem, as well as ultra captum, as being out of the compass of nature,
such things are beyond power and parts lying out of the sphere of natural
possibility.

Fourthly, Repugnantia, such things as are contrary to the course of nature,
and are abhorring from the natural stream and tide of the creature: All
things that carry these characters on them are matter of wonder.

Now the things which God does for his people, they are The wonderful things
which God does for his people are of two sorts.
iether spiritual or temporal.

These spiritual things in order to salvation are indeed admiranda; let but
any one consider from whence to what a state we are recovered, and he must say,
as it is, Romans 11. 33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! etc. that we should be raised from a state of privation,
being divested of all good; from a state of enmity, against all good; a state
in which we were liable to the curses written and unwritten, etc. to be raised
from so low, and vile, and miserable, and abominable state, to be the children
of God. John puts an Ecce, a note of admiration on it, 1 John 3. 1, 2. Behold
what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the sons of God, etc. That we that sat in darkness and in the shadow of
death, should be raised up to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 2. 6. this is wonderful, and we may truly say, What has God wrought?
That we that have so many ways provoked the Lord to destroy us, should be
pardoned is wonderful: the Church speaks of it by way of wonder, Micah 7. 18.
Who is God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? Is it not matter of wonder that
God should say, I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgression, etc. Isa.
43. 25. to them he speaks that had not called on him, that were weary of him,
that did not sacrifice to him, that would not serve him, but made him to serve
with their sins, verse 22, 23. To go over all the particulars that might be
insisted on, would be a vast thing; I proceed therefore to temporals, and shall
consider what great things God has wrought in them.

Secondly, for temporal things, there is abundant matter of wonder in them: He
is wonderful in his protection and preservation of his people; the Church may
always fing the 124. Psalm, If it had not been the Lord who was on our side.
etc. they had swallowed us up quick, etc. for a company of Sheep and Lambs to
live in the midst of whole Herds and Droves of Wolves and Tigers, and all
sorts of Beasts of prey is much; for the Bush to burn, and not to be consumed;
for the vessel of the Church to be full of waves sometimes, and not to be
drowned; for the male child newly borne to be kept from the Dragon with seven
heads and ten horns, Revel. 12. 3, 4. that the Lilly should live in the midst
of Thorns, and not be torn in pieces; that the people of God should be safe
in the midst of principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses, which
bring out all their train of Artilery, that come furnished with all the
ammunition and magazine of hell: This is wonderful preservation.

Secondly, he is wonderful in his salvation and deliverances of his people out
of the greatest dangers and out of many deaths; when God delivered his people
from the power of the Egyptians, then Moses in his Song, Exodus 15. 11. say,
Who is a God like unto thee, etc. working wonders? When the people of God were
delivered out of captivity, they were like men in a dream, Psalm. 126. 1. nay,
the heathen themselves said, the Lord has done great things for them, ver. 2.

Thirdly, he is wonderful in the destruction that he brings by them on their
enemies, Is. 41. 14. 15, 16. that a worm should be as a new threshing
instrument to thresh the mou^tains, and beat them small, and fan them, etc. is
a wonder: that Israel a poor contemned people, should be the battle-axe of
God, and his weapons of war, to break in pieces the Nations, and to destroy
Kingdoms, etc. Jer. 51. 20, 21. this is wonderful; that a poor captivated
people, even Jerusalem, broken and undone, should be a cup of trembling to all
round about, and a burdensome stone for all people, and cut them in pieces,
etc. Zech. 12. 2, 3, 6. that the stone cut out of the mountain without hands,
should break in pieces the iron the brass, the clay, the silver and the gold,
Dan. 2. 45. In this respect it may be said, and it shall be said, What has God
wrought?

Fourthly, he is wonderful in his provision for them: It is the lot of the
people of God to be driven into great streights and extremities, as the people
of Israel were in the Wilderness; yet as God did still provide a supply for
them, so he will also for his people, Isa. 41. 17, 18, 20. When the poor and
needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I
the Lord will hear them, etc. I will open Rivers in high places, etc. and
Psalm. 34. 10. The young Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek
the Lord shall not want any thing.

These things which God works in his own wonderful way, they are such, first,
as nature never does; or secondly, he does work them so as that they are not
brought to pass in the order and method of nature; or thirdly, not by the
principles of nature; now they are said to be miracula quod superent captum
ingenii, ac homini incutiunt stuporem, Funger. Etymol. Latin. grae.

The second thing propounded was, How the Lord would 2. How will, or how has
the Lord wrought these wonders?
work wonderful things for his people.

First, when contraries are made to produce effects opposite to themselves: As
when out of the greatest disadvantages he 1. When contraries produce effects
opposite to themselves: This is three ways.
works the greatest advantage; out of greatest losses he extracts the greatest
gains, out of ruins he works a reparation: When God suffers his people to be
beaten into victories, and routed into triumphs, and undone into riches, so
that it may be said many times periissent, nisi periissent: this is done,
first, when he works on the affections, when he carries them against their own
stream and tide, turns curses into blessings, as in Balaams case, and hatred
into favor, and malignity into mercy, and spite into love, as he did in Laban
toward Jacob, Genesis 30. 24. and in Esau, Genesis 33. 6. and in Abimelech toward
Abraham Genesis 20. 14, 15, 16. These however they were as Wolves in their
purposes and resolutions, yet the issues were most like Lambs. This is
wonderful, and we may say, Who is a God like unto thee, that can thus work?

Secondly, when God turns wisdom into folly, that there should be the wisest
Counsels, and the most foolish results and issues, 2 Samuel 17. 1, 2, etc. by
making the wisest men give the advice of fools, Isa. 29. 14. the wisdom of the
wise shall peresh, etc. and Joh 12. 16, 17. He leads Counselors away spoiled,
and makes the Judges fools; or, when he makes use of such as are accounted
fools to confound the wise, 1 Cor. 1. 27. then it may be said, Who is a God
like unto thee?

Thirdly, when weakness produces strong effects, then it may be said, the
Lord works wonderfully, 1 Cor. 1. 27. we have an instance, Judges 7. 20. and
Joshua 4. 20. that the sounding of Rams horns, like so many Rams against the
walls of Jericho, should batter them down, that Jonathan and his Armor-bearer
should rout an Army, 1 Samuel 14. that Shamgar with an Ox Goad should slay six
hundred men, Judges 3. 31 that Sampson with the Jaw Bone of an Ass should slay
a thousand, Judges 15. 16. that David, a puny, should encounter with, and
conquer Goliath, a man of war armed, with a stone in a sling, is wonderful; or
else, when strong and probable 2. When there be great disappeintments of great
hope: and this is done four ways.
causes produce weak effects; as if a mighty Army should come against a small
weak City, and not be able to take it, Eccles. 9. 14, 15.

2. When there be strange frustrations of very great expectations; first, when
a design is built on power and policy, and carried on with skill and
dexterity, then there be great hopes; now to have such teeming hopes strangled
in the birth, or even when they are betwixt the womb and the world, is matter
of very great wonder; not to obtain where there is great probability, a bare
disappointment in such a case is much; for the wit of hell to be puzzelled, and
nonplussed, for the power of men and devils, to be confounded in their full
carreer; when they are riding post, for their Chariot wheels then to then to be
taken off when they run most smoothly and swiftly, this is a great
disappointment; -- Recoctus scriba ex quinquevivo corvu^ delusit hia item
to frustrate a man when he is with open mouth ready to take in a prey, or even
to fetch it out from between his Bolus creptus faucibus, Crucior said Terence
(in scipipsum excruciante) bolum tantum est mihi esse creptum a faucibus.
teeth, as it is Amos 3. 12. as the Shepherd takes out of the mouth of the
Lion two legs, or a piece of an ear, etc. this is wonderful frustration: nay,
when they have swallowed down the prey, and it is now under the second
concoction, then to disappoint them is more strange, Job 20. 15. He has
swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again: when the wicked have
eaten and devoured the Saints, and as the Whale did by Jonah, swallow them
down also, so that they seem to be dead and buried, and the conclamatum est
has passed upon them, and no returning or recovery (...): as one in Athenaeus
speaks of one past recovery, and as Lucretius l. 3. expresses it; Mortalem
vitam mars cui immortalis ademit.
looked for, yet then to make these Whales to cast up all their Jonahs and to
land them safe, for these that were dead and buried to rise again, is an
extraordinary disappointment, and a wonderful and astonishing thing, Revel.
11. 7, 8, 9,-11.

Secondly, there be great disappointments, when expectations are made ones
destruction, when hopes fall on the authors head and dash his brains out, when
one is not only disappointed of the good that he looked for from the child of
his hopes, of which he traveled, but this child, like Adramelech and Sharezer,
sons to Senacharib, kill their father that begat them, Isa. 37. 37, 38. We
read of the wicked, Jer. 16. 16. how they are called Hunters and Fishers,
because they hunt and fish, and persecute the people of God; now that these
hunters should be taken in their own toils, and these fishers should be
caught by their own Angles, hanged on their own hooks, tangled in their own
Nets, is wonderful: We have many instances, Judges 5. 28, 29, 30. how full of
hopes was the Mother of Sisera and the rest with her, and yet what ruin
followed, even by them which they had swallowed up in their purposes and
expectations, Exodus 15. 9. the enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I
will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied on them, I will destroy
them: And yet all fell out not only praeter spem, but contra, as much as could
be: So, Judges 7. 22. and 1 Samuel 14. 20. and 2 Chronicles. 20. 22, 23. they that
brought weapons of cruelty to destroy the people of God, are so far from
doing them any hurt, that they kill and destroy one another: How was Haman and
the enemies of Daniel disappointed, and by their own plots ruined, Hester. 8.
and Dan. 6. 24. thus does God take the wicked in their own craft, Job 5. 12,
13, 14, 15. and he that digs a pit for another, is buried in his own grave,
Psalm. 9. 15, 16. which is matter of great wonder, and to which David affixeth,
Higgaion Selah.

Thirdly, when there be strange discoveries beyond all probability or
expectation, when plots secretly and wisely continued and managed, and almost
ripe for an issve, it is a great disappointment, then in that nick of time, to
be discovered: As it fared with that monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens (and
when fire was ready to be given, the match and powder were now meeting) cui
lumen ademptum: I need not tell what I mean, every one knows the
Powder Treason to be even as the firstborne of Hell and Rome together: How did
the Lord discover the Counsels of the King of Syria, when they were ready for
execution, 2 Kings 8. 9. And how did the Lord discover that plot against the
death of Paul, Acts 23. 14, 15, etc.

Fourthly, when counsels and designs in their prosecution running in a full
stream, have been turned clean another way, by some unlookt for emergency, 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27, 28. Saul in a hot pursuance of David, is taken off by a
messenger that came and told him, the Philistians had invaded the Land: by this
means very often it is, that the wicked are a ransom for the righteous, Prove.
21. 18. 3. The third way which God takes to work wonders for his people


A third way that God takes to work these great things, is when by himself or
by some of his creatures, he brings strange confusion on his adversaries, and
strange deliverance for his people: How did the Lord with a mighty hand deliver
the people of Israel out of Egypt, and with a mighty hand destroy their
enemies, Exodus 7, 8, 9. chap. and 15. 10. the Lord did blow with his wind, and
the waters covered them; so when with his Angel he destroyed in a night one
hundred forty five thousand men: he delivered Elisha, 2 Kings 6. 18, 19. by
smiting the enemy with blindness; he withered Jeroboams hand, stretched out
against the Prophet, 1 Kings 13. 4. God sometime does let forth some visible
demonstrations of his wrath against his enemies, so that it may he truly said,
What has God wrought? How did God smite Arrius? how did God take vengeance on
him, Arrius in foelix, qui curva per avia rectum
flectere visus iter, foveam delapsus in atram,
Corruit, and tetri mersus petit ima profundi:
tam vacuus sensu, justae quam tempore poenae
Visceribus fusis vacuus quoque ventre remansit,
Caelius Sidulius. --
Vid. Paurentii Pudovici, Orat. 1. eccles. vet. nov.

Vid. Francisc. Baldwinum Jctum,

De Constantini Imp. legibus ecclefiast. atque civil, l. 1.

Camerar. Cent. 3. c. 3. Nathan Chytraeus in viatico itineris extemi.


causing a sudden consternation of mind to fall upon him, who betaking himself
to a Privy, did empty his bowels there? the death of Julian and Herod was most
eminent from Gods hand immediately; the death of that heretic Olympius was
remarkable at that time, when he vented his herefie against the Trinity, he was
smitten with fiery darts from heaven; and Anastasius the Emperor, when he
would needs have a quaternity worshipped, was struck with a thunderbolt from
heaven; so that in this respect also we may truly say, What has God wrought? I
might be large in instances out of Ecclesiastical story, but I forbear.

Fourthly, when the Lord does seem to alter and overthrow the course of nature
in the deliverance of his people, and the ruin of their enemies: It is
observed by Vid more Nevech. p. 2. c. 29
R. Moses Maiemonides, that the Prophet Isaiah, when he speaks of the
destruction of a people, and the deliverance of his Church, he makes use of
expressions of wouder and astonishment; as of the falling of stars, the
perishing of the heavens, the darkning of the Sun, the devastation of the
earth, etc. Isa. 13. 10, 13. prophesying of the ruin of Babel, he uses such
expressions of wonder; and Isa. 24. 23. prophesying of the ruin of
Sennacharib, he says the like; both these were inveterate enemies of the
Church: So also he speaks of the rescue and deliverance of the Church, Isa. 30.
26. and 34. 3, 4. speaking of the ruin of Edom, which had long afflicted the
people of God, and so would prove safety and deliverance unto them, he uses
words of terror and wonder: All the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the
heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll, and all their host shall fall
down as the leaf falls off from the Vine, and as a falling fig from the
Fig Tree: so also Isa. 51. 6. he speaks his consolation here, with chiding them
for forgetting him that had made the heavens and earth, etc. then ver. 16. when
he speaks of what great things he would do for Zion, he says, That he will
plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say to Zion, Thou
art my people. We read the like expressions elsewhere as Isa. 60. 20. 65. 17.
etc. Ezekiel. 32. 7. Joel 2. 10. Hag. 2. 7. Joel 2. 11,-30. In these and the like
places the Lord uses such expressions and words, as if he would alter and
overturn the whole frame of the Universe, and begin the world anew, when he
purposes to do great things for his people: We read of very strange and
prodigious things in the Roman story, scattered up and down, which God
wrought, then especially when he had a purpose to bring some notable confusion
on the enemies of Gods people; there be Julius obsiqutus de prodigris Polydore,
Virgill. 3. de Prodigiis, speaks of these prodigies with somcuse to the Church.
diverse that have taken pains to set down these wonders, but without any
respect to the mind of God in them with reference to his Church; yet Josephus
Josephus l. 7 c. 82. De bello Judaico, he complains of the great neglect of
these strange things which God wrought, for says he, speaking of the wonders,
(...), etc. Pliny also tells us of a strange apparition in the Heavens observed
by Hipparebus, who lived toward the end of the Grecian Monarchy, about 120.
years before Christ: Which prodigious star then appearing, did by the consent
of the learned foreshew the declining of the Greek Monarchy, and the rise and
strength of the Roman Empire.
has taken notice of many signs in the heavens and earth before the
destruction of Jerusalem: one of the most famous alterations in the Heavens which
has had its most remarkable influences below, was in the year 1572. when there
appeared a strange light, exceeding in the apparent brightness thereof all the
fixed stars, and showing forth a bright and majesticall luster, not in the
night only, but at noon day also: It was the wonder of the world, and the work
and business of all the Astronomers of Europe; but Ticho Brahe a Noble man of
Denmark treats of this star in above 500. pages of his book, called by the
name of Astronomica Progymnasmata: In which book he speaks of the influences
of this star, and the overthtow of States and Kingdoms, and reparation and
glory of the Church: I make mention of these only to show how the Lord does
great things, even overthrowing or changing and altering the frame and course
of nature: As for the operations or portending signification of superior
lights, I think it cannot be denied, but that extraordinary wonders visible in
the heavens may have their significations and impressions also: nor may it be
altogether incongruous literally to interpret those words, Joel 2. 30. I will
show wonders in the heavens and the earth, partly of that flaming sword, like
the Comet Egesip. de excid. urbis Hierasol. l. 5. c. 44. Nam per annum fere
supra templum ipsum Comites, passim ignis and gladii quandam praeferens
similitudinem denunciabat quoque ferra and igni gentis and regni urbique ipsius
vastitatem futuram: quid enim similitudo gladii nisi bellum? quid ignis nisi
incendium denunciaret. The third thing propounded, is concerning the season and
time when it shall be said, What God wrought?
that appeared as a forewarner of the destruction of Jerusalem.

The third thing propounded was, when it shall be said What has God wrought?
for the time:

When creature helps fail; first, in point of prudence they know not how to
advise: secondly, in point of power, they know not how to deliver or save,
Deuteronomy. 32. 35, 36. thirdly, in occasional emergent difficulties, such as could
neither be foreseen nor prevented: fourthly, in great extremities and
streights, when enemies are very high and the Saints are very low; when heaven
and earth and hell seem to join issue, when God himself seems to take part
against the Church, then she is in the greatest extremity, ahd when she is in
this case, then does God arise and help her.

Indeed Gods season is, when it seems to be past season, his time is when it is
past time, Isa. 33. when the people of God are in a forlorn condition, given
up for lost, then God, ver. 10. says, Now will I arise, now will I he exalted,
now will I lift up my self: Now, now, now, he repeats it three times with
variety of language, there is something more then ordinary in that expression,
so trebled as it is, to encourage their sinking souls, who thought God would
not, or could not, or had altogether laid aside the thoughts and care of
helping them; when the wound is past cure, then he undertakes the cure, Jer.
30. 12, 13. there it is said, Thy wound is incurable, and ver. 17. It is said,
I will cure thee: When all passages are blockt up, when there is a close siege
of difficulties and impossibilities, when dangers are inextricable, and the
matter past recovery, then is Gods time; when the ship is full of waves, Mat.
8. 24. when Lazarus was dead and buried, John 11. 21, 32, 39. when the woman
had spent all she had upon Physicians, and there was as little hope as money
left, Luke 8. 43. then is the Lords time to work and fetch out of the fire as
it were, Zech. 3. 2. and from the dead, Revol. 11. 11. and from the ruins and
destruction of death, Ezekiel. 37. 7, 10, 11.

The fourth thing propounded was, why does God thus The fourth Particular
propounded, was concerning the reason, why does God thus appear in such a
wonderful manner for his people. The first reason respects Gods glory.
appear for his people; first, to magnify his own glory more; the first end
respects Gods glory: there be three things in the wonderful proceedings of God
that magnify him very much: First, there is a mystery in the proceedings of
God; mysteries affect with wonder and admiration, and the Lord does carry on
his work in a very mysterious way, and in a hidden manner: Isa. 45. 15. it is
said, Thou art a God which hidest thy self, spoken with reference to the great
things which he would do for his people: so also, Hab. 3. 4. He had horns
came out of his hand, and there was the hiding of his power: there be many
intricacies of providence, Ezekiel. 1. 16. and perplexed and involved
difficulties; so Zech. 1. 8. the Lord Christ is in that vision presented in a
Wood, and in a bottom, not easily discerned, when he comes to work for his
people; mysteries do affect with wonder more, and they magnify the Lord more.

Secondly, there is a majesty in these wonders, and this does cause men to
admire also and to magnify the Lord; he seems to go in state as it were, when
he will do great things for his people, Deuteronomy. 33. 26. The Lord rides on the
heavens for thy help, and his excellency on the sky: so Hab. 3. 8, 9. the Lord
appears in his Majesty there, and ver. 10, 11, the Sun and other creatures
seem to be trembling and wondering; and Nahum 1. 3, 4. the Lord is brought in,
in a glorious manner; and then, ver. 5. The mountains quake, etc. this also
does magnify the Lord, and show forth his glory.

Thirdly, there is a peculiar excellency in Gods great works which does affect
the heart with wonder; the excellency of his wisdom shows it self in
infatuating and blasting the councels of the wise, and of his power that shines
in breaking their strength, in which the wicked are so confident; the
excellency of his justice that appears in the execution of the wicked, and
vindication of his peoples cause; the excellency of his faithfulness and truth
breaks out in making good his Word, and fulfilling his promises. This is the
first reason why God does work wonders for his, in which there is a mystery, a
majesty, and a peculiar excellency appears.

A second thing respects the enemies of Gods people; first, The second reason
respects the enemies of the Saints two ways. 1. That the confusion of the
enemies might be the more notable.
that so the greater confusion and shame may come on the enemies of the Saints;
for God to deliver his Saints from many, and mighty, and malicious enemies is a
wonder, especially when it is with great confusion on the adversaries. There is
by so much the greater confusion on the wicked, by how much the more sure they
made themselves of the ruin of Gods people, and by how much the more the enemy
was exalted, as it is Obad. 3. 4. the Lord orders it so in his providence, that
the confusion and shame of the wicked shall have all the ingredients in it,
that so the wonder may be the greater: first, they shall conceive great hopes
of accomplishing their designs. Secondly, they shall carry on those hopes with
much success even almost to a desired issue; they shall plow, and sow, and be
ready to reap. Thirdly, there shall be disappointment sudden, unexpected,
unavoidable, irrecoverable. Fourthly, that which they least of all looked for
shall come to pass, even that themselves should be destroyed by them whom they
thought to destroy, Zech. 12. 2, 3. Jerusalem is a cup of trembling, she that
was rather as a cup of wine that might invite an adversary to drink it up, for
sweet wine being in a cup tempts more then being in a Butt or Barrel, and is in
danger of being swallowed down; now that this cup which is so exposed to every
one that goes by, should be a cup of poison and ruin to them that thought to
devour it, carries much shame and confusion. It is said that it shall be a
burdensome stone; it is not said it shall be as a millstone, or a mountain to
crush in pieces, for if the Church were of a mighty bulk and greatness able
to make its part good with an adversary, then perhaps they would not be so
eager against it. There is no man going by a stone of many loads and of a
mighty weight will attempt to remove it, but a little stone that lies in ones
way that may be spurned which the foot, or taken up in the hand and cast away: a
stone, first, that is little; secondly, that lies ready in the way to be cast
aside, or made use of. Thirdly, in which is a fitness for use to ones self;
such a stone carries a kind of temptation with it to one to carry it away;
such a stone the Church seems to be in the eyes of her enemies; the Church of
God lies in the way of wicked men, as a little contemptible stone that they
need not take much pains withal, but such as they may kick out of the way with
the foot, or easily cast it away with their hand; now that this stone should be
like many milstones and mountains to dash the wicked in pieces, that is the
greater confusion and shame.

A second respect is in regard of the great terror, as well as 2. That there
might be the greater terror brought on the wicked.
the great shame which God brings on the wicked, Exodus 15. 14, 15, 16. when
God had wrought that wonderful deliverance for his people, and confusion of
their adversaries, the enemies round about were afraid; so it was also Josh 2.
9, 10, 11. and 5. 1. and Deuteronomy. 2. 25. and Numb. 22. 2, 3, 6. The third reason
respects the people of God themselves.


The third reason why God will work strange things for his people against
their enemies, respects the people of God themselves; that they might appear
the more glorious, and be known to be saved by the Lord, Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Happy
art thou O Isrel, who is like unto thee? saved by the Lord, etc. so also 2.
Sam. 7. 23. What one Nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel,
whom God went out to redeem from a people to himself, and to make him a name,
and to do for you great things and terrible? etc. this was it which did make
the people of God so famous and glorious that God had done such wonders for
them.

Now we shall proced to use, first, of caution: God has The fifth particular
propounded was, what use may be made of this which has bin spoken of these
wonders of the Lord. The first Use is a Use of caution.
wrought great things for you: (Honorable and beloved) take heed least by your
ingratitude, you cause him to do great things against you: It has been said,
what has God wrought for you? beware that it be not said, what has God
wrought against you? he has made you the wonders of his mercy, take heed that
he does not make you the wonders of his fury: It has been said, what has God
wrought, that has magnified his wisdom in carrying on your affairs; take
heed he does not leave you to your selves, and so you become the wonders of
folly and madness to all the world; he has magnified his power in your
behalf, take heed he does not dismantle you, and lay you naked, and make you
wonders of weakness, and expose you as a prey to the most contemptible enemy:
he has made you the wonders of his protection and love, take heed he does not
make you the wonders of his rejection, as it was with Israel.

I suppose a caveat now cannot be thought unseasonable, in regard I find that
the greatest temporal mercies which ever God gave to his people, were given
with the greatest caveats and many provisoe's, they were given under lock and
key as it were, a mercy and a caution, as a keeper to go along with it to see
to the good behavior of him that has it in the use of it: The Lord did
nurture the Israelites, being to enter into Canaan, and he did discipline them
beforehand, and give them many caveats, Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 2. there is an exhortation
to obedience being to enter into Canaan, and ver. 5, 6. speaking of going in
thither, take heed therefore, says he, ver. 9. and 14, 15, 16. he speaks to
the same purpose, and ver. 22, 23. and 38, 29, 40. take heed, etc. then again,
chap. 6. 10, 11, 12. speaking of the plenty of Canaan, then beware, says he to
them; and Deuteronomy. 8. 10, 11. take heed, again: David gives Solomon (speaking of
great things that he should enjoy) warning to beware; and Christ said to him
that he healed, John 5. 14. Sin no more, etc.

Now there is great reason of this, because upon the receipt of great mercies,
we are in danger of great sins: we find that they which have been the wonders
of the world in regard of great favors from God, have been the wonders of the
world after, for great sins against God: Noah had the favor to be preserved in
the Arc from that universal deluge when the world was drowned, and Noah not
long after was drowned in drunkenness. Lot had that great mercy showed him to
be delivered out of Sodom, and after! that he turned Zoar into a Sodom by his
uncleanness: How shamefully did David fall, after those multitude of favors
he had from God 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8, 9. How did Hezekiah show himself to be very
unthankful, after such mercies as all the world might wonder at: How did Jonah
qvarrell with God presently after after he came out of the Whales belly: How
did Peter deny his Master with an oath, that had the honor (besides other
favors) to see him transfigured in the mount? We are in danger, first, It is
reported of Philip King of Macedon, that he appointed a Lad to come to him
every morning before any other, and say to him three times, Philipe homo^es,
least upon the success of his victories over the Athenians he might forget
himself, Aelian. variar. Histo. l. 8. c. 15 that of Tacitus is sure, acrius
explorant animum resprosperae quam adversae, Terrul. in Apologet. Arrian, l. 3.
of pride, of being lifted up above our selves: It was the sin of Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. when he waxed strong his heart was lifted up: secondly, we be in
danger of forgetfulness, Dent. 8. 16. thirdly, They that write of the ruin of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, do give this as on cause and that a chief one, to
wit, prosperity Althus. Polit. l. 23. c. 7. Val. max. l. 7. c. 2. Alex. ab
Alex. l. 3. c. 20. lips. lib. 6. and the Scripture is frequent and full in this
particular.
we are in danger of luxury and riot, we quickly surfeit and wax wanton with
mercies: fourthly, of carelessness, you need not advise one that is poor or
ready to be staryed, to look out for provision, such will be too careful; but
you had need advise them that are rich and full, least they grow negligent and
supine, and careless in their duty to God, and laying out what they have for
his glory: fifthly, we are in danger of relapses, after recovery out of great
dangers and diseases, etc. if there be not great care, we fall into the old
trade and way again, daily experience testifies this truth: sixthly, we are in
danger of great judgments, Ezra 9. 13, 14. in all these respects, we have a
much more slippery standing then we had before: A Paradise is a much more
dangerous place for us to be in then a Wilderness.

But what must we beware of chiefly: First, that we do not forget our low
estate before God wrought these wonders for us: For this consideration does
much advance Gods wonders, by how much the lower our state and condition was,
when he began to work for us, by so much the greater is the mercy, and
therefore God will not have us forget our low estate. The Lord does very often
make mention of the deliverance he wrought for Israel, and he makes express
mention of Egypt, and the house of bondage; he speaks of it, first, in giving
of the Law, Exodus 20. 1. secondly, when he instituted the Sacrifices, Levit.
22. 33. thirdly, when he makes the promise of blessings to them, Levit. 26. 13.
fourthly, in reckoning up his great works he had done for them, Deuteronomy. 4. 32,
33, 34. and when he speaks of the favors he would bestow, Deuteronomy. 6. 10, 11, 12.
fifthly, he reckons it as a great sign of his love, Deuteronomy. 7. 8. sixthly, when he
disswades them from ingratitude, Deuteronomy. 8. 14. seventhly, when he instituted the
paschall Lamb, Deuteronomy. 16. 6. eighthly, when the Angel reproved the people, Judges
2. 1. ninthly, when he purposed to give them victory over the Midianites,
Judges 6. 8, 9, 10, etc. tenthly, when they were about to set up a King, 1 Samuel
10. 18. how frequent is the Lord in making mention of Egypt upon every
occasion? surely to put them in mind of their low estate, Revel. 2. 5. the
Church of Ephesus is bid to remember from whence she was fallen; and surely we
must not forget from whence we are risen, Jer. 2. 6, 7. that it may with
greater wonder be said, What has God wrought for us that were so low? for God
himself takes occasion to amplify his favors upon this consideration, Ezekiel.
16. 3, 4, 5. so David reckons it among the miracles of mercies, that God
remembered them in their low estate, Psalm. 136. 23. we must not forget who they
were that owned us and the cause we undertook, in our low estate: It was
confessed that our Brethren of Scotland did such service for us, that they
deserved much at our hands, as much at least as In his Sermon entitled New
Englands sense of old England and Irelands sorrows.
Master Hook in his Sermon gives them, when he styles them, that honorable
Nation that united in a Covenant against the Prelates; we may have cause enough
to think on them, as Master Cotton does in his Sermons on the Vials, where he
apprehends that God made use of them to pour out his Vial upon the seat of
the Beast, and his Kingdom (...), he thinks that the word there clearly
pointed out the Vide 5. Vial
Scots: Of whom he says; Nor do I know that any of the former Vyals have been
poured out by any men, whose loins have been more girt about with truth, and
whose clothing has been more pure and white, then these servants of God have
been girt with, and clothed withal.

II. We must beware we do not forget the special providence of God which go
along with his great mercies, for these do put a very great price upon the
favors you receive: God sends you a Cabinet in such a mercy, you must open it,
and you shall find many jewels in it: he does dismember a mercy that does not
take it in all its dimensions, nor can God have the full praise of a complete
mercy, when we our selves do not see into all the parts of it; we must
therefore look at the mercy, and, First, the season of the mercy, in the Mount;
extremity was Gods opportunity; when thy spirit would have failed, if God had
not then come, Isa. 57. 16. then to afford mercy, when the full time to have
mercy was come, Psalm. 102. 11. is a blessed fit time; or perhaps it was at such
a season, when we were praying and fasting, or presently after; God is pleased
to time his mercies which he bestows; for it is said, Isa. 49. 8. In an
acceptable time have I heard thee; and David says, Psalm. 69. 13. In an
acceptable time have I prayed; it is a blessed season for God to be giving when
we are praying, as it is Isa. 65. 24. Whilst they are speaking, I will hear:
How often have our Thanksgiving days trod on the heels of our Fasting days? how
often have Victories come flying on the wings of prayer so fast, that they have
taken us upon our knees?

Secondly, we must not forget the many difficulties and intricacies through
which our mercies have been conveyed to us; we must look at the cross,
perplexed passages of providence; there has been many a time in our great
affairs, an appearance, as it were a wheels within a wheel, Ezekiel. 1. 16. so
that God manifested his mervailous loving kindness, as David speaks, Psalm. 57.
7. when he has given a blessed issue in such cases.

Thirdly, we must not forget this providence, when God makes many means
conspire for our good, when he commands a constellation of means of different
complexions to coutribute their influences for our good; when men of a contrary
temper and disposition one from another and averse from me, should yet be
overswayed to combine for my good, this is an admirable providence.

Fourthly, we must not forget how suddenly and unexpectedly the Lord has done
things for us: The Lord has not wearied us out with waiting; that which looked
like a work of two seven years, he has dispatched in the space of two seven
months; many a victory has come so suddenly, that it has even surprised us,
that we have been as men in a dream, as the children of the captivity, Psalm.
126. 1, 2.

Fifthly, we must not forget the fruitfulness of our mercies; one mercy has
been pregnant and big with child with many: our victories carry in their womb,
our lives, our liberties, our interests and privileges, our Gospel and
Reformation; none of which we should enjoy, if so be the enemy had conquered:
God has given us many mother mercies.

Sixthly, the small loss of blood and men, this must not be forgotten; we
might have purchased many things at a dear rate; if these victories and
surrenders had come swimming in blood, or if there had been the demolishing
Cities, University and Towns, we might have wept over our victories, as the
children of Israel did when they had conquered their Brother Benjamin, Judge.
20. 2.

Perhaps those that have been engaged in these transactions, and whom God has
made isntrumental in his service, are able to speak of many particular
experiments of providence, which we that are at a distance, are not able to
discern: Let them whom it does most concern have a special care that God
loses none of his honor in those remarkable passages of his providence
toward them that have enjoyed them.

Thirdly, we must not forget how we have provoked God, how we have murmured,
how we have distrusted, how sometimes we have been lifted up with success, and
then we thought we should never be removed, as David said, Psalm. 30. 6, 7. and
when the Lord hid his face, how were we troubled? sometimes we have been in a
full tide, and then again at a dead low ebb. This is it which the Lord
presses on his people, Deuteronomy. 9. 7. Remember and forget not how thou provokedst
the Lord thy God to wrath in the Wilderness, from the day that thou departedst
out of Egypt until ye came unto this place, ye have been a rebellious people.

Fourthly, we must beware that we do not forget our Vows, Prayers, Fasts,
Covenants, Protestations: The servants of God do drive a great trade with
Heaven by these, they have intercourse with God; we should take notice of our
revenues and returns hereby: now we are too apt to forget our engagements to
the Lord; and hence it is that God presses Covenant on his people when they
should come into Canaan, Deuteronomy. 4. 23. Take heed (says he) least ye forget the
Covenant of the Lord your God etc. remember, as it is, to offer unto God
Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows to the most high; keep Covenant, and remember
Vows and Promises made with God, with your friends, with your enemies: It is a
complaint (God grant it be not found to be true) that Articles are not kept on
our part with the enemy; I shall only mind you of that passage, Joshua 9. how
the Israelites did keep their Covenant with the Gibeonites, though they were
undermined, and it were to their prejudice: The forms of Covenants among the
Romans and others were very strict, and their observation of them also; after
the invocation of their gods, they did bind themselves under a curse after this
manner: Si prior defecit (speaking of the Pop. Rom.) publico consilio, dolo
malo tu illo die Jupiter Pop. Romans sic ferito, ut ego hunc porcum hodic feriam:
tantoque magis ferito, quanto magis potes, pollesque: Id ubi dixit, porcum saxo
silice percussit T. Live l. 1. de faedere inter Tullum Hostilium and Albanos
percusso agens. Vid. Barn. Briss. de form. l. 4.
The Heathens and Gentiles, etc. have been most precise in this particular; now
we ought to beware that we do not forget all these considerations, in regard
Pausanias in Arcadicis observavit, ubi scribit Philippi Macedonis Regis liberos
propterea tantis calamitatibus affectos fuissae, quod ipse fidem in pactis
conventis, confaederatis datam, nihil faceret. Camerarius oper. subsic. l. 2.
c. 78. How does Agamemnon in Homer cry out against the breach of faith in the
Trojans. which he says, God will avenge; whose sense we have in these Verses:

Et superiuros violato foedere Troas
Jupitere Coelis praesenti haud puniet ira,
At quandoque graves magno cum faenore poenas
Hi cum coniugibus and tota stirpe rependent.
The very Heathen have set it as a brand on some people for breach of faith:
Hence (...), Tit. 1. 12. he cites Epimenides for this, who says, (...), etc.
So dolus Troianus in Plauti Pseudolo and Punicas^les, are taken up as Proverbs
of reproach; so that this sin had always a note of ignominy among the Heathen.
Great. de iure belli, l. 2. c. 13.


they all do add much to the wonder of Gods mercies: For first, may it not be
truly said, What has God wrought, who has raised us from so low a state to
this condition, that he should be pleased to take notice of us, when none durst
own us? Secondly, may it not be said What has God wrought, in all these
admirable providence afforded to us? Thirdly, may it not be truly said, What
has God wrought, who preserved us when we provoked him? Fourthly, may it not
be truly said, What has God wrought, who had respect to the prayers, fasts,
etc. of his unworthy servants? wherefore if we should forget these, we should
much dishonor God, and take off from the wonder of his mercies.

Fifthly, we must beware that we do not forget the low condition of others: It
is a sin which those that enjoy temporal accommodations, are incident unto,
even to forget others that are in want and misery: You know how Ireland cries
aloud for help, and can find none; shall we think to sit down in peace, when
Ireland is in blood, and even bleeding to death? We read Numb. 31. how the
Israelites did give a very great overthrow to the Midianites, and what spoil
they took, and chap. 32. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. we read how the children of Ruben and
Gad, having a great multitude of Cattle, therefore they desired of Moses that
they might stay in that Country which the Lord had smote before the
Congregation of Israel, it being a very commodious place: but ver. 6. Moses
said to them that made this request, shall your Brethren go to war, and
shall ye sit here, etc. he chides them, ver. 7, 8, etc. and tells them ver. 14.
that they were risen up in their Fathers stead, an increase of sinful men,
etc. So say I, if we shall now sit down and take up our rest, and think our
work is done, when Ireland has no rest, and is in a manner undone, this may
provoke the Lord against us: I hope you will remember them in their low estate
as God has remembered you in yours.

The second Use shall be of Exhortation, that since God has wrought such
deliverances as these, and has given such wonderful mercies to you, that you
would labor to walk in a way correspondent to these mercies, that you would
be wrapped up with wonder in the contemplation of them; we may make use of the
signification of the word Mirari, and stir you up to your duty, and go no
further then the Word affords: First, it signifies intent intueri, for it
comes from the Hebrew, (...), est visus, so that we first wonder: Martin.
Lexic. vocab. Miror.
First, Take a view and survey our mercies, look into them; this I have spoke
of before: secondly, we should mirari, (i.) cum voluptate intueri, we should as
David, Psalm. 13. 5, 6. rejoice in the Lord, and sing unto him, because he has
dealt bountifully; we see the Church often upon the receipt of mercies,
rejoicing, Isa. 61. 10. and elsewhere: thirdly, we should wonder (i.) Intueri
cum stupore, break out into holy astonishment; the Church upon the
contemplation of the mercies of God, stands as one amazed, Isa. 25. 9. In that
day it shall be said, Lo, this is our God! an ecce, a note of wonder put upon
it; then it follows, We will rejoice in his salvation: fourthly, we should
wonder and say, What has God wrought! (i.) magnifacere and venerari, we should
exalt and magnify the Lord for his mercies; thus David teaches us this lesson
in his own practice, Psalm. 34. 2, 3. he calls upon others to magnify the Lord
with him for his mercies: this magnifying of the Lord should be done with holy
and humble veneration: We find Revel. 4. 10, 11. when the four and twenty
Elders give praise to God, they fall down before him, and cast their Crowns
before the Throne, etc. so also chap. 5. 8. and 7. 11. and 11. 16, 17. they
fall down and give thanks to the Lord God, because he had taken to him his
great power, and had reigned; and chap. 19. upon the great judgment on the
Whore, ver. 4. the four and twenty Elders and the four Beasts fell down and
worshipped God that sat on the Thronc, saying, Amen Allelujah.

I shall now propound some considerations to you, taken from some of the
wonderful things which God has done for us, that by them I may raise up your
hearts to the highest strains of admiration and gratitude, and quicken you up
to answerable walking, according to the great mercies of God bestowed on us.

First, it has been said, What has God wrought, who has brought this war
(in a manner) to an end, which every one almost did think would have ended our
liberties, lives? etc. now by way of gratitude, let us all labor to put an end
to the war, one among, and one against another: I could heartily wish that
the Sea of Ordinances were Crystal, very pure, and not glass, and freed from
fire, that contentions were banished from us, Revel. 15. 2. me thinks we should
not quarrel; that one word in which we all agree, viz. Saints, Brethrne,
Members; nay that reconciling word, Christ, for we are one Christ, 1 Cor. 12,
12. I say, any of these words should compose all differences among us; how
often have some noble Commanders, by a word sometimes, such as that,
commilitones, Quirites, settled the distempers of a mutinous Army; why should
not that word Christians, like that word Peace, be still, spoken by Christ to
the winds and waves when they were most boystrous, bring a great calm among
us, as that did once? Mark 4. 39. The issue of our divisions and animosities is
generally the same in effect as I have read in a story concerning two Doctors
of Physic, the one a Galenist, and the other a Paracelsian, who met at a
feast, and fell into a dispute: the Galenist discoursed of the retentive
faculty in the stomach, how the meat is there depressed for a time, and made
fit for digestion, and thence a milkie juice is sucked by the Mesaraicae venae,
which forthwith is conveyed to the workhouse of blood, thence to the heart the
store house of spirits, and so these two, like two careful Purveyors, send
their provisions by the veins and arteries, as by two common road ways, into
every part of the little Commonwealth of man's body: The Paracelsian, a
professor and practiser quite contrary to the other, as well in his order of
diet as cure, opposes himself against all these assertions, partly out of
opinion that he was in the right, and partly out of a contentious humor and
spleen which he bore to the others profession; they fall from argument to
railing, and at last to deadly war and bitter defiance, whereby the meal they
then made was hindered in digestion, choler increased in the one, and malancholy
in the other, and the blood enflamed in both, so as they were both taken away
(without saying grace) desperately sick; the Galenist of a shaking ague, and
the Paracelsian of a dead palsy: there needs no application, it is well known
that the Galenist and Paracelsian men of contrary judgments, do sometime fall
to disputation, from this to railing, from this to distemper and sickness of
spirit, by which means God loses the glory due to him, and many times both
lose both themselves and the truth to boot: It is a sad thing to me to think
that they which look on one another as Saints, should behave themselves each to
other as the Jews had wont to do toward Heathens Hence we read of those words
in the new Test. (...) alienigenis; so it is often objected by Josephus against
the Jews, (...) whence that of Juvenal concerning the Jews,

Non monstrare vias, eadem nisi sacra colenti, and that of Tacitus, Hist. 5.
apud ipsos fides obstinata, misericordia in promptu adversus omnes hostile
odium: What a miserable thing is it, that this Jewish carriage and distance,
these excommunicating terms should be made good among those that are received
into the bosom of the same Christ? Althusius in his Politiques, c. 31. says,
Exitus discordiarum est, aut universorum interitus, aut victoris dominatus and
regnum, vid. Bodin. l. 4. c. 1. there was a sad issue of those names of
difference the Guelphs and the Gibbelines, the Calvinists and Lutherans, the
Samaritans and the Jews; let us learn from them to lay aside charactericing
names, which ^^se at length into factions and tumults.


.

Secondly, it may be said What has God wrought for you in restoring your
captivated liberties, your ensalved privileges, your laws made arbitrary once
by usurpation and tyranny, and of late by necessity in time of war: In a
common fire and conflagration, many houses must be plucked down to save the
rest H. Grotius, l. 3. de jure belli, c. 1.
; and many things are lawful in a time of war, which otherwise could not be
permitted: Since therefore God has done this for you, let it by way of
gratitude be said, what has this Parliament done, in laboring to settle the
peace of the Church: He has done your work very quickly; set close to his and
do it quickly: or else you may have Christ come quickly as he threatened,
Revel. 2. 5. and remove your Candlestick from yo; and as it is ver. 16. Repent,
or else I will come quickly and fight against thee, etc. and Revel. 3. 11.
Behold I come quickly, etc. the adversary makes haste to pluck up, and to pull
down and to unsettle the Church of God, and build up his own Babel of fancy and
opinion and falsehood: whilst the Ordinances of God are unsettled in their
purity, power, glory and perfection, in their full compass and latitude, the
enemy gets ground. Bishop Jewel Jewel in ep: de conc. Trident. tract. (...) de
Papa and Cardinal. etc.
speaking of the subtilty of the Pope and Cardinals, to frustrate the Council
of Trent, or to retard it, makes use of a Story which may be applied to our
case: It is reported of the Athenians, that when they began to build their walls
which were cast down, the Lacedaemonians (that so they might have them in
their power) sent to them to surcease: But Themistocles being very wise,
perceiving that the safety of the Country was in jeopardy, promised that he
would come to them, yet he did purposely create delays and excuses, pretending
that their agreements did not like him, and then saying that he would send
Ambassadors to treat with them: In the mean time while he baffles them with
delays and pretenses, the building of the walls goes on, and in the time they
are disputing the matter, the business is dispatched, and the walls are built,
and now pluck them down that dare or can. It is certainly the design of some
to keep you off by delays and plausibilities and fair pretenses, from setting
in its full power the government of Christ, but in the mean time the walls of
Athens goes on; and ere long, if you do not make the more haste, they will be
finished, and then you may pluck them down if you could tell how: And as God
has delivered you from arbitrary government, so do you leave as little to
arbitrament in the State as can be: A good Law is better then the best Lawyer
Melius est legibus, ac consuetudinibus bonis sidere, quam octimis hominibus
Cardan. l. 5. de Sapient.
.

Thirdly, it may be said What has God wrought? who has subdued your enemies
in the Field, many, mighty, malicious; who as they called you Rebels formerly,
and think you so still, so they would have used you as Rebels; by way of
gratitude labor to subdue Gods enemies in your houses and hearts, those
reigning sins that captivate you, and ride in triumph over you. Is not that
true which we read, Isa. 60. 14. The sons also of them that afflicted thee,
shall come bending unto thee, and all they that despised thee, shall bow
themselves down at the soales of thy feet, etc. how should you stir up your
selves to mortify your lusts? It was the glory of the King of Arragon that he
conquered himself when he conquered his enemies: And it was the blot on
Alexanders conquests, that himself was conquered with wine: and on Hannibal,
that cruelty was his Master. We find in Stories many scoffs of Soldiers cast
on their triumphing Commanders in this kind. Gallias Caesar subegr, Nicomodes
Caesarem Ecce Caesar nunc triu^phat, qui subegit Gallias. Nicomodes non
triumphat, qui subegit Caesarem, Sueton in Jul. c. 49. and also c. 40.
concerning the same, they that waired on Caesar in his triumph by way of
mockery. U bani servate uxores, Maechum calvum adducimus. Auro in Gallia
stuprum emisti, hic sumpsisti mutuum. So true is that distich. Fortior est qui
se quam qui for tissima vincit Maenia, nec virtus altius ire potest.
Let us down with the strong holds of the Devil. Alehouses generally are the
Devils Castles, the meeting places of Malignants and Sectaries, they are the
campus Martius of Satan, he has his train of Artillery, his chief
Ammunition, his head quarters are there, especially if any pestilent Priests
steeped in the gall of Antichristianisme be among them: It is most requisite
that such meetings, such places be dissolved. I could wish that garrison of
rancorous and imbittered spirit were utterly slighted and demolished in us all;
this one thing has overthrown whole Kingdoms many times vid. Jun orat. Tom.
1 orat. 1 de colleg. concordia and orat. 2.
; God forbid it should act its part among us, I trust God will never give us
over to that unquiet, destructive spirit.

Fourthly, God has in a strange manner purged out from among you many rotten
members, which you could never have cast out, if they had not excommunicated
themselves, by a voluntary separation and banishment from you, and desperate
engagement against you; so that in this respect it may most truly be said, What
has God wrought?

By way of gratitude, you must fall to purging and reforming; God has showed
you the way, who has distinguished betwixt the precious and the vile, which
you must also do; for the iron and clay will never incorporate, Dan. 9. 42.
take heed you do not give the Lord occasion to say, as it is Ezekiel. 24. 6,-13.
Her scumme is not yet gone out. In thy filthiness is lewdness; because I have
purged thee and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. The scum of
swearers, drunkards, etc. abounds among us. But besides these, there is a more
dangerous sort of people of choice parts, possessed with the spirit of
Antichrist, of as cross a grain to reformation as any men whatsoever, being
soaked in malignity; if these have the liberty of the Pulpit, they have liberty
and opportunity to diffuse their poison; these ought to be purged out of
Pulpits especially. It is reported of Cato Censor, when Carneades the
Philosopher came to Rome in an Embassy, that the young men of Rome flockt to
him, being allured with the sweetness and majesty of his eloquence and
learning, gave counsel in open Senate, that they should give him dispatch with
all speed, least he should infect and inchant the minds and affections of the
Youth, and bring in an alteration of the manners and customs of the state.
Cato's advice will suit well with this which is propounded concerning such men
before spoken of: You have an University and a Kingdom to purge, which lies
like the Augean Stable, and it is a very vast business to do it; but as it is
reported of Hercules, being to cleanse the Augean Stable (in which was kept
three thousand Kine, and it had not been cleansed for thirty years together)
but Hercules letting in the River Alpheus, did that with ease which was thought
impossible: So you by letting in the waters of the Sanctuary spoke of, Ezekiel.
47. 2. The River which refreshes the house of God shall purge it; so shall it
be said, What have you wrought?

Fifthly, the Lord has protected you in a most strange and admirable manner,
so that it may be said, What has God wrought? by way of gratitude be you a
sword and a shield; to the truth a shield, and to error and heresy a sword:
It was said of Fabius, that he was Romanorum clypeus, and of Marcellus that he
was Romanorum ensis, because it was the chief care of the first, to safeguard
his Soldiers from the danger of Annibal, and of the other to destroy him:
Certainly it may be said of you as it was Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Happy art thou O
Israel; who is like unto thee O people! saved by the Lord the shield of thy
help, and who is thesword of thy excellency: and thine enemies shall be found
liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places.

Sixthly, the Lord has appeared eminently in executing judgment on your
enemies; we may say, as it is Psalm. 9. 16. The Lord is known by the judgment
which he executes, the wicked is snared in the work of his own hand: Higgajon
Selah. by way of gratitude do justice, execute right judgment. There be many
sad complaints of partiality and affection in Committees, of retarding of
causes, of pleading for delinquents, of oppressing of right, it is vox populi,
which is sometime called vox Dei: It was your honor to put down those bloody
Courts of the Star Chamber and High Commission, and the arbitrary proceeding of
the Councell-table, and I hope it shall be your care that there be not a (...),
a translation of the spirit of those Courts into the Parliament; they did turn
judgment into wormwood, and leave off righteousness, as it is Amos 5. 7. but I
hope that judgment shall now run down as waters, and judgment as a mighty
stream, ver. 24. God refuses to have any thing to do with his people, till
they came to do justice, Isa. 1. 16, 17. then says he, Come let us reason
together, the Lord presses it on them, Ezekiel. 45. 9, 10.

Seventhly, the Lord has done great things for us in the surrender of OXFORD;
if all things be well considered it is a great mercy: The strength of the
place, the provisions of all kinds within; the resolution of the men to hold
out a sullen siege, the danger of demolishing an University, famous as any in
the world, the danger of breaking our Army; the advantages which hereby we have
of being assistant to Ireland, together with the advantages that you may have
of promoting the reformation, in that place above others; all these put
together make it a great mercy.

Now by way of gratitude, make it your business and care now to purge and
reform that place above others: Give me leave to propound some things to your
consideration concerning that place, with submission still to your wisdom
herein: I do it the rather because I know there ought to be had a more then
ordinary care of such places as that is; for a Fountain, a Garden and a
Nursery must in a special manner be looked unto; for it is a rule that quod
initio est vitiosum, tractu temporis non convalescet; and it is a rule
concerning Physic, that an error in the first concoction is not corrected in
the second; besides, there ought to be a special care of what is put into new
and fresh Vessels, and what mold is to be laid on tender plants and young
trees: these things laid together, make me the bolder to propound some things
to your wisdom, with reference to that place.

First, if there be any such to be found there, which by reason of necessity
have been constrained to live in that place; yet they have that mark on their
foreheads, which is to cry What Tacitus speaks of a Prince I doubt not but you
will observe, Non poena semper sed sapius poenitentia contentus esse. Agric.
Poenam igitur si tuto poterus, donabis; sin minus, temperabis, Sen. dc Clem. 1.
for alll the abominations of it, as it is Ezekiel. 9. 4. or if there be any that
shall be found, which now remember their doings and ways, wherein they have
defiled themselves, Ezekiel. 20. 43. if there be any such who (whatsoever they
have been heretofore) episcopal, etc. yet if now they shall do that heartily
which the adversaries of the captivity did but pretend to do Ezra 4. 1, 2.
help you to build, and seek God as you do, if perhaps in all things they shall
not come up to close with every particular with you, yet they will be quiet,
will not oppose or hinder you: I hope you will do by these as Herekiah did by
them that were not cleansed, and did eat the Passover otherwise then was
written, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18. he prayed for them, the Lord pardon the^ that prepare
their heart to seek the Lord, etc. ver. 19. and ver. 22. he spoke comfortably
to the Levites, etc. Not that I would have a toleration of practice for any
error, but a tender usage and respect to such, of whom we cannot say, they will
not, but for want rather of a cleerer discovery, have not, do not see what for
the future perhaps they may assent unto: It shall be your glory to recover and
gain such as these with love and the spirit of meekness, rather then to cast
them out -- Peragit tranquilla potestas quod violenta nequit, mandataque
fortius urget Imperiosa quies, -- Claud. Paneg. Adhibenda est moderatio, quae
sanabilia ingema distingucre a deploratis scia, Sen de Clem. 1.
.

Secondly, if upon due search made and cognizance had, you find that the
Fountain is become bitter, like the water of Marah, Exodus 15. 23. if there be
mors in olla, as there was in that pot which was set on for the sons of the
Prophets, 2 Kings 4. 38, 40. if it be found that the salt of the earth be
unsavory, Matthew. 5. 13. if the light be extinguished; if it be so that the
Garden be overgrowne with Nettles and Brambles, and Weeds Infoelix lolium, and
steriles dominantur avenae,
Pro molli viola, ac purpureo narcisso
Carduus, and spinis surgit palinurus acutis.
Virgil.

, and Thorns.

If Whither that of Fr. Petrach concerning Rome, may not in some sort be true
here let others judge.

Errorum ludus, sectarum nobile templum
Roma quidem fueras, nunc es Babylonia fallax,
Ex qua tot luctus, gemitusque feruntur in orbem,
O fraudum matter, carcer teterrimus irae,
Carnificina boni, sed iniqui sedula nutrix.

it be found that she which should have been a mother, has proved a step-dame;
if that which should have been a nursery of holiness and Religion, be found a
sink of profaneness; if that place which should have been a mint of the
precious coin, that should pass current every where without control or
contradiction, be found to be a forge of counterfeit coin and falsehoods,
against God and the Parliament; if that which should have been a Goshen be
found an Egypt rather; if that which should have been as Zion be a Sodom, and
that which should have been as Jerusalem be a Babylon, then I know every one
will say, you had need bestir your selves here above all other places
whatsoever.

But what is here to be done? I dare appeal to prudentiall men among our
adversaries: Put the case the Parliament had possessed Oxford, and the Divines
which adhered to that had sheltred themselves there, and were in all those
places of maintenance and trust which they have which are opposite to the
Parliament and their cause: had the King prevailed and taken the place, as now
you have done, I appeal to any impartial men, what would they have done? you
may if you please make that good, the children of this world are wiser in their
generation then the children of light; I do believe it should never have come
into debate, whither you or any that have eminently engaged for and with you,
should have compounded for estates; it may be you would have thought it
happiness and favor enough to have redeemed your lives. These things being
premised, and there be truth in these suppositions, then I think you need not
have any one to tell you what to do; never any did begin a plantation among
weeds and brambles.

But it will be said, these be men of excellent parts and accurate learning;
what shall we do with them? I answer, as one says of the Jesuits, quo
meliores eo deteriores, concerning whom I say further, as Agesilaus did of his
adversary Farnabasus, talis cum sis, utinam noster esses: I could wish for my
own part that all ways were used to gain them, if it might be; and I could
wish heartily that the University had been conquered as well as the Garrison,
and Christ had captivated learning, as our Army did the Militia, and that the
Militia togata as well as armata, (I could wish they had been distinguished)
had yielded up it self to God and you: Put the case they have been never so
bad, and have appeared never so much against you, yet if they shall do as
Benbadads servants did to the King of Israel, who said, Behold we have heard
that the Kings of Israel are merciful Kings, and they put -- Ignoscere
pulchrut iam misero, paenaeque genus vidisse precan tem, Claud.
sackcloth on their loins and ropes on their heads, and so they came to him,
1 Kings 20. 30, 31, 32. if those that have published you Rebels in the Press,
and preached you Rebels in the Pulpit, and discoursed you Rebels in their
conference, and fought against you as Rebels, in the Field, yet if they shall
do as Benbadads servants did, I suppose you would let them know, you are such
absolute conquerours of your selves, that you can and will pardon such; and
likewise bestow (where no reward is due, but the most extreme punishment)
favors and benevolence. I do believe that many of them will never put you to
it, to turn them out, if you would hire them to keep their preferments with
great rewards, upon your terms, they would not do it; nay, rather then use
the Directory, take the Covenant, submit to the Discipline, stoop to
Parliamentary power, promote your designs, engage in your way of reformation,
all which are contrary to their principles (unless your conquests have had the
like effect which Peter's Sermon had, or that God has wrought upon them) they
will suffer very much, rather then go against their consciences, in submitting
to that which they cannot subscribe to.

In the third place, I hope you will have an extraordinary care in the placing
of fit men in the University: There be three sorts of men you are to look
after: First, professors of languages and sciences: Secondly, Governors of
houses: Thirdly, Fellows and Scholars. As for the first, if England cannot
furnish you, I hope Europe will; for if there be one better then another, let
him be the man, whatever it cost: these are fathers in the faculty, and
progagate the sciences; they have the wardship of learning committed to them:
these Fathers of the Arts if they have not drawn in the masculine vigor and
life of the Muses, they beget but a weak and diseased issue: It is here as with
natural Parents, strong and able Parents have like Progeny Quanta pervicacia
in hostem, tanta beneficentia adversus supplices utendum Tac. Ann. 12.
; besides, he that undertakes g Fortes creantur fortibus, and bonis; est in
juvencis; est in equis patrum virtus, nec imbellom feroces Progenerant aquila
columbaus, Hor. l. 4. od. 4.
such places upon a small and weak foundation, it is as if he should traverse
the Ocean in a Cock-boat, such run a hazard from the Haven, and are like to
prove famous only by their errors and delinquencies.

The second sort that we are to speak of, is Governors of houses, of whom
there ought to be had by so much the greater care, by how much the greater
influence they are like to have, and impression on others, what the Apostle
speaks of such as are to be (...) in Scripture, should be found in such as are
to be heads of Houses; men exemplary in holiness and grace, whose life (as one
speaks of the life of a Prince) should be Pan. Troj.
censura publica, as a public sta^dard, lest happily if they come to be engaged
in an error or sinful course, Sen. cont. 1.
imitatio alienae oulpae be counted innocentia: the deformities and infirmities
of such as we love and honor, so often are doted on, and made patterns of our
imitation: Men -- Amatorem quod amicae tur pia deciplunt caecum vitia, aut
etiam ipsa delectant vetuti Balbinum Poly pus agnae. Hor. Sermon. l. 1. Sat. 3.
of singular self-denial, and of a strict conversation, are the fittest for
such places: that which Cicero notes as an error in Cato the second, when he
writes to his friend Atticus, I take as a virtue required in a Governor; Cato
optime sentit (says he) sed nocet interdum Reip. loquitur enim tanquam in Rep.
Platonis, non tanqua^ in faece Romuli. There is in some an eminent
suitableness of spirit, a notable frame of heart fitting a man for government;
this is of great concernment; and although perhaps there may be wanting some
perfections and accomplishments which others have, yet there may be enough in
these, thus qualified as I have spoken, to do the work. It was said by
Themistocles being asked to touch a Lute, that he could not fiddle, but he
could make a small Town, a great State: what he spoke arrogantly of himself,
may be truly said of these, that though they cannot fiddle, yet (through the
blessing of God) they, of a place infamous for the present, may make a glorious
University. There is an Academicall genius which animates some men, and such
will live best in that element which is most natural: Perhaps some may be
thought on that are of excellent parts, and fit for honorable employments, who
may be thought to put down others; yet as it was noted of Philip King of
Macedon, that he would needs undertake to correct a curious Musician in his
art; but he was answered by him, God forbid that your fortune should be so bad,
as to know these things better then I: This may be said in this case; some men
have served several apprentiships in the University, and of necessity have
been engaged in the studies of the Arts, and such kind of learning; and have
been engaged in a way of employment which may be counted below the education of
such whose fortunes have afforded a subsistence otherwise, and so by this
means are brought into a capacity and fitness for that place which is not
proper for another. Let them be men of gravity and authority, In that question
an Juvenes in numerum conciliariorum principis cooptandi sint? the same that is
said against them will hold good here. Vid. Tiraq de jure primig. praef. n. 9
1. Bodin de Rep. l. 3. c. 1. Non possunt (inquit) uvenes in concione Pop. quae
utiba sunt ac iusta, persuadere: nec senibus, ^^ec iuvenibus probantur, al eri
enim idae atis se illis aequales, alteri sapientia superiores arbitrantur. Pet.
Gregor. l. 24. de Rep. c. expedit omnino iuxta annosas arbores plantas novas in
serere, etc.
whose experience and years, together with their wise and sober carriage puts a
majesty on government, and strikes an awe and respect in others to reverence
and honor the place for the Persons sake. Let them be such who shall be able
and meet, and will resolve to bear the burden and heat of the day, and who
shall in their own persons, not by proxies or deputation, discharge the duty
of the place they shall be called unto.

The third sort, which are Scholars and fellows of houses, to be chosen to
places, I may spare my pains concerning them; yet I hope you will take
special care that such places as heretofore were, may not be vendible things;
but that parts and and learning may be the only friends to plead for such
places. What was said of Vendit Alexander claves, altaria, Christu^; Emerat
ille prius, vendere iure potest. Vid. Ideam reformand. Antichrist. Vid. Busbaq.
Ep. 1.
Alexander the sixth, may be too truly said of some in places of government:
Welfare the Turks, whose custom it is to prefer none but such whose parts
and endowments have advanced them above others. I might here take occasion to
represent the many defects and indeed disorders that are in Grammer-Schooles:
First, in regard all are taken into Schools without any respect to the
capacity, or to future employments, whence many inconveniences do arise:
Secondly, many that are set to be Masters and Teachers of others, do not only
want skill in the Languages, but also that genius and dexterity whereby they
should have a sutablenesse to the forming of that ulum and molle lutum which is
in children; there is great cunning in fitting the seed to the soil: Thirdly,
the anticipation and preoccupating of time; many will venture to go before
they can stand, and to the University they must go, whereas it were fitter for
them to be under the ferula. What an absurd thing is it to come to the
University to construe Logic with the help of a Dictionary: we feel the
miserable effect of these things, and I might set down much more, but that I
hope you will have all the grievances in this kind presented to you from the
hands of them that have better skill.

Your third care must be concerning the present and future peace of the Church,
which depends much upon the correspondence of judgment and opinion among them
which shall be placed in the University; for if that prove a Seminary of
division, and a seed plot of schism and contention, it will not end where it
began, but as water from a Fountain diffuseth, and sparkles from a common fire
scatter, so will it be here: Of what sad consequence had it like to have
proved, the division betwixt Doctor Whitaker regius professor in Cambridge, and
Petrus Baro Margaret professor; they going contrary one to the other in some
great points of divinity: 1 De amissione gratiae. 2 De certitudine salutis.
Baro affirming, and Whitaker denying? by means of which, one says there was
great distraction among the scholars in the University Professorum disputatio
(ut solet) inventutem diu (...) parts traxit, etc. Manuscript lat. hac de re.
: what miserable confusion and distraction did the contention breed in
Christendom, which arose from Arminius professor at Leyden, who was opposed by
Franciscut Gomarus, in that grand controversy concerning the absolute Decree
Arminius tenuit, Deum non absolute quosdam homines, ex solo beneplacito suo,
sed post lapsum, iterum per fidem in Christum credentes ad aeternam
beatitudinem ordinasse; similiter de Reprobatione, nem nem absolute, sed ob
infidelitatem Reprob sic deo prateritos and aternis poenis destin atos: Gomarus
pro sententia contraria disputationem instituit: Vid. (...) dissect. Belgii per
Solom. Theodotum.
? Of what ill consequence was that difference between Epiphanius Bishop of
Cyprus, and Johan. Chrysastomus, concerning the Books of Origin; the former
condemning of them, and the latter appoving them? those that loved neither of
them, made use of these coals between them, to set on fire the Church of God:
These two famous and renowned Fathers fell into bitter language one against
another, and meeting one another, Epiphanius said Chrysostom, spero be minime
moriturum episcopum, Johannes: And Johannes Chrysostom. to him again, spero te
minime ad ecclesiam tuam rediturum: Both these passionate speeches proved true
in the event Eccles. vetus. Nov. edit. cura Abrah. Sculteti. Orat. 4.
. How all sorts of people suffer many times in the differences of learned men,
we are able to speak, and Ecclesiastical story fully represents Videl. l. 3.
c. 2. de prudentia vet. eccles.
. I could also relate diverse particulars in the University of Oxford to this
purpose, when those fancies and opinions of the Arminians, Socinians,
Pelagians, Semipelagians, Papists, etc. began to gather strength among us: it
may be in lesser differences (as Ut in fidibus ac tibiis atque cantu ipso ac
vocibus concentus est quidam tenendus, etc. l. 2. de civit. Dei.
Austin speaks of dissona^cy in the strings of an instrument, there may be
harmony: and as Junius observes, there may be some good come from Jun. orat. 7.
de colleg. concord. ut hostis muris semper imminens facit ut circumspecta and
solicita civitas sit, sic sententiarum diversitate fit, ut nihil agatur
dicaturque temere, etc. Camerar. l. 3. c. 6. Hor. Subseciv.
them; yet in these greater points of controversy, commonly there be the
saddest effects: and therefore I hope it shall be your care to place such there
who shall be of one mind, and walk by the same rule as the Apostle speaks,
Phil. 3. 16.

4ly. let it be your special care that all due encouragements to learning be
continued, and what are wanting may be supplied: It has been a reproach (and
it is well it is a reproach) cast on the Parliament, that you are no friends to
the Muses: What Saul said 1 Samuel 22. 7. Will the Son of Jesse give every one of
you Fields and Vineyard, etc. has in like manner been said of you: will the
Parliament make you Bishops and Deanes, etc. It is confessed they will not; but
they shall do better if they take their revenues, and dispose of them so as to
supply the defects and wants of many, which heretofore did maintain the lust
and pride of one or few: The Lord himself has had a great care of preserving
Learning and the Arts, in regard he has couched all kind of learning in the
bowels of Scripture: He has also still in his providence, raised up some or
other to maintain and support it, when it has been most violently assaulted.
Besides, we find that there is a near affinity betwixt learning and Religion;
hence it is that still the Libraries and Churches joined near together; the
very Heathens did observe so much: As in Rome, the Library in the Capitol, and
Augustus Library near the Temple of Apollo: So Trajan and Domitian did the
like, and so have Christian Superiors; the reason is given, quad Religionem
fine libris non conservari putarunt De legibus Constant. Baldwin. Socrat. l. 7.
c. 25. Eusebius. in vita Constantin. l. 1. c. 35.
: Constantine, Theodosins, etc. have been eminent examples in this kind, for
advancing and favoring both learning and Religion.

Fifthly, I hope you will endeavor to settle a faithful, able godly Ministry
in that place, and there is as much cause as in any place (I do believe) in
England; for that place which has or should have bin a Goshen for light, has
had Egyptian darkness in it, ignorance of Christ in the midst of the Schools
of the Prophets; the very salt-pit has proved unsavory in a great measure;
the eye has been bloodshot or dark, or affected with ill humors; the breasts
have had little or no milk; there htth been a Wilderness in that Garden, and
drought in the midst of plenty; there is scarcely more rudeness, ignorance and
barbarism in the Kingdom then in that very place: I need not spend much time
in this, for you have begun that work already, and I do not doubt but it will
be your care to promote and continue it; so by this means I hope it shall be
said as it is Isa. 54. 1, 2, etc. Sing O barren thou that did not bear; break
forth into singing, and cry aloud thou that did not travel with child, for
more are the children of the desolate then the children of the married wife;
enlarge the place of thy Tent, etc. By your care (I hope) the Wilderness and
the solitary places shall be glad, and the desert shall rejoice and blossom as
the Rose; it shall blossom abundantly and rejoice even with joy and singing;
and the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto It, the excellency of Carmel and
Sharon. etc. Isa. 3. 1, 2. I hope as it follows, ver. 5, 6, 7, etc. that it
shall be fulfilled, The eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the
deaf shall be unstopped, and the lame man shall leap as an Heart, and the tongue
of the dumb shall sing, for in the Wilderness shall waters break out, and
streams in the desert, etc. I hope the Lord will say to that place as it is
Isa. 54. 11, 12, etc. Behold, I will lay thy foundations with Saphires, and I
will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy
borders pleasant stones, and all thy children shall be taught of God, etc. I
hope that the prophecy, Ezekiel. 47. 1, 2, 3, etc. shall have its accomplishment
in a great measure there, and that the waters shall flow from thence, shall
rise up to the neck, and that every thing which lives and moves in those
waters shall live, verse 9. and that all trees shall be planted by those
waters, which shall bring forth their fruit in season, verse 12. If it be your
care (as I hope it will) thus to lay out your interests and pains in this
place, as I have presented to you, it shall be your crown and comfort, and
posterity I hope shall have cause to say, as it is Isa. 25. 1. O Lord thou art
my God, I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name, for thou have done
wonderful things.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii 22. Julii 1646.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that Master Henry Herbert do
from this House give thanks unto Master Wilkinson for the great pains he
took in the Sermon he preached yesterday at the entreaty of this House at St.
Margarets Westminster, (it being the day of public thanksgiving) and to
desire him to print his Sermon; and he is to have the like privilege in
printing of it as others in the like kind usually have had.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.


