SIX SERMONS: 1. Of CHRISTIAN CHARITY, Preached before the Judges of Assize at
Bury S. Edmonds. 2. Of TRUE FELICITY, at S. Peter's in the City of Norwich. 3.
Of the Worlds vanity, and Souls excellency, at S. Paul's, LONDON. 4. Of an
humble Conversion, and an holy Conversation, at Great Bealings, Suff. 5. and 6.
Of S. PAUL'S Concrucifixion, at Hoxne, Suff.
By Edw: Willan, M. A. C. C. C. in Camb. and Vicar of Hoxne.

Basil. Mag. Enar. in Cap. 1. Isaiae. Sunt Sermones isti, quos Propheta vidit,
spectabiles. LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. M DC LI.

May 8. 1651.
Imprimatur,

John Downame.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY, Earl of MONMOUTH, Lord CARRY, Baron of
Lepington, and Knight of the Honorable Order of the BATH.
My very good Lord,
IT is commonly charged upon these Times, that they are Times of many Evils;
And it is a maine Evil wherewith the Times are charged, that the many Charges
of the Times do hinder Men from paying of Debts. I dare not call that Evil,
that has hindered me from paying mine. But sure I am, that Occupationes quibus
indies distincor maximae, aliquid Excusationis ab aequis, ut spero, rerum
aestimatoribus impetrabunt. Armacha. in Praef. ad Britan. Eccl. Antiquitat.
the constant Charges, and frequent Discharges of many Dues unto the People
from the Pulpit, have hindered me from paying any Dues unto your Honor from
the Press; And forced me, as you may see, to borrow back those driblet
Debts, here tendered unto other Friends, for the making up of one small Sum, for
my chiefest Creditor.

There were many Marii in one Sueton. in vita Jul. Caes.
Caesar; And many VVorshipfulls, and Right VVorshipfulls may be in one Right
Honorable: Yet many and many Respects are due from me unto those worthy Names
perfixed to these Sermons; But your Lordships due is all, yea more then all
that I am, and more then all that I am able to do. All this that I have done,
is but the least part of that all, which I should have done. I cannot do all
that I would, but I will do all that I can to attest my desires to do all;
The very seems of Negligence in other Pens are even shamed by seeing the
Diligence of your Lorships.

I know not whether there be such a thing as Scandalum Magnatum in these Times;
But this I know, that ignobile vulgus has commonly accused Nobility of
Idleness; And sure I am, that the many Reames of Paper, which your happiest
Pen has filled, and fitted for the Press, are enough to stuff their
Throats, and to stop their Mouths, that have been opened to speak evil of
such Dignities. I Jude 8.
confess, I should have wondered at the Excellent and Abundant fruit of your
Labors more then now I need, (though still I cannot but admire them) had I
not known your constant course of watering them, by your kneeling down, and
praying in your Been precasse est been studuisse. M. Luther.
Closset before your putting of Pen to Paper. The Power of Godliness in that
your Honors Example did even enforce As there is Treason, and Petty-Treason;
So there is Sacrilege and Petty-Sacrilege; and Petty Sacrilege is to rob
Princes, and great Persons of their due Praises. Dr. Done Sermon. 27.
me to imitation in my adjacent Lodging at More-Park, and ever since has
engaged me to pray daily for your Honor, for my very good Lady, for all the
younger Ladies, and for all belonging to your Noble Family, as the bounden Duty
of

My Lord The humblest of Your Chaplains, VVILLAN.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
READER,
THere are many in these Times that will needs be spreading of their Napkins
before the People, and yet have never a Talent in them; And others there are,
that have many Talents in their Napkins, yet will not spread them before the
People of these Times: And for my part, I would have hid that piece of a
Talent, entrusted to my self, still from the Press, as willingly as any, if I
might; And from the Pulpit too, if I durst; But necessity is laid upon me, 1
Cor. 9. 16.
and woe be to me, if I Preach not the Gospel.

I was even enforced to send three of these Sermons to the Press; And for
their sakes, I forced the other three to go along for company; And had sent as
many more made ready with them, could I have met with Tutelar Names, like
Tobies Guardian Angel, Tobit. 5. 6.
to go before them. I must confess, that six are enough, and more then enough
for such a Mean Beginner to adventure in one Bottom; Yet so many I have
adventured; And if this first Adventure prove successful, I shall soon double
the Number in another fleet, and advance it after them.

I have put these Sermons together, as Plinius Secundus Plin. Secun. Epist. 1.
ad Septit.
did his Epistles, non servato temporis ordine, sed ut in manus venerant; As he
told his friend Septitius. And I was the rather persuaded to print them, for
that I knew, it would be but little profit to me, to keep them by me as a
Private stock for the Pulpit; But I made conjecture, that it might be more
benefit to others, to have them put into their hands, as a Public stock from
the Press. They were never likely again to have any Plus homines oculis quam
auribus credunt. Seneca. Epist 70.
Hearers; But it may be thus they may gain some Readers; And if any Readers
gain by them, it shall be reckoned as the greatest gains that may be to

Thine EDW. WILLAN.

Errata.
PAge 22. l. 32. r. Aegeria. p. 39. l. 19. r. (...). p. 52. l. 6. r. called. p.
59 l. 1. r. (...). p. 63. l. 24. r. if we may preach it. p. 79. l. 1. r. be
universal. p. 111. in marg. r. Vedelius. p. 133. l. 3. r. be less. p. 138. l.
ult. r. (...). p. 156. l. 5. r. (...). p. 162. l. 1. r. of Sympathy. p. 164. l.
9. r. (...). p. 165. l. 29. r. he ye^lds. Reader there are some misplaced
Annotations, whose reducements I must leave to thy discretion as thou read,
Vale.

Ipse Bernardus non videt omnia. A SERMON OF CHRISTIAN CHARITY, PREACHED AT
BURY St. EDMONDS, Before the JUDGES, MARCH, 18. 1649.

It is the Work of Charity to build up Christians. And it should not be the
Work of Christians to beat down Charity. LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, at
the Angel in Ivie-Lane, 1651.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, Wiseman Bokenham, Esquire.
SIR,
THese N^tes belong unto your Worship by a manifold right. Indeed they can of
right belong so properly to none as to your Worship. For First it was by your
command that this Sermon was composed of them, for the Pulpit. And then by your
command it was, that this Sermon of them was thus disposed into a Pamphlet. It
troubled me very much to hear my self so entreated as I was, to Pen this
Sermon for your perusal; But it troubled me far more to see my self
enforced as I have been, to request it back again to send it to the Press.
You cannot but remember, that when you did so heartily desire my Notes, I did
as humbly as I could desire that they might never be made public. I only
thought upon the Pulpit in my studying for them; And I thought but only of
your private perusal in transcribing of them. I would they might have rested
in your hands perpetually. But they are even enforced thus to come abroad, and
appear in public, and your Worship knows from whence the violence was offered
to them.

I must follow after the Sermon, as the Sermon does Qui non diligit fratrem,
manet in morte. 1 Johan. 2. Nemo adultus potest salvari, fine Charitate in
Deum, and proximum. Zanch. Miscellaneorum lib. 2.
follow after the Text; And so must follow after Charity to such as have
enforced me to do what I had no mind to. I know it was the love of Charity in
your Worship, that caused you to like the Matter of this Sermon, when it was
preached; And that it was the Charity of your love unto the Preacher, that
persuaded you to accept the Manner of it, as it was penned. And I hope that
Charity will never fail you toward, Charitas nunquam excidit. 1 Cor. 13. 8.


Sir, Your poor Servant EDW. WILLAN.

AN EXHORTATION TO Christian Charity.
1 COR. 14. 1. Follow after Charity.
THis Text is for this Time. It is a Text of Charity in a Time that wants it.
It was a Prove. 15. 23.
word in due season, when written first to those of Corinth; It is no less in
season to be spoken now to us of England. Corinth 1 Cor. 6. 7.
was not disturbed more, when this was written, then England is by suits; Nor
is England less distracted now, then Corinth was by Schisms.

Corinthus then was crumbled into emulous, into envious, into 1 Cor. 1. 10, 11.
factious Parties, all out of Charity between themselves, by being without all
Charity within themselves: Some for Paul, some for 1 Cor. 1. 12. 1 Cor. 3. 4, 5.
Apollo, some for Cephas, and so but some for Christ.

This Text did sutie with Corinth then, in that condition; it suites with
England now, conditioned as Corinth was. Our English Church is Schismatized now
into a second Corinth; Some for Luther, some for Calvin, some for Erastus, and
some for they know not whom, for they care not what, to the breach of Charity,
to the bane of Christianity.

If ever therefore Christian Charity were a subject fit for every Pulpit, it is
now: for now is almost every Subject out of Charity; yea almost quite out of
Charity with the Pulpit.

Indeed the Pulpit should never cease to sound of Charity to the people, when
ever sound Charity indeed is ceased amongst the people.

The Anticellencies of some Gifted-men in Corinth did make them famous; their
fame did make them proud; their pride did make them factious; and their
factions made Confusion.

That fatal Tragedy of Corinth is Acting now upon our English Theater. These
times have famed some for Gifted-men in England; and the Breath of Fame has
puffed them up with pride; and pride has put them into factions; and what can we
now expect (without reunion) but Corinths fate, Confusion?

Had those of Corinth coveted the Grace of Charity to make them humble, as
impensely, as they did some other Gifts of Grace to make them admirable, their
Church had been less transient, but they much more transcendent.

But, alas for it! Corinth was soon unchurched through the want of Charity in
her Zealous Schismatics; and the want of Charity in other Schismatizing
Zealots, has unkingdomed many Churches, and may too soon unchurch as many
Kingdoms.

(...), There is one Holy Spirit, says holy Athanasius; Symbol. san. Athanas.
And by that one Spirit there are diversities of Gifts, says this Inspired
Secretary of that Holy Spirit.

The same Spirit of Gifts was given to some of Corinth; and diverse gifts of the
Spirit were given to diverse: For some were Gratiae gratis datae, Graces freely
given to some few, for the good 1 Cor. 12. 4.
of many others; and others were Gratiae gratos facientes, Graces given to
diverse, for the good of those, to whom they were given.

The First did make men far more famous, then the Second: But the Second did
make men far more gracious, then the First.

The first did make men great. The second did make men good; All were not great
by the first, that were good by the second. Nor were all good by the second,
that were great by the first.

Some leading men of Corinth were very famous amongst their followers, for
having the first: But very factious amongst themselves, for wanting the second.
Both first, and second were very considerable, but the second most desirable.
The first did make men eminent in the Church: the second did make men excellent
in themselves.

This Grace of Charity in the Text, is of the second sort of Gifts, and as
excellent a Gift it is, as any of that sort. Far more excellent it is, then
any of the first sort; yea then all that sort without it. So Aquinas. And he
speaks the meaning of S. Paul D. Tho. in loc.
Chap. 12. ver. ult. Where the Apostle styles it viam excellentiorem; 1 Cor.
12. 31.
A way more excellent then that by all those others, though never so excellent
in their way.

It is the most eminent of all the Gifts of Grace; says Irenaeus. And
Theophylact commends it, as the way unto them all. Theophyl. ad locum.
It is iter ad excellentiam, as Beza has it in his translation of it: that is,
the way to Excellency, as it were (...), by way of Excellency.

It is a Grace, that is a grace to all those other Gifts of Grace. (...).
Indeed those others are but Gifts of Grace; But this is the Grace of all those
other gifts.

It is a Grace with which those others are not altogether to (...).
be compared. It is a Grace without which they are not all at all to be
computed. They all stand but as mere ciphers in S. Paul's Arithmetic until
the figure of Charity be set before them to bring them into reckoning.

The Apostle makes no reckoning of them all without it. Nor of himself, if he
wants it, though he has them all. As in the foregoing Chap. the first three
verses.

1. Though I speak with the tongues of men, and of Angels, and have not
Charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinckling Cymball.

2. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and
all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so that I could remove Mountains,
and have no Charity, I am nothing.

3. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my
body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profits me nothing.

As if he should have said, that all that can be said, with all that can be
known, with all that can be done, with all that can be undergone, can do a man
no good at all, without true Charity, for the obtaining of the chiefest good of
all.

In that foregoing Chapter, this learned Doctor of the Gentiles, prelates the
Grace of Charity unto all other Gifts, in three Respects.

1. In respect of the Necessity of it. 2. Vtility 3. Stability

First, he gives the Prelation to it, for the Necessity of it, in the three
first, or first three verses.

Secondly, he gives the Prelation to it, for the Utility of it, in the four
next verses.

Thirdly, he gives the Prelation to it, for the Stability of it, in the six
last verses.

And so that Chapter begins, and ends with the Commendation of it; But the
Commendation of it ends not with that Chapter: for this Chapter also eccho's
with the Praises of it, and is fronted with an Exhortation to it. In that
Chapter St. Paul commends Charity to us; In this he commands us to Charity.

(...). Follow after Charity. The Subject of the Text is Charity. And the
Charity in the Text is quite against divisions. The Nature of it is
conjunctive, rather then divisive. It uses to make up divisions, rather then
to make them. And should I offer to make many, and many divisions, and
subdivisions of this little Text of Charity; I should offer more then a little
wrong unto the Charity of the Text.

The Text does offer it self entirely to us all, as an Exhortation useful for
us; and so ought we all to take it, and to take it all, without any curious
mincing of it*

Yet for Order sake, (which is a thing that Charity allows of, though it likes
not of Divisions) I must needs Methodize the chief considerables of the Text,
into this connaturall disposition.

The Text, for form, is mandatory, or at least commendatory; And so
commendatory it is, that it is even mandatory; for that which is commended in
it, is little less then commanded by it.

And from this Text, as the Substance of it, I must recommend these two
Observables to you; Namely,

1. The Duty commended in it to be done. 2. The Persons commanded by it to do
the Duty.
The Duty is expressed to the Persons in the Text, that they may know it; And
the Persons are employed in the Duty of the Text, that they may know themselves,
and do it.

The following after Charity is the Duty.

And Ye the Persons that are to follow after Charity. (...), follow ye, even
all ye, follow after Charity.

The Command is indefinitely given, and therefore universally to be taken,
according to S. Chrysostom, and to the learned Schoolmen.

I shall begin with the Duty charged upon the Persons; and end with the
Persons to discharge the Duty.

In the Duty there are two Remarkables.

The 1. is the Act. The 2. is the Object.
The Act, follow after.

The Object, Charity.

They that follow they know not what, may lose themselves, they know not where.
Many have lost themselves already they know not where; yet still are ready to
follow they know not What. It is wisdom for men to know whither they be going,
before they be gone they know not whither. Let us be so wise, as to follow the
Apostles Direction in the Text, for in the Text the Apostle directs us what to
follow.

It is Charity, that we are all directed in the Text to follow after; And we,
even all we, are directed by the Text to follow after Charity.

Here therefore, let us put Charity before, and follow after it, follow after
Charity.

Surely that must needs be first, that we are all to follow after; and we are
all to follow after Charity.

Charity then must lead the way, both in the shorter Life of my Discourse
about it, and in the longer Course of each man's life, that is to follow after
it. And who can choose but love to follow such a Leader? The Leader chosen for
us all to follow after is love it self.

The Word is (...), from (...). A theme very pregnant in it self, and very
significant in its several uses. Thucydides, Thucyd. de Bello. Pelopon. l. 6.
Theophr. de cause. Plant. lib 3. L^cian in Timone.
and Theophrastes, with diverse others have applied it to diverse uses, yet
never did they use it in a larger, or a better sense, then the Inspired Pen Man
of this sacred Letter.

There are diverse Words for Love, but none like this. (...) signifies to love,
but not like (...). That is to love like a friend; but this like a Christian.
That is for love to one, or two; but this for love to all. That is but for a
time; but this for ever. For (...), says the Apostle. This 1 Cor. 13. 8.
love, which is Charity never fails. It is for every Man. And it is for ever
in a Man. It looks at foes, as well as friends, and it looks like it self
on both. It carries the kindness of true Affections toward both; And it is
carried in the expressions of true kindness unto both. It shows it self in
expressions verbal; And it shows it self in expressions real too. It is
always cordial, rather then complementall.

It is in cord, in ore, in opere. In the Heart, in the Tongue, in the Hands.
In thoughts, in Words, in Deeds. It is in the Inward Man, and in the Outward
too; It is in both toward God, and it is in both toward Man.

The whole Duty of Man, both unto God, and unto Man, requires no more for both,
but true, and perfect love to both.

He that loves one perfectly, loves both truly. And he that loves not both
truly, loves neither of both perfectly. Ne^ D^us fine proximo, nec proxim^s
sin^ Deo dilig^ potest, Says Peter Lo^bard, Neither God without Man, nor Man
without God, can Pet. Lomb. l. 3. Dis. 27.
be truly loved.

When the Moral Law was first promulg^d upon Mount Sinai, it was given to
Moses in ten Commandments, and those ten were so compendious, that M^s^s in
Holy Language called (...) December verba. S. Hieron.
them ten words. Yet lest these ten might seem too many, our Savior did
co^pondiate all in two upon Mount Si^n. And that these two might never be
sundred, this Inspired Apostle has spoken both in One. Yea, (...) In one word.
Galatians 5. 14.

This Text contains that One of Paul. That One of Paul contains those two of
Christ. Those two of Christ contain those ten of Moses. Those ten of Moses
were all delivered in two Tables, to distinguish the Duty of Man to God, from
Deuteronomy. 5. 22.
the Duty of Man to Man. And those two Tables were at first delivered both
together, that the Duties of both Tables might never go asunder.

And it is rightly to be observed, that he who is a good First-table-Man, is
ever a good Second-table-Man too. But he who is an ill Second-table-Man, is
ever an ill First-table-Man also.

That crafty Questionest in the Gospel, that asked our Savior, which was
(...); The great Commandment Mat. 22. 36.
in the Law? Would feign have seemed a very good Firsttable-Man, by the
Question, which he asked: But he showed himself a very bad Second-table-Man,
and so by consequence no good First-table-Man, by his design in asking of the
Question: (...) Mat. 22. 35.
for he asked the Question, but only to tempt our Savior. And so he sinned
against the Second table, in seeming zealous for the First. In his greatest
seems of love to God, he wanted love to Man; yea to that good Man, to that
God-Man, Christ Jesus.

Our Savior was (...), says holy Athanasius, God-Man. Symbol. sanct. Athan.
Mat. 22. 39. Charity is as it were a summary of all the law and especially of
the second Table. Diod^^. Annot. Romans 3. 1 John 4. 20.
(...) Perfect God, and perfect Man, to make a perfect reconciliation between^
God and Man: And as such a Christ, he checked those seems of love unto his
Godhead, which were without true love unto his Manhood. Indeed he could not
love the one, without the other.

He that says he loves God, and hates his Brother, says that which is not
true; yea, in plain^ terms, says S. John (...), he is a Liar. For how can
he love God, whom he has not seen, when he cannot love the likeness of
God in his Brother whom he has seen?

And this Commandment we have from him, that he 21.
who loves God, should love his Brother also, 1 John 4. 20, 21.

Where love to God does go before, there love to Man (as says S. Austine)
does ever follow after: But where this does not follow after, there that does
not go before. We must love both, or we can love neither.

First, we must love God for his own sake; And then, we Pe. Lomb. l. 3. d.
27.
must love Man for Gods sake, as the Master of the Sentences very well.

We must love God above our selves; And we must love our Levit. 19. 18.
Neighbor as our selves.

The sum of all our Duty is but love; And the best of all our Luke 10. 27.
love, is our love unto the best of all. Deus optimus maximus, God is (...).
Pittic.
the best, and biggest of all, and we must love him with the biggest, and best
of all our love.

1. We must love God above all: because God is good above all, the greatest
good of all.

2. We must love God above all: because God does good unto all, and the good
he does, is the greatest good of all.

3. We must love God above all, because it is above all the good, that we can
do unto him so to love him.

God is love; And God is infinite; And we must love him as he 1 John 4. 8.
Ezech. 10. 5. Psalm. 147. 5. Revel. 16. 17. S. Bern. In tract. de diligend. Deum.
is. His love to us is like himself; And our love to him, must be like his to
us.

The Measure of our love to him, (as says S. Bernard) must be without all
measure: for so is his to us. And in loving of him so, there can be no love
lost between us.

Never did any Man lose by loving him; Nor was ever any Jude 21.
Man lost, that he did love. If we make sure to keep his love unto us, we
may be sure, that his Love to us will keep us. Great is Gods Love in caring
for us; And great should our care 1 Peter 5. 7.
be, to keep his Love unto us; If God be for us, who can be against us? for
what cannot he do, where he will? And where he loves, Romans 8. 31.
what will he not do?

Gods Love to us, is not the love of formality; And our love to God must never
be the formality of love. It is Amat Deus ut ametur. S. Aug. Manuel.
for our good, more then his own, that he loves us; And it should be more for
his sake, then our own, that we love Him.

Whom he loves, he loves to the end. Yet there is noe John 13. 1.
end of his loving of them. His end in loving us, is our Glory Jerem. 31. 3.
with him, without all end; And our end in loving him should be 1 Cor. 10. 31.
the endless Glory of that his love to us.

There is no sinister end in sincere love: such is Gods Love to (...); S.
Chrysostom. Hom. 3.
us; And such should ours be to him. If ours be sincere unto him, it will
surely make us ready to serve him; yet not so to serve him, as to serve our own
turns of him, and to turn him off, so soon as they be served by him.

Indeed there are some kinds of Men, that are very kind to others, when they
expect some kindness from them. They will have their hands at the Ground in
their Saluting of them, when the Ground of their Saluting of them, is to have a
hand at them in some benefit be them: But no sooner are all their ends obtained
from them, then all their seems of love are ended toward them. And strange it
may seem to others, to see how strange they presently seem to these. But thus
we must not deal with God. We must not Court him with mere seems of love.
We must love God sincerely, i. e. with our hearts, and we must love him
entirely, i. e. with all our hearts. The love of Man to God must be,

(...). Mark. 12. 30.

(...).
(...).
With all the Heart.
With all the Soul.
With all the Mind.
And it must also be (...), with all the strength.

But how can this be? If we love God thus, with all our hearts, with all our
souls, with all our minds, and with all our mights, how can we love our
selves, as we ought? Or our Neighbor, as our selves?

This quere at the first proposing seems a Riddle, but may be Minus Domine te
amat, qui aliquid tecum amat, quod propter t^ non amat. S. August. Confess.
Lombar. l. 3. d. 27.
thus unriddled with ease.

Minus amat, he loves the Lord the less, that loves any thing with the Lord,
which he loves not for the Lord: so S. Augustine. But he that loves his
Neighbor in the Lord, what loves he, but the Lord in his Neighbor? so Peter
Lombard.

Now he that loves the Lord in his Neighbor, and his Neighbor in the Lord,
loves neither of both the less, but both the more, for loving of both. He
does not forsake the God of love, to love his Neighbor, that loves his
Neighbor but only for 2 Cor. 13. 11.
Gods sake.

All is but love to God; and so he takes it. Although Mat. 25. 40.
this last be a bearing of love unto him the furthest way about.

This Duty of Man to Man, is a Duty of Man to God. By this he affirms his
love to God, and firmes Gods love to himself.

Now these two, the love of Man to God, and the love of God to Man, are points
of Catholic concernment. That is the Point of greatest concernment in all the
Law. This is the Point of greatest concernment in all the Gospel.

It is the greatest Commandment in the Law that is, that we love God. And it
is the greatest Article in the Gospel that is, that God loves us. On these two
hang all the Law, and the Gospel. The whole Law is fullfill'd in that; The
whole Gospel in this. And these two mutually depend upon each other to be
fulfilled. Sine fide non diligitur, and sine dilectione no^ creditur. Leo. Sermon
7. de Quadr. 1 John 4. 10.


He that does not love God truly, cannot truly believe that God loves him.
But he that truly believes that God loves him, cannot but love God truly
again for loving of him.

We love God, (says S. John) because he loved us first. Our love toward him
is but the Reflection of his love toward us.

We believe in him, because we love him. And we love him, as we believe in
him. By believing in him, we increase our love unto him. And by greatning of
our love unto him, our belief is greatned in him. Galat. 5. 6. Jam. 2. 22.


Faith works by love: so S. Paul. And by works it is made perfect, says S.
James.

It is by love to God, that Faith does work assurance in us, Fides esse
potest, prodesse non potest. S. Augu. de Trin. l. 15. c. 18. Jam. 2. 14.
of Gods love unto us: But fine amore, says S. Austin^, without this love of
God be in us, that faith in God, which is professed by us, can bring no profit
to us; for (...), says S. James, what does it profit, my Brethren, though a
Man says he has faith, and has not works? can faith save him? By saying, can
it save him? he says as much, as it cannot save him.

Works of love are fruits of faith; but faith is fruitless, where love works
not. The love of works, with the works of love, is the surest attestation of
true faith.

Works without faith are no good works, and faith without works is no good
faith. They then are both good, when they are both together. Faith never
works any good for him that has it, but when it works by love. No more does
love, but when it works by faith.

It is by love, that we fulfill the law of faith; and it is by faith, Romans 3.
27.
that we fulfill the law of love. We must love, as well as believe: indeed we
cannot believe unless we love.

The Old Commandment of the Law, and the New Commandment of the Gospel are
both for love; and by true love they are both fulfilled: for love is (...), the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 10.
and by love is the law fulfilled diverse ways.

First, Love fulfils the Law, as the Efficient Cause, by moving of Effective.
us Physically to the Observance of it.

Secondly, Love fulfils the Law, as the Final Cause, by moving Reductiv^.
of us Morally to a willing Obedience to it.

Thirdly, Love fulfils the Law, as the Formal Cause, by making Formaliter.
Finis in moralibus habet rationem formae. Quodlibet agens propter amorem agit,
quode^nque agit. Aquin. ^. 2. q. 28. ar. 6.
our willing Obedience to it, to be accepted, as the full performance of it.

For love it is that we observe it; and by love it is that we fulfill it. There
is no keeping of it by us, without the love of God be in us; and there is no
love of God within us, without the keeping of it by us. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments, says our Savior, John 14. 15.

Love is the end of the Law. It was Gods end in giving it; and it is our end in
keeping it. It is finis Moralis, the end of Intention; 1 Timothy 1. 5.
and it is finis perficien^ too, the end of Perfection, or the perfecting End
of our Obedience to it: and is therefore called (...), The bond of
Perfectness. Colos. 3 14.


It gives the form of Perfection, and the perfection of Form to our
Obedience. It perfects all our doing according to the Law; and it perfects all
our Believing according to the Gospel.

But without this love, our faith is said to be informis, a mere uncouth
deformity, in some sense. It is only then formata, a perfect Gal. 5. 6.
faith, or perfectly formed, when it works by love; For it is by works of
love, that it is made perfect. Jam. 2. 22.


It is very true, that Charitas non est forma fidei, Charity is not P. Mart. in
1 Cor. 13. 3. Charitas non est forma fidei intrins^ca, d^citur forma quatenus
per illam actus sidei formatur, and persicitur. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 4. ar. 3.
the form of faith: That is, it is not forma fidei constitutiva, but fidei
forma consecutiva it is. It is not that Intrinsecall form of faith, that gives
the very esse, or being of faith unto it; but that extrinsecall form that adds
the bene-esse, or well-being to it: For faith may be without it, but not well.
Some kinds of faith may be without true Charity; but not a justifying, not a
saving faith.

There may be an Historical faith without it. (...), says S. James, The
Devils believe. They have an Historical Jam. 2. 19. Mat. 4. 7. 8. 19. Mar. 1.
7. Act. 16. 7. 17. 19. 14. Ansel. in. Gal. c. 5. S. Bern. Sermon. ad Synod.
faith, but they have no Charity. They are Believers by such a faith, and yet
are Devils for all they believe by such a faith. Still Devils, and still
Believers. And they that have no better faith then this of Devils, (as our
Anselmus calls it, with S. Bernard) may perish with unbeleevers, and be
punished in Hell with Devils, for all their faith.

And a Miraculous faith may be without it too; for so the Apostle speaks of
it, (...), Though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, (...),
and have no charity, 1 Cor. 13. 2. He supposes here, that the one Totam fidem.
Beza. Tota^ illa^ fidem. Piscator.
might be without the other, that he might have had the whole of that faith of
Miracles, that faith to remove Mountains, without true charity. Indeed he
speaks only (...), by way of supposition; yet it is asserted generally, that
what he did but Chrysostom. Basil. Ambrose. Austine. Oecumenius. Leo, etc. Fulk.
Downam, etc. S. Chrysostom. de fide and lege. (...) Clem. Alex. l. 5. strom.
suppose, may be indeed. So S. Jerome, and so Gennadius, and diverse others
amongst the Ancients. So Pet. Mart. with Piscator also, and Diodate, with
others amongst the Moderns. But it were a Miracle beyond belief, for a man to
have a justifying faith without Charity: for it is the nature of such a faith
to be full of the works of Charity. Such a faith, says S. Chrysostom, (...),
even of it self is full of good works. It is (...), says Clemens
Alexandrinus, a doer of that which is good. It is but fides ficta, say the
learned of the Schools, a mere counterfeit of faith. But umbra fidei, the
shadow of faith, says Master Calvin. But the dead corpse of faith, says Peter
Martyr. Mortua fides cadaver est fidei. Pet. Mart. 1 Cor. 13. Rom 1. 17. Jam.
2. 17.


It is very true, that the just shall live by faith, for so says Saint Paul;
but then it is as true also, that the just man's faith must live by works of
love, for faith without works is dead, so says S. James, Mortua est per se, it
is dead when it is by it self alone; And what can a dead faith do? Quod
e^^icit tale, illud magis est tale, It must be a living faith in Man, by which
a Man must live. He that would live by his own Faith, must give others leave
to live by his Charity.

A living faith is ever a loving faith, and a loving faith is ever Charitas
nunqua^ o^iosa est, semper in alterum porrigit, vel in proximum, vel in Deu^.
S. August. Jam. 2. 18.
a doing faith. He therefore that says he does believe, and does not show it
by his doings, do not believe him. Show me thy faith by thy works, and show me
thy works with thy faith. He that shows nothing but a faith alone, had as good
show nothing, for he shows nothing that is good. Such a faith does make him
nothing in Gods account.

He that has no Charity in his Cribbage, must needs be bilkt at his last
account, for all that faith which he turns up in his outward Profession of
Christianity.

Some well-skill'd in Heraldrie, and in Blazoning of Coat-Armory, Such bearing
is to be accounted false Arms, not worthy to be received, except in some
special cases. Sir John Fern. White Shields were accustomed to be bestowed
upon Novices in Martial affairs, (such as we call Fresh Water Soldiers) to
the end they might in future time merit to have them garnished with the titles,
and testimonies of their valorous deserts; till such time they were accounted
of as inglorious. Guillims Display of Herald^y, Section 2.
have deemed it a dishonor for a man to give a Field without a Charge. The
Romans ever deemed it a disgrace for a man to bear an empty Shield, i. e. a
Shield without any Pourtraicture on it. And can it be any other then a disgrace
in Christian Heraldry, for a great Professor, to bear the empty Shield of
Faith, without any charge of Works, or any Pourtraicture of the Grace of
Charity on it?

It is a shame for Faith to Schismatize from Love. True Faith was never yet a
Separatist from Christian Charity. The language of Faith to Charity is like
that of Ruth to Naomi, Ruth 1. 16. Where thou live, I will live, and where
thou dyest, I will dye, and thy God shall be my God. Faith lives but where it
loves, and only whilst it loves. Now abide Faith, Hope, Charity, these three,
but the greatest of these is Charity, says the Apostle. Now that is in 1 Cor
13. 13.
this life, says Diodate, and so Primasins, with diverse of our Fulke upon the
Rhemish Testa. Downhame of Justification.
own. Now in this life they abide together, and cannot abide to to be asunder;
He that has one, has all, and he wants all, that wants any one. So S.
Ambrose, and so S. Chrysostom. And according to the measure of the one, such
is the measure of both the other.

Quantum credimus, tantum amamus, says S. Gregory; By how Et tantu^ speramus.
S Gegor. super Ezech. Hom. 22.
much we believe, by so much we love, and vice versa, by how much we love,
by so much we believe. Where there is a great deal of faith, there is a great
deal of love; But where there is but a little love, there is ever but a little
faith; And where there is no love, there is no faith. It is our love to God,
for his own sake, that makes us to believe that God loves us; and it is our
love to others, for Gods sake, that makes others to believe that we love God.
It is that belief, that justifyes us in our selves, and this belief, that
justifyes us amongst others. It is Faith that justifies a Man in foro
Conscientia, In the judgment of his own Conscience; And it is Charity that
testifies the the truth of that justifying Faith unto others, and so justifiies
him in foro Mundi, in the judgment of the Word: But it is neither faith, nor
Charity; nor faith, and Charity; not (...), nor (...), not any gift, or gifts
of grace in Man, that justifies Gratiam justificantem, quae est Dei in Christo
misericordia, non in nobis, sed in Dco solo collocamus. Whitaker. Tom. pri.
lib. 8. Page 177.
him in foro Caeli, in the Court of Heaven, in the sight of God; But (...),
That free grace of God in himself toward Man, that first moves him not to
impute Man's own unrighteousness, but to impute the Righteousness of Christ
unto him. It is the mere Mercy of God that persuades him to justify a sinner;
It is Faith that persuades that sinner in his very soul, that he is justified
with God, and of him; And it is the Charity of his Works, by the Works of his
Charity, that testifies the Truth of that his Faith, and proves it to himself,
and others, and persuades them to be confident that he is so justified. Now
this Charity it is, that we are here exhorted to follow after. And this
Charity we must follow after, totis viribus, with all our mights.

The word is (...), which says as much, as follow it hard, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14.
and follow it home, follow after it, until ye overtake it. With Xenophon it
signifies to prosecute; With Lucian to persecute. It is taken both ways in the
Text, by several Expositors. It is S. Chrysostom. Theophyl. P. Mart. Wilson
Christian Dictionary. Romans 12. 14.
well observed by some to refer two ways in holy Writ; Sometimes to a
Person, and sometimes to a Thing. When it referrs unto a Person, it is put in
the worse part, and signifies to persecute with a desire to hurt him; When it
referrs unto a Thing, it is put in the better part, and signifies an earnest
desire, and endeavor to obtain. Thus S. Chrysostom takes it in Romans 9. 30, 31.
the Text. And this Exhortatory Text was first Epistolized to the Church of
Corinth. All they of that Church were then exhorted thus to follow after
Charity; but they of that Church were not all that were thus exhorted to follow
after it; for all we, in them, were exhorted also to it. They were not all
exhorted then unto it, as Corinthians, but as Christians; and so in them all
Christians, as they are Christians, are exhorted to it.

Ye Christians then, ye as Christians even all ye, follow after Charity.

Ye Christian Magistrates follow after Charity. Ye Christian Ministers Ye
Multitudes of Christians

First, ye Christian Magistrates, follow after Charity. After Charity toward
Ministers, After Charity to Multitudes, that both Multitudes and Ministers may
follow after you in Charity. The true Charity of a chief Commander, is a
chief Commander of true Charity; Love in a Leader of the Multitude, is a
Leader of the Multitude to Love. What a Magistrate does, he commands by doing.
When Marcus Julius Philippus became a follower of Christianity, many friends,
and servants, and others became his followers in Christianity. There were many
Marii in one Caesar, said Sulla in Suetonius; And there Sueton. in vit. Jul.
Coes. Aristot. Eth. l. 5. cap. 4. (...), Nazia. Orat. 20.
are many Men, many of the Multitude in one Magistrate. The Magistrates example
is a Law unto the Multitude; Yea the Magistrate himself (says Aristotle) is
(...), a living Law; a Christian Magistrate should be this Law of Love, and the
life of this Law. When they that are Great will do good, it is not to be
spoken, what a great good it is that they do. It goes well with all, when God
makes good Men to be great, and great Men to be good. They then are good, when
they are like to God. And they are then most like to God; when they do most
good; And they are ever best liked of him, that are most like unto him.
Greatness does well with goodness, and goodness does best with greatness.
Be then as good as great; and by your greatness lead the way unto this
Christian goodness. By the Christian Charity of your goodness, set the way
unto the goodness of this Christian Charity. We are all to follow after
Charity; and after you it is, that we must follow after it. In the first place
therefore ye Christian Magistrates follow after Charity.

2. In the next place, ye Christian Ministers follow after Charity. After
Charity to those within; After Charity to those without.

First, to those within, for Charity must begin at home: And so must this
Exhortation unto Charity; it must include this Pulpit also to incline us all to
Charity.

To Charity in our Doctrines.
To Charity in our Doings.
In both to one another.
In both to all others.
To all Magistrates above.
To all Multitudes beneath.
The time will not permit my Discourse to single out these severalls by
themselves; Only in the general, I must tell you, that the Charity we are to
follow after, should rather be in our selves toward others, then in others
toward our selves. Let us then follow the grace of Charity, rather then the
gift of Charity; Let the grace of Charity in us toward others lead us, rather
then the gifts of Charity by others unto us. Those gifts of Charity to us by
others, may hap to lead us wrong; But the grace of Charity in us toward
others, may help to lead them right. Let us progue less for the profit of
gifts, and pray more for the Gifts of the Prophets; And let not Covetousness
make us, to make a prey of Jerusalem, now in her adversity; But let Christian
Charity now make us, to make our Psalm. 122. 6.
Prayers for Jerusalem; and let us labor by all means to make peace in
Jerusalem.

It is said of holy Athanasius, that he was dissidentibus Magnes, Nazian.
Orat. 21.
A Load stone to draw dissentients to agreement. Oh that all our Tongues were
now such Load stones to contract the Iron hearts of these times to a Christian
Monaccord. It is 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20
our calling to Preach peace by Jesus Christ to others: Now let us follow our
calling, and preach him in peace amongst Consule Vedeliu^ de prudentia veteris
Ecc. lib. 3. cap. 2, 3, 5, 6. Prolegom. cap. 6.
our selves. The love of life should make us study to be quiet; And the life of
love should make us quiet, that so we might study: And our study should not be
by curiosity to make quarrels, but by Christian Charity to make quiet.

When the question was asked, how many Angels might stand upon a needles point
at once? The Answer was, that it was but a needless point to stand upon. Let
not us stand upon such needless points of curiosity, to the breach of
Christian Charity. A fraction makes an uneven Reckoning in Arithmetic, and he
that makes a fraction in the Church, will hardly ever make an even Reckoning
with God, when he comes to audite his account unto him. Erostratus would needs
do something Carol. Stephan.
to be spoken of when he was dead, And what was it, but the firing of Diana's
Temple at Ephesus with his own hands? Let us choose rather to be talked of
whilst we live, for doing nothing in the Church of England, then to be talked
of when we shall be dead, for doing so much evil to the Church, as the making
a combustion in it. S. Paul would have us follow after Charity in the Church;
let us follow after his example of Charity toward the Church. Never did Pompey
the Great, nor Codrus, nor Curtius, nor Brutus, nor Decius, nor Caelius
Balbinus, nor any other love their country better, then this Apostle did the
Church; for he was content, that his own eternal Phil. 1. 23, 24.
good in Heaven should give way for a time, to the Temporal good of the
Church. Let not us make the eternal good of the Church give way to our
Temporal good in it. Let us follow after Charity in the Church, and let us
follow after Charity toward it too.

Dives propter pauperem, and pauper propter divitem factus est. S. August.
3. And ye Multitudes follow after Charity.
Follow after Charity in giving to each other.
And follow after Charity in forgiving of each other.
Ye Rich follow after both these kinds of Charity toward the Poor; And ye
Poor follow after both these kinds of Charity toward the Rich.

First, ye Rich follow after Charity toward the Poor, the Poor want givers
in these Times. Alas for them, these Times are too hard for the Poor. Be not
ye that are rich too hard for the Times. Be not Getters from the Poor, when
ye should be givers to them; Such Gettings may be great, but they cannot be
good. Yet the best, and biggest gains are such as are gotten by the Poor, in
such hard Times as these, I say such as are gotten by them, not such as are
gotten from them. (...). Pho^ylid.
Phocylides thought it unlawful for the Rich to be Usurers toward the Poor.
And yet there can be no Usury more gainefull, or more lawful then that, which
the Rich may practice toward the Poor. But the way is not by getting from
them, but by giving to them: for he that gives to the Poor lends Prover.
19. 17.
to the Lord, and he that lends to him shall again receive his own with
usury.

The Lord himself is the poor Man's surety, and he that has his suretyship
is sure. Give then, and it shall be given to Luke 6. 38.
you; He that has given you a Precept for the one, has given you also a
promise of the other. The Poor follow after you for Charity: do ye follow after
Charity toward the Poor. And ye Poor follow after Charity toward the Rich:
for ye may give to them also. Ye may give good words; ye^ may speak
charitably of them; ye may pray in Charity for them; ye may bestow the tears
of sorrow on them for the hardness of their Hearts, in that they will bestow
nothing of Charity on you. And Tears (as says S. Chrysostom) are the best
Almesdeedes that can be done; yet such they are as ye may do. Charity is of
that which a man has, and not of that which a Acts 3. 6.
man has not. S. Peter was poor, yet charitable; He had neither Gold nor
Silver to give, but such as he had, he gave; He give a blessing in the Name
of Christ unto the Cripple. And 1 Timothy 2. 1.
such as are as poor as that cripple, may bestow the Charity of their Prayers
for a blessing upon the Rich. In some Parishes all must be either Givers or
Receivers. In Christ's Church all may be both; All Receivers, All Givers, and
all Forgivers too.

Ye then, even all ye, follow after Charity in forgiving others, and in
forgiving all, even all offenders, and all offenses, For if ye forgive men
their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if ye
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
trespasses, says our Savior Mat. 6. 14, 15. He freely forgave his mortal
enemies, and Luke 23. 34. Acts 7. 60.
prayed for their forgiveness. So did the Prot^. Martyr, S. Steven. And so did
our famous Cranmer. But most men are Dr. Fox Act Mon.
defective in this kind of Charity in these Times. The very Heathen will rise
up in judgment with the men of this Generation, and condemn them; for many of
them were very ready to forgive offenses. The Time would fail me to tell you
the stories of Antisthenes, and Plato, and Aristotle, and Aristippus, of
Phocion, and of Socrates famed by Apollos Oracle for the wisest man in the
World, and of many others, that were easily entreated, yea without any
entreaties, that were ready to pass by indignities. When Calvus the Orator,
and Catullus the Poet, had inveighed bitterly against Julius Caesar, he freely
forgave them once and again. Antigonus, and Alexander, and Augustus Caesar are
all renouned to Posterity for their forwardness to forgive offenses. Great
Tamberlaine was wont to call himself, the wrath of God: But good Titus the
Son of Vespasian, was wont to be called by others, the love of men. Amor, et
deliciae humani generi^.
It is better to be a Titus, then a Tamberlaine; more honorable to be kind,
then cruel. And many Pagans were more worthy of honor for it, then many
Christians.

But shall the Law of Nature do more with Heathens, then the Law of Grace can
with Christians? Let us also practice this forgiving Charity. Forgiving Charity
is most suitable to this Assembly. It makes most for making Peace, and that is
the end of this assembly, as I conjecture.

Give me leave to repeat this Exhortation unto those that are especially
concerned in the Occasion of this Assembly, and I shall conclude.

In the first place, Ye Right Reverend, that are Commissioned for the Seat of
Judgment, (...), follow after charity. Ye are now in this Court of the Lords
house to hear of Charity, and of Mercy; But ye are presently to remove unto
that other house of the Lords Court, to do justice, and to denounce judgment.
Let this Christian Charity follow your Honors from this Court of the Lords
house, unto that house of the Lords Court, that your Honors may follow after
Charity there, remembering Mercy in the midst of Judgment.

And Ye, that are in Commission for this County (...), follow after Charity.
Follow after it in the County, and follow after it toward the County. Be
Plato's Commonwealths men, for (...).
the Commonwealth. Follow after Charity toward the Public: and remember, as
concerning the Private of any, that Charity does no wrong; It oppresses none;
It packs not the heaviest burdens upon the weakest backs. It does not as
Authority does sometimes. Now whether it were Authority, rather then Charity,
thus to charge this public office of Preaching upon the weakest abilities to
discharge it, ye may be Judges: For my part, I will not, may not judge, what it
was that did first charge that Public Authority where it is, so full of other
Charges. But for this, which concerns my charge, I may say, that it was for a
man to Mat. 7. 12. Luke 6. 31.
do as he was done to, not as a man would have been done to. But now this
Charge is even done, and that with Charity. There are but some few others, to
whom I must leave this Exhortation, and so discharge my self.

Amongst those others, Ye Jurors, follow after Charity. And first, Ye Jurors of
the Great Inquests, (...), follow after Charity. Let no private interest be
indulged, to the prejudice of the Public; as the Trustees of the County,
follow after Charity toward it, and show your love unto it. And in private
concernments also follow after Charity. Consider well amongst your selves,
whether Charity in an Ignoramus, grounded upon this Exhortation, be not better
then Extremity in Billa vera, grounded upon bare presumptions.

And Ye Jurors of Life and Death, follow after Charity. I speak not this in
favor of the Tacian Heresy, or the Manichean, but in love to true
Christianity, which proves its self by all 1 Cor 7. 15. 1 Pet. 3. 11.
the parts of Charity, and that tells us, that it is better to save life then
to destroy it, when it may be done without injustice.

And then Ye Jurors of Nisi Prius, follow after Charity. Your calling to
Christianity, and your calling in Christianity, are both to Peace. Your
general calling, as Ye are Christians, is to seek peace for your selves. And
your special calling, as ye are Jurors, is to make peace for others. Let that
Peace of God Coloss. 3. 15.
then rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called in one Body.

It is the business of honest Juries to end differences, and to make peace;
and so it is of holy Christians; There is nothing (...). Jam. 3. 18.
more proper to a Christian, says S. Basil, (...), then to pacify
Dissentients. The fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace, of them which make
peace, says S. James, And blessed are the Peacemakers, says our Savior, for
they shall be called the Sons of God, Mat. 5. 9. If they be the Sons of God
that make peace, certainly says, S. Gregory, they are the Sons of the
Devil, that mar peace, or that hinder it from making. That ye may be sure
to make it, ye must be sure to follow (...), the things that make for peace;
follow Romans 14. 19.
after Charity, that makes for peace, and that, if any thing will make it;
follow after it toward Plaintiffs, and follow after it toward Defendants; And
ye Plaintiffs, and ye Defendants, leave following of one another in vexatious
Suits, and follow after Charity.

It was a strange thing to Salvian, in his days, to see One place his greatest
Happiness, in the great Unhappiness of an other. Why should it be a thing so
common as it is, in these days? The Inhabitants of Japan would needs salute by
pulling Hey'yns Geograp. Oriental Islands.
off their Shoes, because that they of China did use to salute by pulling of
their Hats. Thus many love to live in opposition; And to be like mere
Antipodes, in all their ways, to their next Neighbors. They are easy to be
provoked, and hard to be entreated, which is quite contrary to Christian
Charity; for Charity is not easily provoked, it suffers long, 1 Cor. 13. 4,
5. Jam. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 13. 7.
and is kind, says S. Paul; But it is easily entreated, says S. James. It
bears all things, it endures all things, says S. Paul. It envyeth not, it
seeks not her own: not usque ad apicem juris; To the utmost punctilio of
right; for summum jus summa discordia, says Martin Luther, The extremity of
Right, causes the extremity of Wrangling. Ye Plaintiffs then be persuaded to
remit something of right for Charity sake, and for Quiet sake which follows
after Charity.

And ye Defendants, follow after Charity, and if it be possible, as much as
lies in you, live peaceably with all Men. Rom 12. 18, 19, 21.
Avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with good. (...), says S. Paul; follow after peace,
when the Plaintiff Heb. 12. 14.
has taken it from you, do ye follow after it, until ye have overtaken it,
follow after it with the Plaintiff, and follow after it (...), even with all
Men, and follow after it, with an (...), if it be possible to overtake it, and
follow after it, with a quantum in vobis est, as much as lies in you to
recover it. Be of one mind, and live in peace, and the God of love and peace
shall be with you. 2 Cor. 13. 11.


And Ye, that are Juris periti, ye, that follow the practice of the Laws of
this Kingdom, (...), follow the practice of this Law of Christ's Kingdom,
follow after Charity; follow after it toward your Clients, and follow after it
toward their Antagonists. Plead this Law of Christ's Kingdom to them, as well
as the Laws of this Kingdom for them. Persuade them to value the Authority of
this Law of Christ's Kingdom, by the credit of the Author. The greatest
Lawyers, and Lawgivers amongst the Heathen, did ever father their Laws upon
the Gods of greatest credit amongst them, that men might give the greater
reverence to them.

Those Laws which Lycurgus made for the Lacedaemonians Plutar. in vit. ^y^ur.
Diodorus S^culus.
were fathered upon Apollo; Those Laws which Minos made for the Cretians were
fathered upon Jupiter; And those which were made by Anacharsis for the
Scythians were fathered Herodot in Melpo^. Ludovi^. Vives in S. Aug. de civ.
Dei Plutar. in vit. Number. Po^p.
upon Zamolxis; And those that had no Fathers for their Laws did find out
Mothers for them. Numa Pompilius that made Laws for the Romans ascribed them
to the Goddess Egeria; And Zaleucus that made Laws for the Locrians ascribed
them unto Minerva. These Gods and Goddesses had all been Men and Women amongst
the Heathens. But the Author of this Law of Love is none other but the great
God of Heaven and Earth; The God of Gods, and Lord of all Lords. And it is he
himself that urges the practice of it; For his sake men ought to follow it,
and in special manner toward himself. That Noble Arimathean, that played the
Mat. 27. 57, 58, 59, 60.
Sextons part to in-grave our Saviors Body in a Stone, was one of your
profession, a worthy Counselor; Be ye of his Mark. 15. 43, 46.
profession toward Christ. He showed Charity toward the humane Body of
Christ, when it was crucified; Do ye show Charity toward the mystical body
of Christ, the Church, which is almost crucified. He did his best to take that
Body of our Savior from the Cross, and he did it. Do but ye Luke 23. 53.
your best, to take the Cross from this Body of our Savior, it may be ye may
do it; do something toward it. The Law of Charity was from our Savior; And
the Charity of this Law should be chiefly for him; For his sake then follow
after Charity.

And ye, that undertake for others in their Law-cases, undertake also in this
Gospell-case for Christ, be his Attorneyes. He is the Prince of Peace, be ye
all for the Peace of this Prince. Be Isaia. 9. 6.
ye for Christ, that Christ may be for you; Labor to make peace on Earth for
your Christian Clients, that Christ as your Advocate, may make peace for you
with God in Heaven. Let 1 John 2. 1.
no one here of your Profession be a Lachesis, to spin out the thread of
controversy, when the Judge would be an Atropos, to cut it off. And when the
Judge would be an Oedipus, to unty the knots of doubt between Party and Party;
Let no one be a Sphinx, to entangle them more, and more. When the Judge has
put the old, and tired quarrels to their Squatts, let no one start them
again, to be hunted from Court to Court. Let nothing Philip. 2. 3.
be done through strife, or vain glory. But let all your things be done with
Charity. And so let the things of all. 1 Cor. 16. 14.
I have done with you; I have done with all. What I say to you, I say to all,
(...): Follow after Chrarity.

*

FINIS.
THE CONSUMMATION OF FELICITY. A SERMON PREACHED AT St. PETER'S Church in the
City of Norwich, JUNE, 15. 1645.

St. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. (...). Chassanaeus Catalogi Gloriae Mundi ter. par.
Dabit Deus gloriam omnibus illis, qui moriuntur in statu bonitatis, virtutis,
and veritatis, and qui ipsum diligunt, and suam gloriam sperant. LONDON,
Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-Lane, 1651.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, JOHN HOBART, Esquire. The fullness of joy in the presence of
God, and pleasures at his right hand, for evermore.
SIR,
YOur desires intimated by your Proxy, and iterated by your Self, were as they
seemed very reasonable, so that an utter denial of them must needs have been,
and seemed, most unreasonable; Indeed they were so just, that my devoire could
not but be just according to them. This Sermon, which ere while, (such as it
is) was publicly presented to your ears, is now (such as it was) represented
privately unto your eyes. And surely these are the Organs of a Doctrinall sense
as well as those. And your Piety, I hope, will employ them only as such,
whilst that my Pen does thus repeat this Sermon to them. My Charity compells
me to believe so of them, or otherwise my Pen should never have preached to
them; For I confess ingenuously, that I please my self but only in
pleasuring you by penning of this uncouth Sermon. Many things delivered viva
voce, and passing by the Habet nescio quid l^eutis energiae vox viva. S.
Hieron. Epist. 36.
Ears but once, may pass for tolerable, yea and may be deemed acceptable: But
if once they be turned into Dead Letters, and laid forth in Sheets, their life
is gone, and it were well for them, if they might Solet acceptior esse Sermo
vivus quam scriptus. S. Bernar.
be buried. But alas! then they lie open to more exceptions under a sense more
curious, and more critical then that of Hearing, having an advantage to view,
and review its object as often as it pleases, and (...), S. Chrysostom. Hom. 9.
as long at once. It is therefore the Care, and Policy of many, that they may
keep the credit which they get amongst their Auditors by Preaching, to keep
themselves from penning of their Sermons, lest they lose it by critical
Readers. But for my part I Preached this Sermon to many others with your self,
that you, and they might have an higher estimate of the Matter of it then you
had, and have now Penned it that you may have a lower estimate of the Manner of
it then you have. Indeed I ever intended (...) in composing of this Sermon for
the Pulpit, but (...), I never studied, never intended, and therefore cannot
but admire, that any in that Auditory should admire it for Technologie. Surely
the common abuses of the Pulpit in these Times beneath the Majesty of it, have
caused those Sermons to be Christened Neat, which are not too too slovenly.
With me to Preach honestly is to Preach elegantly; Yet (...), and (...) differ
as much in sense as sound. But call it now even what you please, it is now
yours a second time, and by a second way. Denomination is one Privilege
belonging to Dominion. S. Chrysostom. In cap. 2. Genes. Hom. 14.
It was yours when desired by you, being made yours when first delivered over
the Cushen to you. There could be no injustice then in your Worship in
demanding of your own, but in me there would, had I persisted longer to deny
the private use of that unto you, which I so publicly deliverd to you to make
use of. I could have wished that it might, like the (...), have dyed that very
day that it came up, and dyed mine; But seeing it must be transplanted Plin.
Not. Hist. l. 25. 13.
that it may live, I am very glad that it shall live yours, and shall be more
glad if this performance proves not so unacceptable, but that some further
employment may be commanded him, that by his second endeavors would most
willingly prove himself,

Sir, Your most humble Servant, EDW. WILLAN.

TO THE VVorshippfull John Hobart, Esquire.
SIR,
THis Sermon has been questioned once, and may again be questioned. It has
bin questioned by others before now: And now it may be questioned by your self.
You may now question it for being public: But others have thought their
questioning of it the more pertinent for being thus long private; For their
Question was not about the Matter of it, but the Author. No Tittle in it, that
I know of; but the Title to it was in Question. Had it been one of Smyths, or
Pembles, one of Heirons, or Wheatelys Sermons, questionless the Questionaries
had been so lectured, and preached in it, that they needed not have been so
absonous in public, as to my face to Question, whether it were mine own? I can
but wonder at the Question: for I never borrowed other men's stilts to hide the
lamenesse of my fantasy before the poorest halting Cripples. I confess, I
ever thought it lawful to steal a Sentence in a Sermon; but not so to steal
a whole Sermon. Nor was it any One, but many Authors that afforded help unto
me in composing this. My Purse was never able as yet to purchase Books enongh
to make a complete Library: But such Books as I have, I love to read, and
such Books as I read, I love to make use of; Yet is it not my use to take all
the Principal of any instead of the use. The Prophet David 2 Samuel 24. 24.
would not sacrifice unto the God of Israel, of that which cost him nothing.
Nor do I use to offer that before the same God unto his people, which cost me
nothing but a Groat, or Teston at the Stationers shop. Such as it is it has
been offered once, and again unto the people from the Pulpit; And now, such as
it was; it is to be offered to them from the Press, for I cannot but own it
every where, and desire your Worship to own the humblest of your servants in it

EDWARD WILLAN.

REader, the former Epistle was prefixed when these Notes were first desired by
Mr. Hobart for his private use. This second Epistle is now affixed also to hint
the occasion of my Printing them.

THE CONSUMMATION OF FELICITY.
PSALM. 16. 12. In thy Presence is the fulness of joy: and at thy right Hand
there is pleasure for evermore.
THE fairest way (though it be the furthest way) into the City of the Text is
through the Suburbs of the verse before it. And by that Way we may observe,
that Christ's way to Heaven was by the Gates of Hell. In the verse before the
Text the Prophet foretells the Bitterness of Christ's Passion; In the Text it
self he tells the Blessedness of Christ's Glorification. In that we may
behold him in his lowest Humiliation; In this we may behold him in his highest
Exaltation. In that we may observe him sustaining the fulness of sorrow in
his Fathers absence; In this we may observe him regaining the fullness of joy
in his Fathers Presence. In that we may see how he felt the heavy Hand of
Gods displeasure for a time; In this we may see how he found the pleasure at
Gods right Hand for evermore. And thus in both togerher we may observe how
Christ passed by the Cross of ignominy, and the ignominy of the Cross, unto
the Crown of Glory, and the Glory of that Crown.

Indeed, the whole life of Christ from his Cradle to his Cross Tota Christi
vita fuit continua passio. Brent.
was nothing but a bearing of the Cross; for no sooner did he begin to
cross this troublesome World, but he himself was troubled with a World of
crosses, crossed with a World of troubles. But the greatest Cross that ever
he suffered in the World was his suffering upon the Cross to save the World.
That Cross that did bear Christ was the heaviest Cross that ever Christ did
bear. And therefore though his daily sufferings were increased with his Days
of suffering; yet the Sufferings of his last Day have caused that Day of his
last Sufferings to be Christened his Passion-Day (...). For then was his Soul
in a very Hell of Sufferings; And then were the very Sufferings of Hell in his
Soul. But his Soul was not left in that Hell of Horror; Nor was that Horror
of Hell left in his Soul. His Soul and Body too were both right-soone
felicified with the fullness of joy in the presence of God, and with pleasure
at his right Hand for evermore.

Our Lord and Savior suffered for a time on Earth for us, that we might not
suffer for our selves in Hell for ever. Yea he suffered willingly upon the
Cross for our sakes, that we might be willing to suffer under the Cross for
his sake; and we must be willing to suffer with him here, or he will never be
willing that we should reign with him hereafter. We must take 2 Timothy 2. 12.
up our Cross, and follow him, if ever with him we would enjoy Mat. 10. 38.
16. 24. Mark 8. 34.
the fulness of joy in the presence of God, and pleasure at his right Hand
for evermore.

It was his pleasure to begin an Health to us in the bitter cup of
sufferings; and we must pledge him in the same cup of sufferings, if we would
be sharers with him of the Health. It was his intent, when he took his own
Cup off, to have the Health go round, Ye shall indeed drink of the same cup
that I drink of, says he, Mat. 20. 22. And good reason: for why Mat. 10. 24,
25. Luke 6. 40. John 13. 16. 15. 20.
should any Servant look to fare better then his Lord and Master? It is enough
that the Disciple be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord, says the Lord
our Master.

He was the Lilly of the Valleys which Solomon sung of; and Song of Sol. 2.
1, 2.
as a Lilly amongst Thorns he was whilst he grew in this earthly Valley.
Encompassed he was with Thorns even all the time he was growing here; yea
he was quite covered with them at the last. He was crowned with Thorns; and
by wearing of Mat. 27. 29.
them was worn up by them. But he wore them only as the Head of the Church.
And must not the Body be conformed to Ephesians. 5. 23. Isaia. 53. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
the Head? Must not the Church be thorned with tribulations as well as Christ?
Yes surely; And every mystical Member of the Church must be conformed to the
Body of it: For tribulation is every true Disciples Portion. Christ's Servants
must all be sufferers. He that would wait upon our Savior in the height of
Glory must be content to follow him through the depth of Misery. The way to
Heaven is by weeping Cross. It Acts 14. 12.
is through much tribulation, yea (...), through many tribulations, that we
must pass to the Kingdom of Heaven, if ever we look to enter into it.
Temporal sufferings are the Legacyes which our Lord bequeathed to all his
faithful followers as an annuity unto them. (...), says he unto them, John
16. 33. In the World you shall have tribulation; For if they have persecuted
me, they will also persecute you, says he, John 15. 20. and therefore marvel
not (says he) though the World hate you; for it hated me first. If ye were of
the World, the World would love his own: But because ye are not of the World,
but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you, John
15. 19. In this World therefore they that will live godly in Christ Jesus must
suffer persecution, as says that inspired secretary of the Holy Ghost, St.
Paul. 2 Timothy 3. 12. And well may we say with him, 1 Cor. 15. 19. If in this
life only we had hope in Christ, we were of all men most miserable. (...).
Miserable are all men in this life; But we, the servants of Christ, were the
most miserable of all men, if in this life only we had hope in Christ.

It cannot be therefore but there must needs be an other life, and that life
must needs be better then this present; for it cannot be that Christ our Lord,
the Lord of Life, a righteous Lord, Jerem. 12. 1.
should serve them always worst that in all their lives do serve him best;
And them ever best that serve him ever worst.

It is a Bargain of Gods own making to honor them that honor him. And God
will surely make those Bargains good 1 Samuel 2. 30.
that are of his own making. Can He say it, and never do John 14. 6.
it? Can Truth it self prove false? It cannot be; Never did God suffer any Man
to lose by doing for him; Nor was ever any Man lost by suffering for him. He
will infallibly save all them that do unfeignedly serve him. Yea truly, they
do even serve themselves that do truly serve the Lord. And they do save
themselves too most surely that lose themselves for serving him most seriously.

Indeed it is a Paradox, yet is it Orthodox indeed; for it is an Oracle from
the mouth of Truth it self, Mat. 16. 25. That whosoever will save his life
shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for Christ's sake shall save it.
It seems that it is the loss of life to save it, by forsaking Christ the Lord
of Life; And that it is the saving of life to lose it for his sake, who is life
it self, and the giver of it. He that does not lose Christ with his life, or
in it, shall save his life in Christ, and with him; And he that lays down
his life for Christ his Saviors sake, shall take it up again for his own
with immortality added to it.

Let no Man therefore either think, or say that sufferings are the only
Salaries, or the sole rewards that our Savior Christ vouchsafes to bestow
upon his Soldiers, and upon his Servants: For never did any Soldier bear
arms under the commands of a more Noble Captain, or more excellent General;
Nor can any man serve a better or more generous Master.

The Proto-Martyr was S. Steven. He was the first that ever Dorotheus.
warred under the Banner of Christ's Cross to the loss of life. The vaunt-gard
was led on by him; and he himself did march in the very front to bid the
enemy battle; and was he no way rewarded, think ye? Had he nothing
bestowed upon him, but only a volley of stones? Did he lose all salaries Acts
7. 59.
with himself? Oh no! Did he not rather win that life which is eternal by
losing of his temporal life in that Bed of Honor? And has he not ever since
been invested with the Crown of Martyrdom? And has not that been ever
deemed As soon as he was ordained (as though he were appointed for this
purpose) stoned to death by them that slew the Lord, and for this cause as the
first triumphing Martyr of Christ, according to his Name, he bears a Crown.
Eusebius l. 2. 1. Acts 7. 55, 56.
a Crown of Glory? Who ever called that first Brigade of holy Martyrs a
forlorne-Hope, that was carried on by his Christian Gallantry, and valiant
Christianity? Yet it was the first Party that faced the foe, and gave the
Onset. Did not the very Heavens open to give Quarter to his Soul, when it was
beaten from the littler Garrison of his Body by a charge of stones? They are
happy losers that are so beat into Heaven.

S. Paul was an other valiant Champion for the Lord of Hosts. He fought with
Beasts at Ephesus after the manner of Men, and 1 Cor. 15. 32. Linus Epis. de
Passione Pauli. Dorotheus, Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 22.
overcame them. And was there no reward bestowed upon him for fighting his good
fight, but only the Roman Axe sharpened with Neronian cruelty? Yes, he knew
there was laid up for him a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous Judge would give unto him.

Or had Gods humble servant, holy Job, no better wages then a Dunghill, and a
Pot-sheard for serving in such Pains to such Job 2. 7, 8.
Poverty with such Patience? Pained he was in his flesh till pined unto skin
and bones; And poor he was to a very Proverb; Job. 2. 10.
yet patient to a Miracle; And had he no remuneration? Ye shall find he
had, and that a large one too, if ye shall consult the vouchee of his sacred,
and authentic story toward the Job 42. 10, 12.
conclusion of it. God was as free to him, as he had been faithful to God.
Job was not long in Misery, before the Lord did manifest his bounty to him,
through the abundant riches of his Mercy.

The Crown of Thorns was put upon our Saviors Head, but was soon pulled off
again. And his tender Limbs were fastened to the Cross, but could not be
made so fast unto it, but that they were soon loosed from it. The Misery of the
Cross was quickly changed into the Majesty of a Crown, And the Pain of the
Thorns into the Pleasure of a Throne. The Soul of our Savior was not left in
the Hell of Sufferings; Nor shall the Sufferings of Hell be left in any Soul
that is our Saviors. His Soul was soon translated with His Body unto Bliss,
and Acts 1. 9.
Glory, and so shall all the Souls and Bodies that belong to him. He has
Coronets of Happiness to Nobilitate the Heads of all his faithful followers.
And he has Palms of Victory to Honestate the Hands of all (I do not say)
the Martyred Army of Nobles; But the Noble Army of Martyrs; and has stoles of
Holiness to complete even all the Host of Heaven Cap a^pe.

The Saints on Earth are all but Viatores, way-faring-Men, wandering Pilgrims
far from home: But the Saints in Heaven are Comprehensores, safely arrived at
the end of their journey. All we here present for the present are but mere
strangers in the midst of danger, we are losing our selves, and losing our
lives in the Land of the dying: But ere long we may find our lives, and our
selves again in Heaven with the Lord of life, being found of him in the Land
of the Living. If when we die we be in the Lord of Life, our souls are sure
to be bound up in the bundle of Life, that so when we live again we may be
sure to find them in the life of the Lord. Now we have but a dram, but a
scruple, but a grain of happiness, to an ounce, to a pound, to a thousand
weight of heaviness; Now we have but a drop of joy to an Ocean of sorrow; But
a moment of ease to an Age of S. August. l. solil. cap. 35.
Pain: But then (as S. Austine very sweetly in his Soliloquies) we shall have
endless ease without any pain, true happiness without any heaviness, the
greatest measure of felicity without the least of misery, the fullest measure
of joy that may be without any mixture of grief. Here therefore (as S. Gregory
the Nazianz. in funere patris.
Divine advises us) let us ease our heaviest loads of sufferings, and sweeten
our bitterest cups of sorrows with the continual Meditation, and constant
expectation of the fullness of joy in the presence of God, and of the pleasure
at his right Hand for evermore.

And thus by this vast circumference of the Suburbs, ye may easily guess that
this Text is a City of more then one whole days journey. Yet can I make but
half one Sabbath-dayes-journey into the Parts, and through the Passages of the
same. And therefore I cannot stand, as otherwise I should, to show you all the
Remarkables in it, I shall only point at the chiefest.

When that ancient Pillar of the Church S. Augustine, the Ornament of Hippo,
had enlarged his City of God into 22 Books, he then confessed that all that he
had written was but stilla de mari, scintilla de f^co; as a drop to the Ocean,
or the smallest sparkle to the heap of fire upon the Harth. What an unequal
proportion then must one Sermon needs hold with such a copious subject as this?
Ezechiel the Prophet drew forth a lively Portraiture Ezech. 4. 1.
of the Earthly Jerusalem within the small compass of a Tile. But this
Prophetic Swan of Jordan, this unfabled Muse of Syon, this Hebrew Siren, holy
David, a Musical Prophet, a Prophetical Musician, an inspired Songster, the
sweet singer of Israel, yea Isreal's sweetest Orpheus, has both sung the
Praises, and penned the Portraiture of the Heavenly Jerusalem within the
smaller compass of my Text.

For this Text is a very true Map of Heaven, though it be a very small one. It
is a very full description of that endless, that boundless Kingdom. A very
lively representation of that holy Land of Promise, that promised Land of true
holiness, whereof the Earthly Canaan was but an Adumbration. That great
favorite to the God of Israel, meek spirited Moses, the first Governor of all
the Israel of God, before his departure out of this life, which was before the
Host of Israel had marched through the Wilderness into the promised Land, was
vouchsafed Deuteronomy. 34. 1, 2, 3, 4.
a view of it from the top of Pisga; And that his view of Palestina at that
distance was to show unto us, that a spiritual Israelite may sometimes obtain
a Pisga sight, or Glimpse of Heaven before his entrance there, or that he has
quite passed through the Wilderness of this transitory World. Here therefore,
if the Worldly cares of this Earthly Kingdom of England, deemed by many to be
a second Palestina, have not wholly possessed your minds, and left no room for
any Contemplations of the Kingdom of Heaven, give me leave, for a little time
to remove this Earthly Kingdom from your Minds, by removing your Minds from
this Earthly Kingdom; And let me carry your souls to the Heaven of joys by
bringing the joys of Heaven to your souls. Surely there cannot be a more
pleasing way, nor a nearer to bring Men's souls to the fullness of joy in the
Presence of God, then to bring the fullness of joy in the Presence of God unto
Men's souls. If there be any Heaven to be enjoyed upon Earth, it is in the
Contemplations Speculatio veritatis est ipsa Felicitas. Aristot. l. 10. Ethic.
of the joys of Heaven. And they that open their Souls to let the Pleasures
of Heaven into them by meditating of them, What do they but open Heaven it
self to let in their souls unto those Pleasures? If there be any true
Pleasures to be expected in this life of sorrows they must needs be in the
constant Expectation of the fullness of joy in the Presence of God, and of the
Pleasure at his right Hand for evermore.

In thy Presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right Hand there is, etc.

In the Text, upon the first view of the words, we may discoverer two
Remarkables;

1 The Consummation of true felicity. 2 Continuation

In thy Presence is the fulness of joy, there is the Consummation of true
Felicity.

And a^ thy right Hand there is Pleasure for evermore, there is the Continuation
of that true Felicity to all Eternity.

First of the Consummation of true Felicity; And if we but review the words as
they do discover the same unto us, we may plainly see how true Felicity
ascends as it were by steps unto its Consummation.

The first step is joy.

The second fulness of joy.

The third the fulness of joy.

The fourth the fulness of joy in the Presence of God.

The fifth the Present, constant, and incessant Emanation of the fulness of
joy in the Presence of God from the Presence of God, In thy Presence is, etc.
there it is, not there it was, nor there it may be, nor there it will be, but
there it is, there it is without cessation, or intercision, there it always
has been, and is, and must be. It is an assertion ^tern^ veritatis, that is
always true, it may at any time be said that there it is. In thy presence is
the fulness of joy; And herein consists the Consummation of Felicity: For
what does any Man here present wish for more then joy? And what measure of joy
can any Man wish for more then fulness of joy? And what kind of fulness
would any Man wish for rather then thi^ fulness, the fulness (...)? And
where would any Man wish to enjoy this fulness of joy rather then in the
presence of God, which is the everflowing, and the overflowing Fountain of
joy? And when would any Man wish for this enjoyment of the fulness of joy in
the very Fountain of joy rather then presently, constantly, and incessantly?
Now all these desirables are incircled within the compass of the first
Remarkable to make up the Consummation of true Felicity. In thy Presence is the
fulness of joy.

The second Remarkable was the Continuation of true Felicity to all Eternity,
In these words, At thy right Hand there is pleasure for evermore; ^ And if we
bestow a serious Review upon these words, we may find these four
Considerables in them, which are as so many Retainers to true Felicity.

The first is Pleasure, which is indeed the second self of Heavens Happiness.
The second is a Variety of Pleasures, as it is in our last, and best
translation, Pleasures, in the Plural Number. Delectatio^^s, so St. Jerome,
Jocunditates, so Montanus, (...), so the Original; All Pluralls. And this
Plurality, or Variety of Pleasures must needs add much pleasure to every one of
all those Pleasures whereof there is Variety.

The third is the Height of all those several Pleasures; D^lectationes in
dextra tua, Pleasures at thy right Hand, i. e. Pleasures at the height, for
that is the (...), the apex, the very Commencement, or accomplishment of the
highest Degree of Pleasure.

The fourth is the Length of all those Pleasures at that height, for evermore.
Now what can be thought of to be added more? Can any Degree of Pleasure be
higher, then that at Gods right Hand? Or can any pleasures be more lasting then
those that are for everlasting, or lasting for evermore? What c^^ any Man wish
for more? Can any man desire any more then to enjoy as complete a fulness of
joy as it is possible for any to desire to enjoy, and to enjoy that fulness
of joy as long as it is possible for any Man to desire to enjoy it? Now this
Text asserteth, and ascertaineth all this to be in the Heavenly presence of
God, In thy Presence is the fulness, etc.

There is pleasure; so the former translation. There are pleasures; so the
latter. The latter is the better, but both are best together. We may observe
them both to speak that fully, which either of both speaks truly. Here on
Earth Men seem sometimes to take great pleasure in things, that neither are
true pleasures in themselves, nor have true pleasure in them; And they have
true pleasures sometimes offered to them, and they take no pleasure in them.
But in the presence of God there are true pleasures, and there is true pleasure
in them to the enjoyers of them. True pleasures in themselves they are, and so
shall be for evermore. And they are true pleasures also unto those that have
them, and unto them they shall for evermore be so. The longest Duration of them
shall not diminish their Delectation in them; pleasures at the height they are,
and shall be in themselves. And there shall be the Height of pleasure in them
to those that shall enjoy them for evermore (...) at thy right Hand, Phrasis
Metaphorica, It is a figurative expression; A phrase borrowed (as I suppose)
from that fashion amongst Men whereby they show their Respects unto those of
place and dignity; for by giving the right Hand is signified the giving of
Honor to them. But God is a Spirit, as our Savior tells us, John 4. 24. And
a Spirit has no such hands as Man has; A Spirit has neither a left hand, nor
yet a right. Here therefore the word must not be understood (...), after the
Manner of Men. Indeed it is spoken (...) as the Schools are wont to speak, ad
captum nostrum, to our humane apprehension. But it must be understood (...), in
a Diviner sense, as spoken of God. That caveat therefore with which S. John
concludes his first Epistle may here be very opportune, (...), little Children
beware, and beware of that here whereof he warnes you there, beware of Idols.

There were some Heretics of old, which were called Anthr^p^morphites, as
Theodoret stories it of them, because they Theodor. l. 4. cap. 10. Faber
Stapule^. in canon adversus Hareticos and H^reses.
ascribed an humane shape to God himself. And they did so think of God,
because the Scriptures do make frequent mentions of the Eyes, and Ears, of
the Face and Mouth, of the Heart and Bowels, of the Back parts, and Feet, of
the Arms and Hands of the Almighty. And when some ignorant People read, or
hear such Expressions in the Scriptures they may soon set up an Idol in
their Heads, or in their Hearts. A Man may sooner fancy an Idol then he can
fashion one. His head can work a great deal faster then his hands to make a
Representation of God. The Text ascribes an hand to God, and with a
distinction, a right hand; yet may we not think that God has an Humane
Shape, or Bodily Parts. Nullis S. August lib. de essentia Divinitat. See Rogers
upon the first of the 39. Ar^icles of Religion.
membrorum lineamentis compositus est, says S. Austine, He is without all
kinds of composition. He is neither Physically, nor yet Metaphysically
compounded. In Deo nihil est, quod non est Deus. There is nothing in God which
is not God himself, so the Schools. He is ens primum, the first Being; And
those are but figurative speeches says S. Austine, that ascribe either Parts
or Passions to God Almighty. And by the right hand of God in the Mystical
Dialect of the Holy Ghost diverse things are signified. Sometimes the Power of
God; and sometimes the excellent Works of God wrought by that power, so
Eucher. Intellig. spiritualis formul^.
Eucherius, and so S. Austine too. Again sometimes by the right Hand of God is
meant the incarnate Son of God, by whom he does whatsoever he pleases in
the World; and sometimes by the right Hand of God is meant that height of
Nominall and of Real Honor, which the incarnate Son of Vid. Barth.
Chassa^ae. Catalog. Glor. Mund. 3. par.
God, as he is (...) God-man, has received in his Fathers Presence; as also
that height of Glory, which the Adopted Sons of God shall all receive in the
same blessefull presence, so Dionysius Carthusianus, and Bruno, and so S.
Austine Ad locum.
and Nicholaus de Lyra, and diverse others; Sessio Christi ad dextram Dei, The
sitting of Christ at Gods right Hand, does Ad locum.
signify his eternal settlement in that height of Majesty, and Glory, and
Dominion which our Savior is invested with in Wendel. Divin. These. Perkins
upon the Creed. P. Ramus in Symb.
Heaven; So that holy David here speaks not only in nomine Domini, In the
Name of Christ our Lord; But in Persona Christi too, in the Person of Christ.
And does fore speak the fullest Measure of joy, and the highest Degree of
Pleasure that can be, In thy presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right
Hand there are pleasures for evermore.

And thus this Review of the Words has found out three Considerables, namely:

First, The Fountain of Felicity, the Presence of God; In thy Cum vultu tuo: S
Hieron. Cum faciebus tuis: Ari. Montan. In Deo est gloria, and ipse est gloria:
Chassanaeus in tertia part catalogi gloriae mundi.
Presence.

Secondly, The Felicity of the Fountain, the fulness of joy; In thy Presence
is the fulness of joy.

Thirdly, The Consistents of Felicity in that Fountain, which we may very
fitly call the Integralls, and Dimensions of it.

1 ^he Breadth of it. 2 Height 3 Length

First, the Breadth, in the Extensions of it both to Joy, and Pleasure: Yea, to
Joys and Pleasures, for both are Pluralls in the holy Language. (...)

Secondly, the Height of it, at Gods right Hand.

Thirdly, the Length of it, for evermore, In thy Presence is, etc.

It would require no less then Eternity it self fully to set forth the
fulness of joy in the Presence of God, according to these Acquiri quidem
potest, aestimari non potest. S. Zeged in. loc. Commun.
Dimensions of it. But alas! My time does shorten apace, and I fear your
Patience does so too; I shall therefore, as briefly as I can, lay open this
Fountain of Felicity unto you. And my way to do it shall be by moving and
removing these two Queries.

1. What Presence of God it is in which there is the fulness of joy?

2. What it is that causes the fulness of joy in that Presence of God?

There is a twofold Presence of God, a General Presence, and a Special
Presence.

First, there is a General Presence; The Eyes of the Lord are in every place;
beholding the evil, and the good, says the Wiseman, Prove. 15. 3. And the Lord
himself is in all places as well as his all-seeing Eyes; Whither shall I go
from thy Spirit? or Whither shall I flee from thy Prescence? says the
Psalmist. If I ascend up to Heaven, thou art there; If I make my Bed in Hell,
behold thou art there; If I take the wings of the Morning, and dwell in the
uttermost parts of the Sea, even there shall thine hand lead me, and thy right
Hand shall hold me, Psalm. 139. 7, 8, 9, 10. Cujus non est Deus? says S.
Augustine; Who may not call God his? And whom may not God call his? God indeed
has Being in himself, and of himself; Yea, he himself is Being it self;
so that all Being is from him Fontaliter, in him Formaliter, by him Causaliter,
to him Finaliter; for of him, and through him, and to him are all things, Romans
11. 36. Other things have all their Martin. Metaphys. Verum e^t dicere de
quavis creatura, quod quamdiu est, creatur a Deo. Durand Manutenentia divina
conservantur. Deus est ubique essentia, sed non suo tam singulari favore quo in
Judaea, sic etiam dicitur esse ubique, sed habitaro in sanctis. Pet. Baron in
Jonam Praelect. 7.
Beings by participation. And the Universal Presence of his uncreated Being
does continually create their Beings; for his conserving of them constantly, is
a creating of them continually. His being present at all times, in all places,
does give being to all men, and to all things; Do not I fill Heaven, and
Earth? says the Lord, Jerem. 23. 24. Both are filled with his Presence; But
not both alike. Nor is he alike in all the places of the Earth. He is present
with those that are in joyful Prosperity, and so he is with those in
sorrowful Adversity: But not alike with both, not so with these as he is with
those. His being present with both does give being unto both, but not true joy,
much less the fullness of joy. It must be his special Presence that must do
that, and that special Presence of his is twofold.

1. Gracious. 2. Glorious.
The Militant Saints enjoy the first;

The Saints Triumphant enjoy the second.

Those have the Presence of his Grace; and the Grace of his See Dr. Donnes 3.
Sermon on the Nativity, upon, Gal 4. 4.
Presence, filling them as full of joy as their estate Militant does render
them capable in this valley of Tears. But alas! their greatest measure of joy
here must needs fall short of the fullness of joy. But these have the Presence
of his Glory, and the glory of that Presence, glorifying of them to the
fulness of joy, and gracing of them with the Perfection of all Glory, and the
glory of all Perfection. The Inchoation of glory is here in the Kingdom of
grace; And the Consummation of grace is there in the Kingdom of glory. Grace
is the beginning of glory, and glory the perfection of grace. The joy of the
Saints begins with their glory, and the glory of the Saints is the fulness
of their joy. No joy without glory, and no glory without grace. The Temple of
Honor, and the Temple of Virtue ^ ivi. lib. 27. Plutarch. in vit. Marcelli.
V^ler. Max. l. 1. c. 1. Rosin. Antiquit. Roman l. 2. 18. Gloria virtutem
sequitur, ut corpus umbra. Beroaldus in Tusculan. Qu^st.
were so situated at Rome of old, that no man could enter the Temple of Honor
unless he passed through the Temple of Virtue, to signify unto the Romans
that the way to Honor was only by Virtue.

In like manner, the Kingdom of Grace, and the Kingdom of Glory are so
Ordered, that no Man can enter into the kingdom of glory, but first he must
pass through the kingdom of grace. By grace man comes to glory; And by glory
to the fulness of Joy. When the Lord of glory shall appear to us in Mat. 13.
43. Felix qui potuit boni fontem visere lucidum. Boethius de consolat.
Philosoph. lib. 3. Met. 12. Quanta erit selicitas? ubi nullum erit malum, null^
deerit bonum? S. August. l. 22. de Civit. Dei Equidem beatos existimo, qui ^int
in bonis nullo adjuncto malo, Cicero, l 5. Tusc. Quaest.
glory, and make us appear in glory to himself, and cause that glory of the
Lord to appear in us amongst the glorious Saints and Angels in Heaven, then,
(says S. Jerome) and not till then, shall we enjoy the fulness of Joy; It
is his glorious presence only that affords the fullness of joy; And this
fulness of joy consists in two things.

1. In the Absence of all detestable things. 2. In the Presence of all
delectable things.
In a perfect freedom from all evil things; And in a perfect freedom in all
good things.

First, a perfect freedom from all evil things. Now evil things are of two
sorts.

1. Sinful. 2. Sorrowful.
Mala turpia, and Mala tristia; as the Moralists call them, or Mala culpae, and
Mala paenae, as the School Divines and others. Evils of Sin: And evils of
suffering for sin. These evils are both amongst Men on Earth, but both are
excluded from amongst the Saints in Heaven, there is neither wickedness, nor
yet wretchedness amongst them. Those that enjoy the glorious presence of God
can neither meet with wickedness, nor be met with by any wretchedness; They
can neither find the evil of sin, nor can they be found by the evil of
sufferings; But shall be for ever freed from both.

First, they shall for ever be free from sin; free from the condemning power,
and free from the commanding power of it; free from all guilt of sin, and
free from every Act of sin. There is a freedom in the glorious presence of
God both a peccato regnante, from sin reigning, and a peccato habitante too,
from sin dwelling. In this present World sin reigns over the worst, and
remains in the best: But in Heaven there is neither any dominion of sin,
nor dwelling for sin. There is an absolute Immunity from all sin, and from
all occasions of it, and temptations to it.

And as there is a freedom from all sin; so from all suffering for sin;
All Tears are there wiped quite away from all Revel. 7. 17. 21. 4.
eyes. They that enjoy the glorious presence of God shall weep no more,
unless it be for joy, that they shall weep no more for grief. All cause of
grief is far removed from Non est ibi mors, non est ibi luctus, non est ibi
lassitudo, non est infirmitas, non est sames, milla sitis, nullus aestus, nulla
corruption, nulla indigentia, u^lla maestitia, nulla tristitia. A^gust lib. 3.
de Symbol.
that presence. They that enjoy it enjoy with it an absolute enfranchisment
from all incombrances, and inconveniences. They are free from want; And free
from War. And free from death; And free from Devils.

They are free from want; They can want nothing there, unless it be want it
self. They may find the want of evil, but never feel the evil of want.
Evil is but the want of good, and the want of evil is but the absence of
want. God is good, and no want of good can be in God. What want then can be
endured in that presence of God, where no evil is, but all good that the
fulness of joy may be enjoyed? Here some Men eat their meat without any
hunger, whilst others hunger without any meat to eat; And some Men drink
extremely without any thirst, whilst others thirst extremely without any
drink: But in the glorious presence of God not any one can be pampered with
too much, nor any one be pined with too little. They that gather much of the
Heavenly Manna have nothing ^ver: And they that gather little have no lack.
They that are once possessed of that presence of God are so possessed with it,
that they can never feel the misery of thirst or hunger. And as they are free
from want, so are they free from wars, with all the mischieves that are
concomitant, and all the miseries that are consequent. The Kingdom of glory
can never be turned into an Aceldama; The field of Blood, Mat. 27. 8. John 6.
70, 71. Mat. 26. 15. Mat. 26. 3, 4. 27. 1. Numb. 16. 1, 2, 3.
No foreign enemy can invade it; Nor home bred enemy infest the happiness of
it; No bedevilled Judas can come there to betray his Lord and Master, the King
of Kings, for half a Crown. Nor can any Jewish Elders assemble there to
condemn him, or conspire against him. Moses and Aaron shall never be
confronted there by any gainsaying Corahs, or mutinous Abirams, or complying
Dathans, or any of their confederates; and good King David shall there be free
from the 2 Samuel 15. 2, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12. 16. 5, 6, 7, 23.
pride of all ambitious Absolons, from the presumption of all seditious Shebas,
and from the wicked counsels of all contriving Achitophels. No cursing
Shimeis, Nor railing Rabshakehs shall come there to belch infectious gorges
forth, to poison the Hearts of any subjects in that Kingdom of glory, to
confound the glory of that Kingdom into an Anarchie. No Polupragmaticall
Machiavelians, Nor crafty Boute-fewes, shall interrupt that Kingdoms endless
peace. No bold Seianus can insinuate into that glorious Presence to corrupt it.
No malecontented Cataline can lurk there, either to traduce the glorious
Majesty of the King of Kings, or to seduce inferior Officers. Nor is there any
Warlike Ammunition Magazined there.

No Civil Warrings can destroy that glorious Kingdom, nor can any factious
jarrings deface that glorious Church. No Newfangled Athenians, nor
Schismatic Corinthians can disturb the unity, or destroy the uniformity of
that Church. No over-mastering Pope, nor under-mining Jesuit; No
New-Church-making Familist, nor No-Church-making Atheist, can gain such
favor, or get such footing there, as to eject the settled Saints, and work the
ruin of all that Church. No ravenous Wolves in Sheep clothing can creep by
any Posternes gates into that fold to flea or fleece the flock, and mistake
feeding on them, for feeding of them. That ancient Hierarchy of Arch. Angels,
and Angels, and other Ministering spirits can never be deemed so superstitious
as to demerit an utter Extirpation. The Militant Church may be infested with
some of these destructive Pests at all times, and with all of them at some
times; But the Church Triumphant is at all times freed from all these. Nothing
that works any abomination can come there, and therefore every thing that
tends toward the grand Abomination of Desolation must needs be for ever
exiled thence. The glory of all there must last for ever; And all in that glory
must live for ever. Being free from sin, they shall be free from Death; from
Death spiritual in it, from Death temporal by it, and from Death eternal for
it. That presence of the Ever-living God does set them free from all for ever.

Here we begin to die so soon as we begin to live; All here are borne to
die, and many are but borne, and die.

Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origin pendet; Being born we die, as says
Manilius, and the last of our days does pend upon the first. Our Death does
hang about us from our Birth. We all are bound toward the Womb of ourgreat
grandmother the Earth, so soon as we be loosed from our Mothers Womb. He
that is borne to day is borne to die, and is not sure to live an other day: But
in the glorious presence of God, there is no dying, they that are there are
sure to live for ever, free from the sting of Death, and from the stroke; free
from all tendencies unto Death, and from all fears of dying. When the Natural
Body of a Saint comes there, it does become a spiritual Body; It is there
spiritualized in the manner of subsistence, though not in the Nature of the
substance. It is still a Body, though it be spiritual, and it is said to be
spiritual, says S. Augustine, because it there lives the life of a spirit.

For first, like a spirit, there it lives without any hunger, without any
thirst, without feeling pinching cold, or parching heat. It needs no meat, it
needs no drink, it needs no summers stuff, nor winters cloth.

Again, it lives like a spirit there, free from sickness, free from Aches,
free from all sorts of Diseases; It cannot be distempered into a Fever, nor
dissolved into a Flux, nor corrupted into Ulcers.

Again, like a spirit it lives there without decaying by living long. No time
can dim the Eyes, or dull the Ears, or lame the Legs, or feeble the Hands,
or cripple the Feet, or crook the Back, or furrow the Face, or disfigure the
feature. Though it lives Mathusalems age a thousand times over, yet it never
grows crazie, or decrepit, or Shrinkes into a Skeleton.

And lastly, like a spirit, it is immortal, Death can have no more Dominion
over it. This life it but the shadow of that; (...). Suig^i. (...) in Psalm.
This is but a dying Life, a kind of living Death, but that is vera non
interitura vita; A Life indeed never to end in Death, as Victorinus Strigelius
very truly.

Now tell me, who would not gladly live in such a privileged place, where that
boldest Sargeant, Death, cannot come to arest? such is the Sanctuary of Gods
glorious Presence. A Liberty indeed, free from all kinds of Death, and free
from unkind Devils too; from Devils infernal, and Devils incarnate ^ullus
ibi Diaboli metus, nullae in^idi^ daemonum, Terror gebennae procul. Mors neque
corporis neque animae sed immortalitatis munere uterque solutus, S. Chrysostom.
de reparatione lapsi.
too.

No evil Angels can ascend from the bottomless pit into that presence to
tempt any there to sin. Nor hellish furyes to torment for sinning in times
past. No Devil of the lower Hell, nor any of this wicked World above it, can
find any entrance thither. There is indeed free quarter for Saints, but none
for Sinners; The free Men of that City, and all the Denizons of that Kingdom,
are always freed from all unwellcome troublesome intruders. The spirit of
Debate and Strife can never thrust the Devils mysterious cloven foot into
that presence, to set Divisions, to cause distractions, to bring Seditionum
popularium author est Diabolus, Vedelius de pruden. veter. Ecc. lib. 1. c. 2.
destruction. No carnal pride can ever beget fond fashionists in the streets
of that most holy City; Nor spiritual Pride breed up fantastical factionists
in the Houses. No hiddeous Blasphemies, nor filthy obscenities, nor thumping
Oaths, nor hellish cursings, nor peevish censurings, are used by any in that
presence; All profane, and black-mouthed Monsters of Men are exiled for ever
from that Society of Saints; And so are all insinuating Sycophants, and false
hearted Pharisees. The Devil is never more mischievous, then when he is most
cunningly transformed into an Angel of Light. There is 2 Cor. 11. 14.
none to the white Devil for malignant Devillismes. The Honor of the Gospel
has ever been more impeached by sinful Professors then by professed
sinners. And therefore he who is (...), the Searcher of Hearts, will never
suffer Revel. 2. 2^.
any to come into his presence, that practice impiety under the pretense of
Piety. That grand Devillisme of Hypocrisy can never deceive the All-seeing
Eyes of God Omniscient; No malignant designs can there be advanced by the
seems of Religion. There are none but those that are truly religious. Glory
of the Times. page 207.
None but such as are, as Ephrem Syrus desired to be, That are indeed, as they
are in seem, and are in seem even as they should. It is one degree of
Happiness for a Man to be himself even as he should be; But an other, a
greater, to be with none but such as he is himself. How happy then are they
that can converse with none but those that are truly good? And are truly good
like those they converse with? Who then can choose but wish the enjoyment of
that Presence of God, where none but such have entertainment? Who would not be
there for ever, were there no greater good to be found then this, that no kind
of evil can there be found? No evil company; No evil by company; No company
of evil; No Devils, nor bedevilled Men; No tempters, No tormentours, nor any
other infernalls; No Devils incarnate either white or black; No kind of
Death, either temporal, or eternal; No kind of Wars, No kind of woes, No
kind of sufferings, No kind of Sin. Happy surely are the people that be in
such case.

Yet let me tell you, that it is not the absence of evil alone that can make
a Man truly and fully happy; It may cause some joy, but not the fullness of
joy till the affluence of all good things be enjoyed with it. Now in the
glorious Presence of God, there is not only the absence of all evil, but the
presence of all good; A perfect freedom from all evil.

There is abundantia cumulatissima, says Master Calvin, A In locum.
full abundance, or an abundant fullness of all delectables. Omne genus
jucunditatis, omne laetitiarum genus, says he, there are all kinds of joys,
all sorts of Pleasures. There are profitable pleasures, and pleasurable
profits. Things inconsistent here are all coincident there. Those Gifts that
go not here together, are all united there. Those comforts which are divided
here in several Streams, do meet all there as in their fountain, or rather
in the Ocean. No one here may ever look to enjoy all good things; but all
there do ever so.

There are the precious Merchandies of all Cities: for that is the City of all
precious Merchandies. There are the true delights of all Countries: for that is
the true Country of all delights. There are all the real Honors of the Court,
that can never be lost; And that is the right Court of Honor, that can never be
put down. There are all the true pleasures of Paradise: for that is the true
Paradise of all pleasures. What does any of your souls take most delight in?
What do you most of all desire? There may you have it in the fullest measure,
and there enjoy it in the finest manner.

Do you desire, or delight in Gold? Or precious Stones? Or costly Gemms? or
stately Palaces? There Is a City of pure Divitiae si diliguntur, ibi serventur,
ubi perire non possunt. Honor si diligi tur, illic habcatur, ubi nemo i dignus
honoretur, etc. S. August. Sup. Johan.
Gold, clear as Crystal, walled, and gated, and garnished with Jaspers, and
Saphirs, and all sots of Pearls, and precious Stones, as S. John describes it,
Revel. 21. 18, 19.

Or do you delight in glorious Triumphs, and pompous shows? There are
Triumphs Everlasting. And the Glory of all Nations shall flow into that City in
triumphant manner, as says Saint John, Revel. 21. 26. Or do you delight (as
Massinissa did, and Dioclesian too) in curious Gardens? In fruitful Orchards?
In healthful walks? In pleasant fountains? There is the Celestial Paradise,
wherein a Man, had he an hundred times as many Eyes as Argus, might employ them
all at once with various Curiosities, transcendent rarities. All those admired
Gardens of Adonis, and Alcinous, of Po, and Tantalus, and the Hesperides, could
never boast (no not in any fiction of the Poets) of such a living fountain as
that which flows in the middle of this Garden of Heaven, and affords the
water of life. Nor yet of such a Tree, as that of life, which bears twelve
kinds of fruit, and brings forth every month, as S. John writes of it Revel.
22. 1, 2.

Or do you delight in, and desire Peace? There can you never want it. That new
Jerusalem is the true Jerusalem, the blessefull vision of Peace. A City at
Peace, and Unity in it self. There endless Triumphs of Peace are solemnized
by all the Citizens. That Is the place of peace. There Is the Prince of peace,
the Author of peace, the maker, the Creator of it. There Is the full enjoyment
of that mother-Blessing and all other blessings with it. The true God of peace
is there, and the true peace of God which passes all understanding.

And do you desire Truth with Peace. There are both together. The God of Peace
is the God of Truth; And the truth of God is there revealed fully: The true
worship of the most holy God is there established, and the true God is
worshipped there in the beauty of holiness.

Or do you delight in the melody of consort Music? There are soule-ravishing
Anthems chanted, and warbled by the sweetest of all the Heavenly Quire in that
mother Church, that Glorious Temple Christ's Church Triumphant. There are
Choreall Doxologies Ecchoed forth by all sorts of Celestial Songsters in
Harmonious Diapasons. Hosanna in the highest is here the highest strain that
we can reach in any of the songs of Syon: But in that Glorious presence of God,
every saint can rere his Halelujah above our Ela without hoarsing of his voice.

Or do you delight in Ease and rest from wearisome labors? Hoc accepimus ab
antiquis, Beatitudinis quictom sociam essc. Jul. Caesar Scal. de subtilit.
exercit. 358.
There the true Christian Sabbath is kept holy; Whereof our Sunday Sabbath is
but an Adumbration, or preparatory Evc. Jerusalem below has six Days for
working for one sabbath Day for rest: But Jerusalem above is free to sanctify
an endless sabbath from all sin, and from all servile labor.

Or do you delight in mirthfull feasts and palate-pleasing Banquets? There the
Marriage supper of the Lamb is celebrat with wine of gladness. It was no
small favor, which our Gracious Savior once vouchsafed to the Twelve, when as
he sent both Peter and John to make ready the guest-Chamber Luke 22. 8, 11.
(which was an upper room in the holy City) that he might eat his last supper
with them all: But it is a far greater favor which he showed to them all
with many others, in going himself in person to prepare a place, an upper
room in the holy City of John 14. 2, 3.
Heaven for them. A Guest Chamber furnished well indeed, where they and we may
Eat our last and everlasting supper with him. A supper it may right well be
call indeed; for after that we shall need no following Meal, but may lay us
down in peace, and take our rest for ever, and for ever.

Or do you delight in the presence of great personages? There is the Mighty,
and Allmighty Monarch of Heaven and Earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; And there is his Second self, his only begotten son, the son of
his love, in whom he is well pleased, his Right Hand favorite, his Christ,
our Lord and Jesus in the hight of his Honor, invested with power to unlock
the Eschequer of his fathers richest favors with the key of his Eternal
merits; and to deal them forth at his own good pleasurer amongst his
servants, and such as have been followers of his Grace.

It was a great Honor, which that Lord of all men paramount did freely bestow
upon S. Paul in creating of him Doctor of the Gentiles, and in appointing of
him to be as his Attorney General to follow his business for him; and to
defend the right of his Cause in all the Courts of the Gentiles, even to the
utmost parts of the Earth: Yet this Great Deputy, this Chieftaine of Trustees,
accounted all the Honor of his Trust, but a cipher, or a shadow in comparing
it with that of the Saints in the presence of God. When he had once but seen
the glory of his Master Christ at the right hand of God, and the felicity of
his fellow Servants in that Glorious presence, he sighed out the residue of his
days with panting desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; deeming it
to be best of all, to be with him who is all in all, for Christ is the
Salvation of all Souls there, and the very soul of all their Salvations. The
Happiness of all their lives, and the very life of all their Happiness. The
Crown of all their Glory, and the Glory of all their Crowns. Their
Everything, their All in all. And what can men wish for more then all? Can
there be any desirable above this All in all? And if to all this, to this all,
this All in all, you wish for Courteous fellow servants in your following
Intuere coetum non solum ex hominibus, sed ex Angelis, atque Arch-Angelis,
Thronis, and Dominationibus, principibus, ac potestatibus convocatum. De Rege
a^tem qui borum medius residet dicere vox nulla sufficient. Effuget omnem
Sermonem, atque omnem sensum humanae mentis excedit decus illud, illa
pulchritudo, illa virtus, illa gloria, illa magnisicentia. S. Chrysoft. de
repara lapsi.
of that Court, you may be sure to have your wishes; for there are none but
such, none that are not truly courteous. There are none so ill as the best of
us. There are no meaner fellow-waiters then Cherubs, and Seraphs, then
Principalities, and Powers, then Arch Angels, and Angels, and the spirits of
just men made perfect.

But do we all intend that Court indeed? Do we seek for places of
preferment there? Then let us learn and understand the fashions of that Court,
let us observe the Manners and Demeaners of all sorts of Courtiers there,
before we presume to thrust into that Presence Chamber, lest we be thrust
back, when we presume to enter, for want of Courtship, and good manners.

There every one loves all very truly, and all as truly every one. They know
one an other perfectly, and therefore love one an other so; For quanto notiores
tanto cariores, says S. Augustine; By how much the clearer light they have
into each others breasts, by so much the dearer love they have unto each other
in their own. When the Lady Italica veiled her saddest self in Cypress for
the loss of her second self, S. S. Aug. Epist. 6
Augustine told her in Consolatory Letters to her, that she should enjoy the
sight of him again in the fulness of joy, and then should love him better
then she did, or could do here, because she should know him better.

Here Men's heads are not filled with certainties, and therefore Cum ^nim ad
illam lucem Patris luminum veniemus, nihil in creaturis erit quod nesciamus.
Erit and perfecta invicem agnitio. Zegedin. de aeterna beatitud.
their Hearts are often filled with Jelousies; And Jelousies are wont to
nullify Affections, and multiply Dissentions: But in the Court and Kingdom of
Heaven, there is not any one, but has a certainty of every ones sincerity; and
therefore no affections there are lessened by suspicions. There every one does
unfeignedly love every one, for that he does infallibly know himself to be
unfeignedly beloved of every one. There are no false Hearts, no false Faces, no
dissemblers in that Court or Kingdom. They are all real there in all their
tendryes of Courtesies. O the happiness of all in that society! Which of us
would not willingly be there, amongst so many thousands that would sincerely
love us, and should be as sincerely beloved of us? Not one can there be found
to hate us, or to be hated by us.

The Favorites in that Court are never divided into factions; Nor are there any
factious Subjects in that whole Kingdom. There are no Envyings, no Emulations,
they that are best beloved by the King of Glory, are beloved best by all the
Court, and all the Kingdom too. The greater love and favor that any one
receives from that King, the greater is the outward joy, and inward gladness
of all the fellow Courtiers, and Fellow Subjects. The Joy and Happiness of any
one in that presence is a Joy and Happiness to every one. There every one does
cordially rejoice with every one that does rejoice; And that with so much the
greater joy, by how much the greater cause any other has for to rejoice. How
exceeding great then must the rejoicing be of each Saint triumphant, when as
the number of triumphing Saints is so exceedingly great, and the joy of any one
does add unto the joy of every one? They all there love themselves as they
ought to do, And they love each other as themselves; And therefore do they
all triumph at an others honor as at their own. They bear true loyalty to
the Giver of Honors there, and they bear true Charity to all Receivers; And
therefore do they mutually congratulate one an other in their Honors, without
any secret repining, or any close combining to undo, or undermine any special
Favorite.

When but one penitent Sinner enters the External Court of Heaven, the Church
Militant, the glorious Saints and Angels do rejoice in Heaven for it; There is
joy in Heaven, says our Savior, ever one sinner that repents, Luke 15. 7.
What joy then is there in Heaven think ye, when that penitent with thousands
more come all into the inward Court of Heaven, the Church triumphant, where
they shall be past all fears of Iulianizing or back sliding? We read indeed
of an Host of Angels, that sung a Christmas Caroll from the windows of
Heaven, when Christ was borne into the World, to restore mankind unto Gods
love, and favor; But who ever heard so much as one good Angel, or heard of
any one that rejoiced at the fall of any Man, or any Angel? they all are far
from seeking to dishonor or disgrace any Favorite in that Court, or any fellow
Subject in that Kingdom. But ready they are to rejoice when any exiles are
recalled home, or any Aliens received into Grace and Favor.

There are none that are not willing to let that Ocean of Honor and Glory flow
which way it pleases, and how far it pleases; There are none that seek to
obstruct any streams of Honor derived from that Fountain. Not one that
desires to lessen the greater Channells, because that more is streamed into
them, then into smaller Rivulets. Nor are there any Patentees of Favors in
that Presence; None that would monopolize the whole Felicity of that Glorious
Presence to themselves. There is no Haman there, not one S^janus. There are no
Courtiers that are puffed up with Pride, for those Honors that are conferred
on them already by the King of Glory; Nor any that ambitiously desire to climb
higher then they are. Nulla honoris, aut potestatis ambitio pulsat, says Saint
Austine. No aspiring minds are there, to progue for higher places of Command
and Honor then they have. Every Courtier there is a consort free for any,
hateful to none, hurtful to as few, but helpefull unto all. The lowest there
is not despised by the highest; Nor the highest spited by the lowest. The
highest Ambition there is, who shall be most lowly of all; And the greatest
Emulation is, who shall be most lowly of all; And the greatest Emulation is,
who shall be most loving unto all. They never grow weary of one another
Company. They sue not there for Writ^ of Election. Nor do they there petition
for any new Elections. They arrest not one another there for Actions of the
Case, or Trespass. There are no Quarrels, no Distractions through hateful
Scramblings about meum, and tuum, for the Titular Proprieties of mine, and
thine, or I know not whose, till all Propriety be lost. All things there are
done with liking unto all, they have all one will, all one mind, all one
desire, one delight; Their love is one, they live as one. And what is the Cause
of all this love, the Cause of all this joy in the presence of God? It is
nothing else but the presence of God. He that is one in himself and amongst
them all, does make them all to be as one in him and amongst themselves. The
true love of God in them all does make them all to be as one in that true God
of love.

Great joy there is in the sweet society of the Saints in Gods glorious
presence, by reason of that sweet society in his presence. But the fullness of
joy amongst them in that presence is that presence amongst them. Heaven were no
Heaven were not his Glorious presence there; And Hell were not Hell were but
his Glory present there. This Vallie of Tears may be a Paradise, or as a third
Heaven to S. Paul, if God vouchsafes a Revelation 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4.
of his glorious presence to him here.

Gods glorious presence makes Heaven. It gives Happiness. Happy are all
they, yea thrice happy, and for ever happy, that enjoy it. They that are
without God, or out of him, can never be in the fullness of joy, nor have the
fullness of joy in themselves. They must be in him, and he in them, before they
can be full of joy. But when he, in whom all fullness dwells, does dwell in
them, and they with him, when they are full of him, who is both joy it self,
and fullness it self, then do they enjoy the fullness of joy, and not till
then. O blessefull sight! it is the beatificall vision, videre deum in seipso,
videre in nobis, and nos in co, faelici jucunditate, jucunda faelicitate, says
S. Bernard. S. Bern. Meditat. cap. 4. Hug. Card. In loc. Ipse est finis omnium
d^sideriorum, qui sine fine videbitur, fine fatigatione laudabitur. S. Aug. de
Civitate Dei. l. 22. Infinitatemunu^quodque ens appetit. Jul. Caes. Scal. de
subtle.
When we shall see God in himself, and see him in our selves, and our selves
in him, then shall we be filled with blissful joy, and joyful bliss, fully
happy.

The fulness of joy consists in impletione desideriorum, says Hugo
Cardinalis, in the fullfilling the desires of the Soul. And there is nothing
that can fill them full but God himself. Good is the object of all desires;
And infinite are the desires of all Souls, so that nothing can fit any Souls
desires but that which is good, nor any thing fill the desires of any Soul,
but that which is infinite. And therefore nothing can cause true joy in the
soul, or cause the joy of the soul to be full, but the infinite goodness of
Gods glorious presence. There is nothing good indeed but God, nor any goodness
infinite In loc.
but his. And his is so, he is bonum infinitum, summum bonum, says Nichol. de
Lyra. The Chiefest Good, infinitely good. They In loc.
that are filled with the goodness of his presence seek no further for
felicity, Nihil amplius est quod desiderari queat, says Jacobus Perez de
Valentia; There is nothing more to be desired. In him they have all that can be
desired. Till all our souls enjoy that infinite goodness of Gods glorious
presence, which is all in all, or all in every one, and yet but one in all,
they will always be coveting those good things which others have, and they
have not, rather then Contenting of themselves with those good things they
have, and others have not. But when they shall enjoy that blissful presence,
they shall not wish for any thing else. That presence is to every soul that
does enjoy it, what ever good it does desire to Erit omne bonum and non erit
aliquod malum: erit quicquid voles, non erit quicquid-noles. S. August Soliloqu.
enjoy. It is the fulness and perfection of all good Every soul shall be
best contented with that very good it draws from that presence, because that
presence affords to every soul that very good wherewith it shall be best
contented.

Every Soul shall there enjoy an infinite Happiness, because it shall enjoy
an infinite Goodness. And it shall be for ever enjoyed, without disliking of
it, or losing of it, or lacking any of it. Every soul shall enjoy as much good
Quicquid enim amabile aderit, nec desiderabitur quod non aderit. S. Zegedin.
loc. Commun. In caelesti beatitudine veraciter sine sine gaudium est, sine
aliquo taedio manens aeternitas, and inspectio sola divinitatis efficia ut
beatius nil esse possit. Cassio. epist. lib. 2.
in that presence, by the presence of that good, as it shall be able to receive
or to desire to receive. As much as shall make it fully happy. Every one shall
be filled so proportionably full; And every desire in any soul shall be
fullfilled so perfectly in that presence of glory, with the glory of that
presence, that no one shall ever wish for any more, or ever be weary of that it
has, or be willing to change it for any other.

Indeed the fulness of any evil is an evil fulness, for it ever causes
weariness, and brings wishings of exchanges: But the fulness of joy in the
presence of God, does never create any weariness, nor any beginnings of
discontentednesse.

There is a fulness unto loathing, And there is a fulness unto liking. A
fulness that causes dislike; And a fulness that causes delight. The
lustful desires of any sinners are quickly satiate unto nothing. But the
longing desires of every saint in the presence of God are for ever satisfied
unto liking, and delight. All the desires of the Saints, and Angels, in the
presence of God, are satisfied by their enjoying of his presence, yet are they
never satisfied with the enjoying of his presence, as Dionysius Carthusianus
very wittily. They are always satisfied Dionys. Carthu. de quat. hom. Nov.
Art. 65. Quid enim aliud est Dei Opt. Max. cognitio, atque amor ex ea, quam
inexplebilis appetitus ad haer^ndi illius infinitati. Jul. Caes. Scalig. de
subtle.
with it according to their own desires, and always have desires to be
satisfied with it as they are: They ever enjoy it, without any loathing of it,
and they desire ever to enjoy it, without any languishing of it. Indeed they
can never be wearyed with having of it; but you by this time may with hearing
of it. It is better by far to have it, then hear of it. This discourse about
the fullness of joy in the presence of God, and the pleasures of his right hand
for evermore, may not be like them here, it may not be for evermore. The Course
of all those pleasures may not, cannot be cut off; but this discourse about
them may, and must. Yet here lest all this long contexture should unravell at
this end by being thus cut off; I cannot but presume to turn it in, and make
an hem, or overcast it at the least, that you may make some further uses of it.

And in the first place, because there is the fullness of joy in the presence
of God, and pleasure at his right hand for evermore; therefore let us deem it
rightly as it is, a mere madness in any man to dote upon these empty Shadows
of Earthly joys, and these vanishing Seems of worldly pleasure which are but
for the present. None but the meerest Natural lack-wits will prefer a
worthless pebble to a matchless Pearl. And surely they can be no other but
mere Naturalls which postpone the fullness or joy in the glorious presence of
God, and the pleasures at his right hand for evermore unto the joys and
pleasures of this present world.

He that swops away Heaven for Earth makes a worse bargain for himself, then
Glancus made with Diomedes when he exchanged.

(...), As the Prince of poets Homer. Iliad
writes it, Golden weapons for weapons of brass; Arms worth an hundred Oxen
fit for Sacrifices, for Arms not worth more then nine. What are the Joys, and
pleasures of his present world, unto the fullness of joy in the presence of
God, and the pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore? Alas they are all as
nothing. How firm and fair so ever they are in seem, yet indeed they are but
like the Joseph. de Bell. Judaic. lib. 5.
Apples (which Josephus writes of) near unto the lake Asphaltites, which perish
if they be but touched.

I have seen a witty fancy portraied on a Table, where Justice was Seated
holding a pair of Scales to weigh the Religions of the Protestants, and of the
Papists one against the other. The Protestants put nothing but verbum dei
scriptum, the written word of God into the Scale; But the Papists add, and
heap their Trentalls and all their Decretalls, the Papal Chair, and the
Triple Crown, their Beads and all their Bead-rolls of Tradition, Their
Holy-waterpots, and all their Magazines of holy relics, with all their
Trinckets, Trash, and Trumperie into their Scale, and under neath their scale
that grande Impostour, the Devil, is portraied hanging, and adding all the
weight he can unto that fide, yet all will not do, all cannot counterpoise the
weight and worth of the written word of God alone. And should we take the
Balance of the Sanctuary, and put the joys and pleasures of this present World
into one Scale, and the joys of Heaven or the fullness of joy in the presence
of God, and the pleasures at his right hand for evermore, into the other, and
weigh them one against the other, we should find all worldly joys and
pleasures to be but as the dust Isaiah 40. 15. Psalm. 62. 9.
of the Balance, yea, lighter then vanity it self.

Solomon was as wise as any Man of this World, yet could 1 Kings 4. 29. 30.
Eccles. 2.
he never find out any real joys, or pleasures in this World. Only by his
wisdom he could find, that there are none here to be found; let not us be
so unwise then, as to seek them here, where Solomon himself could never find
them. He could not find them under the sun, let us then seek above it S.
Chrysostom. Hom. 151
for them. (...), says S. Chrysostom, (...), let us not let our thoughts fall
downwards to the Earth, but fly to Heaven upwards. Let us seek those things
Colos. 3. 1.
which are above. Let us seek the fullness of joy in the presence of God, and
the pleasures at his right hand for evermore.

And in the second place, because there is the fullness of joy in the presence
of God, and pleasure, etc. Therefore let us seriously consider, what they lose,
that are excluded, and exiled from that glorious presence of God for ever. Alas
for them! their loss is beyond expression and beyond imagination. No mortal
man can either fathom the depth, or measure the greatness of their miseries,
that are for ever deprived of that felicity. The miseries of this world are a
world of miseries, yet are they all as nothing to the miseries of hell; for
hell is nothing else but miseries; And the miseries of hell are either in poena
damni, or in poena sensus, In the punishment of Loss, or in the punishment of
Sense, or rather in both; The loss of all pleasures, and the sense of all
pains together do meet in hell, and make it to be hell; And the least part of
that punishment that is in hell is very great, but the other grievous beyond
comparison. The last is thought the least; The punishment of Sense is less
then that of Loss. Denominatio sumitur a principaliori, The chiefest Godfather
does use to name the child, and the principal part of the punishment does name
the whole. It is not called Sensation from poena sensus, but Damnation from
poena damni; to intimate unto us, that the loss of all the happiness in
heaven is a greater unhappiness, then all the wretchedness besides. There may
be many now in Hell enduring exquisite tortures, that would gladly have them
doubled for ten thousand years, upon condition, then to enjoy the fullness of
joy in the presence of God, and the refreshing pleasures at his right hand for
evermore. But alas ^ It must not be. When once the righteous Judge has said,
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, that their accursed Psalm. 7.
12. Math. 25. 41.
departure must be for ever, as well as their extremest tortures in that fire.
Men must beware before then, and that we may take heed in time, let us take it
into our saddest thoughts, or rather let us think it far above all humane
apprehension, rightly to think what it is to lose the fullness of joy in the
presence of God, and the pleasures at his right hand for evermore.

And in the third place, because there is the fullness of joy in the presence
of God, and pleasures at his right hand for evermore, therefore let us use our
best endeavors, that we may get into that presence. Summo labor summum bonum
assequi necesse est, says Lactan Institut. Divin. lib. 3. Maximum ens est
maximu^ bonum. Pau. Ferrius in Scholas. Orthodoxi specimine. c. 3. Cum forma
Dei sit sua bonitas, r^linquitur ut cum Deus v^lt omnia propter se, vel ut
quando agit propter se, ideo agat ut res bonitati suae assimulentur. Idem Ibid.
Nostros migrantes non amisimus, sed praemisimus. S. August. Epist. ad Italicam.
Lactantius. The greatest pains must be employed to obtain the greatest
pleasure. Let us place our Summu^ bonu^ where of right we should, let us place
our happiness in that presence, and let all our aims, all our desires, all
our endeavors be to enter into it. Let the enjoyment of that presence be the
ultimate end of all our wishes, and let us all be willing to purchase it at any
rate. The price of it is, what the good man is, not what the great man has. God
asks not goods, but goodness for it. He that has so much of godliness or
goodness in him as to give himself to God for it, shall not for ever go
without it. Let us bestow our selves and service upon the God of Heaven, that
he may bestow the happiness of Heaven upon us.

And in the fourth place, because there is the fullness of joy in the presence
of God, and pleasure at his right hand for evermore, therefore let us never be
cast down with Heaviness, when any of our dearest friends are lifted up with
joy at that happiness, why should their fullness of joy fill us with grief?
If ye loved me, ye would rejoice because I said, I go unto the Father, said
our Savior Christ to his Disciples, John 14. 28. as much as to say, that the
felicity of a friend should make us to be merry, rather then to mourn.

And in the fifth place, because there is the fullness of joy, etc. Nam cum te
aeque ac me diligam necesse, est ut summum bonu^ assequi, te tanquam me
alalterum cupian. Bucherius in Epist. Paraeneric. ad Valerian cognatu^ suum. 1
Kings 19. 4.
Let us never be unwilling to lay down this life of Sorrows our selves for
the taking up of that of joys. It is no great Happiness to live long here,
nor great unhappiness to depart ere long from hence. Only they are happy in
some measure here, that have lived long enough to die so well, that they may
live in happiness for ever after death. This present life is no such desirable
thing, but any man may find sufficient cause to make him willing with Elias to
have it taken from him. When the Patriarch Jacob had lived here as long, and
full as well as any here, and it may be longer then most, and better then any,
he cast up his account by the help of his best Arithmetic, and found that the
total sum would amount to no more then the short Bill of a few evil Days.
Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been said he to Pharaoh,
Genesis 47. 9. And which of all us here might not give in the same Reckoning if we
would but audit our lives? The Summa Totalis of Jacobs life was very small, so
small indeed, that he thought it meetest to multiply the same by days. The
Inches of Days are the fittest measures for the Hand-breadth of humane life.
The length of Psalm. 39. 5.
humane life is but one span, and every day does shorten that little length at
least an Inch. Jacobs life was but of Days, and the Days of Jacobs life were
in all but few; And all those few Days of Jacobs life were evil, as he said
himself, few and evil have Genesis 47. 9.
they been. And whose life may not be measured by days as well as Jacobs? And
whose days of life are not few, as few as Jacobs? Whose life of Days is not
short, as short as his? And whose few Days of life are not all evil, as evil
as Jacobs? Who can look upon them and not say truly, few and evil have thy
been? But are all our days evil? Why then do we all complain, that they are
few? Are not a few evil Days enough? Will any wise man wish for many evil
Days? And again, are all our evil Days but few? why do we then complain,
that they are evil? Who may not bear with a few evil Days, that expects an
Eternity of good Days, when these few evil Days are ended?

In the last place therefore, if we do believe the Truth in the words of the
Text, if we be persuaded, that there is the fullness of joy in the presence of
God, and pleasure at his right hand for evermore, then let us never reckon any
sufferings to be too many, or too great, or too long to be endured, for the
obtaining of those joys and pleasures that shall endure for ever. But let us
reckon with S. Paul, that the sufferings of this Romans 8. 18.
present world are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed in us. Indeed no affliction seems joyous for the Heb. 12. 11.
time, but grievous; And no time in affliction seems short, but tedious;
unless with Paul we be persuaded, that our light 2 Cor. 4. 17.
affliction lasting but a moment, shall work for us a far more exceeding,
and eternal weight of glory. The Lord does make the bitterness of this life of
sorrows to seem the more imbittered to his servants, that the sweetness of
the life of joys may seem the sweeter to them when they come to the enjoyment
of it. Yet that the bitterest sorrows of this life may be the better relished,
the sweetest joys of life are promised to them that in their sorrows wait for
joys with patience. And to persuade to patience in the midst of sorrows, we
must observe them to be common. What Militant Saint did ever bear the Ensign
of a Mortal life, without some Cross, or Crosselet in it? Who could ever
blazon the Escocheon of his Militancy, or Mortality, and not find the Field of
his life to be charged with Crosses Gules, or Crosses Sable? The first Adam
could not; nor could the second. And who indeed can wish for the heaven of
happiness, or the happiness of heaven here, where the King of heaven went
through an hell of miseries? There can be no greater unhappiness Nihil
infelicius co, cui nihil unquam evenit adversi. Seneca Fortuna quem nimium
fovet, stultum facit. Prove. 1. 32. Vexatio dat intellectum.
in this life, than never in this life to have unhappiness. Perpetual
prosperity does make a fool; so says one that was no fool. And Prosperity
perpetual does mar a fool; so says another, and he the wisest of wise men.
Prosperity may sometimes fool a wise man unto folly; and Adversity may
sometimes tutour a fool to wisdom. (...), Many instructions are taught by
afflictions; God sends Crosses in stead of Blessings unto those he hates,
but he often blesses those with crosses which he loves. It is well for them
Psalm. 119. 67. 71
that they are afflicted. It is very true that Oppression makes the wise man
mad; for so says the wise man himself in his Book of the Preacher, Eccles.
7. 7. And it is as true if we Preach it, that oppression makes some madd men
wise. But who is willing to be Schooled by so cursed a Pedagoge? But volenter
nolenter, whether men will or no it must sometimes be so, and better so then
worse for ever. Too much it is for one man to enjoy two Heavens; And as great
pity it is that any one should endure two Hells. And therefore I may truly
say, that God of his goodness, and his wisdom, has appointed one of each for
every man. There is not only an Heaven or an Hell for any one, but an Heaven
and an Hell for every one. This present world is both, but unto several Men;
It is the Sinners Heaven, but Hell it is unto the Saints on Earth. The sinful
worldling takes his pleasure here, he has all his happiness here that he is
ever like to have; here are all his joys, and all his hopes of joy; He wishes
for no other Heaven; he looks not after any other. He thinks not of that to
be enjoyed hereafter. Here would he live for ever if he might; But alas! It may
not be. This world must not last always; and though it might, yet might not
his life in it; his life is but of few days, It soon must have an end. What
wise man then would wish to live his best life first, seeing that it must so
soon be lost? Who would wish to have his heaven here, where he can stay but a
few days? Yea where he cannot assure himself to stay one day, or hour?

Again this present world is a kind of Hell to others, or in stead of Hell
unto them; It is a Place of Trouble, a Place of Suffering. But their stay here
is short. Now who would not rather endure the Hell of a few days miseries
here, and enjoy the Heaven of Eternal happiness hereafter, then enjoy the
Heaven of a few days pleasure here, and endure the Eternal miseries of Hell
hereafter? Temporal Pleasures are dearly bought with the loss of Eternal;
And temporal sufferings are well requited with eternal Pleasures. That is a
miserable happiness that must end in such miseries as must never end; And
those are happy miseries that shall soon end in endless happiness. This
life is but a journey toward Death, and but a short one; And Death is yet a
shorter passage to a longer, and a better life. Indeed no Mortal Pilgrim can
be weary of the longest journey of life, if by the way he does but well
remember the endless joys that he shall enjoy at his journeys end. But yet the
shorter that his journey be, the sooner shall he be at home possessed of those
joys. And who would wish a long and tedious journey to himself to keep him
long from the enjoyment of them?

That life of joys is worth the wishing, that shall never have an End; And
that End of life is full as worthy of our wishes, that shall begin the Joys of
that endless life. And that end Theophra.
must be ere long; for Vita brevis, life is short. Man that is borne of a woman
is but of a few days, and full of trouble, says holy Job. Job 14. 1.
He is of few days, that he may not live too long in trouble; And his days
are full of trouble, that he may not long for more of them then a few. Man's
days are full of trouble, that a few may serve his turn and make him weary of
them; And his days of trouble are but few, that he may not be too much wearied
with them. It is man's great Misery, that his few days are full of trouble; And
it is Gods great Mercy, that man's days of trouble are but few: for if the
Days of Man's life be full of trouble, it is well for Man, that his life of
trouble is not full of Days. It is ill for Man that the troubles of his few
days are so many; And it is well for Man that his days of trouble are so few.
The few days of Man's life are full of trouble, that Man may daily be minded of
his duty in seeking (...). S. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. Corcydas.
for another life, better then this present; And Man's Days of Trouble are but
few, that Man may not be wearied so as to leave seeking for that other life
before that this does leave him.

Then let the Miseries which accompany Mortality weane us from all fondness
toward this life present; And let the felicity of life eternal win us to long
after that. The thoughts of the Elysian happiness did so encourage a poor
Grecian, a mere Pagan, at the instant of his death, that he rejoiced much to
think of going to Pythagoras, and other learned Philosophers; to Olympus, and
other skillful Musicians; to Hecataeus, and other Hecataeus Misesius Historicus
celeberrimus. Volateran. Anthropol. Homeri duo fuerunt. Volateran. Anthropol.
l. 17.
approved Historiographers; to Homer the Prince of Poets, and other famous Wits
that were his followers. That Poetical Paradise, the Elysian Field, could make
a Pagan give his longum vale to this present world with notable resolution: And
shall not the real pleasures of the Celestial Paradise, the fullness of joy
in the glorious presence of God, encourage a Christian at his death to depart
as comfortably as a faithless Grecian? Why should Fantasy in a Heathen be more
powerful, than Faith in a Christian? Is not that company as good, which we
believe to be in the glorious presence of God, as that which he imagined to be
in Elysio Campo? And are not the joys as many and as great? Why then should
not every true Believer cheer up himself at his departure by thinking of his
going to S. Peter, S. Paul, S. James, S. John, and to all that glorious Company
of Apostles in that presence of God? And of his going to Elias, and Elisha, and
Isaiah, and Ezechiel, and to Daniel, and all that goodly fellowship of the
Prophets? And of his going to S. Steven the Proto-Martyr, and to Ignatius, and
to Justinus, and to our Cranmer, and our Ridly, and our Hooper, and our Tailor,
and all that Noble Army of Martyrs? And of his going to that Reverend Patriarch
Abraham, the Father of the faithful, and to Isaac, and to Jacob, and to all
the holy Patriarchs in the Kingdom of God? And of his going to the holy Angels
and Archangels, and Thrones, and Powers, and Principalities, and to the
Spirits of all just Men made perfect? Who can think of Hebr. 12. 23.
being thus transported, and not be transported with the very thought of it?
Surely it must needs be a very Consolatory Viaticum to the soul of a dying
Christian to think of exchanging Earth for Heaven, and the sordid Company of
Sinners for the sweet society of Saints.

Who can think of Reigning with holy David, and good Quae dementia est amare
pressuras and poenas, and lacrymas mundi? S. Cypr. de Mortal. Egredere anima
m^a. S. Hieron. in vit. Hilar. Luke 2. 29. 30. Octogenarius ille ceci^it ^lor.
Draxel. Zodiac. Christian.
Josias, and with Christ Jesus himself in his Kingdom of Glory, and still
desire to be subject to his own corruptions, and the corruptions of others?
He that thinks upon the fulness of joy in the presence of God, and the
pleasures at his right Hand for evermore, can never wonder that old Hilarion
should entreat his own soul to be packing thither.

When Swan like Simeon had but seen his Savior in his state of Humiliation,
he could not choose but sing his nunc Dimittis, Lord now let thou thy
servant depart in peace according to thy word. When his Savior and ours was
come into this World, and he had taken him into his Arms, he desired leave
then of the Lord to take his leave of the World, that so he might leave his
soul in the Arms of his Savior. And they that have seen their Savior by the
eye of Faith, as now he is to be seen in his state of Exaltation, and have
embraced him in Augu. de Civit. Dei. l. 19. Psalm. 39. 12. Et ideo ^anquam
peregrinus ad illam Sanctorum omnium patriam ^estinabat. S. Ambros. de ^on.
Mort.
the Arms of their afffections, can never be unwilling to depart in peace,
that with the God of Peace, and Prince of Peace, they may have peace in life
eternal, and eternal life in peace, as S. Augustine turns it very wittily.
Are we not all Pilgrims here? and are we not almost lost in dangerous ways,
and desperate Times? Who then can choose but wish himself at home?

Caelum Patria, Christus via, and vita nostra deambulacrum, Heaven is our Home,
Christ is our Way thither, and this life is our Walk; Our Home is pleasant,
our Way perfect, but our Walk painful; Yet there is a necessity of our
Walk, and there is Adversity in our Way, But there is Felicity at our Home.
We are all here upon our Walk, And we all have heard of our only Way, and
who does not John 14. 6. Heb. 10. 20.
wish with all his heart that he were at home? I Will speak even all your Errands
in a word, and send you homeward. Remember whither ye are going, and stay not
by the way, for fear it be too late ere ye get home. Remember your Way, and
stray not from it, for fear ye lose your selves, and never come near home;
But be sure to keep your Way, and be content to travel hard, and ye may be
sure ere long ye shall reach home, and receive a welcome home by all the
Saints in Glory, and a Crown of Glory by Christ our Savior, and the fulness
of joy in the Presence of God, and pleasures at his right Hand for evermore
Amen, Amen.

*

FINIS.
A SERMON OF THE WORLDS VANITY AND THE SOULS EXCELLENCY. Preached in the
Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, in the fore-noone, October. 9. 1642. By Edw.
Willan M. A. C. C. C. in Ca.

Homer. Iliad. 10. (...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
LONDON Printed for RICHARD ROYSTON at the Angel in Ivie-lane 1651.

TO The Worshipful Robert Style Esquire, his ever honored Patron. AND To the
Right Worshipful Robert Aylet Dr. of Law, and one of the Masters of the
CHANCERY.
Gentlemen,
THis Sermon was appointed for the Cross; But I hope, there is no cross
appointed for this Sermon. It came not at the Cross when it was preached; And
I hope, no cross shall come at that when it is printed. It took sanctuary in
the Quire, and so was delivered to an extraodinary multitude of Hearers. But i^
now requires another kind of sanctuary, to be delivered from the multitude of
ordinary Censurers. Your kinder countenances may prove such a sanctuary to it.

It is a Sermon of Merchant-Adventurers; and it has made me a Venturer, though
no Merchant. And in this Paper-bottome I have made a twofold Adventure. The
first is of this Tendry of Respect and Service to your Worships, for the
gaining of your favors, for the Protection of the other. And that other is not
an adventure of a Soul for the gaining of the World; but of a Sermon, about
the World and the Soul, (into the World,) for the gaining of Souls.

And your joint favors (as I conjecture) may prove a very safe Convoy to it
through the World. Caeptis aspirate.

It was the one of your good Worships which called it then unto the Pulpit, or
caused it to be called thither: And it is the other that has now called it
unto the Press, or occasioned the Printing of it. And now, whose shall I call
it? It might sometimes have been called mine: But it has been miscalled, I
know not whose. I remember well, I heard the Character of a Sermon (from a
young Practitioner) so like unto it, that I might justly challenge it. I must
confess the Title to it is not worth a quarrel; yet there may be right in a
Penny as well as in a Pound. And the Poet Virgil would not lose his Title to a
Distichon, by his perpetual silence. His Distichon was such as he might very
well own: And therefore, when he saw that Augustus did approve it, and that
Bathyllus (tacentibus aliis) did asselfe the praises of it, he did inscribe his
lines again, which were these,

Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectacula mane: Ti. Claud. Do^at. de vita. P.
Virgilii Maronis.

Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.
And then subscribed this claim unto them:

Hos ego versiculos feci: tulit alter honores.
Sic vos non vobis nidificat is aves.
Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis oves.
Sic vos non vobis mellificat is apes.
Sic vos non vobis fertis aratra boves.
I shall spare the Young-mans name: I would not have him to be as Bathyllus
was, Romae fabula. But I have presumed to set both your Names before my Sermon,
because I know it has been had before both your Worships. Be pleased with it
from the Press, as well as from the Pulpit; And let me call it Yours: And call
me,

Gentlemen, Your Worships most Humble Servant Edward Willan.

Of the Worlds Vanity, and the Souls Excellency.
Matt. 16. 26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole World,
and lose his own Soul? Or, what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?
THe Coral, and the Crystal, are accounted precious stones, by skillful
Lapidaries; And therefore, it is neither a fault nor yet a folly, for such as
find them in their Travels to stoop down and take them up: Yet are they but
minus pretiosi, of an inferior worth with the chief Philosophers; And
therefore, it would not only be a folly but a fault too, for any Traveller to
turmoile himself in gathering of an heavy burden of these together; and in the
mean time to neglect, or, for their sakes to reject a richer booty of
Jasper-stones, or Saphir-stones, or of Amethysts, or the like.

We are all Travelers wandering through the wilderness of this transitory
World, toward that City of pure Gold, ^^er as Crystal, the foundations of
whose Walls are garnished with Berils, with Emeraulds, with Chrysolites, and all
manner of precious stones, as St. John describes that new Jerusalem, Revel. 21.

Now in this our Pilgrimage we meet with Marbles, and we meet with Jacincts;
with less pretious-stones, and with more precious Gemms. I mean, the less
worthy blessings of Gods left hand, the more worthy blessings of Gods
right hand, Genesis 1. 29. 28, 29. 30, 31.
Earthly Treasures, and Heavenly Treasures: And lawful it is to gather the
meaner of these Treasures together, and to use the meanest of them: For God,
who made them all, did make them good, and for the good of man it was, that he
made them so.

God made this present World for man, but man himself for another to come,
far better then this present; And man does fool himself extremely, when he
sels the reversion of that to come for ever, for this present, which is but for
the present. That other is without compare: this but a very nothing to it. Let
no man therefore overvalue this, or postpone that unto it. Let every man be
ware, that in stooping down to take up Earthly Things, he does not let fall
Heavenly: Or, that for the gaining of this baser World of drossie Earth, he
does not lose the refined substance of his most precious Soul: For, What is a
man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or,
what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?

The most Emphatical words in this Text are Metaphorical: For borrowed they
are, either from that richer way of Merchandising by Wholesale; or, from that
poorer way of Peddling by Retaile. I must needs follow the Metaphore in my
discourse, and the rather because it is in this Place, A place Londinium senate
Navale, vel Vrbs navium, etc. Vrbes plurimae a navibus nomina tulerunt: uti
Naupactus, Naustathmos, Nauplia, etc. Sed ex his nulla meliori jure Navalis
nomen sibi assumere possit, quam Londinium nostrum. Tamasi adposita, qui
placidissimus rerum in orb nascentium Mercator, statis horis Oceani aestibus
superbus, alveo tuto, praealto, and navium quamlibet magnarum capacissimo,
tantas Orientis, and Occidentis opes quotidie in vehit, ut cum Orbis Christiani
Emporiis de secunda palma hodie contendat, etc. Camden in Brit. de Middlesex.
of Commerce. The very Metropolis of this Kingdom, the chiefest place of
Merchandise; and the place of the chiefest Merchants and other Traders, that
labor to gain this present World, by the several ways of chaffering for it.
Here therefore give me leave to deal with you in some of your own terms, that
so I may trade the Commodity of this Text of Trading with the greater profit to
you.

In the Text there are two Questions proponed to you.

The first in these Words. What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul?

The second in these, What shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

The first seems to relate to your Trading by way of Commer^e. The second, to
your trading by way of Merchandising Exchange. In both together, there are two
Considerables,

1. The Mystery of Worldly Merchandise. 2. Misery by

The first, in the first question; The second, in the second: Yea both may be
observed in either of both. I shall discourse Ostenditur and quam inutile sit
lucrum vitae temporalis im^totius mundi cum perditione animae, and quam
irreparabile sit damnum perditionis animae. Jasen in commen. in concor.
of both, as they are both discovered in the first question, which refers to
Trading by way of Commerce, In these words; What is a man profited, if he shall
gain the whole World and lose his own soul?

In which words we may observe these Four particulars,

I. A Merchant. II. His Wares. III. The Merchandise it self. IV. The Balance
of Trade.
First, the Merchant, Man: What is a man profited?

Secondly, the Wares, and they are of two sorts.

The 1. Imported. The 2. Exported.
The Ware imported; the whole World. The Ware exported; his own Soul.
Concerning the first, two Circumstances are considerable.

1. A Variety. 2. A Monopoly.
The Variety; the World. The Monopoly, the whole World.
Concerning the second, three Circumstances are remarkable;

1. The Quality or Nature. 2. The Quantity, or Number. 3. The Propriety, or
Relation.
For Nature or Quality, it is a Man's Soul; For Number or Quantity, it is his
One soul, his only soul, in the singular number; For Relation or Propriety,
it is his own soul. And lose his own soul.

Thirdly, the Merchandise it self, or the Negotiating o^ the Trade, which is
notably set forth unto us by a strange Paradoxe, of gaining, and losing by the
same bargain; y^^ of gaining the whole World, and losing by the bargain. gain
the whole world, and lose his own soul.

Fourthly, The Balance of Trade, which in the Dialect of Merchants, is nothing
else but an exact Computation, o^ the casting up of a just Account, thereby to
know what i^ S'r Ralph Madd^son, in his Englands looking in and out.
lost, or gained by the Merchandise. What is a man profited? as much as to say,
Balance the Trade, compute the worth of the Ware exported, with that of the
Ware imported, and then tell me, What is a man profited, if he shall gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul? These Minutes of the Text shall be the
Measures of my Time, and your Patience.

First of the Merchant, Man. What is a man profited? By ^ man here, our Savior
means any man whatever: He speaks here not only of such as compass Sea and
Land to gather the Riches of this World together, as Ferdinandus Magellanes
did, Ferdin. Mag^llan. Portuga. rei nauticae peritissimus, impetrata class 5
navinm a Caesare, an. Dom. 1519. 10 die August. ex Hispali solvit, Canar^as
adit, ab iis recte Brasiliam navigavit. Navis ejus a sociis in Hispaniam
ducitur, 6 Septem. 1524. Haec prima suit Navigatio. Drake Id. December. 1577. ex
Anglia solvit, toto terrarum orb circumnavigato, domum redit 4 Kal. October.
1580. Tho. Cavendish ex Anglia solvit Jul. 21. 1586. totum terrae ambitum
circumnavigavit, and rediit Sept. 15. 1588.
and as our Drake, and Cavendish after him, with other Circum-Navigaters. Nor
speaks he only of such as adventure to some special, or particular Ports or
Places of Merchandise, such as Alexandria, and Aleppo, the Gra^^ Caire, and
both the Indies are, as th^^ Royal Merchant King Solomon did, who sent forth
ships from Ezion-Geb^ for the transfretation of Gold from Ophir. And as that
neighboring Prince of ours, that s^^ 1 King. 9. 26. 28
forth sumptuous Plate-Fleets, for the importation of h^^ Perulania. But he
speaks of any Man, that adventures the loss of his Soul, by any way of
Traffiquing for this present World. For thus an indefinite Interrogation may
ve^^ well the universal, in the Interpretation. And this French Title Merchant
(as Ambrose Calepine asserteth) may be given Diction. Hexag.
to any man, that any way deals or chaffers for any thing in this World,
whether it be for his own use, or to trade away again to others. And surely
such as adventure the loss of an Eternal estate in Heaven, for the gaining or
the increasing of a Temporal one on Earth, are very Merchants indeed. Now of
such, and unto such this Question is most fitly propounded: What is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?

Thus we have found out the Merchant, Man, any man. Now let us look upon the
Wares, and they are (as you have heard) of two sorts: The first, Imported; the
second, Exported.

First of the Ware imported, concernig which two Circumstances are to be
considered. 1. A Variety. 2. A Monopoly.

First of the Variety, The World. Now the World may be considered two ways.

1. Philosophically. 2. Theologically.
First Philosophically, and so indeed the World is nothing Conimb^. lib. 1. de
Coelo, cap. 1.
else but a Variety of things in a beautiful Order. The (...), or beautiful
Order in that Variety has given the Appe^^ations to it, both in Greek, and
Latin. It is ordinata compages rer^^ omnium, a well-disposed Pack of all kinds
of War. s. Omnia Corpora simul sumpta dic^^tir Mundus: All Physical B^d^s taken
and compact together are called the World: But there are no Merchants (as I
conjecture) that trade for this World in this Philosophical sense. And
therefore secondly, the World may be considered in a Theological sense; and so
it must be in this place.

In a Theological sense, by the World is meant the Honors, B^ll. de G^mit.
Columbae, lib. 3. cap. 10.
Riches, and Pleasures of this present World. He that gains a Variety of th^se,
is sometimes said to gain a World of Riches, and Honors, and Pleasures: It is
much for a man to gain all the^^; but it is more for him to gain as much as the
Text does speak of: For here is not only the Variety in the World, but the
Monopoly of all these, and of all of all these, in the whole World: -- gain the
whole world.

Could one Merchant but engrosse the Artificial Wares of Archb. Abbots
D^scription of the World. Dr. Hey. Geogra.
all Q^insaio, or all the Alexandrian Warcs, or all the rich Perfumes, or
costly Drugs, or fragrant Spices of Arabia felix, it were enough, and more then
enough to tympanize his heart with the proudest thoughts of the Wealthy. And
yet, alas, all these Alls together can amount to no more then a little Packet
or a worthless Fardle, in compare with that Ingrossment in the Text, the
gaining of the whole World. Yet see, the Savior of the World does question
this great gain, whether it may be rightly called Profit or no: yea rather He
puts it out of question, by putting forth of this question, What is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?

Indeed these words are not only one, but two Questions: the first is Absolute,
the second Hypothetical. The first is in these words: What is a man profited,
if he shall gain the whole world? The second in these, added to the former by
way of condition: And lose his own soul?

First of the first. But first observe, that it is but a mere supposition, that
is the foundation of both. Our Savior speaks only (...), by way of
supposition, (...), If he shall gain the whole world, i. e. suppose it were
possible for him so to do, and that he should do so: I say suppose it. But
suppositio nihil ponit, The bare supposing of a thing to be, is no proving of
that thing to be as it is supposed; That may be supposed to be, which never
was, and that which never shall be, yea that which never can be. Such is this
thing supposed by our Savior, the gaining of all this present World.

For alas! it is not all the plodding in the World, nor all the projecting for
it, that can gain it all. Oh no! It is not all the griping Usury, nor all the
pinching Misery, that can draw so much as ilia terrae, the Guts and Garbage of
the Earth into one man's Coffers, no not so much as the white or yellow Intrails
of the Indian-Earth.

Suppose that a man could have a mind more covetous Ovid. metam. lib. 11.
then Midas had, or be more dunghilly-minded then Crassus or Hortensius; And
suppose that such a man were more ingenious Valor. Max. lib. 9. cap. 4.
to invent new projects to gain the World, then the old Athenians were, which
were the very Minters of Arts and Sciences; And suppose he could be more
assiduous in It is nor improper that the I^elian (i. e. the Hollander) be
compared to the Ant for his sedulity and labor. Vocal Forest.
all his Negotiations, then the most industrious Hollander; and more deceitful
in all his dealings, then the most perfidious Carthaginian: yet could he never
engrosse the whole World.

Let this Merchant, Man, have never so great a Stock to begin the World with,
and let him drive never so good a Trade to increase it, yet must he never think
to gain the whole World. Were he the only Son of a second Pyrrhus, and the
only Nephew of another Craesus, Volateran in Anthropologia.
and so had both their wealths to set up with; And were it possible for him to
use a Conscience more cauterized then the worst of Jews in the hardest ways
of Usury; And could he have an Head-peece more crafty then that of Mahomet in
the mysteries of Merchandise, and an Heart more Archb. Abbot, of Arabia, in his
Descrip. of the World.
greedy then his, and Hands more violent in robbing of other Merchants in their
travels; And could he be more fortunate then Polycrates himself, that was the
very Favorite of Fortune, as Herodotus has storied it: yet would it still
Herodot. in Thalia 78.
be (...), a thing impossible for him to gain the whole World.

Though Machiavels Policy, and Catalines Activity, and Hectors Valor, with
that Martial prowess of those two Thunderbolts of war, Menelaus and
Agamemnon, should all meet in one man: yet could they never advance him to the
absolute Command or Governance of the whole World. The greatest Monarchies of
all, that ever were in the world, were never truly universal, of all the world.
Indeed Nebuchad-nezzar was a mighty Monarch in Syria and Chaldea; And Cyrus had
vast Dominions, when he had joined the Kingdom of the Medes unto the Persians:
yet both their Territories had their Fron^iers. And though the prodigious
Avarice, and boundless Ambition of Alexander the Great affected the
Sovereignty of more then one whole World, (as Plutarch stories it of him) yet
could he never reduce the whole of this one World unto his Grecian Monarchy.
Nor could those Noble Victors, Caius Julius Caesar, and Octavian^^ Caesar
Augustus, subjugate the whole unto the Roman Eagle, by all their notable
Victories. And without all controversy, the sole Command of all the World, is
too great a Sovereignty for any one Man in the World. It must needs seem a very
mockery, for the sullen Donns of our neighboring Nation to sooth their
Sovereign up with the fondlyaffected Title of Catholic Majesty. Me thinks
that ominous Ribellion of Catalonia, with that fatal Revolt of Portugal,
without the thinking of others that led them the way, or that are like to
follow them, might fully infeoffe them with the apprehension of that dislike
which the undoubted Monarch of Heaven and Earth has often shown unto such
general Claims. Though many and many Manarchs be the Supreme Governors in
their several Monarchies; yet may no Monarch in the World claim any title to
the Manarchy of the whole World. It is an honor belonging to God alone: And
mine honor (says he) will I not give to any other. It is He that is cloa^hed
with Catholic Majesty. It is He that is King. The Lord reigns (says the
Psalmist) and let the Earth rejoice, yea let the multitudes of the Isles be
glad thereof, Ps. 97. 1. He reigns not only over one, but all the Isles; nor
reigns He only over Isles, but over the Continent too; for He is King over all
the Earth, Ps. 47. 7.

It was but an Usurpation in Dari^s the Persian, to style himself The King of
Kings. And it is no less presumption in Rex Regum and Consanguineus Deorum. Q.
Curtius, l. 2.
the Pope to aself that Title. It is a Title belonging to God alone, who is (as
S. Paul proclaims him) the blessed and only Potentate, (...), The King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords. 1 Timothy 6. 15.

And certain it is, He never made the whole World for any one man. Yet when any
one shall prove himself the sole Heir of the Protoplast, the World will give
him leave to claim his Propriety in the whole. But for the present, the
Possessions of Adam are parcelled almost into as many Particles, as his Nature
is into particular Persons; which numerous Progeny knows not how to
acknowledge any Lord Paramo^nt amongst them, besides that only true God, whose
Throne is in the highest Heavens. Nor may the Christian World acknowledge any
Catholic Those that are learned know, that the government of the Church is
neither Popular, nor Aristocratical, but a Monarchy. Of the Universal Church
only Christ is the head and chief; and therefore the state of it is
Monarchical, etc. Whitgi^ts D^f^nce of the Answer to the Admonision, tract. 17.
Commander besides our Savior Christ, who is Emmanuel, God with us: The God of
Gods, as well as, Lord of Lords. Yea God of God, (...), very God of very God,
as the Nicene Council has well explained the second Article of the Apostles
Creed against the Arrian Heresy.

It was into lerable Pride in that Roman Prelate, that first contended for the
supreme Headship of the Christian World. Indeed, this very sin of that very
Man, has plainly proved him to be that very Man of Sin, that St. Paul
forespake of, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. It must needs be deemed a most hateful enclosure,
for any Subject in the Kingdom of Christ, to take in all the Commons of the
Christian World: And yet alas! the World Christian is a very little one, a small
Manor; a very little Lordship in compare with the vast dominions of the great
Sultan, and grand Sophie, and other parts of the World not Christian.

But suppose a man could gain the Monarchy of the World, not of the World
Christian only, but of the whole World; yet still the Question may be asked,
What is a man profited?

For such sovereignty would neither make him the sole Possessour, nor yet the
proper Owner of the whole World: For still the Subjects should not only have
the Possession of, but a true, and just Right, and Title to, and Property in
all their Goods Constitut. 1. made at the Convocation 1640.
and Estates; yea, and perhaps some churlish Nabals might have full-Coffers,
when such a Monarch might have au empty Exchequer.

But to put the Supposition as high as our Savior Christ here puts it in the
Text: Suppose a man should gain, not only the empty Title to the World; but
the full possession of the whole World; yet still the Question may be asked,

What is a man profited? For what is the World, the whole World, but a Shop of
vanities, a Storehouse of vexations, a Stall of toys and trifles, lighter
then vanity it self? Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, Vanity of
vanities, all is vanity. And what profit has a man of all the labor which he
takes under the sun. Eccles. 1. verse. 2, 3.

Man disquieteth himself in vain to gain the World: and what is it that he
gains by it, but a world of disquiet? Suppose he gains the World and all of
Vanities, even all the Vanities of the World; what profit is there in such
gain? What profit can it be to gain a World full of nothing else but
emptiness, a World empty of every thing but nothingnesse?

This Worlds everything is the Wisemans nothing: Omnia nihil, All is nothing:
yea, the nothingnesse of nothing. Omnia vanitas, all is vanity; not vain only
in the Concrete, but Vanity in the Abstract: Yea, Vanitas vanitatum; in the
Abstract of that Abstract, Vanity of vanities, i. e. vanissima, most vain,
says Hugo Cardinalis. What are the chiefest seeming some-things of this World?
Pleasurers and Honors, and Riches, they are. And what are they? Are Nihil
aliud sunt quam merae nugae. Jo. Fran. Pi. Miran. lib. 2. de Mort. Christi.
they not all vain? altogether vanity?

Solomon the wisest of Kings and of men, that did know as much as any man, or
King of them; for he knew them by Inspiration, by Speculation, and by
Experience; and upon his certain knowledge of them he gives this Character,
that they are all Vanity. They are all but vanity in respect of their
Instability or mutability; so Hugo de Sancto Victore. And they are all but
vanity, in respect of their insufficiency, and mere vacuity; so Hugo
Cardinalis. They cannot continue Hugo de Sancto Victore in Et^l. Hugo Cardin.
in Eccles.
with man when he has them; nor can they content him whilst he has them,
though he has them all. But let us consider them severally; And first let us
consider seriously of Worldly Pleasures. What are they? Indeed they are
miscalled Pleasures; but alas! they are not Pleasures indeed, but the shad^w^s
of them. The joys of the World have a world of sorrows waiting on them, and the
sweets of content in them are imbittered with more discontents adhering to
them. Alas for them! The Brooks of worldly Pleasures are very shallow and soon
dried up. The very Sources of them are like broken Cesternes that can hold no
water. The Flowers of worldly Pleasures are all Ephemerons, or like to
Ephemerion, a Plant of one days continuance. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 25. 13. Jonah
4. 6, 7.
Jonahs Gourd, growing speedily, and gone as suddenly. The fairest Nose-gayes
of them are but for a show, and that show but for a moment; yet the greatest
part of the World are taken with such shows. The seems of pleasures are the
greatest Witches in the world, and the greatest of the world are bewitched with
them. Indeed like Witches they can do mischief to many, but little or no good
to any: And like Witches, they use to do most hurt to those, that are most
inward with them. The life of worldly Pleasures, like that of Witches, is very
wicked; and their end, like that of Witches, is very wretched: for these
Pleasures of sin for a season, must end in those sufferings of punishment which
must have no end. Let us then beware of these most fatal Enchantments of the
Flesh, these grand Impostures of the World, worldly Pleasures; let us overcome
these sins of Pleasures, lest the pleasures of these sins do overcome us. And
here let us leave these vain pleasures, that we may come to Honors. And what
are they?

In the Second place then, let us seriously consider of Worldly Honors: Are
they also all but Vanity? Yes, they are more then vanity, but yet they are
Vanity; They are vanity and vexation of spirit. They are Vanity when they are
gotten, but vexation of spirit ingetting, and vexation of spirit in losing:
they are hardly gotten, but easily lost.

The Bubble of Worldly Honor is hardly blown up to any bigness by the breath
of many friends; but easily broken by the blast of a few enemies: yea, it is
often broke by their breath that blow it up, and sometimes whilst they are
blowing of it. It is (...), the vapor of vapors, and Ayrie thinness, and the
very thinness of the Air, it vanishes whilst it vapoureth: It turns to
nothing when it seems the greatest something: It is a vexatious vanity,
depending upon that which is lighter then vanity it self: The lightest Plumes
of Worldly Honors are tossed up and down, and up and down by the lighter puffs
of Popular humors. Vulgus Proteus est ipsissimus. The respects of the Protean
many, are more changeable then the Aspects of the Moon her self. The salve^es
and valetes, the embracements, and the ba^ishments, the applauses and
disgraces, which the four Scipios met amongst the Romans, may sufficiently
attest the Mutability and Lunacy of the Bedlan many Yea the Histories of
Socrates, of Pho^ion, of Demosthenes, and Plu^ar. P^^n. S^c. Valeran. Erasm.
Apoph. Valeri. Maxi.
of Demetrius Phalerius, are approved Testimonies of the Worlds Athenian
Inconstancy. But we need not beat the w^d^st fields of Humanity for single
Instances; we may spring and retrive whole Covies in the Authentic Histories.
Our Savior Christ with his Disciples are cried up and down by the mutable
many. The same fountain cannot send forth sweet water, and bitter, at the same
place; yet the same men at the same mouths did send forth the sweetest language
of Commendation, and the sowrest language of Condemnation of the same Objects
of their violent love, and violent hatred. That fi^le multitude that cried out
Hosanna to the Son of David, Hosanna in the highest, in honor of our Savior,
Matthew. 21. 9.
did presently cry out in fury against him, Let him ^^ crucified, let him be
crucified. Mat. 27. 22, 23.


St Paul and Barnab^s were one while greatly admired by those fond Zealots, or
zealous Fondlings, the Lystra^^a^^ Act. 14. 8, 9, 10 11, 12, etc.
they cried out to one another in the Ly^aonean language, that the Gods were
come down unto them in the liknesse of Men. They thought that Paul could be no
less then Mercury, nor Barnabas then Jupiter, and ^uch they had to do to
restrain them from offering sacrifices to them as Gods. But presently this
Springtide of Popular applause abat^th to as low an Eb^ of causeless,
senseless, and masterlesse contempt; Oh how this Sea of Men does turn and
return, and turn, and turn again. They desie them now, which even now they
Deifie^. Those violent hands which even now could scarcely be ^^strained from
offering Sacrifices to Paul and Barnabas, as unto gods, can scarcely be
restrained now from offering th^^ as sacrifices to the fury of Men. What Man
then upon the serious consideration of this inconstancy of World^y Honor,
would once adventure the loss of his eternal weight 2 Cor. 4. 17.
of Glory for it. Those that are now lifted up to the Excellency of Honor, and
to the Honor of Excellency, by the men of voice, may soon have all their Honors
laid in the dust by the voices of men. And yet that the voice of the
Commonpeople Matthew. 7. 13.
is the voice of God, is the common voice of the people; and that the Multitude
cannot err in judgment, is the judgment of the multitude, but a judgment
full of error, for the greatest multi^udes are wont to wander in the broadest
ways of Error, and they that run with the multitude to seek for Worldly
Honors, may lose their Honors by the Multitudes in this World, and themselves
with the Multitudes in the World to come.

In the last place, let us see the vanity of Worldly Riches. When Solomon had
viewed, and reviewed all the Works that he had wrought, and all the labors
that he had labored to do, he audited this account of them all, that they were
all but vanity and vexation of spirit, and that there was no profit under the
Sun, Eccles. 2. 11. Be then persuaded by St Paul, and (...), etc. St Chrysostom.
Hom. ^.
trust not in uncertain Riches. There is nothing more uncertain, nothing more
unfaithful, (...), says S. Chrysostom, to day with thee, to morrow against
thee. Let us not make Riches our God, and Poverty our Devil, l^st our Riches do
part us from God, and pack us to the Devil. The Devil is (...), The god of this
World, as the Apostle calls him, 2 Cor. 4. 4. from Worldly Riches was he called
Pluto, or from his name (...) were they called (...). Thus did the Greeks of
old entitle him to Worldly Riches, and entail their Worldly Riches upon him.
Let us not entitle our selves to them by him, nor him unto our selves by them.
Let us never place our Heaven in them, seeing Hell it self is so near unto
them: and seeing that we may not place our Happiness in them, let us never set
our hearts upon them. Nothing should have Man's heart, but that which is his
Heaven, or does relate unto it. (...), says Saint Chrysostom. The Riches that
are truly everlasting Chrysos. Hom. 2.
are all in Heaven, and all the Riches that are in Heaven are truly
everlasting. Let not us then seek for In comparatione aeternorum honorum vana
sunt omnia etiam bona temporalia. S. Greg. Mag. in Prim. Sam. cap. 12.
Riches here on Earth, as for our Heaven: But let us seek for Heaven, that may
be more then Riches to us for ever hereafter. Alas! these Worldly riches, in
compare with those of Heaven (as S. Gregory tells us) are altogether vain, yea
vanity it self, as Solomon speaks them in the same sense.

But here let us advance the Supposition one step higher: Let us suppose the
Riches of the World to be neither vanity nor vain, but to have reality and
worth in them, yet still the Question may be asked, What is a man profited? For
what profit can it be to a man to gain such things, as he may not think his own
when he has gained them, nor use them as his own? They that get these Worldly
Riches by ungodly means, are by those means indebted to the God of this World
for them: And he will be paid by all his Debtors; 2 Cor. 4. 4.
They may all look to be arrested at his Suit, and cast into the prison of
Hell, but may not look to get out thence. until they have paid the uttermost
farthing. And as for such as use the lawfullest means to get them, they may not
use them as they list or will themselves when they have got them: For why, they
are but Servants, in receiving of them; but Trustees, in keeping of them; and
but as mere Stewards they must be, in accounting for them. Now it is very
requisite in Stewards to be found faithful; Faithful in all Imbursements, 1
Cor. 4. 2.
faithful in all Disbursements, faithful in all Intrustments.

God himself was the Maker of all this World. And he himself is the Master of
it. He is the Author of all good in the World. And he is the Owner of all the
goods of all the World. Man must ever therefore have respect to him, and to his
pleasure, in the using of his goods. There must at last be a general Audit,
and man must reckon for all; And woe unto him, if he makes not an even
Reckoning. An even Reckoning is hard to be made, though never so small, but the
greatest Reckonings are hardest to be made even. There is no Euge to be
expected from the Master, without an even Reckoning from the Servant: Nor can
the Servant make his Reckoning even then, unless he be now fidelis in minimis,
faithful in the smallest driblets, faithful to the utmost farthing, careful
not to waste the very minutes of his Masters goods, by mispending of them. He
is said to waste his Masters goods, that does mispend those goods by riotous
courses, which are entrusted in his hands. And for his wasting of them so, he
is soon to be discarded from all Entrustments by his Master: Read rationem
villicationis tuae, says his Master to him, Luke 16. 1. Come, give an account
of thy stewardship, for thou may be no longer steward. Durus est hic sermo:
This is an hard saying: But it it said, and it must be so; There must an
Account be given. And now does not this great Rich Worldling begin to wish that
he had ever been a Lazarus, rather then a Dives? That he had never Luke 16. 19,
etc.
been entrusted with so much of this Worlds goods, that so he might not now
have had so much to reckon for? But to whom much is given, of him there is much
to be required. He Luke 12. 48.
must now answer for all. He had a great Trust committed to him, and now he
distrusts his Reckoning the more. The Reckoning is so great that he is to make,
that he makes no reckoning to save himself when he has made it. By the
Divitiarum acquisitio magni laboris est, possessio magni timoris, amissio magni
doloris. Idiotae Contemplat. de amore divino. c. 33.
very Summons to the Audit, he hears an Exauctoration decreed against him, He
may be no longer Steward. For misspending that part which he had, he must now
part with all that he has. But all that will not serve the turn: For what he
has is none of his, but his Masters; and it will not satisfy for that he has
misspent of his Masters. And therefore what he is, Soul and Body, must be
sold, that payment may be made. Now tell me, where is his profit? He willingly
lost that other, that better World, for this; and now has lost both this, and
himself, with that other.

But let us put the Supposition one step higher: Let us suppose a man to gain
the World, and to use it as he ought. Yet still the Question may be asked,

What is a man profited? For why, still he cannot keep it; He must be taken
from Heb. 9. 27.
that by death, if that be not taken from him before. It is appointed for all
men once to die. And there is no man that knows either how he shall die, or
where he shall die, or when he shall die: But this every man may know, that
when he does die, he shall carry nothing with him of all that he gained when he
lived. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, said holy Job, and naked shall I
return thither.

That great Sultan that conquered the Christians in the Job 1. 21.
Eastern Countries, and gained the Holy Land from them by his Conquests, was
conquered himself soon after by Death, and carried captive to another World,
and so was forced to leave even all his Worldly pomp and riches here behind
him. As it was expressed to the life at his Funeral-Solemnities: For then his
shirt or shroud was put upon the point of a Lance (according to his
fore-appointment) and so carried Knoll. Turk. Hist. Sabellic. E^. 9. l. 5.
before his Hearse, whilst a plain Priest proclaimed with a loud voice, That
Saladine the great Lord and Governor of Asia is dead, and of all his Worldly
wealth he carried nothing with him, but left his very shirt or shroud behind
him. It may be Saladine had gained more then he could well tell how to spend,
yea much more then he could tell how to spend well. But what profit was it to
him, when he was so quickly parted from it? His time to have it was but short,
and it may be his enjoyment of it was not all that time he had it. But let us
put the supposition higher yet. Let us suppose a man to gain the World, and to
live longer in it then Saladine did: Yea let us suppose his years to be as many
as Mathusalems Genes. 5. 25, 26, 27.
days were by appointment: Yea let us make him immortal by our supposes. Yet
still the Question may be asked,

What is a man profited? Ps. 102. 26, 27. Matthew. 5. 18. 2 Pet. 3. 11. 12 Zanch.
Miscellaneor. lib. 1. de fine seculi. Nihil ^nim est magnum re, quod parvum
tempore nec longis dila^ur gaudiis quicquid arcto fine conditur. Eucher. ad
Valerianum.
For why, though his life should never have an end, yet there must be an end of
the World. And that end of the World may be e're a day to an end. How quickly
might he see the conflagration of all, by that most fatal fire that must
demolish all? This present World is momentarie, but that to come for ever. Yet
the great Gainers of this present World, are wont to look so much after this
World, which they g^t, that they forget the World to come, which they should
look after: And by the greatness of their gains in this World, they gain
that Worldly greatness, which makes them too great to enter in at the straight
gate of that better World; and so when this world must be burnt with fire, they
must needs burn with it for want of entrance in at the straight gate. But let
us put the Supposition as high as it can be put. Let us suppose a man to gain
the World, and never to lose it again, either in whole, or in part, by being
taken from that by Death, or by having of that to be taken from him by fire.
Yet still the Question may be asked,

What is he profited? For why, for all this he may be still a poor man, a
discontented man, an unhappy man. Unhappy by being discontented, and
discontented for being poor. Indeed he has riches enough, that is contented
with the riches that he Nihil potest animae sufficere praet^r summum bonum. St
August. Manuel. c. 25.
has. But alas! it is not the whole World, nor a World of Worlds that can
content a Worldly mind, or make it think it has enough. The desires of Man's
heart are infinite, and the World but finite, and therefore it cannot satisfy
them to contentment. This present World was so small a thing in compare with
Alexanders wishes, and the vastness of his desires, that he did even sweat to
think how his Greatness was to be narrowed, and crowded up in it.

Aestuat infaelix angusto limite mundi. Juvenal. Sat.
As the the Poet fancies of him, that he was even stifled with the conceit,
that he should not have elbow-room enough in this World.

And again, as it is finite, so all the treasures of it are extrins^call, and
so never enter into the Heart of Man to fulfill the desires of it. Though his
Barns, and Granaries be never so full, and all his Bags and Coffers; yet his
Heart and Soul are never the fuller, but it may be much the ^mpti^r, by having
their desires more and more enlarged.

Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit, Juvenal.


Says the Poet. The love of Money creaseth as the Money creaseth or increases
that is beloved. The more draughts of Non qui parum h^bet pauper est, sed qui
plus cupi^. Seneca,
gain be swallowed down, the more is the Hydropical Thirst of gain increased.
The more that the covetous Worldling gain^th, the more he coveteth; and the
more he coveteth, the more he wants; and the more he wants, the poorer h^e
grows: so that by consequence it clearly appears, that the more he
gains, the poorer he grows. Now what profit is it, for a man to gain that
which makes him poor? He is not so poor that has enough of a little, as he
that has much, and yet wants much more; and that is the condition of the
Covetous worldling, He is ever in want. And therefore says S. Chrysostom,
(...): It is one thing to be a Covetous man, and (...) S. Chrysostom. Hom. 2.
another to be a Rich man: for the covetous man is never rich; He ever wants
what he coveteth, and he ever wants what he covers. He covers what he
has, from himself (...), etc. Idem ibid.
as well as others; and he coveteth what he has not, whilst others have it. He
wants all that others have, and he wants all that he has himself. All that
he has, did I say? Alas for him! he has nothing: but the goods which he has
gotten, have gotten him; He does not possess them, but they possess him; He
does not command them, but they command him. According to that of Chrysostom,
(...). Avaro deest tam quod habet quam quod non habet. S. Hier. Valor. Max.
lib. 9. cap. 4.
The covetous man may be a keeper of money, but not a commander of it; a servant
to it, not a master over it. As Valerius Maximus writes of that Ptolom^us which
was King of Cyprus: Titulo Rex insulae, animo autem pecuniae miserabile
mancipium: He was in title the King of the Cyprian-Isle; but in truth, he was a
miserable Bondslave to his Pelf. Now what profit is it to gain and increase
that money, which begets and increases misery? And if it be so little profit
simply to gain the World, certainly there is less profit in the gaining of it,
if a man must pay his own Soul for it.

And this brings us to the second Querie, that Hypothetical Question, that
includes the whole Text:

What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul? And this Question sets us to consider of the second sort of Wares, the
Ware Exported; concerning which three Circumstances were proposed to be
considered.

1. The Nature or Quality. 2. The Number or Quantity. 3. The Relation or
Propriety.
First, for the Nature or Quality, we may observe, that it See Nemesius of the
Nature of Man.
is a Soul. Yet not a Vegitative Soul, such as is in the Plants; Nor yet a
Sensitive Soul, such as is in Birds and Beasts; But a Reasonable Soul, such
as is in Man, such a Soul as makes him to be a Man; It is is his Soul, his
own Soul. I shall It is the soul of man that makes him to be a man. See
Philip of Mornay's Trunesse of Christian Religion, translated by St Phil.
Sidney chap. 14.
not tell you what Aristotle says of the Soul of Man, nor yet how other
Philosophers use to define it. But let me tell you thus much of it, that it is
an Heavenly Jewel in a C^binet of Earth, and a Jewel of that worth it is, that
not all the Diamonds in the World, though never so curiously cut, and never so
artificially set, in the richest Rings of the most refined gold, may be valued
with it, though it be cabined in the most deformed lump of Red Earth. There be
many Reasons in it to raise the estimate of it. I Will name some of them.

As first, it is the Medal of the Almighty; The lively Image of the living God;
Or the Tablet upon which that King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, has drawn his
own likeness. Now shall the Image of a Mortal King, stamped on the substance
of the Earth, or the Earthly substance of Gold or Silver, make man so to esteem
it as to become an Idolater toward it; and shall not the Image of the Immortal
King of Kings imprinted in his own Workmanship upon the Heavenly substance of
Man's soul, persuade him far more highly to value that?

And a second reason, why this Merchant Man should inhaunce Dei insignita
imagine, decorata similitudine. St Bern. Medita. de digni^. animae. Men's nostra
Dei similis, etc. Gregor. Nyss. disputat. de anima and Resurr.
the price of his Soul, may be this, because it is a spirit, an Immateriall
substance. It is indeed within the substance of the body, but yet without a
bodily substance. And the more that any substance be spiritualized, the more
pu^ and precious it is, and the more ennobled. And the further that any
substance be distanced from the nature of a body, the nearer it draws to the
Nature of God; For (...); God is a Spirit. And the spirituality of the Soul
does far exalt it above the body, as coming nearer to the purity of God who is
a Spirit. And therefore it is well asserted by St Bernard, that the worst of
souls in respect of substance, is far more excellent then the best of bodies,
and ought to be valued far above them.

A third Reason to persuade this Merchant-man to value his Soul at a very d^ar
rate, may be the Immortality of it: It is immortal as well as immaterial.
Indeed man dies at See the Immortality of the soul discoursed of largely and
very learnedly, by Philip of Mornay Lord of Pl^ssie, in the Trueness of
Christ. Religion, c. 14. 15.
his appointed time, but the soul of man does never die. By death the whole man
is dissolved, but the whole of man is not destroyed by death: The soul of man
does live, when man is dead. The soul is doomed at the instant of death, either
to enjoy everlasting felicity in Heaven, or to endure everlasting misery in
Hell. And that endless misery is often called Mors secunda, the second death.
Yet is it not so called, that we should think that the Soul does cease to live
in hell, but rather because it cease to enjoy its life. The damned Non enim
quia solvitur compositum, inde etia^ necessario consequitur una cum composito
d^ssolvi id quod compositum non est. Greg. Nyssen. disput. de Anim. and Resurr.
souls in Hell live not there to enjoy life, but to endure grief. And therefore
their life there is said to be no life. Simplex vita non est vivere, sed
valere: merely to live, is no life; but to live indeed, is to enjoy life. It is
a kind of death, for one to live in pain, that has lived at ease: It is a kind
of death for one to live in prison, that has lived at liberty; A kind of death
for one to live in penury, that has lived in plenty. Those damned Souls that
lie imprisoned in Hell, do all live there in pain, for living here in pleasure:
their joys are turned into pains, and their life now is worse then death.
Their Damnation in Hell is like to Death in four respects; In damnatione
novissima qua^vis homo sentire non desina^, tamen quia sensus ipse nec
voluptate suavis, nec quiet salubris, sed do^o^^ poenalis est; non immerito
mors est potius appella^a quam vita. S. August.
and for its likeness in each respect it is called Death.

First, it is like it for Separation. In temporal death, the Quamvis enim
humana anima v^raciter immortalis perhib^tur, habet tamen etiam ipsa mortem
suam.
Soul which gave life to the Body, is separated from it: So in Damnation, the
Lord of life, which gave life to the Soul, is separated from that. Mort^ae sunt
animae, hoc est, a Deo desert^, says S. Austine: The damned souls are dead,
that is, forsaken of God. For, Sicut mors corporis est cum id deserit anim^,
ita mors animae est cum eam deserit Deus: As it is the death of S. Aug. de Civ.
Dei, l. 13. c. 2.
the body when it is forsaken of the soul, so it is the death of the soul when
it is forsaken of God. Sicut enim anima discedente moritur corpus, sic anima
Deo d^s^rente mori credenda est.


Secondly, Damnation is like to Death in respect of Place. Hell is a place of
Darkness, a place that is very disconsolate: Primasius super Apocalyp. cap. 18.
so is the Grave. And therefore (...) Sheol with the Hebrews signifi^s both
Hell and the Grave; and so does (...) with the Greeks.

Thirdly, Damnation is like to Death, in respect of Pain Quid sacient intime
familiares, quales sunt corpus and anima, quae ab ipso utero ita jucundissime
vixerint? The spirit may be willing, but the flesh will be loath. Manchest. Al
Mond^ contemp. mortis.
and Grief. Great are the pangs of Death, and great the grief of Man that is
dying: and the grief and pains of Hell are full as great, and greater.

Fourthly, and last, Damnation is like to Death in respect of Horror. Death is
called the King of fears, the most terrible of terribles. Nature abhors
nothing more then Death, there is nothing that is known to Man more terrible;
and therefore is Damnation called Death. Indeed Damnation is beyond expression
terrible, yea beyond all apprehension; we want words to express it by, we want
things more hideous to resemble it unto. We mis-call it Death, but it is not
Death indeed. The Damned may wish for Death, but they must not dye. The Damned
souls are all immortal, they are sent to Hell to live in misery, yea to live in
misery for ever, yea for ever and for ever. The expression is as useful, as it
is usual: Mark it well, for ever and for ever. That which is but once for ever,
can never have an end. But the living, and lasting Miseries of Hell are said to
be for ever, and for ever, to make us the more seriously to consider of them.
This Duplication intimates thus much to us, that when the poor damned soul
has passed a thousand years, and ten thousands more, and as many thousands
more as the nimblest imagination can conceive of, and more Millions of Ages
more then the best Arithmetician can ever multiply, yet then he shall be as if
he were newly to begin, he has still and still another for ever to endure
miseries. This it is that does so aggravate the Misery of Man by his Worldly
Merchandise. If he must lose his Soul, for his gaining of the World, his loss
is infinite, because the Damnation of his Soul is endless. It is for ever and
ever. It was the thought of this, that caused that Right Reverend Parson of
Bethlem Parish, devout St Hierome, to renounce this present World, and retire
into a Cell or Cave, which he either found, or founded in Bethlem; lest he
should lose his Soul for ever and ever in Hell, by gaining the World for a
time.

The fear of endless torments turned his Cell Dr Willans (...).

Into a Jayle, and made his Cave his Hell.
Propter metum Gehennae tali me carceri emancipaveram, as he said himself to
Heliodorus. That good old Father was wont to be portraied with a young Lion by
his side, partly to signify how fiercely he cried out against the Schisms and
Heresies, and other sins of others in his time; and partly to signify that he
sometimes roared out for the very disquietnesse of his own heart, at the sight
of his own sin, knowing that if his soul must be lost by them, his loss would
be intolerable, because it would be the loss of an immortal substance.

A fourth Reason to raise the estimate of the Soul, may be taken from the
Reason in it. It is a Reasonable Soul, an Intellectual It is chiefly in respect
thereof that we are called Reasonable Creatures. Nemes. of the Nature of Man,
cap. 14.
Substance. The richest Treasure of any that Man as man is entrusted with. By
this he comes to know himself. By this he comes to know the way to save
himself. By this he comes to know the worth of this and other things. If he
loses this, he is but a lost man, yea without this he is no man at all: And
therefore Man should value this above all.

A fifth Reason may be this, that the losing or saving of the whole man depends
upon the saving or losing of the soul. If the Soul of man be turned into Hell
at the first Judgment, the whole man must be tumbled thither at the second
Judgment. But if it be translated to Heaven at the Night of Death, the Body
also shall have a removal thither at the Morning of the Resurrection.

It is a preposterous Care in many Great ones in this Multus Corporum Curationi
impenditur usus, multum huic operae in spem med^lae datur. Nunquid medicinam
anima non m^retur? Etsi varia corpori auxiliae studio tuendae sanitatis
adhibentur; sas non est tamen animam velut exclusam jacere, and quasi neglectam
morbis suis intabescere atque unam a propriis remediis exulare: immo vere plura
animae conserenda sunt, si corpori tanta praestantur. Nam si r^cte quidam
carnem famulam, animam vero dominam esse dixerunt; non oportet post^ri^re l^co
nos dominam ponere, ac famulam iniquo jure praeferre. Eucherius in Epist.
Paraenet. ad Valerianum.
World, to make great provision for their Bodies here before death, and also
after it, but none at all, or very little for their Souls. Alas for them! Let
them provide what Physicians they can to prevent the Death of their Bodies, yet
are they mortal, and so must dye. And let them prepare what Tombs they will to
preserve them after Death: Yet if their souls be sent to Hell to be tormented
for their sins done in their bodies, their bodies must be sure they also
shall be sent to suffer with their souls: As they sinned together, so must
they suffer. But whatever become of their Bodies after death, if their Souls
be saved when they die, their Bodies also shall be saved at the second coming
of our Savior. As they have served him together, so shall they be saved
together by him. The happiness or unhappiness of the whole man, depends upon
the happiness or unhappiness of his Soul.

The sixth and last Reason to persuade this Merchant, Totus quidem iste mundus
ad unius animae pretium aestimari non potest; non enim pro tolo mundo Deus
animam suam dare voluit, quam pro anima humanae dedit. Sublimius ergo animae
pretium, quae non nisi sanguine Christi redimi potuit, etc. Agnosce homo, quam
nobilis est anima tua, and quam gravia suerunt ejus vulnera, pro quibus necesse
suit Christum Dominum vulnerari. Noli ergo vilipendere animae tuae passionem,
cui a tanta Majestate tantam vides exhiberi compassionem. S. Bern. Medit.
Man, to prize his Soul above the World, may be taken from the consideration of
that price which our Savior paid for the redemption of it. And was it not very
considerable, think you, that the Son of God, the welbeloved Son of God,
the only begotten Son of God, equal to the Father in goodness, and power,
and glory, and majesty, should condescend so low as to become a Man, a Man of
no reputation, the very scorn and derision of men, and the very Outcast of the
people? That he should take upon him the form of a Servant, and vouchsafe to
be a Servant of servants; To be mocked of many, to be hated of most, to be
forsaken of all at last? Yea more, that he should asself the blame, and shame,
and sufferings of all the sins of man; Of man that was his enemy, of man that
hated him? That he should die for man; and die the worst of deaths too, the
death of the Cross, a painful death, a shameful death, an hateful death, a
cursed death? And more yet; That he should suffer as many Torments of Hell it
self, as might save man from being tormented for ever? Can we think that he,
the Son of God, begotten of the Father of Wisdom, yea begotten of the
Wisdom of the Father, should dote on Man to very folly, and do and suffer
this, even all this, for a toy, for a trifle, for a thing of nothing? Surely he
did highly prize the Soul of man, or he would never have done and suffered so
much to redeem it. Too many there be indeed, that make too little reckoning of
their Souls: For, all they do so, that adventure the losing of them, for the
gaining of the World. Indeed if man had many Souls, the loss of one were not
so much, as it is now that he has but one. The loss of one is the loss of
all, of himself and all.

And that is the second Circumstance concerning this Commodity Exported, to be
considered; The Number or Quantity: His one Soul, in the singular number. When
a cunning Merchant has but a small quantity of some special Commodity, he
knows then what he has to do, he makes his price accordingly, or rather he
knows not what price to make of it, he thinks he can never ask enough,
especially if these five Circumstances be coincident with the smalnesse of the
Quantity.

First, if it be such a kind of Commodity, as that he may be sure he can get no
more of the same kind, if he parts with that he has.

Secondly, if it be such a Commodity as he cannot be without, if he desires to
have a being; such a Commodity as he can neither trade for the World, nor
subsist in the World without it.

Thirdly, if it be a Commodity received from a Friend, and Keep thy soul
diligently, Deuteronomy. 4. 9.
such a Friend as he ought to love above the World, and that Friend gave it to
him to the end that he might keep it for his own endless good, and for his
sake that gave it to him.

Fourthly, if it be such a Commodity as does exceed all For it cost more to
redeem their souls; so that he must let that alone for ever. Psalm. 49. 8. What
shall he give in exchange? Intelligere oportet de anima perdita. Jansen.
prices that can be given by this World for it.

And lastly, if it be a Commodity that cannot be regained by any man that has
parted with it, although he would part with all back again that he took for it,
and give even all that he had before to boot.

Now all these Circumstances do concur with the Singularity of the Soul. For,
1. A man can never get another Soul, when his own is lost. 2. A man cannot
subsist without his Soul, he could not be a Man but for his Soul, it is Soul
that makes him so. 3. It was the Lord himself that gave his Soul unto him, and
for his sake he ought to keep it; and he gave it him to keep, until that he
should come and take it to himself again. 4. It is of worth above the World.
And lastly, nothing in the World can ever redeem it, if it be lost or laid to
pawn. The loss must needs be great: And how great soever it be, that man that
has lost it must bear all the loss; no man can be partner with him, because
it was his own soul, and only his.

That Is the third Circumstance to be considered, and it is very considerable;
It is his own Soul. Others can have no share with him in the substance of this
Commodity thus exported, and therefore can they not be sharers with him in his
loss of it. Others may have their hands in the loss of this Soul, and so may
be punished with the loss of their own for it, yet will their losses no way
lessen his. His soul was all his own before he parted with it, and all the
loss must be his own for parting from it. A great loss it must needs be unto
him: It is the loss of his greatest good, and with that the loss of all his
goods. Yet for the gaining of wordly goods, too many adventure the loss of
their souls.

Some Merchants have adventured much, and have gained more; they have
adventured with their goods, and have saved themselves: But others have lost
both their goods and themselves by the like adventures. Some men have
adventured far for the gaining of the World, and have come home again to
themselves without losing their Souls: But others have lost them by adventuring
of them. Some men lose their Souls by adventuring of them: Some others sell
them, and so lose them.

And so we are fallen upon the third particular, the Merchandise it self, or
the Negotiating of the Trade. And in this negotiating of the Trade, there are
both gaining and losing: Gaining of the World, and losing of the Soul. The
gains are great; gain the whole World: But the loss is greater; and lose his
own Soul. He that sells his Soul for the whole World, makes but an ill bargain
for himself: He is a loser by the bargain, and such a loser, that his very soul
may be said to be lost though he sells it, because he sells it so much under
foot. There are two Ways to lose the Soul by selling of it.

The first by Wholesale. The second by Retaile.
Men may be said to sell and lose their souls by Wholesale, when they take
some great reward of iniquity for them, and so Iose them all at once. And they
may be said to sell them by Retaile, when they forfeit and lose them by little
and little. There are Minuta peccata, says S. Austine, peccadillio's, little
S. August. de de Cevit. Dei. l. 2. cap. 32.
sins. And there are Peccata conscientiam vastantia, Conscience-wasting
sins, great offenses. The Soul may be lost by one of these, or it may be
lost by a multitude of those. It is traded away by Wholesale, when it is lost
for one grand offense; And it is traded away by Retaile, when it is lost for
many minute offenses. St Bernard calls these Venialia, S. Bern. de praecep. and
dispen. cap. 14.
and those greater Criminalia: but these Venials are made Mortals, when a
mortal man allows them in himself, and himself in them, and so multiplies
them upon that stock of allowance. St Austine compares these smaller sins to
the grains of Sand, and to the smallest drops of Water. The grains of Sand
are very small, yet if many of them be put together into a Bag, or Sack, and
laid upon the head, or shoulders of a man, they will press him down: And the
drops of Rain are little by themselves, yet when many meet together they may
cause an inundation. Many small sins may be as heavy as one great sin,
says S. Austine. S. August. Epistol. 108. ad Seleusian.
And he fitly resembles the loss of a Soul to the loss of a Merchants ship
upon the Sea; Sometimes a Ship is lost by one great Wave that overwhelmes it,
and sinks it right down; and sometimes a Ship is lost by the Water that leaks
in by some breach or breaches in the sides or bottom. So some men's souls are
lost by the sins that sue in through their leaking senses; and sometimes they
are lost by some great sin that swells above them, and sinks them right down
to the very bottom of perdition; such was that grand Rebellion of Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, and Number. 16. 1, 2. 4. 31, 32, 33.
their factious Accomplices that rose up against Moses and Aaren to pull them
down. It was so heinous and so heavy a sin, that it sunk them all to the pit
of destruction, the very Earth was not able to bear them with that sin upon
them. Some other trifled away theirs souls by little and little: But these
traded theirs away by wholesale. But which way so ever they be sold, they are
but lost. And in both these ways of selling them there are two things
remarkable:

First, the making of the Bargain. Secondly, the performing of the Bargain.
First, the making of it. And it may be made two ways: Explicitly, or
Implicitly; that is Formally, or by Consequence.

First, Explicitly, or Formally, when both parties do capitulate the
Conditions, and agree upon the Terms. Thus Witches, and Wizards, and all
Confederates with the Devil, are said to sell their souls unto him.

Secondly, Implicitly, or by consequence: and this is when the Devil, or his
Factors come into the Mart of this World, and fall to chaffering for Men's
Souls by cheapning of them, and bidding like Chapmen for them. The Devil comes
to the Covetous man, and asks him the price of his Soul; He comes to the
Voluptuous man, and asks him the price of his; And he comes to the Ambitious
man, and asks him the price of his. The price of the Covetous man's is Wealth;
the price of the Voluptuous man's is Pleasure; and the price of the Ambitious
man's is Honor. The Devil knows their several prizes, but knows not how to pay
them down: Yet like himself he offers all they ask, and promises in time to
pay them all. Matthew. 4 9.
Haec omnia vobis dabo, all these things will I give unto you. And then for
Earnest, or in part of payment he puts a penny or a Teston of unlawful gains
into the hands of the Covetous man to conclude the Bargain with him: He
procures an opportunity of unlawful Pleasure according to the Voluptuous man's
desire, to conclude the Bargain with him: And by a small Bribe he sets the
Ambitious man upon the first step to preferment, to conclude with him. These
men cannot be ignorant of the Devils aims, they must needs know, that what he
offers, is but in earnest or in part of payment for their souls; yet they take
his offers, or rather are taken with his temptations: and what call you this,
but a striking up of the bargain? Now the bargain being made, the performance
is expected. But here men think to be too cunning for the Devil himself. They
never intend to perform the bargain, they think to put him off by denying of
it. They intend to put him to prove it by sufficient witnesses, which they
think he cannot do, before the Judge at the great Assize. But alas for them!
before it comes to that, they may be sure to be Arr^sted at the Devils Suit, by
that bold, that inexorable, that impartial Sergeant, Death. Executions will be
granted out against them; and those not of goods only, nor yet of bodies and
goods; but of goods and bodies and souls. And Death's Warrants run very high,
Non omittas propter ullam libertatem: Attach them wherever thou find them.
There are no places in this world, that are privileged from the Arrests of
Death. When once this Sergeant Death has arrested their Bodies, their Souls
must presently be sent to the Bar of Judgment for particular Sentences. Then
actum erit, the matter will be past cure; the bargain will be proved against
them by credible witnesses: For first, the Devils payments will be proved by
that Coin of his, those pieces of Devillisme found in their possessions at the
time of their attachments. Those sins which the Devil brought to them, or
them unto, will all be witnesses against them.

Secondly, the Day-book of their own Consciences will be produced as a thousand
Witnesses against them: for there the Debt of Sin is scored up, and never can
be crossed until it be expunged by repentance. And now, shall not the Judge of
all the World do right? Yes surely, and he will give the Devil his due. There
is no remedy now, the bargain must be performed: The Devil bought their Souls,
and he must have them. The Devil is the Jailour of Hell, and thither the Judge
commands them: Take them Jailour, says the Judge; that is, take them Devil,
and keep them fast till the general Judgment: They might have been wiser
before, but now there is no help for them; It is now too late to repent, let
Merchantmen beware in time then; let no man think to cheat the Devil, lest he
cheats himself. Let no man think himself secure in the midst of danger. Think
not your selves by the African Promontory, the Cape of good Hope, when ye are
very near the Magillanean Straights. Mistake not those unfortunate Caput bou^
sp^t. Abbots description of the World.
Islands near the Molucco's, for the very Canaries. If you be not yet arrived
at Lucians Island of Dreams, do not dream broadwaking; do not imagine your
souls to be in safe habours when they are in the midst of Hellish Pirates.
This World is like a Sea, a dangerous Sea; and that Arch-Pyrate the Devll, and
many Scouts from Hell are coasting this Sea of the World; from place to place.
And the Devil can play the Merchant as well as the Pyrate, if he cannot take
men in the World, he will try to take them by it: If he cannot surprise them in
it, he will offer it as a prize unto them, and many are taken by it: Many sell
themselves unto him for it, and so undo themselves for ever; for they lose
their Souls by the sale, which are more worth then all the World. And so much
they must confess, if they balance the Trade.

What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? i. e. Balance the Trade, compare and compute the worth of the wares,
and then say, What profit is it for a man to gain the whole world, and lose his
own soul? I may not stand to recapitulate the several circumstances of both
these Wares, the whole World, and a man's own soul; and so compare them: Let
your Meditations ease me of that labor, whilst I sum up the Uses that may
be made of these Meditations.

Yet for the Ballancing of the Trade, let me make a tendry to you of three or
four Considerables.

1. Consider, That the gaining of the whole World can never make the Gainer of
it happy: But so will his saving of his own Soul.

2. Consider, that a man cannot be happy without his own Soul; but without the
World he may

3. Consider, That a man must lose the World, or leave it before he can be
happy; but if his Soul be lost, when it must leave him he can never be happy.

4. Consider, That the Soul is infinite in duration, and the World but finite.
This but temporal; but that eternal, aparte post, as some distinguish. The one
a matchless treasure, the other a worthless trifle in comparison.

Now balance these Considerables: What profit is it for a man to gain that,
which can never make him happy, and lose that for it, which would make him so
for ever, if he did not lose it? Or, what profit is it for a man to gain that,
which he must lose again before he can be happy; and for his gaining of it,
must lose that which can no more be gained, nor happiness without it? Or, what
profit can it be to gain that which is but finite, and lose that which is
infinite? Inter finitum, and infinitum nulla datur proportio. There is no
proportion between a thing that is finite, and a thing that is infinite.

Is it so then, that the whole World is not to be valued with one Soul? What
folly then do those men show to the world, that adventure the loss of their
Souls for the very Attoms of the world, or the smallest gains that can be in
the World? for an Inch in an Ell, for an Ounce in a Pound? What lunacy, what
madness to hazard a Soul Si ergo homines totum mundum spernere oportet ne
animarum damna patiantur; and propter suam salutem debet quispiam etiam sua
lucra contemnere; quam infidelis est, quam insipiens est, qui ut alium divitem
faciat, animam suam ipse condemnat? Maxim cum and ille non multum adipiscitur,
qui usum temporalium rerum accipit^ and ille inaestimabilia damna praeferat,
qui fructum beatae aeternitatis amittit. Salvianus ad Eccles. Cathol. lib. 3.
for farthings, or the Minutes of the World? for a moment of Pleasure, or a
Puff of applause? Many think they bring their Souls to very good Markets, if
they can sell them with a Ziba for a Mephibosheths inheritance; or with an Ahab
for a Naboths Vineyard, or with an Achan for a wedge of gold. Many are willing
to sell them as Esau did his Birthright, for a mess of Pottage; yea, for a
piece of Bread some will transgress. Judas the Traitor valued his Master at
thirty pence: But how many are there, that can be content to sell their
Savior, and give their Souls into the bargain, for the bare moitie of his
reward of iniquity? Ananias and Sapphira sold themselves for part of that
price, that should have been laid at the Apostles feet, Acts 5. A very
inconsiderable price. But what if it had been all? And what if that all had
been as much as all the world? what profit would it have been unto them, if
they must have lost their own Sacrilego poena est neque ei soli qui e sacro
abstulerit, sed etiam ei qui sacro commendatum quod and nunc multis sit fanis.
Cicer. de leglb. lib. 1.
Souls for it? Alas, no profit at all! For what is a man profited, if he shall
gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul?

And secondly, is it so that the gaining of the whole World is not to be
balanced with the loss of one Soul? What answer or account can those Factors
make to their Principal? What can such Malefactors answer unto God Almighty,
that have caused the loss of a World of Souls, for the gaining of a little
Worldly Pelf, or a little vain Applause, or a little vanishing Pleasure? Cicer.
Parad. lib. 3.


The Stoics thought (as Cicero tells us) that all sins are equal. And some
Heretics have thought that all sufferings shall be so in Hell. But dantur
gradus in Gloria; there are degrees of Glory in Heaven amongst the Saints, and
there shall be degrees of Misery in Hell amongst the Sinners. It has been the
judgment of many Orthodox Divines, that the Authors and the Abettors of the
Arrian Heresies had their Torments in Hell increased daily, as the number of
Souls increased which were daily lost by following of their Heresies. Yet for
a little applause amongst some people, and for some small Benevolence from
them, the old Heresies are unraked out of their ashes, and new ones are blown
up daily into blazing-flames, to the great disturbance of Isreal's peace, and to
the destruction of Sions prosperity. The Pulpits are profaned, and the Presses
are pestered, and Myriads of Souls are seduced with the daring fancies of
desperate Opinionists. For small gains, some have written, and others have
printed, and diverse have vended dangerous Pamphlets, to corrupt men's judgments,
and poison their affections, and undo their souls. Oh that the worth of Souls
were better considered!

It was a pious Resolve in an English Gentleman, an elegant Penman, neither to
write, nor yet to read any profane Pasquils. He would not write any such, lest
his own condemnation should be increased by theirs that should be corrupted by
his Pen: nor would he read any such, lest he should be corrupted, and increase
their condemnation that wrote them. It is better to have a lame hand, says he,
then a lewd pen. Our Savior paid very heartily to redeem men's souls; And must
not those men pay very dearly for them, that thus adventure to ruin them?

In the third place: Is it so, that our Savior Christ the chief Pastor and
Bishop of Souls, has such an estimate of Souls, that he deems one Soul worth
more then all the World? Then let all Bishops and Spiritual Pastors take the
greater heed unto those Souls committed by him to their Charges. All others are
Vicarii ejus, but his Curates or his Vicars, says Omnes alii sunt Vicarii
ejus, quia ipse pascit oves proprias, alii vero oves Christi. Aquin. in Ep. ad
Heb. c. 13.
Aquinas; and unto him they must answer for those entrusted to them. It is
reported of S. Austine, that he wept when he entered into Holy Orders: And some
have thought those Tears prognostics or forerunners of his following Troubles
in his Office. But surely the sight of his Danger under that Charge did draw
tears out of his eyes, as well as his foresight of those Troubles that he
found in the Discharge of his Office. Indeed his pains in Preaching were like
to prove Paraemian; his labors little better then the washing of the
Black-Moore: His Cure consisted of Swarthy Africans See Eliah's wish, preached
by Dr. Willan ar the Funerals of the Lord Bayning.
whose Souls were as tawny as their Hides. And those Labors of the Pulpit were
likely to be made more difficult by multitudes of Gainsayers. He was likely to
have perpetual Bickerings with refractary Schismatics, and with obstinate
Heretics, such as would oppose the Discipline, and such as would apostatize
from the Doctrine of the Church. And likely he was by their means to meet many
Atheists too, such as would neither believe the Truth of God, nor the God of
Truth. For all Africa was full of such Monsters in Africa semper aliquid
apportat novi.
the time of S. Austine, as full as of other Monsters at other times.

The first Part of S. Austin's Polemicks does still attest what Div. Aug. Tom.
6.
bickerings he had with Jews, and with Pagans; with Fortunatus, and Adimantus,
and Faustus, and Felix, and Secundinus, and other Manichean Heretics; with
Maximinus, and Felicianus, and other Arrians; with Priscilianists, and
Originists, and Jovinian, and other Heretics. And the second Part of his
Polemicks does abundantly show his troublesome Conflicts S. Aug. tom. 7.
with Parmenian, and Petilian, and Cresconius, and Gaudentius, and Emeritus,
and Fulgentius, and other malignant Donatists, and with that pestilent Heretic
Pelagius and all his followers.

Pelagius was born in Wales, about the time that S. Austine Pelagius Brito
Monachus, An. Dom. 415. Bellar. Chron. par. altera.
was born in Africa; and the infection of his Heresies as well as others, did
spread as far as the Diocese of Hippo, when Father Austine was Bishop there;
and it cost him no little pains to administer an Antidote against the poison.
But S. Austine was Malleus Haereticorum, the Maul of Heretics: For the
Heretical opinions of Pelagius, see Mer. Hanmers Eccl. Chron.
and so he proved to Pelagius. It was by special Providence (as some have
thought) that these two were (...) or Contemporaneans, that so the Antidote
might be contemporal to the Poison, and that the Truth might have an Austine to
defend it, when it had a Pelagius to oppose it. They were born both in one day.
Noah's Dove, by Dr. Valentine.
S. Austine had work enough with him, and such as he. Yet his troubles were
increased by composing of Quarrels between Dissentients in Civil things. But
that which was most burdensome of all, was his Charge of Souls. He knew right
well the worth of Souls; and he knew as well what a strict account would be
required of them. Judah's engagement Genesis 43. 8, 9.
for Benjamin was full of hazard: But a Pastors, or Bishops engagement for the
Souls in his Charge is far more hazardous; though few men think themselves
beholding to them for engaging for them.

But Ghostly Fathers are not the only men that must answer for Souls: for
Natural Fathers are Curates too. The Souls of all their Children are committed
to their trust, and scored upon their accounts: It is their Duty to bring
Ephesians. 6. 4.
them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. And if they perish for want
of such admonition and nurture, the Souls of the Fathers must suffer for them.

And Masters of Families are Trustees too, they have Cures of Souls committed
to them; The souls of their Servants are all upon their scores. And therefore
Joshuah's care was not for a personal piety only, but a domestical too. As for
me and my house, we will serve the Lord. Jos. 25. 15. And the care of Philemon
was to have his house like the house of Philem. 2.
God. And such was the pious care of Aquila, and Priscilla. 1 Cor. 16. 19.
The Apostle tells us of Churches in their Houses: their Houses were like to
Churches, for government and for godliness. Each master was as a Bishop in his
own Diocese, respecting the Souls committed to his charge, as one that must
answer for them.

And Public Magistrates have Charges of Souls too, and such as are full of
hazard. It belongs to them (...), to 1. Reprimendos esse haereticos ab omnibus
piis, secundum illam vocationem, and potestatem, quam acceperunt a Deo, satis
apparet ex natura rei: quia omnes pii ad militiam Christianam vocantur ut in
suis stationibus opponant sese singuli regno tenebrarum. 2. Magistratus locus,
and officium postulant, ut reprimat improbos turbatores gladio, vel potestate
publica, and externa si opus fuerit. 3. Si igitur Haeretici sint manifesti, and
public noxii, debent a Magistratu publica potestate coerceri. Amesius de
Conscien. lib. 4. cap. 4. qu. 6.
oversee, or to watch over them. That first of Christian Emperors, Constantine
the Great, did think so, when he told the Fathers of the Church at the Nicene
Council, that he was (...), a Bishop as well as they; he was to have a care of
of Souls; yea, his office bound him to watch over their Souls as well as
others, though his office did differ from theirs in administration of duty.

The Minister has one sword of God put into his hand, and he must not bear the
same in vain; for he is the spiritual Magistrate of God to denounce the evil
of Punishment against all the doers of the evil of Sin. And the Magistrate
has another sword of God in his hand, and he may not bear it in vain; for he
is Gods temporal Minister, to execute Vengeance upon them that do evil. All
things do Romans 13. 4. 1 Timoth. 2. 2.
then go well in Commonwealth, when the mouth of God, the Minister, and the
hand of God, the Magistrate go both together to beat down sin and schism, and
blasphemy and heresy. Indeed, there may be some danger in such times as these,
for either Magistrates of Ministers to Imperatorumest tollere schismata.
Theodori^us de Nicen.
displease the violent many, by discharging of their offices: But must there
not needs be more danger to them, if they displease God Almighty by not
discharging of them, to humor the Many. It is good sleeping in a whole skin;
but better keeping of a whole Conscience. It is well when men can save
themselves here; but better if they can save their souls hereafter. But this
cannot be done by neglecting the Souls of trust. Magistrates are called Gods;
yea, God himself Surely the Parliament was very sensible of this, when the
Article for exterpation of Popery, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness,
etc. was put into the Covenant, and when the Ordinance for that day of
Humilition, March 10. 1646. for the suppressing of Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies, was made:
does call them so, Psalm. 82. 6. And God forbid that they should be like to
Idol gods, Which have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, and hands but strike
not.

I have both heard and read a story (related as from the Sea Archbishop Curles
Sermon upon Hebr. 12. 14.
Pen of Plutarch) of a certain Virgin that had many Suitors, and every one
pretended an only right unto her: All could not have her, and therefore they
resolved to pull her in pieces. Now me thinks Religion is like that Virgin:
many pretend to be good-willers to it; and every mere pretender to it claims
the whole right of it. The Papist says, Religion is his. The Brownists says,
it is his. And so says every kind of Anabaptists. And every sort of Familists.
All cannot have it, as they would; and therefore they endeavor to rent it all
in pieces, that the true Protestant may not quietly enjoy it. Thus the life of
Religion is in danger, and must needs be lost, unless the Magistrate, with the
sword of Justice in his hand, will show the Justice of that sword, and do the
Protestant right by defending his Religion. Tirannis non est impedire
novationes in Ecclesia orthodoxa: Videlius dePruden. Ver. Eccles. l. 3. c. 4. 1
Kings 13. 16, etc.


King Solomon could certainly conclude, that she was not the true Mother of the
living Child, that was for the dividing of it. And any Magistrate may conclude
as certainly, that they are neither Fathers, nor Mothers, nor Brothers, nor
Sisters, nor any way allied to Religion, but mere aliens that are either for
dividing of it, or dividing from it.

You then that have the over sight of such a City as this, be not over-seen to
lose your own Souls by conniving at Acts 18. 17. Sine zelo nec Religio
conservari, and propagarii nec tentationes vel spei, vel metus superari
possunt. Videlius de Prudent. Ver. Eccles. l. 1. c. 3.
the loss of thousands. Be not Gallio's at such a time as this, in such as a
case as this, in such a City as this. But be as zealous for the Truth, as any
can be for Errors. Be as watchful for the Church as others are against it. Be
for the Lord, and he will be for you. Zeal for the Lord does w^ll in any man,
but better in the Magistrate. Qui non zelat, non amat. He that is not zealous
for the City of God, and for the God of the City, loves neither as he should:
Oh, love the Lord, and love the place where his honor dwells; love the
worship of the Lord, and the place of his worship, and the time for worshipping
of him in the place of worship. Love the Levit. 19. 30. Psalm. 93. 5. The
Parliament has done the Lords Day right by that Ordinance April 6. 1644. for
the strict observance of the Day. John 2. 14, etc. Si quis domum Dei
contemptibilem esse, and conventus qui in ea c^lebrantur, Anathema sit.
Carranza Council. Gangr. Can. 5.
Lords house, and the Lords day; holiness becomes both: let not profaneness
come into either, lest it enter also into men's souls. If we have neither a set
time, nor a settled place for solemn worship, we shall quickly have no worship.
And if we lose the worship of God amongst us, must we not look to lose the Lord
himself from amongst us? And if we lose him, can we save our selves? Must not
our souls be lost, if he be lost that should save them? Let us keep his Day,
and keep his House, to keep him in his house amongst us.

When our gracious Savior was upon the earth, his pious zeal for the place of
public worship, did even compel him to whip the profane Huc^sters out of the
Temple. And were he now upon the earth, his zealous Piety might be compelled to
whip some Hucksters with other prophaners of his Sabbath, into his Temple: And
yet it may be he would whip them out again, for coming profanely thither, or
committing profaneness there.

Many are so greedy of worldly gains, that they cannot forbear their
Huckstering upon the Sabbath: they lose a greater good for the gaining of a
little goods. They lose the Time and Means of gaining goodness, and gaining
godliness. Godliness is great gain. But alas! their gains by hapering at
home are small and inconsiderable. What if they Vbi salutis damnum est, illic
utique jam lucrum nullum est. Eucher. Epist. ad Valerian.
gain much? What if they gain as much as all the World, if they must lose their
Souls, their gains can no way recompense them for their loss. There can be no
profit in such gains; For, What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul?

FINIS.
The Pious Convert. A FAST SERMON, As it was Preached at Great Bealings in
SUFFOLK, By Edw. Willan, M. A. C. C. C. in Ca.

Luke 5. 32. I came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to repentance.
Matthew. 3. 8. Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance. Seneca Tragaed.
8. Quem paenitet peccasse, pene est innocens. LONDON, Printed for RICHARD
ROYSTON at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1651.

To the Worshipful, ALMOT CLENCH Esquire; His very loving Friend and Kinsman.
SIR,
YOU cannot but know by whom this Text was given to me: But I cannot know to
whom this Sermon may be given so rightly as to the Giver of the Text. Give me
leave then to give that to you a second time, and by a second way, which has
been yours from the first. Why should it not be yours in your Hands, as well as
yours in your Head, and yours in your Heart? The Text was very well taken from
his hands that gave it: And I will hope that those hands which gave the Text,
will take the Sermon so. Indeed I must needs say, the Text was very worthy to
be accepted; But so I dare not say of the Sermon. But if you please to take it
as it is, it is as it was. It was yours from the Pulpit at the first; And yours
for ever it must be from the Press, by all the right that may be.

I have minded you already of your Interest in the Argument: But I suppose I
need not mind you of your Interest in the Author, Who is

Sir, Your Worships humble Servant, and poor Kinsman, Edw. Willan.

The Pious Convert.
Ezekiel 18. 32. Wherefore turn your selves, and live ye.
IT was not I that chose this Text for this Time: nor was it this Time that
chose this Text for me. Yet choice it was, not chance, that put me at this Time
upon this Text, or this Text rather upon me. I cannot choose but like and love
the choice from him that made it, and say, My lot is fallen to Psalm. 16. 7.
^n a fair ground. It is a Text as fitly chosen for these ^es as may be. We
cannot yet say, that the Times are tur^g; yet may we say, that they are turning
Times: And ^ Text is like them; a Text of Turning. I wish my Ser^n may be as
suitable to the Text, as the Text is to the ^e; and then I am sure it cannot be
unseasonable.

Those Sermons are never out of Season, which season the ^rts of Sinners with
godly sorrow for their Sins. And ^se Seasons, wherein the Hearts of Sinners
are without ^h Sorrow, may not be without such Sermons. It were to wished that
such Sermons were less suitable then they are ^o these Times. But alas! there
can be no Sermons more ^hen Penitential, for the present Time: Nor any Time ^re
fit then the Present, for Penitential Sermons.

That inspired Secretary of the Holy Ghost St. Paul, did truly foretell of Evil
Times. And truly these Times are as Evil, ^ 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2.
any that he did foretell of: Evil they are in respect of S^^ings; and worse
they are in respect of Sins: And ther^^ worse they will be also in respect of
Sufferings, unless ^^ do become less evil then they are in respect of
Sins. ^^deed most men wonder to see these Times so evil as they ^^ already:
But we may rather wonder that we have not ^^ready seen them far worse then
they are indeed.

The Itching Ears of these Times have made them very ill ^^ready: ^ Tim. 4. 3.
God forbid that I should make them worse by cl^^ing of them: He that claws an
itching Humor does b^ make it spread the further. And truly too much clawi^ of
itching Ears on both sides has already spread such ^^mours too too far: for
so invenomed they have been ^^ such clawing, that no remedy but Phlebotomy
could c^^ the Malady. The folly of clawing has fetched blood alre^dy on both
sides: And it were to be wished, that the bl^^ already drawn might serve the
turn. It would, it may ^^ if men would turn themselves. And there is no way to
^^ away the Times of this most dangerous Phlebotomy, but ^ turning away from
the most damnable flatteries of t^^ Times. These are Times indeed to break Men's
Hearts ^^ serious Blames of their iniquity: No Times to break ^^ Heads with
the precious Balmes of flattery. These are times ^ Psalm. 141. 6. Rev. 2, 16.
19, 15. Ephesians. 6. 17. Hebr. 4. 12.
incite men to shed Tears gladio oris, with that sword of ^^ which proceeds
out of his mouth, the keen blade of ^^ Word, sharper indeed then any two-edged
Sword. No Times to ^ men on to shed more blood still ore gladii, with the mo^^
or edge of that mortal Sword which eats Flesh and drin^ Blood. These are no
Times to drive ill Humors in at m^^ Ears, but to draw them out at their Eyes.

Never were lamenting Jeremies, or relenting Jon^hs, or^ proving Nathans, or
repenting David's more needful to any p^^ple: Nor ever any People less
heedfull unto such Prop^^ then the English in these Times. No Times did ^ver
aff^^ more Preachers, or fewer Practicers of Repentance then ^^ Present.
Indeed, the sound of Repentance was never m^^ affected by any People: But sound
Repentance indeed ^^ ^ver less effected by any Preachers.

Those Prophets of the Lord do ever bring most profit to ^^ People, which
preach the People into Repentance, by ^^aching Repentance unto the People: And
those People ^e ever return most profit to their Preachers, which do ^urn or
repent at their preaching of Repentance to them. that better office can a
Preacher do to any People, then ^nvert them from their Sins by speaking home
unto their ^onsciences? And what greater Honor can the People ^e to any
Preacher, then to hear and believe, and turn at ^s preaching to them? (...),
says ^. Chrysostom: What profit a crews to me from all these Chrysostom. Hom. 2
^^ie applauses? (...), says he; And that profit is there to me from all these
popular praises, (...), S. Ch^ys. Hom. 2.
^d tumuls? My praise, and profit, and honor are rather ^ your Works then in
your Words. Then am I to be dee^ed happy, says he, not when ye hear, but when
ye do that I deliver to you; or, when ye turn at my reproofs, and ^^ amended
at my exhortations. The Preachers greatest ^rofit is in the Peoples: And
certain it is, that no People of ^e Lord can do a better turn unto themselves,
then to turn ^^mselves unto the Lord of all People. Wherefore turn your ^ves,
and live ye.

This Text concludes the Chapter, and as a rational Con^usion it is inferred
from many Premises in the Chap^^r. ^^d in this Text we may observe the Use and
Application of ^ the whole Chapter: The Use is an Use of Exho^tation. The ^^xt
is Hortatory; two Exhortations are couched in it. ^he first, an Exhortation to
Repentance: The second an Ex^rtation to Perseverance. Turn your selves; there is
the first. ^^ve ye; there is the second. The last is ushered in by the ^^st:
And the first is ushered in by an Illation, or note of In^^^nce, which
refers unto both: Wherefore turn your ^^ves, and live ye.

Or in the Text we may observe twice two Considerabl^s.

Two Conjunctions, and Two Injunctions.
First, two Conjunctions. The first to join the two In^^ctions in the Text unto
the former Parts of the Chap^^ The second, to join the latter Injunction in the
Text ^^ the former. The two Conjunctions are both Copula^^^ Et reverti sacite,
and vive^is. Ar. Mont.
according to Montanus: But according to our Eng^^ Translation, the former is
an Illative, the latter only C^^lative. The first brings both the Injunctions
into the Ch^^ter; The second brings them both together.

The first Injunction does command an Humble C^^version,

Turn your selves. The second commands an Holy Conversation,

Live ye. The performance of the first, prepares for the second* And the
performing of the second, is to the perfecting ^ the first. The second cannot
be without the first; And t^^ first had as good not be, as be without the
second. Both ^^ be performed, and both in order: First turn, and then ^^ Living
is commanded, as well as Turning. The last Ve^b^ as mandatory as the first;
both are in the Commanding Mood, both Imperatives, (...) and so they are bo^^
translated by S. Hierome, and by our own Translators to^ Revertimini, and
vivite, says he: Turn your selves, and l^ve ^^ say they. Revertimini per
poenitentiam, says Ni^. de Ly^^ Nic. de Lyra in locum.
Turn your selves by repenting of your sins. Et vivite p^gratiam, quae ducit
ad vitam glori^ sempiternam: And live t^^ life of Grace here, which leads to
the Life of Glo^^ hereafter.

It is to no end or purpose to turn your selves, unl^^ Paenitentiam quippe
agere, est and perpetrata mala plangere, and plang^nda non perp^trare. S.
Gregor. in aesti. temp.
you purpose to go on unto the end, when ye are turn^^ Wherefore turn your
selves, and live ye. Be Converts, and continue such: Live ye ever so, and so ye
shall live for ev^^ Living without Turning is impossible; and Turning without
Living is unprofitable. Indeed there is no Living without Turning, nor any
Turning indeed without Livin^ He that would live, must turn himself: And he
that do^ turn himself, must live too: And he shall live, that so d^^ turn
himself. Wherefore turn your selves, and live ye. Re^^ facite, and vivetis,
says Montanus: Do your endeavors to be Ari. Mont. Bibl. secund. Zanti^
Pagnini interpretationem.
turned, and ye shall live. And so Montanus seems to part the Text into a
Precept, and a Promise.

First, into a Precept of Turning. Secondly, into a Promise of Living.
Turn, and Live. As much as to say; Repent, and so be reprieved; Forsake your
sins, and so save your souls; Be but penitent, and ye shall be pardoned. The
last is hinted as a Promise, to persuade men to the Performance of the first.
The Promise commends the End; the Precept commands the Means. Life is
offered in the Promise as the End; and Repentance is required in the Precept as
the Means. He that would obtain the End, must use the Means; and he that does
use the Means, shall obtain the End. He that would live, must turn himself; and
he that does turn himself, shall live. Wherefore turn your selves, and live ye.

Thus some have taken both parts of the Text as mandatory; And others have
taken only the first part to be mandatory, and the second to be promissory. So
that some have taken the last part as an Injunction, and some have taken it as
an Invitation; Some as a Precept, and some as a Promise. Let us now take it as
both; As a Precept, and as a Promise too.

As a Precept to live. And, As a Promise of Life.
First, as a precept of Living after turning; And secondly, Dr. Done, Se^m. 7.
on the Nativity.
as a promise after both. As a Precept enjoining the Life of Grace; and as a
Promise of enjoying the Life of Glory. As a Precept requiring a Spiritual life,
which is the life of life; And as a Promise of requiting it with Life Eternal,
which is (as One calls it) the Exaltation of Life Spiritual. Yea, the Promise
is not only of enjoying the Life of Glory, with the Glory of Life hereafter;
But of enjoying the Life of Grace here, with the Grace of Life here also. Turn
your selves, and live here: Turn your selves, and live hereafter. The promise
is of the less sa^vation as well as of the greater, and no less of the
greater then of the less. Temporal life may be prolonged, and Eternal life may
be procured, by that Turning here required. Eternal judgments may be prevented,
and temporal judgments may be diverted or turned away, by turning here
according to the Text. Wherefore turn your selves, and live ye.

Wherefore] is a Note of Inference, and it does refer the Text to that which
goes before it. Now here to take in that before it which relates chiefly to
it, we must take our rist at the Verse before it: And in that we may note two
things very considerable.

1. An Exhortation. 2. An Expostulation.
The Exhortation is very passionate; The Expostulation very compassionate. The
first in these words; Cast away from you all your transgressions whereby ye
have transgressed, and make you a a new heart and a new spirit. The second in
these words; For why will ye die, O house of Israel? The first is moving, but
the second urging. Expostulatio pungit: A zealous Exppostulation does infuse
the spirit of Compunction: it has the quickest touch of any kind of speech, it
often touches to the quick. And God himself does here expostulate the cause
with dying Sinners, to make them sensible of their dangers, and to quicken them
in their seeking of deliverance. First he exhorts them to forsake their sins,
to save their souls. And then (seeing his Exhortation to work but little upon
them, though it were pathetical and paraenetical) He falls to expostulate the
reason with them: For why will ye die? As if he should have said; If ye will
but cast away your sins from you, ye shall not be cast away for your sins:
But if ye will not, ye must: If ye will not leave them whilst ye live, ye must
die for them, whether ye will or no, and they must leave you, when ye die. Why
will ye die? Why will ye? As much as to say; I must needs demand the reason, or
ask the cause of you, in whom the Provoke me not to anger with the works of
your hands, and I will do you no hurt. Jer. 25. 6.
cause of dying is. Ye die, because ye will die. Why will ye die? As much as to
say, I would not have you die; it is not merely from my will that ye die, but
from your own. Do not say then, that ye must needs die, because I will have ye
die; and that I will have ye die, because I will. I have no such will: I would
have you live; and therefore have exhorted you, and entreated you again and
again to turn from your evil ways, the ways of sin, which are the ways of
death. And I have promised to you, that if ye will repent, iniquity ver. 30.
shall not be your ruin. And my meaning is very sincere and real: I will be as
good as my promise, if ye will be but as good as I desire you. And because I
see mine Exhortation to be neglected of you, therefore do I come thus home unto
you with an Expostulation, to make you sensible of your fault, and folly, and
to make you see, that the cause of death is in your selves, in your own wills,
or rather in your wilfulness. Ye will die. Why will ye die? Ye will do that
for which ye must die: Ye will needs sin, to die for it: Ye will not avoid
it, by resisting the Temptation; nor make it void, by repenting of it; and
therefore ye must die for it, For the wages of sin is death. I must needs say
unto you, Why will ye die? Why will ye not return, and live? Why will ye not be
persuaded? why not entreated? why not commanded? Why, can no means, no mercies,
no promises, no threatenings prevail with you? Will ye sin wilfully? will ye
die sinfully? And yet will ye say, that it is my will that ye should so do,
and so die? Ye do that which is quite against my mind, against my Word, which
is my will. If ye die then, thank your selves for all your sufferings, or
rather blame your selves for all your sins.

Let this then serve as a Caveat to every Sinner, to admonish him to take good
heed that he does not charge God foolishly, and falsely with the impulsive and
original cause of his eternal death. Nefas est Deo ascribere causas
peccatorum, and ruinarum omnium, says S. Austine. It is a funerious crime S.
Aug. Resp. ad articulos sibi false impositos.
to fasten the cause of all evils upon God himself. Let no man therefore say,
that he must needs sin unto death, and die in sin, because it is Gods will
and (...) or good Or, had I not rather that he should be converted from his
evil ways, and live? Diodat.
pleasure that it should be so: for God himself does say the contrary, and that
with a kind of indignation; For, says he, have I any pleasure at all that the
wicked should die; and not that he should return from his ways, and live? v.
23. His Interrogation does import a vehement Negation. In saying, Have I any
pleasure at all that the wicked should die? He says as much as, I have no
pleasure at all that the wicked should die? And so he says very positively in
the words before the Text. For I have no pleasure in the death of him that
dies. So far he is from taking Nolo mortem morientis, quantum ut convertatur,
and vivat. Pamelius in Tertull. de Paeniten.
pleasure in the death of Penitent sinners, that the death of Impenitent
sinners is no pleasure to him. He has no pleasure in the death of such as dye
naturally in their sins, or for their not repenting of their sins before
they die. I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies.

If ye die then, the fault's your own. It is your wilfulness in sinning: or
your unwillingnesse to repent you of your sinning, Ye will not be persuaded to
forsake your sins before ye dye; and therefore ye must needs die, and suffer
for their sakes. Perditio tua ex te: O Israel, thy destruction is of thy self:
says God, Hos. 13. 9. The same may be said to any damned soul, or dying
sinner.

The Lord is very desirous to clear himself from all aspersions in this
particular; and therefore does not only say it, but swear it too, that he
would not the death of the wicked. As I live, is an Oath, and a great one too:
Yet God himself does take it to attest this Truth; As I live, says the ^cut
verum est quod sum vita per essentiam, it a verum est quod nolo mortem impii,
etc. Nicho. de Lyra ad locum. Psalm. 89. 35. Genesis 17. 1. Luke 1. 73. Numb. 20.
12. Exodus 14. 11. Psalm. 50. 21. Ezekiel. 18. 25, 29. Psalm. 78. 19, 20
Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. But that the wicked
turn from his evil way, and live. Ezekiel. 33. 11. For the Lord of life to say,
As I live, is an oath by the life of the Lord. And that is as high an oath as
can be invented. Had he sworn by his Truth, as he does sometimes; or by his
Holiness, as he did to David; or by his Omnipotency, as he did to Abraham,
his engagement had been very great. But this by his Life is deemed greater: for
his Truth has been questioned by diverse, and so has his Holiness, and his
Almighty Power has been doubted of by as many: But who did ever question his
Life? Now it is his very Life that he does engage for the clearing of this
Truth. As I live, says the Lord, etc.

He is the Living God. And he is the God of the Living, not of the Dead: And
therefore would not have the wicked Die, Matthew. 22. 32. Tertull. l. de Paenit.
but Live. And this he swears by his Life, that we might believe him; Jurat
Deus, cupit sibi credi, says Tertullian; When God does swear, we must believe
him, for he swears to be believed. Ideirco jurat, says St. Hierome, ut si non
credimus Deo S. Hieron. To. 2. Epist. 46.
promitte^^i, credamus saltem pro salute juranti. God therefore swears, that we
may believe him upon his oath, when we Magnum est loqu^ dom^num quanto magis
jurare Deum? St. August. in Psalm. 49.
will not believe him upon his word. It is much for God to speak, but more to
swear. By speaking a word, he made the World; for, he did but speak the word
and it was made. But he that could create the World with a Word, could not be
credited in the World upon his Word; and therefore was forced to bind it with
an Oath. Now though we do not believe him upon his Word, yet let us believe
him upon his Oath.

We may believe his bare Word; for it is the God of Truth Deutr. 32. 4. Isai.
65. 16.
that speaks in his Word, and it is nothing but the Truth of God which is
spoken: We will believe an honest man upon his word, and shall we not believe
the most holy God. Durum est. It is very hard, if we shall not give as much
credit to God, as we do to an honest man, as says Vincentius very divinely.
Genesis 3. 4. Durum est cum non tantum tribuamus Deo, quantum diabolo. Vincent. An
non hac ratione Deum in animo tuo perstringis mendacii, qui verbo quidem dicat
te velle servare, etc. interim tamen licet tu velis in Christum credere ipse
tamen nolit. Zanch. de nature. Dei l. 5. Numb. 23. 19. Romans 3. 4. 2 Cor. 1. 20.
Hebr. 6. 18. 1 John. 3. 3.


Our first Parents believed the father of lies, when he did but say, ye shall
not surely die. And shall not we believe the father of mercies, the God of
Truth, when he does not only say it, but swear it too, that he would not have
us die: He swears that he would not the death of the wicked. And shall we still
say that he would their death? Or that he would have them wicked, that so they
might die? Absit, absit, God forbid that we should harbor such a thought of
our most holy God! The truth is, Gods Word in it self is as sure as his Oath;
for he is not a man that he should lie: Let God be true, and every man a liar.
All his promises are yea, and in him amen. Heaven and Earth shall pass away,
but not one tittle of his word shall fail: So that for the certainty of what
he speaks, there needs no such religious Contestations: Yet for our sakes the
Oath of God is added to his Word, that we might thereby have (...), strong
consolation. That we might believe a possibility of repenting; And a
probability, yea an infallibility of Pardon upon our repentance. That we might
have hopes of life, and purge our selves upon our hopes, Debile fundamentum
fallit opus. A weak foundation Nemo potest been agere paenitentiam nisi qui
speraverit indulgentiam St. Ambr. de Paenit. did. 1. cap. Nem.
fails the building: But here is a sure foundation for us to build our hopes
upon as high as heaven. Dei juramentum e^^ fide^ nostrae fundamentum. Gods oath
may surely ground us in our holy faith: Does he swear it? O then, let us
believe it! O beatos nos quorum causa jurat Deus! O miserrimos, si nec juranti
Deo credimus! O happy we, for whose sake the living God does swear by his life,
that he would not our death! O most wretched we, (says Tertullian) if we
Tertull. de Paeniten.
will not believe him when he swears. He swears he would not our death, but
have us live he would, and therefore would have us use the means. Now turning
is the means of living; Wherefore turn your selves, and live ye.

Turn your selves. These words are altogether Mandatory. And the Precept in
them has these two Considerables.

1. Who are commanded. 2. What is commanded.
First, Who. The word is Plural in the Text: And the Mandate in it is
indefinite, and so must reach unto us all. Turn ye, even all ye. Turn your
selves, ye that are sinners; Ye that Deus definitionem non facit, qui
misericordiam suam omnibus promisit. S. Ambros. de Paenit. did. 1.
must otherwise suffer eternally for your sins: Turn your selves. We are all
concerned in the duty here commanded. And in that we may consider three
particulars,

1. The Act. 2. The Object. 3. The Time.
The Act, Turn. The Object, Your selves. The Time, Presently.
For the word is in the Imperative Mood; and that admits of none but the
Present Tense. And thus from these words we may infer these three Conclusions:

1. That we must all Turn. 2. That we must all Turn our selves. 3. That we must
all Turn our selves without delay.
Wherefore turn your selves. First of the first, we must all turn. But what is
it to turn? By Turning here is meant Repenting. In Sinning there is a turning
from the Creator, and a turning to the Creature: And therefore in Repenting
there must be a turning from the Creature, and a returning to the Creator. And
this Turning is commonly called the Conversion of a Sinner. And in this
Conversion there are many Turnings. The first is the Sinners turning of al^
sins out of himself, by a full and clear Confession of them. The second is,
the Agite paenitentram det^stando peccatum. Nic. de Lyra in locum. S. Aug. Ser.
3. de Not. Dom.
Sinners turning from all sins so turned out, with an utter detestation of
them. And the third is, the Sinners turning or returning unto God, with true
compunction and contrition for his former turning from him. For, Paenitentiam
certam non facit, nisi odium peccati, and amor Dei, says S. Austine. A sinner
can never be said to be a true Convert, until he turns his loving of sin
into a loathing of it, and his hating of God into a loving of him. God hates an
obstinate Sinner, God accounts those to be haters of him, which continue
sinners against him. Ex. 20. 5.
but loves an humble Penitent. And we cannot but love him when we are
Penitents, though we were haters of him whilst we were Sinners. When our
repenting of our sins has procured his love to pardon them, and his
pardoning of our sins has persuaded us to love him, then our love unto him
must needs provoke us to abhor even all our sins, which provoked him to
abhor us; and to set our hatred most against those Delilahs or delightful
sins, on which we once most set our hearts. Our Hearts are most of Prove. 23.
26.
all desired of God; And God (who is a ( jealous God in this particular) is
most jealous of those sins which have been our Darlings; for those are most
likely to steal away our hearts and turn away our loves from him. He loves
nothing like our Hearts, and wooes us for nothing more then for our loves, and
therefore hates nothing so much as those insinuating sins, which will needs
be his Corrivals and Competitors in Courting of our Hearts. And therefore we,
to attest the truth of our love to him, must from our very Hearts detest those
sins, and scorn to entertain them as beloved Suitors. Yea, we must even hate
them with a perfect batred, or we cannot love God with entire love: And unless
we love him, we cannot hope for his love toward us: And without his love we
cannot live, or not so as we would, not well, not in peace, either with him, or
others, or with our selves.

Sin is a very Makebate, a common Barattor, the grand Boutefeu of
Great Britain, and of all the World. It is the partition wall betwixt God and
man, and betwixt man and man too. It is Sin that has parted the Church and
the Isa. 59. 2. Jer. 5. 25.
State: it is Sin that has parted the Sovereign and the Subject, the Prince
and the People. It is Sin that has been the Impulsive cause of all our
hurtful Combustions; Lam. 5. 16.
and Sin it is that is the Impedimental cause of all our hopeful
Accommodations. Oh, Sinne's the Remora of Reconcilement. What evil of Suffering
is there now amongst us, which the evil of Sin has not pulled down upon us?
Isa. 48. 22. 57. 21.
It is Sin that has been the Traitor (...), both to the King and to the
Kingdom; the Troubler of this our Israel. Sin is the grand Malignant, the
great Delinquent: It is Sin that hurts, and hinders the Great and Gravest
Council of the Kingdom. What evil has been acted, but Sin has had a finger
in it? Sin is the all in all for mischief.

It has been thought by some Politicians, that malus Vir may be bonus Cives;
An evil Man, and a good Commonwealths man. But believe it upon a plain
demonstration, A great Sinner can never be a good Subject: His sins are ever
doing of more evil in a Kingdom, then he himself is able to do good: Whilst
the Sinner himself may be fighting for it, his sins are fighting against him
and that. When a Kingdom quarrels with it self, it is a sign that God has a
quarrel with it. When the people of any Country do sin against God, they do
but pick quarrels betwixt God and their Country; and God he fights them all, by
making them to fight each other, whilst the sins of the divided Parties do
ever fight against their own Parties. How many on both Parties swear to fight
for their own Parties, to the best of their powers and policies; and drink deep
Healths to the greatest Leaders of their Parties, with intentions and
protestations to be faithful to them: whilst their Drinkings, and Swearings,
and other sins are very treacherous to themselves, and make them as ill as
Traitors to their Causes, and to their Companions? The sins of each Party do
take part with the other Party against the Sinners and their Parties. Yea
indeed there would be no such Parties, nor any need of such parts-taking, but
for the sins of both Parties. O that every Party and every person would look
upon their own sins as the most malignant party, and as the worst of enemies.
O that every man would take some speedy course to secure himself and all
Parties, by seeking out of those most dangerous Malignants that are in his own
bosom, and bringing them to their trials before the Bars of Self-examination,
and Self-Conviction, and Self-condemnation! That every man would turn out his
own sins, and turn them off, and return to the God of peace and mercy, that
God might turn away his fierce anger from us all, and turn his displeasure into
love, and his controversy with this Nation into a National peace. And this he
might be persuaded to do for us, could we be persuaded by him to turn from all
our sins, and return unto him. Wherefore turn your selves.

This brings the Act unto the Object, I would it might also bring the Object to
the Act. It has brought Turning unto you; I wish it might as well bring you to
Turning.

Many are busy in turning, but it is not of themselves. They are turning out
and turning off, but it is not of their own sins. There are many and many ill
turns done to others in these Times, but these are not the turnings in the
Text. Our turning must be of our selves. Wherefore turn your selves. Let us
search and try our own ways, and turn again unto the Lord, says the Prophet
Jeremy, Lam. 3. 40. Let us turn our selves; and let us all do so. A particular
Person, by turning of BP. Davenant, Sermon before the House of Lords. Jer. 3.
22.
himself unto the Lord, may turn away a particular Judgment from himself: But
when the sin has been general, and the suffering be as general almost as
the sin, then the sorrowing for it must be general. There must be a general
Turning at such a time, to turn away the Judgment. Clergy and Laity, Noble
and Ignoble, all must turn at such a time. When that great Defection was in the
Kingdom of Israel, and both parties had been sorely punished, the lamenting
Prophet Jeremy, by inspiration bespake both parties to return together. Let the
Children of Israel, and the Children of Judah come together, and weeping seek
the Lord their God, Jerem. 50. 4. And the Prophet Hosea's Exhortation return is
general. Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has spoiled us, and he will
heal us, he has wounded us, and he will bind us up again, Hos. 6. 1. Then
our Turning may be to purpose indeed, when it is universal, when we all join
hands hearts, and turn as one Man unto the Lord. When every Man turns one,
every one turns himself. When every wicked man forsakes his own ways, and
every unrighteous man his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord. As the
the Prophet Isaiah exhorts, Isa. 55. 7.

Great complaining there has been by the Many, against all sorts of
Magistrates, both Supreme, and Subordinate. Yea the greatest Council of the
Kingdom has been complained of by many: As if all evils were originally from
miscarriages in Governors. But may not the Many err in this, Matthew. 22. 29.
not knowing the Scriptures?

It was the Sin of David that caused the people to be numbered: And it was
from David's numbering of the People, that seventy thousands of them were swept
away in three days space by the plague of Pestilence. Yet was it not David's 1 Chronicles. 21. 2. 7. 14.
sin, but the sins of the People, that gave the first occasion of that
punishment. As you may see 2 Samuel 24. 1. And again the anger of the Lord was
kindled against Israel, and he moved Causa causae est causa causati.
David against them to say, go number Israel and Judah. When God is angry with
a people for their sins, he suffers their Ruler, or Rulers to do something
amiss, that so upon the fault of the Magistrate he may take an occasion to
punish the multitude. And it becomes the people to begin their Complaints,
where the fault to be complained of began. See this point very excellently
handled by Mr Rous in his Oil of Scorpions, Sect. 14.
If the sufferings of Israel were occasioned by David's sinning, And David's
sinning were occasioned by the sins of Israel, then surely the way for Israel
to have turned away their sufferings, had been by turning from their finnes.

Let not us inferiors look above our selves, or from our selves: for the
finding out of faults to be amended, but let us look into our selves, and amend
what there we find amiss.

The Hearts of the Governors are in the hands of God, and he Prove. 21. 1. They
are still in the hand of Gods powerful providence, though he permits the Devil
to have a hand and power over them. Dr Jermin Paraphrastick Meditations upon
the Proverbs.
turns them as he pleases which way he will himself. When he turns away
their hearts from the People, it is a sign that Hearts of the People are
turned away from him. He is the God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, He is the
Over-ruler of all Rulers; and by his disposing it is that they rule, for the
benefit, or for the detriment of the People. Now if there by any miscarriages
in our Governors, the way to win the Lord to set them right unto us, is to set
our selves right to the Lord. Let us but turn with all our hearts unto the
Lord, and he will surely turn the Hearts of all our Governors to us, and our
welfare. He will make their Counsels prosperous, He will make their designs
successful; He will turn our storm into a calm, our dangers into safety, our
troubles into tranquillity. All things Romans 8. 28.
shall work together for good to those that love him.

Many Men have many enemies in these times; And every Man's desires are to get
the Victory over his enemies. Our greatest Enemies are in our selves, our own
sins are bosom Enemies; And homebred Enemies are ever most mischievous.
Above any other Enemies let us therefore labor to get the Victory over our
selves. Let us never give over combating till we have conquered our own
corruptions. These are the first, and worst of Enemies, the Makers and Jam. 4.
1. Pugna, ut sit in animo hominis paena peccati est, ex primo homine in omnes
filios propagata: ut qui noluit cum Deo esse unitus, esset in semetipso
divisus: and qui imperanti Dom ino noluit esse subjectus, sibi ipsirebellis
atque contrarius esset. Isidorus de Summo bono, l. ^. cap. 26.
Movers of all Enmities. From whence come Wars and fightings amongst you? Come
they not hence, even of your Lusts which war in your Members? says St.
James. Our unruly affections make us all unruly. Our mutinous affections make
us so amongst our selves. There are Wars within us, and they are the
incentives of the Wars without us. Let us labor to make a peace within us,
and that is the way to have a peace without us. The way to get the Noblest
Victory over all our Enemies, is for every Man to get the Victory over
himselse. Caesar was more commended by Cicero for overcomming his own passions
to the yielding of Pardon to Marcellus, then for his greatest Conquests over
his other Enemies. It is a signal Conquest for a Man of a fiery Spirit to
suppress his Anger; It is with Hercules to conquer one of the furies of Hell.
It was but Inhumanely spoken by Vitellius upon the Death of Otho, as he viewed
the Carcasses on the place where they fought the Battle. O how sweet a perfume
is a dead Enemy! But it may be Divinely spoken by one that has Conquered
himself, or Mortified his sinful affections: O what a savor of life unto
life! is the Death of such a Mortal sin, Such a bosom Enemy! The Sins of
every Man are every Man's greatest Enemies. And the Kingdoms greatest Enemies
are the greatest sins of the Kingdom. I have been ever more afraid of the Sins
of this our Nation, then of any Soldiers from foreign Nations. Great talking
there has been of Danish Fleets, and other Outlandish Forces But we have more
cause to fear our Sea-mens sins, and the sins of our own Land. If God be
for us, who can be against us? And he will be for us, if our sins be not
against him: but our Romans 8. 31.
sins are all against him, and for their sakes he is against us. Were it not
for them, we need not fear any Danish (...). St Chrysostom. Nemo leditur nisi a
seipso.
Fleets, or Spanish Armados, or Turkish Navies; nor all the Pirates and Powers
of Hell. We have most cause then to be afraid of our selves, to fear our own
sins. Every Man may well pray as some of old were wont to do, Ame Domine
serva me: Lord save me from my self! In the Common Prayers; when the Minister
said, Give peace in our time, O Lord! the People were wont to answer, Because
there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O. God. A very
strange Reply, but not more strange then true; for true it is, that it is God
alone that fights for us. The Devil, he fights against us. The World, that
fights against us; And the Flesh as much as either of both. So that we our
selves are enemies Quo sugiam poenitendo, nisi ad ejus misericordiam cujus
potestatem contempseram peccando? Tertul.
to our selves, and fight against our selves. And so may fitly pray, Lord save
us from our selves. Now there is no way for us to save our selves from our
selves, but by turning of our selves to him that fights for us. Wherefore
turn your selves.

But it is not every turning that will serve the turn There is ease indeed to
be had by this turning, but this turning is not to be had with ease. It is not
turning with the Time, nor turning to the Time, that can turn the Time: No,
but our turning of our selves in time from the sins of the Time. God himself
will turn unto our side, and When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even
his enemies to be at peace with him. Prove. 16. 7.
make us all to turn unto one side, or rather turn away all this siding,
would men on all sides but turn themselves to him. Wherefore turn your
selves. And how ever the Times turn this way, and that way; backward, and
foreward: Yet let not us turn mere Cameleons in Religion, as if we had no
color for it, but what we borrow of those which are nearest to us: Neither let
us be turned about like Weathercocks, with every Wind of New Doctrine. Let us
not turn, and turn, and turn with every Polypus, and every Proteus, and
every fantastical Changeling, which turn to every new Religion, Proteo
mutabilior. Eras. Adag.
until they have no Religion left to turn unto. Turn not with them that are
ever turning their old Religions out of themselves, until they have turned all
Religion out of themselves, and themselves out of all Religion. There need but
these two moving in our turning of our selves.

1. Downwards. 2. Upwards.
First, Downwards by Mortification. Secondly, Upwards by Vivification.
Downwards by a Death unto sin; Upwards by a New Birth unto Righteousness.
Downwards by an Humiliation; Upwards by a Reformation. And if we thus draw nigh
to God, he will draw nigh to us. He will return to us with much Compassion
toward our souls, if Jam. 4. 8. Zach. 1. 3.
we will turn to him with true Compunction for our sins. He will be
displeased with us for our sins, till we be displeased with our selves for
them. For he can never take pleasure in us so long as we take pleasure in that
which is so displeasing as sin is unto him. But when we are displeased with
sin in our selves, then he is (...). Menand. Hug. Cardin. l. 3 de Myster.
Ecclesiast.
pleased with us. When we condemn our selves for sinning so against him, we
save him a labor, we prevent him for condemning of us. Paenitentia,
quasip^nientia, says Hugo Cardinalis. True Penitency is a punishing of sin
in our selves, to save our selves from Gods punishments. For God will not for
ever punish that which has been once punished Poenitentia est quaedam doloris
vindicta, puniens in se quod se dolet commisisse. St August. Poenitentia, quasi
paenae tentio. Guido de Monte Rocherii in Manipulo Curatorum.
. God has promised Remission of sin to those that have Contrition for sin.
At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom of
his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord.

But observe it well. He that has promised to pardon a sinner at what time
soever he does turn himself, or truly repent him of his sins, does not
promise that he shall repent, or turn whenever he will. We cannot repent
when we would, therefore let us repent when we can. We are not sure of time
hereafter, therefore let us take the present. Repentance is a due debt, and
there is no longer day given in the Bond, and therefore the payment must be
presently. And that is the third Conclusion.

We must all turn our selves without delay. Therefore also now, says the Lord,
Turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping,
and with mourning, Joel 2. 12. As it is never too late to amend, so it is never
N^m sera nunquam est ad bonos mores via. Seneca Tragaed. 8.
too soon to be good. Better late then never; but the sooner the better. They
do well that do amend, though it be at the very last: But they better, that
amend sooner; And they best of all, that amend first of all. The sooner men be
good, the easier it is unto them to grow better. And the later they amend, the
harder it is unto them to grow better, or continue good. At this time there are
many, who might by this time have been better then they are, had they been good
but sooner then they were: And would by this time have been worse then ever
they were, had they not grown better then they were until this time. The evil
man's condition is made worse and worse, by his continuance in an evil
condition. The deferring of his amendment does make the difficulty of amending
double.

Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit. He that is unfit to repent to day,
will be more unfit to morrow, for he will have more sins to repent of, and
will be hardened more in his sins: He will have a Day more to repent of, and
a Day less to repent in. Every Day does add a new Sum to the old Score; yea
every hour does score up many smaller Debts to increase the Total Sum. So
that he who is not able to dischage the debt of his Sins to Day, will the less
able to unscore a longer sum to Morrow. The longer any sinner lets his scores
run on, the greater will his quantum be, when it comes to be summed up. And
they must needs become non-solvent, that score up sins too many days before
they reckon. Often reckoning does make long friends: And easy reckonings are
made by often reckoning. So it happens between man and man: And so it happens
also between God and man. But many deal with God, as some evil Debtors deal
with their Creditors; they study much how to get into debt, but not at all how
to get out: They take great care to be trusted; but little care to pay. Whereas
their first care should be to run as little as may be into Gods Debt, by
scoring up of Sins: And their next care should be to get out of Debt as soon as
may be. It is the height of impiety, to be hardened with impenitency. To commit
sin is to displease God; but to continue in sin, is to despise him, when he is
displeased, or to slight his displeasure. And to go on in sin at such a time
as this, when God has taken his Rod into his hand, and such a Red as now he
has, can be no less then a bidding of utter defiance to him. It is a bidding
of him to do his worst.

They go far that never return: far be it from us to go on in sin so
far, or too far to return. Some Mariners have sailed so far to the
Arctick-Pole-wards, and staid so long in those Northern parts, that their ships
have been bewintered in the midst of congealed waters, and they bennumed in
their frozen ships. Lots wife was turned into a Pillar of Salt for turning back
so soon; and they into Pillars of Ice for Genesis 19. 26.
not returning sooner: And many in the World are like such adventurous
Mariners, they go on, and on, and on in the ways of sin, which are the ways
of death, so far, that they can never return alive to the land of the living.
They are benumbed by the winterly frosts of Icie Death before they be aware. O
beware that ye be not so surprised. Repent speedily, ye may die suddenly: Take
the counsel of Jesus the son of Sirach, And make no tarrying to turn to the
Lord. Put Ecclus. 5. 7.
not off from day to day: for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth,
and in your security ye shall be destroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance.
(...); So Demosthenes to the Athenians, and so say Demosthen. Olynthiac. 3.
I to you, What Time, or what opportunity do ye look for better then the
present? (...), When will ye do what ye ought to do, if ye will not do it
now? when will y^ repent and turn your selves, if ye will not now? (...): Do
these things, says he, whilst a propitious fortune leads the way. And Haec
sacite, duce prospera fortuna. Vit. Amerpach. interpr.
whilst a fair opportunity does invite you, do this thing which does so much
concern you, Repent in time. They that defer their repentance till it be too
late to repent, will repent when it is too late, that they did so long defer
their repentance. True repentance is seldom late: and late repentance is
seldom true.

Indeed the Authentic story (as that famous Poet calls the Gospel) does tell us
of one true Convert, which returned Du-Bartas.
as far homewards in a few hours, as he had wandered from home in many years.
The penitent Thief was far gone in that broad way, which leads to
destruction, before he returned into Luke 23. 40, 41, 42. Matt. 7. 13, 14.
the narrow way, which leads unto life: He was gone to the very gate of Hell,
and yet returned. But let no man presume to run on in his evil way in hope of
his good return: for he had an advantage which no man else is like to have; for
John 10. 7.
the door of Heaven was next unto him, when he began to turn: Christ is the
way, and the Gate, and the Door, and the 14. 6.
Guide, and the Help to Heaven; and the All in all in Heaven, and he was as
near to the Penitent Thief as he could wish, when he began to be a Penitent.
And it was a good turn for him, that so it was, or he might have come short of
Heaven as far as some other Thieves have done, who never thought of turning
themselves to Heaven-wards, until they were even ready to be turned off the
Ladder. O, what an happy turn was this for that Penitent Theif! This Turn did
set him safe upon the Ladder of Life, the true Hebr. 10. 20. Joh. 1. 51. Genes.
28. 12.
and living Ladder, which reaches up from Earth to Heaven: The substance of
Jacobs Ladder, whose foot did stand upon the Earth, and whose top did reach up
unto Heaven. That Symb. S. Athan. (...).
mystical vision was an adumbration of Christ: his Humane nature was as the
foot, and his Divine nature was the top of the Ladder. The top and foot made
but one Ladder, and God and Man make but one Christ, as the only Mediator
between God and man; the new and living way between Heaven and Earth; the
Ladder by which the penitent Thief Luke 23. 42, 43 Non dicit in die judicii,
cum justis ad dextram te locabo. Non ait, post aliquot annos Purgatorii ad
refrigerium te perduca^. Non post aliquot menses vel dies te consolabor; Sed
hodie, etc. Bellar. de sept. verb. ^ Christ. in cru. prolat. Si quis vel
historias legate, vel cursus quotidianos observat, inveniet profecto rarissimos
fuisse qui de hoc mundo exierint, cum per totum vitae suae cursum perdite
vixerint. Bellar. de sept. verb. ^ Christo in cruce prolat. lib. 5. cap. 5.
Psalm. 9. 17.
climbed up to Heaven. There is no way for a Thief to steal into Heaven. It was
not by stealth that the penitent Thief got thither: It was by turning from his
theft, that he got into the way; It was by repenting of his former ways of
stealing, that he got into the favor of Christ; and by his favor it was, that
the gates of Heaven were fairly opened to him. Upon his turning, Paradise was
promised. Verily Isay unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise, said
our Savior unto him. See what a sudden return was here! He does not say, after
so many ages, or years, or months, or weeks, or days; but, hodie mecum, To
day shall thou be with me in Paradise: This day thou have turned thy self from
an heinous Peccant to an humble Penitent; and this very day thou shall be
turned from an humble Penitent to an heavenly Triumphant: This is the day of
thy Conversion, and this shall be thy day of Coronation: This day thou art
truly humbled, and this day thou shall be highly exalted. But this one Swallow
makes no Summer: This rare Example may not be made a general Rule to go by:
This Phoenix had no Mate. A pair of Malefactors were concrucified with Christ,
but both were not converted unto Christ. Christ was brought with both unto the
Cross; but the Cross could not bring both of them unto Christ. They both came
to the death of the Cross by the same way: but they went not both the same way
after death from the Cross, for that they turned not themselves the same way
upon the Cross before death: One turned unto the Lord upon the Cross before
his death; but the other was cross, and would not turn. And therefore the Lord
did turn to that one in mercy, and turned his Cross into a Crown: But the
other was turned into Hell. And so shall all the ungodly that forget God. One
of the two was saved, that none might despair: And but one, that none might
presume. Our Saviors accepting of the Penitent upon the Cross, may encourage
us to repent, be it never so late: and his rejecting of the other bold
impenitent Thief, may discourage us from sinning, be it never so soon.

As it is therefore now with us, whether sooner, or later, Utendum est ^tate,
cito pede labitur aetas. Ovid. l. 3. de Art. amand.
Let us apply our selves to the season: Let us neither despair of time past,
nor presume of time to come; but let us take the time present, and turn our
selves. Time is but a moment, and Eternity depends upon it: Ex hoc momento
aeternitas, Eternity it self depends upon this moment; yea two Eternities
depend upon this one Article of Time; Eternity of Happiness in Heaven, and
Eternity of Misery in Hell do both Erasmi Adag. Qui arripit occasionem rei
conficiendae, dum illa sese offert, ille sapit; qui negligit, desipil. Cornel.
a Lap. in Prove. c. 10. Psalm. 95. 7. Heb. 3, 7. 8, 15.
depend upon the very (...) of Temporal life: and man has no more of Life, or
Time, but the very present. Post est occasio calva, Time is bald behind:
Yesterday cannot be recalled, To morrow cannot be assured. Let this Present
therefore be well employed. One To day is worth two To morrows, to turn your
selves in. To day therefore, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts, but turn your selves. Let impertinent mirth be turned into penitent
mourning. Let laughing at sin be turned into lamenting of sin. He that has
not been a Prometheus in his life, let him be an Epimetheus before his death:
He that has not been fore-witted Do therefore the work of the day in die suo.
No man can promise himself a morrow. Deferring as well as presuming makes many
implicit Atheists. Manchest. Contemp. mortis and immortal.
in his actions, let him show himself after-witted in examining and amending
them. If the want of due advice has occasioned any improvident act of Sin,
let the betteradvised act of Sorrow prevent the final punishment of it. And if
the fear of Hell cannot make us repent in Time, then Hell it self shall make us
repent to all Eternity. They that will not give so much for the love of God as
a few penitential Tears, shall have the hatred of Devils for nothing: And they
that will not take so much pains to go to Heaven, as to turn themselves, may go
to Hell with ease. Facilis est descensus averni: It is an easy matter to go to
Hell, but not so easy to get out. Ab inferno nulla est redemptio. If a sinner
be once but Sera nimis vita est crastina, vive hodie.
turned into Hell, he can never return. Be persuaded therefore to turn your
selves, before you come there. Turn your selves, and ye shall never come there.
Turn your selves, and ye shall live.

And live ye. Turn your selves, and live here: Turn your selves, and live
hereafter. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. Luke 15. 20.
Life temporal and life eternal are both promised to all those that turn
themselves, or those that turn a natural life into a spiritual.

But now I perceive my preaching upon this Text, to be like to most men's
practicing of it: They are so long in turning of themselves, that they leave
themselves but a very little time to live in, when they are turned. And I have
been so long in persuading you to turn your selves, that I have left my self
but a little time to speak of Living.

I must now do, as the Time has done: I must make haste to have done with the
Time.

The Evils of these Times do threaten every man with Death: yea Death it self
does threaten every man a Mischief in these Times of Evil. And what way is
there for any man to turn away these Times of Evil from himself, but by turning
of himself from the Evils of these Times? Who is it, that does not even long to
see a return of better Times? And who can make any doubt but better Times would
yet ere long return to men, would ^en but turn themselves to better the Times?
The Times grow good, or bad to Men, as Men grow in their Times. The Times would
soon be better, would Men be so; and Men must mend, or the Times will not. But
evil Times can never amend, whilst evil Men grow worse and worse, Or whilst
they sleep supinely in their Evil. No Times can make some Men to amend or turn
themselves: But would they turn themselves, they might both turn the Times, and
save themselves from ruin. See Jer. 3. 12. 13. 22. and see Joel 2. 12, 13. 18,
19, 20, etc. Ezekiel. Isa. 1. 16, etc. Promissa haec tua sunt; and quis falli
timeat, cum promittit ipsa veritas. S. Aug. Jonah 3. 6, etc.
33. 12. 14, 15, 16, 19. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and
concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If
that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent
of the evil that I thought to do unto them, says God himself, Jer. 18. 7, 8.
So he dealt with Niniveh; And so he has often dealt with our Metropolis, and
with this whole Nation. He is long-suffering to usward, Ego and ante mortem
prae malis sum mortua. Eras. Some pleasant their lives, as if the world should
always laugh upon them. Qua^vis p^jor est mundus cum blanditur, quam cum
indignatur. Manchest. Al Mondo's Cont. Mortis and Jmmortal. Sueton. de vita
Tiberii. Si salvabor salvabor. Si praedestinatus sum, nulla peccata poterunt
mihi regnum coeloru^ auferr^: Si praescitus, nulla opera mihi illud valebunt
confer. Heisterbach. l. 1. de memor. Hist. c. 27. We are instruments, though
not causes of our own salvation. We bring nothing for it, but something to it;
Nothing worth it, but something with it. Dr. Done.
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance,
says S. Peter, 2 Epist. c. 3. v. 9. Both perishing here, and perishing
hereafter too, may be prevented by repenting here in time.

Euripides brings in Hec^ba crying out amain, (...) Iam even dead with the very
terrors of death^ And many in these evil Times have even killed themselves with
the fears of being killed. But others are still running nearer unto Death, and
to Damnation ^oo, and yet are further every day then other from thinking of
either. They think they shall not die as yet; and therefore as yet they think
not of preparing themselves for death by turning of themselves. Yea, many live
as if they thought they should ever live; and therefore never think of turning
themselves that they might live for ever.

Tiberius thought that all things came by destiny; and therefore neglected all
endeavors to prevent or alter any thing. And many are like Tiberius, at least
in deportments, if not in judgments. They do not endeavor to turn themselves,
to turn the times; to save their lives, either in this present world, or that
to come. Yea some are ready to say, as that Italian Ludovicus did: If we shall
be saved, we shall be saved. And as that Lantgrave of Thuring did, which
Heisterbachius writes of: If we be elected, no sins can keep us out of
Heaven; but if we be reprobate, no sorrows can keep us out of Hell. This is a
most irreligious kind of reasoning. This is not the way for men to work out
their own salvation with fear and trembling, This is not the way to persuade
them to give all diligence to make their calling and election sure.

True it is, that all that Man can do is but in vain, unless that God bestows
his blessing on it: But all in vain it is for Man to expect a blessing from the
hands of God, unless that he will do what God expects at his hands for the
procuring of it. For God will not do all things all alone for them, that will
do nothing for themselves with him, when he is doing for them. When God is
working in men, and for them, then they in him must needs be (...) workers
together with God. In vain it is for men to call to In vain do men call to
Heaven for help, when they withstand the help of Heaven. Many do invoke it, and
yet do hinder it: They require help from others, and abandon themselves; and by
their deeds, contrarying their words, they show, not to have desired what they
have entreated; and to have entreated, that they might not be heard. Malvez.
Romul. and Tarq. translated by the Earl of Monmouth.
Heaven for help, if they will not use the help of Heaven which they call for.
In vain it is for men to have any Talents of Grace, if they will not put them
out to use: And they that have them, and will not improve them, deserve to have
them taken away from them.

By Nature indeed we are all dead in trespasses and sins, and cannot help our
selves. But when God by the Spirit of Life has helped us unto the Life of the
Spirit; then we, like men of spirit, must bestir our selves to use his help.
When God Dr. Love's Watchmans Watchword.
has begun with us, then we must go on with him: when he is turning of us,
then we together with him must turn our selves: And being turned, we must live
too. Turn, and live. An early endeavor is then to purpose, when it is put on
with an earnest endeavor to persevere. But it were better to begin late, and
hold out unto the end, then to begin betimes, and be presently weary of
well-doing. There is a Penny Man. 10. 22. Gal. 6. 9.
promised to him that comes to labor in the Lords vineyard at the eleventh
hour of the day: But no Salary promised to him that ends his labor, before
the day of his life be ended. We must go on then, as well as begin. It is
Perseverance that crowns Repentance. Turning it is that prepares the way of
Living; And Living it is that perfects the work of Turning. Optima paenitentia
nova vita. Luther.
We must do the last as well as the first. Indeed we can do neither well,
unless we do both: But by doing both, we may do well. And that we may be sure
to do so, let us both turn, and live. Wherefore turn your selves, and live ye.

F^NIS.
St. PAVL'S CONCRVCIFIXION. Preached in two Sermons at Hoxne in the County of
SUFFOLK, By Edw. Willan, M. A. Vicar of Hoxne.

Galat. 6. 14. God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom the World is crucified to me, and I unto the World.
LONDON, Printed for RICHARD ROYSTON at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1651.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, ROBERT STYLE, Esquire. his very Generous and bountiful
Patron AND TO THE WORSHIPFUL, NATHANEEL THRUSTON, Esquire. his very Worthy
Parishoner.
WORTHY SIRS,
IT was by both your Worships that I was placed in the Pulpit where these two
Sermons were preached. By the one of you it was that I was persuaded, and by
the other it was that I was presented to it; and therefore by both your
Worships may both these Sermons be jointly and justly claimed. I shall not
disclaim the right of either to them. They were both my Service in that pulpit
long ago upon one of your Sabbaths, one of my Working days; But neither of
your Worships (ni memini male) were that day near to hear them as they were
presented to the care, be pleased to let them come so near unto your Worships
now, that you may read them as they are represented to the eye. Mine Office
does bind me to live, not to my self, but others. It makes me a Servant to all
by Common Duty: But my place to officiate does make me by Special ties, and
Service,

Sirs, Your Worships devoted beadsman and poor Vicar. EDW. WILLAN.

S. PAUL'S CONCRUCIFIXION.
GAL. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ that lives in me.
THat we are all alive, and here together this Day, we see: But how many Days
we shall be here, Jam. 4. 13, 14. Psalm. 89. 48. Heb. 9. 27. Moriendum enim
certum est, sed id incertum an ipso die. Cicero de Senectute. Mat. 28. 5, 6.
Mark. 16. 6. Acts 2. 24, 25. Rev. 1. 18. Romans 1. 1.
or alive, we cannot say. And that we shall all die, we all know: But how many
here amongst us all are now both dead, and alive together, God knows. Indeed
S. Paul was so. He was both dead and alive indeed; and so may some here be: But
it may be, all here are not so. Saint Paul's Condition was never Common.

Our Lord, and Savior dyed once, and lived again: But his Servant Paul was
dead, and alive at once. The Lord of life, our Savior Christ was crucified for
Paul, and lost his life: But Paul the Servant of Christ was crucified with
Christ his Lord, and lived nevertheless.

Some men have lived here the less by being crucified for Gal. 2. 7. Linus
Episcopus de passione Petri. Eusebius Pamphil. Ecclesi. Histor. lib. 2. 25.
Christ: But others much the more for being crucified with Christ. The great
Apostle of the Jews was crucified for Christ, and dyed: But the great Apostle
of the Gentiles was crucified with Christ, and lived. The Cross of Christ did
bring that one to death, but not this other. It brought Death to Saint Peter,
but life unto Saint Paul. It can bring life as well as death; It gives life
sometimes, and sometimes it takes life away. It takes life away sometimes
that it may give it. It takes one away to give another. It takes this away to
give a better; And sometimes it kills, and saves alive together. It can do
both at Several times, and it can do both at once. It can do both to
several men, and it can do both to one. It can do both by several ways,
and it can do both by one. sometimes it brings Life with Death, and
sometimes after Death it brings Life. With the Death of sin it brings the
Life of Grace; And after the Death of Nature it brings the Life of Glory.

True it is, that the End of Life is ever by Death. And yet it is as true, that
Death is not ever at the end of Life. The Apostle dyed before his life was
ended. In the midst of Death a Man may be in Life; And in the midst Life a Man
may be in Death. 1 Cor. 15. 31.
I dye daily said this Apostle, when as yet he lived. He had both Life and
Death together in him. He was in Death and Life at once; A living dead man,
vivus and crucifixus, Crucified with Christ, and yet alive. I am crucified with
Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ, etc.

This Text you see, is full of turnings. The Apostles Conversion is the Subject
of it; and well may it be the Subject of many conversions to quicken my
discourse upon it. Would my discourse upon it might quicken as many Conversions
by it.

Now the Chief Considerables in it are these two.

1. A Contradiction in Seem. 2. A Reconciliation in Substance.
In the first we have a Riddle Propounded.

In the Second we have the Riddle Expounded.

And in both together we may both Read the Riddle, and the Reading of the
Riddle.

I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, there is the Riddle.

Yet not I, but Christ that lives in me, there is the Reading of the Riddle.

In the Riddle there are two Remarkables.

1. The Mannr of it. 2. The Matter in it.
It is the Manner of it that makes it seem so intricate a Riddle as indeed it
is, for it is proposed in a seeming Contradiction. First the Apostle says,
that he is crucified with Christ, and thereby seems to say as much, as that he
is not living, but dead. For Christ was crucified to Death. And then he says,
that he is nevertheless alive, and thereby seems to say, and says it in more
then seems, that he is not dead, but living. Now thus to say it, and to unsay
it, is to make a contradiction of it, at least in seem. It is to speak a
Paradox in it. And all Paradoxes are admirable Propositions, says the Roman
Orator; And this Text for a Paradox is as admirable as any other. Every Riddle
has something mystical in it: But this Paradoxicall Riddle is a very mystery.
Yea, whole Armies of Mysteries do keep their Randezvous within the quarters of
this grand Paradox, I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live.

And for the Matter in it, it could not be more clearly expressed then it is
by this very Manner of expression. The Subject matter of it is S. Paul's
Regeneration, And that is a matter very Mysterious. It is mirabile magnum as
Musculus calls it; a John 3. 1.
great Wonder. When our Savior first propounded the Doctrine of Regeneration
to Master Nicodemus, that great Ruler of the 3.
Jews, and Master in Israel, 10.
it seemed a very Riddle to him, and such a Riddle, as he neither apprehended,
nor believed; And therefore his Reply was not by unriddling, but rejecting of
it with a (...); How can these things be? It did so 9.
puzle his Reason, and so perplex his Faith, that it seemed (...), a thing
impossible, a thing incredible, though it were proposed by Truth it self, in
the plainest Dialect of the Gospel. John 14. 6.
What would it have done, if it had been lapped up in Aenigmaticall Language,
like this of Saint Paul? How would Rationis humanae in mysteriis regni dei
caecitas in Nicodemo apparet, cui omnia ista, quae de regeneratione
proponuntur, absurda apparent. Theodoricus in Analys. Evangel. Domin. Trinit. 1
Cor. 15. 45.
it have posed his Mastership, had it been proposed in the Wonderment of a
Riddle, or seeming contradiction? Yet in this Seeming Contradiction, we may
plainly see the parts of Saint Paul's Conversion, and in that, the parts of a
perfect Regeneration.

The first part is Mortification. The second is Vivification.
The first is a Death unto Sin; The Second is a New Birth unto Sanctimonie.
The first is the killing of the first Adam; The Second is the Quickening of the
Second in him.

I am crucified with Christ, there is his Mortification, His Death unto sin,
The killing of the first Adam in him. Nevertheless I live, there is his
Vivification, His New Birth unto Righteousness, The quickening of the Second
Adam. I an crucified with Christ, there is his putting off of the Old Man, which
Ephesians. 4. 22.
is corrupt concerning the former Conversation. Nevertheless I live, there is
the putting on of the New-Man, which after God ^^ Ephesians. 4. 24.
created in righteousness, and true holiness. I am crucified (...) Christ,
there is the Mortifying of the flesh, The members upon the Coloss. 3. 5. Romans 8.
13. 4.
Earth, The deeds of the Body. Nevertheless I live, there is the Quickening of
the Spirit, The walking after the Spirit, The life of righteousness by the
Spirit: for the spirit is life because of righteousness, Romans 8. 10. I am
crucified with Christ, and so broken for sin; nevertheless I live, and so am
broken from sin. In the first, there is a true Humiliation, in the second, a
real Reformation; In both together there is a present Change of the State of
Nature into the State of Grace. Yea he is so Changed, that he is not himself
any longer, not the man he was, but ^ new man, a new Creature, and hence it is,
that he says, I liv^, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Galat. 6. 15.
Yet not I, non amplius ego, not I any longer, not I the same man I was, but
another. Not Saul now, but Paul; Not a persecutour of the Gospel, but a
Preacher of it; Not an Enemy to the Phil. 3. 18. 2 Cor. 11. 30.
Cross of Christ; But a friend unto it, A lover of it, one that gloryeth in
it. God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of Christ, by whom the
world is crucified in me, and I unto the World. Gal. 6. 14.

I am crucified with Christ, that is, baptized into the death of Romans 6. 3, 5,
6, 7.
Christ, or planted in the likeness of his Death, which was by crucifixion,
that the old Man might be crucified with him, that the sin of the body, and
the Body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth I might not serve sin,
for he that is dead is freed from sin. Nevertheless I live; not the less,
but the more, Coloss. 2. 12, 13
by being quickened with Christ, and risen with him through the faith of the
operation of God; Transplanted in the likeness of his Romans 6. 4. 5.
Resurrection, to walk with him in newness of life. Now the Romans 7. 24.
Body of Death being thus killed in this holy Apostle, and the spirit of his
mind being thus renewed, he reckons himself to ^e dead indeed unto sin,
but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Ephesians. 4. 23. Romans 6. 12. Uno
verbo dici potect, concrucifixus. Faber Stapulensis in Examine.
Lord, which in other terms he signifies saying, Christo concrucifixus
su^^, vivo autem, as Montanus has it, I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless
I live.

(...), I am Crucified with Christ, there is his Mortification, or the first pat
of his Regeneration, and in these words we may observe two Remarkables,

1 Exemplum, A Pattern, and 2 Exemplatum, A Parallel.

The Pattern is our Saviors Crucifixion; The Parallel in S. Paul's
concrucifixion. Our Saviors Crucifixion was in example to S. Paul's; And S.
Paul's concrucifixion was in imitation of our Saviors. Christ was crucified for
Paul, and Paul was crucified with Christ; and we should all be crucified with
both. The crucifixion of our Saviors Body for sin was a pattern to every
one of us as well as to S. Paul, that all we might learn to crucify the Body
of sin in our selves. His dying upon the Christus crucifixu^ est idaea
nostrae mortificationis. Climac.
Cross for our sins, should teach us all the Apostles way of dying unto
sin. Christ's crucifixion is the true Idaea of out mortification, and a
Christian truly mortified is to the life the likeness of Christ crucified;
Christ was crucified for all true Christians, and all true Christians are, as
Paul in this was, crucified with Christ.

Our Saviors crucifixion, and S. Paul's concrucifixion were both mysterious,
both full of Paradoxes; and our Saviors Person was as paradoxicall as his
Passion. They are both the subjects of many and many seeming contradictions. In
his Person he was made a very contradiction for sinners, and at his Passion
he endured the contradictions of sinners. In his Person he Heb. 12. 3.
was the great Creator himself that formed every creature; yet was a Creature
formed by that Creator. His Body was made of his Mothers substance: yet he it
was that made the substance of his Mothers Body, of which he was made. He was
made after the World was, what he was not before the World was made; yet was
he still after he was made, what he was before the World was made, or he so
in it. He was begotten before his Mother was borne; yet was he borne of his
Mother before he was begotten of her. As old he was as Daniel. 7. 9. John 1.
14. 3. 16.
the ancient of days, his Father, that begat him: and older he was then his
Virgin Mother that gave birth unto him. Begotten he was of his Father, and
borne he was of his Mother; yet was he not begotten by his Father as he was
borne of his Mother; not yet borne of his Mother as he was begotten of his
Father. He was the only begotten Son of his Father, and he was begotten of
his Father only; His Father begat him without Virgo and Matter, utiq^e and
admirabilis, and singularis, a seculo non est auditum quod virgo esset, quae
p^perit: and Matter esset, quae virgo permanfit. S. Bernard. Ser. 10. Isaiah 9.
6.
the office of his Mother. And he was the only Son of his Virgin Mother,
and the Son only of his Mother as he was her Son, and borne of her; His
Mother, did bear him without the office of a Father. On his Fathers side he
was God, and not Man, and on his Mothers side he was Man, and not God; yet
betwixt both he was both, God and Man, to mediate betwixt both, at his first
coming, and to arbitrate betwixt both at his second.

No wonder then it was, that his Name was called Wonderful: for every thing in
him was full of Wonder, and his Passion was as wonderful as any thing. His
coming into the world had a world of wonder in it; and so had his being in it,
and his leaving of it did leave as many behind it.

He was crucified, yet was not crucified; He suffered, yet did not suffer;
He dyed, yet did not die; and he rose again says S. Ambrose, yet did not
rise again: And are not all these S. Ambros. de Spirit. sancto.
seeming contradictions? Is not every period a very Paradox? yet all very
orthodox, and easy to be unriddled? Two Natures were united in that one Person
of Christ; And Christ endured that in one of his Natures which the other could
not endure; As Man, or in his Manhood he suffered, was crucified, and dyed, and
rose from Death: But as God, or in his Deity, he could do neither.

Thus the Life and Death of Christ were very mysterious, full of mysteries, and
so are the Life and Death of every mystical Member of Christ. Every true
Christian is such a Member, and this Vessel of Election, our holy Apostle, was
such a Christian. He was one that had the characters of Christ's sufferings in
his mortified Body, I bear in my Body the marks of the Lord Jesus, says he,
Galat. 6. 17. conformed to the mystical Head of the Church in sufferings,
Christo concrucifixus, crucified with Christ; and his estate now was very
Mysterious, he was both dead and alive at once, Crucified with Christ, and yet
alive nevertheless.

But why should we think it strange to hear of a Man alive and dead at the
same time? Are not all Men living ever so? Is not every Man always dead and
living so long as he is a Man, or living? Alive naturally, and dead
spiritually; or Qui luxuriatur vivens mortuu^ est. S. Hieron. ad matr. and
filiam.
dead mystically, and alive spiritually? Dead in sin, and alive in Nature? or
dead unto sin, and alive in Grace?

When Paul was in the state of Nature, he was both dead and alive, he was
alive Naturally, but dead spiritually. But when he changed the state of Nature
for the state of Grace, he changed the Natures of his life and death. He was
dead in sin before, but now dead unto sin, or sin is dead in him; He
lived as a Natural Man before, but now as a Spiritual; He lived in sin
before, but now Grace lives in him. He is now dead to himself, dead to his
sins, but alive to his Savior, living to the Lord of life; Crucified with
Christ, and living to him, alive in him. Now this his mystical death is very
desirable. It is rather to be wished, then any kind of Death, that Augustus
thought of. It is a Death that may be lawfully sought for: yea, it is a Death
that men must pull upon themselves as soon as they can with a holy kind of
violence, and the more earnest any man is in doing of it, the more he is to be
praised for it; and more worthy of praise is he, that thus kills the old Man
in himself, then ever Cleombrotus was, or Cato, or Lucretia, for Plato in
Phaedone. S. August. de Civitate Dei, l. 1. ca. 19. 23.
killing, as they did, themselves; yea, he deserves no praise that does not
thus crucify himself. This is an Euthanasy indeed, and there can be none
without it; They never can die well, that do not die thus whilst they live;
Nor can they ever live well, that are not thus dead. When Paul was crucified
with Christ, then he reckoned himself to be alive indeed; Christo confixus
sum cruci, vivo autem jam, says he, as the vulgar translation has it, I am
crucified with Christ, and now I live; Jam viv^, now I live, as if he had not
lived indeed till now that he was thus crucified with Christ. As he lives
after his crucifixion, so he lives by it; He that lays down a Duplex hic
est miraculum, and quod mortuum vitae restituit, and quod per mortem. Theophil.
in locum.
temporal life for Christ's sake, shall take up one eternal for it; and he
that with Paul does part with an evil life, does gain a good one by it; yea
he gains two good ones by it; one here, and one hereafter: for he shall
reign with Christ, that is crucified with him, as well as he, that is
crucified for him.

I am crucified with Christ, says our Apostle; Christ was crucified, and so
was Paul, but several ways; Christ was crucified for Paul, but so was not
Paul for Christ. Yet san^ sensu, in some sense Paul was crucified for Christ;
but not so as Christ for Paul. Paul was crucified for Christ's sake, and Christ
for Paul's; But Christ was crucified for Paul's sins, so was not Paul for
Christ's. Christ had no sins of his own to demerit any crucifixion in
himself, or in any other for him, but so had Paul; And Paul's crucifixion was
for himself rather then his Savior; yet it was of the sins in himself,
rather then of himself in his sins. It was a crucifying of sin^^ in his
mortal Body; Not a crucifying of his mortal Body in sin.

Christ was crucified for Paul in Body, and Paul for Christ Per crucem Christi
remotus est a me proprius affectus. Aquin. Commenta. in locum. 1 Cor. 9. 27.
in Mind. Mente orucifixus sum, As Theophilact expounds it, In mind I am
crucified with Christ; In mind with him, not in person for him. It was not a
corporal but a spiritual concrucifixion; Yet it was in Body as well as Mind,
(...), I beat my body down, says he, and keep in subjection. And this
subjection of the Body it self was spiritual. It was not a crucifixion of
flesh, but of fleshly-mindednesse; It was the suppressing of the Rebellions of
Nature, not the destroying of Nature it self. The Nature of his life was
altered by it; But the Life of his Nature was not utterly abolished, for still
he lived for all this kind of Death. This concrucifixion was not to Death,
but Life. There are two kinds of concrucifixions.

1. Corporal. 2. Spiritual.
Those two Malefactors that dyed when Christ did upon Luke 23. 33.
the Cross, were both crucified with Christ; But not as Paul was in the Text;
for one of the two was never the better for that corporal concrucifixion. He
lost his temporal life upon the Cross with Christ himself: yet he got not
Life eternal for it from the Cross of Christ. Alas for him! His was a Cross
indeed, but none of Christ's. He suffered not for Christ's sake, but for his
own sins, and there is seldom Life in such a Death. A Cross may be the
Tree of Life unto a Penitent thief; But such Malefactors are seldom truly
penitent. Indeed the Cross is vita justorum, life to the Righteous, but mors
infidelium, Death to the Wicked, says Cassiodorus. The true Believer lays
hold of an other, a better Life then this present, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2. Heb. 11. 35.
as he parts with this; But the Infidel loses this and gets no other for it.
The wretched, and impenitent unbeliever, by the Cross of sufferings, or by his
sufferings upon the Cross, does lose even all his stock of Life, and gains
nothing; The believing penitent loses little and gains much, he parts
with a bad life and receives a better for it. But our Apostle loses nothing,
and gains all: He gets a new life without giving the old away. But his
concrucifixion was of an other kind, It was not corporal, but spiritual, and
such concrucifixions are twofold.

Primarie, and Secondarie.
Now the first of these is that which every true Believer suffered in the
Person of Christ, when as Christ suffered in the Person of every true Believer:
For as all that fell by the sin of the first Adam, did sin with that Adam
in his person, and Romans 5. 12.
fell in his Person with him; So all that are saved by the sufferings of the
second Adam, did suffer with him in his person, and are so saved with him.
Christiani omnes una cum Christo tanquam illius membra in cruce pependerunt;
All Christians as the Musculus in locum.
members of Christ did suffer with him upon the Cross. The catholic Head of
the Church was fastened to the Cross, and suffered for the whole Mystical
Body, and all the mystical Members that are fastened to the Body by love, and
to the Head by faith, must needs be sensible of the sufferings of the 1 Cor.
12. 26, 27.
Head; Whereas one member suffers, all the members suffer with it, by way or
sympathy, and therefore surely, when as the Head suffers, which is the
fountain of sense, there must needs be a Catholic Compassion in all the
Members. Those are not living Members of Christ's Mystical Body that do not
sympathize with him in the biternesse of his passion. The very Remembrance of
his grievous sufferings upon the Cross for their sakes does make make them
grieve for his sake, And that is their first Concrucifixion; Now the second
follows this, and is twofold.

1. Mystical. 2. Moral.
And the first of these is in the Sacrament of Baptism. For that Christens a
man, and makes him a member of Christ: So many as are baptized into Christ,
they put on Christ. And they put Galat. 3. 27.
on Christ crucified, that put him on by baptizme. It is into the Death of
Christ, that they are Baptized; And the Death of Christ was upon the Cross, by
crucifixion. And this laver of Signum est exhibitivum.
Regeneration, the Sacrament of Baptism, does both sign and seal the
Benefits of Christ's crucifixion to a Christian. And from this sacramental or
mystical concrucifixion must we all derive that concrucifixion which is Moral.

And the Moral Concrucifixion does Crown the Mystical. The Sacrament of
Baptism does begin the life of Christianity, but it is the Christianity of
life that does complete a Christian, and fits him for the Crown of life. Non
quaeritur in Christianis S. Gregor. l. 28. Moral.
initium, sed finis, says S. Gregory, The initiation of Christianity in any
man is nothing so remarkable as the consummation of it. Alas what is it to
begin to be a Christian, unless a man goes on to the perfection of
Christianity? I mean, what profit is it to be baptized into Christ, unless a
man does live like a Christian? Quid enim tibi prodect, vocari quod non es, and
nomen usurpare alienum? sed si Christianum te esse delectat, quae
Christianitatis sunt gere. S. August. de doctrina Christiana.
What benefit can there be in putting on of Christ by Baptism, unless we
keep him on in our lives, and wear him in our Conversations? Christiani nomen
ille frustra sortitur qui Christum minime imitatur, says S. Austine, Its a
frivolous thing to be a Nominall, and not a Real Christian, to have the Name
of a Christian, and not be a follower of Christ. Christianus a Christo, A man
is called a Christian from Christ, whose follower he professes himself to be,
as those Disciples did which were first called so at Antioch, Act. 11. 26. But
those men belly A Christo Christiani and ^umus and ^uncupamur. Athan. Orat. 2.
contr. Arian. Gregor. Nyss. de profes. Christianor. S. Cypr. de 12. abusionib.
Greg. Naz. in Orat. funebri de S. Basilio.
the Name of Christ, says Gregory Nyssen, that do nor make their practice of
Christianity to answer their profession of it. Nemo Christianus vere dicitur,
nisi qui Christo moribus, pro ut valet, coaequatur, says S. Cyprian, No man is
rightly called a Christian, unless he follows Christ in his moralls as near
as he can. S. Basil the Great, and Gregory the Divine, that were like Twins
of Devotion in the Service of the Church, did both rejoice that they both were,
and were called Christians. The putting on of Christ by Baptism, does give the
Name, but it is the keeping of him on in our moralls that speaks us Christians
indeed. It is not enough therefore to be crucified with Christ in Baptism
only. Ecce baptizati sunt homines, See says Saint S. Aug. Ser. 16. de verb.
Apost.
Austine, men are baptized, and thereby their sins be washed away, yet still
something remains on their parts to be performed. Restat lucta cum carne,
restat lucta cum diabolo, restat lucta cum mundo, still there remains many
Combats to Revel. 2. 10. Mysterium hoc geritur in Christianis sacramentaliter,
and efficaciter. Sacramentaliter in Baptismo, efficaciter in ipsa veteris
nostri hominis mortificatione, and vitae novitate. Musculus. Dicendo, simul cum
Christo crucifixus sum, Baptismum tecte significat, di^^do, Vivo autem jam non
ego, sequeme^ vitae ratione^ significat, per quam mortificantur membra. S.
Chrysostom. in loc.
be maintained against our Ghostly Enemies the world the flesh and the Devil.
And indeed every Christian is engaged by his Baptism, to bid defiance unto
these, and to fight against them under the Banner of Christ's Cross, to the
utmost of his life. We must be faithful unto Death, or never expect the Crown
of life.

Thus is this Mystery begun, and carried on in all true Christians, as Saint
Chrysostom has observed, and after him Theophilact, and Musculus after both.
It begins in Baptism, and must be carried on in our lives. It is this Moral
concrucifixion, that God expects, and rewards. But this is not easily and
quickly finished; Hic labor, hoc opus, it requires our greatest care and
diligence to crucify our selves with Christ in our lives. This part of
Christianisme is the hardest task that our Master Christ has imposed upon us
as his Disciples. It is a work that must be done so long as we live, for that
so long as we live we must never think we have done it. But what is it, that
makes it so hard to be done? there are many things that do increase the
difficulty of it.

The first is, that innate power, or natural strength that the Body of sin
has in our Mortal Bodies. I delight in the law Semper in nobis, dum vivimus,
peccati Adami no^nullae reliquiae manent. Si enim ista semina sic omnino clui
possit, ut nullae in nobis restarent sordes vitiorum, nec Paulus de leg^
membrorum mortisque corpore conquestus fuisset, nec nos assidua spiritus
renovatione opus haberemus. Whitak. ^^. 1. li. 8.
of God, after the inward man, says this Apostle; But I see another law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into Captivity to
the law of sin, which is in my members, Romans 7. 22, 23. See, here was law
against law, and members against mind, in Paul himself. The corrupted
Principles of Nature opposing the reformed and refined Principles of Grace, and
sometimes prevailing to the conquering, to the captivating of this great
Apostle, and compelling him to cry (...), O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver ^^ from the body of this death? Romans 7. 24. Though man be renewed in
his mind by the law of Grace, or the Grace of the New man, yet the Old man is
still in him, and the old man in him has the law of Nature, or the law of the
Members on his side, and the Nature of that law is not easily overcome; so
soon as we begin to kill or crucify the old man in our bodies, he presently
lays the law to us, and pleads the law of Nature against us, and so makes us
very remiss, and it may be lay aside our work of moral Concrucifixion. There
was peccatum habitans, sin dwelling in Romans 7. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Concupiscentia in renatis est peccatum. Daven. Determ. Quaest. pr.
Paul himself, and that sin made him do the evil which he hated, and made
him leave und one the good he greatly desired. Such sin there is in every man,
though he be regenerate, and that sin in him does make his Concrucifixion
very difficult.

The Second thing that greatens the difficulty of it, is the Old man's easy
Recovering, or his speedy Recruting of his forces, within us, when we think we
have so far worsted them, as that they must needs yield. It is storyed of the
Giant Antaeus, Antaeus gigas ex terrae filiis cum Hercule congredi^^s ut
deprehensus est ex telluris tactu vires excrescere Volatera. Paralipom. Not.
Comes Mytholog. l. 7. c. 1. 1 Cor. 15. 47.
the son of Neptune by the Earth, that when ever his strength began to fail
him, tactu terrae recreabatur, it was recruted, or renewed by his touching of
the Earth. And this made it so hard for Hercules to overcome and kill him.
Natales Comes seeks to verify this fable by other allusions, but it is most
true of the Body of sin, which is indeed Terrae filius, The son of the
Earthie part which is in Man. The Old man is of the Earth Earthie. And sin is
the Son of the Old Man, and like the Giant Antaeus it renews strength by
touching of Earth and Earthly things, which makes it so hard a matter for the
Body of sin to be Mortified by us, so long as we have our Conversations upon
the Earth.

I remember a story, which I have read in Neubrigensis, it is Q ippe ex
Alienora quondam Francorum Regina susceptis 4 siliis, Henricum natu majorem
Regni Anglici, and Ducatus Normanici, cum Andegavensi Comitatu successorem
relinq^cre, Richardum vero Aquitaniae, and Galfridum Britanniae praesicere
cogitabat: quartum natu minimum Joannem sine terra cognominans, etc. Gulielm.
Neubrigen. lib. 2. c. 18.
of King Henry the Second, who having bequeathed no Land of inheritance to John
his fourth and youngest Son by Queen Elinor, surnamed him Johannem sine
terra, John without Earth or Land to live upon. It was his Fathers Pleasure so
to deal with him, and so to miscall him. He wanted such a portion of Earth
without him as was given by his Father to his other Brothers, but he wanted not
his portion of Earth within him. He had the inheritance of an earthie part in
his Mortal Body derived from the Old man in his Father. He was not Johannes
sine terra, in respect of the body of sin; he was of the Earth Earthy, and so
is every man living upon the Earth, and the Earth within us, does strengthen
sinagainst us, and makes it very hard for us to crucify it in us.

A Third thing that makes our Mortification difficult, is the Time that the Old
Man in us must have to dye in. He must needs dye a lingering death, for he must
be dying all the days of our Natural life. Those two Malefactors, that were
crucified corporally when Christ was, had lingering Deaths; yea so long they
were in dying, that the Soldiers had Orders given them to break their legs,
for the hastening of their Deaths. And he that begins to crucify the Old Man
in himself, shall find him so loath to dye, and so long in dying, that new
violences must be offered to him to make him yield. The fastening of him to the
Cross does make him sick, and the breaking of his legs does make him weak: Yet
will he not dye so long as the man does live, nor wholly yield to the
spiritual man until that ye yields up his spirit. The nature of this
mystical death does differ much from the death of Nature; this is mors sine
morte, a death without death. That may be a lingering death sometimes, but this
is ever a living death, a death in life. It is Martyrium vivum, as Tertullian
phraseth it, a living Martyrdom, a killing of the flesh, and a leaving of the
man alive. Martyrium sine sanguine, S. Bern. inter Sententias.
says S. Bernard; A Martyrdom without any Bloodshed, a Mortifying of the Body
without killing of it. Other Martyrdoms Duo sunt Martyrii genera, unum in
habitu, alterum in actu, etc. P^imasius in c. 7. and in c. 11. Apocalyp. Josua.
9. 21. Carranza in Sum. Concilior. Apostolor. Canon. 23, 24. Council. Nicaen.
Can. 1. Council. Arelaten. Can. 7.
are either in Mind, or Body, this is in both, without the destruction of
either. A man may Mortify his members with S. Paul, without cutting of them
off with Origin.

Gods people, the Israelites, did not kill those enemies of theirs the
Gibeonites, but brought them into subjection, and made them serviceable. And
such as are godly people need not destroy their bodies, or their affections
natural, but subdue them, and make them spiritual, and serviceable. Thus much
the Apostle intimated to the Romans, in saying, As ye have yielded your
members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity, unto iniquity; even so now
yield your members servants to righteousness, unto holiness, Romans 6. 19.
Where observe, that they still be members, and still yours, your members, and
still servants, but not still in servitude to the same masters. Their masters
are newed, and so is the manner of their service. This Moral Concrucifixion
may consist with Natural Conservation; This Mortification is not meant of the
Common Death of Man, says Saint Chrysostom, and S. Chrysostom. Theophil. in locum.
Quos Deus mortificat, and affligit, postea vivificat. Mendoza in lib. 1. Regum.
Tom. 1.
after him Theophilact, but of a Death unto sin. And with this Mortification
of the Old man there must ever be the Vivification of the New man. I am
Crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live. There is life with Death, yea life
by it.

When the Natural Man begins to live, then he begins to die: and when the
Spiritual Man begins to die, then he begins to live. Man's first Birth leads
him unto Death, His second lets him into Life. He is borne at first to die;
But borne again to live. It is the beginning of Misery to be borne once; But
the beginning of Felicity to be borne again. The first Birth only lets man
into Natural life, and into that but only for a time, and that time but a
short one too; But the second Birth does let life into Man, and that a
Spiritual life, and that is the Pledge, and Means of life eternal. It is the
Nature of man's first life to give him only the life of Nature; But the second
life, being the life of Grace, does give the Grace of life. And this life of
Grace is the only way unto the life of Glory, and to the Glory of that life.

But first a Man must be crucified, before he can be glorified; he must die
before he can live: and this his dying too must be before his death. He must
be as the Apostle was, Dead and alive together, Crucified with Christ and yet
alive. Dead and yet not dead; Not dead in trespasses and sins, and alive in
Nature: But dead unto sin, and alive in Grace and Nature. A live unto God,
and dead unto the World. Like Simon Mat. 19. 27. 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Peter that forsook the World for Christ's sake; Not like to Demas that
forsook S. Paul to embrace the present World. Like a dead man in the World,
he must not doat upon it; But live in it as if he were departed from it. He
must not be like that younger Widow that our Apostle wrote a warning of unto
young Timothy, that lives in pleasure, and is dead whilst 1 Timothy 5. 6.
she lives; But like our holy Apostle himself, that lived whilst he was
dead. He must die unto sin before his Natural Climac. in scala Parad i.
Death, that he may not die in sin, when he must needs die a Natural Death.
If he suffers sin to live in him until his Natural Death, he must
suffer a Death Eternal for living so in sin.

Man's first Birth brings him forth a Sinner, his second brings him forth a
Saint: By his first Birth he is made what he was not before his Generation;
By his Second he is made again what he was not by his First, and yet
remains what he was. His Generation made him a Man, His Regeneration makes
him more, it makes him a good Man, a Man of God, a Member of Christ. This is
that, that this Apostle intended of himself in his state of Regeneration, when
he said that he did live, and yet not he. I am crucified with Christ,
nevertheless I live, yet not I. Now this may set our thoughts to the second
General of the Text, the Reading of the Riddle; but I must deal with you, as
those are wont to do with others, that propose hard Riddles to them, I must
give you a longer time to consider of it, then merely this time of your
hearing of it; I must give you until our meeting next in this place, which
must, (God willing) be in the afternoon, then I shall give you the reading of
this Riddle; but thus much for this Time.

S. PAUL'S CONCRUCIFIXION. SERMON Second.
GAL. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ, etc.
I Must begin this Afternoon, abruptly, as I ended in the Fore-noone, lest
I end this Afternoon abruptly, as I do begin; and I shall begin this
Afternoon where I ended in the Fore-noone, that this Afternoon I may end
with this Text, where in the Forenoone I did begin.

In the Text I observed two Remarkables.

1. The Propounding of a Riddle. 2. The Expounding of the Riddle.
In the Fore-noone you heard the Riddle propounded, This Afternoon you are to
hear it expounded. The Riddle was propounded in these words, I am crucified
with Christ, nevertheless I live. Now it is to be expounded by these words,
yet not I, but Christ that lives in me.

Not I, but how do these words Resolve, or Read the Riddle? They rather seem
to make an other Riddle, or to make the Text like the Prophets Mystical Vision
of a Wheel within a Wheel. Here is one seeming contradiction upon an other, a
Riddle upon a Riddle; for first he says, I live, and then he says, not I,
and so seems to say, and unsay, or to contradict himself.

Indeed, had he said no more but yet not I, he had not read the former, but
made an other; But the clausile added in the close discloseth all, not I, but
Christ that lives in me. This like a Key unlocks the Cabinet of the mystery;
This like an Oedipus unriddles all; Like a Clue it guides the Reader through the
Labyrinth of the Riddle to the Reading of it. It shows what life it is, that
now he lives; It speaks the change of his life, from that of a Natural man,
to that of a Christian; He lives now the life of one that is in Christ, the
Lord of life. The life of one that has the Lord of life, Christ Jesus, and the
life of the Lord now in him, not I now, but Christ in me. He cannot now say
with the Heathenish Poet, Ille ego qui quondam, I the same Man, that in time
past did so and so, but with the convert, Ego non sum ego, I am not I.

I live, yet not I, Not I the same, but I an other. An other, and yet I. I an
other Man, I a new Man, Non amplins ego, Not I a mere Man any longer, but now
a Christian; Not I still contrary unto Christ, but I a Convert now unto him,
and so I am not I, and yet I am; I am still, but not still what I was; I Acts
23. 6. Phil. 3. 5. Acts 9. 1. 1 Timothy 1. 13. Virgil. Aeneid. l. 1.
was a Pharisee, but now I am not; I was an enemy to the Cross of Christ, but
now I am not; I was a Blasphemer of his most blessed Name, sed quantum mutatus
ab illo? But now how much am I altered from what I was? So changed in my self
I am, that I cannot say, I am my self; Yea so unlike I am my self, that I
cannot but say, that I am not my self. It is not I Necesse est ut qui non
vivit in se, vivat Christus in illo. Et hoc est quod ^it Apostolus vivo autem,
^am non ego. S. Bernard.
that lives in my self, But Christ my Savior that lives in me.

He is not now the Man he was, and yet a Man he is even as he was; He is
now a new Man by his second Birth, and yet he is the same Man he was by his
first; He is a Man still as he was, and still the same Man that he was, and
yet he is an other Man then he was, changed much from what he was. The same
Man still in Person he is, and still the same in Parts: But in Passions or
Affections he is now an other. The same he is in constitution of Body, and in
Quantity, but in quality of Mind, and in conditions he is an other Man. A new
Creature. It is the same Man that lives still, but he now lives as an other
Man; He is not the same in Life, His manner of Life is not the same. A new
Conversation does ever follow a true Conversion. This Mutation aims not at the
Transformation of the Man, But at the Reformation of his Manners.

It is not like the Poets Metamorphoses, where Jupiter transformes Ovid
Metamor. lib. 3. Lib. 3. Lib. 4. Lib. 5. Lib. 15. Lib. 1. Lib. 9. Lib. 10. Lib.
1. Lib. 6. Lib. 6. Lib. 11. Lib. 13. Lib. 10. Lib. 14.
himself into a Bull, and Diana turns Actaeon into a Stagg; where the Theban
Sisters, the Mineides, are metamorphosed into Batts, Ascalaphus into an Owl,
and Aesculapius into a Serpent; Io into a Cow, and Ilithyia into an Heifer;
Daedalion into a Faulcon, Arachne into a Spider, and the Lycian Clownes into
croaking Frogs; Lycaon into a Wolf, Hippomenes into a Lion, and Hecuba into a
Dog. The Inhabitants of Cyprus into Oxen, and the Companions of Ulysses into
Hoggs. Men by the fictions of the Poets were transformed into Beasts and other
Brutes; But by this Mystical Mutation in the Text, a Beast or Brute may be
Reformed into a Man, and a man Regenerated to a Saint; Such men as are
degenerated into brutish manners may be restored to the Properties of men, and
the Prerogatives of Saints. S. Paul was changed by his Regeneration into a new
Creature, and yet was still the same in substance that he was by Generation.
He was Reformed in Moralls, and yet remained what he was by his Natural
form.

I live, yet not I, but Christ that lives in me, That is, says Aquin.
Comment. in loc.
Aquinas, tantum Christum habeo in affectu, My love is wholly fixed upon Christ,
My delight is only in him, Ad alia quidem omnia mortuus sum, as says S.
Bernard, to all other things I am as a man that is dead, I mind them not, I
look not after them, I care not for them; Placet quod ad ejus honorem fieri
video, displicent quae aliter fiunt, That which tends to the honor of Christ
I like well, but I dislike things that have no tendency toward it. Nichol. de
Gorr. Heming. Theophilac.


Some there be that take the Apostles Mortification, or his Concrucifixion, to
relate not only to the Law in the Members, ^ut to the Law of Moses. Or not
more to the Law of sin, then ^o the Law of C^remonies. And his vivification
by Christ, or his spiritual Resurrection with Christ, not more to intend the
Reformation of his Moralls, then the Conformation both of his Opinion, and of
his Practice according to the Doctrine of the Gospel. It may be taken both
ways. In the words before the Text, he says, he is dead unto the Law, but
alive to God; Dixit se mortuu^ legi ut Deo vivat. Nunc quomodo Deo vivat
exprimit. Ne quis s^spicetur illud intelligendum esse de vita naturae, quod de
vita gratiae intelligi debet. Hemingius in Locum. Aquinas in Locum.
And in the Text he tells the Manner how, that so we may not understand him of
the life of Nature, but of the life of Grace, qua Christus in fidelibus vivit
sua virtute, justitia, and vita, says Hemingius, By which grace of life, or in
which life of Grace, our Savior Christ does live in all Believers by his
virtue, and justice and life. For fides in Christum est vita fidelium, says
he, The believing in Christ is the life of the Believer. Ipse Christus est vita
mea, says Aquinas, Christ himself is my life, for he is life it self, as he
says himself, John 14. 6. therefore might S. Paul most truly say, Mihi vivere
Christus est, To me to live is Christ, Phil. 1. 21. And the life that I ^ow
live, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself
for me, as it is in the words immediately after the Text. And the Rule of this
my life is not the law of Moses; But the Gospel of Jesus Christ. I was a
Pharisee by my Education, and by my profession I was of the strictest sect of
the Pharisees; I lived precisely Gal. 3. 11. Romans 3. 28. Cermoniae legis ante
Christum nec Mortuae e^ant, nec Mortiferae, post promulgationem Evangelii, and
Mortuae, and Mortif^rae, inter passionem Christi, and promulgationem mortuae,
sed non mortiferae. S. Aug. Epist. 19 Tom 2. Mat. 11. 13. Mark. 1 19. Luke 3.
21.
according to the Law, and hoped to live for ever by it: But I have now found
my mistake, I have now found, that by the works of the Law, there shall no
flesh living be justified. I have most happily found that life, and happiness,
is no where to be found but only in Jesus Christ, that was crucified for me,
to bring me unto life. And therefore now with him I am for ever Crucified to
the Law, and to that life which I sought in my self by my observance of the
Law.

The Ceremonial Law before the Incarnation of Christ was neither dead nor
deadly; But after the Crucifixion of Christ, and Promulgation of the Gospel,
it was both dead and deadly. And betwixt both it was dead, but not deadly. The
Baptist was Pr^cursor Christi, the forerunner of Christ to make way for his
Gospel. And the law of Ceremonies was alive in Strength till John the Baptist,
but with his Preaching of the Gospel it began to die. Yea dead it was when
Christ was once Baptized of John in Jordan. Dead it was quoad necessitatem, in
respect of any necessary observance of it, yet propter vinculum Charitatis
Thom. Aquin. 1. 2. Quaes. 103. ar. 4.
and quoad Convenientiam, to avoid offense and Scandal, and for Convenience
sake, it was not presently cast out, nor did the Apostles deem the observation
of it to be deadly, but for Charity sake they sought an honorable Burial for
it, which could not be on the sudden; yet was it dead unto Saint Paul, Act.
13. 59. Romans 7. 27.
and he to that. It was not the Law of Moses, but the Law of Faith, that now
was the Tutour of his life; It was not Moses the Servant of God, but Christ the
son of God that lived in him. I live, yet not I, non ego qualis fui sub lege,
not I, such as I was Nichol. de Lyra in Locu^.
under the Law. But Christ now lives in me, habitans in me per gratiam
Vivificantem, dwelling in me by his quickening grace. So that the life which I
now live is by the grace of Christ.

It was neither a Ceremonial, nor yet merely a Moral life which the Apostle
lived, but an Evangelicall, and this finished his Ceremonial, and furthered
his Moral. By Christ's living in him, he did not mean the Person of Christ,
but his power in him. Christ's living in us says S. Chrysostom is his working
in S. Chrysostom. in loc.
us, and his ruling over us, and overruling of us, to make us mend our Moralls
according to the way and purpose of the Gospel. For the Gospel does not
utterly destroy the Moral law, nor make it absolutely void. Think not that I
am come to destroy the law or the Prophets; I came not to destroy, says
Christ, but to fulfill, Math. 5. 17. Do we then make void the law through
faith? says our Apostle, God forbid, ye we establish the Rom 3. 31.
law. Indeed they that are in Christ, and have Christ living in them, are not
under the law but under Grace. But how? Not Romans 6. 14.
under the law to seek for justification by it, but yet they are under it to
increase their sanctification by it. They are not under the Curse of the law to
Condemnation, but under the Course of the law they are for Commendation. Not
under the Rigor of it, but under the Rule of it. And he can never be a true
disciple of Christ that will not be ruled by it.

He that would live with Christ in Heaven, must live with him on Earth first.
He that would be like him in the life of Glory, must be like also in the life
of Grace. And he that would be so, must labor to be like him in his Moralls.
He that is Crucified with Christ, must live like one that is so Crucified, like
one that is dead to sin, like one that is dead unto himself, like one that
has Christ living in him, and that can never be, until the life of Christ be
represented in his life, in the manner, or morality of it. It is this that our
Apostle S. August. Sermon. 13. de verb. Dom.
cheifely points at in the Text, when he says Christ lives in him.
Vnumquodque secundum hoc vivat, unde vivit, Says Saint Austine, every thing
ought to live according to that by which it lives. The Body lives of the
Soul; And the Soul lives of Christ: Let both then live according to those
things that give them life; let the Body live so after the Soul, and the Soul
so after Christ, that both soul and body may live together with Christ for
ever hereafter.

It is from this kind of life, that a man may have hope in death. And it is by
this kind of life that a man may assure himself that he is dead. Death unto
sin is best attested by the life of Grace. It was by this that Saint Paul
could ascertaine himself of his concrucifixion. By this it was that he knew
himself to be a Mortified member of the mystical body of Christ. He found
Christ living in him, and that made him say, that he was crucified with Christ.

It is no easy matter for a man to be as this Apostle was, a Mortified Man,
Crucified with Christ; But easy it is for a Man to know he is so, if he be so;
yet many are mistaken in this matter, and take themselves to be so when they
are not; but the reason is, they do not observe the Manners of a Man
concrucified. They do not observe how it was with Christ, when he was
crucified, or with Saint Paul when he was crucified with Christ. They do not
enquire whether it be so with themselves.

When Christ was crucified he was Patient, and so was Paul Isal. 53. 7.
in all his sufferings for Christ, when he was concrucified. Are all we so? Are
we patient in tribulations? Can we suffer our 1 Pet. 2. 23.
losses, and crosses with patience? When our Savior was reviled, he revlied
not again. When he suffered, he threatened not, but Committed himself to him
that Judges righteously. Do we do so? So did S. Paul, Being reviled we
bless, says he, and being Persecuted we Suffer it, and being defamed we
entreat, 1 Corinthians. 4. 12, 13.

Again when Christ was crucified he was very pious. Are we Luke 23. 34.
so? He prayed for the pardon of his Persecutors; do we so? So did the
Protomartyr Saint Steven, and so did Paul, and Acts 7. 60.
so do all that are conformed to our Crucified Savior. And if we do not so,
it is a sign we are not crucified with our Savior.

Again, when Christ was crucified, he left the world; He neither reckoned of
the Pomp, nor of the Glory of it. And so it was with Paul when he was
crucified with Christ; The world Gal. 6. 14.
was crucified to him, and he unto the world. Now is it so with us? If it be
so, the world may fawn upon us, but we will not S. Aug. lib. de Salu. doc.
cap. 16.
fancy it, and it may frown upon us, but we will not fear it. If we be
crucified to that, and that to us, we will not Court it for any Pleasure; nor
Covet it for any Profit. We will not Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 55.
flatter it, nor yet be flattered by it. We will not seek to win, nor suffer
our selves to be won by the alurements of it. With Paul concrucified we will
esteem all worldly things, as Phil. 3. 8.
dung, and dross, in comparison of Christ.

Again, when Christ was crucified, he was a dead Man, and Crucifixum esse est
mortuum esse. Musculus. (...). Photius. Ephesians. 4. 19.
so was Paul, and a dead man does not sin; he that is crucified with Christ,
as Paul was, is dead indeed unto sin, and alive unto God. Though sin it self
be not departed, yet the life of sin is gone. Sin is mortified in him. Now how
is it with us? How is sin now committed by us? Do we still sin with
greediness? Does sin still live in us? and we still love to live in sin?
If so, we are not yet concrucified. True it is, that the old sins of Man, as
well as the old man of sins, must have a time to die after they be crucified.
There will be sin in any Regenerate Man as long as he lives, though he be
never so long concrucified before his death. For if we say we have no sin we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Yet if we be truly Crucified
with Christ, the love of sin will abate in us, yea our loving will turn into
a loathing of it, and though we carry sin every whither about with us, yet we
will not be carried every whither about with sin. There will appear the
power of godliness in us Counter-manding the Commanding power of sin, though
it cannot always prevail. The flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5. 17.
and the spirit against the flesh, and these two are so contrary that a man
cannot do the things that he would. There is a continual See Perkins in his
combat of the Flesh and Spirit.
Combat between the Regenerate and the Unregenerate parts of any Regenerate
Person. Such a Person is like that mystical purse that has both old and new
coin in it. The first, and second Regenetatus duplici constat homine,
interiore nimirum, ut ^xteriore. Zanch. Miscellan. lib. 3.
Adams are both in the old new Man, a living dead man, a renewed man, crucified
with Christ, and yet alive. Such a person was S. Paul, a person that had both
sin and sanctity at once. A person crucified with Christ, and so dying daily
unto sin, but not quitedead unto it; or dead it may be unto many sins, but not
to all; or dead to all it may be in some degrees, but not in all. There were
still peccata quotidianae incursionis, though not peccata prav^ dispositionis,
in him, sins of infirmity he had, and sins of inadvertensie, though not of high
presumption, and deliberation.

There are two degrees of Moral Concrucifixion, non servir^ peccato, and mori
peccato, not to serve sin, and to die unto sin. The first is possible in this
life, says Cajetan, but not the second. Nondu^ mortuus, sed fixus est noster
vetus homo, Our old man is not Cajetan. in c. 6 Epist. ad Roman.
yet dead, says he, but fixed unto the Cross he is, and so made sure for
serving Sin any longer. This inchoation of our concrucifixion is very feizible
in this life; But not the consu^mation of it: for that is to be affected rather
then effected here. From the service of sin we may be free, but not from sin it
self, whilst here we live.

It is one of the hardest things in the World to be truly crucified to the
World. The Practicalls of Christianity are harder then the Theoreticalls; And
of all the Practicalls this is one of the hardest. I would feign say with Paul,
that I am crucified with Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I
unto the world, but I cannot, says S. Chrysostom; And so said Saint Chrysostom.
in Math. Hom. 55 S. August. de docu. Spirit. S. Bernar. in in Cant. Sermon. 72.
Austine too; And so Saint Bernard: Yet these were holy Men, Concrucified, and
such as did even Sequester themselves from this evil World. But so sensible
they were of their own infirmities in it, that they seemed to themselves
uncrucified to it. They wanted much of Paul's degree of Mortification, and
wished as much for it; But it would not come with wishing. Yea Paul himself
fell short of that Perfection of it, which he wished. Indeed he freed himself
from Servitude to sin, though not without much Labor: But with that Labor
and much more he could not free himself from Sin. Yet nevertheless, but
much the more, he strove to be as free as he could from sin. And so must we.
He did, and suffered much to be Concrucified; He fasted, he prayed, he watched,
he labored, he was in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in
hunger, 2 Cor. 11. 27.
and thirst, in fasting often, in cold, and nakedness. Yet all that he did,
and suffered, would not do it alone; But it was 1 Cor. 15. 10.
by the Grace of God, that he was what he was.

All our Endeavors are but in vain, unless that God vouchsafes a blessing to
them. And all in vain it is to expect a blessing at his hands, unless we
endeavor with our own. It is by Grace Ephesians. 2. 5. Phil. 2. 12. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
that we may be saved; yet must we work out our own salvation with fear and
trembling; And give all diligence to make our calling and Election sure; we
must be (...), workers together with God in this most godly work of Moral
Concrucifixion. We must endeavor the effecting of it, and pray the Father of
Mercies to crown our endeavors with his blessing.

And the Difficulty of the Work should make us double our diligence to
perform it. Difficilia quae pulchra, the best things are ever dearly
purchased, and the best works hardly perfected. Facilis est descensus Averni,
It is an easy matter to descend to Sanctitatis via ardua est. Franciscus de
Mendoza in li. 1. Reg. cap. 4. Tom. 2. Mat. 7. 13, 14.
Hell; But very hard to ascend to Heaven. Ardua est via virtutis. Men may pass
in the Broad Way, and enter in at the Wide Gate without contending; But at the
Strait Gate there is no entering without much striving. There must be vis
impressa, a violent force impressed upon a stone, or any heavy Body, to make it
ascend; And we must offer a kind of violence to our stony Hearts, heavy with
loades of sin, or they will never ascend to Heavenward.

It is very difficult indeed to be concrucified, but not impossible. Consider
this Apostle, and be encouraged. This was as unlikely a man before his
Conversion as any here. Of all men the Jews were most unlikely to be converted
unto Christ, and crucified with him; And of all the Jews the most unlikely
were the Rulers; And of all the Rulers the most unlikely were the Pharisees,
Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? John 7. 48.
It seems it was a thing unlikely, that any such should ever become his
Proselites; but unlikely things are brought to pass sometimes, and this very
thing, as unlikely as it was, was more then once effected, for Nicodemus was
converted, yet was he a Jew, a Ruler, a Pharisee, A man of the Pharisees a
Ruler of the Jews. John 3. 1. Acts 22. 3, 4, 19, 20.
And Paul was a Jew too, and a Pharisee too, and a kind of Ruler, at least an
unkind Under-officer he was, and very pragmaticall in his Office. A new
commissioner he was made, with power Phil. 3. 5, 6.
delegated to him, to enquire after all sorts of Christians, and to persecute
them all whether they were men or women. A p^stilent Acts 24. 5.
fellow he was, as that Orator Tertullus called him, though not in his sense;
And a mover of sedition amongst all the Jews, and a Ring, leader of tumults
against the Church of Christ. He breathed out Acts 9. 1, 2. Acts 8. 3.
nothing but threatenings and slaughters against the Disciples of the Lord; And
fearful havoc it was that he made with the Church; yet Lupii ^xuit subito,
induitque agnum. Geor. Abbot. Cantua. Archie. de fuga in perse. Linus de
Passione Pauli. Mat. 3. 9. See Archb. Abbot in his six Questions determined at
Oxford at the beginning of the 5. De sug ^ in persecutione. Acts 13. 9. Saul,
abutens, vel abusivum eorum. Philo. Interpr. Arquirius in Dictionario
Theologico. Eucherius de Nomin. Hebraic. 1 Cor. 15. 9. Paulus, mirabilis, vel
electus. S. Hieronim. Arquirius. Theolo. Dictio. John 22. 27. 1 Timothy 1. 15.
Acts 9. 15. Acts 8. 1. Philem. 9. Acts. 13. 7. S. Hieronim. de claris
Scriptorib.
this furious Persecutour of those Christians was soon turned to a zealous
Preacher of Christianity. This Wolf was turned soon into a Lamb, yea this
crucifier of others was himself even crucified with Christ in his Life, and
suffered for Christ at his Death.

Let no Man therefore here exclude himself from hopes of Heaven. Let none
despair of his own conversion, or concrucifixion; God is able of stones to
raise up children unto Abraham, of hard and stony hearted sinners, he can make
most tender hearted Christians. He can make wheat of tares, corn of chafe,
flower of bra^, good of evil, gold of dross, light of darkness, life of
death, grace of nature, Quidlibet ex quolibet, A Paul of a Saul. This great
Apostle was Saul at first, that is, Superbus, proud, and lofty, as Pharisees
were wont to be; But he became a Paul at last, that is, humilis, humble and
lowly; mirabilis, vel minimus, so Eucherius, Mavelous, or the meanest. Indeed
he deemed himself the least of all the Apostles, as well as the last, not
worthy to be an Apostle, forasmuch as he had so much opposed the truth of the
Gospel. And it was mavelous indeed that ever he proved such an Apostle as he
did. But see what God can do, Those things that ar^ impossible with men, are
possible with God, with him all things ar^ possible, Mat. 19. ^6. Then be not
faithless, but believing; Of the chiefest of sinners, see one of the choycest
of Saints, of a Vessel of dishonor, see now a Vessel of honor, vas
electionis, a chosen vessel. Of a young Saul that consented to the stoning of
that holy Proto-Martyr S. Steven, see now an aged Paul, that converted S^rgius
Paulus, Proconsull of Cyprus, and from that changing of him unto Christianity
had his own name changed amongst the Christians, from Saul to Paul, as S.
Jerome avoucheth. The Name of Paul in the oldest holy language sounds
wonderful, and full of wonder we may be, that ever the Man was changed so in
Nam^ and Nature. But let us more admire the Power of God, and godliness in
Paul, that did so change him in himself, and yet so keep him in the change,
that he might truly say, as he did, I am Crucified Buxtor. Etimol.
with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ that lives in me.

FINIS.

