THE Prince of Orange's LETTER TO THE KING.
HOW great our Devotions have always been to your Majesty's Service in these
Parts, we believe may be sufficiently known, both by our so Faithful Service to
your Majesty, and by those Favors which in lieu thereof, you have upon all
Occasions so Graciously conferred upon us; the same Zeal makes us now perhaps
transgress the Rules of Reverence, that we may not prove faulty in those of
Loyalty. (Your Majesty) at your Departure, left the Government of these
Provinces to the Duchess of Parma, so virtuous a Princess, as she has fully
the applause of so worthy a Choice. It was believed that the Bishop of Auras,
now Cardinal, was left with her, to Counsel and Advise her, and not to be
Arbiter in the Government, but he arrogating unto himself the absolute Disposal
of all things, and leaving nothing of Regent to the Duchess, but the bare
Name, disposes of these Provinces, as he would do of his own private House; He
orders all things as he pleases, he handles and resolves the weighty Affairs,
without the Knowledge of the Council of State, and does this so Imperiously, and
with such contempt of all the Nobility, as the manner is more Odious, than the
thing it self. If the Evils which ensue from hence, did terminate in our own
private Offenses, we might at last resolve to bare with them; but experience
does show daily more and more, that this Malady is already become Public, and
that not stopping in the Court, it certainiy passes, and breaks out into all
the Provinces, with sure and great danger, that the effects will still prove
worse, as long as the Cardinal Granville shall tarry in Flanders, so long will
these Inconveniences and Disorders Increase; and because they perchance in
time arise to such a height, that it will be too late to remove him from hence;
We therefore have thought it suited with the Obligation, which the candor of
our fidelity, and the Condition of our several Employments, imposes upon us to
acquaint Your Majesty with what has been said, to the end, that you may apply
such Remedy as is necessary, which certainly consists in taking the Cardinal
from Flanders as soon as may be; those who are here of the best sort, and
generally all the rest of the Provinces are of our Opinion: in which let not
the Cardinal boast himself that he desires the integrity of these Countries
more then we: for we may rather justly glory, that had it not been for us the
Liberties thereof would have been much more damnified and diminished in them.

The King's Gracious Answer.
I Am glad that I can Attribute all that which you have written touching
Cardinal Granvill, to the particular respect of My Service. I commend your Zeal
and am well pleased with the Courage; but on the other side I do not use for
any Complaint* to be made by others, to bereave any Officers of Mine and his
Employments, without hearing him speak for himself. Moreover it is fitting in
Business of this Nature, to come from generalities to particular Offenses, to
the end that if the Accused cannot justify himself, his Punishment may be the
greater; but because these are things which peradventure may better be discust
by word of mouth then by Letters, I think it best that you to that purpose come
over to me in Person, with assurance of being here by me, both willingly heard
and Honotrably received. See C. Bentev^g Hist. part 1.

EXON: Printed in the Year, 1689.


