The Letter OF Master ALEXANDER WILLIAMS, In Ireland to his Father here
Resident in LONDON.
I Do believe you do expect some news, which in brief I will relate unto
you. I had been out with the rest of our Company diverse times to find some
Rogues, but could not meet any till at last going to a Castle where we found
it very strong and guarded with two hundred and fifty Rebels which we put all
to the Sword, with the loss of some three men, and two great Commanders, and
at another Castle a Mile beyond that, the very same day was I shot with a
Bullet in the Shoulder, which will seem to you very miraculous, for the Bullet
made a hole in my Cloak, and a hole in my shirt, and wounded my Shoulder, yet
never made a hole in my Coat, but a dent which shoulder now is well. On
Friday, we killed some fifty at another Castle, and on the very next day
following the Rogues Army marched the whole day of one side of us being ten
to one against us, displaying their Colors in a most glorious way, making
themselves sure of the victory, having cast lots the day before for our
garments. Our Field pieces, and our Wagons marched so far with us, that we
could march no farther, without giving them battle in the field, which we did
and in a moment, put them to flight, being twelve thousand, and we scarce three
thousand. And we killed of them that day some eight hundred, or very nigh one
thousand, but it was God that did fight our battle for us.

We have fired above an hundred Irish Towns. It is for truth. From Dublin,
1642. May third
Another from Dublin, this 30. of April, 1642.
SInce my last, of the last weeks Post, I have received yours of the twelfth
present, and have answered as by the enclosed. For the affairs in general,
God be praised, they go prosperously forward, From Youghall this week letters
came unto Conne, that the rebbels came up to the walls of Korke, and drove away
the pray of the Town, but my Lord Eusequeene and Sir Charles Uaverson, my Lord
president yet being sick, followed them, recovered the Cattle, and killed eighty
of them, that the young Lord Brahal, the youngest son of the Earl of Kork, made
a road into Roaches Country, and there killed 400. or 500. of the rebels.

That the second son, the Lord Killinmekey, being at Band sent out a squadron
of Horse, upon some design up into Carbory, the rebels laid an Ambush and
took 14. of them upon quarter, but no sooner possessed of their bodies, but
they cut their throats under their tongue roots, and pulled out their tongues
thorough it, othersome they pulled their eyes out, no sooner was this barbarous
cruelty committed, but upon notice given to my Lord Tillinmequie, he presently
sallied forth, with the strength he could make, the Rebels fled to some great
Castle, and he pursued them, broke in, and killed 400. of them, And Muskerry
himself as it is advised escaped from them, with great difficulty.

That the Count of Kinsale is revolted, and that those English that were in it
are all Butchered.

From the North we hear the Scots are landed 4000. strong and are marching to
the Newry, and Sir Henry Tishbourne on foot, with his army toward the Navon,
where it is said the rebel makes great head.

This day, thanks be unto God, part of our Army in this town, which marched
out yesterday morning with two great pieces of Ordnance, a demicannon and
Demiculverin are all safely returned from a Castle called Loisleipe, being one
sir Nicholas Whites who has been these two months in the Castle of Dublin,
there the Rebel had made himself very strong, being but six miles off us, and
accounted to be one of the greatest Castles for strength in our parts, and
accommodated with a most advantageous help of wood and river adjoining unto
it, yet nevertheless after discharge of some forty great shot in the dark of
the night by the help of several advantages, our men not being able to hinder
their flight, they all stole away and left us the Castle, which is made a
garrison, fifty soldiers left there, Sir Charles Coot still at the Nasse, and
has done several services there abouts since our armies coming home, one day
last week the Rebel took a Bog, his men stripped themselves of their breeches,
and followed the Rebels into the Bog, there killed an hundred of them, as I was
credibly told by a Lieutenant yesterday that was in that skirmish, and they
Recovered that time 300. head of Cattle, the Almighty God prosper and continue
these happy progressions; I remain with my prayers for the establishment of
true peace, and settled Unity amongst them.

London, Printed for Richard Lowndes, and are to be sold at his Shop next
without Ludgate. 1642.


