April, 21. 1642.

VICTORIOUS NEWS FROM WATERFORD IN IRELAND: Being the Copy of a Letter, sent
from Dublin the 18. of April by Mr, Andrew Williams, Merchant, to Mr. Adam
Atkins Citisen of London.

Relating a happy and Renowned Victory, obtained by Sir Christopher Loftus,
against the Rebels in Waterford.

Likewise the manner how he took the Town, and put the Rebels to Death.

Also a Relation, how that the Earl of Cork took the Earl of Osmond Prisoner,
where he now remains in Cork Castle, weighting the Lord Justices pleasure.

Printed for John Wels, 1642.

C R
the initials 'C R' (Carolus Rex) surmounted a crown and flanked by the English
lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the other
Victorious News from Ireland.
SIR*
HAving so fit an opportunity to present my service to you, I have thought good
by this Bearer, to give you a real Relation of all the eminent Occurrences,
and proceedings that have passed since the death of Sir Simon Harcourt, both
near Dublin and Waterford, as also, of what proceedings and victorious fortunes
have attended my Lord of Cork, to the great damage and disheartning of the
rebellious Rout, as touching Dublin, that (God be thanked first, next the King
and Honorable Parliament) is pretty well fortified, having received lately
forces which were sent from Chester, with Ammunition of all sorts; insomuch,
that our party is pretty strong. It pleased God to bless Sir Christopher
Loftus (a noble Gentleman lately come out of the Low Countries, and now
Commander of a Regiment of Volnnteers.) So that on the 15 day of this month, he
gave them a mighty overthrow: it happened that a number of the Rebels that were
at Waterford, left only as a Garrison to guard the town, were gone out under
the Command of Mark-maroth, with intent to pillage some near adjoining
Villages, and to fetch in Cattle, leaving not above 200. soldiers and two
Corporals to guar^ the town in their absence; which being done, and they busy
at pillaging and burning up the neighbor Villages, the report came to Sir
Christopher, who then was marching with his own Regiment, and 500 horse with
firelocks, and 3 Towns of Scotch Dragoners, which he had sent out to scour the
Countries, who returned with this News, that the Rebels were abroad, and that
as they conceived by their Number, Waterford must of necessity be but weakly
guarded.

Sir Christopher hearing this News, gave Command, that his Drums should be
unbraced and that they should march with as much silence, as speed toward
Waterford, which was forth with accomplished, which plot took so good effect,
that they passed the Centries which were without, they supposing they had bin
their own men, which were abroad a pillaging.

They came even to the town without any disturbance or suspect, till drawing
nigh the Court of guard, they were discovered, who immediately discharged upon
them, and retired to the Town, giving an Alarm, but our, forces, especially
our Horses followed them so close, and fired so fast upon them, that of 50.
persons their went but 8 to tell the news at Waterford. The Alarm being given
the town took Arms but in such rude combustion that it was to little purpose,
for before that they could ioyn themselves into a body we had possession of the
court of guard, and had dismounted all their Ordnance, which being done our
Drummers beat a parley, which they answered in our own language, then Sr.
Christopher sent out a corporal to inform them that if they that were
governors of the town, would yield themselves to the Kings mercy, they should
have all fair quarter, but if not, He vowed to use the uttermost of his power,
to burn the town up: and to cut them off. They yielded to the King, declaring
to Sr. Christopher that it was force by the Rebels, not disloyalty made them
revolt, since they were foret to make policy prevent a greater mischief, Sr.
Christopher having taken good order for the security of his new purchase, he
with the remainder of his men marchched out again, to meet the plundering
party, which by good fortune, ^e meet with all just at the entry of the town
Whose une^^pected sight did so amaze the Rebels that they grew desparate,
charging us so fiercly that had not God fought for us, we had undoubtedly bin
overthrown.

Three times they charged us fiercly, which we withstood, using our uttmost
power, to mke good the passage. Their anger being almost spent, then we began
to play our parts and with our horse to circumvent them, which was immediately
performed, and they left no possibillity of escape, they were almost all cut
off to the vallew of 1500 only some threescore which were taken prisoners
eleaven of which Officers though but Inferior, as Corporals, Seargeants, and
the like thus was this great victory obtained by the valor of this noble and
Heroicke gentleman and the town of Water-foord, brought into subjection, to the
King, He lying with his men, in the town in manner of a Garrison. least that
(as before) they would again revolt.

Likewise, the Earl of Cork in his parts has behaved himself very valiantly,
and in a Battle fought on the 13. day of this month, took the Earl of Osmond
prisoner who now remains in Cork Castle, til they have Order from the Lord
Justices what to do with him; much more I could relate, but that I will refer
it to my next opportunity, which with Gods assistance I will wait, giving you
by it a true relation of our further proceedings till which time I rest. your
friend

Andrew Williams.
From Dublin this 17. April. 1642.
FINIS.

