His Majesty's Order For taking off the CHIMNEY-MONEY, In His Gracious Message
to the Parliament, for the Ease of His Loving Subjects.
With some Observations thereupon.

AS the Almighty by so wonderful a Series of Success, has Placed Our present
Sovereign on the Throne, so He has singled out for that Sacred Trust, and the
Reception of those wondrous Providence, the Person (if Man can merit from
Heaven) the most deserving of them.

A most peculiar Instance of Royal Grace perhaps was never more Conspicuous,
then in His late Message to the Parliament.

Friday March the First. 88.
Mr. Wh^rton Delivered a Message from the King viz.

That His Majesty found the Act for Chimney-Money, was grievous to the Subject,
and therefore left it to the Consideration of His Parliament to take off the
same, etc.

In Answer to which, was made an Address to the Effect following.
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses in Parliament (...), (...) taken into Consideration Your Majesty's
Gracious Message, wherein Your Majesty is pleased to Express Your Great
Kindness and Sense of Your Peoples Condition, by Your Tender Consideration,
that the Revenue of the Hearth-Money is very Grievous, and are pleased to Agree
either to the Regulation of it, or Taking it wholly away.

And as Your Majesty is pleased in this, to Consider the Ease of Your People,
we acknowledge our selves Obliged to declare that Your Majesty has filled our
Hearts with an Entire Satisfaction and Gratitude, by this your most Gracious
and Vnprecedented Offer.

And we humbly Crave leave to present this Assurance to Your Majesty, that we
will make such Grateful and Affectionate Returns, and be so careful for the
Support of the Crown, that the World may see, to the Discouraging of your
Enemies, and the Satisfaction of all Good Men, that Your Majesty Reigns in the
Hearts of Your People, which God grant long to continue.

How infinitely does this Glorious Goodness and Condescension to His People
outshine His Predecessors! To instance no farther back then the two last
Reigns, Time has been when the National Eas^ has been so little the
consideration of the Crown, that our very Meeting of Parliaments have dwindled
into little other Use, than, Give us more of your Money, and less of your
Counsels; and scarce one good Act for the benefit of the Subject obtained
without the tacking of a Money-Bill at the End of it. Nay, and when the English
purses would not drain fast enough, we have wretchedly truck'd to France to
help out the count. But not to rake into the Ashes of one, or the misfortune of
the other, what between the Effeminacy of one Reign, and the Bigotry of the
other, what unaccountable sums, and as unaccountably consumed, have been
expended, and preverted directly contrary to the Intent of the Original
Donation, the great End they were given for?

But this long Sovereign fault amended, (not to mention all the other long
blemishes in the Imperial Scutcheon, washed off in the Person of our present
truly GRACIOUS KING,) as vast a Revenue as the Chimney-money may be, yet
considering the Iniquity and Partiality of it, together with the Cries against
it, (for never so uneven a Tax was formed.) He considers the Delight of
disburthening His People above the Gratification of filling His Exchequer: And
as weighty a Crown Jewel as it is, He thinks His Diadem (on that only store)
shines brighter, though not richer, without it. And undoubtedly this one
unprecedented Act of Royal Grace, attended with all the Circumstances of such a
Voluntary Tender, (even singly and separate from that unbounded Goodness, and
those Accumulated Glories we have so large a future prospect of, from so
promising a Reign,) is sufficient of it self alone to stand a REGAL MONUMENT.

And now my Friends and Neighbors, after a hearty Farewell to your
Chimney-Money, listen to some few Comforts in store for you. The poor Country
Wife may now boil her Child's Milk, or her Husbands Gruel, without endangering
the Consiscation of her Skillet or Crock, for the use of a Chimney to warm it
in. The poor Labourer, that out of his Weeks Wages can arrive to a
Sabbath*Days-Joint of Meat, need not fear the loss of his Spit on Monday, for
eating of Roast-Meat on Sunday; with the hearty Wish too, perhaps at the Tail
on it, that the Chimney-Money-Statute-Makers were spitted and roasted after it.

The furnishing his Hearth now, shall not cost him the Unrigging of his
Kitchen. Nor shall the Great and (before) Glorious Name of a King, be longer
debased to so Vile and Wretched a Voice of Authority, as the Rifling of
Cottages, and Plundering of Poverty. The Painted Staff shall now make no more
havoc amongst their Dishes and Platters, with the untuneable comfort of the
Cries of the Poor to make up the Harmony* And that Original Peace-keeper, the
Constable, ^^ virtue of a hard lettered Statute, shall now no more be put to
the Office of a French* Dragoon, in breaking open of Doors, and making Military
Execution on the Goods and Chattels even of Indigence and Begga^^. Those
hard-look'd Guests the Collectors, a sort of Visitants as troublesome as a Cat
in a Glass-Box, (thanks to Heaven and our good King) are like to have their
Reign but short. For that Egypt-Plague, those House Locusts (GOD and Great
William be prais^^) are now departing your Dwelling^; and you and your Race for
the future may live in hopes of making your Fires burn clear, without melting
down your Porridge-Pots into the bargain. A long and Everlasting A^ien to that
Crown Grind-stone, the Hearth-Statute. The Face of the Poor shall now be Ground
no more. And so

God Save King William and Queen Mary.
London, Printed by George Larkin, at the Two S^ans without Bishopsgate. 1689.


