THE DISCOVERY OF MYSTERIES: OR, The plots and practices of a prevalent faction
in this present PARLIAMENT. To overthrow the established Religion, and the well
settled Government of this glorious Church, and to introduce a new framed
Discipline (not yet agreed upon by themselves what it shall be) to set up a new
invented Religion, patched together of Anabaptisticall and Brownisticall
Tenants, and many other new and old errors. And also, To subvert the
fundamental Laws of this famous Kingdom, by devesting our King of His just
rights, and unquestionable Royal prerogatives, and depriving the Subjects of
the propriety of their goods, and the Liberty of their persons; and under the
name of the Privilege of Parliament, to exchange that excellent Monarchical
government of this Nation, into the Tyrannical Government of a faction
prevaling over the major part of their well-meaning brethren, to Vote and Order
things full of all injustice, oppression and cruelty, as may appear out of
many, by these few subsequent collections of their proceedings. By GR. WILLIAMS
L. Bishop of Ossory.

Printed in the Year. M.DC.XLIII.

TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
THough the wisest man in all the Kingdom of Persia says, great is the truth
and stronger then all things; yet the father of lies has now played his part so
well, that as the Prophet says, truth is fallen in the street, and equity
cannot enter in; and your Majesty, whom the God of truth has anointed his
sole vicegerent, to be the supreme protector of them both, in all your
dominions, has accordingly listed up your standard against their enemies; and
I may truly say of you as Menevensis says of that most noble King Alfred.

Si modo victor erat ad crastina bella pavebat.
Si modo victus erat, ad crastina bella parabat.
Neither do I believe, that Lucans verse can be applied to any man better then
to your Majesty: -- Non te videre superbum
Prospera satorum, nec fractum adversa videbunt.
As the height of your glory and prosperity never swelled your pious heart, so
your greatest crosses and adversities never dejected your royal spirit; But as
the Prophet says of the Captain of the host of the Lord, so I say to you
that are his Lieutenant, ride on with your honor, or ride prosperously,
because of the word of truth, of meekness, and righteousness, the people
shall be subdued unto you; and because the King puts his trust in the Lord,
and in the mercy of the most highest he shall not miscarry; especially, while
he fights, as he does, the battle of the Lord, in defense of the Church of
Christ, who has promised to be his shield and buckler; which is the daily
faithful prayer of

Your Majesty's most loyally devoted Subject, and most faithfully obliged
servant GR. OSSORY.

To the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of ENGLAND.
Most dear Christian Brethren, and fellow Subjects,
I Call God for a record upon my soul, that I have proceeded in this Discovery
of Mysteries, to discharge my duty, as my conscience directs me; and if I
perish Iperish, the Lord has hitherto most mercifully preserved me: I have
read of an ungrateful beggar that when a pious man seeing his nakedness, and
having a full web of cloth, did freely give him as much as was requisite to
make him a fair garment, yet he was no ways satisfied therewith, but would
have violently snatched all the web, in despite of the right owners teeth; and
shall we that have so freely received so many acts of grace from our King, more
then ever any other King has granted, exact so much more, as to make him no
King, In the life of Henry 3. presented to King James page 29. Choron. Santh
Albam.
or a King of no power? like Henry the 3. in the Parliament at Oxford, where
the good King met so many undutifull demands, that he was forced to render up
to their rebellious will his royal power, and when others managed the State,
he was left a cipher; alas who has bewitched us? when men do rent the regal
justice, they make themselves of so many Subjects, whilst they live in duty,
totidem tyrannos, when they have left their loyalty: and promises made by men,
which can not say they are at liberty are weak; when force has no power to
make a just interest; Therefore let not a faction prevail to destroy us all; I
assure my self most of our two Houses of Parliament are very noble and very
pious, and many of them would willingly yield to His Majesty's persuasions for
acco^modation; but our Savior says a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump,
and a small faction may insensibly seduce, if it were possible, the very elect:
I will appeal to your own consciences, if we have not a most religious and a
most gracious King? if he has not abundantly granted his favors to all this
Kingdom? and if the faction does not still demand what he may lawfully, and
ought justly to deny? then I beseech you let me not become your enemy for
speaking truth; let not the kingdom be made more miserable, and the Church
more despicable, by your assisting of such a faction to the new moulding of
them, and let it not be thought strange, that we believe one seditious
schismatique in a Parliament may prove a treacherous rebel against his King,
and this Traitor may possibly seduce many, and those many not unlikely to
prevail to infect the major part of both Houses: and if so, * Shall we deem
them a Parliament and think it fitter, to have them Jvdged by themselves then
by the known laws of the land?
then the first plotters of so great a mischeife, having so far transcended the
limits of truth and justice, to wound their consciences, and to confound the
State, that they know not how to retire, and think they can not find grace,
is it any wonder that such men with Judas run on, from bad to worse, from worse
to worst of all, till at last they come to the highest step that hell can teach
them? But we being Gods olive, though some of the Branches be broken off; Romans
11.17.
yet I hope God has not cast away his people; and therefore if you take not
pleasure in wickedness, and love not to become more miserable, let us all
fear God, honor the King, forsake the rebels, and defend the Church; so the
God of all mercy will yet be merciful unto us, that we shall find grace both
with God and our King; which is the hearty prayer of

Your most affectionate Christian brother, that does most heartily wish your
happiness, GR. OSSORY.

Christian Reader,
AS this Treatise was ready for the Press, I lighted upon Os ossorianum,
wherein I saw neither learning, nor truth, nor modesty, nor honesty, nor any
one thing worth reply, but a most distempered rage, and moody choler that
transported the silly man beyond his sense; for omitting those his rarest
passages, which some discreet welwiller of the man collected in Os ossis and
oris. if you look in page 59. you shall find his double admiration, that I
should not be either recompensed with vengeance revealed from heaven, or be
made an example of the deepest severity of the justice of the land (whereby I
presume he means this Parliament) or otherwise to be dismembered and torn in
pieces by the impatient rage and indignation of the people. for which direful
imprecation I wish the poor snake nothing else, but that our good God would be
so merciful unto him, as to restore him to his wits, which I understand he
scattered about the streets of Amsterdam, and give him grace to repent for
those intolerable treasons and abuses which he dispersed in his Pamphlets
against his own Sacred Sovereign. And for his bone, wherein I find neither
flesh nor marrow, I shall throw it to his own dogs to fight about it; and will
ever lest

Thine affectionate loving Brother, GR. OSSORY.

PSALM. 89.49. REmember Lord the rebuke that thy servants have, and how we do
bear in our bosoms the reproach of the mighty; wherewith thine enemies have
reproached thee, and slandered the footsteps of thine Anointed. Arise
therefore O Lord, maintain thine own cause; have mercy upon us, and deliver
us, because we have put our trust in thee; and forgive those poor seduced
sheep which know not what they do.

The Contents of the several Chapters contained in this TREATISE.
CAP. I. Shows the introduction; the greatness of this Rebellion; the
original thereof; the secret plots of the Brownisticall faction, and the two
chiefest things they aimed at to effect their plot. page 1. CAP. II. Shows
the eager prosecution of our Sectaries to take off the Earl of Straftords
head, how he answered for himself, the Bishops right of voting in his cause,
his excellent virtues, and his death. p. 6. CAP. III. Shows how they stopped
the free judgment of the Judges, procured the perpetuity of the Parliament;
the consequences thereof, and the subtle device of Semiramis. p. 14. CAP. IV.
Shows the abilities of the Bishops, the threefold practice of the faction to
exclude them out of the House of Peers, and all the Clergy out of all Civil
Judicature. p. 19. CAP. V. Shows the evil consequences af this act, how
former times respected the Clergy, how the King has been used ever since this
Act passed, and how for three special reasons it ought to be annulled. p. 25.
CAP. VI. Shows the plots of the faction to gain unto themselves the
friendship and assistance of the Scots, to what end they framed their new
Protestation, how they provoked the Irish to rebel, and what other things they
gained thereby. p. 32. CAP. VII. Shows how the faction was enraged against
our last Canons; what manner of men they chose in their new Synod, and of 6
special Acts of great prejudice unto the Church of Christ, which under false
pretenses they have already done p. 40. CAP. VIII. Shows what discipline or
Church government our factious schismatics do like best, 12 principal points
of their doctrines, which they hold as 12. articles of their faith, and we must
all believe the same or suffer, if this faction should prevail. p. 51. CAP.
IX. Shows three other special points of doctrine, which the Brownists and
Anabaptists of this Kingdom do teach. p. 57. CAP. X. Shows the great
bug-beares that affrighted this faction, the 4 special means they used to
secure themselves, the manifold lies they raised against the King, and the two
special questions that are discussed about Papists. p. 64. CAP. XI. Shows
the unjust proceedings of these factious Sectaries against the King; eight
special wrongs and injuries that they have offered him: which are the three
States: and that o^ Kings are not Kings by election or covenants with the
people. p. 73. CAP. XII. Shows the unjust proceedings of this Faction against
their fellow Subjects, set down in four particular things. p. 83. CAP. XIII.
Shows the proceedings of this faction against the Laws of the Land, the
Privileges of Parliament transgressed eleven special ways. p. 88. CAP.
XIIII. Shows how they have transgressed the public Laws of the Land 3
ways, and of 4 miserable consequences of their wicked doings. p. 94. CAP. XV.
Shows a particular recapitulation of the reasons, where by their design to
alter the government both of Church and State is evinced, and a patheticall
disswasion from Rebellion.
THE Discovery of Mysteries: OR, The Plots and practices of a prevailing
Faction in this present Parliament, to overthrow both Church and State.
CHAP. I. Shows the introduction; the greatness of this Rebellion; the
original thereof; the secret plots of our Brownisticall faction; and the two
chiefest things that they aimed at to effect their Plot.
I Have long wandered in a region of Rebellion, among seduced Subjects, and
discontented Peers; and now at last, after I had passed the raging Seas, and
very hardly escaped the storms and dangers of the furging waves, I am arrived
in my native soil: where I find my self encompassed with far greater
storms and more violent winds then ever I thought could be on any Land; for
though that Grand Rebellion, which you may find lately described, was both
magna and mira, very great and very grievous, such as I supposed could not be
exceeded by any humane malice; yet now (me thinks) I hear the Spirit saying
unto me as he did unto Ezekiell, Son of man stand up, and I will show thee
greater abominations; and a rebellion far greater and more odious then either
Popish, Irish, or any other Sect or Nation of the world has hitherto produced;
and therefore I may now say with the Poet, Barbara Pyramidum sileat miracula
Memphis.
Let proud Babylon cease to boast
Of her Pyramid's stately spires;
This Rebellion is more stange,
Surmounting all infernal fires:
No age the like has ever bred,
Nor shall when these Rebels be dead.


The seed of it was unseasonably sown in the Northern storm, The seed and
original of this rebellion.
and the original of those Boreall blasts (either why or by whom those spirits
were raised) is not so well known to me; therefore how justly the King did
undertake the quarrel, I will not at this time determine; or with what equity
the Scots made their approach into England, it is not my purpose to discuss:
yet I must needs say, that our English Sectaries, and Amsterdam Recusants,
which hated our Church and loved not our King, justum, quia justum, only
because he is so good, too good for them, did from hence arripere ansam, take
hold of this opportunity, by procuring those to proceed that were coming on,
and discouraging the others of the Kings side, that were cowardly enough (to
say no worse) of themselves, to betray both King and Kingdom into the hands of
the Invaders. So the good King was now with King David brought into a strait,
So new I fear more the secret enemies both of Church and State, that may lurk
in Court, then those that he in the Earse of Essex his Campt.
either to take counsel and follow the advice of those secret Sectaries, and
the masked enemies both of the Church and State, that as yet insensible unto
him, were such, in the bosom of his Court, and most slily aimed at a further
mischief then his Majesty could have imagined, as now it appears by the
consequences of this Parliament; or else to hazard the dangers that his then
open foes were like to bring upon his people: And I assure my self, eyes of
flesh, that cannot pierce into the mysteries of the hearts and our secret
thoughts, could see no further, nor make any better election then His Majesty
did; that is, to call a Parliament, which the hearts of all the Kingdom called
and cried for; and which, in former times, by the wise institution and right
prosecution thereof, was found to be the Panchreston, or, as the Weapon-salve,
an antidote to cure all the diseases, and to heal all the bleeding wounds of
this Kingdom, (though of late we have sensibly felt the unhappy ending of some
of them, which perhaps may be some accidental cause of some part of this
unhappiness:) here was His Majesty's fair mind, and an act of special
grace; for which all His Subjects ought most thankefully to show themselves
loyal unto Him, when He preferred their safety before the prosecucuting of his
own resolutions.

But, Decipimur specie recti, we are many times deceived by the shadow of
truth, and betrayed under the vizard of virtue; for, as God produces light out
of darkness, and good out of evil; so wicked men, like the spiders, do
suck poison from those flowers, whence the Bees do extract honey; and these
subtle-headed foxes (whereof many of them had unduly got themselves elected
into the House of Commons, and there factiously combined themselves together to
do their great exploit, to overthrow the Government both of Church and State,
and minded to make the Parliament. House like Vulcans Forge, where they
intended to contrive their iron net that should be able to hold fast all sorts
of people, from him that sits upon the Throne, to him that walloweth in dust
and ashes) turned the hopes of our redresses to our extreme miseries, when in
stead of rectifying our abuses, they intended principally to work our ruin in
our just apprehension, though perhaps our happiness in their own mistaken
conception.

And, as the Apostle says, Known unto God are all his works from the
beginning, and he has eternally decreed how and by what means to bring them
all unto perfection; so the Devil, beings Gods Ape, and the wicked treading in
his steps, do first mold their designs and intentions in the Idea of their
own brains, and conclude the works they would have done in their own
conceits, and then they frame to themselves the means and ways, whereby they
are resolved to produce and perfect all those misshapen embryoes that they
conceived; and so these factious men, this brood of vipers, that would gnaw
through the bowels of their mother, from the first convention of this
Parliament had resolved upon their plot, and contrived among themselves what
great good work they would by such and such means bring to pass.

And that was (as I hope this subsequent discourse will make it plain to all,
The design and plot of the faction of Sectaries.
that will not be wilfully blind) the subversion of the ancient government
both of this Church and Kingdom; and to introduce a new Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and to frame a new Common wealth, much like, if not worse then that
of our neighbors in the Low Countries.

Gratum opus agricolis; a brave exploit, and a great work indeed, beyond the
adventure of Junius Brutus, that expelled the Kings, but left the Priests
alone; that purged the corrupti^ on of the royal government, but meddled not
with the religion of their Bishops and Prophets: and beyond the undertaking of
Martin Luther, that pulled down the pride of the Pope, and all that Romish
Hierarchy, but ventured not to trample upon the Scepter of Kings, and the
Imperial government, which he held sacred and inviolably to be obeyed; for
these men perceiving how God had so wisely ordered these governments among his
people, to assist each other, that the one can neither stand nor fall without
the other, (as it is fully and truly showed in the Grand Rebellion;) therefore
as Caligula wished that the people of Rome had but one neck, that so he might
dispatch them all, unoictu, with one stroke; so these men would overthrow both
governments, and destroy both King and Priest, both Church and State at one
time, with one clap, with one thunderbolt: And so they should be famous
indeed, though it were but like the fame of Herostratus, that burnt the Temple
of Diana, or of Raviliac, that killed the King of France; of Nero that
destroyed his mother, or Oedipus that murdered his own father; for a man may
be as notoriously famous for transcendent villainies, and nefarious impieties,
as another is for his rare virtues and supereminent deeds of piety; as in
History Thersites is as well known for his base cowardice, as Achilles for his
heroicke valor; and in the Scripture, Judas for his treachery is as
notoriously known, as Saint Peter for his fidelity; therefore these men go on
with this great design: and to effect the same, I find that they aimed at
these two special things.

1. To take away all the lets and impediments that might hinder them. They
aimed at two things.
2. To secure unto themselves all the helps and furtherances that might
advantage them. For,
1. As a Vineyard that is well hedged, 1. To remove the impediments of their
design.
or a City strongly fenced with walls and bulwarks, cannot easily be laid
wast and spoiled, before these defenses be destroyed; so the wild boares
cannot devour the grapes of Gods Church, and swallow down the revenues of her
governors: and the Rebels cannot pull the Sword out of their Sovereigns hand,
and lay his Crown down in the dust, so long as the means of their
preservations are entire and not removed; therefore these men endeavor to
eradicate all the impediments of their design: and they saw four great
blocks, that were as four mighty mountains, which their great faith (their
public faith being not yet conceived) must remove, before they could plant
their new Church, and subvert the old government of this Kingdom: and those
were, 1. The Earl of Straffords head. Four impediments of their design.
2. The free judgment of the Judges. 3. The power of dissolving the
Parliament. 4. The Bishops votes in the House of the Lords.
For, as the heavenly Angels could do nothing against Sodom, while righteous
Lot was in it; so these earthly Angels the messengers of Abaddon can never
effect their ends, to overthrow the Church and State, to make them as Sodom,
full of all impurity and villainy, until these four maine stops be taken away:
and therefore,

CHAP. II. Shows the eager prosecution of our Sectaries to take off the Earl
of Straffords head: how he answered for himself: the Bishops right of voting
in his cause: his excellent virtues, and his death.
1. 1. Impediment.
THey get Master Pym, the grand father of all the purer sort, and a fit
instrument for this design, in the name of the House of Commons, and thereby
of all the Commonalty of England, The Earl his charge.
to charge Thomas Earl of Strafford of High Treason; a high charge indeed, and
yet no less a crime could serve the turn to turn him out of their way;
because nothing else could subdue that spirit, by which he was so well able to
discover the plots, and to frustrate the practices of all the faction of
Sectaries; for as the Jews were no ways sufficient to answer Saint Stevens
arguments, but only with stones, so these men saw themselves unable to confute
his reasons, and to subdue his power, but only by putting him to death, and
cutting off his head, for that fault which Pym alleged he had committed.

But then, I demand how this great charge of high Treason shall be made good
against him?

It is answered, How sought to be proved.
that England, Scotland, and Ireland and every corner of these three Kingdoms
must be searched, and all discontented persons, that had at any time any
sentence, though never so justly pronounced against them, by him that was so
great a Judge, Yet conceited to be otherwise by themselves, must now be
encouraged and countenanced by the faction, and most likely by this grand
accuser, to say all that they know, and perhaps more then was true against him,
for what will not envy and malice say? or what beast will not trample upon the
Lion, when they see him grovelling and gasping for life in an unevitable pit,
and it may be, compassed with so many mastife dogs (I mean his enemies and
discontented witnesses) as were able to tear more then one Lion all to pieces?
so by this means they are enabled to frame near thirty Articles against him
ut cum non prosint singula, multajuvent, that the number might amnze the
people, and think him a strange creature, that was so full of heinous
offenses, and so compassed with transgressions.

But, si satis accusasse, quis innocens? The Earl his answer.
if accusations were sufficient to create offenders, not a righteous man could
escape on earth; therefore the Law condemns no man before he be heard, what
he can answer for himself, and the Earl of Strafford coming to his answer
made all things so clear, in the Judgment of the common hearers, and answered
to every article so well, that his enemies being Judges, they much applauded
his abilities and admired at his Dexterity, whereby he had so finely untied
those Gordian knots, that were so foully contrived against him, and as his
friends conceived, had fairly escaped all those iron nets, which his
adversaries had so cunningly laid, and my popular countreyman, with the rest of
the more learned Lawyers, had so vehemently prosecuted to ensnare him in the
linkes and traps of guiltiness; and in breife the Lords, who as yet were
unpoysoned by the leavened subtilty of this bitter faction, could find not any
one of all those articles to be Treason, by any Law that was yet established in
this Land, sic te servavit Apollo; so God delivered him, as he thought and his
friends hoped, out of all these troubles.

Yet, as a rivelet stopped will at last prove the more violent, The nature of
malice.
viresque acquirit ibidem, and recollect a greater strength in the same place;
so rage and malice, hindered of their revengefull desires, will turn to be the
more implacable; quia malitia eorum excaecavit eos, because the malice of men
bewitcheth them, and has no end till it makes an end of its hated foe;
therefore those men, that hated and maligned the Earl (like the Jews, that
because their tongues could make no reply to the just defense of the holy
Martyr. Act. 7.51.
guashed upon him with their teeth and stopping their ears ran upon him with
one accord, all at once) because they had no Law, nor learning, to make those
articles treason, they say with the Poet, hac non successit, alia aggrediemur
via; seeing we failed herein, we will attempt another way: and to that end,
they frame a Bill of attainder against him; and this, if it pass by the major
part of both Houses, and have the royal assent, will bring him to his just
deserved death; and herein, I will not say, they showed themselves worse then
the Jews, because that, when their malice was at the hichest pitch against
Christ, they said, we have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die, and these
haters of the Earl, seeing they had no Law, will have a Law, to be made, that
shall bring him unto his death; because the House might have reasons, which my
sense cannot conceive.

Yet some of his friends have said, that after a former prosecution according
to Law, to make a new Law, where there was none before, to take away a man's
life, is almost as bad as the Romance Law, The rubs of the Bill how taken away.
that I read of, to hang him first and then judge him afterward, to whom I
assented not: and not many less then 60 worthy Members of the House of Commons
would never yield to pass that Bill; and it had a greater rub among the Lords,
where it is not thought upon any slight conjectures, it had never passed but
that this rub must be taken away by a new device; for that the faction judging
some of them might be more timorous then malicious, and remembering, that primus
in orb Deos fecit timor, fear is a powerful passion that produces many
strange effects, the Apprentices and Porters, Water men and Car-men and all the
rascal rout of the ragged Regiment were gathered together by some
Chedorlaomer, and came as they did against Christ, with swords and staves,
without order, with great impudency, to awe them, and to cry for Justice
against him; and this was done, and done again, and again, until the
business, that they came for, was done; a course, not prevented, that may
undo all Justice, and bring us all to be undone.

And yet all this will not do this deed, until the King passes His assent;
The Kings great pains to search out the truth.
for as yet the new Law of orders and ordinances without the King was not
hatched; and the good King, having so graciously, so indefatigably taken such
care and such pains, in his own person every day, to hear and see all that
could be laid unto his charge, and how he had answered each particular, was so
just and of such tender and religious conscience, that he was not satisfied (as
men conceived) with the weight of those reasons that were produced, to pass
the same; therefore here I find another Stratageme used, such as Hannibal
could not invent, to effect this hard talk; what? to persuade mildness to
become severe, or to cause a just and most clement Prince, so full of mercy, so
prone to pardon where there is a fault, and so loath to punish, but where he
must (by the Law of Justice,) the greatest fault, to yield to put him to death,
that was in many things so excellent in his life? the task was, to procure his
assent to pass this Bill; and how shall this be done? as the Man of God could
not be persuaded by any man, but by a Man of God, a Prophet by a Prophet, so
now the Bishops that were good men, men of conscience, and set apart by God to
resolve and satisfy weak and tender consciences, are thought fit to be sent
unto this good King, to persuade him, (as men supposed) that, to prevent a
greater mischief, he might justly pass this Bill; and either 6. or 4. of the
prime Prelates are requested by the Lords, to go unto the King, to assay how
far they can prevail with him herein; and so they went; and how they dealt
with His Majesty, I do not fully understand, but am informed by some that
went, that they assured him he ought to satisfy himself in point of Law by
his Judges, and of State by his Council; and how they did any otherwise, in
any other thing rectify his Conscience, in point of divinity, which belonged
unto themselves, I cannot tell.

But, though I think no man can justly lay the least tittle of blame upon the
just King, no, not the Earl himself, as himself professed, for yielding to
such, and so earnest persuasions of I know not how many reverend Bishops, wise
Counselors, grave Judges, and the flower of all his people, to pass that
Bill whatsoever it was.

Yet to say what I conceive, with their favor, The Bishops right to vote in
any cause.
of my brethren the Bishops, in the prosecution of this cause; I am persuaded
that they had no reason to withdraw themselves from the House, and to desert
their own right, when the Bill or the Judgment was to pass against the Earl,
upon this slight pretense, alleged against them, by the haters of the Earl
and no lovers of the Bishops, that a Clergie-man ought not to have any vote, or
to be present, at the handling of the cause of blood or death; for they might
know full well, when my Lords grace of York did most clearly manifest this
truth: that the first inhibition of the Clergy, to be present and assistant in
causa sanguinis or judicio mortis, in the Canon of Innocent the third (as I
remember, for I am driven to fly without my books) was most unjust, only to
tie the Bishops to his blind obedience, to the apparent prejudice of all
Christian Princes, by denying this their service unto them; and it is no ways
obligatory to bind us, that are by the Laws of our Land not only freed, but
also enjoined to abandon all the unjust Canons, that are repugnant to our
Laws, and derogatory to our Kings, and to renounce all the usurped authority
of the Pope; for I would feign know what Scripture or what reason Pope Innocent
can allege to exclude them from doing that good service both to God and their
King, which in all reason they can or should be better able to do, then most
others; and I am sure that neither in the old nor in the new Testament, nor yet
in the Primitive Church, until these subtle Popes began thus to incroach upon
the rights of Princes, to take away the prerogatives of Kings, and to domineer
over the consciences of men, this exclusion of them from the highest act of
Justice was never found; The Prophets and Apostles judged in the case of life
and death.
for, did not Moses, Joshua, Samuel, Eliah, Elizaus, Jehoida, and others of the
Priests and Prophets of the Old Testament, and S. Peter also the Prince of the
Apostles in the New Testament, judge in the case of blood, and pronounced the
sentence of death against Malefactors? as when Ananias and Sapphira were
suddenly brought unto their end by the judgment of the Apostle; and if they be
able and fit to judge of any thing, then why not of this?

If you say, Ob.
because they are the advocates of mercy, the procurers of pardon, the
preachers of repentance, and men that are made to save life, and not to put any
one to death, or to bring any man unto his end.

I answer, Sol.
that they are therefore the fittest men to be the Judges both of life and
death: for who can better and more justly judge me to death, then he that does
most love my life? It is certain he will not condemn me without just cause;
even as God, that is (...), the father of mercies, and even mercy it self, is
the fittest and most righteous Judge that can be found both of death and
damnation; because his mercy and goodness toward his creatures will not
permit his severity against sin, though never so detestable to his purity,
Clergy, how fit to be Judges.
to do the least injustice to their persons; so our love of mercy and pity
will not suffer us to do any thing that shall transcend the rules of justice
and equity; and as our inclination to mercy prohibits us to condemn the
innocent, so our love to justice, and our charge to preserve it, will not
permit us to justify the wicked; for the Scripture teaches us, that he which
justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the innocent, that calls the
evil good, and the good evil, that spares Agag, and kills Naboth, are both
alike abominable unto the Lord.

And therefore notwithstanding this unjust Canon, I never find in any of our
Histories, that the Bishops did ever withdraw themselves and quit their votes
in this case, either before or after, save only from the 10th year of Richard
the 2d, unto the 21th year of the reign of the same unfortunate King; which
they did, not because they could not justly be present, but because they had
just reasons to be absent, as you may find it in the Annals of his time:
therefore I know not how to palliate their facility of yiedling way to those
Non-Canonicall Lords, to produce those non-obliging Canons, Non Canonical
Lords.
which they abhorred in all that made not for the furtherance of their design,
to exclude them from doing this, which was one of their chiefest duties; for
who knows not the Lord Say and Lord Brook, and others of the Lords, to hate
all Canons, even the old Canons of the Apostles, as inconsistent with their new
rules of independent government? and yet herein, to exclude the Bishops votes
in the judgment of this man, and the passing of this Bill, which being
admitted, might perhaps have turned the scales, they will take hold of the
unjustest Law, and allege one of the worst of Canons, a Canon against reason,
and most repugnant to the best of Gods Properties, which though they be all
equal in themselves, sum and perfectissime, yet are theynot so perceived by
us, but his mercy is over all his works.

But you will say, was this man so just, that he was unjustly condemned to
death, did all men so untruly complain against him, and was he good,
notwithstanding all the evil that was proved against him?

I answer, that I dare not, and I do not say that he was unjustly adjudged to
death, or that the Bill it self was unjust; but this I assure my self, The
Earle's virtues.
that he was a very wise and understanding man, and endued with many rare
heroicke virtues, and most excellent graces, as among the rest with those two
incomparable indowments, that cannot easily be found among many of the Nobles
of this world.

1. Faithfulness to his Prince, to whom (as I conceive) he showed himself a
true servant, and most trusty in his greatest employments, save in what was
(and I know not that) justly proved against him; and I believe he would never
have taken Arms, as some others of the Lords do now, against his Sovereign.

2. Love unto the Church and Church men; to whom, though others think it their
glory to oppress them, and a virtue to contemn them; yet he was a true
friend, a most noble benefactor, and most just unto his death, as his very last
speech unto his dearest Son does sufficiently testify unto all posterity;
which speech was to this effect, (and I would to God it were indelebly
imprinted in the memory of all our Nobility) that, as he regarded his fathers
blessing, or expected a blessing from God upon what his father left him, so he
would be careful never to take away, or in any wise to diminish any part or
parcel of the goods or patrimony of the Church; which if he did, would prove a
canker to wast and consume all that he had.

Yet it may be, he was (which in truth I cannot imagine) as the Philosopher
says of Marcus Antonius, a man of that composition, that his vices did
equalize, if not exceed his virtues, and his-offences cloud all his graces, and
obscure all his glory; and as the saving of one man's life cannot save him from
suffering, that does unjustly put another man to death, so the rarest virtues
cannot justify the man that commits so many horrible offenses, How a
malefactor may be unjustly condemned.
as his accusers conceived this man did; to which it may be well replied, that
a notorious malefactor (though I apply not this to him) may be unjustly
condemned; and so he may be justly condemned, and unjustly executed; as when he
is not condemned for the fault committed, or condemned not according to the Law
which condemns that fact; for though a murderer deserves death, yet any one
may not presently be the death of that murderer, nor the Judge condemn him for
robbery; and though I should commit many offenses worthy of death, yet if the
Law does not condemn me, I ought not to die for any of them; for as the
Apostle says, Where there is no law there is no sin, because sin is the
transgression of the law: therefore the Earl of Strafford might be an evil
man, and do many things that in the sight of God and good men were worthy of
death; yet if our Law made not those crimes capital, or if the Law made them
capital, and not treason, we ought not for treason to adjudge him unto death:
so in sum the result is this, that he might justly deserve death, and yet be
very unjustly condemned to death. And it seemed to some of his friends that so
he was, especially because they had no plain unquestionable Law, but were
feign in some kind, to make a Law, to take off his head; and when his head was
off, this new manner of proceeding should end, and be no Law for any other that
came after; and a Declaration must be made, that the course prosecuted for his
punishment, shall not afterward be drawn into an example, it must be produced
for no pattern, but for him alone and none other; lest perhaps if the same
course should be still practiced, Complaint to the House of Commons. p. 6.
the contrivers of this plot might have the like payment to fall ere long upon
their own heads; therefore some say, this may well draw a suspicion upon the
justice of the sentence, though I will not censure any man for any injustice
therein.

But as the Earl said at his death, The Earle's words at his death.
which he undertook like a good Christian, full of charity and no less piety,
it was an ill omen to this Nation, that they should write the frontispiece of
this Parliament with letters of blood; which, if unjustly done, or unduly
prosecuted, I fear may with Abels blood cry for vengeance in the cares of God
against the contrivers of this mischief, to produce our miseries: and the God
of Heaven does only know how much of the blood of this Kingdom must be
squeezed out, to expiate all the mis-proceedings and the fearful projects of
our people: God Almighty turn his anger from us, and let not the righteous
perish with the wicked, not the sins of some few be laid upon us all.

This was the first impediment that was to be removed, before they could
proceed any further in this Tragedy, and thus it was most artificially acted;
and I say he was a great and a very great impediment of their design, which
made me the larger in the prosecution thereof; because he was a person of that
great ability, and so great fidelity both to the Church and State, and the
taking off of his head, made a very wide gap for our enemies to enter into the
vineyard of Christ, and a large breach into the City of God, to deface the
Church, and to destroy this Kingdom.

CHAP. III. Shows, how they stopped the free judgment of the Judges;
procured the perpetuity of the Parliament; the consequences thereof, and the
subtle device of Semiramis.
2. The second impediment of their design.
THe next let that might hinder their design, was, the great learning, long
experience, and free judgment of the grave Judges, to declare what is truth,
and what is law in every point; for these men being skillful in the Laws and
Statutes of our Land, knew how contrary to the same, and how repugnant to the
fundamental Constitutions of our government, the erecting of a new Church, and
the framing of a new Common wealth would be; and their judgment being to be
inquired in any emergent doubt, might prove very prejudicial unto their plots,
and a hinderance of their design, except it were diverted by some course.

Therefore to stop this stream, How they stopped the free judgment of the
Judges.
to put a gagge in their mouths, to imprison all truths that might make
against them, and to make these Judges yield to whatsoever they do, or at
least not to contradict any thing they say, they get many of them to be accused
of High Treason; and they do but accuse them, and not proceed to any trial
against them, which was a pretty plot of their policy; because that hereby
they kept them, and the rest of their fellow Judges (that had any finger in the
missentenceing of the Ship Money, and were therefore in the same predicament,
and to be under the same censure) under the lash, and to be still silent, for
very fear of their proceeding against them: for they saw by many presidents,
that those men which favored their design, or contradicted not their ways,
were winked at by this Faction, though they were the greatest Delinquents; and
therefore redimere se captos, to free themselves out of the hands of these men,
they might conceive it their safest course to gainsay none of their
conclusions; which was a plot of no small value to further their design, by
this removal of this second impediment.

3. The third impediment of their design.
The third let that stood in their way to make stop of their impious design,
was the royal power to dissolve the present Parliament, as formerly to
dissolve any other, which they knew to be an inseparable flower of the Crown;
timor undique nostris, this brought them in fear on every side, lest, if they
were too soon discovered, they might suddenly be prevented, and their plot
might prove abortive, like the untimely fruit of a woman, that perishes before
it sees the Sun, or as the apples of Sodom, vanishing when they are touched,
into nothing; or, at the best, but to stinking blasts: therefore to escape this
rock, they sail about, and like cunning watermen, they look toward you
when they row from you; their eyes and mouths are one way, when their hearts
and minds are another way; for they tell the King, that the discontinuance of
Parliaments has produced abundance of distempers in this State, and a world
of grievances both in the Church and Commonwealth: besides they say, The fair
pretenses for the continuance of he Parliament.
what the King and every man else saw to be true, that the Scots were entered
into our Land, and settled in the bosom of this Kingdom; and though perhaps if
some things had been better looked into, we might at first most easily have
kept them out; yet now, durius ejicitur, quam non admittitur hostis, it was too
late to shut the door, and it is not so easy to expel and drive them out,
except we made them a bridge of gold to pass over the river, and so to go
homewards again.

And this cannot be done without a great deal of money; which moneys though
the Parliament should grant them, (as we are most willing to do, to free your
Majesty from these guests, and to prevent the dangers of an intestine war)
yet they cannot suddenly be levied and collected, as the times and occasions
now required; therefore it must be borrowed to supply our present necessities,
and lenders we shall find none, except we can show them a way how they shall
be repaid again; and the experience we have lately had in these latter years,
of so many Parliaments so unhappily suddenly dissolved, puts us out of all hope
to find any way to secure their debts, except your Majesty will pass an Act,
(for as yet they durst not say they needed not His assent to what they did)
that this Parliament shall not be dissolved, until it be agreed upon by the
consent of both Houses.

This and the like were their fair pretenses, How the King was seduced by
their pretenses.
like the Sirens voices, very sweet, and very good; and the good King that ever
spoke as he thought, could not think that His great Council, whom He trusted
with all the affairs of His Kingdom, meant any otherwise then they said, or
looked any further then they showed Him; He never dreamed that they intended
to have an everlasting Parliament, and so perfidiously to overreach both the
King and the Kingdom.

But though our gracious King (being not so much versed with the dissembling
subtilty and serpentine windings of wicked hypocrites, that are to be removed
from the King, and expelled out of His house) supposed all them to mean
syncerely, and to deal fairly as they seemed to do; yet I do admire that
the wisdom of the Kings Council, (but that they, which as the Apostle says,
are not ignorant of the devices of Satan, are not permitted by these men to be
of His Council) could not epsy what mischief might lurk under this fair
shade, or what might be the consequences of such a Parliament, that is
inconsistent with a Monarchy, and therefore must in a convenient time be ended,
or else will make an end of all Monarchical government. why then might not a
year or two, or three, or more, so the years were limited, suffice to
determine all businesses, but that the life of this Parliament should be
endless, and the continuance thereof undetermined? this is beyond the age of
the Council of Trent, that they say lasted above 40 years; for I presume, if
some of the contrivers of this design might have their desires, the youngest
of us should hardly see the Dissolution of this Parliament, What the faction
could be contented with. Complaint p. 19.
till the earthly Houses of our Tabernacles be dissolved; for it is likely they
could be well contented, as one says, to make an Ordinance that both Houses
should be a Corporation, to take our lands and goods to themselves and their
successors, and when any of that Corporation dies, toties quoties, the
surviver and none else should choose a successor to perpetuity; so they should
be Masters of our estates and disposers of all we have; (as they are now) for
ever. and therefore this was a plot beyond the powder plot, and beyond the
device of Semiramis, that with a lovely face, desired her husband, she might
rule but 3 days, to see how well she could manage the State, and obtaining
her request, in the first thereof, she removed all the Kings officers, in the
second she placed her own minions in all the places of power and authority,
(as now the faction would do, such as they confide in, The plot of Semiramis.
in all places of strength) and in the third day she cut off the Kings head,
and assumed the government of all the Kings Dominions into her own hands; for
not 3 days, nor 3 years will serve their turn, for fear they shall not have
ability in so short a space to finish all their strange intended projects; and
therefore, that they might not be hindered, their request is unlimited, that
the Parliament should not be dissolved, till both Houses gave consent, which
they were contented should be ad Graecas Calendas.

Yet God that knew best, what punishments were due to be inflicted for their
former actions, and for all the subtle devices of their hard hearts, gave way
for this also, that this third Impediment of their projects might be removed;
that so at last, their sins, like the sins of the Amorites by little and
little growing unto the full, might undergo the fullness of Gods vengeance
which as yet, I fear was not fully come to pass; for till the Parliament was
made perpetual, the things that they have done since, were absolutely
unimaginable; because that while it was a dissoluble body, How the faction has
strengthened it self.
they durst not so palpably invade the known rights, either of King or
Subjects; whereas now, their body being made indissoluble, they need not have
the same apprehension of either, having strengthened themselves by a Bill
against the one, and by an Army against the other; and therefore all the
dissolutions of Parliaments from the beginning of them to this time, have not
done half that mischeife, as the continu^ance of this one has done hitherto,
and God only knows what is to succeed hereafter.

But seeing themselves have publicly acknowledged in their Declarations, that
they were too blame, if they undertook any thing now, which they would not
undertake, if it were in His Majesty's power to dissolve them the next day, and
they have since used this means, which was given them to disburthen the
Commonwealth, of that debt, which was thought insupportable, What many wise
men do say.
to plunge it irrevocably into a far greater debt, to the ruin of the whole
Kingdom, to change the whole frame of our government, and subjecting us to so
unlimited an arbitrary power, that no man knows at the sitting of the House,
what he shall be worth at the riseing, or whether he shall have his liberty the
next day, or imprisonment; many wise men do say, they see no reason that this
trust being forfeited, and the faith reposed in them betrayed, the King may not
immediately reassume that power of dissolving them, into his own hands
again, and both our unjustly abused King and out much injured people, declare
this act to be void, when as contrary to their own faith and the trust of the
King, they abuse it to overthrow the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom;
though I could heartily wish, that because it still carries the countenance of
a Law, the faction would be so wise as to yield it to be presently dissolved by
a Law.

CHAP. IV. Shows the abilities of the Bishops; the threefold practice of the
faction to exclude them out of the House of Peers; and all the Clergy out of
all civil Judicature.
4. THere was one stop more that might hinder, The fourth impediment of their
design.
or at least hardly suffer their plots to succeed according to their hearts
desire; and that is, the Bishops votes in the upper House, nay they cannot
endure to call it so, but in the House of the Lords; for they rightly
considered therein these 2 special things. 1. their number, 2. their abilities.
which are 2. maine things to stop and hinder many evils: For,

1. They had 26. voices, which was a very considerable number, and might stop a
great gap, and stay the stream, or at least moderate the violence of any
unjust prosecution.

2. They were men of great learning, men of profound knowledge both in divine
and humane affairs, and men well educated a cunabulis, that spent all their
time in books, and were conversant with the dead, that feared not to speak the
truth, and have wearied themselves in reading Histoties, comparing Laws, The
abilities of the Bishops.
and considering the affairs of all Commonwealths; and so were able if their
modesty did not silence them, to discourse de quolibet ente, to untie every
knot and to explain every riddle; and being the immediate servants of the
living God, set apart as the Apostle speaks, to offer Sacrifice and to
administer the Sacraments of God, to prepare a people for the Kingdom of
heaven, it ought not, and it cannot be otherwise imagined, by any child of the
Church, that is a true believer, but that they are men of conscience, to speak
the truth and to do justice in any cause, and betwixt any parties more then
most others, especially those young Lords and Gentlemen, whose years do want
experience, Pardon me good Lords for so plainly speaking truth.
and the course of their lives, some in hawking and hunting, and others in
dicing and bowling, and visiting blacke-friers playhouse, or perhaps in worser
exercises, does sufficiently show how weak their judgment must needs be in
great affairs, and how imperfect their conscience is as yet in holy things, I
hope not to be preferred before these grave and reverend men.

And therefore lest these grave men should prove great hindrances of their
unjust proceedings, before any of their worst intentions be well perceived;
there must be an exclusion of them from Parliament and from those Lords, whose
consciences and knowledge they may then the better captivate, and bring them
the sooner to side with them, for to effect their great design. And it is a
world of wonders to see, with what subtlety and industry, with what policy and
villainy this one work must be effected. It would fill a volume to collect the
particulars of their Devices; I will reduce them to these; heads.

1. They used all means to render them odious in the eyes of all people.

2. A threefold practice against the Bishops.
They brought the basest and the refuse of all men, watermen, porters, and the
worst of all the apprentices, with threats and menaces, to thunder forth the
death and destruction of these men.

3. Upon a pretended treason they caused 12 of them, besides the Archbishop
that was in the Tower before, to be clapped up at once into prison; where they
kept them in that strong house, until they got it enacted that they should be
excluded from the upper House, and both they and their Clergy should be
debarred from the administration of any secular act of Justice in the
commonwealth.

1. They endeavored to make them odious unto the people 2 ways.

1. In making that Order (or giving that notice unto the people) that any man
might exhibit his complaint against scandalous Ministers, 1 To make the odious
two ways. 1 Way.
and he should be heard; which invitation of all discontented sheep to throw
dirt in their Pastors faces, was too palpably malicious; for our Savior told
us, we should be sent as sheep into the mids of wolves, but here is a sending
for the wolves to destroy the Shepherds; and it came to pass hereby, that no
less then 900 complaints and petitions were brought in a very short space, (as
I was informed by some of their own House, that feelingly misliked these undue
proceedings) against many Learned and most faithful servants of Jesus Christ,
that were therefore hated, because they were not wicked; The Ministers why
persecuted.
and persecuted because they were conformable to the Laws of the King and the
Church. And the rest of our calling that were factious and seditious, were both
countenanced and applauded in all their seditious courses, and the more they
railed against our Church Government, the more they were favored by these
enemies of the Church Governors. As to instance in both particulars (as you
may find in the author of the Sober Sadness p. 33.) Master Squire, Master
Stone, and Master Swadlin, which they have imprisoned, and scarce allowed them
straw to ly on. Master Reading, Master Griffith, Master Ingoldsby, Master
Willcocks, and many others, having done nothing worthy of death or of bonds,
are inserted into the black bill of Scandalous and superstitious Ministers,
only for preaching obedience to Sovereign authority, and other points
consonant to the Holy Scriptures; and those that are scandalous indeed, as
Doctor Burgess the ringleader of all sedition, Doctor Downing that is reputed
as variable, as was Doctor Perne, Master Calamy, that is little better, Master
Harding, a most vicious man, Master Bridge a Socinian, and Master Marshall, not
free from the suspicion of some unjust persuasions of the weaker sex, and many
more such factious men are not only dispensed with, for all faults, but also
rewarded and advanced for their infidelity to God, and disloyalty to His
vicegerent: this the author of the Sober Sadness affirms of them.

2. 2 way.
By framing petitions themselves (as it is conceived) in the name of thousands
of people, from Cities and Countries, that either never saw or never knew what
was in them, against Episcopacy and Episcopal men; and then exhibiting the
said petitions unto themselves, and the rest of their seauced brethren, to
instigate others of their own faction, that affected not Episcopacy, and those
offenders that by their Ecclesiastical censure were justly punished, and yet
thereby unjustly provoked to hate them, to frame the like petitions against
this Apostolical function, and to make the world believe how odious these
Reverend men were in the judgment of so many millions of men, which were
indeed most ignorant and simple, Petitions against Episeopacie how un justly
procured.
and which God knows, and themselves afterward confessed, knew not what they
did, nor to what end their hands were purloyned from them, under fair
pretenses, that were alleged for the Reformation of some abuses, but were
subscribed to most scandalous Petitions, which the poor men utterly renounced,
when they understood how unchristianly they were seduced: so strange were their
plots to make the Bishops odious.

And yet you must not think, that these courses are more strange than true;
for our Savior tells his Apostles, that were men beyond exceptions, full of
inspirations, and abundantly endued with the gifts of sanctification, They
should be hated of all men for his names sake; and if you look into the
sufferings of Saint Paul, and the most horrible imputations that were so
scandalously raised against the holy Fathers, you need not admire so much to
see these men suffering such things as the hands of sinners, to be made the
scorn of men, and as the offscouring of the people, as they were not long
since, when the Bishops and the most learned Preachers might pass with more
honor, and less contempt at Constantinople among the Turks, or in Jerusalem
among the Jews, than in the City of London among this brood of Anabaptists.

2. 2. How the scumme of the people threaten them.
After they had thus brought them upon the Stage, and used them thus strangely
without cause, they get Ven and Manwaring, and others of the same Sect, to
gather together the scum of all the prophanest rout, the vilest of all men, and
the outcast of the People, such as Job says, Are not worthy to eat with the
dogs of the flock: and as they came before for the Earl of Straffords head,
so now again, they must come in great numbers, without order, without honesty,
against all Law, and beyond all Religion, with swords and staves and other
unfashtonable though not inconsiderable weapons, to cry no Papists, no Bishops,
and if they had added no God, no Devil, no Heaven, no Hell, then surely these
men had obtained (if the Parliament could have granted their requests) the
sum of their desires; and they would have thought themselves better than
either King or Bishop, but as yet they go no farther, than No Papist, no
Bishop; and by this they put the good Bishops in great fear, and well they
might be possessed of that fear, qui cadit in fortem and constantem virum: for
mine eyes did see them, and mine ears did hear it said, What Bishop soever
they met they would be his death, and I thanked God they knew not me to be a
Bishop. Their furious assault upon Saint Peter's Church in Westminster.
Then they set upon Saint Peter's Church of Westminster, burst part of the door
to pieces, and had they not been most manfully withstood by the Archbishop of
York his Gentlemen, and the Prebends Servants, together with the Officers of
the Church, they had entered, and likely ransacked, spoiled, and defaced all
the Monnments of the ancient Kings, broken down the Organs, and committed such
sacrilege and profanation of that holy place, as their fellow Rebels have
done since in Canterbury, Winchester, Worcester, and other places, whereof I
shall speak hereafter; the like was never seen among the Turks and Pagans; and
after these things, what rage, cruelty, and barbaritie they would have showed
to the Dean and Prebends, we might well fear, but not easily judge; I am sure
the Dean was forced to hire armed Soldiers to preserve the Church for many
days after; for seeing these rioturs tumults could not as yet obtain their
ends, they came, nay, they were brought again and again, and they justled and
offered some violence unto the Archbishops Grace, as he went with the Earl of
Dover into the Parliament House, which made him and the rest of his brethren
justly to fear what might be the issue of these sad beginnings, which they
conceived must needs be very lamentable, if timely remedy were not applied to
prevent these untimely frights and unchristian tumults.

Therefore when no Complaints either to the House of Lords or Commons could
produce any safe effects, but rather a frivolous excuse than a serious
redress, that they came to petition against the Government, and not to seek
the destruction of the Governors, the Bishops were enforced (and in my
judgment, flesh and blood could take no better course in such a case, in such
distress, and I believe it will be found wisdom hereafter) to make their
Petition for their security, and Protestation against all Acts as null, (they
might have added to them and whom they represented) that should be enacted in
their unwilling absence, while they were so violently hindered from the House;
and, it may be, some word might pass in this Protestation, that might be
bettered, or explained by another word; yet on such a sudden, in such a
fright, when they scarce had time to take counsel of their pillowes, or to
advice with their second thoughts, Quae semper sunt saniores, to watch for
iniquity, Esaias 29.20, 21.
to turn aside the just for a thing of naught, to take advantage of a word, or
to catch men for one syllable, to charge them with high Treason to bring them
unto death, so many Reverend Bishops to such a shameful end, was more
malicious than ever I find the Jews were to the old Prophets, or the Pagan
Tyrants unto the Primitive Fathers, nor do I believe you can parallel the same
charge in any History: yet

3. 3. How they were committed to prison.
For this one necessitated Act of the Bishops, the House of Commons do
suddenly upon the first sight thereof, charge twelve of them with high
Treason; they were not so long in condemning it as the Bishops in composing it,
and accordingly the Lords commit them unto Prison. And if this was Treason, I
demand, why could they not prove it so to be? Or if it was not, why should such
an House, Flos and medulla regni, the greatest and the highest Court of
Justice, from which (the King consenting with them) there lies none appeal,
but only to the Court of Heaven, accuse them of high Treason? I would not have
that Court to charge a man with any thing that were not most true, for
certainly, whosoever unjustly compasses my death is justly guilty of death
himself, when as the Poet says, -- Lex non justior ulla,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
It may be they would have us to believe this Treason was not proved, nor the
charge so fully followed as they intended, out of some mercy to save their
lives; but I could sooner believe, they rejoiced to see them fear, and were
glad of their mistake, that they might charge them, and by such a charge cast
them into prison, that so they might the more easily work their design, to
cast them out of the Parliament, which now they have soon effected, and
procured an Act for their exclusion.

And you must know, that to cast out from doing good, or serving God, is a
work of the devil, and not of God; so the wicked Husbandmen did cast out the
right Heir of the vineyard, out of his own inheritance; The consequences of
this Act.
so the Jews did cast out the blind man, and all that professed Christ out of
their Synagogue. But you may better judge of this good Act, by these
consequences which are like to be the fruits thereof.

1. Hereby they are all made incapable to do any good, either for Gods honor,
or their neighbors benefit, 1. Made incapable of doing any good.
by executing justice, or pronouncing judgment, in any cause in any temporal
Court: and justice which long agon has fled to heaven, and wanders as a
stranger here on earth, must be countenanced and entertained only by the
sons of men, by secular Lords and Gentlemen: and the Spiritual Lords the
Servants of God, and messengers of heaven must have nothing to do with her; not
because they are not as well able as any other to do justice, but because the
others cannot endure to let them see it, for fear they should hinder their
injustice, and therefore justice and judgment are like to speed well on earth
when their chiefest friends are banished from them, and it may be worldlings,
oppressors, or most ignorant youths, rather than any just understanders of
their natures must be their Judges.

2. 2. Made unable to defend themselves.
Hereby they are made unable to defend themselves or their calling from any
wrong; their respect was little enough before, and their indignities were great
enough; and yet now we are exposed to far greater miseries, and to unresistable
injuries, when a Bishop has not so much Authority as a Constable, to
withstand his greatest affronts.

But hoc Ithacus velit, this is that which the devil and his great
Atreidesses, his prime champions to enlarge his kingdom would fain have, our
souls to remain among Lions, and all the means of defense to be taken from
us, our enemies to be our judges, and our selves to be murdered with our own
weapons. In the time of Popery there were many Laws de immunitate clericorum,
whereby we were so protected, that the greatest Prince could not oppress us,
as you may find in the Reign of King John, and almost in all our Histories:
and when we renounced the Pope, God made Kings our nursing fathers, and Queens
our nursing mothers, and we putting our selves under their protection, have
been hitherto most graciously protected: but now by this Act we are left naked
of all defense, and set under the very sword of our Adversaries, and as the
Psalmist says, They that hated us are made Lords over us, to callus, to
assesse us, to undo us.

3. 3. Debarred of that right that none else are.
Hereby they are made more slavish than the meanest Subject, and deprived of
that benefit and privilege which the poorest Shoemaker, Tailor, or any other
Tradesman or yeoman has most justly left unto him, for to be excluded,
debarred, and altogether made incapable of any benefit is such an insupportable
burden, that it is set upon no man's shoulders but upon the Clergy alone, as if
they alone were either unworthy to receive, or unable to do any good.

4. 4. Made more contemptible than all others.
Hereby they are made the unparalleled spectacle of all neglect and scorn to
all foreign people; for I can hardly believe the like precedent can be showed
in any Age, or any other Nation of the world, no not among the very Infidels or
Indians; for in former times the Bishops and Clergymen were thought the
fittest instruments to be employed in the best places of greatest trust, and
highest importance in the Commonwealth, and Kings made them their
Embasladours, as the Emperor Vas lentinian did S. Ambrose, and our own
Chronicles relate how former times respected the Clergy, and how our Kings
made them both their Counselors, and their Treasurers, Chancellors, Keepers of
the Great Seal, and the like Officers of the chiefest concernment, as Ethelbert
in the year of Christ 605. says, I Ethelbert King of Kent, Vt refert in tract
atu suo de eposeopatu p. 61 62. M. Theyer. Sir Henry Spelman p. 118.
with the consent of the Reverend Archbishop Augustine, and of my Princes, do
give and grant, etc. and the said Ethelbert with the Queen and his Son Eadbald,
and the most Reverend Prelate Augustine, and with the rest of the Nobility of
the Land solemnly kept his Christmasse at Canterbury, and there assembled a
Common Counsel, Tam cleri quam populi, as well of the Clergy as of the
people; and King Adelstan says, Idem p. 403
I Adelstan the King do signify unto all the Officers in my Kingdom, that by
the advice of Wolfelme my Archbishop, and of all my Bishops. In the great
Council of King Ina, Anno 712. the edicts were enacted by the Common Counsel
and consent Omnium Episcoporum and principum, Idem p. 219.
procerum, Comitum and omnium sapientum seniorum, and populorum totius regni
and per praeceptum regis Inae: and in the second Charter of King Edward the
Confessor, granted to the Church of Saint Peter in Westminster, How former
times respected the Clergy.
it is said to be Cum concilio and decreto Archiepiscoporum Episcoporum,
Comitum, aliorumque suorum optimatum, with the council and decree of the
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and other Potentates. And so not only the Saxon
Kings, but the Norman also ever since the Conquest had the Bishops in the like
or greater esteem, that they never held Parliament or Counsel without them.
And surely these Princes were no Babes that made this choice of them, neither
was the Common wealth neglected, nor justice prejudiced by these Governors.
And whosoever shall read mores gentium, or the pilgrimage of Master Purchase,
Livie, Plutarch, Appian, and the rest of the Greek and Latin Histories, I dare
assure him, he shall find greater honor given, and far less contempt cast
upon the Priests and Flamins, the Prophets of the Sybils, then we find of this
faction left to the Servants of the living God, who are now dealt withal
worse, than Pharach dealt with the Israelites that took away their straw and
yet required their full tale of brickes; for these men would rob us of all our
means and take away all our Lands, and all our rights, and yet require not
only the full tale of Sermons and Service, as was used by our Predecessors,
but to double our files, to multiply our pains, How the Clergy are now used.
and to treble the Sermons and Service, that they used to have of our
forefathers, more than ever was done in any Age since the first Plantation of
the Gospel; and when we have done with John Baptist, the utmost of our
endeavors, like a shining and a burning lamp, that does waste and consume it
self to nothing, while it gives light to others, they only deal with us, as
Cartiers use to do with their pack horses, hang bells at their ears to make a
melodious noise, but with little provander lay heavy loades upon their backs,
and when they can bear no more burdens, take away their bells, withdraw their
praises, call them Jades, exclaim against their laziness, and then at last,
turn them out to feed upon the commons, and to die in a ditch; and thus we
have now made the Ministers of Christ to be the emblems of all misery, and in
pretending to make them more glorious in the sight of God, we have made them
most base in the eyes of all men.

And therefore the consequence of this Act is like to prove most lamentable,
when the people, considering how that hereby we are left naked of all comfort,
and subject to all kind of scorn and distress, and how that this being
effected is but the praeludium of a far greater mischief, they will rather
with no great cost make their children of some good Trade, and their children
will choose so to be, than with such great costland more care, and yet little
hope, to bring them up to worse condition than the meanest of all Trades, The
Clargie alone are deprived of Magna Charta.
or the lowest degree of all rustickes; when as they can challenge, and it
shall not be denied them, to have the privileges of the Law, and a property
in their goods, which without their own consent, yielded in their persons or
their representours, cannot be taken from them; and the Clergy only of all
the people in this Kingdom, shall be deprived of the right and benefit of our
great Charter, which so many famous Kings and pious Princes have confirmed unto
us; and when we have labored all the days of our lives with great pains and
more diligence, to instruct our people, and to attain to some competencie of
means to maintain our selves and our families, we shall be in the power of
these men, at their pleasure, under the pretense of Religion, contrary to all
justice, to be deprived of any part of our freehold, when we shall have not one
man of our own calling to speak a word in our behalf, on no Seat of Justice
throughout the whole Kingdom.

O terque quaterque beati, queis ante ora patrum contigit oppetere, O most
miserable and lamentable condition of Gods Ministers; I must needs speak it,
though I should die for it; and if some did not speak it, I think the stones
would cry against it, and proclaim it better for the Clergy, were their hope
only in this world, never to have been borne, or at least never to have seen a
book, then to fall into the hands, and to be put under the censure of these men
that do thus love Christ, This Act more prejudicial to to the future times
than now.
by hating his Ministers, who as I said before, by this one Act are made liable
to undergo all kind of evils, which shall not only fall upon the present
Clergy, (for were it so, our patience should teach us to be silent) but also
to the increase of all prejudices to the Gospel, more than my foresight can
express, in all succeeding Ages.

And therefore I may well say with Jeremie, Jer. 5.9.29.
Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? And we need not wonder,
that such plagues, calamities and distresses, have so much increased in this
Kingdom ever since the passing of this Act, and yet the anger of the Lord is
not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, and I fear, his wrath
will not be appeased, till we have blotted this, and wiped away all other our
great sins and transgressions, with the truest tears of unfeigned repentance.

These are like to be the consequences of this Act; and yet our good King, who
we know loved our Nation and built us a Synagogue, and was (as I assure my
self) most unwilling to pass it, was notwithstanding over-perswaded
(considering where thirteen of the Bishops were, even in prison, and in what
condition all the rest of them stood, in question whether all they should
stand, or be cut down root and branch) to yield his assent unto the Act; though
if the case in truth were rightly weighed, not much less prejudicial to his
Majesty than injurious to us, to be thus deprived of our right, How the King
has been used ever since this Act passed.
and exposed to all miseries, by excluding us from all Civil Judicature: and I
would to God the King and all the Kingdom did continually consider, how his
Majesty was used ever since the confirmation of this Act; for they no sooner
had excluded the Bishops and Clergy out of their right, but presently they
proceeded, and prosecuted the design ever since, to thrust out the King from
all those just rights and prerogatives, which God and nature and the Laws of
our Land have put into his hands, for the government of this Kingdom; neither
was it likely to succeed any other wise, as I have fully showed, and I would
all Kings would read it, in the Grand Rebellion.

But I see no reason why it may not and why it should not be retracted and
annulled, That the act should be annulled.
when the Houses shall be purged of that Anabaptisticall and Rebellious
faction, that contrived and procured the same to pass, for these three
special reasons;

1. 1. Reason.
Because that contrary to all former precidents, that Bill for their exclusion,
was (as it is reported) at the first refused, and after a full bearing among
the Lords, it was by most votes, by more then a dozen voices, rejected; and
yet, to show unto the world, that the factions maltee against the Bishops had
no end, and their rage was still implacable, at the same Session, and which is
very considerable, immediately as soon as ever they understood it was rejected,
the House of Commons revived it, and so pressed it unto the Lords, that (if I
may have leave to speak the truth) contrary to all right, * For I conceave
this to be an approved maxim, that no light, not proved forfitea by some of
fence, can be taken away wuhout wrong 2 Keasom In His Majesty's answer to the
Petition of the Lords and Commons. 16 of July. p. 8.
it must be again received; and while the Bishops were in prison, it was, with
what honor I know not strangely confirmed.

2. Because this Bill had the Royal assent after that a most riotous tumult,
and many thousands of men, with all sorts of warlike weapons both on land and
water most disloyally had driven His Majesty to fly from London, that most
Rebellious City, not without fear, for his own safety, even for the safety of
his life as himself professes; and when they had so cunningly contrived their
plot, as to get some of the Kings servants and friends, that were about him and
employed in the Queens affairs, to persuade Her Majesty to use all her power
with the King for the passing of this Bill, or else Her journey should be
slaied, as formerly they had altered her resolution for the Spaw; and at
Rochester she should understand the sense of the House to stop Her passage unto
Holland, whereas the passing of this Bill might make way for Her passage over;
and many other such frights and fears, they put both upon the King and Queen,
to enforce him full sore against his will, as we believe, to pass this harsh
Bill, for the exclusion of the spiritual Lords out of the House of Peers, and
of all the Clergy from all Secular Judicature.

But Master Pym will tell us, he did, Ald. Gar. speech at Guild. hall.
that it was the opinion of both Houses, there was no occasion given by any
tumults, that might justly cause His Majesty's departure.

To whom I answer with the words of Alderman Garroway if the Houses had
declared that it had been lawful to beat the King out of Town, I must have
sat still with wonder (though I should never believe it) but when they declare
matters of fact, which is equally within our own knowledge, and wherein we
cannot be deceived, as in the things we have seen with our eyes, if they
dissent from truth, they must give me leave to differ from them: as if they
should declare, they have paid all the money that they owe unto the city, or
that there was * For now I understand it is pulled down.
no Cross standing in Cheapside, we shall hardly believe them.

And therefore, seeing we all remember, when the alarm was given, that there
was an attempt from Whitehall upon the City, how hardly it was appeased, and
how no babies thought the design of those subtle beads that gave that false
alarm was no less, then to have caused Wite hall to be pulled down. and they
that loved the King, and saw the Army both by Land and water which accompanied
the persons accused to Westminster the next day after His Majesty's departure,
(as if they had passed in a Roman triumph) conceived the danger to be so great,
that I call Heaven to witness, they blessed God that so gracioussly put it in
the Kings heart rather to pass away over night, though very late, then hazard
the danger that might have ensued the day following:

The meaning therefore of both Houses may be, that there was nothing done,
which they confessed to be a tumult; and no mervaile; because they received
encouragement, as we believed from their defense, and no reproof, that we
found was made, for this indignity offered unto the King: but if I be
constrained and in danger, it is not enough for me, that I am voted free and
safe; for if that, which looks, as like a tumult, as that did, or, as the
representation of my face in the truest glass is like my face, does come
against me and incompasse me about, though I may be, perhaps, in more safety;
yet I shall think my self in great fear, and in no more security then His
Majesty was at Edgehill.

3. 3 Reason. p. 7
Because, as the veiwer of the Observat. has very well expressed it, no act of
Parliament can prevail to deprive the King of His right and authority; as an
attainder by Parliament could not bar the title to the Crown from descending
on King Hen. 7. nor was an act of Parliament disabling King Hen. 6. to
reassume the government of his people, of any force, but without any repeal
in it self frustrate and void. 7. rep. 14. Calvin's case; an act of Parliament
cannot take away the protection or the Subjects service, which is due by the
Law of nature. 11. rep. Sur de la Wares case, William de la Ware although
disabled by act of Patliament, was nevertheless called by Queen Elizabeth to
sit as a peer in Parliament; for that it seems the Queen could not be barred
of the service and council of any of Her Subjects; 2. H. 7.6 a statute, that
the King by no non obstante shall dispense with it, is void; because it would
take a necessary part of government out of the Kings hand: and therefore I se
not how this act can deprive the King of the service and council of all his
Bishops and clergy, but that it is void of it self and needs no repeal; or
if otherwise, yet seeing that besides all this, 13 of the Bishops were shut in
prison when this act passed, and their protestation was made long before this
time, and it was so unduly framed, so illegally prosecuted, and with such
compulsive threats and terrors procured to be passed, I hope the wisdom of
the next Parliament, together with their love and respect to the Church and
Churchmen will nullify the same.

CHAP. VI. Shows the plots of the faction to gain unto themselves the
freindship and assistance of the Scotts; and to what end they framed their new
protestation; how they provoked the Irish to rebel, and what other things they
gained thereby.
ANd thus the Sectaries of this Kingdom and the faction in this Parliament
have by their crast and subtilty prevailed to have all the chiefest impediments
of their design to be removed: so now the hedge is broken down, and all the
bores of the forest may now come into the vineyard, to destroy the vine, and
to undermine the City of God: but into their counsels let not my soul come.
2. The furthetances of their design were five.


2. When they had taken away these stops and hindrances of their projects,
they were to recollect and make up the furtherances, that might help to
advance their cause for the founding of their new Church, and the establishing
of their famous democraticall government and popular Commonwealth. And these I
find to be principally five.

1. The gaining of their brethren of Scotland to become their fast and
faithful friends.

2. The framing of a Protestation to frighten the Papists and to ensnare the
simple, to be led as they listed to prosecute their design.

3. The condemning of our late canons, as abominable in their judgment and
inconsistent with their religion;

4. The appointing of a new Synod, the like whereof was never heard in the
Church, since Adam, to compose such articles as they liked, and to frame such
discipline as should be most agreeable to their own dispositions.

5. The settling of a militia, a word that the vulgar knew not what it was, for
to secure the Kingdom, as they pretended, from those dangers that they feared,
that is, from those Jackes of lent and men of clouts, which themselves set up
as deadly enemies unto the Church and state; but indeed insensibly to get all
the strength of the Realm into their own hands and their confiderates, that so
they might like the Ephori, bridle the King, and bring him as they pleased, to
abolish and establish what laws and government they should propose; whereby,
perhaps, he might continue King in name but they in deed.

These were the things they aimed at, and they effected the first three, before
they could be discried and their plots discovered; but in the other two they
were prevented, when God said unto them, as he does unto the Sea, hitherto
shall thou go and no further, here shall thou stay thy proud Waves: and
therefore. I am confident, and I wish all good Christians were so, that their
purposes shall never succeed, nor themselves prosper therein, while the world
lasts; becaust God has so mercifully revealed so much, so graciously
assisted our King, and so miraculously, not only delivered him from them, but
also strengthened him against them, contrary to all appearing likelihood, to
this very day; which is a sufficient argument to secure our faith, that we
shall, by the help of our God, escape all the rest of their destructive
designs.

But to display their banners, to discover their projects, and to let the world
see what they are, and how closely and yet cunningly they went about to effect
their work, I will in a plain manner set down what I know, and what I have
collected from other writings, and from men that are side digni, (for one man's
eyes cannot see all things, nor infallibly perceive the mysteries of all
particulars) for to confirm the faithful Subjects in their due obedience,
both to God and their King, and to undeceave the poor seduced people, that
they perish not in the contradiction of Corah.

1. 1 The indeering of themselves unto the Scots Out Sectaties the inviters of
the Scots to England.
It is believed not without cause, with far greater probabilities then a bare
suspicion, that our own anabaptisticall Sectaries and this faction were the
first inviters of those angry spirits (that conceived some cause to be
discontented, and were glad of secret entertainers) to enter into the bosom of
this Kingdom; whatsoever those our brethren of Scotland did I will bury it
according to their Act, in oblivion; neither approving nor yet blaming them for
any thing. But for any Subject of England, to enterchange Messages, and to
keep private intelligence, with any that seem to be in arms against their
King, and the invaders of his Dominions, to animate them to come, and advance
forward; to refuse their Sovereigns service, and the eath of their fidelity,
which was tendered unto them, and to hinder the Kings soldiers to do their
duties, either by denying to go with him, or refusing to fight for him when
they went, (which if some men were brought to their Legal trial, I believe
would be more then sufficiently proved against them) can be no less then
heinous trimes, perhaps within the compass of high Treason.

Or were these things but our jealousies and fears, which do wear the garments
of Truth, yet their proceedings in Parliament do add more fuel unto the fire
of our suspicion; as, for our men, whom we had chosen to plead for us, and to
treat with them, to respect them more than us, to enrich them, by impoverishing
us; How they behaved themselves toward the Scots.
giving them no less than 300000.l. who had entered into our Land, and brought
upon us such fears, of I know not how many mischiefs that might succeed, and
not only so, but also, (to show what love they bare to them, and how little
regard they had of us, their native brethren, that put such trust and
confidence in their fidelity, as to commit all our fortunes and liberties into
their hands) paying weekly such a pension for their provision, (besides the
maintenance of our own Army, which were forced to carry them their moneys,
when themselves were unpaid) as in a short time was able to exhaust all the
wealth of this Kingdom, and yet for all his Majesty's continual calling upon
them to dispatch their discharge, and to finish the Treaty, for the good of
both Kingdoms, keeping them here so long, and making so much of them, (which
in truth we envied not, but admired what it meant, when we saw with what
continual feastings they were entertained in London, and their lodgings
frequented as the Kings Court) till all the People began to murmur, and to wax
weary of so great a charge and such a burden as they knew must at last light
upon their shoulders; which must needs be matters worthy of our best
examinations.

But as yet the common people that sees no further than the present tense, and
the outside of things, did little know, Why they detained them here so long.
what many wise men did then foresee, that these men aimed further than they
seemed to do, and delayed the business purposely till they had attained many
of their desires, and had sully endeared themselves into the affections of the
Scots, that (if need required, that they could not effect all the residue of
their design, as they intended, which now could not so suddenly be brought
unto perfection,) they might recall them here again to assist them, to do that
by force, which by their craft and subtlety they should fail to do; as now by
their sending for them, going unto them, and alleging the Act of Pacification
for their assistance, to withstand their King and to overthrow our Church, it
is apparent to all the world how perfidiously they dealt with God and man, and
how treacherous their thoughts were from the beginning both to the King and
Kingdom. Yet as we found our Brethren of Scotland (howsoever these men bevaved
themselves in their secret intentions) to have carried themselves none
otherwise than as wise, rational and religious men, in all the Treaty: so I
assure my self they will hereafter still continue, both faithful unto God,
and loyal unto their King; and as they perceived not their intentions at the
first, so they will not now join with them in any Association of Rebellion to
withstand their own Liege Lord, and to change the established Laws and
Religion of our Kingdom; but will rather live in peace and happiness in their
own Land, than by forsaking their enjoyed quietness, to involve themselves in
the unhappiness of a desperate War in another Country.

2. 2. The compelling of all people to ^ak: their new ^amed Protestation.
After they had thus endeared themselves unto their Brethren of Scotland, they
framed a Protestation, to maintain and defend, as far as lawfully they might,
with their lives, powers and estates the True Reformed Protestant Religion, his
Majesty's Royal Person, honor and estate, the power and privileges of
Parliament, the lawful rights and liberties of the Subjects, and every person
that should make the same Protestation, in whatsoever he should do in the
lawful pursuance of the same; and to their power, and as far as lawfully
they might to oppose, and by all good ways and means, endeavor to bring to
condign punishment all such as shall either by force, practice, counsels,
plots, conspiracies, or otherwise * Which word is like the etc. in the
Canonical Oath.
do any thing to the contrary of any thing in the said Protestation contained;
and neither for fear, hope, nor other respect to relinquish this promise, vow
and protestation.

In which Protestation, though no man can epsy the least shadow of ill, prima
facie, at the first reading thereof; yet if you look further, and search
narrowly into the intentions of the composers, the frame of the Protestation,
and the practice of these Protestors, ever since the framing of it, you shall
find that Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne: these men are no
Changelings, but as like themselves as ever they were; for,

1. As it was intended, so it succeeded; 1. To terrify the Papists, and to
raise a rebellion in Ireland.
it terrified the Papists, and made them so desperate as almost to despair of
their very being, as concerning the place where or the manner how they should
live; which thing, together with many other harsh and hard proceedings against
many of them, and the small countenance which they showed unto a very moderate
Petition that the Papists exhibited unto them, has driven abundance of them
into Ireland, (whom I saw my self) and there consulting with the Irish, (which
were then also threatened by the Agents of this faction there, that ere long
they should be severely handled, and brought to the Church whether they would
or no, or pay such a mulct as should make them poor) what course they should
take in such a desperate condition, wherein they were all like to be ruined, or
to be rooted out of all the Kings Dominions, they concluded what they would do;
to defend themseves by a plain Rebellion. So this course against them has been
the leading card (as some of them confessed) of that great Rebellion; which
being kindled (as some Sectaries in England expected) they thought they would
so much the more weaken the King, by how much the more combustion should be
raised in each one of his Dominions: and therefore notwithstanding all the
Kings gracious Messages and wishes unto the House of Commons (which I wish all
men would remember, how affectionately he desired it) to hasten to releeve that
bleeding Kingdom, yet still they protracted and neglected their redress; and
at last, passed such Votes, made such Orders, and procured such Acts, as rather
respected themselves and their posterity, to get all the land and goods of the
Rebels to themselves, that were the Adventurers, than the relieving of us that
were distressed, and would (as I told some of the House of Commons) rather
increase the Rebellion than any ways quench that destroying flame. And this
was (as it succeeded, and as you see hereby, most likely intended) a most
detestable plot, for the kindling of that Rebellion, and continuing of that
bloody War in Ireland, without which they knew this Rebellion in England could
never have gained so much strength as it has.

2. 2. To gain all Sectaries to their side.
By their large expression of what religion they protested to defend, not the
Protestant religion, as it is established by Law and expressed in the 39
articles of the Church of England; but as it is repugnant to popery, and taught
perhaps by Burton, Burges Goodwin, Burrowes, or the like Amsterdamian
schismatickes, they opened the gap so wide, and made Heaven gate so broad that
all Brownists, Anabaptists, Socinians, Familists, Adamites and all other new
England brood and outlandish Sectaries what soever, that opposed popery, might
return home and join with them, as they have done since, to overthrow our
established Church, and state. And this plot, to increase their own strength
was as craftily don, and is as Detestable as the other, which to weaken the
King in England, caused a rebellion in Ireland.

3. 3. To descry their own strength.
By their illegal compelling and forcible inducing of all the people in the
Kingdom to take the same, or to be adjudged ill affected and popish, and after
the Lords had rejected the imposing of it, they by their Declaration, which
showed, that what person soever would not take it, was unfit to bear office
either in Church or Common wealth, prevailed in this plot so that they descried
the number of their own party, they understood their own strength, and they
perceived thereby many things, which they knew not before; for now they had
with David numbered Israel, and so far as the wit and policy of the Devil had
instructed them, they had searched into the secrets of all hearts

4. 4. To ensnare all the simpler sort to adhere unto them.
Having compelled the people to take it, they have hereby ensnared all the
simpler sort and tender consciences to stick unto them, when they tell them
and press it upon their souls, that they have made a Protestation to
maintain the privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty of the Subject, and
therefore they are bound to adhere to the Parliament to the uttermost of their
power; and so by this equivocall Protestation, they have seduced thousands into
their Rebellion, and led them blindfold unto destruction.

Butto let you see not the syncerity of their hearts, The mystery of their
iniquity.
but the mystery of their iniquity, by this their Protestation, you shall never
find them urge it unto others, or remembering it themselves for the desence of
the Kings Person Crown or dignity, or for the liberty of any Subject, but only
such Subjects as will be Rebels with them: for how can they be said to defend
any of these, when they do their very best to destroy his person, and deprive
him of all his royal dignities? That the rebels are all perjurers
and to plunder and imprison all true Subjects for being true Subjects unto
their King? Whereby you see how these Rebels are likewise perjured, and have
weaved this Protestation like a spiders web, through which themselves might
pass when they pleased, and like Vulcans net to catch the simpler sort to
adheere most eagerly to their designs; and so it is but a circle of all
subtleties, and not unwittily questioned, an pros testatio parliamentaria
deterior sit juramento cum etc. for if there be any thing enjoined to be done
by that Protestation, which was unlawful to be done before the Protestation
was taken, it is no more to be justified by that act, then any other unlawful
thing is by a rash and wicked vow; and it ought not to be urged to do
mischeise; and if there be nothing to be enjoined thereby, but what was every
man's duty before, there was but small need, to draw any argument from any
protestation: but if they intended to draw men from the duty of allegiance to
which they were legally sworn, and all men understood, to do somewhat which
the ignorant did not understand, then such a voluntary protestation might do
the deed; for they have protested to maintain the privileges of Parliament.
And yet the wisest of us now may justly protest, we cannot tell what those
privileges are, or how far they should extend in the judgment of the House of
Commons; for they are multiplied like the rats of Egypt, and as Pharaohs lean
kine did eat up all his fat Cowes, so these meager privileges have eaten up
all our goodly laws. And therefore, Privileges of Parl. multiplied, and are
like Pharaohs kine.
the unlimited universality of these privileges in the Protestation, extending
it self as far as the et caetera, in the Canonical oath, was but a
mischeivous plot in the contrivers, to catch the simple to adhere unto them;
and it is a madness in any man that has legally sworn to defend the Kings
Person, Crown, and dignity, which he knows, and has irregularly protested
to maintain the privileges of Parliament, which he knows not, immediately
to draw his sword against his known Sovereign, reign or to Rebel against his
well-known lawful authority, in the behalf of some thing, he Knows not what,
but is told by these men it is a privilege of Parliament. O ye unwise among
the the people, when will you understand; who has bewitched you, that you
should not believe the truth?

CHAP. VII. Shows how the faction was enraged against our last canons; what
manner of men they chose in their new synod; and of six special Acts of great
prejudice unto the Church of Christ which under false pretenses they have
already done.
3. 3. The condemning of our last Canons.
FOr the Canons, that were last made, I must confess my self and many others
of my Brethren were very averse unto our sitting, to make any at that time; yet
many reasons were showed us, that we might sit (and we had the Judges of the
common Laws opinion under their hands showed us for the legality of our
sitting) and conclude such canons as might be for the glory of God and the good
of his Church; but of those that are made, though I assure my self the worst
of them is not so ill as they allege, nor near so bad as most (I might say
the best) of their illegal orders; yet there were many of us that never gave
our votes to pass them; and though not for any offense that we saw in them,
yet, for the scandal that might be taken at them we heartily wished they had
never been so zelously propounded at that time.

But the Sectaries of London and the prevalent faction in Parliament did, with
open mouth, spend much time to the no small prejudice of the whole Kingdom,
and made many long speeches to exclaim against them, as against a bundle of
superstitions, that obscured the purity of our religion, an introduction unto
popery, and an intolerable, unheard of the like invasion upon the liberty of
the subjects, that revived again the papal tyranny, which contary to our
fundamental laws had incroached to make canons and constitutions to bind our
consciences; whereupon upon they canvas them and condemn them out of their
house and the house of God, out of the Church and Commonwealth: and not only
so, but also the contrivers of them and consenters to them; they terrify and
threaten to adjudge them, sometimes with a praemunire, to have forfeited all
their goods and possessions, and sometimes to be fined, (as we were at last)
with such a heavy mulct, as in all other men's judgment did far exceed the
pretended offense, especially of us that never consented to them.

And yet we find not only in Lindwood, and others of our Canonists, but also in
the book of Martyrs, and the rest of our English histories, that the
Archbishops, within their Provinces, have at several times made Canons and
Constitutions, for the regulating of all the people committed to their charge,
without any suspicion of the least violation of our laws; but the faction say
sic volumus, and the houses of Parliament understand what is law better then I
do, and therefore accordingly (before the makers of them were called to make
their answers, by what authority they made them, or by what law they could
justify them) they reject the Canons and censure their makers. Yet
notwithstanding their distaste of them, it is conceived by some that the clergy
having His Majesty's writ to be convocated, and leave to compose such Canons,
as they thought fit to be observed, for the honor of God, the discharge of
their duty, and the good of the Church, and having the royal assent and
approbation to all that they concluded; (which is all that I find the Statute
provided in this case requires) though they should be defective or perhaps
offensive in some circumstances, yet if they be not legally abrogated, after a
full hearing of all parties, and the Kings consent to reject them, as it was to
approve them, they are still as binding, and in as full force as ever they
were; though for mine own part, I will not undertake the task, to make that
good, when as both the Houses have condemned them; but I say:

4. 4. The appointing of a new framed Synod.
This Scandal taken against these Canons made way for the faction to call for
a new Synod or assembly of Divines, for the rectifying of things amiss, as
well in Discipline as in Doctrine; And in this new intended Synod, Laymen
choosers of the Clergy, as if a shepherd did choose precious stones.
the Divines are nominated, not according to the rules and Canons of the
Church, and the customs of all Nations, since the first Synod or Council of
the Apostles, by Divines, that can best judge of their own abilities, as when
the spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets: but fearing the Clergy
would have sent men that were too orthodoxall for their faith, they deprived
them of their rights, and forgetting their Protestation to defend the right of
the Subject, the choice is made by themselves, that are Lay men, and young men,
and many of them perhaps profane men, or at least not so religious, nor so
judicious as they ought to be, for a business of this nature, of so great
concernment, as the direction of our souls to their eternal bliss.

And now they being nominated, we know most of them what they are; What manner
of men they have chosen.
men, not only justly suspected to be ill disposed to the peace of our Church,
and too much addicted to innovation, to alter the Government, to reject and
cast away the Book of Common Prayer, to oppose Episcopacie, and to displace the
grave and godly Governors of Gods Church; but also apparently fashioned to the
humors of these their own Disciples (who are to be the only judges of their
determinations) that (although some jew Canonical men, and most Reverend,
learned and religious Bishops, and others, for fashion sake, to blind the
world, are named amongst them, yet, when as in a Parliament, so in a Synod, the
most desperate faction, if they prove prevalent, to be the major part, will
carry any thing in despite of the better part, they shall stand but as ciphers,
able to do nothing) they might abolish our old established Government, erect
their own new invented Discipline, and propagate their well affected Doctrine
in all Churches; for you may judge of them by their compeeres, Goodwin,
Burrowes, Arrow-Smith, and the rest of their ignorant, factious, and
schismatic Ministers, that together with those intruding Mechanickes, (who
without any calling either from God or man, do step from the Botchers board, or
their Horses stable into the Preachers Pulpit) are the bellows which blow up
this fire, that threateneth the destruction of our Land, like Shebah's trumpet,
to summon the people unto Rebellion, and like the red dragon in the Revelation,
which gave them all his poison, and made them eloquent, to disgorge their
malice, and to cast forth floods of slanders, after those that keep loyalty to
their Sovereign, and to belch forth their unsavery reproaches against those
that discover their affected ignorance, and seditious wickedness, in defense
of truth; and are the instruments of this faction, to seduce the poor people to
the desolation of the whole Kingdom, if not timely prevented by their
repentance, and assistance to enable him whom God has made our Protector to
defend us against all such transcendent wickedness. And these are the maine
ends for which they summoned such a new Synod of their furious and fanatique
teachers, upon whose temper and fidelity, I believe, no wise man that knows
them would lay the least weight of his souls felicity. What Synod they should
have chosen.
Whereas if they desired a Reformation of things amiss, and not rather an
alteration of our Religion and the abolition of our now settled Government, they
would have called for such a Synod as was in Queen Elizabeth's time, when the 39
Articles of our Religion were composed, and such as they needed not to be
ashamed to own in future times, nor the best refuse to associaet the rest, for
the illegalitie of their election; for if there be any scandalous Governors,
(as we deny not but there may be a Cham in the Arc, a Judas amongst the
Apost'es, and perhaps an unjustifiable Prelate among the Bishops, as there was
a proud Lucifer among the Angels) or if they think it necessary to correct,
qualify, explain, or alter some expressions or ceremonies in our Liturgy, and
Book of Common Prayer, we are so far from giving the least offense to weak
consciences, that we heartily wish a lawful Synod, which may have a full
legal power, as well to remove the offenses, as to punish the offenders, and
to establish such Laws and Canons, as well against Separatists and
Schismatickes, Anabaptists and Brownists, as against Recusants and Papists, and
such as may be for the glory of God, and the peace of our Church; which was
our sole intention in the last Synod.

But seeing their plot was rather to establish a new Church than to redress
the defects of the old, and to countenance and advance those boute-fues that
schismatically rent our Church in pieces, and most wickedly defile the pure
Doctrine of the same, by degrading and displacing the grave Governors thereof,
I will (to give you a taste of what fruit you are like to reap from them) very
briefly set down the sum of these two points.

1. Two points hindled. 1. What they have already done in the affairs of our
Church. 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. 1. Opened a gap to all licentiousness.
What they have already done, 2. What discipline and doctrine are like to
ensue, if they should be enabled or permitted to erect their new Church; for,
(as you may find it in the Remonstrance of the Commons of England to the House
of Commons,)
1: Under color of regulating the Ecclesiastical Courts, (Courts that have
been founded by the Apostles, and had always their Authority and reverence
among Christians, even before the Secular power (when the Emperors became
Christians) had confirmed them) they have taken away (in respect of the
coercive part thereof, which is the life of the Law, and without which the
other part is fruitless) all the Spiritual jurisdiction of Gods Church; they
have taken away Aarons rod, and would have only Manna left in Gods Ark, so that
now the crimes inquirable and censurable by those Courts, though never so
heinous, as adultery, incest, and the like, cannot be punished; heresies and
schisms, which now of late have abounded in all places, can no ways be
reformed, and the neglect of Gods service can as hardly be repaired, when as
the Ministers cannot be enforced to attend their Cures, the Church Officers
cannot be compelled to perform their duty, and the Parishio^ners cannot be
brought by our Law to pay their Tithes and other necessary Duties; which
things are all so considerable that all Christians ought to fear how lamentable
will be the end of these sad beginnings; for my self have seen the House of
God most unchristianly profaned, the Churchyard and the dead bodies of the
Saints so rooted and miserably abused by hogs and swine, that it would grieve
mere men, that scarce ever heard of God, to see such a barharous usage of any
holy place; and when the Ministers have given a sevennights warning to prepare
for the blessed Eucharist, and the Communicants came to partake of those holy
mysteries, they were fain to return home without it, for want of Bread and
Wine to administer it; and yet now the Church Governors have not any power to
redress any of these abominable abuses.

2. Under show of reforming the Church discipline, 2. Voted down all the
governors of Gods Church.
and bettering the Government thereof, they have voted down those very
Governors, the Bishops and their Assistants, the Deanes and Chapters, whose
function was constituted by the Apostles, and has from that time continued to
this very day, as the most learned Archbishop of Armach, Bishop Hull, Master
Mason, Master Tailor, and that worthy Gentleman Master Theyer, and others have
sufficiently showed to all the world.

3. Under the pretense of expunging Popery, 3. Vilified out Service Book.
which Bishop Jewel, Bishop Parry, Bishop Babington, Bishop Bilson, Bishop
Morton, Bishop Davenant, Bishop Hall, and abundance more of the Reverend
Bishops have confuted, expelled and kept out of our Church, more than any, yea
than all their schismatical Disciples, whose Learning was no ways able to
answer the weakest Arguments of our Adversaries, the Service Book that is
established by Act of Parliament, and was by those holy Martyrs, that lost
their lives, and spilt their blood in defense of the Protestant Religion, and
defiance of erroneous Popery, so divinely and devoutly composed, as all the
Reformation can bear witness, and I am well assured, the whole flock of these
Convocants shall never be able, without this, to make any near so pious, must
be totally cried down, and has been in many places, burned, used to the
uneleanest uses, and teared all to pieces; and to let you see their abomination
herein, I must crave patience to transcribe, that it may the more generally
pass, the Speech of Alderman Garroway, where he says, page 7. Alderman
Garreway, page 7.
Did not my Lord Mayor (that is, Pennington) first enter upon his Office with a
Speech against the Book of Common Prayer? Has the Common Prayer ever been read
before him? Has not Captain Ven said, that his Wife could make prayers worth
three of any in that Book? O Masters, there have been times, that he which
should speak against the Book of Common Prayer in this City, should not have
been put to the patience of a Legal trial; we were wont to look upon it as
the greatest treasure, and the Jewel of our Religion; and he that should have
told us, he wished well to our Religion, and yet would have taken away the Book
of Common Prayer would never have gotten credit. I have been in all the parts
of Christendom, and have conversed with Christians in Turkey; why, in all the
reformed Churches there is not any thing of more reverence than the English
Liturgy, not our royal Exchange, nor the Navy of Queen Elizabeth, is so
famous as this; in Geneva it self, I have heard it extolled to the skies. I
have been three months together by sea, and not a day without hearing it read
twice; the honest Mariners then despised all the world but the King and the
Common Prayer Book; How the Mariners esteem the Liturgy.
he that should be suspected to wish ill to either of them, should have made
but an ill voyage; and let me tell you, they are shrewd youths, those Seamen;
if they once discern that the person of the King is in danger, or the
Protestant professed Religion, they will show themselves mad bodies before you
are aware of it; I would not be a Brownist or an Auabaptist in their way for --
And yet, these men have so basely abused, and are so violent to abolish this
excellent Book and divine Liturgy, that Many will not believe it though it
should be told unto them: Hab. 1.5.
I would they did but read that Act of Parliament which is prefixed unto the
same, to see if they regarded either the Law of God or Man, the Religion of the
Clergy that composed it, or the wisdom of the Parliament that confirmed it.

4. 4. Abused the images and pictures of the Saints and other holy things.
Under color to show their hatred to Idolatry, they have broken down the
glass Windows of many Churches; shot off the heads of the Images of the
blessed Virgin, and of our dear Savior represented in her lap upon the porch
of Saint Mary's in Oxford; thrown away the Pictures of Christ, and of others
his holy Apostles, and Gods blessed Saints into the Rivers; taken the Ministers
Surplices to make Frockes to preserve their clothes when they dressed their
horses; and in Worcester they have done what I am ashamed to speak, and would
loathe any modest ear to hear, made the Pulpit, and (not far from the Town)
the Fout their house of office, as I was informed by one of the gravest
Doctors and Prehends of that Church; thrown down the Organs, which cost above
fifteen hundred pounds, and taken the Pipes and Copes of the Prebends, and gone
round about the Streets, with the Copes on their backs, and the Pipes in their
hands, dancing the Moris dance; so in Winscombe in Gloucester shire, they brake
down the Organs, and made that Church their Slaughter house, when they killed
certain Sheep that they had stolen, and dressed the same upon the Communion
table; and in Lincoln Minster the Soldiers brought their horses into the
Quire, laid their hay upon the holy Table, and made the House of God a Stable
for their horses, that did now eat their hay where the Christians did use to
communicate the Body and Blood of Christ; so that these men give their Savior
no better entertainment now in his glory, than the Jews did when he came in
his humility, Luke 2.7.
but he shall be still kept low, and a Stable shall be good enough for his
Mansion; yet, as in Canterbury they did but little less, so in Winchester
they added this to their former prophanations, to take the ashes of those Saxon
Kings, that were kept in certain Urnes, and threw them about the ground, as if
death it self could not appease their rage. Scava sed in manes manibus arma
dabant, It would fill a whole volume to relate all the villainies that they did
of this kind, the consideration of which profane usage of holy places, made a
worthy Gentleman pathetically to set down these fervent speeches; I would to
God we had not cause to complain of the horrid and barbarous attempts of diverse
among us (Christians I can scarce call them) against some the mother Churches,
* Canterbury, Worcester, Winchester, Gloucester, Chichester, and many others.
who as if they had studied to affront the Almighty to his face, and purposely
with Manasses to anger him, have not spared to profane those goodly
structures, and irreligiously and Antichristianlike to deface the instruments
there prepared and employed in the service of the great God: at the very
thought whereof I tremble and stand amazed, Master Theyer in his Treatise of
Episcopacie, p. 56.57.
and can hardly believe the Christian world in any age (no not under the Goths
and Vandales) can parallel it with an example of like abominable and
atheistical villainies, yet to this day uncensured: and I am heartily sorry
that it should be told in Gath or Ascalon, in any foreign Nation, that our
English People should have any such Sect amongst them, so void of all
humanity, so destitute of all thoughts of a Deity, and so full of all
incredible impieties. And therefore I must use the words of the Prophet
Jeremie, Ier. 5.9.29.
Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? or, shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this? or, is it any wonder, that there are such
Wars, such bloody Wars, such barbarous rapines, and that these miseries do
still continue amongst us; when we not only proceed to commit, but also to
defend and justify these and the like abominable wickedness, Romans 1.32. Heb.
10.31.
and have pleasure in them that do them? for it is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God.

5. 5. Branded the true Protestants, and advanced Anabaptists.
Under the color of advancing the true Protestant Religion, they have branded
the best Protestants, (even those that have most learnedly, both preached and
written against the Church of Rome, and all her erroneous tenets, and were not
long since registered in the class of Puritanes, and for that cause kept under
water) for Papists, and superstitiously Popish, and so Malignants and opposers
of the true to be established Religion; and they have encouraged and promoted
to the Livings and Livelihoods of the most Orthodox and Canonical men.
Anabaptists and Brownists, and other Sectaries of most desperate opinions, that
(as Saint Bernard says of the like, Multiplicati sunt super numerum;) as the
Caterpillars overspread all the Land of Egypt, so these are multiplied in every
corner, without number; and these tares have almost choked all the Wheat in
Gods field, and do preach most desperate Doctrines, destructive both to
themselves, their proselytes, and all the truest Protestants throughout all
this Kingdom; when as Sedition and rebellion, besides their other damnable
Doctrines condemned by the Church, must ever be at one end of their Sermons,
and published in their Pamphlets; as for instance, you may find in the bloody
books and fiery writings of the darling Secretaries of thered Dragon, that
warreth against the Saints, Stephen Marshall, Master Bridges, Jo. Goodwin,
Burroughes, and the rest of the Locusts, * Qua glomerantur in unum innumera
pestes Erebi, Claud.
that are sent out of the bottomless pit to seduce the People of God, and to
lead them headlong unto perdition.

But let me advise the Servants of Christ, to remember their Saviors words, To
beware of false Prophets; Matthew. 7.15.
they shall deceive many, and many love to be deceived by them; those whom God
has given up, That they should believe a lie; 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
Qui infatuati seducuntur, and seducti judicabuntur; but you that desire to
escape their snares may know them by their fruits; The Authors advice.
which are Rebellion against their King, and railing against their Governors,
Perjurie against God, by the breaches of those Oaths, which in the face of the
Church they have taken, both to the King and to their Superiors, Three notes
by which we may know the false Apostles.
and a wilful perverting of the sacred Scriptures, to the perdition of their
Proselytes; besides, many other bitter fruits, that worse than any Aconite are
able to poison any Christian soul, that do but taste of their Philtra's: or if
you will believe these. Apples of Sodom, to be as sweet as they seem fair, then
remember by what marks the Prophets and Apostles tell us that we may know
them; 1. 1. Note. Jer. 23.21.
Such as run before they be sent, as Weavers, Tailors, and the like, that never
had any calling or Authority to enter upon this sacred Function. 2. They went
from us, but are not of us; 2. Note. 1 John 2.19.
such as were called, but then forsook their first love, and apostated from the
Church, and like ungracious children did throw dirt in their mothers face, or
like the brood of Vipers do labor to gnaw out her bowels; and here let the
world judge, whether we went from them, or they from us; whether we or they
apostated from that Oath and profession which all and every one of us did make
when we entered into holy Orders.

3. These false Prophets, says the Apostle, 3. Note. 2 Timothy 3 6, Genesis 3.1.6.
do lead simple or silly women captives; just as their Master first seduced Eve
and she Adam, so do these; and because they have less worth than can attain to
the height of their ambition, you may see most of them by women raised to great
fortunes, and their pride disdaineth to be obedient; or if they fail of such
wives, yer are they swelled with envy, which is as rebellious in these, as
pride is in the other.

6. Under the pretense of making our Clergy more spiritual and Apostolic, 6.
Ordered to take away all the revenues of the most worthy Clergy.
they have voted away most of our temporal estate, the Lands and Lordships of
the Bishops, Deanes, and Prebends, and the Pluralities of those persons that
possessed double Benefices, and made their Order that no man should pay any
rent or any dues unto any of the forenamed persons. And by this taking away
the freehold of the Clergy now in present, (which they hold with as good
right, and by the same Law as the best Lord in England holds his Inheritance)
and this discouragement of Learning for the time to come, they thought to make
our Clergy Angelical, but have proved themselves, I will not say,
diabolical, but most injurious unto the Church of Christ, by committing an Act
of as great injustice, and as prejudicial to the Commonwealth, as can be
found among the Pagans; for what can be more unjust, or more inhumane, than to
take away my Livelihood, which is my very life, in mine old age, without any
offense of mine, for which I had labored all the days of my life* And what
consequence can this produce, than (that which succeeded in the like case, in
Jeroboams time, Sublatis studiorum praemiu ipsa studia pereunt, C. Tacit. 1
R^g. 12.31. Matthew. 15.14.
when he robbed the Priests and Levites of their inheritance) ignorance and
barbaritie, and the basest of the people to be the Preachers of Gods Word,
whereby the blind do lead the blind, until both do fall into the ditch; as
I can testify, some of our greatest Nobility intended to make their sons
Priests and Bishops, while the glory of Israel, and the beauty of our Church
remained un-obscured, and now contempt and poverty being enacted and ordered
to be their portion, those resolutions are vanished, and the Universities can
bear me witness, the lowest Gentry are not so well contented to undertake
this highest calling. These and many other things ejusdem farinae, of the same
mold they have already done, to overwhelme the ship of Christ under the waves
of this turbulent faction. And these prophanations of Gods divine Service, and
the violations of the Sepulchers of the dead (whose ashes and bones, like canes
sepulchrales, they have disturbed in their graves) and those unheard of
sacriledges on Gods Priests and portion and are so equally practiced, that it
is almost hard to judge which are greater, either their impiety toward God,
their inhumanity toward the dead, or their injustice toward the living.

CHAP. VIII. Shows what discipline or Church Government our factious
Schismatickes do like best, and twelve principal points of Doctrine, which
they hold as twelve Articles of their faith, and we must all believe the same
or suffer, if this faction should prevail.
2. 2. What discipline and doctrine the new Synod it like to set up.
FOr the discipline and the doctrine that they would establish, they have not
yet, and I believe they can never fully agree what they shall be; their desire
is first to overthrow the old, and then they will take care and consult how to
devise a new; but I could wish they would let the old alone till they could
agree to produce a better.

Yet, because their blind zeal is so violent, to have their own unjust
desires, to destroy the vineyard of Christ root and branch, I, that have served
seven years, a Lecturer, among them, in the heart of London, and was
conversant with the purest of these holy brethren, and thereby understood most
of their Anabaptisticall and ridiculous tenets, and what discipline they best
liked, will here draw you a model of their Vtopian or new England Church,
which they would transport hither to obscure the glory of old England.

1. For their discipline and government, 1. Their discipline.
some would have the Scottish Synods, and that form of Government, which old
furious Knoxe has first brought among them, and is fully described by that
Reverend Archbishop Bancrofte; Bancrost in lib. English Scottizinge.
otherr like better of the Geneva Assemblies, instituted by Master Calvin, and
continued by Theodore Beza, two worthy members of that Church, or the
discipline of the Hugonots in the new French Reformation, which differs but a
little from the other; but most of them like better of the manner of Amsterdam,
where every Church is independent, and every Pastor is a Pope in his own
Parish; and to that purpose, you may remember how vehemently they have lately
most foolishly written * As Smith, Best, Davenport, Can, Robinson, and M.
Childley, and many other, anonymi.
for this independent Government, and how the Lord Say and the Lord Brooks,
two leading Captains of that faction, have often protested they would dispense
with all sorts of Religions so they might freely exercise their own; Sober
Sadness, p. 22.
and that such a toleration ought to be granted, to all others; because their
independencie cannot otherwise consist; for he that is accountable to none,
will use what Religion he pleases without control; and therefore they
support their own Army by men of all Nations and Religions, not their grand
Adversaries the Papists excepted, but of fifty or fixty Soldiers that billeted
in Adthrop there were no less than three or four Papists amongst them.

But how unsuteable these Governments would prove to stand with our English
Nobility, Now unsuitable their government would be to our Genine.
and Gentry, (besides the noveltie of them, and how far dissonant they are
to the Apostolic diseipline) I will appeal to their own judgment, when every
undiscreet Parson and poor Vicar shall be able, upon every discontent to
excommunicate the best man in his Parish, and as we have seen some of them
debarring whom they pleased from the holy Table, because their great anger, or
little judgment conceived them to be unworthie. When as the Church deemed it
fitter that none of her children should undergo the least indignity for any
personal distaste, but upon due examination of witnesses, a full hearing, and
a just censure in open Court; which course if it be neglected, should be rather
punished in the offenders, than the discipline dissolved, the Governors
removed, and a new fantastical fancy erected.

2. 2. The Doctrines of the faction that are like to be settled by the new Sy^od.
For the Doctrines of these men, they are like the poetical fiction of those
sisters forma non omnibus una nec diversa tamen; I did once intend, while I
lived amongst them to collect a whole Volume of them; but Satan then prevented
me, and plotted my destruction for mine intention; yet now, I will set down
these few, out of those many, which I then observed.

1. 1. They search into Gods secrets. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Though Moses says, The secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the
things revealed belong to us and our children for ever: yet these men are all
gnostiques, they know very much, even of the secrets and counsels of God, and
they are sure who shall be saved, and who shall be damned; and as men of the
cabinet counsel of God, they broach their illusions for divine revelations,
and persuade the People that what they say or do is all from God; and therefore
that this War which they prosecute, was preordained of God for the destruction
of the wicked, to whom they formerly preached their damnation, and thereby have
caused many silly souls most desperately to end the miseries of their wretched
life, by putting themselves to an untimely death.

2. They only, 2. They judge themselves only the elect.
as the elect of God (which shall be the sole heirs of heaven) are the Lords
Proprietories of all this worldly wealth, and the reprobates being enemies unto
God, have no right unto any of Gods creatures; and therefore they think they
may lawfully take away the goods of those reprobates, whom now they call
Malignants, and they have as good warrant for it, as ever the Israelites had to
spoil the Egyptians; for they tell us, that Saint Paul, which knew right from
wrong, tells them plainly, that whether they be things present, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
or things to come, even all are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods; That
there is a double right to the things of this world. Psalm. 104.28. Matthew. 5.45.
but they understand not that men have a double right unto these worldly goods.
1. As Christians, and so God as a merciful Father, has provided all things
for them. 2. As the Creatures of God; and so God as a faithful Creator,
opens his hand, and fills all things living with plenteousnesse; and makes
his Sun, to shine upon the just and upon the unjust; and so the wicked have as
good an interest in their estates as the godly; and besides, God has not given
them the power to distinguish who are the elect, or who are reprobates.

And therefore, if we have any regard of our goods, that God has given us, we
have great reason to look about us, for these are the greatest Cheaters in
Christendom, and as they have made us Malignants, so they will make us
reprobates when they please, that they may enjoy those things that we have. 3.
They think themselves free from all sin. Numb. 23.21. Tit. 1.15.


3. Because Balaam says, God beheld no iniquity in Jacob; and the Apostle
says, To the pure all things are pure: they teach their proselytes, that in
them, which are the holy Brethren, there is no sin, and their adultery,
drunkenness, cozenage, and the like odious crimes are no crimes, because God
loving them so tenderly, as a fond mother sees no fault in her untoward
child, so he takes no notice of any offense that they commit; but for the
ungodly, their Prayers are sins, their Alms are odious, and whatsoever
commendable duty they do perform, To the unbelieving nothing is pure, Titus
1.15.
God accounts their best actions to be heinous trangressions, and to add the
more weight of punishment to their damnation; which Doctrine how abominable it
is to God, and how destructive to all men, to make these holy Brethren and their
sanctified Sisters senseless in all sins, incapable of repentance, Matthew 9.12.
when the whole has no need of the Physician; and to discourage all other
ignorant men from doing good duties, when the performance of them shall
multiply their stripes, is so apparent to all men, that I need not stand to
confute it; for, if Coniah (though he wear the signet upon my right hand; Ier.
22.24
or, as the apple of mine eye) does offend, I will cut him off; and if the
wicked forsake his wickedness, Ezech. 33.15.
and do that which is just, love mercy, and speak truth, he shall be accepted,
and the Lord will not call light darkness, nor good evil in any one.

4. 4. They allow the women to offend while their husbands sl^ep. Ioh 11.11. 1
Cor. 7.39.
Because our Savior says, Our friend Lazarus sleeps; when as indeed he was
dead, and the Heathens say, Sleep is (...), the brother of death, they take
this color to hide their adulteries, that while the husband sleeps, the wife
is as free from him as if he were dead, a foolerie so ridiculous that the
naming of it is a sufficient confutation of it, and yet you shall hardly
withdraw our London Anabaptists from it.

5. 5. They justify many kinds of lies and equivocatious. Genesis 12.13. Acts
23.5.
Because Abraham said that Sara was his sister, and Saint Paul said, I wist not
brethren that he was the high Priest: they hold it as an Article of their
Creed, that for officious lies and equivocations, being for the furtherance of
their cause, the good work which they pretend, they may and ought to use them,
to swallow them down like water, they make no bones of them; and therefore it
is dangerous to treat, and weakness to give credit, without sufficient
pledges, to the faith of these men; whose profession may as lawfully deceive
us, as their Religion teaches them to destroy us, and I believe the experience
which his Majesty's Officers had of them in the performance of their promises
and conditions of departure from Winchester, Reading, and other Towns
surrendered unto them may sufficiently confirm this equivocall point of their
Public Faith.

6. 6. They would root out all those that they term wicked. Deuteronomy. 7.2. 1 Samuel
15.23. Psalm. 58.8.
Because the Lord straightly charged the Israelites to root out the wicked
Canaanites and the rest of those cursed Nations, and translated the Kingdom of
Israel from Saul unto David, because he spared Agag: and our Savior bids us,
succidere ficum, to cut down that unprofitable tree which bare no fruit, they
are so filled with such unmercifull cruelty toward all those they term
wicked, and judge Malignants, that they had better fall into the hands of
heathen Tyrants, than of these their holy brethren, who embruing their hands in
the blood of so many faithful Christians, do sing with the Psalmist, The
righteous rejoice when they see this vengeance, they shall wash their feet in
the blood of the ungodly: for as Solomon says, The tender mercies of the
wicked are mere cruelty. Prove. 12.10.
And I believe the first inventers of that Design to root out all the Papists
in Ireland, and to get that Act to purchase all the Lands of the Rebels, had
tasted too much of this bitter root of such destructive Doctrine; whereby you
see how the Religion of these men robbes us of our Estates, keeps no faith
with us, and takes away our lives.

7. Though among the works of God, 7. They would have a paritie among all men
both in Church and Common wealth. Gal. 5.6. Col. 3.11.
every flower cannot be a Lilly, every beast cannot be a Lion, every bird
cannot be an Eagle, and every Planet cannot be Phoebus; yet in the School of
these men, this is the Doctrine of their to be new erected Church, that with
God there is no respect of persans, and neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision; but whether they be bond or free, masters or
servants, few; or Gentile, Barbarian, Scythian, a country Clown, or a Court
Gallant, rich or poor; it is all one with God; because these Titles of Honor,
Kings, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen are no entities of Gods making, but the
creatures of man's invention, to puff him up with pride, and not to bring him
unto God; and therefore though for the bringing of their great good work to
pass, they are yet contented to make the Earl of Essex their General, and
Warwick their Admiral, and so Pym and Hampden great Officers of State; yet,
when the work is done, their Plot perfected, and their Government established,
then you shall find, that as now, they will eradicate Episcopacie, and make
all our Clergy equal, as if all had equally but one talent, and no man
worthier than another; so then there should be neither King, Lord, Knight, nor
Gentleman, but a paritie of degrees among all these holy Brethren; and to give
us a taste of what they mean! as the Lords concurrence with them enabled them
to devour the Kings power; so they have since, with great justice, prevailed
with the House of Commons to swallow up the Lords power, and have most fairly
invaded their privilege, when they questioned particular Members * As my Lord
Duke, and my Lord Dighte.
for words spoken in that House, and then the whole House, when they brought up
and countenanced a mutinous and seditious Petition, which demanded the Names of
those Lords, that consented not with the House of Commous in those things,
which that House had twice denied.

8. 8 They would have no man to pray for temporal things. Mat. 6.33.34. Matthew.
6.11.
Because our Savior says, Seek ye first the Kingdom of of Heaven and the
righteousness thereof, and all these things, that is meat, and drink, and
clothes, and all other earthly things, (...), shall be cast unto you: and
again, Be not careful for to morrow; they teach their proselytes, that they
ought not to pray, by any means, for any of these things; whereas Christ
bids us to say, Give us this day our daily Bread.

9. 9. Not to say the Lords Prayer.
They cannot endure to say the Lords Prayer, for that is a Popish superstition,
but their Prayers must be all tautologies, and a circular repetition of their
own indigested inventions.

10. 10. Not to say, God speed you, 2 John to 11.11. Not to pray for the
Malignants. 1 John 5.16.
You must not say, God speed you, to any neighbor or any traveller, lest he
intends some evil work, and then you shall be partaker of his sin.

11. They will not allow any of their Disciples to pray for any of the
Reprobates; and therefore they do exceedingly blame us, and tear our Liturgy,
because we say, That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

12. Because Christ says, Call no man father on earth, for one is your Father
which is in Heaven: the child must not call him that begat him and nurseth him
his father, not kneel unto him to ask him blessing, nor perform many other
such duties which the Lord requires, and the Church instructs her children
to do to this very day; and this foolish Doctrine of calling no man father, no
man master, or Lord and the like, in their sense, (because they understand not
the divine meaning of our Saviors word) has been the cause of such
undutifulnesse and untowardnesse, such contempts of superiors, and such
rebellions to Authority as is beyond expression; when as by their disloyalty,
being thus bred in them from their cradle, they first despise their father,
then their Teachers, then their King, and then God himself.

CHAP: IX. Shows three other special points of Doctrine, which the Brownists
and Anabaptists of this Kingdom do teach.
13. BEcause they can find no Text in Scripture, when as the Alcoran is not so
impudently hellish, as to justify the action, for to warrant men, to absolve
our consciences from any Oaths that we have voluntarily taken, for the
performance of any business, I cannot say that they do professedly teach, but
I do hear they do usually practice this most damnable sin; as that Master
Marshall and Master Case did absolve the Soldiers taken at Brainceford from
their Oath, which they took, never to bear Arms against his Majesty; which is
a sin destructive both to body and soul, when their Perjurie added to their
Treason, makes them twofold more the children of hell than they were before,
and if they be taken again, they can expect nothing but their just deserved
death; and therefore I do admire that any man can challenge the name of a
Divine, which does either preach or practice a point so devilish.

14. Because Saint Paul says, These hands have ministered to my necessities and
to them that were with me: 14. They think sacrilege to be no sin. Acts 20.35.
1 Thessalonians. 2.9. 1 Cor. 1.12.
and again, Laboring night and day, because we would not be chargeable to any
of you, we preached unto you the Gospel of God: and because the rest of the
Apostles and Disciples were Fishermen, Trades, men, or professors of some
Science, either liberal or mechanicke, as Saint Luke was a Physician, Joseph a
Carpenter, and the like, who did live by their manual crafts, and were
chargeable to none of their people, but sought them, and not theirs, to win
their souls to God, and not their moneys unto themselves; therefore they
think it no robbery to take away all the revenues of the Church, nor
sacrilege to rob the Clergy of all the means they have; because they should
either labor for their livings, as the Apostles did, or live upon the peoples.
Alms, as many poor Ministers do, to the utter undoing of many souls, in many
distressed and most miserable Churches.

But because this revenue of the Church and the Lands of the Bishops is that
golden wedge, and the brave Babylonish garment, which the Anabaptistical Achans
of our time do most of all thirst after, in this their pretended holy
Reformation, I must here sistere gradum, stay a while and let you know:

1. 1. Sacrilege What it is.
That the taking away of any Lands or goods given and consecrated to holy uses,
and to convert the same to any other purpose than which they were dedicated, is
termed sacrilege; that is, the stealing of holy goods from the right owners,
to our selves and others to whom we leave them?

2. 2. That is a sin.
That this sacrilege is a sin; for it is a snare to the man, who devoureth
that which is holy, and after vows to make inquiry; that is, whether such a
service be needful, or such a taking away be a sin.

3. 3. A great sin.
That this sin is a very great sin; for Saint Paul says, Thou that abhorrest
idols, committest thou sacrilege? And idolatry is the giving of our goods and
service to false gods, sacrilege the taking away of goods dedicated to the
service of any, God, especially of the true God; and this seems by the
Apostles words to be a greater sin than the other; because the devil labors
more to take away the service of the true God than to establish his own
service; for he knows that as light taken away, darkness must needs follow,
Hosea 2.8. Ezech. 16. 1 Reg. 18.19. Genesis 22.
so the true Religion being destroyed, idolatry must needs succeed; and he
knows that idolatry has been bountiful enough to the service of idols,
that he needs not so much to fear the taking away of their goods, as to care
that the goods dedicated to Gods service be taken away.

4. That this sin is a very dangerous sin, both to 1. The Persons that commit
it. 2. 4. A most dangerous sin. Joshua 7. Acts 5.4. 1. To the sacrilegers.
To the Commonwealth that suffers it; for,


1. Not only Achan, Ananias and Sapphira, and other private men perished for
this sin, but the proudest Kings, and greatest Peers that became sacrilegious,
were plagued and destroyed by God; as Belshazzar, the great Monarch of Assyria;
William Rufus, and abundance more that you may find in our Histories; for the
curse of God, like Damocles sword, by a slender thread hangs over their heads,
and makes them like those that perished at Endor, and became as the dung of the
earth; and I beseech you mark it, Make them like a wheel, and as the stubble
before the wind, persecute them with thy tempest, let them be confounded, and
be put to shame, and perish, which say, let us take to our selves the houses of
God in possession; and if this be the guerdon of them that say it, I wonder
what shall be the plague of them that do it; and I wonder more that the very
thought of this curse does not make their hearts to tremble, if their
consciences were not seared to be senseless of all fear.

2. 2. To whole Nations.
The sin of sacrilege extends it self not only to the persons committing
it, but also to the whole Nation that suffers it, as the sin of Achan was not
only a snare to catch him to be destroyed, but it troubled all Israel, so that
they were still discomfited, and never prospered, till the sacriledger was
punished, and the Lord appeased.

If you say the sin is taken away, when the Parliament takes these things away.

I answer, that we must not idolize the Parliament, as if it were a kind of
omnipotent Creature, and like the Pope, such an infallible Lord God upon earth,
as that their Votes and Sanctions were the supremest rule of justice, that
cannot be unjust, because they are enacted by the whole State; because as no
conclusions are therefore truths because determined by a whole Counsel, so no
Laws are therefore just, because done by a whole Parliament, but when they do
agree with the common rules of truth and justice, which God has given unto
men, and showed the same in his holy Word, which he has left to be the right
rule of our actions.

And therefore if the greatest Assemblies, Parliament, or Counsel, make not
the will of God the rule to guide their proceedings thereby, their Sanctions
are so far from taking away the nature of the sin, that they do increase the
evil, and make it the more out of measure sinful, and to become a national
sin, that before was but personal, and the more exceedingly sinful, when the
same is confirmed by a Law, so that none dares speak against it, and the
sinners are become senseless in their sins; and therefore the Prophet
demands, how any man, that fears God, dares meddle with such a people, that
will thus justify their sins, saying, Shall the throne of iniquity, that
is, any unjust course, have fellowship with thee, which frames mischief by a
Law? And the Lord does extremely threaten them, that walk after unrighteous
ordinances, as that they should sow much, but not reap; tread the olives, but
not anoint themselves therewith, Mich 6.15, 16 Hos. 5.10.11.
and sweet wine, but not drink it, because the statutes of Omri are kept; and
all the works of the house of Achab, and they walked in their counsels: and
the Prophet Hosea does more fully set down the wrath of God both against the
makers and the observers of all unrighteous Laws.

If you say, Object.
the Lands and Lordships of the Bishops were not the patrimony of the Church,
but were only, in superstitious times, given by our Kings and others unto the
Churchmen; and therefore now, the King being in want, they may be restored to
the Crown again.

I confess the Lands of the Church are the free bequests of godly Kings, Sol.
and of other pious men dead long ago, with most fearful imprecations made
against all those that should seek to alter their Wills and Testaments; and the
Apostle says, If it be but amans Testament, no man alters it; that is, Gal.
3.15.
no honest man ought to alter it, though perhaps his Will might have been made
wiser, and his goods bestowed to better use; for our Saviors maxim, when he
gave a Penny to him that labored but one hour, and but a Penny to him that had
endured the heat of the day, is unanswerable, Is it not lawful for me to do
what I will with mine own? and therefore,

1. As others daily leave their estates of great amount to whom they please,
many times to strangers, and perhaps to idiots or debauched persons, of wicked
lives and noxious manners; and yet no man grudgeth, or endeavors to take
away those just Legacies, which their good Benefactours had bestowed upon these
unjust men; so there is no reason, that any man's eyes should be evil for the
goodness of their Ancestors unto the Clergy, but that their Wills should
stand to those uses after their death, as intemerate, as if they were now alive
to dispose of their beneficence.

2. They are most injurious to the King, (who is wise as an Angel of God, and
therefore holds this sacrilege odious to his princely heart) that would seek
to enrich his Crown with that, which will shake it on his head, and endanger
all his Posterity to such fearful judgments as his Progenitors have
denounced, and God has executed upon many Kings and Princes for the like
sins; for as Moses prays against the sacrilegious enemies of Levi, Deuteronomy.
33.11.
Smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate
him, that they rise not again: so we find that many ancient families, having
by the Statute of Dissolution taken some of the Lands and Tithes of the Church
into their possessions, Pierius in Hieroglyph.
have found the same like the Gold of Tholous, or the Eagles feathers,
pernitiosa potentia, that will consume all the feathers where they shall be
mingled,

Who so is wise will consider these things, Aelian. l. 5. c. 15. Var. Hist.
and will not to satisfy these Anabaptisticall dregs of the people, and the
enemies of all Christian Religion, sacrilegiously take away, with Aelians boy,
the golden plate from Dianas Crown, the Lands and Revenues of the Church; but,
having not so learned Christ, they will do that which becomes Saints, and
suffer the dead to enjoy their own will in that wherein they put them to no
charge, and if they do intend to promote Gods service, they will not rob Saint
Peter to pay Saint Paul, but will rather say with holy David, God forbid that I
should offer sacrifice to God of that which cost me nothing.

15. As any wooden Preachers, like Jeroboams Priests de face plebis, scarce
worthy to be compared with the Grooms of their stable, Job 30.8.
or such humi serpents, poor abjects, as Job speaks of, The sons of
villains and bondmen, more vile than the earth they crawle upon, are fit
enough to be their teachers and beggarly pensioners; so any place, a thatched
barue, a littered stable, What prayers and Sermons please these men.
or an ample Cow-house is thought by these to be very fair and fit to be the
House of Him that was borne in a stable and laid in a manger; and any service,
prayers without sense, such as our Savior blames, and preaching without
learning, without truth, such as their Euthusiasts conceive in illa hora, and
quicquid in buccam venerit, without any further study of meditation, is
justified to be most acceptable to God; witness the Author of one argument
more against the Cavaliers, where that great Scholar in his own opinion, railes
against our grave Bishops, and most impudently reproacheth a very reverend man
of known worth, and great learning, by the scandalous epithet of The
ceremonious Master of Baliol College, Doctor Lanrence, whom for a most
learned and pious Sermon preached before the King, upon these words of Exodus,
Put off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand is holy
ground: he does, just like the eldest son of his dear father the devil (as
Tertullian calls Hermogenes, primogenitum diaboli) most falsely and
shamelesly charge him with the wearing of consecrated slippers, which was never
done, but is one of those scurrilous invented imputations of this malicious
Accuser of his brethren, now thrown at him, whose shoes, either for learning
or piety, I am sure, this rambling Arguist, and railing Rabsheka is not worthy
to bear; and for the service of God in our Churches, Music ever used in the
Church.
though the holy Prophet, which was A man according to Gods own heart, praised
God in the beauty of holiness, upon all the best instruments of music, and
commanded us as well in the grammatical sense, as in the my sticall sense,
Psalm. 147.1.149 3. 150 3, 4, 5.
to sing praises unto our God with Tabret and Harp, to praise him in the sound
of the Trumpet, in the Cymbals and dances, upon the well tuned Cymbals, and
upon the loud Cymbals; yet this zealous Organomastix, gives us none other
Title, than Cathedral Roarers and Squeakers: Page 14.
and good reason it is he should be very angry with roaring and squeaking in
Churches; for that having been possessed of a very competent Living with cure of
souls these four or five years together (if I am not mistaken in the Author)
he never yet either read or preached in that or any other Church; so necessary
is non residence, and so useful are dumb dogs, when they are willing to
snarle and bark against Government and Religion: but it is strange to me, that
such a divine harmony, which has made others sober, Music how useful.
should make this spawn of the red Dragon mad; for we know some Lawgivers
commanded children to be taught (...), Theodorie. Epist. l. 2. Plutarch de
Musica.
after the grave composed tones of the Doricke way, ad corda fera demulcenda,
to soften the fierceness of their dispositions, and All mentis fervorem
temperandum, to cool and allay the hear and distempers of their minds, as
Achilles was appeased in Homer, Niceph. l. 12. c. 43.
and Theodosius was drawn to commiseration, luctuoso carmine, by a sad poem
sung to him at supper, when he intended the utter destruction of Antioch; and
the Scripture testifies the like effect of David's harp in King Saul; yet all
this sweet and hallowed air, which ravisheth devout souls, has only filled
this envious Malignant with nastie winds and stinking expressions. So contrary
to the words of God himself, Exodus 3.5. and against the judgment of all
Divines, and the practice of all Saints, a primordiis ecclesiae, from the first
birth of Gods Church, Page 15.18.
he most ignorantly denies any place to be holier than another, which makes me
afraid, that Heaven with this man and his faction is deemed no holier than
Hell, or the Lords day no holier than monday, no more than they hold the Church
holier than their barnes, or the holiest Priest, though he were Aaron himself,
the Saint of the Lord, holier than the prophanest worldling; for I find no
difference that they make either of persons, times, or places, but such a
commixtion of all things, as if they intended to reduce and bring the whole
world into that confused Chaos, which God first created, before he disposed the
parts thereof into their several stations.

But I am loath to spend any more time about this ignorant 'Argument, that is,
as all the rest of their Writings are, as full of railing and unsavory
speeches as any mortal pen can diffuse; therefore Heave him to do with his
heart and mouth as that Morussian Cabares (whereof he speaks) did with those
Churches, which the Goths and Vandales had defiled.

Thus you have some, and I might add here abundance more of their absurd and
impious Doctrines, which their ignorant simplicity produced, and their furious
zeal published out of mis-interpreted Scriptures; not that all these points are
taught by every one of their Teachers, but that all these and many more are
taught and maintained by some one or other of them, as I could easily express
it, if it were not too tedious for my Reader; but the bulk of my Book swells
too big, and their fancies are but Dreams fit for laughter, and I brought
these only as Vinegar to be tasted, and then to be spit out again.

CHAP. X. Shows the great Bug-beares that affrighted this faction; the four
special means they used to secure themselves; the manifold lies they raised
against the King, and the two special questions that are discussed about
Papists.
5. 5. The settling of the Milit. a.
FOr the settling of the Militia, and putting the whole Kingdom in a posture of
Defense, as they termed it: 1. They dreamed of a desperate Disease. 2. They
devised an empericall way to cure it.
and,

1. 1. The disease.
The Disease was a monstrous fear of Popery, and the re-establishment of
abolished superstitions in our Church, to invade their consciences, and of the
Papists, with fire and sword, to wast their, estates, and to take away their
lives and liberties, and through that groundless fear, they looked on the
innocent ceremonies, that were established in the Church, as dangerous
innovations and introductions to idolatry.

And in the State, they feared the practiced ways and endeavors, to produce
an arbitrary government by our advancing of a boundless prerogative, even to
the dispoyling of the Subject of his property, and robbing him of the benefit
of the laws: these were their fears.

And the grounds of these fears were lying fictions, and most scandalous
detractions and defamations; for their invented letters that should come from
Holland, and from Denmark, and some other places beyond the Seas, (where we
were better believe them, then go try whether they were true) wh ich informed
them sometimes of a fleet of Danes, sometimes of another Nation, that should
come to assist the King for the setting up of Popery, and the securing of
himself in a tyrannical and arbitrary government over them: What terrible
things frighted them.
and every day almost produced a discovery of new treacheries against the
Parliament, what terrible things frighted them; as the stable of Horses under
ground, (for indeed they were invisible Horses, such as Elisha's servant saw,
terrifying their guilty consciences) and that of the Tailors in Moore-fields,
and the like horrid machinations, that were to come against them, I know not
from whom, and God knows from whence; which things, how false they were, time,
which is the mother of truth, has long agone made manifest and ridiculous, to
any man that is not bewitched with these lying fancies: therefore, lest these
dreams of their distempered brains, should be too soon descryed, and so
prove defective to produce their intended project, they allege the Queen is
a Papist (and I would to God they were so truly religious, and void of
hypocrisy in their profession, as she, most gracious Queen, is in her
religion) then they say, the Bishops are all Papists, Deanes and Prebends are
of the same stamp, and all the Kings Chapleines, that were preferred by the
Archbishop were either close papists or professed Arminians, which are but Cosen
germans unto the other, Arminianism being but a bridge to pass over unto
popery.

And with these and the like false slanders against the King, Queen, and
Clergy, they so bewitehed most of their well meaning brethren of the same
house, and amazed all the simplet sort of people of this Kingdom with these
fears, and filled them with such jealousies, with those pamphlets, that they
caused to be printed, and dispersed every where, that they were at their wits
end, for fear of this lamentable alteration of their religion, and deprivation
of their liberties.

2, 2. The Cure.
The disease being thus spread, like a gangrene, over all the parts of the body
of this Kingdom, they like skillful Physicians devise the cure; and that is,
the preparation of a Militia; and this militia they would have put into such
hands as they pleased, such as they might confide in; and I wish the whole
Kingdom knew who those men were, and who they are, that they do confide in;
for I know,

1. Some of them are poor men of most desperate fortunes, if bankrupters may
be termed such;

2. Others to be most factious and scismaticall men, addicted to Anabaptisme
and Brownisme and other worser sects; as amongst the London Commanders, Ven,
Manwaring, Fawlke, Norington, Bradly, Bast and the rest, whereof there are
twice as many schismatic, and as it is conceived, beggarly sectaries, as are
right honest men among them; and if we looked among their Lords, and all the
rest of their nomination throughout the Kingdom, I doubt we shall find some of
them to be just of the same condition.

And because the King (to whose care and trust God had committed all the people
of this Kingdom, (and not to them, that are called by the King, and chosen only
by men, and that only for this time,) and of whom he will require an account of
the laws and religion whereof he made him keeperand defender, and not of them)
thought most rightly, that this Militia should be committed rather to such men,
as he might confide in (as it was in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and His
Father of ever blessed memory) rather than to any that they should name, which
was to disrobe himself of all his regal power, of the chiefest garland of his
royal prerogatives, (without which he could hold his Crown by no better a
tenure, then durante beneplacito) and to put the sword out of his own hand,
into the hands of them that could not love him, because they could not trust
him, as they alleged; (and what reason had he to trust them that were
causelessly so distrustful of him?) they startled at this denial.

And because the King of heaven had by this time opened the Kings eyes, God
opens the Kings eyes.
to let him see what hitherto he could hardly imagine, that these men (to whom
he had granted for the good of his Kingdom, so many acts of grace and favor,
as never any King of England did before, and had very graciously offered to
commit to the hands of their own choosing, so large a share of the Militia, as
might have rendered the whole Kingdom most secure, if security in a just and
legal way had been all that they sought for) had their intentions far
otherwise then they pretended, and that not only the government of the Church
was intended to be altered, and the governors thereof destroyed, but himself
also was hereby disrobed of those rights, which God and the laws of the land
had put into his hands, and the Kingdom brought either into a base tyranny, or
confused anarchie, when all things shall be done according to the arbitrary
power of these factious and schismatic men, therefore he utterly refused to
grant their desires, and most wisely withstood their design.

Whereupon, these men put their heads together, How they strengthened
themselves to make their ordors firm with out the king.
to consult how they might strengthen themselves, and make their ordinances
firm and binding without the King; and to that purpose, having by their former
doings, gotten too great an interest as well in the faith, as in the affections
of the people, in confidence of their own strength, they came roundly to the
business, and what they knew was not their right, as their former Petitions
can sufficiently witness, they resolve to effect the same by force, but as
insensibly as they can devise; as,

1. To seize upon the Kings Navy to secure the Seas.

2. To lay hold upon all the Kings Magazin, Forts, Towns, and Castles.

3. To withold his moneys and revenues, and all other means from the King.

4. To withdraw the affections, and to poison the loyalty of all his Majesty's
Subjects from him.

And hereby they thought (and it must have been so indeed, Psa, 30, 6
except the Lord had been on his side) they had made their hill so strong,
that it could not be moved, and the King so weak and destitute of all means,
that he could no ways subsist or relieve himself, as a member of their own
House did tell me, for

1. 1 Earl of Warw^ck made vice Admiral.
They get the Earl of Warwick to be appointed Vic-admirall of the Sea, and to
commit all the Kings Navy into his hand, and to take away that charge from Sir
John Pennington, whom most men believed to be far the better Seaman, but
more faithful to his King, and the other purer to the Parliament.

2. 2 Sir John Hotham put to Hull for the Magazine,
They fend Sir John Hotham a most insolent man, that most uncivilly contemned
the King to his face, to seize upon the Kings Magazine that he bought with his
own money, (when they might as well take away my horse that I paid for) and to
keep the King out of Hull, which was his own proper Town, and therefore
might as well have kept him out of White Hall, and was an act so full of
injustice, as that I scarce know a greater.

3. 3 They detained the kings moneys. Esaias 1, 23.
Because moneys are great means to effect any worldly affair, and the sinews
of every war, when as men and arms and all other necessaries may be had for
money, some of them and their followers show themselves to be just as the
Peers of Israel, companions of thieves, mere robbers, which forcibly take
away a man's money from him; they take all the Kings treasure, they intercept,
detain, and convert all the Kings revenues and customs, to strengthen
themselves against the King.

4. Because their former Remonstrances framed by this faction, 4 They labor to
render the king odious by lies.
of the ill government of this Kingdom, though in some things true, (which the
King ingeniously acknowledges, and most graciously promises to redress them)
yet in all things full of gall and bitterness against the King, could not so
fully poison the love and loyalty of the Kings Subjects, as they desired,
especially the love of those that knew his Majesty, who the better they knew
him, did the more affectionately love him, and the more faithfully serve him;
they thought to do it another and a surer way, with apparent lies, palpable
slanders, and abominable accusations, invented, printed, and scattered over all
the parts of this Kingdom, by their trencher Chaplains, and parasiticall
Preachers, and other Pamphleters, some busy Lawyers and Pettifoggers, to bring
the King into an odium, disliked and deserted of all his loving Subjects. And
what created power under heaven was able to dissolve that wickedness, which
subtlety and malice had thus treacherously combined to bring to pass?

Hereupon (after many threatening votes, 1 Lie, that he intended to war against
his Parliament.
and actual hostility exercised against his Royal person) the King is forced
to raise a guard for the defense of himself, and those his good Subjects that
attended him; then presently that small guard, that consisted but of the chief
gentry of the Country, was declared to be an army raised for the subversion of
the Parliament, and the destruction of our native liberties; an invincible army
is voted to be raised, the Earl of Essex is chosen to be their General, with
whom they promise both to live and die, the Earl of Bedford General of the
Horse, moneys are provided, and all things are prepared to fetch the King and
all delinquents, or to be the death of all withstanders; and that nothing might
hinder this design, though the King in many gracious Messages attested by the
subscription of many noble Lords that were upon the place, assured them, he
never intended any war against his Parliament, yet they proceed with all
eagerness, and declare all those that shall assist the King, either with
Horse, money, or men, to be malignants and enemies unto the King and Kingdom,
and such delinquents as shall be sure to receive condign punishment by the
Parliament, Hoc mirum est, hoc magnum.

And among the rest of their impudent slanders, this was their Masterpiece,
which they ever harped upon, that he countenanced Papists, and intended to
bring Popery into this Kingdom, and to that end had an Army of Papists to
assist him.

But to satisfy any sensible man in this point, I would crave the resolution
of these two Questions:

1. Two questions to be resolved.
Whether every Papist that is subject to his Majesty is not bound to assist
and defend his King in all his dangers?

2. Whether the King should not protect his Subjects that are Papists in all
their dangers, so far as by the Law he ought to do it; 1. All Papists bound
to assist their King.
and accept of their service when himself is environed with dangers?

For first, I believe there is no Law that inhibiteth a Papist to serve his
King against a Rebellion, or to ride post, to tell the King of a Design to
murder Him, or any other intended Treason against Him; or being present, to
take away a weapon from that man that attempted to kill the King; because his
not coming to Church does not exempt him from his Allegiance, or discharge
him of his duty and service unto the King and therefore if a Fleet from France
or Spain or any other foreign part should invade us, or any Rebellion at home
should rise against his Sovereign, and seck to destroy those Laws and
Liberties whereof himself and his Posterity has as good an interest as any
other Subject, I say, he is bound by all Laws to assist his King, and to do
his best endeavor, both with his purse and in his person, not only to oppose
that external Invasion, but also to subdue, as well that homebred Rebellion,
as the foreign Invasion.

2. 2. The King bound to protect dutiful Papists.
If a Papist should be injured, his estate seized upon, his house plundered,
and his person, if taken, imprisoned, not because he transgressed any other
Law, but that he dispenceth not with the Law of his conscience, to be no
Papist; and being thus injured, should come unto his King, and say, I am your
Subject, and have lived dutifully, I did nothing which the Law gives me not
leave, I have truly paid all duties and humbly submitted my self to all
penalties; and yet I know not why, I am thus used and abused by my neighbors;
I am driven from my house by force of Arms, and I have no place to breathe,
but under your Majesty's wings and the shelter of your power; therefore I
beseech you, as you are my King, and are obliged to do your best for the
safety of your true Subjects, let me have your protection, and you shall have
my service unto death? I would fain know what the King should do in such a
case; deny his protection, or refuse his service? the one is injustice, the
other not the best wisdom, especially if he needed service; for as the Law of
nature and of nations requires all Subjects, to obey their Kings and
faithfully to serve them, of what Religion soever their Kings shall be; so Lege
relationis, every King is bound to protect every faithful Subject, that
observes his Laws, or submits to their penalties, without corrupting of
his fellow Subjects, of what Religion soever he is: because they are his
Subjects, not as they are faithful Christians, but as obedient men, and he is
to rule, not over the faith of their souls, but the actions of their bodies;
and it is an Axiom in Divinity, that Fides non cogenda; and if Kings cannot
persuade their Subjects to embrace the true Faith, they ought not to cut them
off, so long as they are true Subjects: and therefore with what reason can any
man blame the King, either for protecting them in their distresses, or
accepting their sevice in his own extremities? I cannot understand. And yet,
for the goodly company of Papists which his Majesty entertaineth in all his
Armies, they cannot all make up so much as one good Regiment, as an Officer in
his Majesty's Army confidently affirms; but it will serve their turn to
tax the King, to lay imputations upon him, even the very things that belong
unto themselves (as the whole sum of those things that are expressed in
Englands Petition to their King, Page 10.
mutatis mutandis might truly be presented to the two Houses, that have now
almost destroyed us all) and to make them mighty faults in him, which are no
faults at all in themselves; because there is no fear of their
favouringPoperie, though, as they have very many, so they should have never so
many more in their Army. 3. Lie, that he caused the Rebellion in Ireland.


Another Slander they not only whispered, but also dispersed the same far
and near among the people, to make the King still the more odious unto his
Subjects, that he was the cause of the Rebellion in Ireland, and that the
Rebels there had his Commission under the Broad Seal, to plunder the
Protestants and to expel them thence; that so the Gospel being rooted out of
Ireland, Popery might the easier be transported and planted here in England;
whereas themselves in very deed were the sole causers of this Rebellion, as I
have showed unto you before; The cause of this stander.
and the color of this stander was, that the Rebellion being raised, the
Ringleaders of those Rebels, the sooner to gain the simple to adhere unto
them, persuaded them to believe that they had the Kings command to do the same;
and to that purpose showed them the Broad Seal, which they had taken from
Ministers, and Clerks of the Peace, and others, whom formerly they had
plundered, and taken their Seals from them, which they cunningly affixed to
certain Commissions of their own framing; as M Sherman assured me, he saw the
Broad Seal that was taken from one M. Heart, that was Clerk of the Peace in the
County of Tumond; and was found in the pocket of one of the chief Leaders of
the Rebels, when he was killed by the Kings Soldiers; yet, this false and lewd
practice of these Rebels in Ireland was a most welcome news to this Faction in
England to say this imputation upon the King, that he was the cause of this
Rebellion, which themselves had kindled, and were glad to find such a color
to impute it unto him, that it might not be suspected to be raised by them.

Many other such falsehoods, Lies, and impudent slanders has the father of
lies caused these his Children most impudently to father upon the King; but as
the Philosopher says, Non quia affirmatur aut negatur, How things are in deed.
res erit aut non erit, things are not so and so, because they are said to be
so; neither can they be no such things, only because they are denied to be
such; as Gold is not Copper, because ignorant men affirm it to be so; nor a
drunken man sober, or a vicious man virtuous, because they deny him to be good,
and blazon him abroad for one of the sons of Belial; but as Gold is Gold, and
Brass is Brass, so godly men are good, wicked men are evil, and Rebels are
none other than Rebels, let men call them what they will; and so our King is
not such a man as they say, because they affirm it; but he is indeed a most
just, virtuous, and most pious Prince, let them say what they will, Their
tongues are their own, and we cannot rule them: and so all his followers are
better Protestants in deed, and less Papists in all points of faith than the
best of them, that term us so by false names. God forgive them these
slanderous accusations.

CHAP. XI. Shows the unjust proceedings of these factious Sectaries against
the King; eight special wrongs and injuries that they have offered him; which
are the three States; and that our Kings are not Kings by election or covenants
with the People.
ANd yet for all these strange courses, contrary to all humane thoughts, which
is marvelous in our eyes; Psalm. 118.23. Esaias 46.10.
the Lord of Heaven whose counsel shall stand, and whose will shall be done,
has them all in derision, dissipates all these devices, and turns all the
counsel of Achitophel against his own head, when he opened the eyes of many
millions of the Kings true Subjects, to behold and detest these unfaithful
dealings, and disloyal proceedings against so gracious a King; and therefore
petitioned and subscribed that his Majesty standing upon his Guard, and
defending himself from such indignities as might follow, they would hazard
their lives and fortunes to assist him, to repel those more than barbarous
injuries, that were offered unto Him.

Therefore now, Memoriae proditum est, I find it written, that without fear of
God, without regard of Majesty, without justice, without honesty, they are
resolved, rather than to repent of their former wickedness, to involve the
whole Kingdom in an unnatural civil War; and to maintain the same against the
will and contrary to the desires both of the King and Kingdom; and it is almost
incredible, what wicked courses and how unjust and insufferable Orders and
Ordinances you shall find recorded, that they have made: 1. Against the King.
2. Against the Subjects. 3. Against the Law.
Which are all said to be exceedingly abused by them; for,

1. 1. Their proceedings against the King.
Against the King, it is registered to Posterity, that they have proceeded
besides many other things, in all these particulars:

1. 1. Wrong. Matthew. 8.20
They possess all the Kings Houses, Towns, and Castles, but what he gets by
the strength of his sword, and detain them from him; so that we may say with
our Savior, The foxes have holes, and the fowls of the air have nests, but
the King of England has not an house allowed him, by the Houses of Parliament
wherein to put his head; and they take not only his Houses, but also his rents
and revenues, and (as I understood when I was in Oxford) his very clothes, and
provision for his Table, that seeing they could not take away his life by the
sword, they might murder him with cold or famine, when he should not have the
subsistence (if they could hinder him) to maintain life and soul together,
which is the shame of all shame, and able to make any other men odious to all
the world, The complaint to the House of Commons. Page 19.
thus maliciously and barbarously to deal with their own most gracious King;
neither does their malice here end, but they withold the Rents of the Queen,
and seize upon the Revennes of our Prince, which I assure them, my Country men
takes in great scorn, and I believe will right it with their lives, or this
Parliament Faction shall redeem their errors with no small repentance, when as
we find no Prince of Wales was ever suffered by his Subjects to have such
indignities offered him by the greatest Pecres of England.

And here I cannot omit what Alderman Garroway says of the reproach of Master
Pym, touching the maintaining of the Kings other Children, which he professes
made his heart to rise, and hoped it did so to many more: Is our good King
fallen so low, Alderman Garroway his Speech.
that his Children must be kept for him? It is worth our inquiry, who brought
him to that condition? We hear him complain, that all his own revenue is seized
and taken from him; Is not his Exchequer, Court of Wards, and Mint here, his
Customs too are worth somewhat, and are his Children kept upon Alms? How
shall We and our Children prosper, if this be not remedied? And I pray God
these things rise not up in judgment against them and this Nation; but hereby
they intended to verify that disloyal Speech which One of them uttered in a
Tavern, and God will avert it from his Servant, That they would make the King
as poor as Job, Sober Sadness, p. 22.
unless he did comply with them.

2. 2. Wrong.
If any man which they like not attend the Kings Person, though he be his
sworn servant, or assist him in his just defense, which he is bound to do by
the Law of God and man; yet he is presently voted and condemned for a
Malignant, popish, disaffected, evil Counselor, and an enemy to the State;
and that is enough (if he be catched) to have him spoiled and imprisoned at
their pleasure; nay, my self was told by some of that Faction, that because I
went to see the King, I should be plundered and imprisoned if I were taken.

3. 3. Wrong.
Though they do solemnly profess that his Majesty's personal safety, and his
royal honor and greatness are much dearer unto them than their own lives and
fortunes, The Petition to his Majesty the 16. of July 1642.
which they do most heartily dedicate, and shall most willingly employ for the
support and maintenance thereof, yet for all this hearty Protestation, they had
at that very time (as the King most acourately observes in his Answer)
directed the Earl of Warwick to assist Sir John Hotham against him, appointed
their Generals, Non turpe est abeo vinci que^ vincereest nesas, neque ei
inhoneste alique^ submitti, quem ^e^ super omnes extulit. Dictum Arme^ Pompeio.
and as Alderman Garroway testifies, raised ten thousand armed men out of
London, and the neighbor Countries before the King had seven hundred^ and
afterward, though the King sent from Nottingham a gracious Message and
solicitation for peace, yet they supposing this proceeded from a diffidence of
his own strength, or being too confident of their own force slighted the Kings
Grace, and most barbarously proceeded in the most hostile manner, waged war,
and gave battle against the Kings Army, where they knew he was in his own
Person, and as one of their Preachers taught the Sunday before the Battle,
that they might with a good conscience, as well kill the King (horresco dicere)
as any other man; so (according to Captain Blagues directions, as Judas taught
the high Priests servants) we know what Troops and Regiments were most aimed
at, whereas they do most ridiculously say they have, for the defense of his
person, sent many a Canon bullet about his ears, which he did with that Kingly
courage and heroike magnanimity, yea and that Christian resolution and
dependence on Gods assistance pass through, that it shall be recorded to his
everlasting honor, and their indeleble shame and reproach, so long as the
world endures.

4. 4. Wrong.
They have most disloyally and traitorously spoken both privately and publicly
such things against his Majesty, as would make the very Heathens tear them in
pieces, that should say the like of their tyrannous Kings, and such as I could
not believe they proceeded from the mouth of a Christian against so Christiana
King, but that I find most of them were publicly uttered, made known unto
his Majesty, and related by himself, and those that were ear witnesses
thereof, as (horresco referens) that he was not worthy to be our King: not fit
to live: Sober sadness. P 3 The Viewer p. 4. His Majesty's Declaration.
Trussell in the supplement to Daniels history
that he was the traitor: that the Prince would govern better: and that they
dealt fairly with him they did not depose him, as their forefathers had
deposed Richard the second, whom all the world knows to be most traitorously
murdered, and the whole progress of that act, whereby he was deposed, is
nothing else but the scandal of that parliament, and an horrid treason upon
the fairest relation of any Chronicle: and the good Bishop of Carlisle, was not
then afraid, in open house to tell the Lords so to their faces; and I would
our parliament men would read his speech.

5 They command their own Orders, 5. Wrong.
Ordinances and Declarations to be printed Cum privilegio, and to be published
in public throughout the whole Kingdom, and they are not a little punished
that neglect it; and whatsoever Message, Answer, Declaration or Proclamation
comes from the King, to inform his subjects of the truth of things, and to
undeceive his much seduced people, they straightly forbid those to be printed,
and imprison (if they can catch them) all that publish them, as they did many
worthy Ministers in the City of London, and in many other places of this
Kingdom

6 They have publicly voted in their house, and accordingly endeavored by
Messages to persuade our brethren of Scotland, to join in their assistance
with these grand rebels, 6. Wrong.
to rebel against their Sovereign; but I persuade my self (as I said before)
that the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, are more religious in themselves,
more loyal to their liege Lord, and indeed wiser in all their actions, then,
while they may live quietly at home in a happy peace, to undertake upon the
persuasions of rebellious subjects, such an unhappy war abroad.

7. It is remonstrated and related publicly, that, as if they had shaken off
all subjection, 7. Wrong.
and were become already a State independent, they have treated by their agents
with foreign states, and do still proceed in that course; which, if true, is
such an usurpation upon Sovereignty, as was never before attempted in this
Kingdom; and such a presumption, as few men know the secret mischiefs that
may lurk therein.

8. They suffer and license their Pamphleters Pryn, 8. Wrong.
Goodewin, Burges, Marshall, Sedgwicke, and other emmissaries of wickedness,
to publish such treasons and blasphemies, and abominable aphorisms, as that
the negative vote of the King is no more then the dissent of one man, the
affirmative vote of the King makes not a law, ergo, the negative cannot destroy
it, and the like absurd and senseless things that are in those aphorisms, and
in Prins book of the Sovereign power of Parliament, whereby they would deny
the kings power to hinder any act, that both the Houses shall conclude; and so,
taking away those just prerogatives from him, that are as hereditary to him as
his kingdom, compel him to assent to their conclusions: Why the two ^
Spencers dyed.
for which things our histories tell us, that other Parliaments have banished
(and upon their returns they were hanged) both the Spenters, the father and
the son, for the like presumption, as among other Articles, for denying this
Prerogative unto their king, and affirming, that if he neglected his duty, and
would not do what he ought, Per asperte vid. Elismere post^atip. 99.
for the good of the kingdom, he might be compelled by force to perform it,
which very thing, divesteth the king of all Sovereignty, overthrows Monarchy,
and makes our government a mere Aristocracy, contrary to the constitution of
our first kings, and the judgment of all ages; for we know full well, from the
practice of all former parliaments, that seeing the three States are
subordinate unto the king, p. 48,
in making laws (wherein the chiefest power consists) they may propound and
consent, but it is still in the kings power to refuse or ratify: and I never
read that any parliament man, till now, did ever say the contrary: but that if
there be no concurrence of the king (in whom formally the power of making of
any law resideth, ut in subiecto,) to make the law: the two Houses (whose
consent is but a requisite condition to complete the kings power) are but a
livelesse convention, like two cyphets without a figure, that of themselves are
of no value or power, but joined unto their figures, have the full strength of
their places; p, 19, 20, 21,
which is confirmed by the viewer of the Observations, out of 11. Hen. 7.23.
per Davers, Polydore, 185. Cowell inter. Verbo prerog. Sir Tho. Smith de
republ. Angl. l. 2. c. 3. Bodin, l. 1. c. 8. for if the kings consent were not
necessary for the perfecting of every act, then certainly (as another says)
all those Bills that heretofore have passed both Houses, The Letter to a
Gentleman in Gloucester shite, p, 3
and for want of the Royal assent, have slept, and been buried all this
while, would now rise up as so many laws and statutes, and would make as great
confusion, as these new orders and ordinances have done.

And as the Lawyers tell us, that the necessity of the assent of all three
states in Parliament, Lamberts Archeion, 271. Vid. he Viewes p. 21.
is such, as without any one of them, the rest do but loose their labor: so,
Le Roy est assentus c^o faict un act de Parliament, and as another says, Nihil
ratum ha^ betur, nisi quod Rex comprobarit, nothing is perfected but what the
King confirms.

But here in the naming of the three States, I must tell you, that I find in
most of our Writers, about this newborn question of the Kings power, a very
great omission, that they are not particularly set down, that the whole
Kingdom might know which is every one of them; and, upon this omission I
conceive as great mistake in them, that say the three States are 1. the King,
2. the House of Peers, 3. Which he the three States of England.
the House of Commons: for I am informed by no mean Lawyer, that you may find
it upon the Rowles of Hen. 5. as I remember, and I am sure you may find it in
the first year of Rich. 3. where the three States are particularly named; and
the king is none of them, for it is said, that at the request, Speed l, 9, c,
19, p. 712. Anno 1 Ric. 3
and by the assent of the three estates of this Realm, that is to say, the
Lords Spiritual, the Lords temporal, and Commons of the Land assembled, it is
declared that our said Sovereign Lord the king, is the very undoubted king of
this realm: wherein you may plainly see, the king that is acknowledged their
Sovereign by all three, can be none of the three, but is the head of all
three, as the Deane is none of the Chapter, but is caput cepituls; and as in
France and Spain, so in England, I conceive the three estates to be, 1. the
Lords Spiritual, that are, if not representing, yet in loco, in the behalte of
all the Clergy of England, that till these anabaptisticall tares, have almost
choked all the Wheat in Gods field, were thought so considerable a party, as
might deserve as well a representation in Parliament, as old Sarum, or the like
Borough of scarce twenty Houses. 2. The Lords Temporal in the right of their
honor and their posterity. 3. The Commons that are elected in the behalf of
the Country, Cities, and Buroughs; and what these three States consult and
conclude upon for the good of the Church and kingdom, the king, as the head of
all, was either to approve or reject what he pleased; and, though we find,
with some difficulty (as the viewer of the Observations says) where the
Parliament is said to be a body, consisting of King, Lords, and Commons, (
ergo, without the king there is no Parliament) yet herein the king is not said
to be one of the three states; but the first and most principal part that
constitutes the body of the parliament; p. 2^. 25. H, 8, 21.
but John Bodin that had very exactly learned the nature of our parliament,
both by his reading and conferring with our English Ambassador (as himself
confesses) says, the States of England are never otherwise assembled, (no
more then they are in the Realms of France and Spain) then by parliament
write, and the states proceed not but by way of supplications and requests unto
the king, Bodin. de repub. l. 1. c. 8
and the states have no power of themselves to determine or decree any thing,
seeing they cannot so much as assemble themselves, nor being assembled depart
without express commandment from the king. In all this, and for all the
search that I have made, I find not the king named to be one, but rather by
the consequence of the discourse, to be none of the three, but, as I said, the
head of all the three states for, either the words of Bodin must be understood
of two states, in all the three kingdoms, which then had been more properly
termed, as we call them, either the two Houses, or the Lords and Commons, or
else they must be very absurd; because the three states, if the king be one of
them, can not be said to be called by parliament writs, when as the king is
called by no writ, nor can he be said to supplicate unto himself: or to have
no power to depart without leave, that is of himself, Therefore it must needs
follow, that this learned man, who would speak neither absurdly nor
improperly, meant by the three states, 1. The Lords Spiritual, 2. The Lords
Temporal, 3. The Commons of the kingdom: and the King as the head of all,
calling them, consulting and concluding with them, and dismissing them when he
pleased. And Will. Martyn says, King Hen, 1, at the same time 1114. devised
and ordained the manner and fashion of a Court in Parliament, appointing it to
consist of the three estates, of which himself was the head, so that his
laws, being made by the consent of all, were not disliked of any: these are
his words. And I am informed by good Lawyers, that you may find it in the
preambles of many of our Statutes, and in the body of some other Statutes, and
in some Petitions, especially one presented to Queen Elizabeth for the
enlargement of one, that was committed for a motion that he made for excluding
the Bishops out of the House of peers, Such is the difference betwixt Queen
Elizabeth's time and our times.
the three states are thus particularized, and the Lords Spiritual are
nominated the first of the three, and are termed one of the greatest states of
this realm. And this I conceive to be the right constitution of a Parliament;
therefore now, to cast off one of the three States, Anno octavo Elizabeth c. 1.
and to cut off the head of all three, by making the King but one of them,
(that so both the King and the two Houses might be only coordinate, when as
indeed they are, as in some respect concurrent, so also subordinate unto him,
as to their Head) is such a change and alteration as would quite overthrow the
fundamental constitution of the Government of this Kingdom, and make our King
(if these men might have their will) to have no more power than the Duke of
Venice.

And to that end this Faction have by themselves and their Pamphleters, The
false grounds of the original of our Kings. The disclaimer, p. 17, 18, 19.
laid down such false grounds of the original of our Kings, as are exceeding
derogatory to the Crown of England, as that they are Kings by paction and
covenant with their people, which at first chose them, and entrusted them with
their Government; and for the preservation of their Laws against the
encroachments of the King, and the making of new Laws, as occasions required,
ordained the great Council, which they call Parliament, and which should have
full power to restrain the King, if he did abuse his Power; and therefore the
people may withdraw their trust when the Kings neglect their duty, and nullify
their faith unto their Subjects; for whosoever is indifferently read in
Histories, and the Chronicles of our Kingdom, may easily find how falsely and
maliciously they would make this free Monarchy to have been elective and to be
a conditional Government; because England, France, Post mortem Maximi Constans
postular mi a Britannis. But not a word in all the story, that any one of the
British Kings was electus, Anonymus MS. in Bibl. Oxon. qui scripsit hist,
omnium regum qui regna verunt in Anglia.
and Spain were parts and parcels of the Roman Empire, and when the Emperors,
by reason of their intestine broils at home could not look into the parts
abroad, the right Heit unto the Crown of Britain, assumed unto himself all the
Royalty and power that the Emperor had over us, and succeed him, not by any
pact or covenant with the people, (though not as then for some reasons without
the request of the people) but by that right which God and nature allowed unto
Kings, and was due, either to the Roman Emperor or to any other absolute
Monarch of any Nation (...) (...) the old Chronicles of those (...) the
regaining of the Crown by Vortigerne, after that the people had rebelliously
rejected him, and received, but not elected, his son Vortimer in his place, do
most sufficiently clear the case.

And therefore what Sovereign Power soever is due to any absolute Monarch, and
what obedience soever S. Paul affirms to be due to the Roman Emperors that
then ruled over us, or Saint Peter commands to be given to other Kings, the
same is in all things due to our Kings, ever since Aurelius Ambrosius that
succeeded Vortigerne; or if you will not ascend so high, yet without all
contradiction ever since William the Conqueror, whom you cannot say was
elected, nor any other that succeeded him, and therefore cannot be debarred or
denied any of those Prerogatives and Soveraignties that belong unto the most
absolute Monarch, save only in those things, which of their special grace and
favor they granted unto their Subjects, and bound themselves at their
Coronation, to perform those promises of privilege and freedom which they
made unto them; and that distinction of the disclaimer of an absolute and a
Politic Monarch, P. 17, 18, 19, 20.
with his two leaves discourse upon the same, is so false and so frivolous,
that as Saint Bernard says of the fooleries of Abailardus, it deserves rather
Fustibus contundi quam rationibus refelli: Aristot. Polyt. l. 4.
for Aristotle tells us, that the supreme Power of all Government (which
resideth in every absolute Monarch, and does constituere Monarcham, give being
unto the Monarch) consists chiefly in these three distinct branches: 1. The
supreme power of every Government wherein it consists.
Legislative, to make and repeal Laws. 2. Bellative, to pronounce War and
conclude Peace. 3. Iudicative, decisively to determine all crimes and causes
whatsoever.


And when this threefold power is not penes annus, but penes optimates, then it
is no Monarchis, but an Aristocracie, and when it is penes populum, then it is
neither of those, but a mere Democracie, or popular Government. And therefore
out Kings having the sole power; first, to make War, and conclude Peace at
their own pleasure, and have called Parliaments only to supply their wants,
and to add their council and assistance therein; Secondly, to make Laws and
repeal them when they please, save only that they promised to their People and
obliged themselves not to do it without the advice of their Parliament; And
thirdly, to judge all their Subjects according to their Laws; it is most
apparent that our Kings are most absolute Monarchs; as, Cassaneus, Bodinus,
Sir Thomas Smith, and all that wrote of this Kingdom do peremptorily affirm:
and though I deny not Bodius distinction of a Lordly Monarch, a royal Monarch,
and a tyrannical Monarch, Bod. l. 2. c. 2. 3.
which shows only the Power and the Practice of the Monarch; yet I say, that
the distinction of an absolute and mixed Monarchy, which designeth the manner
of the Government, is a mere fopperie and a ridiculous distinction; because
that Government which extends it self to more than one, can never be a
Monarchy, as every man knows that understands the word Monarch.

These and many more such injuries and insufferable indignities they have
offered unto our King, and so indeed unto the whole Kingdom, which they durst
not have offered to any tyrannical King that would have ruled them with his
iron rod, but as the mercy of God emboldeneth wicked men to proceed in their
abominations, so the lenity and goodness of this pious Prince, and nothing
else in him, encouraged these factious and ambitious men, the people greedy of
a licentious liberty, and the Nobility and Gentry of rule, which is their
natural disease, thus to usurp the rights of our King, and to raise this
miserable war.

CHAP. XII. Shows the unjust proceedings of this Faction against their fellow
Subjects, set down in four particular things.
2. 2. Their proceedings against the Subjects, wherein I shall in most points
set down what I find in the Remonstrance of the Commons to the House of
Commons, and what I collected out of other Writers of the best credit.
LEst they should be thought juster to their fellow Subjects than they are to
their Severalgue King, you may observe what I find related of them. 1. That
besides the Act which they composed and procured it to pass for the Poll
money, wherein they show their exceeding great love to the Clergy, as to make
Deanes, whose Deanaries were scarce worth 100.l. a piece per annum, to pay
40.l. per poll, equal with the Lords and Aldermen of London, and many
Prebendaries to pay more than the annual worth of their Prebends, and the like
many passages of their respect to the Ministers, and some other particulars
which I pass without reproof, because the Act is passed; there were moneys
advanced by gift and by adventure, and Soldiers were prepared for Ireland, to
reduce those Rebels to their former obedience, and to restore the Kings
distressed Subjects to their rights and possessions; but the great neglect they
showed to discharge this duty, (the Soldiers that were sent, being left
almost altogether unpaid, to be sterved, and exposed to the mercy of their
merciless enemies, and we the poor English, that were robbed and spoiled of
our goods and lands, left not only unrelieved, but also twitted with that
scandal for our comfort, that we were worthily expelled by the Irish, 1. How
they neglected the distress^d Subjects of Ireland.
and left unregarded by the English, because we were but as the Samaritanes,
neither Israelites nor Pagans, or as the Turks, that partaking with the Jews
and Christians, are neither Jews nor Christians, so the English in Ireland
were just Laodicean like, neither hot nor cold, neither English nor Irish,
neither zealous Papists, nor true Protestants, and therefore worthily to be
spued out of the mouth of all men; which is the comfort we have of them, and
which puts us in a desperate condition (unless his Majesty will be pleased to
take another course to relieve us) to be left as a prey to be destroyed betwixt
two sorts, we know not which more cruel enemies) makes us believe that the
moneys are diverted, and the Soldiers detained to continue this unnatural War
against our King, that so by loosing the Kingdom of Ireland; they might the
sooner destroy the Kingdom of old England, to bring the Kingdom of New England
amongst us.

And besides this simple conversion of the Irish moneys, it is almost
incredible to consider how unjustly they have dealt with the English Subjects
to get money; for, to let abundance of other particulars pass, the Earl of
Manchester in the night time fetched away six thousand pounds, as I understand,
^o^er sadness, p. 21.
that were collected for the repairing of Saint Andrews in Holbourne, and the
great sums of money that were gathered for Londonderry and for Brainceford,
were employed by these Zelots, not to maintain the lives of those distressed
people, but to destroy the lives of loyal Subjects; and to prove themselves
right Jscariots, they brake into the Hospital at Gilford in Surrey, and took
four thousand pounds from the poor Lazars; but as the Romans dealt with their
neighbors Territories, when they were made their Arbitrators: so these men
dealt as finely with the lading of that Ship called Sancta Clara; for while the
Merchants disputed about the goods, these just Judges, to reconcile the
difference, seize upon all, and twenty thousand pound must be lent them, before
the right owner can receive them: and I might fill my papers with such examples.

2. They have made an Ordinance, 2. How they take what part they will of our
estates. Whereas they object that in the reign of King John and others of our
kings, the wentyeth, fifteenth, tenth or seventh part has been given; I
answer in one word, never a part by the two Houses without the king, and
against the king as they do.
that the twentieth part of men's estates, must be paid toward the maintenance
of this rebellion: and they do appoint those, that, upon their discretion,
shall value that twentieth part; and they may, for ought we know, set down the
tenth for the twentieth: and if they may legally do this we can see no reason,
why by the same rule, they may not take the fifteenth, tenth, or half our
goods for the same purpose: and so they avouch they may, but most untruly: for
it was never known, till this present parliament, that an Ordinance of both
Houses, without the consent, nay against the command of the King, can bind the
free Subjects of England (which do not then renounce their loyalty to their
King, when they make choice of them to be their procurators in the Parliament)
in their lives, liberties, or estates; and yet these men, not only bestow our
moneys as they please, as they did six thousand pound to their own Speaker,
and the places of command and great profi (more then all the revenues of their
lands come to) upon themselves, and upon their children and friends, as upon
Sir John Hotham, the Lord Rocheford, Lord Say, Lord Brooks, Hampaen, Brereton,
Fines, the Earl;e of Essex, and abundance more: but they do also seize upon
our estates, and thus take our goods, under the color of maintaining this
war, to enrich themselves and their children; and for the levying of this, or
what other part they please, they ordain their friends, and appoint their
Collectors to distraine for the sum assessed, and to sell the distress, and
if no distress can be found, then the persons of these notable offenders, that
deny their goods thus illegally to be taken from them, are to be imprisoned,
and their families to be banished from their habitations.

And to make the world believe how justly and sufficiently legal they could
do this, they made another ordinance for the inhabitants of the Counties of
North-hampton, Rutland, Derby, etc. to pay the twentieth part, and to be
assessed by the Assessors that they name, in imitation of the Statute lately
made for the four hundred thousand pound: and it is more than probable, that
this proceeding is but the praeludium of the like exaction to be extended, when
their need requires, to all the other parts of the Kingdom; which is a most
miserable course, and injustice not to be paralleld, to cast themselves, into a
necessity of getting money, to maintain an impious war against their King,
and then out of that necessity to compel their fellow subjects, and those
peaceable men (that do abominate this war,) to maintain the same (yea, and to
fight in the same, to kill men against their consciences,) in despite of their
teeth; or if they refuse to do it, to sond, or at least to permit, a party of
Horse, Dragooneers, and other strength to go to fetch their Money, Plate or
other goods, as if they were the goods of the deadly enemies of the Common
wealth; and this for none other reason, but for that the owners thereof are
good Subjects to the King, and not well affected to their unjust, and ungodly
proceedings.

But let me persuade all men that do fear God, still to suffer any thing,
which they can not avoid, from the violence of these wicked men, rather than
contribute any thing unto them, to further such abominable courses, as they
prosecute against the law of God and man; Rev. 2.10.
because the Lord commands us, to fear none of those things that we shall
suffer; but to stand in our integrity unto death, and we shall be crowned with
the crown of life.

3. They have discharged the Apprentises and servants from their Masters
services, 3. How they discharged the apprentices and compel them to fight.
and have either compelled or persuaded them to serve in their army against the
King, and that without the consent, and against the will of their masters and
dames, yea sometimes against the commands of their own parents, which I speak
from their own mouths.

4. 4. How they imprisoned out men without cause.
They have imprisoned very many hundreds of most able and most honest men; even
so many, that the Prisons are not able to contain them, but they are feign to
consecrate the greatest houses in London to become Prisons, as the Bishop of
Londons house, Ely house, Winchester House, Lambeth house; Cresby house, the
Savoy, and the like. And this they do for none other cause, but either for
performing the duties of their places, and dischargeing their obedience to his
Majesty, as the last Lord Mayor Gurney, which deserved rather to be commended
than committed, if we believe many that were present at his trial; or
petitioning unto them, as Sir George Bynion, Copmplaint p. 8
and Captain Richard Lovelace, and Sir William Boteler of Kent, because they
did not therein flatter and approve their present wicked courses; or intending
to petition unto the King for relief of these lamentable distresses, as those
Gentlemen of Hertford-shire and Westminster; or for being as they conceived,
disaffected unto their disloyal orders: A strange thing, and justice beyond
president, not the like to be found among the Pagans, that (where no law can
condemn a man for his affections when no action is committed against law) men
shall be robbed of their estates, and adjudged for malignants (which is also a
crime most general, and without the compass of any Statute) and then for this
now created sin, to be condemned and imprisoned, and therein to remain
without trial of his offense, perhaps as long as the Archbishop of Canterbury.
And this wonder is the rather to be wondered at, because it is the sense of
both Houses, M. Pym in his Speech at the Guild Hall.
(if we may believe Master Pym) that it is against the rules of justice, that
any man should be imprisoned upon a general charge, when no particulars are
proved against him: for never charge can be more general than to be all
affected, or a malignant, or a man not to be confided in, where of you find
ten thousand in the City of London, and many hundred thousands in the Kingdom:
and therefore when we find so many persons of honor and reputation
imprisoned, only upon this surmise, without any other particular charge so much
as once suggested against them, (as was the Lord of Middlesex, the Lord of
Portland, and abundance more) and detained in prison, because they were ill
affected, in that they have not contributed to the maintenance of this war,
we see how insensibly they have accused themselves to have laid this
insupportable punishment, beyond the desert of the transgressors, and against
the rules of all justice, and how they have forgotten their protestation, and
exceedingly infringed the liberty of the Subjects, whereof they promised to be
such faithful procurators.

CHAP. XIII. Shows the proceedings of this faction against the Laws of the
Land, the Privileges of Parliament transgressed eleven special ways.
3. 1. Their proceedings against the laws.
FOr the Laws of our land, which are either private, as those chiefly which
belong unto the Parliament, and are called the Privileges of Parliament or
public, which are the inheritance; of every Subject, you shall find how they
have invaded and violated each one of these: for,

1. 1. Against the privileges Parliament.
Touching the Privileges of Parliament, we confess, that former Kings have
graciously yielded many just privileges unto them for the freedom of their
persons, and the liberty of their speeches, so they be free from blasphemy or
treason, of the like unpardonable offense, but such a freedom as they
challenge, though for my self I confess my skill in Law to be unable, to
distinguish the Legitimate from the usurped, yet in these subsequent
particulars I find wise men utterly denying it them: as,

1. When they forbid us to dispute of their Privileges, 1. Denying us to
dispute of them. L. Elismer in post nati.
and say, that themselves alone are the sole Judges of them; when as in former
ages they have been adjudged by the Laws of the Kingdom, when Thorpe the
Speaker of the House of Commons has been committed and detained Prisoner upon
an Execution, and the House confirmed that fact.

2. 2. Committing and putting out their Members, Complaint, p. 11.
When the Members of the House (of whose elections and transgressions against
the House, or any of their fellow Members, or the like, the House is the proper
Judge) which ought to have as free liberty as any of the rest, upon any
emergent occasion, are committed, as Master Palmer, and others were, or put out
of the House, as Sir Edward Deering, the Lord Faulkland, Sir John Culpepper,
Sir John Strange ways, and others have been voted hand over head, for speaking
more reason than the more violent party could answer, or in very deed, for
speaking their minds freely against the sense of the House, or rather against
some of the prevalent Faction of the House, which we say is no Privilege but
the pravitie of the House; to deny this just Privilege unto those Members
that were thus committed or expelled; for hereby it does manifestly appear
that, contrary to the practice of all former Parliaments, and contrary to the
honor of any Parliament, things were herein debated and carried, not by
strength of argument, but by the most voices, and the greater number were so
far from understanding the validity of the alleged reasons, that after the
Votes passed they scarce conceived the state of the question, but thought it
enough to be Clerks to Master Pym, 3. Denying their Members to be legally
tried for any capital crime. Vide Dyer, p. 59.60. Crompton. 8. b. 9, 10, 11.
Elism. post. nats 20, 21. The viewer, p. 43.
and to say Amen to Master Hampden by an implicit faith.

3. When they deny the Members of their House, or any other employed by them in
this horrid Rebellion, should be questioned for felony, treason, murder, or
the like capital crimes, but only in Parliament, or at least by the leave of
that House whereof they are Members, or which does employ them; for by this
means any Member of their House may be a Traitor, or a Murderer, or a Robber
whenever he please, and may easily escape, before the party wronged, or
complainant can obtain this leave of the House of Commons: and therefore this
is as unreasonable and as senseless a Privilege as ever was challenged, and
was never heard of till this Parliament: for why should any man refuse his
Trial, or the House deny their Members to the justice of the Law, when as the
denial of them to be tried by the Law implies a doubt in us of the innocence
of those, whom we will not submit to justice; and their Trial would make them
live gloriously hereafter, if they were found innocent, and move the King to
deliver those men, that had so wickedly conspired their destruction, to the
like censure of the Law. But for them to cry out, The King is misinformed, and
We dare not trust our selves upon a Trial, may be a way to preserve their
safety, but with the loss of their reputation, and perhaps the destruction of
many thousands of people.

If they say, they are contented to be tried, but by their own House, which in
the time of Parliament is the highest Court of justice; it may be answered,
said a plain Rustique, with the old Proverb, Ask my fellow if I be a thief:
for mine own part, I reverence the justice of a Parliament in all other
judgments betwixt party and party, yea betwixt the King and any other
Subject; yet when the party accused shall be judged by his own Society, his
Brethren, and his own Faction, I believe any indifferent Judge would see this
to be too great partiality against the King, that he shall not have those,
whom he accuses to be tried by the Laws already established, and the ordinary
course of Justice; and if the Judges offend in their sentence, the Parliament
has full power, undenied them by his Majesty, to question and to punish those
Judges, as they did for that too palpable injustice (as they conceived) in the
case of the Ship money; but they will be judged by themselves, and all that
dissent from them must be at their mercy or destruction. And yet it is said to
be evident, that no Privilege can have its ground or commencement, unless it
be by statute, grant, or prescription, and by the stat. 26. Hen. 8. cap. 13. it
is enacted, that no offender in any kind of high Treason shall have the
privilege of any manner of Sanctuary: so all the Grants of such a privilege,
if any such should be made, are merely void, 1. Hen. 7. Staffords case, and not
one instance could hitherto beproduced, whereby such a Privilege was either
allowed or claimed, but the contrary most clearly proved by his Majesty out of
Wentworths case.

And therefore seeing your own Law-bookes tell us, that the Privilege of
Parliament does not extend to Treason, the breach of the Peace, and (as some
think) against the Kings debt: it is apparent how grossly they do abuse the
People by this claim of the Privilege of Parliament.

4. 4. Conniving with their Faction for any fault.
When they connive with their own compeeres for any breach of privilege, as
with Master Whitakers for searching Master Hampdens pockets, and taking away
his papers, immediately after the abrupt breaking up of the last unhappy
Parliament, and those that discovered the names of them that differed in
opinion from the rest of the Faction, in the business of the Earl of
Strafford, and specially with that rabble of Brownists and Anabaptists, which
with unheard of impudency durst ask that question publicly at the Bar,
who they were that opposed the well affected party in that House? as if they
meant to be even with them, whosoever they were; and likewise that unruly
multitude of zealous Sectaries, that were sent, as I find it, by Captain Ven
and Isaac Pennington, to cry Justice, Justice, Justice, and No Bishops, no
Bishops; and this to terrify some of the Lords from the House, and to awe the
rest that should remain in the House, as they had formerly done in the case of
the Earl of Strafford; and when others that they like not, are for the least
breach of pretended Privilege either imprisoned or expelled; for I assure my
self, there cannot be higher breaches of Privileges than these be, nor
greater stainec to obscure the honor, and vilify the repute of this
Parliament.

5. 5. The engaging one another in civil causes.
When there is such siding and engaging one another in civil causes, (that
they may be conglutinated together for their great Design) to do things, not
according unto justice, but for their own ends, contrary to all right; and
their favor is scarce worth the charge of attendance, to them that speed best
by their Ordinances; but the complaint is that men have the greatest injuries
done them in this that themselves call the highest Court of Justice, which
others say, has now justified all other inferior Courts, and made all
unrighteous judges most just.

6. 6. The surreptitious carrying of businesses.
When (as we have been informed) a matter of the greatest importance has been
debated and put unto the question, and upon the question determined, and the
Bill once and again rejected, yet at another time, even the third time, when
the Faction had prepared the House for their own purpose, and knew they could
carry it by most voices, the same question has been resumed, and determined
quite contrary to the former determination, when the House was more orderly
convened; as it is said they did, to pass the Ordinance for the Militia, which
many men dare avouch to their faces to be no Privilege of Parliament, but a
great abuse of their fellow Members, and a greater injury unto all their
fellow Subjects.

7. 7. Their partial questioning of some men, and not questioning of some
others.
When the elections of some of their Members have been questioned, and others
have been accused, for no less than capital crimes, (as Master Griffith was)
yet if these men incline and conspire with this Faction to confirm those
positions, which they proposed to themselves, to overthrow the Church and
State, and to uphold their usurped Government and tyrannical Ordinances, they
will pretend twenty excuses; as the great affairs of the State, the
multiplicitie of their businesses, the necessity of procuring moneys, the
shortness of their time, (though they sat almost three years already) that
they have no leisure to determine these questions (which in truth they do
purposely put off, least they should leese such a friend unto their party;)
but when any other, which dissenteth from their humors, does but any thing
contrary to the straitest Rules of the House, they do presently
(notwithstanding all their greatest affairs) call that matter into question,
and it must be examined and followed with that eagerness (as in my Lord
Digby's case) that he must be forthwith condemned and excluded; The L. Digby in
his Apolog.
for we say, this cannot be any just privilege, but an unjust proceeding of
this Parliament.

8. When they delegate their power to some men to do some things of themselves
without the rest; 8. The delegating of their power to particular men.
as it seems they did unto Master Pym, when an Order passed under his sole
test, for taking away the Rayles from the Communion Table; for this is a
course we never heard of in former times.

9. 9. The multiplying of their Privileges.
When their Privileges are so infinitely grown and enlarged, more than ever
they were in former Parliaments, and so swelled, that they have now swallowed
up almost all the privileges of other men; so that they alone must do what
they please, and where they will, in all Cities and in all Courts, because they
have the Privilege of Paliament.

10. When according, to the great liberty of language, 10. Their speaking and
s^ing in other Courts.
which we deny them not within their own wall, they take the Privilege to
speak what they list in other places, and to govern other Courts as they
please, where (as they did in Dublin, and do commonly in London) they sit as
Assistants with them, that are privileged by their Charters to be freed from
such Controllers.

11. When, above all that has been or can be spoken, 11. Their close Committee.
they have made a close Committee of safety, (as they call it) which in the
apprehension of all wise and honest men, is not only a course most absurd and
illegal, but also most destructive to all true Privileges, and contrary to
the equitable practice of all public meetings, that any one should be
excluded from that which concerns him as well as any of the rest; and this
Committee only, which consists of a very few of the most pragmatical Members
of their House, must have all intelligences and privy counsels received, and
reserved among themselves; and what they conclude upon must be reported to the
House, which must take all that they deliver upon trust, and with an implicit
Roman faith believe all that they say, and assent to all that they do; only
because these (forsooth) are men to be confided in, upon their bare word, The
greatness of this abuse.
(when their House has no power to administer an Oath unto any man) in the
greatest affairs, happiness or destruction of the whole Kingdom; for this is,
in a manner, to make these men Kings, more than the Roman Consuls, and so as
great a breach of Privilege and abuse of Parliament, as derogatory to his
Majesty, that called them to consult together, and as injurious to all the
people as can be named or imagined.

CHAP. XIV. Shows how they have transgressed the public laws of the Land
three ways, and of four miserable consequences of their wicked doings.
2. 2. Against the public laws of the land.
FOr those public, written, and better known laws of this Land, they have no
less violated and transgressed the same than the other, and that, as well in
their execution and exposition, as in their composition; for,

1. 1. In the execution of the old laws.
When they had caused the Archbishop of Canterbury to be committed to the
Tower, Judge Berkeley to the Sheriff of London, sir George Ratcliffe to the
Gate House, for no less crimes than high Treason, and many other men to some
other prisons for some other faults; yet all the world sees how long most of
them have been kept in prison, some a year, some two, some almost three, and
God only knows when these men intend to bring them to their legal trial;
which delay of justice, is not only an intolerable abuse to the present
subjects of this kingdom, to be so long deprived of their liberty upon a bare
surmise, but also a far greater injury to all posterity, when this president
shall be produced to be imitated by the succeeding Parliaments, and to justify
the delays of all inferior Judges.

2. 2 In expounding the laws.
Whereas we believe what judge Bracton says and Judge Britton likewise, which
lived in the time of Edward the first, Si disputatio oriatur, justiciarii non
possunt eam interpretari, sed in dubiis and obscuris, Domini regis erit
expectanda interpretatio and voluntas, cum ejus sit interpretari cujus est
condere; Citatur a Domino Elism in post-nati, p. 108
if any dispute does arise, the Judges can not interpret the same, but in all
obscure and doubtful questions, the interpretation and the will of the King is
to be expected, when as he that makes the law, is to be the expounder and
interpreter of the law; yet they have challenged and assumed to themselves such
a power, that their bare Vote without an act of Parliament, may expound or
alter a known law; which if it were so, they might make the law, as Pighius
says of the Scripture, like a nose of wax, that may be fashioned and bended
as they pleased; but we do constantly maintain, that the House of Commons
has no power to adjudge of any point or matter, but to inform the Lords what
they conceive; and the House of Peers has the power of Judicature, which they
are bound to do, according to the rules of the known established laws; and
to that end they have the Judges to inform them of those cases, and to
explain those laws, wherein themselves are not so well experienced, (though
now they sit in the House for ciphers, even as some Clergy did many times in
the Convocation;) and if any former Statute be so intricate and obscure, that
the Judges cannot well agree upon the right interpretation thereof, then (as in
explaining Poynings Act, and the like, either in England or Ireland) the makers
of the Act, that is the King and the major part of both Houses, must explain
the same.

3. 3. In composeing and setting forth new laws.
Whereas we never knew that the House had any power to make Orders and
Ordinances to bind any, (besides their own members,) to observe them as laws;
yet they compel us to obey their orders, in a stricter manner than usually we
are enjoined by Law; and this course, to make such binding ordinances as they
do, to carry the force, though not the name of an Act of Parliament, or a Law,
is a mighty abuse of our laws and liberties; for Sir Edward Cook tells us
plainly, that (as the constitution of our Government now stands,) neither the
House of Commons and the King, L. Cook in the preface of the Stat. of
Westminster the second. Lamberts Archeton 27.1.
can make any binding law, when the Peers dissent; nor the Lords and King,
when the Commonalty dissenteth; nor yet both Houses without the Kings consent;
but all three, King, Peers and Commons, must agree, before any coactive law
can be composed: Nay more, it is sufficiently proved, that dare jus populo, or
the legislative power, being one principal end of regal authority, was in
Kings by the law of nature, (while they governed the people by natural equity)
long before municipall laws or Parliaments had any being; for as the Poet
says, Remo cum fratre Quirinus -- jura dabat. Virgilius.

Hoc Priami gestamen erat, cum jura vocatis
more daret populis --
Because this was the custom of the Kings of Scythia, Assyria, Egypt, etc.
(long before Moses and Pharonaus, when municipall laws first began,) to give
laws unto their people, according to the rules of natural equity, which by
the law of nature they were all bound to observe.

And though some Kings did graciously yield and by their voluntary oaths, for
themselves and their successors, bind themselves many times, to stricter
limits, then were absolutely requisite, as William Rufus, King Stephen, Henry
the fourth, Richard the third, and the like, granted many privileges, perhaps
to gain the favor of their Subjects, against those which likely had a better
title to the Crown than themselves: or, it may be, to satisfy their people,
as the guerdon or compensation for the sufferance of some fore-passed
grievances, as Henry the first, Edward the second, Richard the second, and the
like: yet these limitations, being agreeable to equity, and consistent with
Royalty, and not forcibly extracted, ought in all truth and reason to be
observed by them. And hence it is that the Kings of this Realm, according to
the oaths and promises which they made at their Coronation, can never give,
nor repeal any law, but with the assent of the Peers and People.

But though they have thus yielded, to make no laws, nor to repeal any laws
without them; yet this voluntary concession of so much grace unto the people,
does no ways translate the legislative power from the King unto his
assistants, but that it is formaliter and subiective still in the King, and not
in them; else would the government of this Kingdom be an Aristocracy, or
Democracy, and not a Monarchy; because the supreme power of making and
repealing Laws, and governing or judging decisively according to those laws,
Cassan, in catal glorlamundi.
are two of those three things, that give being to each one of these three
sorts of government.

Therefore, the King of England, being an absolute Monarch, in his own
Kingdom, as Cassaneus says, and no man can deny it the legislative power must
needs reside solely in the King, 22 Ed. 3.3. pl. 25. Vid. The view of a printed
book, entitled, Observations, etc. where this point is proved at large p. 18,
19, 21, 22.
ut in subjecto proprio; and the consent of the Lords and Commons is no sharing
of that power, but only a condition yielded to be observed by the King, in the
use of that power: and so, both the Oath of Supremacy, and the form of all our
ancient Statutes, wherein the King speaks as the Lawmaker, do most evidently
prove the same unto us, Le Roy voit.

Neither durst any Subjects in former times either assume such a power unto
themselves, or deny the same unto their King: for you may find how the House
of Commons, denying to pass the Bill for the pardon of the Clergy, which Hen.
8. granted them, when they were all charged to be in a Praemunire, unless
themselves also might be included within the pardon, received this answer from
the King, that he was their Sovereign Lord, and would not be compelled to show
his mercy, (nor indeed could they compel him to any thing else) but seeing they
went about to restrain him of his Liberty, he would grant a pardon unto his
Clergy by his great Seal without them; Sir Rich. ^ in vita Her
though afterward of his own accord he signed their pardon also; which
brought great commendation to his judgment, to deny it at first, when it was
demanded as a right, and to grant it afterward, when it was received as of
grace. And yet the denial of their assent unto the King, is more equitable to
them, and less derogatory to him, then to make orders without him; and this
manner of compulsion, to show grace unto themselves is more tolerable, than to
force him to disgrace and displace his most faithful servants; only because
others cannot confide in them, when no criminal charge is laid against them.

And therefore for the Lords and Commons to make Orders and Ordinances without
the King, and in opposition to the King, is a mere usurpation of the Regal
power, a nullifying of the Kings power, and a making of the Royal assent,
which heretofore gave life to every law, to be an empty piece of formality,
which is indeed, an intolerable arrogance in the contrivers of these Orders and
the makers of these Ordinances, a monstrous abuse of the Subjects, and a plain
making of our good King to be somewhat like him in the Comedy, a King and no
King.

And, where as no Subject, and under favor be it spoken, not the King
himself, after he has taken his Oath at his Coronation, is free from the
observation of the established laws; yet they make themselves so far above
the reach of Law, that they freed him, which the Lord chief Justice Bramston
had committed to Newgate for felony in stealing the Countess of Rivers goods;
they hindered all men, as we found in their journall, from proceeding against
Sir Thomas Dawes; they enjoined the Judges by their orders, to forbear to
proceed in their ordinary courses, in the Courts of Justice, contrary to the
eaths of those Judges; and some Parliament men came to the Bench to forbid the
Judges to grant Habeas Corpuses, which is as great an iniquity, and as apparent
an injustice as ever was done by any Parliament.

And that which is a note above Ela, The most abominable wickedness of these
factious Rebels
above all that could be spoken, whereas the Law of God and man, the bonds and
obligations of civility and Christianity, tie us all to be dutiful and
obedient unto our King, in all things, either actively or passively, and no
ways, for no cause violently to resist him, under the greatest penalties that
can be devised here, and damnation hereafter; yet these men, contrary to all
Laws, do injoyne us and compel us, as much against our consciences, as if
they should compel us with the Pagan tyrants, to offer Sacrifice unto Idols,
to war against our most gracious Sovereign, whom we from our hearts do both
love and honor, and they proscrible us as malignants, and as enemies to the
Common wealth, if we contribute not money, horse and arms, to maintain this
ungodly war, Ps. 50.22. August. contra. Faust. l. 22. c. 75.76.
and so become deadly enemies unto our own souls. O consider this ye that
forget God, lest for tearing us, he tear you in pieces while there is none to
help you: for considering what the Apostle says, Romans 13.1.2. And what Saint
Augustine says, ordo naturalis, mortalium paci accommodatus hoc poscit, ut
suscipiendi belli authoritas atque consilium penes Principem sit; and lest men
should think, they ought by force of arms to resist their king for religion,
he answers that objection by the example of the Apostles, isti non resistendo
interfecti sunt, ut potiorem esse docerent victoriam, pro fide veritatis
occidi. We conceive this to be so execrable an act, and so odious to God and
man, that we are made thus miserable, and abused beyond measure, to have our
Religion, which is most glorious, our Laws, that in their own nature are most
excellent, The miserable consequences of their wicked doings. 1 Mischief.
and our Liberties, that make us as free as any Subjects in the World, under
false pretenses, and the shadows of religion, laws and liberties, to be
eradicated, and fundamentally destroyed; whereby,

1. We are made a spectacle of scorn, 1. Mischief.
and the object of derision to our neighbor Nations, that formerly have envied
at our happiness; and we are become the subject of all pity and lamentation,
to all them that love us.

2. As in the Roman civil wars, in the time of Metellus, 2. Mischife.
the the son did kill his own Father; so now by the subtilty of this faction,
we are cast into such a war as is.

1. A most unnatural War, the son against the Father, and the Father against
the Son: the Earl of Warwick fights for the Parliament, and my Lord Rich his
Son is with the King: the Earl of Dover is with the King, and my Lord Rochford
his Son with the Parliament: so one brother against another, as the Earl of
Northumberland with the Parliament, and his brother with the King; the Earl of
Bedford with the Parliament and his brother with the King; Master Perpoiat with
the Parliament, and the Earl of Newark with the King; Devoreux Farmer with the
parliament, and his brother Thomas farmer, together with his brother in law my
Lord Cockain with the King, and the like: and of Cosens without number, the one
part with the King, and the other with the parliament: and if they do this in
subtilty to preserve their estate, I say it is a wicked policy to undo the
kingdom, which all wise men should consider:

2. A most irreligious war, when one Christian, of the same professed religion,
shall bath his Sword, and wash his hands in the blood of his fellow Christian,
and his fellow protestant, that shall be coheire with him of the same Kingdom.

3. A most unnatural, irreligious, and barbarous War, when the Subject shall
shall take Arms, to destroy or unthrone their own liege, a Religious and most
gracious King.

3. 3 Mischief.
The Service of God in most Churches is neglected, when almost all the ablest,
gravest, and most O thodox Divines and Preachers are persecuted, plundered,
imprisoned, and driven to fly (as in the time of the Arian or Donatist, which
was worse than the heathen persecution) from City to City, and to wander in
Deserts from place to place, to save themselves from the hands of these Rebels
against the King, and persecuters of Gods Church: which is a most grievous and
a most cruel persecution, far more general than that of the Anabaptists in
Germany, or of Queen Mary here in England: the Lord of Heaven make us
constant, and give us patience to endure it.

4. 4 Mischief.
The whole Kingdom is, and shall be yet more, by the continuance hereof,
unspeakably impoverished, and plunged into all kind of miseries; when the
I'ravailer cannot pass without fear, nec hospes ab hospite tutus, the Carrier
cannot transport his commodity, but it shall be intercepted, the Husbandman
cannot till his ground, but his horses, as my self saw it, shall be taken
from the Plough, and his Corn shall be destroyed when it is ready for the
Sickle, which must be the forerunner of a famine, that is ever the Usher to
introduce the Plague and Pestilence, and all other kind of grievous Diseases;
and these things put together, do set wide our gates, and open our ports, to
bring foreign foes into our Coasts to possess that good Land, whereof we are
unworthy; because with the Israelites we loathed Manna, we were weary of our
peace and happiness; we would buy arms and be volunteers, and every Town
being too wanton, would needs train and put themselves into a posture of
defense, as they termed it, to be secured from their own shadows; and though
the King told them often, there was no cause of their Jealousies, and therefore
forbade these disloyalties; yet just like the Jews they were willing to be
deceived by this miserable faction, that contrived that Act whereby they have
persidiously overreached both our good King, and the rest of our wel-meaning
brethren, either to perfect their design, or else, to make themselves
perpetual Dictators, and to betray the felicity of all our people, under the
name of Parliament; which though (as I said before) I honor and love, as much
as any of the truest Patriots of either House, both in the institution and the
right prosecution thereof, that is, as it was constituted, to be the great
Council of the Kingdom graciously called by his Majesty's writ, considently
to present the grievances of the people, and humbly to offer their advice and
counsels for their reformation; yet I do abhor those, men, that would abuse
the word Parliament, only as a stalking-Horse to destroy all Acts of
Parliament; and I hate to see men calling the fanatique actions of a few
desperate seditious persons, the proceedings of Parliament, and others (making
an Idol of it, as if their power were omnipotent or unlimited and more than any
regal power, their judgment infallible, their Orders irreprehensible, and
themselves unaccountable for their proceedings) to be so besotted with the name
of it, that this bare shadow without the substance, for it is no Parliament
without the King; and the Major part of both houses is either banished, or
imprisoned, Ingeniosus ad blasphemiant.
or compelled to reside with his Majesty) should so bewitch us, (as Master
Smith blushed not to say, nothing could free us from our dangers but the
Divinity of a Parliament) out of our own happiness to become more miserable,
then heretofore this Kingdom has ever been by any civil War: for if you
will consider, the Treasons and rebellions, the injustice, cruelty and
inhumanity, the subtilty, hypocrisy, lying, swearing, blasphemy, profaneness
and Sacrilege in the highest pitch, and many other the like fearful sins,
that have been committed since the beginning of this Parliament, by the sole
means of this faction, and observe the ill acts that have been used by them
to compass things lawful, and the wicked acts that have been daily practiced
to procure things unlawful (when by blood and rapine and the curses of many
fatherless and widows, they have gotten the Treasures of the Kingdom, and
the wealth of the Kings loyal Subjects into their hands, and wasted it so,
that their wants are still as notorious as their crimes) we may admire the
miracles of Gods mercy, and the bottomless depth of his goodness, that the
stones in the streets have not risen against them, or the fire from Heaven had
not consumed these Rebels, that thus far and thus insolently had tempted Gods
patience, and provoked him to anger with such horrible abominations.

5. The fifth mischief.
As Jerusalem justified Samaria, so this Faction has just fied all the
Romanists, and showed themselves worse Christians, less Subjects, and viler
Traitors than all the Papists are; for these facticus rebels justify their
Rebellion, and to the indeleble shame of their profession, they maintain that
it is not only lawful, but that it is their duty to bear Arms, and to w^ge
War against their King, when the King does abuse his power: whereas the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome * Christopherson, tract. contr. rebel. Rhemist.
in Nov. Test. p. 301. Goldastus de Monarchia S. Imper. Romans to. 3. Dr. Kellison
in his Survey. Aquin de Regim. Princip. c. 6. Council. Constan Sess. 15.
Stephan. Cantuar. Ando. 8. H. 3. Tolet. in summa. l. 5. c. 6. Gr. Valentia. p.
2. q. 64. Bellar. Apol. c. 13. Lessins l. 2. c. 9. Serrarius. Azorius, etc.
utterly denies the same, and concludes them no Children of the Church that do
it: and Doctor Kellison gives this reason for it, because Faith is not
necessarily required to Jurisdiction or Government; neither is authority lost
by the loss of Faith; therefore it is not lawful for any Subjects to rebel
against their King, though their King should prove a Tyrant, or should apostate
from the Faith of Christ; so that now the Papists boast, they are better
Subjects than these rebellious protestants: and therefore I fear that this
Faction (Defendens Christum, verso mucrone cecidit) By their unjust defigne to
propagate the Gospel, have most grievously wounded the Faith of Christ, and
given a more deady blow to the protestant religion than ever it had since the
reformation when it is impossible that the true religion should produce,
rebellion.

And therefore seeing we are free borne Subjects, and persons interessed in the
good and safety of this Kingdom, as well as any of them, we must crave liberty
to express our grievances, and to crave redresses; and seeing my self am
called to be a Preacher of Gods Word, and a Bishop over many of the souls of
my brethren, for which I must render an account to my God, both for my silence
when I should speak, and speaking any thing that should not be spoken, I
resolved to fear my God, and neither out of flattery to the King and his
party, nor out of hatred or malice to those factious men, but as I am persuaded
in my conscience, fully satisfied and guided by Gods Truth, to set forth this
discovery of these mysteries, what danger soever I shall undergo; and if I
shall become their enemy for speaking truth, I shall fare no worse than S. Paul
did; and it shall be with them, if they do not repent, as it was with the
Israelites, Ezekiel. 7 25, 27.
When their destruction comes, they shall seek peace, and shall not have it,
but calamity shall come upon calamity.

CHAP. XV. Shows a particular recapitulation of the Reasont, whereby their
Design to alter the Government of the Church and State is evinced; and a
patheticall disswasion from Rebellion.
ANd thus I have set down not any thing to render these men more odius then
they are, If I have beer misinformed of any thing that shall appear false, I
shall not blush to retract it by an ingenious confession.
or to abuse my Reader with falsehood or uncertainties, but to report what I
knew, and what I collected out of the present writings of best credit, and
attested by men of known truth and integrity, whereby it is most apparent to
any discerning eye, that the faction of Anabaptists, and Brownists, and some
other of the subtillest heads in the House of Commons, had from the first
convention of this Parliament secretly projected this design, and insensibly
to the rest of their wel-meaning brethren, prosecuted the same, to alter and
change the ancient government both of the Church and Kingdom, which the author
of Sober sadness proves by these subsequent reasons: Sober Sadness, p. 44, 45,
46.
as (for the first,)

1. By suspending all Ecclesiastical laws and censures; Their design to
change the Church Government, proved 4 ways.
which indulgence of all vices has drawn all offenders to comply with them.

2. By setting the people on work to petition against the present Government,
and the Service of the Church.

3. By the Bill concluded for the abolishing of our Government.

4. By the chief persons countenanced and employed by them in that business,
who are Anabaptists and Brownists, and all sorts of Sectaries; he evinceth
their design to change our our Church Government, and to convert the patrimony
of the Church, which our religious Ancestors dedicated for the advancement of
Gods worship, not to establish learning and a preaching Ministry as they
pretended, but to dis-ingage their public faith, which otherwise would never
prove a saving faith.

And I wish there might be none about His Majesty, that pretending great
loyalty unto him, do comply with them herein, and either to raise or to secure
their own fortunes, would perwade S. Paul to part with S. Peter's keys, so he
may still hold the sword in his hand; or to speak more plainly, to purchase
the peace of the Commonwealth with the ruin of Gods Church; but for this let
me be bold,

1. To crave leave to tell His Majesty, it was not His sword that has brought
him from a flying Prince out of Westminster, and as yet unsecured at
Nottingham, to be a victorious King at Edgehill, and immediately to be the
terror of all the Rebels in London; but it was God, whose Church and Church-
Service he defended, that protected him hitherto, and gave him the victory in
battle, and let him be assured that he, which is yea and amen, will be his
shield and buckler still, to defend him from the strivings of his people, and to
subdue them that rise against him, while he defends them, whose eyes next
under God, are only fixed on him, to be as God has promised, their nursing
father.

2 To assure those that would suffer the Church to fall, or perhaps sell the
same out of a by-respect unto themselves, that taking their rise from the fall
of the Church, or laying the foundation of their houses in the ruin of the
Clergy, they do but build upon the sands, whence they shall fall, and their
fall shall be great, 1 Reg. 16.34. ^sh. 6.26.
when the success thereof shall be as the success of the City of Jericho, that
was built by Hiel, who laid the foundation of it in Abiram his first borne, and
set up the gates thereof in Segub his youngest son, and had her destiny
described by Joshua; and all the possessions that they shall get, shall prove
Acheldama's, fields of blood; and we hope God will raise deliverance to his
Church from some better men, when as they and their fathers house shall all
perish, and shall stink in the nostrils of all good men for their
perfidiousnesse in Gods cause.

But if any man should demand why we suspect any Traitors or false Counselors
to be in Kings Courts: I answer, because Saint Paul says, Oportet esse
hareses; and I believe the purest Court has no more privilege to be free from
Traitors, then the Church from Heretics; and you know there was one of eight
in Noah's Arc, and another of twelve in Christ his Court; and he that was so
near him, as to dip his hand with him in the dish, was the first that flew in
his face, and yet with a hayle Master, and with a kiss: two fair testimonies
of true love.

Therefore, let no King in Christendom think it strange that his Court should
have Flatterers, Traitors, or evil Counselors; let not us be blamed for
saying this; and let not Pym so foolishly charge our King for evil Counselors;
for certainly did he know them, I make no question but he would discard them:
or could I, or any other inform his Majesty who they are, and that it were an
easy matter, dicier, hic est; we would not be afraid to pull off their vails,
and to say, as Christ did to Judas, Thou art the man; but their Meandrian
windings, their Sirens voices, and their Judas kisses, are as a fair mantle,
to conceal and cover Ioabs treason, even perhaps to betray some of the wisest
in the Parliament, as well as some of them have betrayed the King. In such a
case, all I can say is this; Memento diffidere was Epicharmus his Motto; the
honest plain dealing man that does things for Religion, not for ends, is the
unlikeliest man to betray his Master; and few Counselors are not so apt to
breed so many Traitors as a multitude; it was the indiscretion of Rehoboam that
lost him ten parts of twelve, to prefer young Counselors before the ancient
* Seldom discretion in youth attends great and sudden fortunes. In vita
Henric. 3.
; and if we may believe that either paupertas, or necessitas cogit ad turpia,
or the fable of the ulcerated traveller, They that are to make their fortunes
are apter to sell Church and State, and to betray King and Kingdom, rather then
those that have sufficiently replenished their coffers, and enlarged their
possessions. But I assure my self the mouth of malice cannot deny, but that
our King has been as wary and as wise in the choice of his Servants, Officers,
and Counselors, so far as eyes of flesh can see, in all respects, as in any
Prince in Christendom, and more by man cannot be done.

And for the second, Their design to change the Government of the State,
showed.
that is, their design to change the Government of the State, and to work the
subversion of the Monarchy: he evinceth it,

1 By that Declaration upon the Earl of Straffords suffering, 1. Way.
that this example might not be drawn to a president for the future; because
they thought that themselves, intending to do the like, and to become guilty of
the same crimes, might by virtue of this Declaration be secured from the
punishment, if things should succeed otherwise then they hoped.

2 By the pulling down of so many Courts of Justice, 2. Way.
which may perhaps relieve the Subjects from some pressures, but encourage many
more in licentiousness, and prove the Prodromes to the ruin of our Monarchy.

3 By those 19. 3. Way.
Propositions, whereby the King was in very deed, The Letter. p. 11.
demanded to lay down his Crown, and to compound with them for the same;
because (as another says) therein, there was presented to him a perfect
platform of a total change of Government, by which the Counselors, indeed,
were to have been Kings, and the King in name to have become scarce a
Counselor, and nothing of the present State to have remained, but the very
names and titles of our Governors.

4 By that expression (so little understood by many men, 4. Way.
and yet so much talked of in many of their papers) of a power of re-assuming
the trust, which is falsely pretended to be derived unto his Majesty, by the
mere humane pactions and agreement of the politic body of the people, which
I showed unto you to be a most false and a mere invented suggestion.

5 By their pretending to, 5. Way.
and according to this doctrine their usurping of the power of the Militia both
by sea and land.

6 By their actual exercising of this power, 6. Way.
in disposing of Offices, Generals, Colonels, Captains, and the like places of
command in War, and appointing their Speaker Master of the Rolls, and other
Officers of Peace.

6 By the expression of one of them to Sir Edward Dering, 7. Way.
while he was yet of their Cabinet Counsel, that if they could bring down the
Lords to the House of Commons, and make the King as one of the Lords, then the
whole work were done; that is, to make the Government of this Kingdom popular.

8 I may add to these, 8. Way.
as another unanswerable Argument of this Design, the licencing of Master
Pryn's Book of The sovereign Authority of Parliaments, and suffering the same
to pass unquestioned to this very day; because that Book devesteth the King
of all his Soveraigntie, and makes our Government Aristecraticall.

And this subversion of our Monarchical Government was the last Design, if
not the grand Design of this Faction: not that all the Members, which have
voted all or most of those things that tended to this change, or be still
remaining in either House, did intend any ill either to Church or State (for I
know many, especially my ever honored Lord, the Earl of Pembroke and
Montgomery, who, I dare avouch it in truth and honesty, did ever, and as I
believe does still bear a most upright heart, and as sincere intentions (how
soever perhaps by a misunderstanding his Lordship and the rest of those well
meaning men may be misguided, as were those honest men that followed Absolon)
both to Gods Service, the Kings Honor, and the happiness both of Church and
Commonwealth, as any man in the Kingdom) but that a Faction, it may be very
few at first, have insensibly seduced the rest to effect their own Design; and
this Faction is all that I mean by the name of Parliament, throughout this
whole Treatise; because their subtlety has prevailed over the plain
integrity of the other well-minded men, to make up the major part of the
House, both of the Lords and Commons; which thing has often happened both in
General Councels, and great Parliaments, as in the Council of Constans and
Trent, and many others, and that Parliament which was branded with the name of
Parliamentum insanum, and the other somewhat like this, Tempore Hen. 3.
in quo jngulum Ecclesiae atrocius petebatur, and the like; for otherwise, I do
both honor, and reverence this Parliament rightly understood, and every Member
of the same, as much as any discreet Member can desire.

And therefore having thus discovered and displayed the Plots and practices of
these infernal instruments, to insinuate their assistance unto the Scots, and
their allurements of them to invade our Kings Dominions; to ensnare the Irish,
and to provoke the Papists, to such a Rebellion as has been the utter ruin
and destruction of many millions of men; to obscure the glory of this noble
Kingdom, to alter the Discipline, and corrupt the Doctrine of the most
glorious and the purest Church, that professes the Name of Christ, and to
bring us all, and all our posterity to extreme miseries, to suffer yet more
then we have endured, or that can be hitherto imagined; and considering those
bloody Treasons that have been publicly uttered and openly practiced against
the sacred Person of our Sovereign; I may justly say, that as the sins of
the Israelites, and their impetuous calling for a King, moved the Lord to send
them a King in his anger; so our sins, and our impatient crying for a
Parliament, made our God to send us a Parliament in his wrath, that will never
turn for our blessing till we return to God from our sins; for when I
consider on the one side, the piety and goodness of our King, the justness
of his cause, and the most ready and cordial valor, as well in the common
Soldiers as the Commanders of a full and sufficient Army; and on the other
side, the multitude of disloyal and seduced Subjects, the vigilancie and
subtlety of their Commanders, with their unlimited ways to get moneys; and on
both sides, the desire of too many, not for the honor of the King, nor the
peace of the Kingdom to end the War, but to continue the same for their own
advantage, until the wealth of Lawyers, Clergy, and Gentry, be transplanted
to the possessions of other Masters, I am afraid it will prove an heavy
judgment; and therefore, lest our obstinacy in our sins should procure the
continuance of Gods anger, which being removed will soon remove all our
miseries; let me persuade all conscientious men, especially the Gentry, and all
other understanding men, (howsoever the Citizens that deceive the Kingdom of
their wealth, delight to be deceived in their faith) that would not be cheated
of their Religion by these factious Mountebankes, and that would not provoke
God to say, I have no pleasure in them, to turn from their rebellious courses,
to listen no longer to those furious firebrarnds, that out of their now
Divinity, contrary to the Doctrine of all the ancient Fathers, and all the
Orthodox and grave Preachers of this Kingdom, do incite the People unto this
unnaturally bloody War, and to slander the footsteps of Gods Anointed; because
they know him not, and to remember the Oaths of their Allegiance and
Supremacy, together with their late Protestation, whereby they stand obliged
to their uttermost power to maintain his Majesty's Royal Person, Crown, and
Dignity, against all treacherous practices, that may any ways dishonor or
impair them: and then I presume their consciences will disavow the proceedings
of these Proj^ctours, protest against all their Ordinances, that are made
against or without the Kings consent, advise all the Knights and Burgesses to
Vote no more against their Sovereign, and to make no further use of the trust
they reposed in them, to murder us and our fellow Subjects under the pretense
of shedding the blood of the ungodly; or if they still go on to abuse that
trust, (to make us yet more miserable) to withdraw themselves and their trust
and power of representation from them, and to join their uttermost assistance
unto his Majesty to protect him, that he may be enabled to protect us, and to
overwhelme the Robels into the same pit which they have made for us.

And this may be, by dissolving the knot of factious members wherein we see our
miseries involved, and to make elections of new members into their places, that
with the rest of the Lords and Commons, which were faithful both to the
Church, King, and Kingdom, shall call them to a strict account, for betraying
our trust, interrupting our peace, opposing his Majesty, and violating all our
ancient liberties.

Or if a better way may be found, let us follow the same to Gods glory, and to
produce the peace and happiness of this Kingdom; lest, if we persist
obstinately in this wilful rebellion, to withstand Gods Ordinance, to oppose
his anointed, and to shed so much innocent blood, we shall, thus fighting
against heaven, so far provoke the wrath of the God of Heaven, as that the
glory of Israel shall be darkened, the honor of this nation shall be trodden
under foot, and be made the scorn of all other nations round about us, and the
light of our Candlestick shall be extinguished, and we shall all become most
miserable; because we would not hearken to the voice of the Lord our God, which
I hope we will do, and do most earnestly pray that we may do it, to the glory
of God, the honor of our King, and the happiness of this whole Kingdom,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be praise and dominion; both now and for
ever. Amen.

AN APPENDIX.
THe man of God speaking of transcendent wickedness, Deu. 32.2.
says, Their Vine is of the Vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah:
their Grapes are grapes of Gall, their Clusters are bitter; their Wine is the
poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Aspes: and I believe never any
wickedness des^rved better to be clad with this elegant expression, then that
threefold iniquity. 1. The unparalled Vote. 2. The intolerable Ordinance. 3.
The damnable Covenant, which the rebellious faction in Parliament have most
impiously contrived, to make up the full measure of their impiety, since the
writing of my discoveries; for,

1. Omitting that horrible practice of those rebellious blood-thirsty Soul
lie's that did their best to murder their own most gracious Queen; this
faction seeing how God prevented that plot, voted this most loving and most
loyal wife to be impeached or High Treason, for being faithful to do her
uttermost endeavor (which will be her everlasting praise) to assist her most
dear and Royal husband, (their own Liege Lord and Sovereign King) in his
greatest extremities, against a virulent mighty faction of most malicious
Traitors; the strangest Treason that ever the world heard of.

2. They made an Ordinance for the composing and convocating of such a Synod
(whereof I said somewhat before) of Lay men, ignorant men, factious men,
traitorous men, and such concretion of heterogeneall parts, like
Nebuchadnezzars image, gold, brass, and clay, all mixed together, and all so
ordered, limited and bridled, (as it is expressed in the 5. and 6. page of
their Ordinance) by the power of both Houses, where there are such abundance of
Schismatic and seditious members, that I should scarce put the worst
sensitive soul to profess that erraticall faith, or any bruit beast to be
guided by that Eccl^asticall discipline, that such factious Traitors (as some
of the are like to be proved) should compose, or cause to be composed.

3. They composed a form of a sacred Vow, or Covenant ((...) they term it)
or, as it is indeed, the Covenant of Hell, a Covenant against God, to overthrow
the Gospel of Christ under the name of Christ: which Covenant is the Oil that
swimm^ uppermost upon the waters, that is, the Oil of Scorpions, or (as Moses
says) the poison of Dragons, so lately wringed and d^fused far and near, to
defile and destroy millions of souls* when, forgetting their faith to God, and
the Oaths of their Allegiance (so often and so solemnly taken by many or most
of them) to be faithful unto their King, they shall be compelled (which is one
degree worse then the vow of them that bound themselves with a curse, neither
to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul; so hypocritically, so perjuredly,
so rebelliously, (...) horribly, and so bloodily, to make such a fearful Vow,
and such an abominable Covenant, so wickedly contrived, that without great and
serious repentance, spitteth forth nothing but fire and brimstone, and can
produce nothing else but hell and damnation to all that take it, especially to
them that will compel men to be thus transcendently wicked, as if they would
send them with Corah quick to Hell. All which triplicity of evil I shall leave
to some abler and more eloquent pen, to be set forth more fully in the right
colors, that being suff^ciently displayed, they may be thoroughly detested of
all good men. Amen.

O Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to to keep thy Laws.
ERRATA.
Page 24. lin. 11. for malicious, read heavy. page 98. lin. 1. rea^ somewhat
like him, etc.

FINIS.

