THE SEALED FOVNTAINE opened to the Faithful, and their Seed. OR, A short
Treatise, showing, that some Infants are in the state of Grace, and capable of
the seals, and others not. Being the chief point, wherein the Separatists do
blame the Anabaptists.

By JOHN WILKINSON, Prisoner at Colchester, against John Morton Prisoner at
London.

Satis est cui contingit nitil am^lius opiat.


ISA. 59. 21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them says the Lord; My
Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth nor out of the mouth of thy seed; nor out of the mouth
of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth, and for ever.

ISA. 65. 23. They shall not labor in vain nor bring forth for trouble: for
they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their off spring with them.

ACT. 2. 38. The promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to all that are
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

To all that love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity, and fervently desire a further
revealing of the mysteries of his Kingdom, Grace, Mercy and Peace be
multiplied, etc.
BEloved Brethern and Sisters in our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: This
little Treatise being composed by one of my ancient Brethren departed in the
Faith, was left in my cust^die for the public good: and therefore considering
how needful it would be to be published rather then ^bscured, I thought none
was more fit to have the special use thereof then those who have the spirit of
discerning, through the knowledge of the Word of Truth, whereby to perceive the
manifest difference between Babels Brats, and SIONS Babes; for the which
respect I have presented it chiefly unto you, entreating you to peruse it with
understanding, and weigh it with discretion; and as the Noble Men of Berea did,
so do ye, search and examine whether the scope thereof be agreeable to the
Scriptures or no.

There are many which strive to enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but are not
able, Luke 13, 24.
because they want Faith Heb, 18, ^9.
which is the gift of GOD Ephe, 2, 8.
GOD can give his gifts to whom he pleases, Luk, 12, 2.
but he will not do all which he can do Exo, 19, 19
though he can do all that he will do. Mat, 19, ^6
To think it any deficiencie in GOD, because he does not, or
unbountifullnesse, because he will not, argues a carnal and sensual
disposition. GOD could have spared the infants of the flood from dr^wning, Gen,
7, 4.
and Sodoms seed from burning. Genesis 18. 24,
He could have spared the first borne of the Egyptians, Ex, 12, 29
and might have left out that Commandment where the Children of Idolaters were
commanded to be slain with their Idolatrous Parents: 1 Samuel 1 3.
but he would not, because it stood not with his Justice; it was his will and
pleasure so to do, who does what he will in heaven and in earth, etc. and who
dare control him? Dan. 4, Psalm, 135,
GOD is as good as his word, who has in all ages from the beginning visited
the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth
generation, and will do so to the end, Exo, 10
GODS two witnesses Isa, 29, Psalm, 119 105,
can produce many examples hereof: we have the Law Prophesies and Gospel, whose
testimony none ought to refuse under pain of damnation.

But it is the property of those who are unlearned (in God's Law) and unstable
(in their ways Iam. 1. 8
) to wrest the Scripture to their own destruction: 2 Pet, 3, ^6
or else seek to restrain the power and efficacy thereof, much like to the
four Angels which John saw stand upon the four corners of the Earth to hold
the four winds of the Earth that they should not blow, Rev. 7. 1. Of this sort
are those which would seek to withold the Covenant of the Gospel from Ezra 9,
2. Psalm, 128,
holy Infants, o the young ^live plants * of believing Parents; it is apparent
that to pluck up these plants is to pluck up the plants which the right hand
of our heavenly Father has planted, Mat 19, 13, 14, 15.
which are the Children of those Parents upon whom GOD has promised to write
his own name, and the name of his holy City.

That just God which did break off the natural branches, the Jews for
unbeliefes sake, together with Exodus, 15, 25,
their seed, the same God has by his own right hand graffed us in their stead,
Rom, 11, 19, 20,
and shall we presume to imagine that he forgot our seed? Mose's who was guided
by the Spirit of God forgot not the seed of the faithful: Deuteronomy, 32,
sure I am (Christ being more faithful in his House then ever Moses was, Heb,
3, 2, 3.
has not made a separation between the faithful and their seed: but
remembers his Covenant (saying) I will be a GOD unto thee, and unto thy Seed,
etc. Gen, 17, 7
seeing that God is their God, they are his People; and such are visible
members of Christ's Church, which is his Body, and Mount Sion, in which place
GOD has promised the blessing, even life unto eternity Psa, 133, 3
.

Therefore in what a woeful condition are those who say all Infants are in one
Ia, 2, 13,
condition, and that no Infants are under the Covenant of Grace: herein they
seek to bind that which God never bound, and to loose that which God never
loosed: v He, 13, 8,
for Jesus Christ is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. Thus when they
have brought forth in outward action, that which they had in conception, it
tends to the destruction of the Covenant of the Lord of glory, which is the
bond of all Christian communion and fellowship.

And those which say that the Infants of Believers have no part in this
Covenant, let them tell us in what estate they be; if they say they are to be
accounted in the state of salvation, then they must needs grant that they are
to be accounted within the Covenant of grace, to whom the outward privileges
of the Covenant do belong Rev, 22, 14.
If they say they are in the state of damnation; and have no promise at all;
but are as the Children whom GOD 2 Pet, 3, 20, 21, Isa, 34, 9, 10.
destroyed with their wicked Parents, some with water, others with fire and
brimstone, etc. I say and will affirm, that this their Doctrine has sprung
from a bitter root: it tends to make the lives of all Infants bitter, because
thereby they make bitter means of the preservation of the life of their souls.

In this they are like to the fallen Star whose name was wormwood, which fell
into the third part of the Rivers and Fountains of waters, and made them
bitter. Rev, 8, 10 11,
But there is a River (which always runs, and a Fountain which always
flows) the streams thereof makes glad the City of GOD, Psalm, 46, 5
by watering the Olive trees, upon which do grow the Olive branches, which
branches are the Infants of Believers, in whose life the Parents have joy, in
whose death they have comfort; because their mourning for them is mixed with
hope, 1 These, 4, 13,
and this their hope is grounded upon Gods everlasting and unchangable promises
Acts 2, 39
made unto them in Christ, which is a motive to move them to love their
heavenly Father, because as he has made them holy, so also has he made their
Children holy 1 Cor, 7, 14,
which are reconciled to God with their Parents: who are by the will of our
heavenly Father sanctified in their life, blessed in their death, and shall
also be glorified at their resurrection: for the second death shall have no
power over them, Deuteronomy, 33, 29
because they are blessed, and holy, Rev. 20, 6
having part in Christ who is the resurrection and the life, John 11, 25,
to whom with the Father and the blessed Spirit be all glory, throughout all
generations. Amen.

Your affectioned Brother in the Patience and Faith of the Saints, William
Arthurbury.

Psalm. 37. 25
I have been young, also I am waxt old: and I have not seen the Justman
forsaken, and his seed seeking bread. 26. All the day, he shows grace and
lends: and his seed, are in the blessing.

A reproof of some things written by John Morton, and others of his Company and
followers, to prove That Infants are not in the state of Condemnation; And that
therefore they are not to be Baptized.
By John Wilkinson, a Prisoner in Colchester, for the Patience and Faith of the
Saints. 1613.
FIRST, they write of Infants, as if concerning salvation and damnation the
estate of all Infants were alike, which is not true, but very erroneous: for
some Infants are in the estate of salvation; and those so far as they may be
discerned, are to be baptized, for a testimony thereof. And others are in the
estate of damnation; and these so far as may be discerned, are not to be
baptized.

That some Infants are of the seed of the Serpent, a^ some of the seed of the
Woman, I presume no reasonable man will deny.

That God has put enmity between those two seeds from the beginning, is
manifest Genesis 3. 15. and 4. 8. and 25. 22. The seed of the Woman was adopted in
Christ before the world was, Ephesians. 1. 5. and were given him of his Father for
an heritage, Ioh. 17. 6, 10. and that to this end that he should give unto them
eternal life, Ioh. 17. 2. and that he should not loose one of them, ver. 12.
but that he should raise them up in the last day, Ioh. 6. 44, 54.

Now therefore it is a sure truth, that not any that be of the seed of the Woman
are at any time in the state of damnation; and that some Insants are of the
seed of the Woman, no man that has any illumination will deny.

Concerning such therefore, their saying is true, that Infants are not under the
state of damnation; to wit, those that be of the seed of the Woman.

Again, it is not to be doubted, but that some Insants are or the seed of the
Serpent, and such are even enemies to the seed of the Woman, and those were
known to God before the world was; and for all such condemnation was prepared
from the beginning; and they are reserved of God unto the day of vengeance; and
such are never but in the state of damnation.

Thus therefore it may appear, that to say that Infants are not in the state of
condemnation, in respect of some Infants is true, and in respect of other
Infants, is false.

In that therefore they speak of Infants indefinitely, without noteing whether
they speak of all Infants, or but of some, they deal loosly; for if they speak
of all, they speak untruth; if they speak but of some, they do but trifle But
in that they speak of Instants, as though they were all of one condition, they
bewray manifest ignorance concerning the truth, which is that some Infants are
in the state of condemnation, and some are not: and therefore they which speak
of Infants in this case, should not speak indefinitely, but by distinction.

Secondly, to free Infants from being under the state of condemnation, they
imagine them to be without sin. But if Infants were without sin, then
should death have no power over them; for death is the reward of sin, Rom 6.
23. And the same soul that sins shall dye, Ezekiel. 18. 4. 20. Seeing therefore
death has power over Infants, it is a plain case, that Infants are not without
sin as they may imagine.

Thirdly, the ground from which they gather Infants to be without sin is
this, that Infants have transgressed no Law of God, because they are incapable
of any.

In this they shoot short, for it does not follow, that because Infants have
not transgressed as they are Infants therefore they have not transgressed at
all. They transgressed before they were Infants, that is to say, in the loins
of Adam, even as Levi paid Tithes in the loins of Abraham, Heb. 17. 9, 10.

And if Infants be without sin, then let them tell me how sin by one man
entered into the world, as the Apostle testifies, Romans 5. 12. 19. Till then let
this be the conclusion, That as that which is bred of a Serpent, is not without
venom, so that which is bred of a sinner is not without sin.

And thus is diminished all that which they have said, to prove, that God has
given no Law to Infants, for all Infants were in the loins of Adam when the
Law was given unto him, and when he transgressed the same; sundry broken
^reames they have whereby they are strengthened in their errors.

First, they conceive that because Infants were not alive in their own persons
apart from Adam when the Law was given him, that therfo^e the Law given to Adam
does nothing at all concern Infants, but was only given to Adam, and Hevah.
But they should consider, First, that Adam and Hevah were such public
persons, as they not only repreented all mankind; but were all mankind both
when the Law was given unto them, and when they transgressed the same and that
therefore the Law given to them was given to all mankind in them; and they
transgressing that Law, all mankind transgressed the same in them, as before I
have said.

Again, they should consider, that if Infants had been alive in their own
persons distinct from Adam when the Law was given, and he trangressed it, then
could not Adam sin have hurt them, for the son shall not die for the
Father: but when a man is a sinner against God, as Adam was, God may justly
when he makes him a Father, make him the Father of a sinner, as he did Adam,
and so visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and
fourth generation, Exodus 20. 5.

Another conceit they have, out of which the former arises, and that is this,
that forasmuch as the Law has dominion over a man so long as he lives,
therefore the Law given to Adam concerns not Infants, because they were not
then alive.

But if this be a sound collection, let them tell me how sin came into the
world? and how God visites the sinners of the Fathers upon the Children? As for
the dominion which the Law has over a man so long as he lives, it is like the
dominion which a man has over his Wife; which is, that she may not be unto
another Man so long as her Husband lives: but if her Husband be dead, then may
she lawfully be unto another man. So man is under the dominion of the Law
until in the body of Christ 'he be dead unto the Law, and so freed from the
Law to be unto another, to wit Christ. This is that which the Apostle says,
Romans 7. 1. 6.

And now I pray you, who being of good understanding, would have gathered from
this place, that because Infants were not alive when the Law was given to Adam;
therefore that Law had no power over them?

Another nice conceit they have, that because the soul is given of God, that
therefore the body and soul in every Infant is first created apart, and
afterward joined together in one.

And out of this they gather again, that the soul coming from God must needs
be good, and therefore without sin until it be joined with the body, and then
have a Law given, and finally transgress that Law. Out of these principles it
seems to them, that they may undeniably conclude, that Infants are without
sin.

How the body and soul come together in Infants, I dare not dispute, that
passes my capacity; But if this be true which they imagine, that Infants are
without sin, how comes it to pass that all Infants as they grow up to
discern things, do bring forth the fruits of sin? Whence comes it that they
lust after evil, and transgress the Law? It is a sure truth, that if Infants
were without sin, they could not bring forth the fruits thereof.

Seeing therefore all Infants which live and grow up do bring forth the fruits
of sin, it may not with truth be denied, but that Infants have the seed and
root of Sin cleaving to their nature, which makes them by neture the Children
of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3.

Thirdly, they conceive because Infants have not understanding, to discern
between good and evil; Therefore the Law and sin concerns them no more then
it does the unreasonable creatures.

This is a very unreasonable collection to imagine Infants which are a part of
mankind, and are sprung out of Adams loins, to be free from the taint and
pollution of Adams sin; as the bruit creatures of other kinds be; does any
creature but mankind only grow up tobe an idolater, blasphemer, adulterer, etc.

If Infants were without sin as other creatures be, mankind would no more
become such, then other creatures do; Seeing therefore Infants grow up to be
such, it is manifest the root of Sin is in their nature.

Lastly, they gather, that if Infants we^e not without sin Christ would not
have said to his Disciples, That except they should convert, and become as a
iittle Child, they should not enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Neither have
put his hands on them and blessed them, if they had not been always without
sin.

If this collection be good, then none can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
except they have been always without sin, and such as never transgressed any
Law; for first they imagine Infants to be without sin, as being such as have
transgressed no Law.

And Secondly, that in this respect, Christ said to his Disciples, that except
they be converted and become as a little child (that is, without sin, and
such as have transgressed no Law, they could not enter into the Kingdom of
heaven.

Thus, thick is the darkness wherewith these men are overwhelmed, and yet they
imagine that they only are in the true light, and all that are not of their
mind are in darkness.

But that which our Savior teaches concerning converting and becoming like
little children, that his Disciples should not be proud, nor highminded to
exalt themselves, and desire to be great and of high degree: but that they
should submit themselves in all things unto God, as Children do to those whom
they stand in awe of; This is that which Christ taught his Disciples, and this
is that which all must do which enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, even submit
themselves under the mighty hand of God that he may exall them.

Against this conceit of Infants, being without sin, it has been objected,
that Adam was a common root to all mankind, and that therefore the Law given to
him (all mankind being in him) was given to all mankind, and likewise in him
transgressed by all mankind, by means whereof, all Infants come from their
Parents polluted with sin, according as David confessed of himself that (as
he was conceived in sin, so) he was borne in iniquity.

To this they Answer, that Adam was a common root, but not to bring any soul
to die for his breaking of the Commandment.

This answer is not to the purpose; the objection is, that all mankind sinned
in Adam, and come from his loins tainted with sin, and so die, not for a sin
that Adam committed apartby himself, without them, but for the sin wherewith
they were polluted in him.

To remove therefore this objection, they must deny that Adams sin did pollute
him, and also asfirme, that mankind proceeded from him as sree and clean from
sin as if he had not sinned at all.

But this they cannot do, and therefore cannot remove this Objection.

There is none of good and sound understanding, that will affirm that where
there is Father and Son, and the Father sins, and the Son sins not,
or the Son sins, but the Father sins not, that in this cause the Son
shall die for the Fathers iniquity, or the Father for the Sons iniquity, their
answer therefore proceeds either of ignorance or perverseness.

But concerning this point, they have another strange conceit, which is, that
Adam should have been consumed if Christ had not been provided: but Christ
being provi^ed, his judgment of being consumed was changed into this
judgment, Cursed is the earth for thy sake, etc. Genesis 3. 17 19. This is a
pretty dream, and it comes of this, that Adam d^ed not a bodily death the same
day that he eat of the forbidden fru^t.

But they should know that there are more sorts of death then one; which if
they did, then would they not gather, that because Adam died not a bodily
death, therefore he died not at all, this is too Childish for those which would
be teachers.

But let God be true and every man a liar: Adam by dying, died the same day
that he sinned, not a bodily, but a spiritual death, under which death he lay
until the promise that the Woman's seed should destroy the Serpents power,
quickened and revived him again.

That Curse which is laid upon the earth, and the labor which is laid upon
Adam, was to bring man to a further knowledge of his own misery, and Gods
mercy and justice.

Bodily death is appointed to dissolve man into dust and ashes, that from
thence he may rise unto an immortal and unchangable estate either of glory or
confusion.

Their imagination therefore that Adam should have been consumed, if Christ had
not been provided, is but a dream which will not stand with the stabilitie of
the Eternal, whose decree is immutable, neither alters he the thing that
proceeds out of his mouth.

Concerning Infants they have found at the last, that by Adams sin they have
upon them the Corruption thereof, and that in such sort, as that thereby they
are made Subject to death: here meeting the truth in their way (unsought for)
and seeing glimse of it, so dazeleth their eyes, that a increases their
blindness: for first their imagine that Infants are not otherwise cory rupted
with Adams sin, nor made subject to death then other creatures are and that
though Infants be subject to death, yet not to be cast into hell fire.

For the first, they should know that there is as much difference between the
Corruption that is in Infants by the means of Adams sin, and the corruption
that other creatures are subject unto, as there is between a young Serpent
venomous by nature, and that which is stung or invenomed by the ^iting of a
Serpent.

The posterity of Adam have a lust to sin, the creature is s^bject to the
vanity of man's abuse unto evil, not of its own accord, Romans 8. 20. In this
therefore their apprehension is too gross to conceive that Infants are no
otherwise corrupted with Adams sin then other creatures are,

For the Second, they should know that out of Adam a^e sprung two contrary
seeds, for which the^e was prepared two contrary conditions before the world
was; and therefore all Infants are not under one and the same. state and
condition, but some are under the state of damnation in hell, and some are
under the state of salvation in heaven, and that from the womb: though they
cannot tell how to deny this, yet will they not rest, but imagine still that
condemnation comes by some other means then by Adams sault, for else think they
God could not be just.

Converning the point of Adams fault, their resolution is, that it came on all
men to condemnation, ^ut how so to corrupt their natures, that when the
Commandment comes, they cannot obey and live, but sin and dye.

Here the truth has met them again, and they have looked upon her, but have
loosed her again, and themselves also: for at the First, Infants were not
without sin; but now their nature is so corrupt, that when the Commandment
comes, they cannot obey and live, but sin and die. And whersore? that let the
Apostle answer, it is because sin dwells in them Romans 7. 17. 20. If sin dwell in
them, how then are they without sin? Thus by wandering they have lost themselves.

The truth they have loosed, by mistaking Paul where he says that once he was
alive without the Law; for out of this they gather, that Paul was no sinner,
till the Commandment came, and they confirm themselves in this error, by
misunderstanding another Scripture; namely that whatsoever the Law says, it
says to them that are under the Law. And they are further confirmed in this by
the mistaking of a third Scripture, which says, That sin is not imputed
whilst there is no Law.

Out of these they gather, that Infants are without sin until they know the
Law, and break it.

But Paul ^s no Patron of this opinion, it was no part of his Doctrine, that
whilst he was without Law, he was without sin: but this is that which he
teaches, that when he was without Law, he was without the knowledge of sin,
because the knowledge of sin comes by the Law: and the reason of this is,
because without the Law sin is dead, that is, has no power to wound and kill
the Conscience: but the Conscience is quiet and at peace, notwithstanding sin
until the Law come, for as the sting of sin is death, so the strength of sin
is the Law. This is that which Paul teaches.

And it does not follow that because sin is dead in a man, until the Law come
that therefore there is no sin in him: for if sin were not in him, how should he
find it by the coming of the Law; in this therefore they understand the Apostle
very childishly and against all reason: for where he says, That he found by
the Law that sin dwelt in him, they understand him to the clean contrary, that
sin was not in him.

And as in this, they misunderstand, so do they in this, that the Law speaks
to those which be under the Law.

Out of this they gather, that a man must know the Law before he be under it,
and he must be under the Law and transgress it before he have sin: so that
until a man know the Law and transgress it, he is without sin: whereas indeed,
the transgression of the Law is but the finishing and bringing forth of sin,
conceived before of lust, which as an harlot consents to the tempter, and
brings forth transgression, I am. 1. 15

The Apostle in saying, that whatsoever the Law says, it ^aith it to those
that be under the Law: does it to prove that those things which are rehearsed
from the tenth verse of the ^hird Chapter to the Romans unto the eighteenth
verse, are ^rue concerning the Jews, and that therefore the Jews were under
sin, together with the Gentiles; and that all the world ^re under condemnation,
verse 19:

Now therefore if Infants be a part of the world, then are ^hey under
condemnation. The Apostle says, not that a man is without sin till he be under
the Law, but he says that the L^w convinces all that be under it of sin,
which could not be, if sin were not in them.

Here therefore they shoot far short of the Apostles mark, he concludes the
whole world to be under condemnation, and proves it by the Law. And they
imagine that when the Law comes, it finds those to whom it comes to be without
sin and free from condemnation. So that still, where the Apostle says one
thing, they understand him of another thing; yea to the clean contrary. The
Lord open their eyes that they may see it.

The third Scripture which they pervert is this, That sin is not imputed whilst
there is no Law, Romans 5. 13.

Out of this they gather, that until the Law be known and transgressed, there
is no sin.

But the Apostle says to the contrary, That sin was in the world even unto the
Law, though sin was reckoned no sin so long as there was no Law: Yet that sin
was in the world though not reckoned of, as may appear by this, That death
Reigned from Adam unto Moses, which it could not have done, if sin had not been
in the world: for death is the reward of sin, and therefore reigns over none,
but those which sin has dominion over, though not transgressors after the same
manner that Adam transgressed. Thus the Apostle teaches, and by this we may
learn, that no Infants are without sin.

Now if this will not be yielded them, that Infants are without sin, then would
they know how they can be reconciled unto God?

Unto this I answer; That unto those which are the seed o^ the Woman, God was
reconciled in Christ, and in him adopte^ them to be his Children before the
world was.

And unto such the corruption of their nature shall not b^ imputed, God has
made them accepted in his beloved.

But they presume, that it must be yielded that Infants a^ without sin, and
being so, they would know what need they have to be Baptized?

To this I answer, That Baptism is the ordinance of God and therefore is to be
used of all his people, to that end for which it was ordained.

It was given of God to set forth and declare what benefit those which be
members of Christ have by his death and resurrection.

That Infants have benefit by the death and resurrection of Christ, these men
will confess, though not aright: Gods people therefore must Baptize their
Infants, to declare their faith concerning the benefit that they have by Christ.

They give us a needless caution or warning that we should not conclude that
because Infants are subject to bodily death with their Fathers, that therefore
they perish i^ hell.

No, we will neither mount so high, nor dive so deep, as so to determine. But
this we do affirm, that if Infants were without sin, bodily death should have
no power over them.

But they will say that bodily death has power over other creatures which be
unreasonable, I grant it: But may a man as lawfully kill an Infant, as he may a
Sheep or a Bullock? Surely no; he which sheddeth man's blood, by man his blood
shall be shed. These men therefore are very unreasonable to match Infants and
other unreasonable creatures together.

But this is monstrous, that they imagine that unreasonable creatures that are
dead and have perished, have prepaed for them the glorious liberty of the Sons
of GOD, and shall be freed from the bondage of corruption when the Sons of GOD
shall be revealed?

And that this is the glory and liberty whereof Infants shall be ^artakers; yea,
and that all other creatures shall have ^tory after death for the afflictions
of this life, and not the ^embers of Christ only? unto this vanity of mind are
these ^en given up. The Lord give them better understanding, if it he his will.

From 2 Cor. 4. 10. and Rev. 20. 12, 13. they conclude that Infants shall not
appear before Christ to receive judgment, because they have done no works in
the flesh, good or evil.

What works Infants do, GOD knows, I know not; John the Baptist sprung in
his Mothers womb; Jeremy was sanctified in the Womb; Jacob and Esau strove in
the womb; God is wonderful in his works.

Therefore I dare not determine of the doings of Infants: But John in his vision
saw all the dead both small and great stand before God, and the^fore Infants as
I unde^stand. And Paul says, we must all be made manifest before the judgment
seat of Christ. I understand him to speak of all mankind, and so of Infants.
And it is too much boldness for any to say none where the Apostle says all.

But what dare not ignorant zeal do?

Their conclusion is, that Infants have not sinned, And therefore need no
Baptism for the remission of sins.

And I answer, that in Adam all mankind sinned, and that by means thereof all
Infants come tainted with sin, from the womb: And that therefore there is no
hope of salvation for any Infants further then they may be reckoned to belong
un^o Christ, as ^eing the fruit of such branches as are ingraffed in him by
Faith: And thos^ which be such are to be Baptized, thereby to declare wha^
benefit all have by Christ that are partakers with him; whos^ holiness is
such, that he sanctifyeth all that have fellowship with him: To whom be glory
for ever, Amen:

JOHN WILKINSON

FINIS.

