Christi Salus de Coelis, OR Gods defense of his Anointed.

BEING, A SERMON Intended for the 5. of Novem. 1647. but Preached upon the
Lords day after, in the Parish Church of St. Peter, near St. Paul's Wharfe.

Wherein is laid down the miraculous preservation that the hand of Heaven has
in all ages extended over Kings.

By John Williams, Master of Arts.

Now Published for the confirmation of the Loyal, and for the consternation of
all such as have or shall presume to lift up a hand against the Lords Anointed.

Fear God and honor the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change; for their destruction comes suddenly, and who knows the ruin of
them both.

Pro. 24. 21. Printed in the Year, 1647.

Omnibus Christi fidelibus.
To all those that are the faithful lovers of the Lord's Anointed.
Christian Reader:
IT is no Ambition that I have to appear in print, which has put forth this
Sermon; only my zeal unto the truth; it is a piece that craves your pardon,
and your patronage: your pardon; because so weakly done as being the work of
him who is minimus Ecclesiae, the least of those who serve at Gods Altar, and
the Primitiae, the first fruits in this kind of his Labors, your Patronage,
because it presses nothing but the truth. You know the Proverb, obsequium
amicos veritas odium parit, and if ever men were hated, persecuted imprisoned
for the Testimony of the truth; (which is the sole Halignancy against them)
this age has done it: it fares with us, as once with that great Apostle St.
Paul, we are become enemies, because we tell the truth; but for my part, I
shall say as once Gregory did, Grego. Moral.
In causa qua Deum servire cupio, homines non formido, I will not trouble you
any longer, I only wish to all men the practice of the wise man's precept, that
we would fear God, and honor the King; which two must always go together,
if we desire that (in this Kingdom) Righteousness and Peace may Kiss each
other; which shall be the constant prayer of him who will for ever rest,

Yours in Christ Jesus John Williams.

Errata sic corrige.
Page 2. l. 21 leave out By. p. 3. l. 21. read is. p. 4. l. 6. read ways.

Christi Salus de Coelis, OR Gods defense of his Anointed.
PSALM. 18. verse. 50. Great deliverances gives he unto his King, and shows
mercy unto his Anointed, even to David, and to his seed for ever. Our ordinary
Translation renders it, great prosperity gives he unto his King, etc.


THE occasion, that on Friday last did call me to this place, was the Kings
injunction; He enjoined the day by Proclamation, and I am sorry that so few
obeyed if. I am sure it is the Apostle St. Paul's injunction, Omnis anima: Romans
13.1.
let every soul be Subject and how then the Contemners, and Neglecters of the
day will answer it I know not: for my own part, as I was willing to solemnize
and observe the day, so I fitted the text unto it; the day it was, dies Regis,
the Kings holy day, so you call it, on that day did the Lord vouchsafe great
prosperity, or deliverance to his King, and the Text it is confessio Regis, the
Kings confession, or Declaration (of that mercy) unto God before the people; so
that you see the Argument of the Text, it is gratiarum actio, giving of thanks,
delivered from his common nature confession: for what indeed are al our praises
but the acknowledgment of Gods mercies? great Deliverances gives he etc. But
not to hold you any longer in the Preface, I come unto the Text it self, and
this naturally digests it self into two general parts: 1. The Thesis. 2. The
Hypothesis.


1. The Thesis, and this comprehends Gods care of Kings.

In genere, great deliverances gives he unto his King.

2. By the Hypothesis, and this comprehends Gods care of David, in Individuo,
of him in special above the rest, and shows loveing kindness, or mercy unto
David.

I begin with the First, the Thesis, and therein I observe 2. parts, First the
quis, the Person who it is that gives deliverance, and that is the Lord,
employed in the Relative, he but collected from the 46. verse of this Psa. Let
the Lord live and blessed be my strength and the God of my salvation be
exalted. Secondly, the cui, the object of this mercy, the person to whom the
Lord vouchsafes it, and that is Regi, to the King, and thus you have the model
of the whole Discourse. And first, I shall begin with the first, the quis, the
person, who it is that gives deliverance, the Lord: And this is a word that
implies a power to perform it: for as Tertullian very well observes, Tertul.
Cont. Hermo.
Deus est nomen substantiae sed Dominus est nomen potestatis. God says he, is
a name of essence, of substance, and implies the Divinity of the Creator, but
the word Lord is a name of power and sovereignty implying the Dominion that he
has over all his creatures, and this says Tertullian, you may observe in the
1 of Genesis 1. and 2. verses, before the Creation the Prophet Moses does call the
Creator God, post creatas vero creaturas Dominum se indicat; In the beginning
God created the heaven and the earth, and the earth was without form and void,
etc. but as soon as ever things were created, then he calls him Lord, and
spiritus Domini, says Moses in the second verse, Incubabat super facies
aquarum, and the spirit of the Lord moved upon the face of the waters: indeed
that which we translate Lord, in the Original Adon from the Primitive Eden:
Basis quia Deus est fundamentum and sustentator omnium creaturarum, he is the
B^sis or Foundation whereupon they stand: and therefore the Prophet David in
the 2 verse of this Psalm, calls God his strength, and his rock, and his
defense, his Savior, his God, and his might, his buckler, the home of his
salvation, and his refuge: It is true if God does not give prosperity,
deliverance, salvation, (for so St. Jerome reads the Text) Magnificans salutes
Regis; It is he that gives great salvation to his King: there is none can do
it, so says God himself, Esaias. 43.11.
Ego sum and praeter me (St. Hierome renders it, absque me) non est servator, I
even I, am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior, and this is the reason
why the Prophet gives God so many titles in the 1 verse of this Psalm, to show
that he is the only and the absolute Savior, and the Devil with all his
instruments has not so many to hurt, as God has many ways to help his King;
nay if God be pleased to help, to give salvation to his King, there is none
can hinder it; we need not fear the worst adversary that happens, and this
is manifestly proved from that of the Prophet Isaiah, Esaias, 43.1.
And now thus says the Lord that made thee, O Jacob, and formed thee, O
Israel, fear not because I have redeemed thee, and called thee by my name,
thou art mine when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee and
through the floods that they do not overflow thee: and thus was God with us in
the year 1588, when he did so wonderfully preserve us, and disperse the Armies
of the Aliens, that great Armado of the Spaniards that did delight in blood;
nay says God in the next words, when thou passest through the fire thou shall
not be burnt, the flame shall not kindle upon thee, and thus was the Lord with
us, this day, this promise was made good unto us; for notwithstanding that a
fire was provided; yea and such an one as even hell (for the end intended)
could not invent a worse, a fire wherein the King and Princes of the people
should all have been utterly destroyed, and yet though it was even ready to be
kindled, the Lord would not suffer it to break forth, and take hold upon us,
the snare was broken, and we were delivered: O that men would therefore praise
the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonder that he has done for us the
children of men: Oh that we would all do as the Prophet David here in the
Text, thankfully and publicly acknowledge that this day did God give great
Deliverances to his King, which very fi^ly brings me to my 2 particular, and
the objectum misericordiae, the object of Gods mercy, the person to whom he
does vouchsafe deliverance, and that is Regi, to his King.

Homines and jumenta servabit Deus, Psalm. 36.6.
thou Lord do save both man and beast, so excellent is thy mercy says this
Prophet: The goodness of God is not concentred in himself, but he does extend
it even to all the works of his hands, even the beasts are partakers of that
saving virtue that is in God, he opens his hand and fills all things living
with his goodness; Ps. 104.28.
yea the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, and so is the broad and
wide sea also; but what does God take care for beasts? Or may we not rather
reason as the Apostle did; Nunquid de bobus cura est Deo? does God take care
for Oxen? an non potius propter nos hae, or are not these things rather written
for us? yea for us no doubt are they written: 1 Cor. 9 9.
if God take care for beasts much more for men, yea for some men most
especially above the rest, and that is for Kings, and therefore he is called
the wholesome defense of his Anointed; Psalm 28.9.
nay that the Prophet might show the special care that God does take in this
particular, he is said to be Mirabilis in Regibus terrae; wonderful among the
Kings of the earth. I need not stand to instance in particulars, and show you
how wonderful God has been in delivering Moses from a Rebellious Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, in preserving David from Saul and Absalom* Hezechia from
the Philistines: our own Chronicles do record many of Gods mercies; in
particular this day above all the rest did God deliver King James (of happy
memory) and in him all us from the damnable and traitorous invention of a
powder plot; And now if you ask me the reason why God gives such great and
eminent deliverance and prosperity to his King? I answer for these three
reasons. The first is in my Text, quia Rex suus, because he is his King, God is
the King, and the earth may be glad thereof, Psalm 47.2.
and they viz. the Kings of the earth are his Ministers; Romans 13.4.
they are Gods shepherds; so speaks God to Cyrus, Esaias. 44.28.
they are his Ambassadors, his Vice-royes, his Lievtenants; now the honor of
the Ambassador is the honor of him that sends him, and the disgrace and
disrepute that is cast upon the Viceroy does reflect upon the King; and
therefore you shall read that when the servants that King David sent unto the
King of Ammon were abused, the King did take the injury as done unto himself
and revenged the infamy: 2 Samuel 10.
If an earthly King do thus in vindication of his servants, how much more
shall the King of Heaven do it unto his? for by him Kings reign, Prove. 8.5.
and this is the first reason, why he gives such great prosperity, or salvation,
or deliverance to his King.

Secondly, as God does give prosperity, because they are his Ministers, so
likewise in the next place, because there is an Abaddon a Prince of darkness;
Diabolus qui malis dominatur, the Devil who rules and reigns in the wicked,
Apoca 9.11.
and he seeks by all means to destroy them; the Devil knows full well that
if once a government be wanting, we shall be sure to fall under his Dominion;
all the vilianies and iniquities in Israel are imputed unto this, non erat Rex,
there was no King in those days in Israel, Judge. 19.21.
where there is no Government, there there is no order, and where there is no
order, ibi ruinae ostium patet, the door is open to ruin and destruction: and
from hence says a Father, malu^ qulde^ est pessimum ubi, est nullus
principatus: It is a passing evil where there is no Government: take away your
Captain from the Soldiers, and there will be nothing but confusion, take away
your Pilot and the Ship must surely miscarry, take away your Shepherd and your
flock will suddenly be scattered, take away your peoples Government and they
must of necessity be brought to ruin; Government, is the very fence that does
preserve all other blessings to us; if this fence be broken down, nothing but
destruction and desolation will ensue, and therefore we had need to pray ut
det Deus prosperitatem Regi, that God would give protection to his King, and
that is the second reason.

Thirdly, and lastly, God gives salvation and prosperity to his King, that we
might live the more prosperously under him; the happiness of the Kingdom
being emb^rqued in the welfare of the King, and this the very Etimon of the
word may tell you, for what is (...) Rex, but (...) the very foundation
whereupon the people stand, and in this respect you have them often called Gods
and Saviors of the people. Psalm. 82.1.
I need not stand to show you how, Judge. 3.9.
and in what nature they are called Gods, it is sufficient for us that the Lord
himself does call them so, Deus Dii estis, I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82,
1.
and yet to give you a more full and ample satisfaction, observe that they are
called Gods three manner of ways: First, by Analogy: Secondly, by Deputation:
Thirdly, by Participation.

First, by Analogy, for as God has his seat of judgment in Heaven; so these
have their Tribunalls and Courts of judicature here below, Theod.
tanquam in hoc Deum imitantes, Psalm. 81.
says Theodor. as it were imitating the Lord in this: and their authority,
though it be not transcendent, yet it is without control of any, save of him
who is Rex Regum, the King of Kings.

Secondly, 2 Chro. 19.8.
they be Gods by deputation, ye judge not for men, but for the Lord, says
Iehosophat, the judgment is Gods, says Moses, Magistrates they are his mouth
to pronounce, and his hands to execute upon the people; they are fingers of
that great hand, as I may so speak, that rules the world. God has two hands,
by the one he governs in the Commonwealth, by the other in the Church; by the
one he deriveth and holds forth good unto the body, by the other to the soul;
by the Magistrate he conveighs good unto the body, by the Minister, as the
outward means he conveighs grace unto the soul; by some Magistrates he gives
peace, by some wealth, by some order, by some justice, by some mercy, and that's
the reason why the Apostles do so earnestly press and urge our prayers for
them, 1 Timothy 2* 1.2.3.4.
that we may live a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

Thirdly, and lastly, they be Gods by participation, God has communicated some
sparks of his own Majesty and glory to them, participando sunt Dii, as St.
Aug. as the stars participate their light from the Sun the primum lucidum;
so these their authority from the supreme Magistracy, which is God himself,
and that's the third and last reason why God does gives such great prosperity
and deliverance unto them.

Well then beloved, Exodus 22.28.
thou shall not rail upon the Judges, nor speak evil of the ruler of thy
people, says Moses, how much more unlawful is it to draw the sword, and to
rebel against him? certain I am, it clearly contradicts that precept of the
Lord Nolite tangere touch not mine Anointed, Psalm. 105.15.
and do my Prophets no harm; If is not as that Reverend Father of our Church,
Bishop Andrews well observes, ne tangete, touch not, for that perhaps we
cannot do in respect of that guard that is about him, but it is nolite
tangere, have not the least thought or inclination of the will toward it; for
if we do but speak, the fowls of the air will carry the voice, Eccles.
10.19.
and that which has wings will declare the matter, and if we think ill of
him, though we keep it never so secret even in the dept of our heart; why yet
one time of other God will bring it out, he will shoot at us suddenly, as
the Psalmist speaks; yea our own tongues shall make us fall, Psalm.
64.8.9.10.11.
insomuch that all men shall say this has God done.

Rebellion of all sins is the most unnatural, for what can be more
unnatural then for the child to rebel against the Father, the Wife against
the Husband, the Servant against the Master? and if these be so unnatural,
much more then is it for the Subject to rebel against his Soveraige.

It was well said of Samuel, has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offerings
and sacrifices, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey is
better then sacrifice, and to hearken better then the fat of Rams; but
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, of all sins there is none so odious unto
God as this; I could instance to you in particulars, and show that there was
never any treason or rebellion prospered: the seditious Israelites were
destroyed sometimes by fire from heaven, sometimes with fiery Serpents,
sometimes by the earth, for the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up
quick into hell; seditious Mirians was stricken with a leprosy; seditious
Absalom was hanged by the head in an oak, as one spewed out of Heaven, and
vomited out of the earth. Achitophel for want of a hangman (a convenient
servitor for such a Rebel) hanged himself; did ever Sheba blow a trumpet of
sedition, but his blood must make a satisfaction? Had Zimri peace which slew
his Master? What became of Shemei that reviled the Anoynt^d of the Lord, though
David spared his life, yet Solomon his Son did bring his hoary head unto the
grave in blood? 1 King. 2.9.


Nay to instance here at home, this days experience joyfully does tell us,
that the end of our Popish Traitors here was blood; the pit that they dug
for others, they did fall into themselves, so strangely was their foot taken;
and indeed can it possibly be otherwise, but the vengeance of the Lord should
follow this sin? for it is a sin that is contrary to God; in every notion
he is the God of grace, the God of peace, the God of order; but this is a sin
that is opposite ex Diametro, in every notion it resists grace, it murders
peace, it destroys order; if therefore we will not be guilty of this horrid
sin; let us learn as the Apostle enjoynes to submit unto the higher powers,
for we must suffer the Princes will to be done aut a nobis, aut de nobis,
either of us, or on us; of us when he commands for truth, on us when he
commands against truth; either we must be Patients or Agents, Agents when he
is good and godly, Patients when he is tyrannous and wicked; if we resist, our
end will be damnation, either temporal in this life; for the wrath of a King
is as the roaring of a Lion; Prove. 2 0 2.
he that provokes him to anger, sins against his own soul, or else
eternal in the life which is to come; and so much shall serve for the first
Use, to invite us carefully and conscionably to beware that we do not presume
to lift up our hands against the Lords Anointed, from the first reason in the
Text, quia Rex suus, because he is his King.

Secondly, Rex suus, his King, so in the second place, if we will continue
Loyal, it should teach us to avoyde the company of those that are given to
this sin, and that from the second reason, because they are inspired by him,
who is the Abaddon, that destroyer of all order; indeed the Devil was the
first Rebel in the world, the Ringleader and Captain of sedition, he first
rebelled against the Lord, and ever since has endeavored to induce the world
into it; if therefore, if we will not be led by him, nor run into the same
excess of treason and rebellion with him; let the counsel of the wise man be
imprinted in our souls, fear God and honor the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change: and so much briefly for the second Use.

Thirdly, novis omnino est indignus beneficiis qui acceptis ingratus reddit, he
is altogether unworthy of new blessings, that returns himself unmindefull of,
and unthankful for those he has received; nay, he is altogether unworthy of
the least blessing, that is unthankful for the greatest. These. 1.5.18.
It is the Apostles universal Proposition, in omnibus gratias agite, in every
thing, give thanks, and if in every thing, then sure in so great a thing as
this, without which all other would be nothing to us. Secondly, as it should
teach us to be thankful, so to be diligent in prayer, that God would continue
this hand of preservation and protection to them: It is want of prayer that
does cause a want of blessings. We are too too frequent in our healthing to
him; but too too backward in our praying for him: and this does seem to me to
be a strong convincing argument that we are stupid and senseless of the great
blessing of a King preserved in safety.

I will not stand to parrallell our case with that of Isreal's, when there was
no King: I am sure it is bad enough; if therefore we will be delivered from
the miseries we suffer, and be restored to the mercies we have lost; let us
pray, and pray earnestly, and pray constantly, that as God did deliver David
his Servant, and King James his servant; so he would now deliver King Charles
his servant, not only de pulvere maligno, Ps. 144.10.
from a powder plot, but de gladio maligno, from the hurtful sword that is now
amongst us, that so the Mountain may bring peace, and the little Hills
righteousness, unto the people; which God of his mercy grant for his sake, in
whom alone he is well pleased, and to whom with the Holy Spirit, three
Persons, but one only wise immortal God, be all glory, and honor, now, and
for ever.

FINIS.

