By the King, A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas We have been Informed, That a False, Scandalous and Traitorous Libel,
Entitled, An Inquiry into the Causes of the Miscarriage of the Scotch-Colony
at Darien, or, An Answer to a Libel, Entitled, A Defense of the Scots
Abdicating Darien, has been Printed and Dispersed, the Design of which Libel
was to Create a Misunderstanding between Our good Subjects of England and
Scotland, and to Stir up Sedition and Rebellion, and is Injurious to, and
Reflects on the Honor of both Nations: And whereas the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses in Parliament Assembled, have humbly besought Us, to Issue Our Royal
Proclamation for Discovering and Apprehending of the Author and Printer of the
said Libel; We therefore (with the Advice of Our Privy Council) have thought
fit to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation, hereby Requiring and Commanding all
Our Loving Subjects whatsoever, to Discover and Apprehend the Author and
Printer of the said Libel, to the end they may be dealt withal and proceeded
against according to Law. And we do hereby Promise and Declare, That whosoever
shall Discover or Apprehend the Author of the said Libel, so as he may be
brought to Justice, shall have and Receive, as a Reward for such Discovery and
Apprehending, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds: And that whosoever shall Discover
or Apprehend the Printer thereof, so as he may be brought to Justice, shall
Have and Receive, as a Reward for such Discovery or Apprehending, the Sum of
Two hundred Pounds; Which said respective Sums of Five hundred Pounds and Two
hundred Pounds, the Commissioners of Our Treasury are hereby Required and
Directed to Pay accordingly. And We do hereby further Promise and Declare, That
if any Person (other than the Author himself) who was any ways Privy to, or
Instrumental in the Printing and Dispersing the said Libel, shall Discover or
Apprehend the Author thereof, the Person making such Discovery, or Apprehending
the said Author, shall not only have the said Sum of Five hundred Pounds, as
aforesaid, but also Our Gracious Pardon for his Offense. And We do hereby
strictly Charge and Command all Our Loving Subjects (as they will answer the
contrary at their Perils) that they do not any ways Conceal, but Discover and
Apprehend the Author and Printer of the said Libel, to the end they may be
Proceeded against with the utmost Severity according to Law.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Twenty ninth Day of January, 1699. In
the Eleventh Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1699.


