W R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King, A PROCLAMATION For Encouraging Mariners, Seamen and Landmen to
Enter themselves on Board His Majesty's Ships of War.
WILLIAM R.

WE being desirous to give all due Encouragement to all such Able Seamen, as
have not been in Our Service the last Year, or being in the Service have been
regularly Dicharged therefrom, and also to able-bodied Landmen, who shall
Voluntarily Enter themselves in Our Service, and remain on Board Our Ships of
War in Our Royal Navy, Have thought fit, by and with the Advice of Our Privy
Council, to Publish this Our Royal Proclamation; And We do here by Promise and
Declare, That all Seamen and able-bodied Landmen, who shall, after the Date of
this Our Royal Proclaniation, and before the Twentieth Day of February next,
Voluntarily Enter themselves and Remain on Board any of Our Ships of War, or
Fire Ships, or on any Press-Vessels or Tenders belonging to Our Fleet, shall
Receive as Our Free Gift and Royal Bounty, the respective Allowances and
Rewards following, Viz. Each able and ordinary Seaman Three Months Pay, and
each able-bodied Landman One Months Pay, to be Paid to them by or before the
First Day of May next, and if any Ship shall be sent Abroad, the Men so Entered
on Board the said Ships shall be paid before they Sail. And We do hereby
Command and Require the said Seamen and Landmen to Repair on Board the
respective Ships on which they shall so Enter themselves, and give their
constant Attendance, for fitting out to Sea such Ships as each of them do
belong unto. And We are also Graciously Pleased to Declare, That Conduct Money,
according to the Practice of the Navy, shall likewise be Allowed to such Seamen
and Landmen as shall Voluntarily Enter themselves and Remain on Board any of
Our said Ships, according to the true Meaning of this Our Royal Proclamation.
And for the Prevention of any Deceit and Abuses that may happen by any Person
or Persons leaving the Ships to which they belong, and Entering him or
themselves on Board any other of Our said Ships, as a foresaid, in order to the
obtaining of the Bounty-Money herein before Granted, We do hereby likewise
Direct, Declare and Command, That such Seamen and Landmen belonging to any of
Our Ships or Vessels whatsoever, as shall leave any of the Ships or Vessels to
which they belong, and Enter themselves on Board any other of Our Ships in
order to the obtaining of the said Bounty-Money, shall not only lose the Wages
due to them in the Ship which they shall so leave, but also be severely Punished
according to their Demerits.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Twenty sixth Day of December, 1695. In
the Seventh Year of Our Reign.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased: Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695.


