THE CASE OF THE ARMY Truly stated, together with the mischiefs and dangers
that are imminent, and some suitable remedies, Humbly proposed by the Agents of
five Regiments of Horse, to their respective Regiments, and the whole Army. As
it was presented by Mr. Edmond Bear, and Mr. William Russell, October 15. 1647.
unto his Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax. Enclosed in a Letter from the said
Agents: Also his Excellencies Honorable Answer thereunto.

Deuteronomy. 20.8. What man is there that is fearful and faint hearted? let him go
and return unto his House, least his brethrens heart faint as well as his
heart.

Judge. 7.7. And the Lord said unto Gideon, by the three hundred men that
lapped, will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hand, and let
all the other people go, every man unto his place.

LONDON Printed in the Year, 1647.

The Case of the Army truly stated, togegether with the mischiefs and dangers
that are imminent, and some suitable remedies, Humbly proposed by the Agents of
five Regiments of Horse, to the respective Regiments and the whole Army.
WHereas the grievances, dissatisfactions, and desires of the Army, both as
Commoners and Soldiers, has been many months since represented to the
Parliament; and the Army has waited with much patience, to see their common
grievances redressed and the rights and freedoms of the Nation cleared and
secured; yet, upon a most serious and conscientious view of our Narratives,
Representations, Engagement, Declarations, Remonstrances, and compairing with
those the present state of the Army and Kingdom, and the present manner of
actings of many at the Head Quarters, we not only apprehend nothing to have
been done effectually, either for the Army or the poor oppressed people of the
nation, but we also conceive, that there is little probabillitie of any good,
without some more speedy and vigorous actings.

In respect of the Army,* there has been hitherto no public vindication
thereof, about their first Petition, answerable to the Ignominy, by declaring
them enemies to the State, and disturbers of the peace: No public clearing nor
repairing of the credit of the Officers, sent for about that petition as
Delinquents: No provision for Apprentizes Widows, Orphans, or mained Soldiers
answerable to our reasonable addresses propounded in their behalf: No such
Indempnitie, as provideth security, for the quiet, ease, or safety of the
Soldiers, disbanded or to be disbanded. No security for our Arreers, or
provision for present pay to enable the Army to subsist, without burthening the
distressed Country. And in respect to the rights and freedoms of our selves
and the people, that we declared we would insist upon, we conceive there is no
kind or degree of satisfaction given: Viz. The copy of the grievances presenteD
to the Parliaments Commissioners at Saffron Walden.
there is no determinate period of time set when the Parliament shall certainly
end: The house is in no measure purged, either from persons unduly elected, or
from Delinquents, Viz. the Re monst, of Iun. 23. page 6 7. Its mentioned as one
of the disatisfactions, that caused the march to London.

See also the disatisfactions of the Army annexed to the Engagement. page 19,
20.


that appeared to be such at the Armies last insisting upon their rights, or
since; the Viz. the Representation of the Armice dissatisfactions, agreed on
upon June 4. and 5. page 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. where these were represented as
the ground of the filoma Engagement.
honor of the Parliamentary authority (...) cleared, and vindicated from the
most horrid injustice of that Declaration against the Army for petitioning nor
of suppressing and burning Petitions, abusing and imprisoning Petitioners: But
those strange presidents remain upon Record, to the imfamy of Parliamentary
authority; and the danger of our own and the peoples freedoms: The people are
not righted, nor satisfied in point of accounts, for the vast sums of money
disbursed by them: None of the public burdens, or oppressions, by arbitrary
Committees, Viz. the declaration of Iu. 14 p 6.9.
injustice in the Law, Tithes, Monopolies, and restraint of free trade, but
then some Oaths, inc quallitie of Assessements, Excize, and otherwise are
removed or lightened, the rights of the people in their Parliaments, concerning
the nature and extent of that power, are not cleared and declared. So that we
apprehend our own and the peoples case, little (if in any measure) better,
since the Army last hazarded themselves for their own and the peoples rights
and freedoms. Nay, to the grief of our hearts, we must declare, that we
conceive, the people and the Armies case much impaired, since the first
Randezvouz at New Market, when that solemn engagement was entered into: And
that from the consideration.

That the Armies Engagement, Representations, Declarations, and Remonstrances,
and promises in them contained, are declined, and more and more daily broken,
and not only in some smaller matters, wherein the Army and the Kingdom are
not so nearly concerned, but in diverse particulars of dangerous consequence to
the Army and the whole Nation. As,

First, In the Engagement, page the 5. the Army promised every Member thereof
each to other, and to the Parliament and Kingdom, that they would neither
disband nor divide, nor suffer themselves to be disbanded or divided until
satisfaction should be given to the Army in relation to their grievances, and
desires; and security that neither the Army nor the free borne people of
England, should remain subject to such injuries, oppression, and abuse, as the
corrupt party in the Parliament then had attempted against them.

Secondly, The Train of Artillery is now to be disbanded, before satisfaction
or security is given to the whole Army in relation to themselves, or other the
free borne people, either in respect to their grievances or desires. And when
the strength or sinews of the Army be broken, what effectual good can be
secured for themselves or the people in case of opposition?

Thirdly, The Army is divided into quarters so far distant, that one part is
in no capabilitie to give timely assistance to another, if any design should
be to disband any part by violence suddenly, although neither our grievances
nor desires as Soldiers or Commoners are redressed or answered. And as we
conceive this dividing of the Army before satisfaction or security as
aforesaid, to be contrary to the Armies intention in their Engagement, at the
said Randezvouz, so we conceive it has from that time given all the advantage
to the enemies, to band and design against the Army, whereby not only pay
has been kept from the Soldiers, and security for arreers prevented, but the
kingdom was endangered to have been imbroyled in blood, and the settlement of
the peace and freedom of the Nation, has been thus long delayed.

The whole intent of the Engagement, Viz. His Excellencies letter to the City
sent from Royston, June 16.
and the equitable sense of it, has been perverted openly, by affirming, and
by sinister means making seeming determinations in the Counsel, that the Army
was not to insist upon or demand any security, for any of their own or other
the free borne peoples freedoms or rights, though they might propound any thing
to the Parliaments consideration; and according to that high breach of their
Engagement, their actions have been regulated, and nothing that was declared
formerly, to be insisted upon, has been resolvedly adhered to, or claimed as
the Armies or the peoples due, and we conceive it has been by this means,
that the Soldier has had no pay constantly provided, nor any security for
Arreers given them, and that hitherto they could not obtain so much, as to be
paid up equally with those that did desert the Army, The pay since received
has not been so much as since accrued to be due in course, and therefore that
answers not the three months Arreers that was paid to the deserters of the
Army.
it not being possitively insisted upon although in the Remonstrance of June,
23. page 11. It was declared, that it should be insisted upon resolvedly, to be
done before the Thursday night after the sending that Remonstrance, and its now
many months since.

Fourthly, In the prosecution of this breach, there has been many
discouragements of the Agitators of the Regiments, in consulting about: the
most effectual means, for procuring the speedy redress of the peoples
grievances, and clearing and securing the native rights of the Army, and all
others the free Commons.

It has been instilled into them, that they ought not to intermeddle with
those matters, thereby to induce them, to betray the trust the Regiments
reposed in them; and for that purpose, the endeavors of some has been to
persuade the Soldiery, that their Agitators have meddled with more, then
concerned them. In the Declaration of June 14. page (...) It was declared that
the Army would adheare to their desires of full and equal satisfaction to the
whole Soldiery of the Kingdom in Arreers, Indemnity, and all othre things
mentioned in the papers, that contained * It was declared to be one of the
chief grounds of discontent, if any part of the Army should be disbanded
before satisfaction was given to the whole, See the Engagement page 3. and the
Armies first grievances, and are not all that concurred with the Army in the
same condition?
the grievances, disatisfactions and desires who did then, or should afterward
concur with this Army in these desires.

But many thousands who have concurred with this Army, are now to be sent for
Ireland, or to be disbanded with two months pay, before any security for
Arrears, or sufficient Indempnitie, or any satisfaction to any desires as
Soldiers or Commoners, then propounded; so now our Declaration is forgotten,
and the faith of the Army, and his Excellency broken, for it may be remembered,
that his excellency often promised, that the same care should be taken for
those, that concurred, that should be for this Army, therefore if this course
be driven on, what better can we expect for our selves in the end?

Sixthly, In the same Declaration, June 14. page 6. it is declared that the Army
took up Arms, in judgment and conscience, for the peoples just rights and
liberties, and not as mercenary Soldiers, hired to serve an arbitrary power of
the State, and that in the same manner it continued in arms at that time, and
page 7. of the same Declaration, it was declared that they proceeded upon the
principles of right and freedom, and upon the law of nature and Nations, But
the strength of the endeavors of many has been, and are now, spent to
persuade the Soldiers and Agitators, that they stand as Soldiers only to serve
the State, and may not as free Commons claim their right and freedom as due
to them, as those ends for which they have hazzarded their lives, and that the
ground of their resusing to disband, was only the want of Arrears and
Indempnitie.

Seventhly, In the Remonstrance June 23. page 14. compared with page 15. it was
declared, that such extraordinary courses should be taken as God should direct
and enable them thereunto, to put things to a speedy issue, unles by the
Thursday then imediately following, assurance and security were given to the
Army and Kingdom, that the things desired in the Declaration, June the 14.
should be speedily granted and settled.

But there has been ever since, a total neglect of insisting possitively upon
the redress of those grievances, or granting those desires of the Army as
Soldiers. That the Declaration of June the 14. page the 3. refers unto, as
formerly expressed, and not so much as one of those desires, as Commoners of
England in the behalf of themselves and others, (propounded in the same
Declaration, page 6.9, 10, 11.) has been insisted upon possitively; neither
setting a determinate period, wherein the Parliament shall certainly end, nor
purging the House, nor clearing the rights of the people, in petitioning nor
the righting of them in accounts, etc. so that by these declinings of the Army,
Viz. declaration June 14. page 4.
from insisting resolvedly upon the peoples, and the Armies own rights, both
are after long expectations, as far from right and freedom, as though there
had been no man to plead p their cause. And herein it is to be observed, that
the neglect of insisting upon our most just desites, has given enemies such
secret encouragement, that they shufle off any desires, though propounded; as
to be insisted upon, Viz. the Armies representation of disae tisfaction Iun.
4.5. page 19.
as may be mentioned in that our just desire, of recalling publicly the
Declaration, inviting al to desert the Army, and professed to be insisted upon,
in the same Declaration, June 23. page 11. which notwitstanding to this day was
never publicly recalled; so likewise the desire of vindicating the
Parliaments honor, in relation to a public disowning the order to suppress
our first Petition, and many others. The parliament and Scots Commissioners
long since resolved that satisfaction and security was to be given to the
people in relation to those public ends for which they expended so much
treasure and blood, before the King should be provided for this is hinted in
the Remonstrance signed King stone, page 11.


Eighthly, In the declaration of June 14. page 10. as in all other Remonstrances
and Declarations, it was desired, that the rights and liberties of the people
might be secured, before the Kings busincsse should be considered. But now the
grievances of the people are propounded to be considered after the restoring
him to the regal power, and that in such a way according to the proposals viz.
with a negative voice, that the people that have purchased by blood what was
their right, of which the King endeavored to deprive them, should yet solely
depend on his will, for their relief in their grievances and oppressions; and
in like manner the security for the Armies Arrears is proposed, to be
considered after the business of the King be determined, so that there is a
total declension since the method formerly desired, in the settling the peace
of the Nation.

Ninthly, It has been always professed and declared, that the Army was called
forth and conjured by the Parsiaments Declarations, for defense of the peoples
rights, against the forces raised by the King, and for delivering the King from
his evil Council, who seduced him to raise the war, and bringing Delinqueuts
to condign punishment, But now through the Armies countenance and indulgence,
those conquered enemies, that were the Kings forces, abuse, reproach, and
again insult over the people, whose freedom was the grounds of the Armies
engagement, yea, the Kings evil Counselors, that concurred in designing all
the mischiefs in the Kings late war against the people, are again restored
to him, and are admitted free access without check into all the Armies
quatters, whereby they are restored to a capacity of plotting and designing
mischief against the Army and kingdom.

Tenthly, When imminent ruin, to the whole nation was apprehended, by means
of the multitudes of corrupted Members in Parliament, diverting and obstructing
all good proccedings; then the purging of the House in part, from one kind of
Delinquents, was again insisted upon, and a solemn Protestation was passed in
the remonstrance from Kingstone, page 21. That the Army would not permit those
to sit in the House, that usurped the name and power of Parliamentary
authority, when the Parliament was by violence suspended, and endeavored to
raise a war to distroy the Parliament and Army, but that they would take some
effectual course to restrain them from sitting there, that the people might
be concluded only by those Members that are free from such apparent treacherous
breaches of their trust.

But hitherto this Engagement for purging the House from those Delinquents,
(whose interest ingages them to be designing mischief against the people and
Army) is declined and broken, to the black reproach and foulest infamy of the
Army; and now these strong cords are cut in sunder and so forgotten, that there
are no visible endeavors or intentions, to preserve the honor of the Army,
in its faithfulness to its Engagement and Protestation.

Thus all promises of the Army to the people that Petitioned his Excellency
and the Army to stand for the National interest, freedoms and rights, are
hitherto wholly declined, and the law of nature and nations now refused by many
to be the rule by which their proceedings should be regulated; they now strip
themselves of the interest of English men, See his Excellencies letter to the
City, dated Iu. 10. page 4.
which was so ill resented when it was attempted by the malice of the
enemies.* And thus the peoples expectations that were much greatned, and their
hopes of relief in their miseries and oppressions which were so much heightened
are like to be frustrate, and while you look for peace and freedom, the
floodgates of slaverie, oppression and misery are opened upon the Nation, as
may appear by the present manifold dangers that incompasse about the Army and
the whole Nation.

The mischiefs, evils, and dangers, which are and will be the necessar
consequence of the Armies declining or delaying the effectual fulfilling of
its first Engagement, Promises and Declarations or of its neglect to insist
possitively upon its first principles of common right and freedom.
Whereas its now many months since the Army declared (In answer to the
Petitions of diverse Counties, and from the sense of an absolute necessity
thereof,) that they would insist upon the peoples interest; as in the
Declaration of June 14 page 13. And yet no relief for the people in any of
their oppressions, Then also they professed that they hoped God would clear
it, that they have acted the kingdoms and every honest man's interest. viz. the
Remonstrance from Kingstone page 12.
by arbitrary powers, Monopolies, injustice in the proceeding at Law, Tithes,
Excize, etc. is effectually procured; nor any greater probabillitie of future
help is visible then was before; no foundations of freedom being yet laid;
and yet the Soldiery burthening the country with free quarters and occasioning
greater taxes. These five mischiefs and dangers ensue inevitably.

First, The love and affection of the people to the Army, which is (an armies
greatest strength) is decayed, cooled, and near lost; its already the common
voice of the people, what good has our new Saviors done for us? What
grievances have they procured to be redressed? Wherein is our condition
bettered? or how are we more free then before?

Secondly, Not only so, but the Army is rendered as an heavy burden to the
people, in regard more pay is exacted daily for them, and the people find no
good procured by them, that's answerable or equivolent to the charge, so that
now the people begin to cry louder for disbanding the Army then they did
formerly for keeping us in Arms, bcause they see no benefit accruing, they say
they are as likely to be oppressed and inslaved both by King and Parliament, as
they were before the Army engaged professedly to see their freedoms cleared
and secured.

Thirdly, whilst the peoples old oppressions are continued, and more taxes also
are imposed for pay for the Army, they are disabled daily more and more for the
mantaining of an Army for their preservation, for they begin to say, they can
but be distroyed by oppression, and its all one to them, whether it be by
pretended friends or professed Enemies, it were as good, say they, that the
King should rule again by prerogative; we were slaves then to his will, and we
are now no better; we had rather have one tyrant then hundreds.

Fourthly, By this means, distractions divisions heart burnings and jealousies
are increased to the imminent danger of ruin to the Army and kingdom; the
people are inclined to tumults, crying out, will none procure reliese for us!
shall we always be deluded with fair words, and be devoured by oppressors? we
must ere long rise up in arms, and every one catch what he can: thus confusion
is threatened.

Fifthly, The Army is exposed to contempt and scandal, and the most black
reproaches, and infomies are cast upon them; the people say, that their
resolutions not to disband were, because they would live idlly on the peoples
labors; and when the Soldiers are constrained to take free quarters, this
(says the people) is for freedom, and right, to cate the bread out of our
childrens mouths: so that many Soldiers are ashamed of themselves, and fear
that the people should rise to distroy them: you will do nothing for us (say
they) we are vexed by malignant Judges, for conscience sake, by arbitrary
Committees in the Country, and at Parliament ordering one thing this day, and
recalling it the next to out intolerable vexation; injustice in the saw is the
same, and we buy our right at as dear a rate as ever, Tithes are enforced from
us double and threble Excize continues, we can have no accounts of all our
moneys disbursed for the public, more is daily required, and we know not what
is become of all we have paid already, the Soldiers have little pay, and the
maimed Soldiers, Widows, and Orphans, are thrust upon us to be parrish charges.

2ly. Whereas the Engagement is broken, and the first principles deserted or
neglected, They formerly prevailed and proceeded in that way viz Dcl. offered
to the Commissioners at Saffron Walden.
these mischiefs and dangers have casued.

1. The enemies are encouraged and imboldned to proceed in prejudice to the
people and the Army as formerly: they may receive hopes upon the armies own
words in their general Councels, that the army will not oppose or disturb them
in their proceedings, to deprive the Army and people of their native rights;
for if they can abuse the Parliament, or surprise them as formerly, they may
say for themselves, the Army has declared, that they stand only as Soldiers,
and will not insist upon any possitive demand of their own and the Nations
freedoms, and was it not this that imboldned the enemies formerly to suppress
our first petition, and declare us enemies, for petitioning? they thought we
would have stood only as mercenary Soldiers, hired to serve their arbitrary
power; and not remembered that we by, their invitation took up arms in
judgment and conscience, to preserve the nation from tyranny and oppression,
and therefore were obleiged to insist upon our rights and freedoms as
Commoners, and surely it has been upon this ground, that they kept us without
money so long, thinking we would not or durst not insist upon our demands of
that which is due to us; and upon this ground we judge the Parliament has
proceeded of late to increase the peoples oppressions, by an Ordinance for
trible damages, to be paid by all that refuse, (though for conscience sake) to
pay Tithes, and an Ordinance to lock up the printing presses against whom they
please, which was in the Bishops time complained of, as one of the great
oppressions, and have flighted just petitions, and neglected to consider and
redress the prisoners grievances and oppressions, and the sufferings of
conscientious persons, by the unjust statutes against Convinticles so styled,
and statutes for Common prayer Book, and enforcing all to come to Church, and
all other the peoples grievances.

2. From the Armies declining their first principles, the same corrupt Members
remain in Parliament that caused the Army to be proclaimed enemies for
petitioning, and its to be observed that through the influence of those in the
House, there was never any public vindication of the Armies honor, and of the
justice of their petitioning at that time; and can the Army be safe, so long
as its old declared enemies are in power, and do but watch the fittest
opportunity to work any mischief, but not only those enemies remain in
power, viz. the Remonstrance from ^^ngston August 18, page 21.
and watch to distroy you, but 65. at least that lately voted and endeavored
to raise a new war, to distroy the Army, are suffered to vote in the
Parliament, though the Army has protested solemnly, they would not suffer
those usurpers to sit there, or that they would be concluded by those that were
coactors in such treasonable breaches of their trust.

3. Through the Armies dividing contrary to the Engagement, and neglecting to
insist upon the first declaration, the enemies have had power and opportunity,
to prevent them of their constant pay, and obstruct all proceedings to
security for arreers, whereas otherwise the enemies would not have dared to
presume to obstruct good proceedings, and to prosecute their designs against
the army.

4. Through the armies backsliding from the Remonstrance, and Protestation
from Kingstone, August. 18. those that lately endeavored to raise a war
against the Parliament and Army, continue in the House, and have passed an
Ordinance, viz. Dec. showing the reasons of their last march unto London page 9.
wherein those bettayers of their trust are acknowledged to have been a House
of Parliament, when the Parliament was forced away and suspended, and the Army
having declared them to be no Parliament, and his Excellency slighted their
command, at Colebrooke professing he knew no Parliament, to which he should
send, are by this made guilty of the highest treason, and so a snare is laid
for his Excellency and the Army, that when the enemies shall have the
advantage, they may be declared traitors, for declaring against the Parliament,
and disowning their authority, so that if some speedy remedy be not applied,
no man knows how soon the enemy may prevail to distroy his Excellency, the
Army and kingdom by this means: and the policy of the enemy (...) to be
observed, that they would never suffer that Declaration to be debated in the
House, that was published at the Armies marching toward London, wherein those
that usurped the power of a Parliament, when the Parliament was suspended, were
declared to be no legal Parliament: but the Declaration and Remonstrance of
August 18, wherein the Army protested against the sitting of those usurpers in
the House, may together be made the ground of their declaring us Traitors upon
any advantage, for disowning, and declaring against the supreme authority of
the Nation, in case those usurpers shall continue to be acknowledged a house of
Parliament, sit remains at present by the late Ordinance of August 20.
procured to be passed by those Usurpers themselves fitting Judges of their own
case.

5 By this neglect and declining of the Army, The Parliament is returned to
their old delatory way of proceeding, neither insisting upon the relieving the
people speedily and effectually in any of their grievances, nor providing
constain pay for the Army, nor security for arreers; so that the delays that
are occasioned through the Armies declining their first principles are as
distructive to the Army and Kingdom as if there were direct actings by the
Army against the Kingdoms peace.

6 Through the same declension of the Armies first principles, and the good and
necessary method propounded for settling the nation in peace and freedom before
the kings business be considered, the King is likely to recover his old
capacity, before the peoples freedoms (which they have redeemed out of the
hands of him and his forces by blood) be cleared and established securely, and
likewise before any security be given for arreers; and then what probability
there is that then there should be any good security of pay obtained for the
army that conquered him, and for the freedoms of these that assisted them,
let any rational man iudget It may more certainly be expected, that he will
provide for the pay and Airers of his own Soldiery rather then of ours. And
likewise by the same means, the armies and their assistants indempnitie, is
propounded to receive its strength from the Kings consent; whereas not only his
signing of, or consent to any act is wholly null and void in law, because he is
under restraint, and so our indempnitie, will be insufficient, if it shall
depend in the least, on his confirmation. But also its the highest
disparagement to the supreme authority of this Nation, the Parliament, that
when they have commanded an army upon service against the King, they should
not have sufficient power to save them harmless for obedience to their
commands, and also its the highest dishonor to the army, that they should
seek to the conquered enemy to save them harmless for fighting against
them, which is to ask him pardon, and so will remain as a perpetual reproach
upon them.

7. Through the armies declining its first principles, to insist upon
satisfaction and security as Soldiers and Commoners before disbanding or
dividing the army, is it now likely to be so far scattered into several
quarters, that it shall be in no capacity, to insist upon security for
arreers, sufficient indempnitie or upon any its own or the nations rights, in
case they shall be still denied them.

8. It is to be considered that the enemies on the one hand, and the other
increase daily in their boldness, confidence, and strength, whilst security
for the armies arreers, and constant future pay (so long as it shall be
continued) are not provided, and and the rights and freedoms of the people are
not cleared and secured, and the army may divide in case one part should
insist upon the first just principles, and be faithful thereunto, and another
part should by flatteries, preferments, fear or negligence decline or desert
them, and let it be considered what strength that would adds to the enemies,
and how far it will endanger the ruin of the army and kingdom.

Now we cannot but declare, that these sad apprehensions of mischiefs, dangers
and confusion gaping to devour the army has filled our hearts with troubles,
that we never did, nor do regard the worst of evils or mischiefs that can
befall our selves in comparison to the consequence of them to the poor Nation,
or to the security of common right and freedom, we could not but in (real not
formal fained) trouble of heart for the poor Nation and oppressed people,
break forth and cry, O our bowels! our bowels! we are troubled at the very
heart to hear the peoples dolfull groans, and yet their expected deliverers
will not hear or confider, they have run to and fro, and sighed or even wept
forth forth their sorrows and miseries, in petitions, first to the King then
to the Parliament, and then to the army, yet they have all been like broken
reeds, even the army it self upon whom they leaned have pierced their hands,
their eyes even fail with looking for peace and freedom, but behold nothing
but distraction, oppression and trouble, and could we hope that help is
intended, yet the people perish by delays, we wish therefore that the bowels
of compassion in the whole army might yearne toward their distressed
brethren, and that they might with one consent say each to other, come let us
join together speedily to demand present redress for the peoples grievances,
and security for all their and our own rights and freedoms as Soldiers and
Commoners. Let us never divide each from other till those just demands be
answered really and effectually, that so for the peoples case as many forces as
are not absolutely necessary may be speedily disbanded and our honor may be
preserved unspotted, when they shall see, that we minded not our own interest,
but the good, freedom, and welfare of the whole Nation. Now to all that shall
thus appear we propound.

That whatsoever was proposed to be insisted on either, in the the Declaration
of June the 14. or the Remonstrance June 23 and in the Remon. from Kingstone,
August 18. be adhered to resolvedly, so as not to reced from those desires,
until they be thoroughly and effectually answered: more particularly that
whereas it appears by possitive laws and ancient just customs, that the
people have right to new successive elections for Parliaments at certain
periods of time, and that it ought not to be denied them, being so essential
to their freedom, that without it they are no better then slaves, the nature
of that legislative power, being arbitrary and that therefore it be insisted on
so possitively, and resolvedly, as not to recede from it.

1. That a determined period of time, be forthwith set, wherein this Parliament
shall certainly be desolved, provided also that the said period be within 9. or
10. months, next ensuing, that so there may be sufficient time for settling of
peace and freedom.

2. Whereas all good is obstructed and diverted by the power and influence of
Delinquents the late usurpers, and undu elected ones in the Parliament, that
therefore it be possitively and resolvedly insifled on; that the house be forth
with purged, from all that have sorfited their trust or were unduly elected, but
especially that an order be passed forthwith, for the expelling all those from
the house, who sat in the late pretended Parliament, and that likewise a
severe penalty be ordered to be imposed on every of those usurpers that shall
presume to sit in the House, for the passing of such an order, before they
shall have given sufficient evidence, that they neither voted for a new war,
or for the Kings coming to London upon his own terms.

3. Whereas his Excellency and the whole army, were guilty of the highest
treason if the pretended Parliament had been a legal Parliament, and its
apparent that they were no legal Parliament, that therefore it be possitively
and resolvedly insisted upon, that the Declaration of the army upon their last
march up to London be forthwith publicly owned, and approved of by the
Parliament, and that the same public approbation be Passed upon the Remon,
and protest sent from Kingstone August 18.

5. Whereas Parliaments rightly constituted are the foundation of hopes of
right and freedom to this people, and whereas the people have been prevented
of Parliaments, though many possitive laws have been made for a constant
succession of Parliaments, that the before it be possitively and resolvedly
insisted upon, that a law peramount be made, enacting it, to be unalterable by
Parliaments that the people shall of course meet without any warrants or wries
once in every two years upon an appointed day in their respective Countries,
for the election of the representors in Parliament, and that all the freeborn
at the age of 21. years and upwards, be the electors, excepting those that
have or shall deprive themselves of that their freedom, either for some
years, or wholly by delinquency, and that the Parliament so elected and
called, may have a certain period of time set, wherein they shall of course
determine, and that before the same period they may not be adjurnable and
disolvable by the King, or any other except themselves.

Whereas all power is originally and essentially in the whole body of the
people of this Nation, and whereas their free choice or consent by their
Representors is the only original or foundation of all just government, and
the reason and end of the choice of all just Governors whatsoever is their
apprehension of safety and good by them, that it be insisted upon possitively.
That the supreme power of the peoples representors or Commons assembled in
Parliament be forthwith clearly declared as their power to make laws, or
reveal laws, (which are not or ought not to be unalterable) as also their
power to call to an account all officers in this Nation whatsoever, for their
neglect or treacheries in their trust for the peoples good, and to continue or
displace and remove them from their offices, dignities or trust according to
their demerrits, by their faithfulness or treachery in the business or
matters where with they are entrusted and further that this power to constitute
any kind of governors or officers, that they shall judge to be for the peoples
good, be declared, and that upon the aforesaid considerations it be insisted
upon, that all obstructions to the freedom and equallitie of the peoples
choice of their Representors, either by Patients, Charters or usurpations, by
pretended customs, be removed by these present Commons in Parliament, and that
such a freedom of choice be provided for, as the people may be equally
represented. This power of Commons in Parliament, is the thing against which
the King has contended, and the people have defended with their lives, and
therefore ought now to be demanded as the price of their blood.

That all the oppressions of the poor by Excize upon Bear, Cloth, Stuffes,
and all manufacturies, and English commodities; be forthwith taken off, and
that all Excize be better regulated, and imposed upon foreign commodities, and
a time set wherein it shall certainly end, if there be a necessity of its
present continuance on such commodities.

3. Whereas the people have disbursed such vast sums of money, by Pole Money,
Subsidies, proposition money, Contribution, the five and twentieth part, viewes
and reviewes of the same monthly assessements, Excize, and other ways, and
such vast sums have been collected and enforced by Sequestrations,
Compositions, sale of Bishops lands, and other ways, that the whole charge of
the forces by sea and land might have been defrayed to the utmost farthing, and
yet many millions of money remained of all that have been disbursed freely, or
enforced had been faithfully brought into the public treasury, and improved
for the public use, only therefore that in respect to the peoples right, and
for their ease, and for better and more easy provision of money for the
Soldiery, that it be insisted upon possitively, that faithful persons be
chosen to receive accounts in every part of the kingdom, especially
considering that former Committees for accounts were constituted in a time when
corrupt men over poured the Parliament, and yet they have done no service in
discovering moneys since their constitution, and herein its to be insisted on,
that all without distinction, as well parliament men as others, may be equally
accountable to persons chosen for that purpose.

Now herein its further to be insisted on, that whereas the time was wholly
corrupt when persons were appointed to make sale of Bishops lands, and whereas
Parliament men, Committee men, and their kinsfolks were the only buyers, and
much is sold, and yet its pretended, that little or no money is received, and
whereas Lords, Parliamentmen, and some other rich men, have vast sums of
arreers allowed them in their purchase, and all their moneys lent to the state
paid them, while others are left in necessity, to whom the state is much
indebted, and so present money that might be for the equal advantage of all,
is not brought into the public Treasury by those sales. Its therefore to be
insisted on, that the sale of Bishops lands be received, and that they may be
sold io their worth, and for present moneys, for the public use, and yet the
sale of all such be recalled, as have not been sold to their worth, or for
present moneys.

And it is further offered in consideration that the Court have occasioned the
late war, and reduced the state to such necessity, by causing such vast
expense of treasure, that therefore whereas the many oppressions of the people,
and the danger of absolute tyrany, were the occasion of the expense of so much
blood, and whereas the people have bought their rights and freedoms, by the
price of blood, and have in vain wasted long since, the common enemy, has
been subdued for the redress of their grievances and oppressions, that
therefore it be demanded as the peoples due, which ought not to denied to the
Army or to them yet seeing the King has his Court and lives in honor, yet
before his business be further considered, because the people are under much
oppression and misery, it be forthwith the whole work of the Parliament, to
hear consider of, and study effectually redress for all common grievances and
oppressions, and for the securing all other the peoples rights and freedoms,
besides all these before mentioned, and in particular.

First, that all the orders, votes, ordinances or declarations, that have
passed either to discountenance petitions, suppress, prevent or burn
petitions, imprison or declare against petitioners, being dangerous presidents
against the freedom of the people, may be forthwith expunged out of the
Journall books, and the injustice of them clearly declared to all the people,
and that in such a declaration the soldiery be vindicated, as to the right and
equity of their first petition, all those large sums of money that were
allowed to needless pretended Officers of the Court which did but increase
wickedness and profaneness, may be reserved for a publiqve treasure to be
extended in paying those Lords that must be maintained, for the peoples safety,
and whereas there is now 50. l. perdiem: allowed for the court, who offered
that there might be 300 l. perdiem: allowed for the court, to be paid out of
the public treasury, through a good and faithful improvement of all the Lands
pertaining to the Court, there must be as much reserved for leaving public
charges, and easing the people.

And its further offered, that whereas millions of money, have been kept in
deads stock in the City of Lonndon the Hals and Companies, and the free men of
the City could never obtain any account thereof, according to their right.
That therefore a just and strict account may be fhorthwith given to all the
free men of any those dead stocks, and yet whereas there has been nothing paid
out of those, nor for the lands pertaining to the City, whiles the estates of
others have been much wasted, by continual payments, that therefore
proportionable sums to what other estates have paid, may be taken out of those
dead stocks, and lands which would amount to such vast sums, as would pay much
of the soldiers arreares, without ou^ ^hening the oppressed people.

And its further offered, that forest lands, and Deanes and Chapters lands, be
immediately (...) part for the arrears of the Army, and that the revenue of
these and the residue of Bishops lands unfold till the time of sale may be
forthwith appointed to be paid unto our Treasury, to be reserved for the
soldiers constant pay. And its to be wished that only such part of the
aforesaid lands be sold as necessity requires, to satisfy the soldiery for
arreares, and that the resedue be reserved and improved for a constant revenue
for the State that the people may not be burdened, and that out of the
revenues public debts may be paid, and not first taken out of their own
pursest to be repayed to them.

And its further offered for the peoples ease, that the arreers of all former
assessements be duly collected from those who have sufficient estates, and have
not been impoverished by the war.

And whereas its conceived that the fees of receivers of customs and Excize if
they were justly computed, would amount to near as much at the Armies pay, its
therefore offered that speedy consideration be had of the multitude of those
officers and their excessive fees, and profits, as 500. 600. 1000. 1200. l. per
annum. As also that many Excize men appoint whom they please as their
substitute, and allow what they please for their pay, that the officers may be
few, and constant stipends allowed them none exceeding 200. l. per annum, that
so more moneys may be brought into the publ^^^ treasury.

And for the ease and satisfaction of the people, its further to be insisted
on, that the charge of all the forces to be kept up in the kingdom by sea or
land, be particularly computed and published, and that all taxes that shall be
necessary, may be wholly proportioned, according to that charge; and that there
be an equal rate propounded throughout the kingdom in all assessements, that
so one town may not bear double the proportion of another of the same value.

4. That all Monopolyes be forthwith removed, and no persons whatsoever may be
permitted to restrain others from free trade.

5. That the mast sad oppressions of prisoners be forth with eased and removed,
and that no person that has no estate real or personal, nor any person that
shall willingly yield up his estate to satisfy his creditors may be detained
in prison to the ruin of their persons and families, and likewise, that no
person imprisoned in a criminal cause, may be detained from his legal trial
any longer then the next rear me.

6. That all Statutes, for the Common prayer book, and for enforcing all to
come to Church, whereby many religious and conscientious people are daily vexed
and oppressed be forthwith repealed and nulled. As also that all Statutes
against Convinticles, under the pretense of which, religious people are vexed
for private meetings about the (...) may be likewise repealed and nulled.

7. That all the oppressive, statutes, enforcing all persons though against
their conscience, to pay T^thes, whereby the husbandman cannot eat the fruit
of his labor, may be forthwith repealed and nulled.

8. That all statutes enforcing the taking of oaths, as in towns corporate,
the oath of Supreamacy, etc. Wherein either the whole oaths, or some clauses in
them, are burdens, and snares to conscientious people may be repealed and
nulled.

9. That it be declared that no person or Court shall have power or be
permitted to enforce any person to make oath, or answer to any Interrogatories
concerning himself, in any criminal case.

10. That a Committee of conscientious persons be forthwith selected to
consider of the most intolerable oppressions by unjust proceedings in the law,
that with all the laws might be reduced to a smaller number, to be comprised
in one volume in the the English tongue, that every free Commoner might
understand his own proceedings, that Courts might be in the respective Counties
or Hundreds, that proceedings might become short and speedy, and that the
numberless grievances in the law and Lawyers, might be redressed as soon as
possible.

11. That all privileges and protections above the law, whereby some persons
are exempted from the force and power thereof, to the insufferable vexation and
ruin of multitudes of distressed people. may be forthwith abbrogated.

12 That all the ancient rights and donations belonging to the poor, now
imbezled and converted to other uses, as enclosed Commons, Alms houses, etc.
throughout all parts of the land, may be forthwith restored to the ancient
public use and service of the poor, in whose hands soever they be detained.

Many other grievances are and ought to be redressed, but these as they are
propounded, we conceive might be in a very short time redressed to the relief
of many distressed ones, and to a general ease; or at least, put into a way,
wherein there might be visible hopes of remedy, and therefore these might be
demanded as due to the people, though we desire the Counties might be
encouraged to represent all their other grievances also for speedy redress.

7. General head. That it be insisted on, that such Indempnitie be forthwith
given both for the Soldiery and all that gave them assistance, and shall
provide securely for their quiet, ease and safety, and prevent all chargeable
journeys to London, to seek after and wait upon Committees.

8. That in some of the fore mentioned ways, security be given for arreers
forthwith, that as soon as the rights and freedoms of the people be secured
according as its hereupon propounded, and the other desires of the Army in
relation to their particular freedom from pressing: and provision to be made
in a certain and no dishonorable way for maimed Soldiers, Widows, and
Orphans, that shall continue during their lives, then the Arms may be disposed
into the hands of the faithful well affected of the Nation, which may be so
formed into a military posture, as to be ready on all occasions of service, and
as many of the forces that are kept in constant pay, as shall not be absolutely
necessary for the preservation and safety of the people, may be as speedily as
possible disbanded, that they may not be a burden to the Nation.

9. Whereas mercy and justice are the foundations of a lasting peace, its
necessary to be insisted on (for the healing differences as far as possible,)
That all those whose estates have been sequestered, and yet were not in arms
for the King, or gave any actual assistance to him in men, money, or arms,
plate, horse, etc. in the late war, that all such be discharged forthwith
from their sequestrations: and that all such as have compounded, may not be
enforced, to pay the five or twenteth part, seeing their whole estates were so
long under sequestration: and that all those that have not compounded, who were
in Arms for the King, may be compelled forthwith to compound, provided, that
their Compositions be so moderate, as none may exceed two years revenue, that
their families be not ruined, and they put upon desperate attempts against the
peace of the Nation to preserve themselves.

These things propounded are no more then what we conceived, should have been
thoroughly done long since, being as to the principal of them but this
substance and equitable sense of the former declarations, Remonstrances? and
representations, and therefore though our restless desires of the peoples
good, and of the welfare of the Army, have constrained us thus publicly to
state our case, and the remedy according to the best improvement of the small
Tallent of understanding that God has given freely to us. Yet let not the
matter be prejudged because of the unworthy Authors, neither let it be thought
presumption. It may be remembered that the Fathers danger made a dumb child to
speak, and the Armies yea all the peoples dangers and miseryes have wrested
open our mouths, who had otherwise been silent in this kind to the grave, and
let it not be thought that we intend the division of the Army, we profess we
are deeply sensible and desire all our fellow soldiers to consider it.

In case the union of the Army should be broken, (which the enemy wait for,)
ruin and destruction will break in upon us like a roaring sea, but we are
much confident that the adhearing to those desires and to that speedy way of
attaining our just ends for which we first engaged, cannot be interpreted to be
a desire of division, but the strongest vigorous endeavors after union, and
though many whom we did bettust have been guilty of most sapine negligence, yet
we expect that the same instruction of judgment and conscience, that we have
all professed, did command us forth at first for the peoples Freedom will be
again so effectual, that all will unannimusly concur with us so that a
demand of the peoples and Armies rights shall be made by the whole Army as by
one man, that then all the enemies to, or obstructors of the happy settlement
of common right, peace and freedom, may hear of our union and resolution, and
their hands may be weak, and their hearts may fail them, and so this Army
that God has clothed with honor in subduing the common enemy, may yet be
more honorable in the peoples eyes, when they shall be called the Repayters of
their breaches, and the restorers of their peace, right, and freedom.

And this is the prayer, and shall always be the earnest endeavors of.

The Army and all the peoples most faithful servants. Lievt. Genesis
Robert Everard. George Sadler.
Com. Genesis
George Garret. Thomas Beverly.
Col Fleetwood.
William Priar. William Bryan.
Col. Whalyes.
Matthew Wealy. William Russell. Richard Seal.
C. Riches.
John Dober. William Hudson. Agitators.


Gilford. October 9, 1647.
FINIS.
A Copy of a letter from the Agents of the aforesaid five Regiments of Horse,
unto His Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax.
May it please your Excellency,
FRom the deep sense of out duty to God, to our native Country, to your
Excellency, to this army, and to our selves, and to posterities to come, we
find such obligations upon our consciences, written naturally by the finger of
God in our hearts, that we cannot behold the honor of God to be impaired, the
works of his hands the land of our Nativity, your Excellency, this army, our
selves, or posterities, ready to be swallowed and devoured up in confusion,
thraldom and ruin, and to sit still, and not arise in the strength of his
might, to contribute our best endeavors for the prevention thereof; for, God
has given no man a talent to be wrapped up in a Napkin and not improved, but the
meanest vassell in the eye of the world is equally obleiged and accomptable to
God with the greatest Prince or Commander under the Sun, in and for the use of
that talent betrusted unto him: and therefore we presume that your Excellency
(who does acknowledge your self a creature of, and servant to the same God)
will not think it strange, or judge us disobedient or refractoy, that we
should, as we have presumed, to state the case of the army, how declined from
its first principles of safety, what mischiefs are threatened thereby, and what
remedies are suitable for prevention, which herewith we do humbly present and
offer unto your Excellency; for, Sir should you, yea, should the whole
Parliament or Kingdom exempt us from this service, or should command our
silence and forbearance, yet could not they nor you discharge us of our duties
to God, or to our own natures, for we must be accomptable, and judgment will
come for the deeds done in our flesh, whether good or evil; and he that has
not improved and put forth his talent to use, shall be bound hand and foot, and
cast into the lake of eternal vengeance: So that we are bold from our sense of
your Excellencies piety honesty and uprightness to God and to your Country,
that in this our discharge of our duties to both, we shall not ineurre your
displeasure or discountenance, but that you will freely commit us and the issue
of our endeavors to God, and if it be of him it will stand, and from our
consciences we attest, and protest in the presence of his all seeing diety, as
we desire safety in this life, or in that which is to come, we have no other
then cordial and fathfull intents and resolutions to the undoubted safety and
weal of our native country, to Parliaments your Excellency, and this army in
this business represented in these enclosed papers, and we do utterly abhor
and renounce al secret or private designs or interest under the same, together
with all that is contrary to the plain and vulgar sense, expressed in the
premises thereof. And if by any one your Excellency shall be suborned, that we
are transgressors of all order and form, and in that sense only to look upon
us. We desire to mind your Excellency, that the law of nature and nations
attested in our own public Declarations and papers may be an answer to such
for the just fication of our present expedient, for all forms are but as
shadows and subject to the end, and the safety of the people is above all
forms, customs, etc. and the equity of popular safety, is the thing which
justifies all forms or the change of forms for the accomplishment thereof;
and no forms are lawful longer then they preserve or accomplish the same. If
our duties bind us when we see our neighbors house on fire, to wave all
forms, ceremonies or complements, and forthwith (not waiting for order or
leave) to attempt the quenching thereof without further scruple, as thereunto
called of God, we say if we be so obliged and called in the case of a
particular, then much more are we obleiged and called, when we behold the Great
Mantion house of this Common wealth, and of this Army (wherein all the
families of the Nation are contained) on fire, all ready to be devoured with
slavery, confusion and ruin, and their national native freedom (the price of
their treasure and blood) wrested out of their hands, as at this present
appears to our best understandings: And therefore in this exigencie and
straight of extremity, we from the very dictates of Divinity, Nature and Reason
engraven in our hearts could not otherwise choose (with quiet and peace to our
consciences, (which no mortal man can take from us or suppress the
overpouring motives thereof) but consider with our selves, what we should do
to award those threatnning mischiefs from this nation and army and to that end
we find nothing more effectual then to knit our selves together with this
fixed resolution, to part with our lives and all that is near and dear unto
us, before we part with our freedoms; and in relation thereunto we the Agents
to five Regiments of your Horse, have after our weak manner in this our
Representatation directed to our respective Regiments and to the whole Army,
discharged our duties; And we presume we have not erred from the equitable
sense of our solemn Engagement, or from the just maxims and matters contained
in our Declarations. Remonstrances, etc. from the which we are resolved not to
receed. Thus humbly craving your Excellencies favorable construction in our
innocent intentions and endeavors, we (as we always have been) cordially
remain.

Your Excellencies, and this Nations faithful Servants and Soldiers, to stand
or fall with you and it, for common Right and Freedom. Lievt. Genesis
Edward Trevers. Edmon Bear. Edward Trevers. Edmon Bear.
Com Genesis
George Garret. Jeremiah Cole.
Col. Fleetwood.
William Prior. William Bryan. John Fletcher.
Col. Riches.
John Dober. William Hudson.
Col. Whaleys.
Matthew. Wealey. William Russell..


Hamstead, October 15. 1647. We appoint Edmond Bear, and William Russell
abovesaid, in our names to present this Letter together with our Representation
entitled, The case of the Army, etc. to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.




