Truths triumph, OR Treachery anatomized, BEING An impartial Discovery of the
false, and treacherous information of M. Masterson, pretended Minister of
Christ at Shoreditch, against L. C. J. Lilburne, and I. Wildman, at the Lords
Bar, January 18. 1647. concerning a meeting of several honest men, in East
Smithfield, Ian. 17. etc.

In relation to which Information, the said L. C. Lilburne stands committed to
the Tower, and J. Wildman to the Fleet.

WITH A true Narrative of all the Passages and Discourses that passed at the
said meeting; as it was delivered at the Bar of the House of Commons, by J.
Wildman, Ian. 19. 1647.

Veritas non querit angulos;

He that is of God, loves the light. etc.
The Righteous is as bold as a Lion.
JOHN WILDMAN.

London Printed for Ia. Hornish, Feb. 1. 1647.

An impartial Relation of all the passages and discourses at a meeting of some
Honest men in East-Smithfield, upon the 17. of this present January, in
reference unto which, Lievt. Col. John Lilburn, and Mr. John Wildman stand
committed, one to the Tower, and the other to the Fleet. As it was made at the
House of Commons Bar on January 19.
IN this generation, Dicere quod nolo miserum, quod volo and debeo periculosum,
but if I perish I perish. Pereundum in licitis, that man's death is honorable,
whose integrity is the sword that slayes him. I hope I am no less provided of
a safe retreat, then the most adored Grandee of our times, a pillow of peace is
prepared in my most contemptible grave, and the gate of that blessed secure
Paradise of full communion with the Father is open for me. Et contempsit omnes,
ille qui mortem prius; he that contemns Death scorns both hopes, and fears,
those only affections which possess men's spirits with baseness or cowardice.

Surely he that is no great Astrologer may judge by the Aspect of the Stars in
this Horizon, that this English Air agrees best with the bodies of Camelions,
Parasites, Time servers, and implicit believers, such as change their forms.
Toties quoti^ annulus vertitur politicus. And therefore it would be a courtesy
beyond my enemies intentions, if they would send me post to a purer Climate.

But it may be some will call my Innocence Impudence, and ignobly impute my
justification of my self, to my effronted boldness: But if I had regarged the
barking of every Cerberus, I had now been deaf. Si sat esset accusasse quis
innocens erit; Indeed its the cry of many Sicophants of our age, that its
impudence to question the judgment of Parliament men, but I was never yet
persuaded that they all possessed Peter's Chair, or that I was bound to believe
my actions to be errors upon their word.

Yet I am so devoted to support the AUTHORITY and honor of the Commons in
Parliament, that were my single interest only concerned, rather then J would
discover one stain of injustice more in the robe of their honor, I would only
assert my innocence with a dumb eloquence, manibus ad sydera tensis: But the
fathers abuse and danger loosened the strings of the dumb child's tongue: There
is an invenomed arrow shot by my imprisonment, into the heart of the common
cause of my dearest Country, the black cloud of infamy cast upon my name,
dishonours the cause which I profess, to maintain and in the consequence may
divert well minded men from its prosecution: and beside, the nation has
received no superficial wound by my Arbitrary restraint: There was neither
witness nor evidence against me of a Crime, or a legal transgression in the
least punctillo: The Informer himself coming face to face at the Commons
bar, accused me of nothing in Law Criminal; and yet that I should be
disseized of my Liberty, and charged in the warrant with no less then
Treasonable practices against the State, whereby my life, credit, and estate,
are all endangered, this is a President, whose utmost evil consequence to the
freedom, life, and estate of every English man. If I should attempt to
demonstrate. J should with the painter that could not express his grief for
his daughter. Draw the Curtain. But let me first give you an impartial
Narrative of my cause.

On Wednesday the 19. of this instant January, I had intelligence as I was
walking in Westminster Hall, that J was inquired for by the Sergeant at Arms;
thereupon J voluntarily repaired to the House of Commons door, and presently I
was called to the bar, and the Speaker asked Mr. Masterson what he had to say
against me, to which he answered in words to this effect, viz.

That the discourse at the meeting in East-Smithfield was interchangeable, yet
this he remembered, that I said some Lords had sent to me the same day of the
meeting, to tell me, that they were willing to lay down their privileges of
being free from Arrests, and to be subject to the Law, and that they would be
content to part with their Legislative and Law-giving power from their
Posterities, so that it should not descend to their Heirs, provided they might
enjoy it for their own lives.

Likewise the Informer said, that at the time of his coming into the meeting,
I was speaking about tumults of the poor in Wiltshire.

Hereupon the Speaker asked me what I answered to them, and then I spoke to
this purpose, if not in so many words. viz.

Mr. Speaker, I come not herein reference to this Informer, or what he has
laid to my charge, neither am I here, by virtue of any legal Warrant, for I
received none; but I am here only in respect to this Honorable House, to
attend its pleasure; but as to this Informer; if that were truth, and a legal
Crime which he informs against me, I humbly conceive it comes not under the
cognizance The cognizance of any offense, except the offense of Judges, or
administrators of justice, does not originally or in the first place pertain
to the Parlia. but information ought to be given to some Justice of the peace
in the County where the offense is committed that he may proceed according to
law, that so in case of injustice or undue proceedings the party accused may
have his remedy and reparations by Law, whereas if the Parl. take the first
notice of any supposed offense and commit any person, he is under an
impossibility of reparations in a legal course, what injustice soever he
suffers.
of the Honorable House; for I conceive it far beneath the Authority of this
Honorable House to be executers of Law, seeing you are of right the sole
Legislators or Lawmakers: but though what this Informer says against me were
a Crime, and did come under the cognizance of this Honorable House; yet I
conceive I were not obliged to answer, because there is no legal Accusation,
but only a verbal uncertain relation of a discourse at a meeting. I shall
here add the proof of this assertion, the Statute of 42. Ed. 3. c. 3. Which
says, Its assented and accorded for the good governance of the Commons, that
no man be put to answer without presentment before Justices, or matter of
Record, or by due process and writ original according to the old Law of the
land. And the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. 64. says, That no man shall be taken by
Petition or suggestion made to the King or his Council (and the Parliament is
his grand Council) unless it be by indictment, or presentment of his good and
lawful people of the same neighborhood where such deeds be done, in due
manner, or by process made by writ original at the Common Law. See the Stat.
of 37. of Ed. 3. c. 18. and Petition of Right Now to proceed I further added
these words or the like.

Mr. Speaker, I was borne in England, and the Laws and Liberties of the Nation
are my Birthright, and I am so tender of those Liberties, that I cannot, I
dare not in conscience so far betray them, as to return answer to this
Informer. Yet I owe so much respect to this honorable House, that if you shall
please to give me freedom of speech and audience, I shall ingeniously and
impartially relate the matter of the discourse which passed at the meeting on
Ian. 17. for which I am accused, with all the circumstances to the best of my
remembrances.

Hereupon Mr. Speaker commanded me to withdraw, and the House debated whether I
should be heard, and within half an hour I was called in again to the Bar,
and Mr. Speaker said thus, Mr. Wildman, I am to tell you, that the House
commands you to return answer to what Mr. Masterson has said; unto whom I
answered thus.

Mr. Speaker, I cannot, I dare not betray my liberty in answering to this
Informer, upon the reasons which I have rendered, yet if this honorable House
please, I shall make a perfect relation of the business in question, and not
being interrupted I proceeded thus.

Mr. Speaker it is truth, I was at the meeting in East-Smithfield on Monday
last, and as I was informed, the principal occasion was to satisfy some which
were not maliciously, but conscientiously scruplous, whether they should any
more petition this Honorable House: the reason which was rendered, was, that
they had wearied themselves with petitioning, and notwithstanding they had
purchased their freedom with their blood, yet all their endeavors were
fruitless, and their persons imprisoned and abused for petitioning, and
sometimes their Petitions burned.

These scruples I endeavored to answer, first I undertook to prove that it was
their duty to employ all their power toward settling the freedoms of the
Nation: whosoever (said I) improves not his power to preserve that outward
happiness which God has in mercy given him. he rejects and dispises the
goodness of God toward him. Now a man's liberty is a special part of man's
earthly happiness, and therefore its every man's duty to endeavor to his
utmost to secure and setle his native freedoms; and otherwise, all the
miseries which ensue to any man by the loss: or want of his native liberty, is
brought upon himself, and it may be justly said to such, you have destroyed
your selves: Yet further (said I,) its the command of God, that every man
should seek the good of his neighbor, and consequently much more the good of
the Nation. Its the essential property of the blessed God to communicate of
his goodness universally, and no man shows forth any luster of the image of
God in him, unless it be by doing good, and its made the Character of a man of
worth or excellency, or a man approved of God, that he served God in his
generation; and so its said of Cornelius, he was a good man, that is, an
useful man in the age wherein he lived: And further (said I,) has not God
commanded us to relieve and help our neighbors oxen or Asses in any distress,
or being sunk down under any burden? and does he not much more command us to
endeavor the relief of the people of our Nation, whose backs are bowed down
under their heavy burdens? and wherefore (said I) have God united people into
a body or society, or Nation? is it not for this? that every one should be
helpful each to other and endeavor one another good mutually: and if one
person may sit still, and suspend all endeavors for the settlement of the
Nation, by the same reason another and another may be wholly negligent also,
and so throughout the Nation.

Further, I endeavored to convince them, that it was their duty in this
juncture of time. Now (said I) the greatest and most portentuous evil which
threatens sudden destruction to the Nation, is the divisions and distractions
which daily increase and abound. And its the unquestionable duty of every man,
to seek for peace and union if it be possible with every man; now it is not
possible to effect or procure an union in the Nation, without clearing and
securing its freedoms: wherefore (said J) have we contended each with other
near seven years? Is it not for justice and freedom? Has not the Kings
Partizens pretended that they fought for their laws and liberties? both
parties have made the violation of those, the seeming ground of their quarrel,
and the securing those the only price of their blood; therefore its impossible
there should be union, unless you discover even to your opposers in
particular, what those freedoms, and what those rules of common justice are,
for which you have contended. Doubtless (said I) its the ignorance or
misunderstanding of one another, that has made the contention so bloody: if
your opposers did understand that what you desire, is as much for their
freedom as your own, and that they should enjoy as great an influence of good
as your selves, from those principles of freedom which you desire should be
established; that bitterness, malice and hatred which burns now in their
hearts against you, would then cease: what has been their cry (said I) bnt
this, that you know not what you would have, therefore if all of us would
desire friendly, loving meetings with our neighbors, and say to them, here is
that which we account the price of our blood, the bottom of our desires: had
we but this, we should never accoun^ any thing more worth blood; or the
engaging in a new war: I beseech you friends consider whether those our
desires concern not you and your Posterities, as much as it concerns us: Let
us consider it in love, if this were done (I said) I was confident, our sad
distractions would soon cease. And here I added, that I judged it the wisdom
of those, whosoever they were, that drew the large Petition, that they inserted
no such particular grievances, as might disingage any considerable party, and
so continue our distractions: For instance, Tithes are by many conceived to be
a heavy burden, yet the removal of them is not desired in the large
Petition, because a considerable party in the Kingdom has much particular
interest in them, and the removal of such a particular grievance is not worth
blood, or the hazzarding of a war, by continuing our divisions. Unto this J
added; present necessity did now call upon every man to stir up all his
strength in endeavoring such an union of the people in the principles of
common right and freedom; I told them that they felt by sad experience, that
trading was decayed, and the price of food so excessive, that it would even
rend any pitiful heart to hear and see the cries and tears of the poor,
who profess they are almost ready to famish, and while our divisions
continue, and there be no settlement of the principles of freedom and justice,
trading will but more decay every day: Rumors and fears of War, and the
Army coming now into the City, makes M^rchants unwilling to trust their goods
in the City, and exchange beyond sea falls, and there will be no importing of
goods, and then there will be no exporting and so the staple commodities of the
Kingdom which maintains the constant trade, will not tend to the advantage of
the laborers, and then most of the poor in the Kingdom which live by
spinning, carding, etc. will be ready to perish by famine: Upon this occasion I
told them what I heard at my Inn at the Sarrazens head in Friday street, viz.
that some Clothiers of Wiltshire came in, who professed that trading was so
dead, that some of them who set at work formerly a 100. did not now set at work
above a dozen or the like, and that the poor did gather together in troops of
10. 20. 30. in the Roades, and seized upon Corn as it was carrying to market,
and divided it among themselves before the owners faces, telling them they
could not starve: and hereupon J inserted that in probability a sudden
confusion would follow, if a speedy settlement were not procured.

But J further told them, that J conceived no other probable way of preventing
a new war with the Scots and other forraigners, but by uniting the people in
the principles of common right and freedom, wherein all are equally concerned:
and J said, I believed it was intended that the large Petition should be sent
into all parts of the Kingdom, that if it be possible all might join in those
desires.

And if God should be so propitious to this Nation, then the Scots would
despair of any Partizens or assistants amongst us, and so would be more
catious in adventuring to engage in war against us.

Now having thus convinced them of the necessity and their duty, to put forth
their utmost vigor, in endeavoring the settlement of their freedoms. I also
attempted to demonstrate to them, that there was no legal, justifiable way
wherein they could seek for their freedoms, or redress of their common
grievances, but by petitioning this honorable House. I told them there was no
other visible Authority to whom they could seek, or which is entrusted by the
people with power to redress their grievances, or to make or repeal Laws,
for the vindication, clearing, and securing their native rights and liberties,
and therefore their interest was involved and bound up in the interest of this
house, and (though some Members of this House, did not as we feared so intend
pnblique good as we could wish) yet if this visible authority was not supported
and preserved from contempt, a general confusion would follow, and the nation
be laid wast and desolate: and by these or words to this effect, the scruples
were cleared.

After this there was occasion offered accidentally to discourse of the Lords
Legislative or lawgiving power, both of the rights, and of the mischieses which
have ensued upon their exercise of it, and there I spoke my opinion: I told
them I conceived they had no legal right to such a coordinate power in making
Laws with this Honorable House, and I induced for a proof the Declaration of
this House; wherein you have given us a transcription of the Kings Oath out of
the Records, and aver that the King is sworn to pass and confirm by his
authority, such laws as the people shall choose, See their Rem. of May 26.
1642. book decl. page 712. 713. It was but a formality, that laws have bin
carried to the King, for his assent; for it was wont usually to be done the
last day of the Parl. and so his passing the Bills or laws dissolved the Parl.
and therefore observe, when the King passed any Bill since this Parl. there is a
proviso in the Act that the passing that Bill shall not dissolve the present
session of Parl. See a little book of the manner of holding parl. page 54, 55.
See the Arm. decl. of June 14. 1647 book decl. page 43.
or as in the old translation. the folks or Commons shall choose; whereby the
Lords are totally excluded, from any interest in, or right to the Legislative
power, seeing they neither profess themselves to be Commoners personally, or
to represent the Commons. And thence J inferred, that it was further evident
from that Oath, that the King himself had no right to the Law-making power: for
this Honorable House has asserted and proved, that he has no legal power to
dissent: from the laws that you make; and then its irrational to imagine that
there need be any assent, or that it should be of any validity: and hence J
concluded that there was no color of the Lords right to that power. They are
created Lords solely by the Kings will, and sit by virtue of his pattent, and
the King himself being not entrusted with any share in that supreme lawgiving
power, his pattents cannot invest the Lords with that power or trust.

And I yet further added, that the law giving power is arbitrary in its own
nature, and to estate an arbitrary power in any whatsoever during life, is
inconsistent with freedom, and with a just government of a people, by written
laws, and renders any * State wheresoever it is, no other then a Tyranny, and
the people no better then Vassalls: but much more is it incompatible with a
shadow of freedom to have such an arbitrary power descend in any Line from
Generation to Generation forever. Yea I told them that I conceived this was
contrary to the common light of nature, the very end of Government, and the
express words of the Scripture. Its said Romans 13. 4. That the Magistrate is
the Minister of God for good, now that implies, that persons which are
entrusted with such power, ought to be so qualified and accomplished, that they
may be suitable to exercise and improve their power for good, otherwise the very
end of Government is subverted. Now how is it possible that there should be any
assurance, that a father furnished and completed with all excellencys, shall
have an heir endowed with the least ability or capacity of governing? what is
more common, then that the wisest Solomon may have an unworthy Rehoboam for his
successor? no man can promise that the Lords Sons shall have either so much
wisdom or honesty, as to be fi^ Subjects of any power, much less of that
supreme trust of the Lawgiving power.

And as to the evils that have ensued upon the Lords exercise of that Law
giving power. I spoke my opinion as freely; I told them, that in reason, their
claim to that power, was the occasion of all the innocent blood that has been
split in England. Jf the Ordinance in Feb. 1642. for settling the Militia of the
kingdom, had been put in execution when it was first sent up to the Lords for
their concurrence, the King could never have raised an Army; but their assuming
to themselves a power coordinate with this Honorable House, and then refusing
when this Honorable House sent again, and again, and again, to pass that
Ordinance; these etheir delays, and preventions of settling the Militia gave
both time and opportunity to the King to raise an Army; and then this
Honorable House was compelled for the peoples defense to raise an Army also,
and engage in war. I might have added, that the Lords did never then consent to
that Ordinance until See 1 part. book Decl. page 364, 548.
Mr. Hollis demanded in a manner the names of those Lords at the bar, which
would not concur, and desired that those Lords which would join with the
Commons to save the Kingdom, would take some course to discover themselves,
and also showed them a Petition to the Commons, desiring that such Lords would
sit and vote with them as one entire (c) Body.

But this I did add, that we had most sad experience now of late of the
dangerous consequence of their claim to that Power, they exposed the Kingdom
again to Blood and Confusion by delaying so long to pass those gallant Votes
of this Honorable house against the King by that means the people which are
discontented at those Votes, have time to ruminate and chew upon their
discontents, and the fire of their displeasure has time to kindle, and no man
knows into what flames it may break forth; and therefore I conceive there is
no possible means to preserve the Nation from ruin, unless there be speedy
acting, and proceedings according to the good beginnings of this Honorable
House.

Some other discourse happened accidentally about the reasons of that sudden
Change which appeared in Lieut. General Cromwell, and Commissary General
Ireton, that they now declare against any addresses to be made to the King, or
received from him, whereas they have pleaded, That they were engaged to
preserve the Kings person, and establish him in his just Power.

Hereupon a story was related by a Gentleman at the Meeting, to which I was an
auditor, he said, he had credible information, that a gallant honest Gentleman
of the House of Commons, whose father was a Knight, had certain intelligence,
That the King had promised Lieutenant General Cromwell, to give a blue Ribband
and a George, and make him Earl of Essex. And that Commissary Ireton, should
be either Field-Marshall or some such great Officer in Ireland; and that his
own Son should be Bod-chamber man to the Prince: And hereupon his Spirit was
so moved, that he resolved he would rather become another Felton to Cromwell,
then suffer his Country to be betrayed, and all honest men destroyed: And that
he had prepared himself with Pistol and Dagger for that purpose, only he
revealed his mind to another Member of the Commons House, which dissuaded him
from attempting the execution of his purpose; and that Lieutenant General
Cromwell had intelligence of this, and presently a Fast or day of Humiliation
was called, and so the great change ensued.

After this, I spoke my thoughts to this effect; That I knew not what influence
any such Circumstances might have upon the spirit of Lieutenant General
Cromwell, but I rather conceived that the change was upon this occasion, viz.
That the Presbyterian Scots, considering that Lieutenant General Cromwell was
no friend to them, and that the King was possessed with deadly hatred against
them; and having intelligence, that the King relied upon the Lieutenant
General to make his terms for him with this Honorable house, and well
weighing the danger to which they were exposed by two such potent Enemies, or
rather one such impla^able opposer; backed with a potent Army, were enforced in
respect to their own preservation to attempt the breaking of that design, and
prevent the Kings coming in upon the Armies, or Lieutenant General his
interest: thereupon, though they were no real Friends to the Kings negative
voice, or to his pretended right to the Militia, and would not allow the King
in their own Kingdom a negative voice to their Laws in the least Punctilio,
nor the least shadow of Power in disposing of their Militia; yet a necessity
was upon them to out-bid Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell, and to offer both a Negative
voice, and a Militia to the King in this Kingdom, That so the King might be
induced to cast himself upon them, and presume to come in upon their interest:
hereupon the King as he said at Ouburne, accepted his best bargain, and took
their proffer who bad most for him; and then the tenders of the Lieutenant
General being rejected, he was necessitated to engage with this Honorable
house in those Votes, that there should neither any addresses be made further
to him, nor any received from him. And when I consider how zealously Commissary
General Ireton has formerly endeavored the renewing addresses unto the King,
and that there should be another manner of address made to him, then was by
the Proposions sent to Newcastle, and when he was reflected upon by some of
the General Council at Putney, as having occasioned the sense of the Army to
be misrepresented to this Honorable house, viz. That it desired a new address
to be made to the King; he professed that if he did not think it to be the
sense of the Army, he would loath and abhor the Army and detest to continue
with them for a day: When I consider these things, and mind that the same
Gentleman should be the first or second man in this Honorable house, which
should move that no more addresses should be made to or received from the King,
I cannot imagine that this so great a turn should be upon any other then a
private interest.

After this, one at the meeting moved a Question, viz. Whether it be not
needful to frame something speedily to present to the Parliament, to encourage
them to proceed according to those good Votes against the King, late passed,
the rather, because the large Petition will be a long time before it be
presented.

Unto this I answered, That I conceived the large Petition contained those
Principles upon which this Honorable house must proceed in case those late
Votes be prosecuted, and doubtless that Petition is known to be abroad by
every active Member of this Honorable house, and in case the people shall
freely join in that Petition, it will more strengthen their hands in their
effectual proceedings according to the late Votes, then any Paper subscribed
only with Three or four or 5000 Men.

Some other contingent discourse passed and something like to that which this
Informer falsely averres to be spoken by me, was spoken by another Gentleman in
the meeting, viz. He said, that some which were near to some Lords had been
that day with me, and toled me that some Lords were willing that their
Legislative Power which they exercise should not descend to their Posterities
as an inheritance, that they could freely part with their Privilege or
Freedom from Arests and be subject to the Law, to be compelled as others may
in case of default to pay their This was the only thing which Mr. Masterson
informed against me to my face at ye house of Common^ Bar, which if it were
true, were no crime, yet the thing is false as to me, being not spoken by me.
Debts.

One passage more J remember I heard from some in the meeting, viz. That the
large Petition did cost money for the Printing, and whosoever pleased might
contribute either Twopence, 6. d. or 12. d. toward the charges that were
incident to Printing and dispersing.

This is the sum and effect of what I spoke at the House of Commons bar and
I could not then remember any other material passage in discourse, or any
other considerable circumstance at the meeting; yet by recollecting my thoughts
I remember a passage or two more, viz. One at the meeting inquired of L.
Colonel Lilburne, whether there was any truth in the rumor, that the Lords had
sent to him to offer him 3000. l. to desist the promotion of the This qu^ the
informer changed to an affirmation with a large addition, averring that L. C.
Lilburne should say, that the Lords had offered him 3000 pounds to desist from
promoting the large Petition.
large Petition; but Lieut. Colonel Lilburne answered, That it was a false
groundless report, neither did he imagine what should be the original or
occasion of that rumor, unless it were this; That a Lord sent to him in
relation to his particular business, to tell him, that he conceived he
suffered much want and hardship by the Lords, and that he could not but be
reduced to a necessitous condition by his Imprisonment; and therefore he had a
considerable token for him if he thought it would be accepted as love, and not
despised: to this said he, I answered, that any favor could not but be an
engagement to an ingenious spirit to serve the Donor, and that he would not be
engaged to any Pattentee Lord who claimed a right to the Law-giving Power, by
virtue of a Patent from the King; but if that Lord would reject his Patentee
Lordship, and be content to be chosen by his Country as a Knight of the Shire,
he should then accept the smallest token of his Love, if it were but five
shillings.

One thing more comes to my mind, viz. Lieut. Colonel Lilburne speaking of the
necessity of uniting all sorts of people in the Principles of Freedom, which
are of common concernment, and that he conceived there was no other possible
way to prevent confusion; he added, that if God should not suffer it to be
prevented, yet in a general confusion he was confident, that those who should
be known to have promoted the Large Petition, which equally concerned the good
of all men should be more safe then he that should wear a blew Ribband in his
This I hear the Informer turned thus, that L. C. Lilburne should say, That he
intended to raise the People, and that his friends should have the Large
Petition in their hands and blue Ribbands in their Hats.
Hat.

Courteous Reader, thou have now the impartial narrative of all the Passages of
that meeting, where the common bruit of the unworthy Pamphletiers say, such a
dangerous Design was laid; I wish the most piercing Eagle-eye would make the
exactest search into all my discourse, and demeanours in this business, and
discover to me an erratum according to the rigor of the Law or Justice, even
in the least Punctilio. The Informer charged me with no colorable crime,
though whatsoever he said to my face had been true in every punctum; and as for
Witnesses none were called or examined (though the Diurnall man's Pen could
bear no true ink in that particular) yet those two Persons whom the informer
brought as pretended Witnesses, confessed as I can prove by Oath; That there
was nothing spoken at the Meeting for which J am accused, but what rended to
advance the Parliaments honor, or words to that effect.

But upon what invisible grounds I know not, in the Evening this ensuing Order
passed the House.

Diae Mercurii 19 Januar. 1647.
ITs this day resolved upon the Qnestion by the Commons in Parliament
assembled, That Mr. John Wildman be Committed to the Fleet in Order to his
trial according to Law, for treasonable and seditious Practices against the
State.

Hen. Elsinge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

In prosecution of this Order Mr. Speaker issued forth to the Sergeant at Arms
this ensuing Warrant.

BY virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, these are to require you to
receive from the Sergeant at Arms, or his Deputy, the body of Mr. John Wildman
into the Prison of the Fleet, London; and him there to detain in safe Custody
as your Prisoner in order to his trial according to Law, for treasonable and
seditious Practices against the State, until the pleasure of the House be
further signified. And for so doing this shall be your Warrant.

Dat. 19 January, 1647. WILLIAM LENTHALI, Speaker.

The Serjant at Arms sending this warrant, I refused to serrender my Liberty
unless he would force it from me because I conceived the warrant to be
illegal; and upon the same account, I refused also the next day, until force
was brought: though then that clause, until the pleasure of the House be
further signified, was expnnged: and then I told them that if Theefes meet me
upon Newmarket Heath and will have my Purse, if they be too strong for me: I
judge it wisdom to surrender my Purse, rather then hazard my life; and I
protest here I yield to you my Liberty upon the same reason only.

Now least this my deportment, should be matter of offense to any, or scandal
to my self, as if I slighted that supreme Authority of Parliament, which I
have so vigorusly contended to maintain; I shall give a faithful account of
the reason of my demeanor.

First, there was no shadow of a Legal crime; not so much as a misdemeanour
objected to my face against me by the informer: and to this I may add, that
though the information had been of something criminal, yet being only a
verbal, uncertain information, or suggestion, its contrary to Magna Charta,
to the Stat. of 5. Ed. 3. 9. 2 of Ed. 3. 4, 28. Ed. 3. 3. 42. Ed. 3. 3. that my
Liberty should be taken from me upon that ground only, and hereupon I desired
on Thursday, the 20 of Ian. only so much favor, as to be heard speak for my
self in this particular.

Secondly, Suppose a crime had been objected against me, yet the warrant for my
commitment was wholly illegal.

Let me not be mistaken, as if I intended to bound the power and jurisdiction
of Parliament any further, then common equity and reason limits them, which is
naturally implied, and supposed to be a Law to Legislators, even from that
annallogy, which all bodies politic hold with the natural, whence all
governors and governments borrow a proportionable respect; hence I conceive
that an act of parliament against common right or reason, or repugnant, or
impossible, to be performed, is null and void in it self: as supposing an act
of Parliament should be made to constitute a man judge in his own case, it were
void in it self, and I judge this to be the ground of executing that exemplary
justice upon Empson, and Dudley, for putting in execution that Act of
Parliament in the 11 of Hen. 7. C. 3. that Act of Parliament was against common
equity and reason, the words are these, be it enacted that the Justices of the
Assizes, and Justices of the peace upon information for the King, before them
to be made, have full power and Authority by their descretion to hear and
determine all offenses and contempts, etc. See Cooks Instit. 4. part. page 40.
First, here the Justices were authorized to proceed upon information, without
any indictment; second, to judge by their discretion and not according to the
Law and custom of England, as all proceedings ought to be, now this being
against common right and reason, the Act was null and void in it self, and
Empson, and Dudley, Justices, died justly, for what they did according to this
Act, as though there had been no such Act.

Nevertheless I conceive the maxim that this Parliament declared in their
Remonstranee of May 26. 1642 book decl. p. 281. stands impregnable, viz. that
those which shall guide themselves by the judgment of Parliament, ought
whatsoever happen to be secure and free from all account and penaltys; but it
is naturally, and necessarily supposed, that the judgment of Parliament cannot
be against common equity or reason: as when the Law made it petty treason for a
servant to kill his master, it was not made such a hanious crime for a child to
kill his father; the reason was, because the Law supposed it to be a thing so
abhorred of nature, that such a fact would never be committed and likewise its
not to be supposed that the judgment of Parliament should be contrary to
common reason or equity, and therefore such limitations are not expressed in
any maxims relating to the power of Parliaments; yet they are necessarily
implied: but I believe the freedoms of this Nation will never be secure until
the extent of the power and trust of the peoples representatives, and the
peoples reservations to themselves be clearly declared; This I speak in
referrence to their legislative power, of which only I conceive that maxim in
the Law concerning the Parliament is to be understood, viz. Leges latent in
^ectoribus, the Laws are hidden in the Parliaments breasts.

But as to the Parliaments power in executing Laws, upon such offenders as do
properly and originally come under their cognizance, in my humble opinion they
are obliged to proceed in the legal and ordinary way of putting the Laws in
execution, this Sr. Edw. Cook, 4 part instit. p. 3^. expressly affirms;
says he; Where by order of Law a man cannot be ^^tainted of high treason,
unless the offense be in Law high treason, he ought not to be attainted by
general words of high treason by authority of Parliament, but the high treason
ought to be specially expressed. And when King Hen. eight, enquired of the
chief Justices, whether a man that was (h) See Cook, instit. 4. part. 137.
forth coming, ought to be attained of high treason by Parliament, and never
called to his answer? the Judges answered, that the high Court of Parliament
ought to give examples to inferior Courts in proceeding according to Justice;
no inferior Court could do the like. Let their judgment be duly observed,
they said no inferior Court could so proceed, and therefore muchlesse the
Parliament; who ought so to observe the Laws and rules of justice, as to be
patterns of justice to other Courts, and the rather, because from them there
is no appeal; so that the argument is a minor ad majus.

Indeed the high Court of Parliament has a power of declaring the Law in
particular cases, before them; and they say they have not claimed it nor
exercised it otherwise, to be obligatory as a Judicial declaration of the Law
See the Parlm. Rem. of May 26 1 part book de. p. 721.
but observe: this power is to be exercised about Laws which may be taken by
way of consequence, equity or construction, not about penal declarative Laws;
such must be taken by the letter, only; otherwise they should implie a
contradiction to themselves, and be no more declarative Laws but Laws of
construction or constitutive; so that this their judicial power in declaring
Laws, exempts them not from an obligation to proceed according to Law, in
executing any penal declarative Laws; such as are the Laws against treason,
etc.

But the Parliaments Legislative power has its exercise in this case; they may
repeal any penal declarative Law, or enact any new Law, declaring what shall
be treason or petty treason, etc.

But every supposed offender ought to injoye the benefit of any Law which was
unrepealed at the time, of his supposed offense; neither can any Law enacted
after the imagined crime of any man, be the rule by which such a criminal
person shall be tried or judged, Romans 4. the script. says expressly, Where
there is no law, there is no transgression; and I may say further, where the
Law is not declared it binds not, nor can any man justly suffer any punishment
for the breach of such a law; Its a known maxim of the Law, de non
existontibus et non apparentibus eadem est ratio, there is no difference
between Laws not made, and Laws not declared; and therefore of old all the
Acts made by any Parliament, were by the Sheriff of every County of England,
Proclaimed and published in all places through his Bayliwick, and the Kings
writ issued forth to every Sheriff to that purpose. See Cooks instit 4 par.
c. 1, p, 16,


Now I conceive I may conclude that the Parliament ought to proceed in the
ordinary, legal, way of executing at least the penal laws: and if it were
otherwise, their were no law in England during the seting of Parliaments: for
if the Laws which bind to such and such manner of ^roceedings be not
obligatory to the Parliament, then no other Laws, which declares offenses, and
the penalty of offenders, are binding; and consequently, the Liberty, estate
and life of every man is subject to there absolute wills^ nay should it be
granted, that the Parliament may proceed against, and imprison, try, judge, or
censure supposed offenders, contrary to the kowne laws and the ordinary
proceedings therein, all the people are the worst of vassalls in the time of
Parliament, being in effect without a Law, whereby to put a difference between
good and evil, between just and unjust: and yet being in danger of the loss
of estates, Liberties, and lives, for doing what they conceive most purely
just, in case others shall judge it unjust; Its the Law which is the safeguard,
the custody of all private interests: the estates, Liberties, and lives of all
are in the keeping of the Law.

And therefore the Parliament in their Rem. of May 26. 1642. 1 book of decl. p.
693. justly testifies an indignation in their spirits against that scandal
which Reader observe that cases of necessity in time of war are always to be
excepted necessity dissolves all Laws and such cases proceeding must be
arbitrary.
the King cast upon them, viz. that they disposed of all the subjects lives and
fortunes by their own votes, contrary to the known law of the land: upon
these grounds I hope I may say without offense, that the warrant was illegal,
and the illegality was not in a punctilio but in the principle clause, for
there is no particular crime expressed in it^, and Sr. Edw. Cook, in the
second part of institute, says its the special thing required by act of
Parliament to make a Mittimus legal; that the cause be expressed with such
convenient certainty as it may appear judicially that the offense requires
such a judgment, as in case a person be committed for high treason: its not
sufficent that it be expressed in the Mittimus for high treason, but it must be
more particularly for high treason against the person of the King; or for
counterfeiting the broad seal, or the money of the King etc and in case it be
for petty treason, it ought to be declared in the Mittimus as for the death of
A. B. his Master, and so for felony for the death that, C. B. or for stealing
a horse, etc. and its to be observed that an indictmeut ought to rehearse the
effect of the Mittimus, which directly proves, that the cause in such a
general certainty ought to be showed, read Cooks exposition of Magna Charta 29
for further satisfaction: and that of Festus in Act. 25. 26, 27. is worth
observation that he sought for some certain thing against Paul to insert into
his Mittimus, whereby he should be sent to Caesar, for (says he) it seems to
me unreasonable to send a prisoner and not withal to signify the crimes laid
against him.

And I cannot but imagine that the Parliament proceeded upon this ground in
refusing to imprison such as have been accused in general, of high treason,
doubtless, with Festus, they judged it unreasonable to ^ disseize any man man
of his Liberty without such a particular crime probably at least objected
against him, as evidently requires such a judgment; Thus when the Kings
Attourny General exhibited Articles of high Treason against Mr. Hollis, Mr.
Pim, Mr. Hampden, Mr. Stroud, and Sir Arthur Has^eridgo, they Petitioned the Sea 1. par. book Decl. page 52. 65, 67.
King twice to discover what proof of those Articles were against them, before
any proceedings were to be against them; and in a third Petition See 1 part
book Decl. page 77.
they have these words; Whereas by the express Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, that is to say, by two Acts of Parliament, the one made in the 37, and
the other in the 38 of Edw. the 3. If any whatsoever make suggestion to the
King of any Crime, committed by another; the same Person ought to be sent with
the suggestion before the Chancellor, or Keeper of the Great Seal, Treasurer,
and the Grand Council, there to find surety to pursue his suggestion; which if
he cannot prove, he is to be Imprisoned until he has satified the Party
accused of his damages and slander, and made fine and Ransom to the King. And
least it should be said, That this concerns only Suggestors made against any
to the King himself; Its said in the Statute of the 25 of Edw. 3. Chap. 4.
That no man shall be taken by Petition or suggestion made to the King, or his
Council, etc. And I am sure the word Council, includes the Parliament; And
least it should be said, that there ought to be Particular matter, and probable
proofs offered before the Imprisonment of the Members of Parliament: But its a
Privilege peculiar to them: the Parliament has declared as much in the case
of other Persons, viz. When the King about January, 1642. in answer to the City
Petition, desired that Alderman Penington, Alderman Foulk, Colonel Ven, and
Colonel Manwaring, might be Committed to safe custody as guilty of high
Treason, that they might be proceeded against by the course of the Sea 1. p.
book Decl. page ^40, 841.
Law, Mr. Pim declared to the City by the Command of both Houses, and as their
Sense, that Its against the rules of Justice, that any man should be
Imprisoned upon a general charge, when no Particulars are See 1 par. book
Decl. page 845.
proved against them. And besides the Privilege of Parliament men objected,
extends not to Treason, Felony, or breach of the Peace; but in such cases any
Member of Parliament may be Arrested by any minister of Justice, to the intent
he may be brought to Parliament, Corpus cum causa, and also detayned in safe
custody till such time, See 1. part. book Decl. page 723, 724; and therefore
the Case is generally inclusive, and to that purpose most excellent are the
Parliaments words in their Declaration of May 19. 1642. 1. p. book Decl. page
201. We conceive it a heinous Crime against the Law of nature, against the
rules of Justice, that innocent men should be charged with so high an offense
as Treason in the face of the highest Iudicatory of the Kindome, without
witness, without evidence, without all possibility of reparation in a Legal
course. Reader take notice, that the single Informer against me, produced
neither Witness nor evidence of what he said, and I am left without all
possibility of reparations in a legal way; because the Parliament has taken
the first cognizance of my supposed crime and in stead of a Justice of Peace
committed me to Prison.


And doubtless upon the same ground the Parliament refused to suspend from the
House, ^d much more to imprison the 11 Members accused by the Army, though 5.
Articles See the book of the Arm. decl. page, 47, 48. 49.
were ^en in against them, v^z. 1. That they had endeavored to overthrow the
rights of the Subject in ^rary ways, and to delay and obstruct justice. 2.
That they had deluded, surprised, and abused (...) House to provoke the Army to
distempers, and re^and the relief of Jreland. 3. That they endea^red the
pulling the Army in pieces, to the danger of the Kingdoms peace. 4. That they
had en^voured to raise forces, to list, and procure to be listed, Officers and
Soldiers without the authority (...) Parliament, to imbroyle the kingdom in
blood, for their own desperate designs. 5. That they had ^vited and ab^tted
tumul^ous Reformado Officers to assemble at Westminster, to offer violence to,
(...) enforce the Parliament. The House voted and declared about the 25. of
June after the ex^biting this charge: that by the Laws of the Land, no
judgment could be given to suspend those (...). Members from sitting in the
House before particulars were produced and proofs made. See the Manifesto of
the Army from Vxbridge June 27. upon these Votes book decl. page 70.


I have thus enlarged my discourse of this particular, to satisfy all men that
my desire of a (...) warrant or commitment was grounded upon the Parliaments
own Declarations, as well a^ ^aw, and that malice it self might not dare to
adjudge me for that humble and peaceable desire, (...) contemner of the
authority of Parliament, for the preservation of which I shall run ^ch manifold
hazzards.

Neither was there any necessity to speak thus much in relation to what Mr.
Masterson informed against me. For he accused me of no crime, unless it be a
crime to relate to honest ^n, what I heard of the tumu^uo^snesse of the poor in
Wiltshire, or to tell them what I ^ard some Lords were willing to condescend
to, in relation to their privileges and their ^gislative power, though this
latter was fal^e and not spoken by me.

Now if any shall inquire how an order passed the House to commit me for
treasonable and ^ious practices against the State, J must return an Jgnoramus:
its transcendently above the ^sphere of my understanding.

But least the grisly aspect of such horrid words seeming to relate to some
monstrous crimes, ^ould ^ffright or amaze my friends, I shall give them a
brief account of treason, which yet is ^laid to my charge, and what it is in
law, and J shall not trifle about the derivation of the lord, as from Trahir,
treacherously to betray, etc.

All offenses which are treason, are comprehended literally and expressly in the
Stat of 25. (...) Edw. 3. c. 2. And this Statute has been confirmed, and more
honor given to it by Par^ments, then to any other except Magna Charta: as the
Stat. of the 1. Hen. 4. c. 10. Re^ing, that whereas at a Parliament holden 21.
R. 2. diverse pains of Treason were ordained (...) Statute, in so much, as there
was no man did know how to behave himself to do, speak, ^say, for doubt of
such pains. Its enacted by the King the Lords and Commons, that in no ^me to
come, any treason be adjudged of, otherwise then it was ordained by the Stat of
25. ^d. 3. c. 2. and the Stat. of 1. Ed. 6. c. 12. and 1. M^. Chapter 1. Sess 1.
Now all the offenses which are contained in that Stat. of 25. Ed. 3. may be
divided into six Classes, the first concerns death, which is either a
compassing or imagining the death of the King, Queen, or Prince, and declaring
the same by some Covert deed, or a killing and murdering some Officer of
^stice in their places, doing their offices, as the Chancellor, Treasurer,
Justices of the one ^ench and of the other, Justices in O^re, etc The 2. kind
of Treason, is the violation of, or carnal knowing of the Queen, the Kings
eldest daughter, or the Princes wife. The 3 is, levy^g war against the King.
The 4. is, adhering to the Kings enemies, within the Realm or without, and
declaring the same by Court Act. The 5. is, counterfeiting the great Seal, the
^ivie Seal, the Kings coin. The 6. is, bringing into the Realm counterfeit
money to the likeness of the Kings coin. Now unless an offense be within one
of these Classes or heads its (...) high treason. See Cooks 3. part, inst. page
3. 4. But let the Reader observe, that the King in this statute, is taken in
hispolitick capacity as he is a man, there is no treason can be committed
against him, but only as he is a person trusted with such high authority, and
so the levying war against the Laws and authority of the King, is a levying
war against the King, See the Parl. Rem. of May 26 book decl. page 727.
though it be not against his person, yea, though those who levy the war, have
the personal command of the King for it.

This Stat. provided sufficiently, that the people should have a clear rule
whereby to measure their actions in case of treason, so as to be secure from
the Judges malice or injustice, the words are positive and exclusive, as to
them, that they shall not judge any thing treason, which (...) not specified in
this Act, the word specified is to be observed, which is as much as to say
particularized, or set down particularly. But the saluo, that the Judges in
case of any Act, not particularize^ and supposed to be treason, should defer
judgment, and transfer the case to the King and Parliamen^ who might declare
it treason. This made the rule of the peoples actions, as to Parliaments to be
wholly uncertain, this saluo was like a drawn sword hanging over every man's
head by the slender thre^ of a consequence or illation. And by this diverse were
condemned by the King and Parliament a^ Traitors, which could not have been
condemned by the Statute, one was transferred from the Kings Bench to the
Parliament in the 8. of Rich. the 2. and his fact was adjudged treason and in
the 11. of the same King Rich. 2. the Duke of Jreland, and Nevill Arch Bishop
of Yor^ were impeached of treason by Gloucester, Arundell, and Warwick, and
though their facts were not treason by the Statute; yet by virtue of the saluo
they were convicted of treason, and i^ the 21. of Rich. 2. the King and
Parliament reversed that sentence, and by the same salu^ those three Noble men
their accusers were adjudged Traitors, and in the 10. of Hen. 4. h^ successor,
that revocation of the sentence against the Duke of Jreland and Nevell which
wa^ in the 21. of Rich. 2. was again repealed, and the sentence against them,
in the 11. of R. (...) was established, thus by this uncertain proviso, treason
was tossed to and fro, and no man knew when he was safe, because the rule of
their actions were uncertain, according to the o^ maxim, misera servitas ubi
ius est vagum et ^ncertam.

But in the Parliament of the 1. H. a petition was preferred to have Treason
limited with in some statute, because they knew not what to speak, nor what to
do; least it be adjudged treason, and hereupon was that statute made of the 1.
of H. 4. c. 10. whereby that uncertain proviso was repealed, and it was inacted
that in times to come, nothing should be esteemed treason; but what was
literally contained in the Statute of 25. E. 3. c. 2. And in the 1. of Ma. S^
1. this was confirmed that nothing should be adjudged high Treason, petty
Treason, (...) Misprision of Treason, but what was declared and expressed in
the 25. of Ed. 3. c. 2. This wo^ expressed says Cook 3. part instit. p. 24.
excludedeth all implications or inferences whatsoever, See Cooks 3. part
instit. p. 9.
Now nihill relictum est arbitrio iudicis neque parliamenti, there is no
constructive nor i^terpretative treason by arguments, a minori ad maius, or a
simili, either from the like fact, (...) from the lesser to the greater.
Neither is there any intentionall treason, saving against the Kings life. If
persons should conspire to levy War, it were no treason, for by the Statu^
there must be levying war in facto, actually before it be treason.

Now in my humble opinion, the King by consequence or influence cannot justly
decla^ the act of any man to be treason according to this statute, unless it
be contained in the express letter thereof, and I humbly offer these reasons.

1. This Statute is a declarative Law, and should it be taken by equity, or
construction the implies a contradiction. 2. This is a penal law, and such can
admit of no construction or i^ferences. Penalties are to persuade to the
keeping of known laws, not of Laws coniectura^ ambiguous, and to be taken by
consequence, which perhaps the most learned Lawyers may n^ imagine to be
intended by them, and much less the people. Doubtless they are to concer^
that in case they obey the statutes according to the Letter, they are not
liable to any penal^

And J find that the Parliameut in the 13. of Eliz. did exactly observe this
law, that nothing should by virtue of the statute be interpretative treason.
They might have very plausibly have impeached those of treason which brought
the Popes Bulls from Rome to stir up the people to mutiny and rebellion, and to
take away the Queens life, but this fact was not contained in the preceding
statute, and therefore the persons not justly guilty of treason, seeing they
transgtessed no declarative law, and yet that Parliament declared it to be
treason for the time to come, during the Queens life, for any person to bring
such Bulls from Rome to stir up the people to mutiny. Thus every Parliament
may declare what crimes they please to be treason, but by common reason or
light of nature, those statutes must refer only to future obedience; a real
crime committed before the making of a statute cannot be a breach of that
statute because it was not extant, in rerum natura.

Now let honest hearts (which J understand be too many) that are troubled at my
restraint, upon pretense of treasonable practices, set them J say, be satisfied
from their own reason. Let them judge whether a loving peaceable discourse with
honest men at a meeting to which J was invited, wherein the sole purpose and
intent of our hearts was to unite all well minded people in matters of common
concernment, that the distractions of the nation might be healed, and those
clouds of blood diverted, which are now impending. Jn which discourse it was
laid down as the principle maxim, that the authority of the Commons in
Parliament must be preserved and freed from contempt. Whether this discourse J
say can be either by the letter of the law treasonable, or by construction, if
that should be admitted, and malice it self made Judge.



inter arcanu imperij, amongst the mysteries of state, and its opus Herculium,
a work for Hercules in my opinion to find the suspected Crime, yet I have
ercted in my self a new Jnquisitiou office, for that purpose, and J shall give
you a copy of some of the examinations taken.



desired leave to protest against those Lords which would not agree to the
votes of the Commons, those Petioners, J say were accounted amongst not the
lowest order of Englands worthyes, and many thousands of poor about London,
which petitioned against the Malignant faction, and desired, that those Peers
which concurred with the Commons in their happy votes, mght be desired, to sit
and vote with the Commons as one entire body, though the language of the
petition was threatening, saying they should be enforced to lay hold on the next
remedy, which was at hand, to remove the disturbers of their peace, etc. these
Petitioners were accounted gallant English Champions, and their petitions sent
by the Commons to the Lords at a conference, and such Constables were checked,
as attempted to disturb the people which met in great multitudes to subscribe
petitions against things established by law, and a Justice of the peace
committed to the Sea 1. part book decl. ^p^ge 547, 548.
Tower for executing a warrant from the Lords, for seting watches under
p^etence of avoiding Tumults, to hinder the peoples resorting in great
mnltitudes, to the House to prefer petitions, See first book decl. page 532.
yea the Lords and Commons both in their Remon. of May 26. 1642. acknowledged
it to be their duty, to receive petitions, these are the words; we acknowledge,
that we have received petitions for the removal of things established by law,
and we must say, and all that know what belong to the course and practice of
Parliaments, will say, that we OUGHT to do so, See first parr book dec. p. 720.
and upon the late London petition in Novem. last the Commons declared, that it
was the people^ right to petition, and their right to judge of Petitions,
whence it is clearly to be inferred that it is the peoples right to petition,
for whatsoever seems good to them though it be really evil, otherwise it were
not the Parliaments right to judge of their petitions, certainly it is not the
Parliaments right to walk contrary to common equity, or to reject the good
desires of the people promoted questionles, the Armies eye could not with
patience read in the petition^ of the bil of scandalous sinners, An order to
suppress a petition, was the first and the greatest grievance See the
represen. of the Armies grievances the decl. of June 14. and Rem. of June 23.
of the Army, the principal ground whereupon they undertook to oppose, and
encounter with the Parliament, the prejudging petitions, and abusing
petitioners was a principle^ article in the impeachment of the 11. Members.

And in their Remon. of Jnne 23. book decl. p. 60. speaking of the Parliaments
orde^ to suppress their petitions, and the declaration against those which
should proceed in it^ they have these words; that such proceedings against the
Army and others i. e. Lodnon Petitioner^ do carry with them such a face of
injustice, arbitrarinesse oppression and tyranny (as we think) is no^ to be
paral^ld in any former proceedings of the most arbitrary Court against any
private men, bu^ have brought insufferable dishonor upon the Parliament (which
we are, and others ought to be sensible x See the 6. of the charge book decl.
page 83.
of) has tended to disoblige all men from the same, and to destroy all just
freedom both of Soldiers and Subjects: without controversy, the promoting a
petition cannot be my supposed crime^ I may take up the Parliaments own
words, with an addition, in the 3 Rem. May 26. 1642. book decl. p. 281. viz.
that those that shall guide themselves by the judgment of Parliament (...) and
the Army also) ought whatever happens to be secure, and free from all accounts,
and penalties, upon the grounds of equity^ of the Stat. of the 11. of Hen. 7.
chap. 1.



Antipodes or look through a Magic Glass, that shall Judge such Discourses or
Endeavors to occasion Tumults.



May 26. 1642. which declared in effect that according to the Kings oath,
neither the King nor Lords had a right or liberty of dissenting from the
Laws, which the Commons shall choose; and by consequence their assent is of no
validity, and while the Parliaments words are my text, and my conclusion
rightly inferred: they are my guide, and so I am free from account, ^ut however
there is neither Law nor equity, which renders me accountable for speaking my
opinion o^ the peoples native freedom, and of the encroachments upon it.

To conclude I must profess that upon the most rigid examination of my self,
I am not conscious to my selfe^ in the present matters any transgression of the
law of God or Man, in the least puncti^io neither in action or intention, unles
it be a crime that I was too solicitous for the welfare of the commonwealth
even to the total neglect of my private occasions, or unless it be a crime to
extend my utmost powers, to prevent the imminent danger of confusion to the
whole nation, or to unite the people in the common principles of spiritual and
civil freedom, or unless I mistook the means to these happy end, which I
conceived was to support and preserve from contempt, the authority of the
Commons in Parliament.

Yet if any Eagle eye can discover an erratum in my actions, or intentions, let
him reprove me sharply, and those (...) Hic merus abenenus est.
words of reproof shall be as precious ointment, and until then J shall
persist in my opinion, that it is the duty of every one which is faithful to
God and his Country, to endeavor the union of the people in desires of
immediate setlement of the foundations of common freedom, for the consciences
and estates of all men equally, this only can prevent the insinuations of the
Royal and Episcopal party and prove a bullwarke within a wall ^brasse about
the Nation.

FINIS.

