A Three fold Help TO POLITICAL OBSERVATIONS Contained in three DISCOURSES.

Written by that learned and experienced Gentleman, Sir Jsaac Wake.

1. The first concerning the thirteen Cantons of the Helvetical Leagve, Or of
the Switzers. 2. The second declaring the State of Italy, as it stood near
about the year 1625. 3. The third touching the proceedings of the King of
Sweden in his Wars in Germany.
Published for the benefit of the diligent Observer.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook, at the sign of the green Dragon in St.
Paul's Church-yeard. 1655.

The Preface.
Gentle Reader,
THou have here presented to thine own, and the public view, three distinct
treatises, written upon several subjects, and several occasions; But because
they have all one Author, and were not much different in time, and especially
because (though they seem strangers in their Titles) yet there is a kind of
affinity in the subject matter of them, as being all descriptions, of several
parts and provinces, and bearing equal Marks of judgment, and policy in
affairs of state. It was thought fit to bind them up together, that so they
might become more considerable in the sale, to him that was to bear the charge
of printing them, and likewise yield more variety of pleasure and content, if
not of profit and advantage to the judicious Reader: for though it has been
said by some, that things of this nature, when once they are known do lose the
estimation we had of them before, yet certainly an active understanding man
will find a way to enlarge his knowledge, by the use of them, upon future
occasions, when they shall be offered. For otherwise, what benefit shall we reap
by History, discourses of al kinds, or any practick knowledge, which we shall
attain unto? though both the State of these Provinces and the affairs, and
relations of the World, as to them, have suffered many great alterations, since
these treatises were written, yet such are the continual vicissitude, and
changes of all sublunarie things, as though it be not probable we shall ever
see them settled in all points as they were before, yet may they come so near
either in the same, or other parts, as that these observations may serve as
landmarks by which we may steer our course in the like conjunctures.

The Author of all these three treatises was Sir Isaac Wake, a man of exquisite
humane learning, strong parts of nature, and a most refined wit, able to
penetrate into the depth of things, and give a judgment on them, grounded upon
solid reason: These parts, both of nature and learning, assisted with a neat
expression of his own conceptions, not only in the Latin tongue (wherein he
was excellent) but also in the vulgar languages, together with a logical
invention, made all his composures not only Methodical, but pleasing and
perspicuous

To all these may be added, as the Crown of all, his long experience in
affairs of state, as having been many years employed an Ambassador abroad to
foreign Princes, both by king James, and the late king Charles, wherein he
behaved himself so dexterously, and judiciously, as not only gave full
satisfaction to his Masters, but procured him love and respect from all those
Princes, and Republics, with whom he was to negotiate, and raised him to that
credit, and reputation amongst them which did much facillitate the expedition
of affairs to his Masters honor (whereof he was ever most Jealous) and his own
deserved-commendation. The Reader may observe in the first of these treatieses,
a particular example of his admirable dexterity, in expediting the most
intricate affairs, when they were held almost inextricable. That Gordion knot
(as he calls it) about the Pais de Vaud, which (notwithstand the interposition
of most of the potent Princes of Christendom) continued forty years, without
finding any man that could unloose it, was by his ministry, and not ordinary
endeavor, at last untied; and though he out of Modesty and duty, ascribe all
this (and that deservedly) to the wisdom and felicity of his Masters Genius:
yet the judicions reader may observe that excellent temperamentum to which this
difficult business was reduced through the ripeness of his Wit and judgment,
whereby it was at last composed. Having said thus much of the worthy Author (of
whom much more might yet be said, if it were fit to be inserted in a Preface.)
There will be no need to speak much of the treatises themselves, their own
worth will bring both delight and profit to the observing Reader. The first of
them may perhaps appear to him the most exact and perfect description of those
parts, which has hitherto been offered to the public view.

The second was peculiarly proper to our industrious Author, whose constant
course it was, upon all remarkable changes, and alterations either at home or
abroad in the Provinces under his charge, to give a summary relation of all
affairs transacted there, and of their ends and interests, who sat at the
stern to guide them, by which means his Masters and their Ministers of state at
home, received great light and information, how to steer their course, and give
directions to their public Ministers abroad. The benefit which accrues from
these general relations, is remarkable in the state of Venice, whose
Ambassadors are bound to give an exact account to that grave, and wary Senate,
of the Condition and interests of all those Provinces where they reside, and
when they return home, to give a full relation in writing, of the State and
condition of those parts, as they stood when they departd from them, and these
are carefully kept in Archivis for their future use and information.

The last of these three discourses (it must be confessed) may seem imperfect,
yet is it composed with so much sound judgment grounded upon reason, and
experience as may give the dilignt Reader a full and perfect view, of the
Motives which perswadeded, and the ends to which the proceedings of that
glorious king of Sweden were directed. It has been held a piece of policy in
the Ancients, to leave all their great and magnificent works in some one part
or other unfinished, that so there might be Desideratum quid something for
desire to long after, and wish for, till it be satisfied, the want whereof,
works is us so great an estimation of that which appears admirable in it self,
as that it seems a pity, that it was not brought to full perfection. But when
once the mind of man is fully satisfied, our admiration cease, and with it
the value, and esteem of that which once we did admire; it cannot be reasonably
supposed, that in so short and succinct a piece as this, any such ambition
could cause the Author to leave it imperfect; But yet the want of that which
should have been the conclusion and application of the whole discourse, may
happily stir up some active brain, to supply that defect, and it may perhaps be
thought no point of defficulty, for one acquainted with those times out of
these premises, to draw a right conclusion. Only it is to be feared, that it
may prove like that Capo di venere (as the Italians term it) that unparraleld
Head of Venus, cut out, and delineated with exquisite Art and Beauty by that
rare statuarie, who intended to have fitted the whole body to it, but was
prevented by death: and though there were then, and bave been since, many
excellent Artists in that kind, yet such was the rarity and admirable
sculpture of that Head, that no man ever after, durst put a hand to finish what
was left undone.

However (gentle Reader) if thou find either Content, or profit in this or
either of the other two Discourses; Thine be the benefit, and mine the pain.
And so I bid thee heartily farewell, and rest

Thy loving friend IGNOTUS.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE Thirteen Cantons OF THE HELVETICAL LEAGUE
THe 13. Cantons of the Helvetical League are these, Zurick, Berne, Lucerne,
Vrie, Swits, Underwald, Zug, Glaris, Basil, Friburg, Soloure, Schaphusen,
Appenzeil.

Of these, four are wholly of the reformed Religion, namly, Zurick, Berne,
Basil, and Schaphusen. Two are mixed, namely Glaris and Appenzeil, but the
greater part in both those Cantons are Protestants, and generally they do
concur with the four above named towns.

The Popish Cantons are in number seven, Lucerne, Vrie, Swits, Underwald, Zug,
Friburg, and Soleure.

The first that did Cantonize themselves were Vrie, Swits, and Vnderwald, in
the year 1308. upon occasion of Tyrany which the house Austria did exercise
upon them, which first League was afterward more solemly confirmed by a public
Act, signed and sealed at Brunen in the year 1315.

Lucerne was the next that entered into this Alliance, in the year 1332. The
name of Lucerne was given to that Town upon occasion of a Lantern, or beacon
that did shine there in the night, to give light to those that did pass upon
the lake.

After Lucerne, Zurick did Colleague it self with the four Cantons above named,
Anno 1351. and had the prerogative to be ranged in the first place, by reason
of the greatness of the Town, which was very famous in those days, and still
it does hold the chief rank among the thirteen Cantons.

Glaris did enter into this Alliance in the year 1352. and the same year Zug
was likewise Cantonized 1352. The year following 1353, Berne entered into the
same association, beginning with Uri, Swits and Vnderwald, which three Cantons
did oblige themselves to Zurick and Lucerne, to succor them when they should
need, and to bring with them those of Berne, if Zurick and Lucerne should
require it, as likewise Zurick and Lucerne did promise to assist Berne, when
the three Cantons should summon them thereunto.

Friburgh made first Allliance with Berne, Anno 1403. and by their means were
joined to the other Cantons, upon certain conditions.

Soleure entered likewise first into confederation with Berne Anno 1351. and
held good correspondence with the other Cantons afterward having assisted the
other Swisses against the Duke of Burgundy, they and Friburg together were
taken into the number of the other Cantons.

Basil was made a Canton Anno. 1501 and received into a perpetual.
confederation of all the body of the Swisses; Schaphusen made first Alliance
with some of the lesser Cantons, for term of years, and lastly, Anno 1501.
that Town was taken into the general league Helvetick: the name of this Town is
taken from Scapha, or Skiffe, as being seated upon the Rhine in the midst of
certain rocks, which cause the river to to precipitate sike a torrent, by
reason whereof it is impassable, so that al boats that come from the lake of
Constance, are forced to unlade there and from the number of boats, the Town
takes his name.

Appensel is a Village situared under San Gallo, a great Town on the frontire
of the Grisons; In this village the Abbot of San Gallo was wont to reside, and
from thence the village dotl: derive his name, Appenzel being as much as
Abbatis Cella. The inhabitants did first set themselves at liberty by force of
arms, and afterward they did purchase both their peace and freedom with a
great sum of money, whicd they did pay unto the Abbot. Their first Alliance was
with Zurick, Lucerne, Swits, Underwald, Zug and Glaris, and in the year 1513
they were received into the number of the Cantons.

The Alliances that the Swisses have with their neighbors are these; first
with the Abbot and Town of San Gallo; Secondly with the Grisons; Thirdly with
the Valesiens, Fourthly with Rotoille, Fifty with Mulhouse, Sixthly with Bienne,
Seventhly with Geneva, Lastly with Neufchastel, which confederations are not in
general with the body of the Swisses, but particular with particular Cantons;
some Cantons having taken some of the above named Towns into their
Conbourgiosie, and others taken other some; the Grisons are allied with all,
and have besides particular alliance more straight with some particular Cantons.

Baliages.
The Baliages that are governed in common by the thirteen Cantons, or the
greater part of them are these: Turgow, Bade, the Rhegujces, called in their
Language Rhintal, Sargans: the free Country Lugano, Locarne, Mendrise, the
valley of Madia, and Bellinsone: of these Rhintal and Sargans confine with the
Grisons, and speak that Language. Lugano, Locarne, Mendrise the valley of
Madia, and Bellinsone, are beyond the Alps, on the othet side of the mountains
San Gotard, and San Bernard; the other three, namely Turgoro, Bade, and the
free Country are properly Swisses.

All the Cantons have not equal authority over these Balliages, but as their
associations were made in diverse times, so likewise the right of the Cantons is
diverse.

Turgoro is commanded by the seven first and most ancient Cantons, namely,
Zurick, Lucerne Vri, Swits, Vnderwald, Zug, and Glaris who do alternatively
send Bailifs thither, but Berne, Friburg and Soleure, have likewise some little
right in causes criminal.

Bade is subject to the same seven Cantons, and Berne, Sargans, Rhintal and the
free Country is likewise governed by the first seven Cantons, only in the
government of Rhintal they have given part to Appensel.

The four Balliages beyond the hills, namely, Lugano, Locarne, Mendrise, and the
valley of Madia, is subject to all the Cantons except Appensel, who have
nothing to do there, as being incantonised, after the winning of those places.

Bellinsone is subject only to Vri, Swits and Vnderwald, every one of which
Cantons has a Castlel or Citadel in the Town, commanded by a particular
Officer of their own.

That which they call the free Province is certain Castles and Villages
situated along the river of Russ, above and below Bremgarten, the names of the
chief Villages are Meyenberg, Richensce and Ergow, which ancienly had their
jurisdiction and their Magistrate apart, whereupon they were called les
Provinces libres.

The greatest part of these Provinces were subject formerly to the house of
Austria, and in the reign of the Emperor Sigismond, when Frederick of Austria
contested with him, the said Emperor persuaded the Switses to take arms
against Frederick, and promised them that they should retain whatsoever they
could conquer over Frederick of Austria, by which right they hold the most of
their Bailliages, on this side the hills.

As for the places which they hold beyond the Alps, their right is somewhat
questionable: they pretend that in the year 1513, when they did help Maximilian
Sforza Duke of Milan to chase the French out of Italy, he did in liew of their
assistance give them the four Balliages confining with their Country, namly
Lugan lies from Milan N N W ^ a point W. 47. Miles, and being prodigal of his
name communicates it to a lake called the lake Lugan which tends N. and S.
and is in length 20. Miles, and where it is broadest 8. Miles, and narrowest 3.
Miles.
Lugano, Locarne lies from Lugan 20. Miles N.N.W. and is situated at the
Western side of the great Lake, called in that respect il Lago Maggiore which
tends N. N. E. and S. and by W. and is in length 47. Miles and breadth 7.
Miles.
Locarne, Mendrise, and the valley of The Val de Madia lies between Mont S
Gotardo (called anciently by Ptolome Adula, more modernly Dogel, and now as
formerly, in regard of a little Church built in honor to that Saint Gotardo)
and the lake Maggiore, it tends N. N. W. and S. S. E. 40. Miles in length,
and 7. broad. The town Madia stands by a River of that name, which confineth
the Valley.
Madia, and that afterward Francis the great when he recovered the state of
Milan, did confirm unto the Swisses, the former donation of Maximilian Sforza,
by a public Act passed at Fr^burg.

But in a relation that I have seen of the State of Milan, I find that they
are accused to have usurped those places, in the time of Jews the 12. King of
France, il quale (says my Author) havendo guadagnato to stato di Milano, and
Licentiato li Swisser chi havenano Jeruiti in quella impresa, and fatto loro
ogni dimostratione di gratitudine, non solo con gl'intieri pagamenti, ma con
molti doni et pensioni, quessi medesimi ritornandosene a casa occuparono
Belintina insolentissimam le, non assignando altra ragione di quel che
facenano, che l'ssere loro necessaria quella pialla, per aprirsi il passo allo
stato di Milano, quando havessero voluto entrarui senla haverlo a dimandare ad
altro Principe. and enstandi il Re Luigi per la restitutione, risposero
superbissimamle: che volevano anche la Murata, and Lucarno appresso, per farsi
pin facile l'entrata in Italia a voglia loro, and cosi lo pisero in essecutione
etc. Tesoro Politico 1a part fol. 295. impress. Francofort. 1610.

Which comes in English thus.
Who (says my Author) having obtained the State of Milan, and permitted the
Swissers to depart, that had served him in that enterprise, and showed them all
demonstrations of gratitude, not only by allowing them their whole pay, but
by many gifts and pension, bestowed amongst them. Those very men returning
home, most insolently surprised Belinsone, giving no other reason for it, but
that the place was very necessary for them, to open their passage into the
State of Milan, when they had occasion to pass that way, that so they might
not be compelled to demand it from other Princes. And King Lewis using all
means possible for the restitution of it, They most proudly answered, that they
would also have Murata and Lucarne ere it were long to make their passage into
Italy more easy at their own pleasure, and this they brought to pass etc.
Tesoro Politico ia part. fol. 295. printed at Erancofort 1610.

The Swisses foreign Alliances
Among the Alliances which the Swisses have at this present, the most ancient
is that with the house of Astria, which is hereditary and perpetual, and common
with all the thirteen Cantons; they receive no pension, non deniers de Paix, as
they call it, this for Alliance, in regard that the Austriaci do buy the League
dear enough in letting the Swisses enjoy peaceable what they have conquered of
the dominions belonging heretofore to the house of Austria.

The second general Alliance that the Swisses have with foreign Princes, is that
which is contracted betwixt their whole body, and the Crown of France, for
which the French King does pay in yearly pensions the value of 30000 franks,
which is divided among the several Cantons by a Geometrical proportion, and not
Arithmetical; for every Canton does not share alike, of these Deniers de Paix,
but they have some more, some less, according as some are able to contribute
more men then others to the service of that Crown.

The Duke of Savoy and his house, has a general Alliance with the whole
Helvetian body, which is called une League de regard containing no particular
restriction to defensive or offensive succor one of the other, but only fair
and good correspondence befitting neighbors, whose states are confining.

With the Catholic Cantons the said Duke has a particular league, namely with
Lucerne, Vri, Swits, Vnderwald, Zug and Friburg, of whom he is to have six
thousand men for his service at his own cost, in case of defense, and in lieu
thereof he does pay to those Cantons the yearly sum of 9. thousand dueatons,
which is distributed likewise by unequal portions, and part thereof is allotted
to the common treasury of every one of those Cantons, part to particular
persons, who are of most credit and Authority in their Country. This league
was made in the year 1579. in the time of the Duke Emmanuel Philibert, and the
durance thereof is expressed to be, during the life of the said Duke, and of
his son Charles Emmanuel now living, and ten years after his death.

The king of Spain has a league with the forenamed six cantons Catholics,
namely Lncerne, Uri, Swits, Vnderwald, Zug, and Friburg, and likewise with
Apensel, which is a mixed Canton, consisting half of Protestants, and half of
Papists; He does pay in continuation of this Alliance an yearly pension of
fifty thousand ducatons, which is divided betwixt the Treasuries of each
Canton, and particular persons, proportione Geometica, and he is to have of
them all for the defense of the State of Milan six thousand men, at his own
charge. This league was contracted Anno 1589. in the time of P^^lip the second
King of Spain, and is to last during his life, and his son the King that now
reigns, and ten years after both their deaths.

When this league was first made, Spain had small credit in this Country, and
the French crown was only respected there, insomuch that the King of Spain was
enforced to desire the Duke of Savoy, who is now alive, to interpose his
authority, which was great with that people, for the effecting of that
Alliance. Howsoever the French Ministers did at that time oppose themselves
against it with such heat, that the league was made with conditions as
disadvantagious to Spain as might be, namely, barely defensive for the State of
Milan, in case of invasion, since that time the Spaniards (according to the
custom of that nation) have incroached a great deal, and by the help of the
Jesuits, they procured in the year 1604 a declaration of certain articles
contained in the first league, which they did get to be extended more to their
advantage then the intent was at the first, and in particular they obtained a
specification of the passage to be granted through the State of the Cantons,
for all strangers whom the King of Spain should have occasion to leavy for his
service in Italy. The French Ambassador did strongly oppose against that
declaration at that time, but all that he could obtain was a reservation of the
right of the French King, and that the said declaration should be understood
not to prejudice in any thing the Alliance that the French King has with that
people.

Since that time the Spanish pistols proving more weighty then the French
crowns, Alfonso Casati Ambassador for the King of Spain in those parts,
procured of the Canton of Uri, (in whose hands the passage is) a new
declaration in the year 1616 in favor of the Spanish league, without
reservation of the exception formerly interposed by the French Ministers, to
the notable prejudice of the Crown of France, and likewise of the public
liberty. Monsieur Vigier, who was resident in Swisserland at that time, in the
absence of Monsieur de Castille, the French Ambassador, seemed to be much
offended with that usurpation, and threatened to protest solemnly against the
Canton of Vri, but when the public Diet was held at Bada, in the month of
June the same year, though the matter was then fresh, in regard that the
Lands-Knights were but newly passed at that time into Italy under the conduct
of the Count Carlo Lodovico di Solz; Monsieur Vigier held his peace, and said
nothing, having (as is imagined) received order out of France not to oppose
himself against any thing that the Spaniardes should do, by means of which
connivence the Spanish party has got so much ground, that hereafter it will
not be in the power of France to counterpoise them, when they shall in these
parts attempt any thing that may prove a disservice of the French King or
Crown. Neque enim ibi consistunt exempla ubi ceperunt, sed quemlibet in tenuem
recepta tramitem, latissime evagandi sibi viam faciunt: an evident proof
whereof we see in the incroaching of the Spaniards in these parts, for whereas
at the first they did not dare to specify the point of the passage in their
Alliance, they did begin (as has been noted above) in the year 1604. by way of
explanation of their articles, to draw in the benefit of the passage, but which
reservation of the right of France, in the year 1616. they renewed their
declaration, without reserving the right of the French, and this year 1617.
they have gone so far, as to take the point of the passage, for a thing
granted, and without asking leave of the eight Cantons, who have equal
jurisdiction at Bada, or of the twelve Cantons, who have the same right in the
Bailliages beyond the hills, the Spanish Ambassador has treated the business
only with the Catholic Cantons, who are all now at his devotion, and in scorn
of the Protestant Cantons, he did write letters to Zurick, Berne, and the rest,
which did only advertise that the Wallons which Don Verdugo did conduct to the
service of the king of Spain in Italy, were to pass through places of their
jurisdiction, and that therefore they should do well to see them provided of
victuals, and al such things as they should want, without using a word of
entreaty or request in his letters, as if those had nothing to do in the
business: as he has at this present excluded the Protestant Cantons from
having any thing to do in granting the passage through Towns subject to their
jurisdiction, because the Catholics have the plurality of voices, so will he
hereafter exclude likewise the Catholic Cantons, having already laid the
foundation of that design; for, in his proposition this year 1617. in the
month of April, at Lucerne, he demanded passage of the little Cantons, for
four thousand foot only, and 1000. horse, without arms, and to pass by 200.
at a time, a days journey distant the one from the other, and notwithstanding
that his grant was for no more, and in the form specified, he caused 6000.
Wallons to pass and 1000. horse, together with their arms, so that hereafter
he will alledg this example, that as this year there have passed two thousand
without leave so hereafter he may cause as many as he list to pass, and never
ask license for them, but take the matter as a thing already granted and
accustomed. This league is now upon the point of expiring, for the ten years
after the death of Philip the second, and his son Philip the third are almost
run out, and therefore it will shortly appear upon the renewing of this league,
whether the French will be so wise as to oppose against the above specified
encroachments, or the Swisses so careful of their public liberty, as to
restrain it within the limits of the bounds prescribed in the beginning. As
France is now governed, it is not likely that opposition will be made on that
side, considering that the Ministers of that Crown, do visibly in all places
cooperat toward the aggrandising of the Spaniards; and as for the Catholic
Swisses, it may be said as truly as it was said of Rome, O vrbem venalem and
cito perituram, si emptorem invenerit?

Zurick and Berne have a particular league with the Marquis of Baden, and
Turlach, contracted in the year 1612. during the life of the Marquis, and of
Prince Frederick his son, and ten years after. It is merely defensive, and as
each of those Cantons are to give him for his defense 1000. men at his charge,
so he is bound to furnish them with the like proportion, at his charge, or so
much money, the choice being left unto them, whether they will have men or
money. This league is still on foot, although the Marquis has lost most of his
estate, for the Emperor has invested a Nephew of the Marquis, called Edward
in the Marquisate of Baden, and although Prince Frederic, his eldest son is
suffered to enjoy the Marquisat of Turlach, in contemplation of the Duke of
Wirtenberg, whose sister he has married, and whom the Emperor is unwilling to
displease, yet Tilly and Verdugo do lodge and quarter troops there at their
pleasure, so that the Prince does hold it, but as it were precario.

The Canton of Berne has an Alliance and league apart with the house of Savoy,
contracted in the year 1617. betwixt that State and Charles Emanuel Duke of
Savoy, and it is to last during his life, the life of the Prince of Piedmont,
and ten years after. They are bound to furnish Savoy with 3000. foot at his
cost, and for the defense only of his estates, and he is obliged to give them
2000. foot, and 500. horse, or so much money, when the necessity of their
defense shall require it. The birth of this league may be called partus
elephantinus, in regard that it had been treated forty year before it could be
concluded. The French King Henry the fourth did interpose himself twice as an
arbitrator, but could not bring it to conclusion; The whole body of the
Helvetical Cantons, did embrace it likewise diverse times, but could never
prevail, and lastly it was referred unto the Valesani, as to a Republic
nearest confining, and strictly allied with both the parties, yet after many
years negotiation, and much pains they could effect nothing. In the year above
named 1617. King James of glorious memory did interpose his authority, and as
he had a particular genius which did incline him to endeavor the accommodation
of all misunderstandings among all Christian Princes, and States, so God did
miraculoussy bless those pious intentions of his, and in this particular his
Majesty had the honor not only to extinguish that mortal hatred which had
reigned ahove 60 years, betwixt the house of Savoy and that State, but to join
and unite them in a strict bond of league and Alliance. The transaction of the
business in it self is very considerable, in regard that so many had so long
time traveled in that vineyard, and never reaped any fruit of honor, whereas
his Majesty employing his servant Sir Isaae Wake thither in March, the Treaty
was concluded ratified, and executed before the end of June.

This Gordian knot, which was thought would have required the sword of
Alexander to cut, before it could be undone, was tied in this manner. In the
time of Charles le bon grandfather to the present Duke of Savoy, Charles the
fifth, and Francis the first warring one against the other, did par droict de
bien ieame, share and divide betwixt themselves almost all Pied-mont, so that
little being left unto the good Duke Charles, but Savoy and the Countey of Nisla
in Province, he was enforced for the supply of his urgent necessities to borrow
a considerable sum of money of the Ssri. of Berne, unto whom he did impawn for
their reimbursment the Country of Vaud. After his death his son Emanuel
Philibert having little to maintain himself at home, did adhere unto Philp the
second, of whom he deserved so well in the Battle of S. Quintin, that the King
was content to restore unto him that he did hold of his in Pied-mont, and
because he married the Lady Margarite de Valois daughter of France, in
contemplation of her. Henry the third passing through Pied-mont, as he returned
out of Polonia, restored unto him likewise all that the French had usurped: yet
was not this Prince able, with this addition to his fortune to redeem the
engagement of the pais de Vaud, and being willing to enjoy quietly that which
he had, he did confirm unto the Bernesi, the morgage made by his father, so
that they did live in peace during his time, though not without great
jealousies, in regard of the hatred of the Savoyards their confining
neighbors, who had always had them in detestation since the morgage of that
Province.

Charles Emanuel now regnant, being born under a Martial Planet, and having
sagittarius ascendant in his nativity, did affright the Bernesi at the
beginning, and not long after it did appear that they did not fear him in vain,
for he did presently cast his eye upon the Pais de Vaud, and because he could
not abruptly break the contract of Morgage made by his Granfather, and ratified
by his father, and was not able to pay the principal and interest, which in so
many years was grown to a great sum, he did lay his first claim to the Town of
Geneva, in the defense of which City the Bernesi being engaged, they were of
necessity to declare themselves his enemies, and so minister unto him a fit
occasion of invading them, which was the thing that he did aim at, and he had
fortune so favorable, that in the year 83. as I take it, he did shut them up
so close in Cologne, a Town three miles distant from Geneva, near the Rosne,
that they were enforced to yield themselves to his discretion. If false friends
had seconded his true valor, it would have gone hard with Geneva and Berne
both at that time. But the Spaniards upon whom he did wholly rely, at that time
desiring only to imbroyl and consume him a petit feu, and not to make any
addition unto his fortune, did divert him from prosecuting that design, and
turn him with his Army upon the conquest of Marseilles and Provence, during the
combustions of the league in France. After he had wearied himself there, they
did animate him to the conquest of the Marquisate of Salulles, which did
succeed to his advantage in Italy, but to his loss on the other side of the
hills, drawing upon him the victorious arms of Henry the fourth, who did
enforce him to exchange Salulles with the Bailliages of Bresse, Baugo Veromme
and Gez, which were the best flowers in the garden of Savoy. Now were the
Bernesi out of danger, those confining Provinces being out of his hands, and
their state in the protection of the French King, whom they had asssisted
during his troubles, both with men and money: yet did their jealousies still
continue, until the invasion of Monferrat Anno 1613. did draw upon the Duke of
Savoy the arms of the king of Spain, which did enter into Pied-ment first Anno
1615. under the conduct of Don Gio: di Mendoza Marquis of Hyntioza, and
secondly Anno 1617. under the command of Don Pedro di Toledo: it was time now
for the Duke of Savoy to seek for help from all places, and therefore
despairing of ever recovering the pais de Vaud, he was contented to give over a
lost game, upon condition that he might get some reasonable consideration, for
his resignation. Here is the knot which I mentioned, for he did pretend much,
and the Bernesi would not give any thing, alleging that they would not buy
that which was their own already. Toward the untying of this knot, the
authority of his Majesty was used, the Duke of Savoy imploring, and the Bernesi
accepting of his mediation: means was found to reconcile these contradictions,
with mutual satisfaction, for the Duke of Savoy did receive as much as he could
with reason expect, and yet the Bernesi did not stipulate with him for any
thing; the expedient taken was this. The Bernesi were desired to concur with
his Majesty in the assistance of the Duke of Savoy against the violence and
oppression of the Spaniards, and in consideration thereof his Majesty did
promise and undertake to give them a final and total resignation of the Pais de
Vaud, free from any future claim or pretention. To gratify his Majesty, the
Bernesi did send unto the Duke of Savoy four thousand men paid by them for
three months, and in requital of this favor Sir Isaac Wake did present unto
them two formal Acts, the one of the Duke, and the other of the Prince of
Pied-mont, which did contain an absolute cession of all future claims or
pretentions by any of that house to the pais de Vaud. This point being
accommodated the treaty of Alliance was instantly concluded, but neither in the
preface nor in the Articles was there any mention made of the succors sent by
the Bernesi, or of the resignation of the pais de Vaud, it being an Act passed
merely by his Majesty without any mutual stipulation of the parties, and as
the Duke of Savoy and the Prince of Pied-mont did trust Sir Isaac Wake with
their Resignations, so did the Bernesi give likewise unto him four thousand men
to dispose of, as his Majesty should be pleased to command, and so all
differences were accommodated with reciprocal contentment of both the parties,
and with much honor to his Majesty, who had no partner in this work, but the
God of peace, whom he did truly serve, and who did bless his pious intentions.
I have the more willingly specified these particularities, because the
difficulties supposed to be insuperable, serve to illustrate the honor of my
gracious Master, whose glorious memory I shall desire may be perpetuated unto
eternity.

Misunderstandings and jealousies.
Having showed the strength of that State which does consist in the bond of
union, and confederation among themselves, and Alliance with foreign Princes, I
must now point out some symptoms of misunderstandings and jealousies, which do
indicate the weakness of that body, and threaten danger of the dissolution
thereof in time.

The first, like original sin, is derived from the birth, and first conception
of their liberty, which has drawn upon them, and upon their posterity an
hereditary ill talent of the house of Austria, who remembering very well that in
former times they were sovereign lords of all that province, will never forget
the wrong which they do conceive has been done unto them, by those who under
the pretext of vindicating their lives and honor from the oppression of
tyrannical officers and Governors, have infranchised themselves and cast off
the yoke of subjection which they owe unto the Arch Duke of Austria, their
natural Prince and Sovereign. This will never he forgotten, but manet alta
mente repostum, and when the Austriaci shall have power answerable to their
will, they will call these people to account, and like rivers deturned by
force, seek to break away and enter into their first and original channel.
Berne and Friburg may seem to pretend a little exemption from this general
contagion of that body, in regard that they were infranchised from their first
foundation, by the Duke of Ziringa their founder, and the name of the latter
does imply. If this were granted, that freedom must be confined within the
walls of those Towns, and cannot be extended unto the enlargement of their
dominion, wherein they have more then any one Canton, of what did anciently
belong unto the Austriaci, and the Bernesi have a special mark of greater envy
then all the rest, in regard that they are masters at this day of the Castle of
Habsburg, which was the patrimony of Rodolphe the first Emperor of the house
of Austria.

Secondly the neighborhood of the King of Spain, and the vicinity of the
French Country of Burgandis, is another thorn in the side of that body;
although Spain of it self does not pretend any thing that way, yet being head
of the Austrian family, they have a principal interest in all that does belong
unto that house, and if that were not so (as is too evident) yet the natural
inclination and genius which that nation has, dilatare fines imperij, does
draw upon them an envious reputation of being ill neigbours, besides that the
greatness of that Monarchy does bring it within the compass of the Italian
proverb, which does forbid a man to dwell near four F. namely, Frati, Fiumi,
Forni and Forti, and by consequence greatly injealous all the Swisses, who have
the last F. at their door. Besides, as Duke of Milan, and the king of Spain
have a mortal quarrel unto all the Cantons except Apenselle, for their having
usurped (as he does allege) the Bailliages of Lugano, Madrise, Lucarne, and
Belinlona, which wre members of the Dutchey of Milan.

These are the main jealousies, with which that whole body is troubled, and
indeed all that I can remember, the Duke of Savoy being not to be spoken of in
this place, in regard that Geneva is not numbered among the Cantons.

The particular misunderstandings are so much the more to be feared, as
internal mischiefs are more dangerous then external; they are many, and have
several branches, but may be reduced all unto one head, and that is an
alienation of affections, hatred and rancor caused by their division, in matter
of religion. This fatal distraction has bred a mortal faction, in which most
of the Princes of Christendom have part, the Pope, Emperor and Spain openly
fomenting, France and Savoy favoring the Catholic party, and all the reformed
Princes and States, wishing well unto the Protestant side. These latter have no
other motive but pure zeal, and a desire of the preservation of that true
religion whereof they do make profession, the orthodox Helvetians being a
principal member of the reformed Church, and having like a Seminary produced
men of extraotdinary learning and zeal, who have labored in the vineyard of
reformation, with much pains and great profit to the Church, such as were
Zuinglius, Oecolampdius, Simler, Hospinian, Waser, and many others who for
converting of souls, do now shine in heaven, like stars in the firmament. Those
who do foment the Catholics, have diverse ends, for although it may be presumed
that the Pope does intend nothing but the reduction of that whole body to the
obedience of the sea of Rome, wherein likewise there is so much mixture of
worldly respect, as the increase of spiritual Faires and Markets, do fill his
coffers by the vent of his indulgences and pardons, yet it is certain, that the
Emperor and the King of Spain have ragione di stato, which does move them to
adhere and take part with the Catholic Cantons. For besides that those
divisions and factions, are like the cutting of Samsons locks, the strength of
that body consisting in union, as his did in his hair, if at any time they can
prevail so far, as to kindle a war in those parts grounded upon religion, they
will soon make an end of the quarrel, by setting upon both, parties when they
have weakened one another; this design is so well grounded, that it may
perhaps rake effect in time, for since the reception of the Jesuits in Iucerne
and Friburg, exacerbations have daily increased, and nothing but the fear of a
foreign enemy does keep them now from a civil war. From this original fountain
of habitual dissension, grounded upon difference in religion, are derived many
small streams of discord, which inereasing the misunderstandings of those
people, are with much artifice cultivated by those who for spiritual or
temporal respects, desire to trouble those waters: I cannot particularize in
all, because ever and anon the Catholics do make by the instigation of their
partisans, and their own natural inclination, une querelle d' Allemande,
against the Protestants in which they do get nothing, because they do meet with
men that do understand reason, and will not be out braved, but I will point at
three issues which I have observed in that body, that do run perpetually, and
will hardly be stopped, depending all of them upon the first head of division
in matter of Religion.

The first is a difference betwixt Berne and Friburg, who have four Bailliages
in common, which they do govern alternatively in this manner, that when Berne
does name the Magistrate, he is bound to take his oath at Friburg, and when
Friburg does nominate him, he is to do the like at Berne, The names of these
Bailliages, are Murate, Gransone, swarsbourg, and Eshallons, and by public
Acts of convention betwixt the two Towns it has been stipulated long since,
that for the preventing of misunderstanding betwixt them, their subjects of
those common Baillages should be left at liberty, to exercise what religion
they listed, with this proviso, that when any of the communalties should
require le plus (which is as much as putting the question) it should be
granted, and if the Catholic party had most voices, then no Religion should be
exercised in that jurisdiction, but the Roman, if the Protestants were
supernumerary then the Catholics were to yield. It has so fallen out that the
Preachers of the Gospel having got the start of the Priests and Friars, le
plus, has been demanded some years since by all those four Bailliages, and the
voices being all in advantage of the reformed religion, Popery has been
utterly exterminated. Friburg which has equal jurisdiction alternatively,
cannot endnre this innovation, and the Jesuits who are potent in that Town have
counseled a division of those four Bailliages, that two may be for Berne
entirely to dispose of as they will, and the other two be left free for
Friburg. The Bernesi will not hearken to this motion, but to hold themselves
strongly unto their capitulation, wisely foreseeing, that if they should come
to a division, the Friburghesi would drive out the Protestants out of those two
Bailliages, which would touch unto them, and replant the Roman Religion.

The second is a dispute betwixt Zurick: and the little Cantons about the
Country of Torgaw, which being morgaged some years since to Zurick, and not
redeemed, possession was taken, the Zurigani acknowledged for sovereigns, and
the whole Countey reformed and made orthodox. The little Cantons instigated by
the Nontio and Jesuits, do except against the reformation, and because that
cannot be altered as long as Torgaw is subject to Zurick, they do offer to
repay the money, which the Zurigani will not accept, as well knowing that the
point of religion is only aimed at.

The third and last which I will note, is a controversy betwix Glaris and
Swits, about a Bailliage in common betwixt them both. For the understanding of
this puntilio, it is to be noted, that the Cantons of Glaris is misparty, half
of the reformed religion, and the rest Catholics, but the Protestants have in
all assemblies of that Canton, more then two thirds of their favor. Betwixt
the Canton of Glaris and Switz by the Capitulations and Charters it is agreed,
that in that Bailliage common betwixt them both, alternatively each Canton
should depute their Bailiff. In virtue of this capitulation both the Cantons
have alternatively named their Bailiffs, and I think that Glaris being
mis-party did usually name one of their body that was a Catholic, when it
appertained unto them to nominate, but it is certain that they have of late
chosen one of our religion, against whom those of Switz have excepted, only
for being of the religion.

These three controversies are still kept on foot by the Roman and Austrian
party, and as they are always debated at the general Dyett, held at Baden upon
the nativity of Saint John Baptist, so they always part without resolving any
thing upon these particulars

Of the form of Govenrment.
The name of a Republic does imply an union, and that has reference to an
unity which is the beginning of numbers; for the delineating of this
commonwealth, we must of necessity have recourse ad quantitatem discretam,
because it is not continua, the body of their union, and unity of their body
consisting in an accumulation or aggregation of thirteen Republics different
in form of government, but joined in a formal association among themselves for
the preservation of their public liberty. The several lines drawn from
thirteen particular and distant superficies, and meeting all in one center of
public association; do make a show of uniformity, and of this body Zurich is
the visible and figurative head, all letters written from foreign Princes or
States, or from any of the particular Cantons which do require communication
unto the Helvetian body, being to be presented first unto the Borgomasters of
that Canton, who have authority to open them, and to call a public Dyett at
Baden, for the communicating of all such letters, and returning of answers as
occasion shall require. They have no public laws which do bend their whole
body in matter of government, every Canton governing it self by constitutions
of their own framed suitable and proportionable to the Aristocratical state of
some, and Democratical of others. Yet their Magna Carta, or Charter of
association has some show of a fundamental Law, for that does not only
combine them together in their league of mutual defense, but bind them
likewise to stand to the decision of the major part, in all cases which concern
the integrity of their body, such as are the admittnig or not, of any new Town
or state into the association of their common body, the renewing or dissolving
such leagues as the whole body has with foreign Princesorstates, as namely
with the house of Austria, France, Grisons, and Valesani, the granting or
denying leavies required by any confederate Prince of all the Cantons, the
passage and transportation of foreign Armies or forces through their State, and
the like. In all which cases a Diet is to be called at Baden, and there the
plurality of voices is to decide the cause, every Canton sending thither two
Ambassadors, or Deputies, whose first commission is only ad referendum, and
when they have acquainted their several Masters with what has been proposed,
then does every Canton send unto their Deputies their resolution, yea or no,
and according to the plurality of voices the question is detemined. Some other
constitutions there are, which although they be not enacted by public decree,
yet are they religiously observed by every several Canton, and those do concern
leagues, which not the whole body, but any private Canton or Cantons do
contract, with any foreign Prince or State, wherein there are some Articles
which do run in form, and are called Helvetical Customs. I will note some few,
because I cannot take notice of all. 1. All their leagues are merely defensive
for the conservation of all their Allies, but not to offend his enemy by way of
invasion, being their friend or neutral. 2. That Regiments be kept entire, and
quartered together, not lodging one company in one place, and another in an
other. 3. That justice be administered by their own officers without appeal to
the Prince or State whom their soldiers do serve. 4. That their men be not
commanded to go to any assault, but only to guard Towns or trenches, or to
fight in battle, in which last case, if the day prove theirs, they are to
receive a months pay extraordinary. 5. and lastly, They may not be made to
serve by sea, either upon ships or galleys. They have no public stock or
treasury, or any common Arsenac or Magazin of arms, but as every Canton is
provided severally, so in case of invasion they are to send a proportion of men
paid and furnished with ammunition of war and victuals. When they do make an
offensive war (which is not usual) then such Cantons as do concur therein, are
to have part in the conquest, proportionable to what they do contribute. At
Baden they have a kind of Chambere de Contis, and every year at the feast of
Saint John Baptist, their Bailiffs, which do alternatively administer and
govern those Bailliages which are in common, do there give up their accounts,
which are reserved and kept in Archives there. If any foreign Prince do call a
public Diet at Baden, to propose any thing, his Ambassador must defray all
the Deputics that meet there upon that occasion, during the time of that
assembly, one of the Borgomaster of Zurich being always speaker or prolocutor
in those Diets, and returning the answer to the Ambassador in the name of all
the rest.

Confederate Neighbors.
GRISONS.
MY relation being confined to Helvetia, I will speak of their neighbors no
more then what does concern their relation unto the Helvetical body. The
Grisons are the Antemurali of Helvetia, toward the County of Tirol, and with
them besides the ligue de regard which all the Cantons have with the three
leagues of the Grisons, called the Grisa, la di Dio, and Dieci Dritture, the
protestant Cantons have in general an Alliance of defensive combination, and
the two Cantons of Zurick and Berne a More specifical confederation tending to
the defense of that Republic. The Bishop of Coir is a perpetual lapis
scandali, for he does pretend to be supreme Prince of that state as well in
temporalibus as in sbiritualibus, and whosoever does reside in that sea, is
fomented by the Austriaci, encouraged by the Popes Nuntio residing at Lucerne
in Helvetia, and favored by the Catholic Cantons. The Archduke Leopold did
aspire many years to that Bishopric, and there is nothing more feared in those
parts, then that one day some Prince of the house of Austria, may get the
possession of that Church. The Grisons do not pretend jus nominandi, which is
free to the Canons of the Church, and cannot be taken from them, but they have
so tied the hands of former Bishops with capitulations, that the temporal
govenrment does remain in the hands of the three leagues, and the Bishop has
nothing left him but the name.

These people were for a long time wholly devoted to the service of the French
Crown, and Henry the fourth did not only much esteem of their Alliance, but
carefully watch over the preservation of that Republic; for the security
whereof, he employed his potent offices to join them in league with the
Venetians; but that league expiring within a few years after his death, the
French Ministers did so much neglect and contemn that nation, that the
Austriaci and Spaniards had the opportunity, first to raise a party or faction
with whom they did treat Alliance, and afterward to seize themselves by force,
of Rhoetia and the Valtelina, from whence did spring all those troubles and
innovations that have been in those parts, since the year 1617. until the
present, at which time having been worse cured by the Physicians of France
Venice and Savoy, then they had been wounded by their enemies, they do enjoy
but a shadow of liberty, and do incline again to treat Alliance with Austria
and Spain.

San Gallo.
San Gallo bordering upon Glaris, and Appenseil does confine with Suevia,
toward the lake of Constance. This town is populous, rich, of great trade, and
is in a manner wholly orthodox and reformed. The Abbot does claim sovereignty,
and style himself Prince, governing absolutely throughout all that
jurisdiction, except the town, which having infranchised it self, and excluded
him, does live free under protection of the Cantons, who do carefully
invigilate upon the preservation of that place, as being a principal bulwark of
defense unto them from any invasion which may be atempted by the Austriaci, by
the way of Suevia.

Milhusen.
Milhusen confining with the Rauraci toward Alsatia, is the best defense the
Swisses have that way, and the only guard of the town of Basil. The Archduke
Leopold does look with an envious eye upon the liberty spiritual and temporal,
which they do enjoy under the protection of the Swisses, and these are very
jealous of their preservation, especially the Protestant Cantons, who are
paries proximus, and unto whom the Austriaci in general, and the Archduke in
particular does bear a very ill talent. They have often consulted upon
fortifying that Town, which would quickly be made very defensible, but the
Citizens being poor and not able, and the Swisses covetous and not willing to
disburse any money, it has hitherto been neglected, and may in time endanger
their ruin.

Valesani.
This Republic does consist of seven Ditains or Tithings, every Ditain being
an aggregation of ten Parishes. Their form of government is Democratical, and
all the people have a deliberatire voice in the election of officers, and the
determining of public affairs. The Bailiff (who is the representative head of
that Commonwealth) and the counselors his assistants, do always reside in
Lion the Metropolis of that State, and from thence they send to the several
Ditanis for their votes, upon all important occasions. They have a perpetual
quarrel with the Bishop of that sea, who does claim Monarchical sovereignty,
which it should seem his predecessors have in former times either usurped or
enjoyed, if not absolutely (which I will not deside) yet in a very great
latitude, as may appear by the Cardinal Bishop of Lion, who not a hundred years
since, did bring into Italy an army of thirty thousand men, for the service of
the Pope. This could not be done without much authority, and great revenue,
which is so much diminished at this present, that the Bishops of latter years
have scarce wherewithal to maintain honestam familiam, and dignitatem cum
decoro; yet do they still pretend strongly to the recovery of what they do
conceive has been unjustly taken from them, but the Magistrate does so clip
their wings, that they cannot fly very high, wherein that Republic has this
advantage, that no religion being professed there publicly but the Roman,
(although there be among them a great number of orthodox) the Bishop cannot
make it a question of religion, and by consequence does want that open
protection of the Pope, Emperor, Spain, and Catholic Cantons, which is upon
all occasions offered to the Bishops of Coir, Basil, and Geneva, whose case is
all alike, setting religion aside. This Repubilck has a defensive league with
the whole body of the Cantons, and likewise with the Duke of Savoy, but with
State of Berne, they have a more strict confederation, in regard of the
vicinity of both those States.

Neufchastel.
This County seated upon the border of a lake which does take his name from the
Town, is subject unto the Duke of Longueville, who is lord thereof, and so
acknowledged: yet is not his sovereignty absolute, but restrained with
immunities, and privileges which he cannot infringe or innovate: The
inhabitants do enjoy le droict de combourgoisie with the Town of Berne, and in
case of difference betwixt the Prince and subject, the lords of Berne are to
decide the question. This is a great modification of Monarchical supremacy, in
regard that appeals are never made, but to a higher power. They being all
Protestants, the Duke has often attempted to reduce then to the Roman
religion, but they have still saved themselves by appealing to the Bernesi, by
whom they are so potently protected, that when he did few years since transport
himself in person to Neufchastel, and carry a priest with him to say Mass in
the Castle, he was therein opposed, although it was his own house. The Duke is
protected by the French King who has often threatened to assist the Duke with
a potent army, but hitherto he has forborne the execution of that violent
design, for fear, not only of the Bernesi, who are very potent, but of the
Spaniards likewise, who will not suffer the French to be absolute Masters of a
province which does confine with the County of Burgundy.

Bienne.
This Town seated upon a branch of the lake of Newfchastel, is a little
Republic allied with Berne by combourgoisie. They are all of the religion, and
not troubled with any pretenders to their liberty spiritual or temporal, but do
live securely under the protection of Berne, and do enjoy all the liberties of
that Town as free denisons; serving jointly unto that State as a good
antemurale against the French County of Burgandy.

Geneva
Geneva does stand in the bottom of a lake, unto which it does give name. The
river of Rhosne does run through part of the city on the one side, and the
river Arva does pass by it on the other side. This Republic was received into
the protection and confederation with the Canton of Berne in the year 1592. or
there abouts, and does serve as a strong bulwark to secure the Bernesi from any
invasion that way. Henry the fourth of France, in the time of the league, did
employ his best offices to incantonise this Town, wisely foreseeing that in
time Spain would overbalance France in Helvetia, where he (being then a
Protestant) could only promise unto himself the devotion of four orthodox
Cantons, and the two misparties, and Spain was sure of the other seven.
Plurality of voices in the general Diet of Baden, does oversway all businesses,
but equality does make a stop, and enforce sine temperamento. If he could have
made Geneva a fourteenth Canton (as his purpose was) then the Pope, Emperor
and Span had lost all hope of predominating there, which now they have with the
odd voice: but since his death, the government of France has fallen into the
hands of ministers, who do what they can to advantage the Spanish faction in
those parts, and to suppress those who were and are most devoted to the French
Crown. Unto the sovereignty of this town the Duke of Savoy, does pretend in
temporalibus, and the Bishop in temporalibus and spiritualibus. The Town does
save it self, like an Animal amphibion, as may be seen by their arms, which
are the eagle on the one side, and the keys on the other: with the keys, they
do exclude the house of Savoy alleging that none can pretend there but the
Bishop, and with the eagle they do soar over the Bishop, declaring that their
City is imperial. If any man be curious to see the state of this controversy,
let him read le Chestal. Savoysien, written by a Savoyard, and the answer
thereunto, called le Cittadin di Geneve, written by Mr, Saralin, though his
name be not affixed: these are pamphlets of small volume, which do state that
question pro and contra. Pere Monnau a Jesuit confessor unto Madam Chrestienne
Princess of Piedmont, has likewise written a book in octavo in favor of the
house of Savoy, which was printed in Turin Anno 1622. but never published or
divulged; a copy whereof Sir Isaac Wake did send to Geneua, as soon as it did
pass the press, and if they be not provided of an answer, upon all occasions,
it is their fault. The situation of this Town does secure it from danger, for
it cannot be besieged unless armies do lodge and quarter within the dominions
of France Savoy, and Berne, and that there be a fleet likewise to command the
lake: if they be true within themselves, I do conceive it to be the most
impregnable place in all Europe.

Of the use of correspondence in those parts, as far as it does concern the
Crown of England.
IT is a Maxim irrefragable, that when enemies or ill-willers do oppose or
malign the proceedings of any Prince or State, they are to be esteemed
behoofful and advantageous for the Actors. From that Aphorism I do conclude
that the correspondence of his Majesty in Helvetia and Rhetia is not only good
but necessary, having found by expecting that the Pope, the Emperor France and
Spain, have expressed displeasure at the appearing of any Minister of his
Majesty's in those parts, upon whatsoever occasion.

Extention and latitude of correspondence does add unto the honor of great
Princes, and most commonly conduce to their service, as was well known and
observed by the wise Cardenal Wolsey, who left no Prince nor little State of
Christendom without an Ambassador or Agent of his master. The Venetians do
observe the same style, and Henry the seventh who did hate foreign Ambssadours
in his own Court, was frequent in employing his own abroad.

If it be said that we have no need of them, it may be answered, that perhaps
sometimes they may have need of us, and being fellow members of the body of our
Religion, do deserve not only countenance but protection. The Protestants in
those parts are often braved by their Allayes of the Catholic Cantons, who
being fomented by the Popish and Austriacal party do insult upon them many
times, Contentions and disputes do arise often, and the poor and simpler sort
of people intimidated with the apprehension of so potent enemies; do
unwillingly concur with the Magistrates in the defense of their liberty and
conscience, in such cases (which are frequent there) the sight of a minister of
so great a Monarch as is his Majesty, will invigorates the most stupid among
them and the opinion of his royal protection will encourage them to maintain a
good cause.

The seat of that place is very proper observe to andamenti of those upon whose
proceedings it is fit that wealwayes have a vigilant eye, for from thence as
from a watchtower we may easily discover long before whatsoever they do intend.

Those people are not only auxiliaries, of which most princes does serve
themselves, especially France and Spain, who do buy the love of the Cantons at
a dear rate, that they may be furnished with men, when they shall require any:
in which regard it will be fit that his Majesty were always advertised
aforehand when any leavy is intended to be made in those parts, that knowing
what innovation is machinating by any of those Princes who do require
auxilliaries, he may govern himself accordingly as the state of affairs shall
minister occasion.

The passage out of Germany into Italy and Vice Versa, is a point of important
consideration, and as it may import much to know when any passage is demanded,
and by whom, so will it be easy for a careful minister, to discover aforehand
the design of those that ask the passage, and perhaps he may sometimes have
credit enough (upon some occasions either to stop or delay the passage, if it
may prove prejudicial to any friends of his Majesty's, or to facilitate it, if
it may turn to their service or advantage.

The State of Venice and the Duke of Savoy his Majesty's good friends,
notwithstanding their Alliance with some of the Cantons, may have use of the
power and credit of his Majesty in those parts: for as in the year 1615 the
Protestant Cantons, did upon a letter of his Majesty's of glorious memory,
grant the passage through their dominions unto such troops as the Count John de
Nassaw had then raised for the service of the Duke of Savoy, in despite of
France and Spain, and in the year 1618 the Bernesi at the request of his
foresaid Majesty did lodge in the Pais de vaud and give quarter unto Count
Mansfelts army (retyring then out of Pied-mont) four months together, until
Vorcelli was surrendered, so hereafter occasions of the like nature may present
themselves, wherein his Majesty may favor his friends, with his authority and
good offices.

Lastly, it is to be presumed that the Palatinate and Marquisate of Baden shall
be restored in due time, and in that case the neigborhood of the four
Evangelical cities, who have Alliance with Strasbourg, may prove of good
consideration, and a Minister of his Majesty's will be necessary to cement the
intelligence and good correspondence which may be renewed betwixt those Princes
and the foresaid Cantons.

Of the name and Original of the Helvetij historically.
MAny nations do seek their pedigree further then it can be found: and some of
them are sorry to find what they did seek. Quicquid quaeritur, optimum
videtur: yet a modest ignorance is in many cases more comfortable, then any
vain curiosity can profit. The Arcadians did flee beyond the moon, and call
themselves (...). The Helvetians (like their Antipodes) go under ground and
pass the center of the earth to seek their original. They are not ashamed to
derive their extraction a Dite inferorum Deo, and their name has consonancy
with their fantasy, for Helvatter in their language is the father of Hell, and
anciently they were called Helvetteri qnasi inferno nati, which name the Romans
with the advantage of a more easy pronuntiation, did corrupt into Helvetij.

This etymology of the name will easily be accepted by those who will give
credit to Aegidius Tschudus, and Henricus Glareanus, who do affirm that the
ancient Gauls did speak the German tongue, and especially that of the Helvetij,
for although I will not affirm the uniformity of their language, yet this
conceit de Dite Patre either was infused to the Gauls by the Helvetians, or
common to them both as one people; for Julius Caesar does write of the Gauls in
this manner, Omnes se ab Dite Patre prognatos praedicabant, idque a Druidibus
proditum dicebant. This name anciently formidable to the Romans, was in a
manner extingushed when Aulus Caecinna did overcome and beat them aplate
cousture ad Vindonissam, which was so perfect a conquest, that he did divide
the whole Country into two Provinces, Sequance and Rhaetia. After that
conquest, they did look more toward Germany then toward the Gauls, and in
time did wholly pass into the name, manners, customs, and tongue of the
Germans; when being impatient of their subjection to the Romans, the
inhabitants did join with the Germans, to deliver themselves of bondage.

The second name and most known of that Country at this day is Saitia
Swisserland, but the etymology is as uncertain as of the former, in regard of
the variety of opinions; some (with the addition of the letter s. at the
beginning would derive them a vitis a people of Saxony, whom Charles the great
did drive out of their own country for frequent rebellions, and confine. within
the straight passages of the Alps, Others run into Sweden, and bring them from
the Sueci, who in the time of king Sigebert made a transmigration out of
Suecia, and planted themselves in this Country.

A third opinion there is of some wise in their own conceit, who do baptize
them Swisses, from a war which those of Zurick did make eight years together in
the time of Frederic the third against those of Swits, Glaris, and their
confederates. But we need not go so far, for it is most probable that the wholly
Country did take this name from the village or now Canton of Swits where the
first foundation of the Helvetical league was laid, the fabric whereof was
shortly after raised to perfection, by a memorable victory which they gained
not far from that village upon the Austriaci, who came with great forces to
break their new begun confederation.

So much of the name; as for their first plantation, they do pretend almost as
high as the flood, for they do believe that Zurick and Soluere are coetaneall
with Triers, the first foundation whereof is thought to have been in the time
of the Patriarch Abraham, almost two thousand years before the birth of our
Savior; All the Annals of Helvetia are constant in this assertion, and I will
rather believe them, them seek arguments to confute them.

Of the extention of Helvetia.
This Country was anciently confined betwixt the mountains Iura, and lake of
Geneva, Italy and the Rhine. Now Basil, Schpahusen, and Roteville, which are
beyond Iura, and the Rhine and the Lepontij, namely those of Belinsona, Lugan,
Locarne and Madrise, on the other side of the Alps toward Italy, being
incorporated into that body, have much increased the ancient limits thereof
from the north toward the South.

The Gaeodectical longitude according unto Caesar's account, should be 240.
miles, and the latitude 180. Most of the later Geographers do agree with him in
the longitude, but they do conceive that he did extend the latitude further
then it did reach in his time and Glareanus (who does excuse Caesar, by saying
he did take it upon trust and heresay) has contracted it to the extension of
three days journey. Ortelius to 160. miles, John Henry Switlerus, to 100.
Tschudus and Mercator to 80. with these supputations, the journals do well
agree, for from Geneva to Constance (which are the extremities of the length)
they do account 48 leagues, and from Basil to Saint Gotard (which is the breadth
20. one of those leagues, being near about five Italian miles, the difference
will not be great, betwixt the account of the former and of the latter.

These were the ancient bonnds of Helvetia, the breadth whereof (as I have
noted) is now augmented since their passing the hills, and having added unto
their dominion a good part of the Duchy of Milan.

From hence the Cosmographical Longitude, and Latitude may easily be collected.
For Como called Forum Varronis with which they do now confine, being in the
Latitude of 45 degrees and 6. Minuits, and Basil in 47. and 30 the difference
will be found to be of 2. degrees, and 24. Minutes of Latitude, and will cut
through the midst of the sixth Climet unto the beginning of the seventh. The
difference of the Meridions, or of the Longitude, from Geneva unto Saint Gallo
near Constance, which is the greatest Extension from the West toward the East,
is about 3 degrees and 46 Minutes of the lesser Circle if we follow the
Mappes, but being examined by the Calculation of the Triangles, it does contain
5 degrees, so that the whole Country is bounded and confiened, within the
Meridians, 27.30. and 32.30.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE State of ITALY, as it stood about the year 1625. OR
SOMEWHAT AFTER.

Directed to the late KING CHARLES in the beginning of his Reign.

Most gracious Sovereign,
SEeing it has pleased Almighty God, To establish your sacred Majesty in the
royal throne of your ever blessed Father, I have held it my duty, with bended
heart and knee, to present unto your Majesty at the beginning of your reign a
short view of the present estate and condition of Italy, that therein, as in a
little Map, your Majesty may see the true face of this province, and make such
use thereof hereafter, as in your Princely wisdom you shall find to conduce
most to the advantage of your own affairs, Crowns, and dignities.

THE POPE.
TO begin with Rome, that seat is possessed at this present by Urbane the
eighth a Florentine by extraction, of the family of Barbireni, a Prince of of a
vigorous age, active Spirit, great experience, who hitherto has done little to
be commended, nothing to be blamed. He did fall at the beginning of his reign
into troublesome times, for his Predecessor Gregory the fifteenth did leave him
a fosterchilde of the Valtelina, without any portion but charge, expense and
trouble. This infant was surreptitiously taken out of the cradle by the
Spaniards, who being not able to keep it longer from the true father, the
Grisons in whose favor France, Venice, and Savoy did appear, did put it into
the hands of the Church, as into a sanctuary. In the election of Pope Urban the
French faction had the affirmative and active part, for it was the hand of the
Cardinal of Savoy that did put that Crown upon his head; the Spaniards had
only a passive and negative part, in not excluding him, which favor they do
account to be great, and he does esteem to be something. As soon as he was
enthroned, he did find his Crown to be full of thorns, for some of his
promotors did pretend to all that he could give, and all unto something; to
please all, it was impossible, to displease any, dangerous, until he had his
house settled, and his friends about him. Being unwilling to disoblige France
and the league, and fearing to offend the Spaniards, he did resolve at the
first upon a neutrality, conceiving that, to suit best with his quality of
Padre commune, and hoping in time to derive unto himself the honor of
accommodating those differences by way of negotiation. But his expectation was
deceived; for by this temporizing the Valielina was lost, not without some
dishonor to him, and so lost, that he has no thanks from the league, and many
curses from the Spaniards. This pill, although it were very bitter, he would
have passed over, if it had wrought no further; but when the Duke of Savoy and
the Constable d' Esdignieris did begin to march into the field, the Spaniards
did grow so clamorous, that he was enforced to gratify them in such things as
they did desire, though perhaps that which he has done will not turn to their
advantage. The things which they did require, were, that he should send his
Nephew into France to procure a suspension of arms, and that himself should
arm potently within his dominions to join with them in the defense of the
Catholic Religion, and the liberty of Italy. These requests have been granted,
for his Nephew is not in France, and he has raised, and given order for the
raising of twelve thousand foot and two thousand horse; but what his intention
is to do, is hard to guess. It is certain that if he do love the French and the
league but a little, he does fear the Spaniards much, and therefore these arms
of his may be as well to defend himself against them, as to offend any of the
league, against whom he does now profess that he cannot declare himself,
because il suo. pegno, e in Francia; That he will employ his arms against the
league it is unlikely; for although he does inherit one quality of all his
Predecessors, which is to hate the Venetians, yet he will fear to lose by the
bargain, considering that the best part of his dominions does lie open to the
Adriatic sea, of which the Venetians are absolute masters, and may ravage all
his country at their pleasure. That he does fear the Spaniards, there are some
probabilities, as his withdrawing the Jubily from the Church of Saint Paul, and
shutting up of that gate which does lead toward Naples: his taking in and
railing a garden belonging unto the Constable Colonna, confining with Monte
Cavallo, and seeming a little to command that palace, his having required the
said Colonna, (who is a Roman, but Constable of the kingdom of Naples likewise)
to deliver into his hands a Castle of his upon the confine betwixt Rome and
Naples, and lastly, his having commanded all Cardinals and Prelates of quality,
to bring their unwrought and unguilded plate unto his exchequer, allowing them
upon the Monti (which are certain banks of money in Rome) one hundred and twenty
four Julij, (which is five pound twelve shillings sterling) for every pound
weight. These are arguments that he does fear some body, and whom he can fear,
but the Spaniards, cannot be imagined: for the kingdom of Naples is at his
door: the French are too far off, the Duk of Savoy too weak of himself, and of
the Venetians he is sure that if they may live in peace, they will disturb no
body: some are so wise as to think, that secretly he does understand with
France, and that he would willingly lay claim unto the kingdom of Naples, if
the league would bring the Spaniards so low, that he might dare to appear; but
it does plainly appear by his Ministers abroad, and their negotiations in all
places, that he does really and diligently seek to divert the storm which is
threatened unto the Genoesi, and by consequence unto the Spaniards, whether it
be that hope of good from them, or fear of hurt from innovations, or an
ambition to be the arbitrator, does move him none can tell but he who has the
key of hearts. It is likely that he would fain see an end of these troubles,
because being a Priest and a Florentine too, he has no mind to spend, and
although he has not done yet much for any of his house, yet perhaps he would
imitate his predecessors in that kind, which he can hardly do until this
storm be overblown.

Until it shall appear what will become of Genova and Breds, he will not
unmask himself certainly: but it is likely that according to the event of those
two great enterprises, he may sail as he shall find the wind.

The King of Spain.
THe dominions which the King of Spain does possess upon the Continent of
Italy, are the kingdom of Naples, and the Duchy of Milan. Naples does afford
him good store of men, and some money. Milan some few men, but no money, with
these two, they have long kept Italy in awe, rather by reputation then force:
for they have not four thousand Spaniards in both those Provinces. The subjects
have groaned a long time under a heavy burden of misgovernment, and if a fair
occasion should be offered, it is thought they would willingly mutare dominum,
non servitutem, especially those of Naples: for though the carriage of the Duke
of Feria has been moderate, yet he had ill fortune to fall into times, when
the service of his Master would not suffer him to ease the subjects according
to his desire. The best flower in the garden of the Spanish Monarchy is the
Duchy of Milan, for that is the stomach from whence is derived the aliment
which does nourish all his states in Germany and the low Countries; that rest
is now at stake; for if the Duke of Savoy and the Constable do encounter at
Genova, a check given there, does mate Milan, and the cards are so well packt,
that if they no not shuffle them anew at Paris, it will prove a hard game, and
very dangerous for the Spaniard. The vicinity of Helvetia, the proximity of
Germany by the way of Tirol, the neernesse and conveniencie of Genova, did
really make the state of Milan formidable to all Italy, and terrible to all
their neighbors. If Genova do now fall, all hope of money is lost, and no more
Neapolitans, Sicilians nor Spaniards can enter into Lombardy. The Swisses, when
they shall see that Genova, from whence they had all their Spanish pensions, is
no longer at the devotion of Spain, will quickly faint, and they have likewise
a strong counterpoise of the Protestant Cantons, which being declared for the
league, do keep the Catholic Cantons in awe. As for Tirol and Germany, they
are of no further consideration, for so much as does regard the State of Milan,
rebus sic stantibus: for the passages, which the Marquis di Coruvies has taken
in Rhaetia and the Valtelina do exclude all Almans from entering that way into
Italy, and there is no other way for them, (the Duke of Savoy being of the
contrary side) but only through the state of Venice, or of Swisserland. The
kingdom of Naples is like old Rome, Venalis si emptorem invenerit, the first
opportunity that shall present it self, will make them prove true Neapolitans,
false to their last master, and ready to betray any that shall succeed; of
Sicilie, Sardinia, Majorche and Minorche, I say nothing, because they are
Islands divided from the main, and like Pinasses must follow the fortune of
these greater ships.

Florence Parma Nodena Luca
OF these I will speak together: be-because although they are supreme in their
several circumferences, yet all their lines do meet in one center of devotion
to the Crown of Spain, Florence being bound to give four thousand men for
Sienna, Parma three thousand for Piacenta, Modena two thousand for Pensions,
and Luca two thousand for Protection; their obligations do run only for the
defense of the State of Milan, but yet the Marquis of Hiniosa and Don Pedro di
Toledo did serve themselves of their forces offensively against the Duke of
Savoy in the last wars of Asti and Vercelli, and the Duke of Feria has made
bold to employ their troops at this time in favor of the Genoesi, as has
appeared by their ensigns and Commanders taken at Ottaggio. This may prove
lapis scandali, and perhaps hereafter those Princes and states may be called to
an account, by the French and Savoyards, for having appeared in a quarrel in
which they had nothing to do. Heretofore Florence did proceed more warily as
long as Cosmus the son of Ferdinand lived, for his mother Madam Christienne of
Loreign, a Woman of imcomparable wisdom, did so temper that government, that
Spain was served in what was due, and yet France was observed with a decorum
befitting the extraction of the French king out of that house, and the Crown
wherewith the queen mother has honored their family. But Cosmus the young
Prince who has since succeeded, being governed by the Arch-Duchesse who is
sister to the Emperor, does derive all the silver streams of that state unto
the Austrian Mill, so that France is now wholly neglected, and only Spain
respected. Edward Farnese Duke of Parma, being likewise very young, is governed
by his Uncle the Cardinal Farnese, whose red hat being died in the Court of
Rome must needs incline him to follow the Popes directions, and that house
having likewise the Dutchies of Castro and Caprarola lying within the kingdom
of Naples, it is not to be marvelled if they do worship toward the south. But
it may seem strange that Cesare di Este Duke of Modena, whose eldest son Prince
Alfonso has married Isabella the infanta of Savoy, by whom he has ten
children, should run so violently the other way. Herein there is a mystery full
of cunning malice, and malicious cunning. For shorly after the death of Prince
Philibert of Savoy, who died in Palermo the last Summer) a will of his was
produced, wherein he did declare his sister of Modena haredem ex Ass, and
bequeath unto his eldest son the Principalities of Oneglia and Marro. The Duke
of Modena in virtue of this will, did lay claim unto all that might be thought
to appertain unto Prince Philibert, and being opposed by the Duke of Savoy, who
did first first except against the will as not being authentical, in regard
that it was only drawn by a Notary, but never signed by Prince Philibert; and
secondly allege, that the son had no power to make a will during the life of
his father, and lastly that Oneglia and Maro had been lately conferred upon the
Prince by his father, with express reservations of returning to the Ducal
chamber of Savoy, in case the Prince Philibert should die without lawful issue,
the Duke of Modena offended with this refusal, did flee off from Savoy, and
cast himself into the arms of Spain: whose invention it was to cast that bone
betwixt those two houses of Savoy and Modena, may easily appear by the rule of
Cui bono. The father having fallen off from Savoy, his younger son Prince
Luiggi di Este must needs fall off as soon as he could from the Venetians,
whereupon as soon as they had entertained the Count de la Tour for their
General, Prince Luiggi seeming to be offended therewith, did ask leave to be
gone, and being taken at his word by these Sri. who did not like that the
father should serve the Spaniards, and the son the league, he retired to Modena
about two months since.

Mantova.
FErdinand Gonlaga, Duke of Mantova, has his house free from any dependency by
obligation, but as his controversies with Savoy did first enforce him to seek
the protection of Spain, so since by marrying a daughter of Florence, and the
marriage of his sister Eleonora with the Emperor, he has espoused a tacit
but absolute dedevotion to the service of the house of Austria. He is a Prince
whose natural and intellectual parts are singular, and his moral good,
unfortunate in having no lawful issue; for if he and his brother Don Vincenlo
die without heirs male, their Niece the princess Maria, daughter unto the
late Duke Francesco and the Infanta Margarita of Savoy, will carry from their
house the marquisate of Montferrat, and a 100000. crowns revenue of Beni
Allodiali upon the Mantovan. His differences with Savoy will never be
reconciled, as long as the Spaniards have the upper hand in Italy; for Beati
Pacifici is not to be found in any Spanish Liturgy. But in these present
innovations he does not yet appear, for Montferret concentrating with Piemont,
and Mantova being surrounded with the dominions of Venice, he has only
voluntatem liberam, but potestatem ligatam, with the State of Venice he does
hold very good quarter, and they do respect him as figlivolo di S. Marco.

Of Genova nothing shall be said, until it may appear what will become of
them; for as they are now, either they must stand by the strength of Spain, or
bury the reputation of the Spaniards, in the ruins of their City and State.

Venice.
THe Venetians did lay the first stone of this great building, upon which all
the present innovations in these parts are grounded: for they did wisely
foresee, and earnestly remonstrate unto the French king and the Duke of Savoy,
the danger which the public liberties would run, if the daily usurpations of
the Spaniards and Austriaci were not timely prevented. Hereupon the league was
concluded at Lions, ratified at Paris, confirmed at Susa, and executed first by
the Marquis di Coruveres in the Valteline, and since by the Duke of Savoy and
the Constable d' Esdiguisere in the Genoesate. Their proceedings in this
business have been, and are still mixed with a constant temper of generosity,
and wariness; for they do not spare to assist and favor all that are contrary
unto the Austrian party, as does appear by their assisting the states of the
united Provinces, their contributing to Mansfelt, their sending of men, money
and ammunition to the Marquis di Coevures, their entertaining the Count de la
Tour, and their resolution, to set upon the state of Milan when the Duke of
Savoy and the Constable shall begin: and yet they do very cauteloussy keep
themselves to the letter of the league, and therefore they will not take notice
of Mansfelt until he may come so near the Valteline that it may appear he was
entertained by them, only for that end, nor have any part in the enterprise of
Genova, although they do very well know, that the weakening of the contrary
party in any place, does conduce unto the end which they do aim at. Good
Chirurgians do not descend unto Cauteries, but in cases of extremity, and it
may be presumed of the wisdom of the state of Venice, that they would never
have disturbed the peace of Italy, if they might have lived securely, without
innovation. They are not ignorant, that the remedy is little less dangerous
then the disease, but the disease being upon the point to grow incurable, they
were enforced to apply that remedy which only could save them (as things did
stand then) from present precipitating. Of their constancy there is no doubt to
be made; for they do well know, that as they were the first that did raise this
storm, so they shall be the last whom the contrary party will forgive, and they
have a maxim in this state, that Priti and Spagnuoli non perdonano may. The
correspondences of the State of Venice, and at this present with Rome, are
only formal with such Princes of Italy as depend upon Spain, ceremonial: with
the French king and the Duke of Savoy real, with all Princes and states opposite
to the house of Austria, cordial. By sea, in their own sea, they are strong.
Upon Terra firma they have all their Cities well furnished, and for the
defensive, they are in good state. How they stand in matter of treasure is a
secret, but certainly omnes vias pecuniae norunt, and they do spend as if they
did not fear to want.

The Duke of Savoy.
CHarles Emmanuel Duke of Savoy, with the Infanta Caterina did espouse the
interests of Spain, and he was truly constant in serving that Crown and
observing that King, until Philip the second making his peace with Henry the
fourth did out of charity to himself exclude his son in law the Duke of Savoy,
as may be seen in the Treaty of Vervins. Then did Henry the fourth lay claim to
the Marquisate of Salulles, which Savoy had usurped by the counsel of Spain,
and did retain upon hope of assistance which was secretly promised, but not
performed, The Spaniards had obtained their end, when by the taking of Salulles
the French were driven quite out of Italy; but because they did not desire that
the house of Savoy should aggrandize it self, they were content to abandon him,
and let the French king weaken him as much by the taking from him by
composition, Bresse, Beauge, Verome, and Gol, on the other side of the Alps,
as might balance what he had added to his state in Italy, by the taking of
Salulles: peace being concluded upon the conditions of that exchange in Lions,
the Duke of Savoy did begin to see, that his alliance with Spain was an
honorable burden, and a golden chain, which did captivate the liberty of his
house, whereupon his wife being dead, he did shortly after bury in her tomb the
best part of his affections toward Spain, but he did not fall off quite, in
regard of his children, who being of Spanish extraction, did naturally incline
to the house of their mother. Not long after his eldest son Philip Emanuel died
in Spain, not without some suspicion of help, and the ministers of Spain in
Italy did often minister unto him occasion of discontent, so that at the last
he resolved to forsake those who had forsaken him, and betwixt Monsieur de
Bethunes, who was then Ambassador for the French king at Rome, and the Count di
Verrua, who was Ambassador there likewise for the Duke of Savoy, a Treaty of
confederation and alliance was concluded betwixt Henry the fourth and Charles
Emanuel, The death of the French king ensuing shortly after, the affairs of
France did change face, and the reciprocal marriages contracted betwixt France
and Spain, did exclude the Duke of Savoy from hope of having the eldest
daughter of France, which had been promised to his son, or being assisted with
the protection of that crown, yet would he never depart from the Treaty made
with Henry the fourth, notwithstanding many unkindnesses received from France
in the beginning of the reign of king Lovis, but still hoping beyond hope, and
injurias ferendo and gratias agendo, he did in the end compass all his
desires, with the death of the Marischal d' Ancre, all animosity against him
was laid aside, and not long after he obtained the second daughter of France
for the Prince of Piedmont, then was he and his house incorporated into France,
and that union has since been strengthened by the declaring of the Prince
Cardinal Protector of the French nation in Rome, and the marrying of Prince
Tomaso unto Madamoyselle de Soissons. Now he and all his sons are openly
declared for the French party, and with Prince Philibert there did die all the
affections of the house of Savoy toward Spain. This part of the world does owe
unto Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy the discovery of one great secret, which is,
that the Spaniards are resistible in Italy; for he did make his party good
against them when not a sword in all Europe was drawn against them but his, and
they employed against him all the power of their Monarchy. Marcellus was the
first that did make the Romans see Annibalem potuisse vinci, and after he had
once beaten him, he ever thrived. The Spaniards have sped little better in
these parts, since the Duke of Savoy appeared against them; for whereas the
ministers of Spain did govern all the Princes and states of Italy, with tale la
meant delle; es menes ter mortifica tal Principe, and di castigare tale
Republicar now they do speak the language of Christians, and do recommend
themselves unto those whom heretofore they did despise. If France do not
abandon him, he will be a dangerous thorn in the side of the Spaniards; for he
has an undaunted courage, infinite experience, incredible vigilance, an active
spirit, an able body, beyond the proportion of his years, the love of all
soldiers, the affections and hearts of his subjects, inventions to find money
as fast as he does dispense it liberally, and which does crown his happiness,
all his children of both sexes, besides their incomparable fillial obedience,
and singular virtues, have abilities to govern a far greater state then his: so
that fearing no disorder in his own house, he may adventure safely his person
abroad, where he is kliewise nobly seconded by two of his sons. His pretentions
are great, unto Savona, the Marquisat of Final, and many other places, and he
does hope with this occasion to advantage his house in something, whereupon he
has without ceremony pulled off his mask, and being the first that has entered
into the list, he will be the last that shall retire.

Although I have just cause to fear, that this disjoynted discourse may seem
tedious to your Majesty, yet must I needs in all humility crave leave to add
one word of application, which together with all the rest I do humly submit
unto the consideration of your Majesty's wisdom.

In the time of Henry the eighth, the Italian Histories of that age, did with a
constant style give him the title of Protettore della liberta d' Italia, and
yet it does not appear that he did ever directly embrace the protection of this
province, or interest himself in any of their quarrels, only the Venetians did
reap notable benefit by his withdrawing himself out of the League of Cambray,
and all the rest had their eyes upon him, because he was a contrepefo betwixt
the two kings of France and Spain. As the affairs of the world do stand now,
that title cannot but be derived unto your Majesty, if you will be pleased to
accept it, for your Majesty is now the rising sun, whom all in these parts do
worship, and without any cost or trouble your Majesty may take to your self as
much honor from the Protection of these princes and states, as may not be a
burden unto you, and yet advantage your own affairs else where. Of Florence,
Mantova, Modena, Parma, Genova, and Luca, your Majesty shall not need to take
further notice then by a gracious answering such respects of observance, as
perhaps some of them may show unto you, for as things do stand now, they are
not sui juris, and at no time can any great use be made of them for your
Majesty's service. With the Pope your Majesty does hold no correspondence, and
yet Rome is a place upon which your Majesty's servants had need to have a
vigilant eye, for there are forged all designs pernicious to your Majesty's
dominions, and all mysteries of state, which are afterward acted in several
stages of Christendom, are first attired in that attyring house. In the kingdom
of Naples, and the Duchy of Milan, your Majesty's subjects shall always find
entertainment conformable unto the correspondence, that shall pass betwixt
your Majesty and the king of Spain. There do remain only the Venetians and
the Duke of Savoy; these do properly retain their full liberty, and are able to
do your Majesty service, and to offend any that shall be your enemy. By their
means, and with the help of their Ministers and subjects, your Majesty may
know whatsoever is done at Rome, and singular use may be made of their
friendship, without any cost or trouble: for the Venetians will never desire
more then to have their Ambassadors kindly used, and that the world may see,
and take notice, that your Majesty does respect them, and if upon fit
occasions your Majesty will be pleased to favor the Duke of Savoy, and the
Prince of Piedmont with some horses and dogs, they will be proud of such a
token of your love, and be ready to deserve it. Your Majesty does already
inherit the affections and devotion both of the State of Venice, and of the
house of Savoy: and when they shall cast themselves into your arms (as now
they will do) if you be pleased only to embrace them, they are yours fot ever.

I will here conclude with my hearty prayers unto Almighty God, for the
preservation of your Majesty's sacred person, and your daily increase in
happiness and prosperity, and ever rest

Your Majesty's most humble faithful and obedient subject and servant J. W.

A DISCOVRSE upon the proceedings OF THE KING of SWEDEN

Anno Dom. 1655.

THT PROCEEDINGS OF THE KING of SWEDEN
IT is a received Position, that all great conquests have proceeded originally
from the North, and terminated in the South, which point Mr. Bodin does
exemplify very well in his Method, and confirm with a passage of scripture,
omne ex Aquilone malum. In stead of Conquests put Incursions and in stead of
All, most, and then thim axime may pass, but under correction that passage of
scripture is misaplied, and not to be admitted in this sense. The King of
Sweden, Gustavus, has lately added a new example to confirm the old position,
and if his proceedings be understod as Incursions, and not as Conquests, they
will have perfect conformity with the first generally received position.

He did first pass the Baltic sea, with an army of no great consideration;
and did hazard himself upon some disadvantages; for he could not land upon any
ground, which he was not first to dispute with his sword, and was to encounter
at his beginning with Imperialists, who having many years sucked the blood of
poor Martyrs in that Country, would not render it without hazard of their own.
Put into his balance the land troops which he had in Prussia and Livonia, I
will confess, that the hope of joining with them (although they were far off)
did encourage him and his naval army, to adventure upon an enterprise that was
little better then desperate, for although he did well know, that the
Imperialists were hated in those parts for the cruelties and extortions which
they had committed a long time, and that he should be received of all good
Patriots as a Protector of the public liberty, yet was he to break the ice of
himself, there being none that did dare to appear in his favor, until he had
no need of the favor of their appearing. It is more then eight years since the
Imperialists have looked toward the North, presuming (and with good ground)
that if they could be Masters of the Rivers and that sea, all Germany was to be
at their devotion. None went further then Vallestein, who did serve his Master
well, and lose nothing by the bargain. This was the only man, to speak
humanly, that could have stopped the King of Sweden at the beginning; for the
Emperor having given unto him the investiture of the Duchy of Mechelbourg, he
was able of himself to have maintained his possession; but the Duke of Bavaria
and the Catholic league having constrained the Emperor at the last Diet of
Ratisbone to license him, he retired to Prague, and Tilly having the general
command under the Duke of Bavaria, did not care to fortify the maritime places
of Pomerany and Mechelburg, because they did belong to Vallestein, whose ruin
the Duke of Bavaria did seek, and if Tilly could have been sure that the king
of Sweden would have contented himself with the reintegration of the Dukes of
Mechelbourg, and Prince of Pomerany, and what with the Imperialists had gotten
in the Duchy of Holstein, he would never have appeared as an enemy, there
being nothing that the Duke of Bavaria, and he did desire more then the ruin of
Vallestein, the discrediting the Emperor, and the exaltation of the Catholic
league which might in due time authorize Bavaria to make a king of the Romans
according to his own mind, and stamped at Munichen. Now if it be rightly
examined, it will appear that the king of Sweden has not spent so many months
since his departure from Sweden, and his arrival in Francony and Suevia, as the
Imperialists did spend years in conquering North-wards: and the facility of his
progress is to be attributed unto the finger of God, and not unto the arm of
flesh.

This is taken pro concesso, that he has assured himself of the Baltic sea
for his retraite, that he has infranchised Pomeranie, Mechelbourg, and
Holstein, that he has cleared the best parts of the rivers of Elbe and Weser,
that he has put the Circle of lower Saxony in state of defense, secured the
Marquis of Brandebourg, saved the Duke Elector of Saxony from utter perdition,
seated himself of the Bishoprics of Bamberg, and Werteberg, encouraged the
Landgraves of Hesse, and disposed the capital Imperial Towns of Francony and
Swevia to accept him as Protector of the common liberty. This is very much to
be done in so short a time, but it was not done sine sanguine and sudore; for
when Tilly did see that the king had passed the Elbe, he did look that way, to
stop his further advancing, and upon the confines of that river there did pass
many rencounters which were very bloody, but the main battle was given near
Lipswick, wherein God did bless the king, and our Laity did not favor Tilly.
It cannot be denied but that he did the part of a brave General in that battle,
and in all the former rencounters, and he has now discovered an error in our
ordinary Arithmetic, for that Hydra of his, has still multiplied by
substraction, and he is now as strong as ever he was. It is therefore necessary
that we should examine well how things do stand at the present, foresee what is
likely to ensue and deliberate quid agendum.

In my conceit, things do stand yet in aequilibrio, for although much ground
has been gotten since the battle near Lypswich, and the hearts of milions of
men are turned to our favor in detestation of the cruelty which the Imperial
Commissaries have used; yet if the chance of the war do turn in an other battle
to our disadvantage, all that ground is lost, and those people will return
tanquam canes ad vomitum, let us take it for granted, that the king of Sweden
may go into the field with twenty thousand foot and five thousand horse, not
counting his garrisons. He will be encountered by Tilly and Lorain with as
many, if not more. If the Imperialists get the day, we may say good night,
unless we will deceive our selves. If the king prevail, it is not so, for he
pretending nothing in Germany for himself, but intending the repatriation of
diverse exiled princes, and proscribed States, they will not be able to subsist
severally of themselves without him, nor he be able to maintain his army, if he
do give every man is due, and retain nothing unto himself, which may enable him
to maintain both himself, and those whose protection he does undertake. Herein
I do find a great difficulty; for if he do live wholly upon the Catholic
Princes, our civil disputes will terminate in a war of religion; and if he do
live upon the Protestants, they will be as weary of him, as they are now of the
Emperor: if he do exact from both, he will be in short time equally odious to
both, who will see that they have changed Dominum non servitutem. But if the
Emperor do lose the day, he will not be so far straightened: for the reverent
respect due unto his Imperial Crown will always keep in devotion to his
service, milions of souls, who do detest the barbarous proceedings of his
Ministers. Secondly, the hereditary possessions of the house of Austria yield
many men, and are of great extension, which none can take from them in good
conscience. Lastly, the dominions of the king of Spain are very vast, and his
Treasure of such consideration, that it is a ridiculous thing to think, that he
can want money; for although he does somtimee turn banquerupt, when it does turn
him to account; yet he does always find money for his own occasions, and he
that has money, shall never want men. His Majesty has sent the Marquis
Hamilton with forces to the King of Sweden, those are counterballanced by the
troops which the Duke of Lorain has conducted in service of the Emperor. The
states may perhaps assist the king of Sweden with considerable troops, when
they have nothing to do; but it were better for him that they had something to
do, because the Infanta will send as many to the Emperor as they can send to
him, so that the balance does go equal at present, but for the future, we have
this disadvantage, that if we have this disadvantage, that if we be once beaten
a Plat cousture, we shall be worse then before Prague, and if the Emperor lose
the day, he will prove like Anteus, and rise from the ground with new strength,
having a good pulse of his patrimony, in the conservation whereof many are
interessed.

The point most considerable is, that of religion, which we are like to fall
upon, although we are to avoid it like a rock. If inevitable necessity do cast
us upon that desperate coast, we must make account, that at this present in
Germany there is much ground possessed by those who do declare themselves on
our side; and thus much enjoyed by our enemies declared, as may be seen by a
schedule apart, which shall be annexed into this discourse.

If we do confine our selves unto Germany only, we shall get little by the
bargain, and if we do go out, we shall lose more. In Germany the Catholics
have this great advantage, that they do in Spiritualibus, all acknowledge the
Pope, and do agree among themselves in doctrine and discipline, whereas we have
nothing but the confession of Ausbourg, which does bind us with so loose a
chain, that the names of Calvinists, Lutherans, Hussits are still in esse, and
their, and their hatred one against the other, greater then of them all against
the Catholics. If we do go out of upper Germany, there is Great Brittany,
Denmark, Sweden, and the states of the united Provinces, which do come short of
France, Spain, and Italy, who will be against us when we shall come to that
point, for although this Pope be contrary in affection to the house of Austria,
yet he must contribute what may lie in his power, to the maintaining of the
Catholics, and the like must be presumed both of the French King, and of the
Venetians and Duke of Savoy, who do all wish an abasing of the Austriaci, but
will never endure the increase of our religion in any place where they can
hinder it. Spain and the other Princes of Italy may well be left out here,
because it is too well known how they do incline, and if they could agree among
themselves, perhaps the Duke of Nivers and Mantova might be their General, with
his new order of Militia Christiana.

I have heard some say, that we must trust to our selves, and never expect any
good from Catholics; the first I grant, but I deny the second. I will say
those men are very wise that will demonstrate how Protestants thorowout Europe
subsist without support of Catholics; but if we can be without them, it is
good, because they are to us like a lake of Anecie, which does yield fish all
the year, but in lent, as these may serve us at all times, but when we have
most need of them. Here we may put into our scale, those of the religion in
France, whose relics are something numerous, quantum ad individua, but they
are light grains, and of no greater consideration since the integrity of their
body has been dissolved and broken, their fortifications demolished, and their
leaders either seduced or exiled, so so that nothing can be expected from them,
but the aid of some few voluntaries, whose zeal may transport them to offer
their service unto such as do or may appear in this cause, and the prayers of
the Churches, and good wishes of all true Protestants.

There is yet another thing of greater consideration, which does make for us,
and that is the difference among Catholics for civil respects, which will in
part help to counterpoise the misunderstandings of our religionaries in
Germany, of which before I have spoken; though France has not hitherto so
visibly aspired to an universal Monarchy, as Spain is said to have done,
(perhaps unjustly) it is apparent that their perpetual domestic brovilleries
have hindered them from executing, and perhaps from projecting any such vast
designs. But it is certain, that either envy, or emulation, or reciprocal
jealousy have bred such an Antipathy betwixt those two nations, that though
they are unwilling to break, yet they will always disagree, unless the
crucifying of our Savior do reconcile Herod and Pilate. This emulation of
these two Crowns does breed as great a distraction of the Catholic body in
Europe, as may be equivalent to the disunion of our body in Germany, only
herein they have the advantage of us, that their quarrels being purely civil are
more accommodable of themselves, and that they have the Pope for Padre commune,
unto whom they do willingly remit the arbitrament of their differences, when
they are both so weary of making war that they do not care upon what conditions
any peace be made pro interim; whereas our differences in matter of religion,
are more irreconcilable; for although the parties may agree in the ground of a
Confession, yet differences of opinions do prove conscientious in matter of
divinity, and opiniastretes in those who do every one of them abound in their
own sense, can never be reduced to temper, much less to regularity, especially
there wanting a head on our side, who might call an universal Council, and by
coactive power enforce conformity unto what should be decreed by the major part
of Princes.

I do not bring in the king of Poland into any part of our account, because
although it be well known he does stand affected, yet it is certain that he has
only voluntatem liberam and potestatem ligatam at this present, so that he can
do no great hurt, nor good.

There is an other circumstance which does make against us, namely, that the
present visible supportation of our cause does lie upon the king of Swedens
person only, whom none but God can secure from Assassinates; and if he should
miscarry, we should be to seek, whereas the Imperialists, and Catholics have
more strings to their bow then one. But in case God do protect him from treason
intended, and that he do give him farther victory, he cannot but live with some
little anxiety, for fear lest the king of Denmark, retaining the memory of old
quarrels, should come behind him, and that the Duke of Saxony should fall from
him, and accommodate with the Emperor. Agaiust these I have no grains of
civil considerations to oppose, but must hope that God who has made choice of
him to fight his battles, will always assist him from open and secret enemies,
and either by him, or some other whom God himself will choose, will perfect the
work that he has begun.

If this model of the present state of affairs be just, or does come near unto
rectitude, then in the same glass which does show unto us the present face of
things, we way foresee what is likely to be the event, as far as any thing may
be conjectured de futuris contingentibus, the certainty of which is known only
to God, All that can be said in this subject, must be reduced unto two heads;
namely the accommodation of all differences, all amiable, or the continuance of
the war; this being to be understood only of Germany, which Province at this
present is the only Seeds belli, it is hard to say which of these two is the
most likely to ensue in the first place; for although it may be granted, that
peace is desired on both sides, yet the concluding thereof will prove a hard
resultate; first in regard of the proximity of the armies, which can hardly be
contained from enterschaking when they come to a reasonable distance; secondly
in regard of the dispersion of the armies, which being divided in places far
off, cannot easily agree upon a surseance of arms universal, if any such thing
should be accorded in any one place: Thirdly, because neither the one party nor
the other can long live en gros upon the Paisant, and therefore they must es
loigne themselves, or dispute their bread with their swords. Fourthly we do
not hear as yet of any Mediator, neither can we know where to find one that
may be trusted of both parties.

for although the French king would perhaps derive unto himself that honor,
yet the animosity that he has and does still express against Spain and the
house of Austria, will hinder him from being trusted by them, and the
partiality that is discovered in him toward Bavaria and the Catholic League
will make him suspected by us. This office would stand best with his Majesty,
if he were not in a manner a party; for although in this conjuncture he might
interpose very opportunely betwixt the king of Sweden and the Austriaci, yet
Bavaria and the Catholic electors will hardly admit of him for what does
concern their interests. the one in regard of the electorat and Palatinate, the
others in regard of difference in religion, The peace or truce in the low
Countries, will prove a knotty piece of work, and without that the peace of
Germany can hardly be concluded; Again there is an other dfficulty in regard of
a new war likely to begin in Italy, which will cause the French to disturb the
quiet of the Austriaci in Germany as much as they shall be able, and to
traverse likewise any Treaty with the low countries: Lastly, the Duke of Lorain
having now with Tilly the command of the Imperial or Catholic army, it is
likely that they will both incline to war, the one to purchase the electorate
of Brande-bourg (which is promised unto him) and the other to have his revenge,
for having been beaten.

All that can be said on the other side, is that both parties may be so weary
of the war, that they may rather desire Peace upon any conditions then hazard
new Battles, which are journiaillers. Secondly that the question of the
Palatinate whereupon the quarrel is grounded, may seem unto some of easy belief
to approach near unto the point of accommodation, considering that Spain has
undertaken to dispose the Emperor on the one side (how real I know not) and
that France does seem willing to dispose Bavaria on the otherside, to
accommodate with us upon any reasonable conditions.

Lastly that the Abbate Scaglia having in his hands the negotiation of Peace or
Truce with the States of the united Provinces, it may be presumed that he may
effect as much as father Ney did heretofore.

If these Landmarks be not mistaken, we may conclude that in probability and
quoad hominem it is more likely that the war will continue then any Peace be
agreed upon, and therefore taking that for granted, it will now be time for us
to take into consideration quid agendum.

But before I enter upon that discourse, I will in one word mrake quid non
agendum, namely, that we be careful above all things not to break off any
Treaties that are or may be set on foot for the accommodation of the Palatinate
how captious and elusory so ever they may be, it being good to keep them up, as
long as they do do not amuse us, and that we do not trust unto them but put in
lucro any benefit that may unexpectedly come by them, and therefore it will be
very necessary to dispose the king of Bohemia, not to stir as yet, nor to
appear in person (as he does seem to intend) for very good respects and
considerations.

Secondly, that to much passion be not expressed on our side in favor of the
Queen mother, or Monsieur, un-until our present negotiations here be
consummated (which will be very shortly fait ou failli) and that we may see
more clearly how they will govern themselves toward the king of Sweden, and
Bavaria, which will be a short work, considering that their assisting of
Bavaria will be a secourse of Pisa, if it be not speedy, and that both the king
of Sweden and the States do call upon them now very instantly for 5000. livers
due unto each at the end of this month, and therefore these will prove good
pietre di parangona, and make us see how their pulse does beat.

The territories and Cities of the Protestants and Papists in Germany, are at
this present so intermingled, (most of the Princes of each Religion having in
their possession some places of the contrary party) that it will be difficult
to make an accurate Geomatrical division, and distinction of them.

The chief places which the Protestants do at this time possess, and in which
there are few or not places which are Catholic are, Swede. Livonia. Norwegia.
Prussia


The Marquisate of Brandenbourg, Upper and Lower Lusatia, (engaged to the Duke
of Saxsony by the Emperor, and now regained by the Kings of Sweden)

The Duchess of Pomeranta, and Mechlebourg.

Denmark. -- All Holsatia.

The Circles of the upper and lower Saxony, in which are comprised the
Electoral Duchy of Saxony: and other Principalities belonging to the house of
Saxony,

The Dutchies of Lunembourg and Brunswich, (although the lower circle be much
mingled is rather to be accounted Catholic) East Fresland, sc. the County of
Emden.

Oldenbourg -- Thuringues.

The Marquisates appertaining to the house of Brandenbourg, sc. Beyreuch,
Culembach, and Onolesbach, or Anspac.

Part of the Circles of Franconia and Swabe, in which are comprised the Cities
of Norimberg, Vlm, Nordigen, Francfort, and diverse others though much
intermingled.

The whole Duchy of Wittemberg: wherein there are oney two or three Cities in
which the Emperor and Bavaria have Garrisons.

Part of the Marqvisate of Durlach.

The Duchy desdeux Ponts.

The Counties of Hannaco.

Diverse Counties upon the Confines of Alsatia, belonging to the house of Nassaw.

The Wettaraw, wherein are diverse Countries the most of which have lately cast
off the yoke which Tilly had laid upon them.

Hesse of Cassel. and Marbourg.

Part of the Dutchies of Berke; Mark, Iuliers and ^leves.

The city of Strasbourg, and the teritories adjoining,

As for the Imperial towns, they are comprised in the Circle of Saxony,
Franconea, and Swabe; of which I make no mention here, neither do I make
mention of the Swisses, which may also be esteemed separate from Germany.

All the formentioned Provinces (without taking in Swede, Narwegia and Denmark,
which are in a manner Peninsulaes) contain in latitude from the Baltic sea, as
far as Franconia (where the King of Swed is at this present) fourscore German
Leagus. In longitude they contain from East Freesland to the Confines of
Poland, running along by Prussia and Livonia, a hundredth and five and thirty
leagues; of which fifteen make a degree.

The Principal Rivers are,
Ems which discharges into the Ocean at Emden.

The Weser that discharges it self into the sea at Bremen.

The Elue which discharges at Hambourg.

The Rehein which passes into the Ocean through the united Provinces of the
Low Countries.

The Trave which enters into the Baltic sea at Lubeck.

The Oderspree, and other Rivers which enter into the Baltic sea at Starlsund.

The Vistule which enters into the Baltic sea at Dansk.

The chief Provinces which the Catholics have are,
The kingdom of Bohemia

Austria. Siletia.
The kingdom of Hungaria.

Carinthia, Croatia, and other Provinces the Hereditary possessions of the
house of Austria.

Stiria Tirol Carniola. Moravia.
Archbishopric of Saltsbourg.

Upper and Lower Elsace.

Bavaria.

Upper and Lower Palatinate.

The Bishopric of Spires and Worms.

Archbishopric of Treves.

Archbishopric of Colen.

Archbishopric of Ments.

Diverse Bishoprics and other places, which as also the Bishoprics and
Archbishopricks above mentioned are contained in the Circles of Franconia,
Westfal a, and of the Rhein.

These kingdoms and provinces, contain in Latitude a hundredth and twenty German
Leagues, and in Longitude (according to the Largest account) a hundred and
forty.

FINIS.

