His Majesty's most Gracious LETTER TO THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND.
WILLIAM R.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE Continuation of the War, still Hinders Us from Pursuing Our Resolution of
being amongst you in Person; And so Obliges Us to Call you together once more
in Our Absence. Therefore We have appointed Our Right Trusty and Right Entirely
Beloved Cousin and Counselor, John Marquis of Tweeddale, to be Our
Commissioner, and to Represent Our Person and Authority amongst you. The Proofs
he has given of his Capacity and Experience in Business, as well as of his
Fidelity and Zeal, by his many and long Services to the Crown and Nation, and
particularly to Us, since We made him Our Chancellor, will Render Him very
Acceptable to you. We Desire you to give him Entire Trust and Credit; for We
have fully Instructed Him with Our Mind. He has Powers to pass all such Laws
for the Good of that Our Ancient Kingdom, as have been proposed to Us at this
Time. He is to Ask Nothing of you in Our Name, but that which the Interest of
the Country makes necessary to be Done; And therefore We need not Mention to
you, that the Subsidies for Paying the Forces are now Expired, and that your
Peace and Safety Requires the Renewing of them during the War. You will be also
Sensible, that there is a Necessity to have the Coast and Trade secured from
Privateers. We are glade of any Appearances of a Disposition to Moderation and
Union, about Church Matters; We Hope you will Encourage it, and Promote it, by
removing the Subjects of Differences as much as you can.

We are not unmindful of your Letter to Us in the close of the last Session.
The known Interruptions We have had in Business this Winter, have been a great
Hinderance to Us, but We are Resolved to Do whatsoever may be for the Security
of the Government, and the Satisfaction of Our good Subjects. We Recommend to
you Calmness and Unanimity in your Proceedings; and Doubt not, but that you will
Act sutably to the Confidence We have put in you, in Calling you again in Our
Absence: And that as you have done upon other Occasions, so you will upon this,
Give Us such Signal Testimonies of your Duty and Affection, as will Convince
all Men, of the perfect Union and Understanding, that is betwixt Us and that
Our Ancient Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the 17th Day of April, 1695. And of Our
Reign the 7th Year. By His Majesty's Command, J. Johnstoun.

Directed thus, Scotland.
THE SPEECH OF JOHN Marquis of Tweeddale, His Majesty's High Commissioner, to
the Parliament of SCOTLAND, On Thursday the Ninth of May, 1695.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE great Confidence the King has in your Affection, and Faithfulness to his
Government, and the Trust he reposes in you, does evidently appear in His
calling you so frequently together, during his own necessary Absence beyond
Sea, as well as His tender Care and Concern for your safety and Welfare, in
minding every thing which may contribute thereto.

Particularly as to the Concerns of the Church, that all Differences about
Church Matters, and amongst Churchmen may be composed; it being His Majesty's
Purpose to maintain Presbyterian-Government in the Church of Scotland.

And that the Peace and Security of the Kingdom against Foreign Invasion and
Intestine Commotion be provided for, by renewing the former, or granting other
Supplies for maintaining the Land Forces, and providing and intertaining a
competent Naval Force for the Defense of the Coast, and securing of Trade.

And if you find, it will tend to the Advancement of Trade, that an Act be
passed for the Encouragement of such as shall Acquire and Establish a
Plantation in Africa or America, or any other part of the World, where
Plantations may be lawfully acquired: His Majesty is willing to Declare, that
He will grant to the Subjects of this Kingdom, in Favors of those Plantations,
such Rights and Privileges as He does grant in like Cases to the Subjects of
His other Dominions.

And that the Judicatories Higher and Subaltern be so Regulated in their
Proceedings, as Justice may be Administered with the greatest Dispatch, and
least Charge to the People.

These Things have taken up some part of His Majesty's Time and Thoughts these
Months past, that I have had the Honor to wait upon Him, and have been
frequently Discoursed by Him, and then put in the Method of Instructions, and
Directions for my Behavior in the Station He has honored me with.

So that I can say without Flattery, there is nothing that can Contribute to
promote the Honor and Interest, the Safety and Security of this His Ancient
Kingdom, which His Majesty will not concur with you to provide for, and has
not Empowered me to Consent to.

It remains then, My Lords and Gentlemen, for you to take these weighty Affairs
under Consideration, and to Consult of the best Ways and Means to enable His
Majesty to perfect so good Designs.

By granting Him Supplies for maintaining the present Landforces.

And for Providing and Entertaining a Competent Naval-Force, for the Defense of
the Coast, and Securing of Trade: In Order to which, His Majesty has granted a
Commission of Admirality for Managing the Affairs thereof.

Not omitting to take Care for the other unavoidable Contingencies of the
Government, wherein the Civil List comes short.

Your Dispatch of these Great Affairs with Cheerfulness and Alacrity, will
perfect a good Understanding, and perpetuat a Confidence betwixt the King and
you.


