A Few QUAERIES TO SIMON FORD Priest at the Town of Northampton.

By Daniel Wills.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson.

A Few Queries to Simon Ford Priest at the Town of Northampton.
SIMON FORD,
I Hearing of thy late change, and of thy public Confession, before thy
Congregation (whom thou have formerly and still do pretend, is at thy care,
and that thou have a charge over them from the Lord) moved me to write these
Queries to thee, of which from thee I expect a speedy answer, either to the
clearing of thy self, or else thy silence shall condemn, thee guilty before the
Lord and thy Congregation: to as many of whom as I can I shall communicate the
same.

Whether it is the same God that has given thee the charge over these People
since thy change, as did before, yea or nay?

Whether is it the same spirit that has moved in thee, to take upon thee to
read the Common Prayer to these People, whom thou pretendest to have a charge
over, for the good of their souls: as moved thee to preach openly against it
not long since, as many of thy hearers can testify, yea or nay?

Whether that God whom thou worshippedst, (before thy now change) be the same
God thou now worshippest, yea or nay?

Whether thy belly be not thy God whom thou servest: and whether is it not for
filthy Lucre thou now labourest, yea or nay?

Whether thou had received the Holy Ghost before thy change, for the Office
and Work of a Priest: or whether thou have received it since, by the imposition
of the Bishops hands, yea or nay?

Now if thou had not received the Holy Ghost before thy late change,

Whether then do not some of those Curses belong unto thee, and are due upon
thee, which thou art to read and pronounce to thy Congregation on the first day
of Lent, according to thy late assent and consent made in public, before them,
whom thou have so blindly led, infomuch, they could not believe thou would
have deceived them, as thou have door, although it was told to some of them
long since, viz.

Cursed is he that makes the blind to go out of his way.

Whether have thou done this, yea or nay?

Cursed is he that puts his trust in man, and takes man for his defense,
and in his heart goes from the Lord.

Whether art thou guilty of this, yea or nay?

Cursed are the Unmerciful, Fornicators, and Adulterers, Covetous persons,
Idolaters, Slanderers, Drunkards and Extortioners.

Whether do not some of these fall weighty upon thine own head, yea or nay?

Whether thou putst thy trust in man, or was it not for fear of man or for
loosing of that thou call thy due, as the False Prophets of old did who
preached for filthy lucre, that caused thee thus to change and deceive the
people who so much put their trust in thee, answer yea or nay?

Now if these Curses be due unto thee,

Whether then has the bishop (or any other) power to absolve or pardon thee,
thereof: seeing thou have taken upon thee to absolve and pardon others, as thou
have declared to thy Congregation in thy late acknowledgement, answer yea or
nay?

D'ANIEL WILLS.
A Copy of these Queries were given into his own hand, by one of his hearers,
on the 29. day of the sixth month, commonly called August, 1662. of which there
has been no answer.



Some words of unfeigned Love, to all the Tenderhearted People in the said
Town of Northampton or elsewhere, who are yet held in bondage under the
changeable Priests of this Age.
DEar People,
since it has been the good pleasure of the Almighty God to bring a day of
Trial upon your Teacher, (whom you could not discern) would have so shamefully
dealt concerning you his hearers, until God by his good pleasure has
manifested him and discovered his deceit, and laid him to your open view, with
many others in this day in these Nations. O dear and tender People, whose
hearts have been and are as yet made sad by the abominations of your Teacher,
and his unexpected change; But this know every one of you, it is not enough for
you to see your Teacher go aside from the right way of God; but it may well
bring you to consider, whether ye ought not ^o come out from amongst such, and
^e separate from them, and not to touch the unclean thing, that the
unchangeable God may receive you. Oh! let none rest there and say I can go
after he has read that which I do not like of; and if I come there before he
has done it, I will not regard it, I will keep my mind on other things. Oh!
dear People how can this be well, where will be your Testimony that you bear
for the Lord God, who gives you life and breath; and let none think to stand
excused before the Righteous God by so doing, for thus you must expect, and it
shall surely come to pass, that all who partake of the sins of the changeable
Priests in this day, shall assuredly partake with them of their plagues: for so
might the chree Children have said, its but bowing our bodies to the Earth, we
may keep our minds to God, and do this, and then shall we escape the wrath of
the King, and our bodies will be preserved out of the hot fiery Furnace; but
they consulted not with flesh and blood; but in true obedience to the Lord
their God; and their faithful standing therein, though but the number three,
how mightily did the Lord appear for the preservation of them in the fire, and
also to the getting himself a name throughout the Kingdom; and some of you have
said we had warning enough, we might have kept our selves out of Prison, we
might have forsook the assembling of our selves together for one day, and then
it might be, we might have escaped these sufferings, as to be separated from
our Families and outward employments, which thing we count of no value, for the
sake of whom we suffer; but to the witness of God in your Consciences I desire
such to turn and well consider whether they might not as well have said the
same to Daniel when the Decree was given forth, that not any should call upon
the Name of any other God, but the god who was set up for all people to worship
in that day: but mind what Daniel did, when he heard the Decree was sealed
unalterably, and he well knew by the same Decree he who called upon any other
God for thirty days should be cast into the Den of Lions, yet notwithstanding
he presently went and called upon the Name of his God with his window open, as
he had usually done; so he was cast in: but God preserved him out of the Lions
mouths, and got himself a name greatly in that day thereby. So dear People mind
the Saints and Prophets of old, who sought not to save their Goods nor Lands
nor their lives, if the Lord called them to bear a Testimony therewith; but
always freely sacrificed up to the Lord God that gave it them; and this is our
God only and true, who is the same yesterday, to day and for ever, and he also
requires the same faithfulness of his Children in this age, as he did in ages
and generations past, even to give up all for a Testimony for his glorious
Name, who, we well know is worthy for ever and ever; and we can truly say, he
never required any thing of any of his, or to part with any thing for his Names
sake, but he has been ready always to attend with his strength, even so much
that he makes the trials easy: And I well know he is the same to all, who
wholly put their trust in him; but mind this dear People, then you must Worship
no other god besides him, neither Wife nor Children, Father nor Mother, House
nor Land, Liberty nor Life; for which of these is delighted in more then the
Lord God, are made Idols on, and so get the heart from the living God and
adulterates it from his pure Presence, without which his Children in Ages past
could not live, neither can his tender Ones in this Day; So pure, living,
eternal Praises do we give to the God of our Salvation always, who has set
the door of his Mercies open, that whosoever will come, may come and drink of
the Waters of Life freely without Money or without Price; So dear people,
slight not this Day of Gods Visitation, but return at the Reproof of the
living God, who has discovered mighty things unto you, and mind his Witness
in your Consciences, and be truly obedient unto that when it secretly reproves
you, when no outward eye sees you, Oh! that is always near you, in your Beds
that will plead with you, and into your secret Chambers this will follow you;
Oh! dear People, it was the Saints desire in the days of old to keep their
Consciences void of offense toward God (mind that) and toward men, the same
is the desire of the Saints in these days, which makes them cheerfully willing
to part with all for the great and glorious Name of God, and it is the desire
of our Souls that you might drink of the same Fountain, and eat of the same
Bread and no longer feed upon the Husks without, as the Prodigal did, but
return inward whilst you have time, that you may find a sure hiding place, even
your lives to be hid with Christ in God; then, even then, and not till then
shall you be hid from the wrath of the Lamb, which is surely a coming, and
shall surely come upon all the workers of iniquity.

By one who was forceably taken out of my own hired House, and by the Wills of
the Magestrates of the said Town, was (contrary to any Law) by them committed
to Prison; but they considering their unjust Action toward me, did the same
day send for me from the Prison, who (in execution of their design) tendered me
the Oath, and sent me back again, where I remain a present Sufferer for the
Testimony of a pure Conscience.

DANIEL WILLS.


