THE WAY To Life and Death.

LAID Down in a SERMON, 1629. before the Lord Major of London then being.

By N. Waker M. A. late Minister of Jesus Christ at Lawndon in Buckinghamshire.

Now published for the reasonableness of the advice therein given, touching
the five Controverted points, viz. Predestination, general Redemption,
Freewill, Conversion, and Perseverance of the Saints.

Directing a safe way for the Practice of private Christians, as confessed by
the disputants on both sides.

The text, Romans 8.13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye, etc.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Phil. Stephens at the gilded Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1655.

TO The Reader.
WHat entertainment this sermon will find in the World, I can easily foresee.
Some I hope it will both profit, and delight. If it displeases some others, I
have what I looked for. To the pious, charitable, and ingenious, it cannot (I
think) be unacceptable: sure I am unseasonable 'twill never be: so long as the
world is so full of walkers after the flesh, the sharpest reproof comes not
amiss. Of the Author, my near relation forbids me to express what I might
justly make known to the world.

In the eyes of some he will be in dislike, as being (in their opinion) too
mild and moderate in the Controversies about Predestination, General
Redemption, Perseverance, etc.

Touching which Points, he lays down the Rules for Christian practice
according to Godliness; which are confessed to be so by the Disputants on both
sides. Live here we must, as if infallibly chosen to life eternal, and yet
never cease to give all diligence to make our calling and election sure,
implore the special aid, and assistance of his holy Spirit, who works in us
both to will, and do, even all our works in us, and for us; not forgetting in
the meantime to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling.

Further, we have here a portraiture of LIFE and DEATH, the life of the
spiritual, with the death of the carnal, both of them pictured and set forth in
most lively colors, upon which is grounded a pious and patheticall Exhortation
to fasting and mourning, a duty as well now as then, yea, now (if ever)
needful: A Platform we have drawn to our hands, by the Learned and most
eminently holy Bishop HALL: In a Book entitled. The Holy Order and Fraternity
of Mourners in Sion
Let none be ashamed to follow so worthy a guide; and have we not just cause?
our sins and Gods Judgments, the confusion of our Land, the ruins of a fair
and flourishing Church, will not all this open the flood gates of our tears?
yea, let it at last (till then there is no hope of mercy) wring from us bitter
cries and lamentations. Let us all with holy David set our faces unto the Lord
God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and
ashes, nor let us ever cease till our God at length (overcome with our
importunity) show mercy unto us, bind up the wounds of this bleeding Island,
hear the prayers of those that stand in the Gap, and be favorable unto us. All
which that he would for his Sons sake, hear, and grant, is the uncessant prayer
of him who professes himself one of that Holy Fraternity of Spiritual
Mourners. Even yours in the Common Savior,

John Waker.

THE Way to Life and Death.
Romans 8.13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye; but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.


THis whole Universe may not unfitly be divided into three principal
Kingdoms; The Preface, or introduction.
the first in Heaven, where God reigns; the second in hell, where Beelzebub
domineereth; and the third on Earth, which God has given to the children of
men. In the first is nothing but holiness, and happiness; in the second
nothing but sin and misery; in the third a mixture of all: in the first is
light without darkness, in the second darkness without light, in the third
both light and darkness. In the first are Angels, and the spirits of just men
made perfect in glory and bliss; in the second, the Devil, and his angels
tormented in flames; and here are men of a middle condition placed on earth,
for the trial of their obedience; and accordingly, as they shall demean
themselves in this world, so shall their doom be hereafter, either to live with
God, who is the fountain of life; or dye that second death with the damned
spirits. Here then we are in a center, from hence are drawn two long lines,
the one reaching to heaven, the other to hell: in this world God has showed us
the way of both; the one, that we might avoid it; the other, that we might walk
in it; nay, he has given us a taste of both, of hell in the miseries of the
world; of heaven in the comforts of it; of this, that we might long for the
fruition of the harvest; of that, that so we might ever take heed, how we come
into that place of torment. So then there are but two conditions after this
life; the one of joy, the other of torment; the one of life, the other of
death: and there are but two estates of life in this world, as means tending
thereunto, one evil, another good; some live after the flesh, and some after
the Spirit; and they that live after the flesh shall dye, but they that by the
Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, shall live: So that here the Apostle
describes two contrary ways, and two contrary ends unto which they lead, the
first is the broad way that leads to destruction, a way of pleasure, but it
ends in woe. The voluptuous man now fares deliciously, anon cannot get a drop
of water; now clothed in fcarlet, anon tormented in flames; now accompanied
with Nobles, anon haled by devils: the other sowes in tears, but reaps in joy;
now full of sores with Lazarus, anon with him full of pleasures; now among the
dogs, anon among Angels; now on the dunghill, anon in Abraham's bosom, vere
stupendae vices: the former of these ways is through the fairest street in the
City, but it leads to the place of execution; the other through a narrow dirty
Lane, but it brings to the Kings Palace, where is prepared a costly banquet;
the first is a way pleasing to flesh and blood, strewed with Roses, over
flowery meadows, having all the delights that nature, or art can afford, but it
leads at last to the dead Sea, it tends to the chambers of death: the other is
beset with briars and thorns, haunted with wild beasts, thieves, and robbers,
over craggy Rocks, and steep Mountains; where if a man cannot find a way, (for
few tread that path,) he must make it, (as he did over the Alps) but this way
leads to the new Jerusalem, to the Celestial Paradise; Non qua, sed quo, must
be the wise man's quaery, not which way we go, but whither: so that here you
have our Saviors two men in the field, two women grinding, the one taken, the
other left; you have his broad way, that leads to destruction, the way of the
flesh, and many there be that walk that way; the other the narrow way, that
leads to life, to mortify the deeds of the body, and few there be that find
it. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye, etc.

Which words (to avoid needless curiosity) admit of a threefold consideration:
The words variously considered.


1. We may consider them absolutely, and so they contain two conditional
Propositions; Absolutely.
the one, a Commination, If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye; the second, a
Consolation, If ye by the Spirit mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

2. We may note them in their antithesis, or opposition; In their antithesis.
Though the wicked be destroyed, yet it shall go well with the righteous,
intimated in the particle (...), but; and though the wicked perish as dung, ye
it shall go well with the righteous: and contra: there is, and ever will be an
opposition.

3. In their coherence, intimated in the illation (...), which briefly lies
thus: In their coherence.
There are two things which molest a Christian that is justified, the relics
of sin, which he thinks cannot stand with Justification, and Sanctification;
and the afflictions of this life, which seem repugnant both to the mercy, and
Justice of God. The Apostle in this Chapter prescribes an antidote for both,
gives both comfort, and counsel: for afflictions, the comfort is, that they
shall work our good here, augment our glory hereafter; and the counsel
inferred, therefore to be patient under them, and make good use of them: for
sin, though it do remain, yet it shall not condemn, unless it reign; that is
the comfort, and his counsel; and therefore let it not reign, but mortify it:
and in this verse he lays down a twofold Argument to incite Christians, to
embrace that counsel; For if ye live after the flesh, etc. The first is taken
from the pernicious consequent of a carnal life, the second from a sweet effect
of a spiritual: For if ye live after the flesh, etc. (...), etc.

First then to handle the words absolutely, as two distinct conditional
Propositions, Absolutely considered, and (...) two parts, a Commin^t^on and
C^n^ol^tion.
If ye live, etc. and here perversum aliquid videtur docere divinus sermo,
Strange paradoxes to some Nicodemus, divine riddles like that of Sampson. If we
laugh now, we must weep hereafter; but if we sow in tears, we shall reap in
joy; the way to death, is to live in pleasure; the way to life, is here to dye.
He that will save the life of his sin, shall lose the life of his soul; but he
that mortifies himself, his most beloved self, he shall live for ever.

In the Commination, 1. Proponit modum culpae, he lays down the kind of sin,
to live after the flesh.

2. Ostendit stipendium miseriae, he declares the horror of their punishment,
Moriemini, Ye shall dye.

In the Consolation

1. Proponit officium, he prescribes a duty, that is, by the Spirit to mortify
the deeds of the body.

2. Promittit mercedem, he promises a reward; Ye shall live.

And first to begin with the Commination, where are laid down two estates of
the wicked; the one present, Th(...)mmination.
the other future; the one of pleasure, the other of pain; neither of which the
Apostle directly charge on the Romans, but shows, that by admitting the
former voluntarily, they involuntarily plunge themselves into the latter. If ye
live after the flesh, ye shall dye; where is the description of the disposition
and condition hereafter of every Epicure; yea, every unregenerate man like that
prodigal, he receives his portion from his father, he feeds his eye, his ear,
his palate; but with him never returns to his father any more; but rather like
the rich glutton, he goes clad in purple, and Scarlet, and fares deliciously
every day, but at last he dies, and that death is but the beginning of death;
when his friends leave him, the fiends take him, and carry him to the place of
torment.

But before we can improve this for your spiritual advantage, we must explicate
the two things propounded, what the sin is, and what the punishment.

The sin is to live after the flesh; where two things offer themselves to our
view; 1. The rule (though a crooked one) that is the flesh. 2. The conformity
to this rule, which is nothing but irregularity, to live after the flesh: of
which briefly.



Sometimes it is taken for a substance; so it

1. Signifies the nature of man, or all mankind, Flesh what it signifies.
Genesis 6.12. All flesh had corrupted his way; in this sense it is no enemy, nor
must we Timon-like be haters of men, (...), or for humane nature, Is. 40.6
sometimes more strictly it signifies the body, as opposed to the soul, 2 Cor.
7.1. in this sense we must not proclaim enmity against our selves, nor like
those foolish Baalites hate, or hurt our own flesh: or most strictly for that
solid and similary part of the body, contradistinguished to the blood, bones,
nerves, and sine was, Psalm. 79.2. the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of
the earth. It is inhumane, and barbarons for another to abuse this, but
unnatural for a man to do it himself, therefore this is not the meaning.

2. It Is sometimes taken accidentally, sometimes in the better part, Ezekiel.
11.19. 2 Cor. 3. more usually in the worse; so it

Signifies the frailty of humane nature, an effect of sin, 1 Cor. 15.50. in
this sense Christians are in the flesh. 2 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. in this sense it is
no potent enemy, but a weak friend, not to be opposed with weapons, but
comforted with cordials: or most usually for sin, which is the cause of this
frailty, that Leprosy which overspreads the whole nature, mind, will, memory,
senses, affections, body, and all; disabling a man from that which is truly,
and savingly good, and inclining him to every thing that is evil; the unhappy
offspring of our first Parents, the mother, and nurse of all those vipers that
daily breed in our own bosoms, and that hereditary disease which we derive
unto all our posterity. By the way we must note, that not the body alone, as
the Manichees dreamed, or the inferior faculties only, as our adversaries of
Rome, some of them suppose, are termed flesh; for we read of a mind that is
carnal, Romans 8. the purest part of the soul; yea, the quintessence of that
part, the intellectus agens, as some will have it, the Spirit of the mind, as
the Apostle calls it, Romans 12.1. that must be renewed: therefore it signifies
that sinful disposition that is in the whole man. Therefore you must not here
with the Manichees accuse the nature of the flesh; for he which praises the
nature of the soul as the chiefest good, and accuses the nature of the flesh,
as an evil thing, loves the soul carnally, and carnally flies the flesh. St.
August. Lib. 14. de civit. Dei, cap. 5.
Nam qui velut summum bonum laudat animae naturam, et tanquam malum naturam
carnis accusat, profecto animam carnaliter appetit, et carnem carnaliter fugit;
and as he says elsewhere, The flesh is not naturally repugnant to reason, but
as vicious: Caro non repugnat naturaliter rationi, sed ex vitio: and again, The
corruptible flesh makes not the soul sinful, but the sinful soul makes the
flesh corruptible: Caro corruptibilis non facit animam peceatricem, sed anima
peccatrix fecit esse corruptibilem carnem.

Now sin is called by the name of flesh, Sin why called flesh.
rather then any other part of man, it may be to cast ignominy upon sin,
because this is one of the grossest parts, where is most earth, that is
predominant, the basest element; to show the dissimilitude and distance betwixt
corruption, and the Spirit, he denominates it from that substance which is most
unlike the Spirit; or because many motions of it arise from the flesh, are
fomented by the flesh, and tend to the pleasing of the flesh, and acted, and
perfected by the flesh; the flesh is that oft-times which offers the bait to
the soul, as the stomach or spleen, being troubled with oppilation, send fumes
to the brain; or to show how near corruption is unto us, as it were
incorporated, nay, transformed into us, and we into it; and so much the more
dangerous, because it is a viper bred in our own flesh, and harbored in our
own bosom; or because the soul in committing of sin does give over it self to
fleshly delights. The soul while, and when it still hankereth after fleshly
things is called flesh, Anima vero dum carnalia bona adhuc appetit caro
nominatur; and so in the perpetrating of sin, the soul is made subject to the
flesh, and as it were transformed into flesh. St. Aug. renders another, Ser.
48. de verbis Domini.
because flesh was a sacrifice for sin, as Christ that knew no sin, is said
to be made sin, that is, a sacrifice for sin; whether in some, or in all these
regards sin is called by the nameof flesh, I will not further dispute. You see
what is meant by this name, and thereason of the denomination. And so much for
the rule, the flesh.

I come now to the conformity of this rule, What it is to live after the flesh.
which is indeed mere deformity, which is to live after the flesh: it is called
a life, though indeed he that thus lives is dead while he lives, and because
flesh, as we heard, is diffused through the whole man, we will consider it both
in soul and body, what it is to live after the flesh.

In the mind and understanding, to walk according to the flesh, is to give
consent to fleshly desires; In the mind and understanding.
Secundum carnem ambulare est carnalibus concupiscentiis consentire, Aug. When
the fancy runs in a muze of sinful objects with delight, and takes thought for
the flesh to fulfill it in the lusts of it, to search out mysteries of iniquity,
and prove wise to do evil, that in their judgment esteem a sinful life to be
happy, and account it wisdom with profane Esau to sell their eternal
birthright, to purchase this mess of pottage. There are in the mind of man a
world of false principles, to harbor these, and to live after them, is to live
after the flesh. The flesh is sometimes a Devil to it self, sometimes provoked
by the Devil his instruments, and outward objects; as these and the like are
the fleshes Creed, That Religion is but a matter of policy, or a bare
profession of it serves the turn, or some Ceremonies and formalities; or to
rest in some duties, or avoid some sins; that it is lawful to commit smaller
sins, to avoid great or imminent danger; that it is too much preciseness to
make conscience of smaller sins, it is no sin to abuse liberty in things
indifferent, to extenuate or hide sin, that we may defer our repentance
because God is merciful, it persuades that Christian duties are tedious, and
not necessary, therefore not to do them at all, or else not presently, or else
not constantly, or else unseasonably, igrantly, or heartlessely, or else to
rest in the work done, and grow proud of it, In holy Scripture there is a kind
of wisdom attributed to the flesh, called (...); Some translate it prudence,
prudentiam; others understanding, intelligentiam; others affection, or desire,
affectum; others sense, sensum; Now (...) is a habit of acting according to
right reason, in all things that are good or evil to man, est habitus agendi
secundum rectam rationem circa universa bona vel mala homini; but this is
carnal wisdom, and our Savior speaks of some that in their generation are
wiser, (...), they do meditate on earthly things, (...), choose according to the
flesh, the world rather then grace, or heaven, fly the smoke, and fall into the
fire; choose sin rather then labor or sorrow, get earthly things rathen
heavenly, carnal rather then Spiritual, temporal rather then eternal. This is
foolishness with God, and they live after the flesh, that hearken to this
counsel.

In the will they live according to the slesh, In the will and affections.
that are ruled by that perverse enmity, which it bears to God and his Law; in
the memory, that make it a treasury of wickedness; in their affections, that
set them upon wrong objects, or inordinately, and immoderately on the right,
that love sinful delights constantly; if they are absent, desire them, and
greeve for them; if present, rejoice and delight in them.

In their lives, and actions, In natural actions.
men live after the flesh, that eat, drink, sleep, etc. not for necessity, but
to satisfy lust unseasonably, immoderately: thus in natural actions. So St.
Aug. De docu. Salut.
He lives according to the flesh, who so lives according to himself, etc.
Secundum carnem vivit qui secundum seipsum vivit, pergit quo vult, dormit
quando vult, and quamdiu vult loquitur quae vult, and cui vult, manducat, and
bibit, quando vult, and quantum vult, ridet and jocundatur turpiter inter quos
vult, and quando vult, postremo quicquid naribus suave est quaerit, quicquid
tactui blandum, quicquid oculis delectabile, quicquid corpori suo jocundum
exercet, and sequitur qualiter vult, and quando vult, qui omnia licita and
illicita carnaliter vult; he that makes himself, his fancy, his lust, the rule
in his actions, that goes whither he lists, that sleeps when he will, and as
long as he will, that laughs, and sports, talks scurrilously, or obscenely at
any time, in any company, and gives the raines to his lust to please his
sensual appetite in all things, that desires things both good and bad,
according to the corruption of his own heart. And if this be to live after the
flesh, we may see by the flesh of many, what it is they live after.

In civil actions that make their lust a law; In civil actions.
that Magistrate that uses his sword, or any Superior his authority for his
own private ends, in distributive justice; in inferiors when they desire
dignities, eat and drink, and curse Abimelech, walkers after the flesh, when
they are full they deny God, much more his Ministers; anarchy is that they
affect, that every man might do that which is right, yea, sometimes wrong in
his own eyes; and if the Magistrates proceedings parallel not with their
fancies; their tongue is their own, who is Lord over them? Jude 8. Michael
durst not revile the Devil, they speak evil of the gods; in commutative
justice, oppress, defraud, and grind the faces of the poor, so they can carry
it smoothly, care not what they do; and so there be too too many, that cast off
all obedience in Political, Ecclesiastical, Occonomical Societies.

In spiritual actions many live after the flesh; Matthew. 23. In spiritual
actions.
for not only Epicures are guilty here, but an abstemious Pharisee, that fasts
twice a week, that places the power of godliness in outward formalities; so
our adversaries of Rome when they most abstain from flesh, live after the
flesh; preferring sometimes their own traditions to Gods oracles, and sometimes
circumstantial parts of his worship to substantial, macerating their bodies,
while they mortify not their sin. Nor can all amongst our selves exempt
themselves here, right Formalists, I would they could see this beam in their
eye, pray over beads many do; so some preach, and most hear, rather by tole
then weight.

Others placing their Religion in nice speculations, zealously striving for
they know not what. Once it was a character of a Christian almost among some to
be repugnant to Church Government, or at least to disobey with the heart; and
deride with the tongue, what the hand had subscribed to. But now that spirit is
well laid, they have a new Creed which they are no less hot for, though they
understand it less; and they are out of charity with that man, and will
censure him for an Apostate, that is not to an hairs breadth of their conceit,
when it is indeed but a mere conceit.

Others undertake acts of Religion with a carnal mind, and a corrupt conscience
for base ends, that preach for lucre, so did Judas; and pray for credit, so the
Pharisees; that read for profit, like Diana's Chaplains, and communicate for
applanse, and hear for all ends, do all for custom, rather then conscience,
and were it not for his own ends, would never longer serve that God which he
cares not for. Of all walkers after the flesh, the hypocrite is sure to dye,
for hell was chiefly prepared for him, and others are said to have their
portion with him.

Now that in any of these kinds a man live after the flesh, it is required,

That there be an habitual pursuit of sin, Carnem tanquam ducem sequi; or as
Salmer: Imperio, legibus, and carnis desideriis subesse. A man may sometimes be
drawn aside by the flesh, and yet not live after the flesh; as Noah in his
drunkenness, Lot in his incest, David in his adultery: as on the contrary you
may see Cain sacrificing, Saul among the Prophets, Herod hearing John Baptist
gladly, and still living after the flesh: as a passenger sometimes wanders out
of the way, and a thief sometimes steps into it. To live according to the
flesh, intimates a constant course of man's life, that makes the law of sin the
rule of his obedience; they act this with most vigor, as from an inward
principle. A wicked man's education, company, etc. may sometimes restrain from
sin; violence of temptation drives a good man upon it, but this is not their
rule. Hieron. Omne quod loquimur, agimus, cogitamus, duobus seminatur agris,
carne, et spiritu. Let us then examine the habitual course of our life, that is
it which denominates, and if we live after the flesh we must dye.

It were as possible to number the stars, to count the dust, as to
particularize the many lusts of the flesh; men's conversations give us too many
instances. I pass then from the sin to the punishment, Ye shall dye.

We see what it is to live after the flesh; and is not this a merry life, to go
clad in purple, in scarlet, and fare deliciously every day, to neglect God in
heaven, and contemn Lazarus on earth, to forget our selves whence we are, or
whither we go? Yes, but hear what follows. The bell toles for this voluptuous
Epicure, the earth that insatiable grave longs for his corpulent carcass to
feed worms, and the devils stand waiting more eagerly for his soul. The
Spirit of God has written his doom in letters of blood, which with Belshazzar
might make his heart ache, and joints tremble. Ye shall die. His pleasure is
gone, his guilt remains, and his damnation sleeps not. God wills not, yet he
threatens death, Non vult mortem Deus, et minatur mortem; and therefore does
threaten it, because he does not desire it, as willing to be prevented.

You shall die, What is here meant by death.
and what is that? How should that be defined which is only a privation? or if
it had a positive being, how should I describe it, who never conversed in those
Cells of darkness, or with any that brought news from those Cimmerian regions?
or how can that distinctly be known, which contains in it nothing but
confusion, and contradiction, fire without light, burning, and no consuming,
labor in continual idleness, living, and yet ever dying? for they live for
nothing else, but that they may continually dye.

If I should procure you a painter to decipher the first death, he would show
you a grim anatomy, with a lean body, a pale face, a wanne countenance, etc.
that which has devoured the whole world so many times over, like Pharaohs lean
kine, is as lean as ever.

And had you a Poet to describe unto you the second death, he would tell you of
that triceps Cerberus, devouring the flesh of the wicked; he would tell you of
the two Rivers Cocitus, and Phlegethon, the one overflowing with tears, and the
other boiling with brimstone; they would make a narration of that palus Stygia,
of Tantalus his apples, and Titius his liver devoured by vultures, of the
continual turning of Ixions wheel, and the rolling of Sisiphus his stone, or of
those infernal Furies, ready to torment those whom Charon should waft over; and
Ridentem dicere verum quis vetat? even these mythological expressions hold some
proportion with the truth. But I will draw my water out of a purer fountain;
surely it must needs be an ill-favored brat that is born of two such hideous
Monsters, the Devil the father, and corrupt nature the mother; it must needs be
terrible that is the wages for such work so contrary to God, and goodness.

Death is nothing but a privation of life, and a subjecting the creature to
those miseries, which are contrary to the comforts of life. And by life we do
not only understand the conjunction of soul and body, but all that perfection,
and bliss, which was either actually conferred unto man, or to be communicated
to him; so that in this monosyllable is contained the whole world, hell with
all the torments of that, earth with all the miseries therein. But is there any
death in heaven? Surely it is a death to lose heaven, and it contains that
also; so that look how variously sin reflects on God, so do his judgments on
us, that we may read our sin in the judgment.

But that I may proceed orderly, I will borrow a distinction of Philo, Lib.
leg. alleg.
(...) There is a death of the man, and a death of the soul; the first is a
separation of soul and body; the second a deserting of virtue, and assuming of
sin. But all misery is called by the name of death, because of all, death is
most unavoidable, most bitter.

Death in regard of the kind is either corporal, or spiritual, Death Corporal.
Sen.
which kinds are to be considered in degrees, inchoation, In regard of
inchoation.
and perfection; both which kinds are to be considered in regard of loss, and
pain: You shall dye, that is, a corporal death, in regard of inchoation; for in
this we are mistaken, that we look forward upon death, whereas a great part of
it is already past; in hoc enim fallimur, quod mortem prospicimus, magna pars
ejus jam praeteriit. Death is behind us a great part of it; the life of to day
is the death of yesterday. We dye daily. Every little public, or personal
cross, is a petty death, and a harbenger sent by that insatiable enemy of
humane nature to take possession of his right. Thus you shall lose the good
temperature of body inwardly, and outwardly all those comforts of nature,
whereby life is maintained; in a word, true dominion over the creatures, that
in regard of loss: Either you shall lose the world, or have it with a curse,
your table shall become a snare; and so some even dye with laughing, with a
pleasant gale of wind are carried upon rocks and sands, pampered in fat
pastures for destruction, and carried down the pleasant River Jordan into the
Dead Sea. In regard of sense, inwardly ye shall be perplexed with grief, and
sorrow, and weariness: outwardly, with famine, pestilence, sword; both ways,
with ten thousand calamities, as waves of the Sea coming in the neck one of
another, which as they be vexatious in themselves, so certainly shall they be
unto you; insomuch that your life shall be an hard apprentiship, groaning daily
under the iron yoke of bondage.

Ye shall dye, And Consummation.
that is, a natural death, in regard of consummation. This inexorable Sergeant
that rides on the pale horse, will ere long knock at your door, and by violence
pull your soul out of that Tabernacle of clay, when the soul shall be kept in
chains of darkness, till the judgment of that great day, and the body in the
grave, as in a loathsome dunghill, till that general Assize. In regard of
loss here is a deprivation of life, and all that supports it, meat, drink,
apparel, society, and all the comforts of nature; and though there be no poena
sensus in the body which is kept in that hideous prison, yet there is in the
soul; Luke 16.25.
for the glutton cries, Crucior in hac flamma; nay, and it may be this accursed
corporal death will take you away in the acting of your sin, with Zimri, and
Cosbi, so that you shall not live out half your days, but be haled to
execution, as soon as your crimes are committed; and it may be before you go,
feel the very flames of hell in your souls, as Cain and Judas did.

But this natural death of the body though horrid unto nature, Death spiritual,
in regard of inchoation.
yet it is nothing to the spiritual death of the soul; that being a more
excellent creature, and having a more eminent life. To proceed then, that is
spiritually, in regard of inchoation, God shall be separated from your soul,
the light of his countenance shall not shine upon you, the understanding being
full of darkness, the heart of uncleanness, the conscience void of serenity,
the whole soul out of order, full of confusion, destitute of true comfort.

In regard of sense, a servitude and subjection of the soul to your spiritual
enemies, and the powers of darkness, made a vassal unto Satan, who works
effectually in such a slave to the world, which is the devils slave, yea, unto
sin, which is worse then the world or the devil. In which regard it comes to
pass, though a man retain that natural liberty of his will, which is essential
to it, and cannot be lost, yet that liberty which pertains to the perfection
of humane nature to exercise acts spiritually good, and so savingly acceptable
unto God, this is utterly lost, man being dead in sins and trespasses, and the
uncircumcision of his heart.

But all these are but the beginnings of sorrows; And of consummation, or
eternal death.
that which is here principally meant, is the consummation of spiritual death.
And now had I but the keys of hell, and death, to show unto your bodily eyes a
glimpse of that infernal fire, and those hideous monsters that dwell in those
horrid vaults, I should either lose my auditory, or it may be so prevail with
some, that they would beware how they came into that place of torment. But I
desire that my speech may work in you such fear of those pains, that you never
feel them; and that you may be terrified so now, that hereafter you may be
secure; consider what Abraham saito to the rich glutton, Son, remember. We
likely remember it not till it be too late, and therefore smart for it, because
we do not remember it.

You shall dye then, that is, first immediately, when your soul and body are
parted, your souls shall be haled by the Devil into that place of torment. St.
August. speaking of the rich glutton, says, The soul likewise grieves when
separate from the body; for verily the rich man grieved in hell, when he said,
I am tormented in this flame. Dolet etiam anima non in corpore constituta, nam
utique dolebat dives ille apud inferos, quando dicebat, Crucior in hac flamma.

And not only with present torment, but with fear and expectation of future;
his case is like to a condemned malefactors, who is adjudged to live two or
three years under the place of execution, the gallows, and all those
instruments of death continually in his eye, in the mean time he is bound with
chains, whipped with Scorpions, fed with the bread of affliction. Thus he is
most exquisitely tormented with pain of the present, and horror of that future
vengeance that is likely to fall upon him. So the devils cry out, Torment us
not before the time.

But this is not all. The dregs of this cup of vengeance are yet behind. You
shall dye, that is, your bodies, at that dreadful day, with the sound of the
Trumpet shall be awaked, like a Traitor to be brought before the Judge, and
shall hear that doleful doom, Ite maledicti, etc. Go ye cursed.

Now the loss here shall be unspeakable; In regard of loss.
He shall lose God, and that loss is infinite, because he is an infinite good,
not in regard of his power, for that will be ever present to torment him; but
in regard of the light of his countenance, that shall never more comfort him;
Mat. 25.41.
here is a total desertion, and a final exclusion from his presence: Chrysostom.
Should any one suppose 1000 hells, it will not be so much as to be driven from
the happiness of this beatifical glory; Si mill aliquis ponat gehennas, nihil
tale dicturus est, quale est, a beatae illius gloriae honor repelli. Oh what
Tophet is not a Paradise, what flames are not a bed of down to this? that that
God who is the comfort of our souls, that wishes, and entreats us now to be
reconciled, shall then shut up his tender mercies in eternal displeasure; Ite
maledicti, etc. Go ye cursed.

Again, there shall be a total privation of all the gifts of the Spirit,
charity, peace, wisdom, piety, mercy, and all the means that tend thereunto,
Word, Sacraments, etc. But it may be they will like the loss of these.

In the next place, there shall be a loss of the world, and all the pleasure
of that; therefore St. Aug. notes, that Abraham speaks to the rich man of good
things past, Omnia dicit de praeterito, Dives erat, epulabatur, recepisti. No
meat, nor drink, clothing, company, houses, not so much as a drop of water to
cool thy tongue.

Nay, which is strange, their very sins they shall lose some of them; those
sins which delighted them they cannot commit, no adultery, or lasciviousness,
no drunkenness, gluttony, and revellings no Play Houses, or brothel-houses
there, but those sins which shall torment them, they shall be suffered to
commit, if God withdraw the light of his countenance. Wicked men can comfort
themselves with the creature now; or if the creature deny them solace, Gods
people can encourage themselves in God: but when both God and the creature are
lost, what comfort can there be?

You shall dye. In regard of sense in hell, In regard of sense.
a total, and eternal bondage of the whole man, when soul and body being
reunited, both shall be cast into that Lake of fire and brimstone, where the
body shall be terrified in all the senses, in all the parts, outer darkness to
the eye; for there are flames, but no light; heat, but no comfort; to the ear
howling of tormented spirits, weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; to
the smell, a stench of brimstone, the very dregs of Gods wrath; to the feeling,
exquisite pain by fire. There shall be tears in the eyes, for there is
weeping, and wailing; horror in the ears, cursing, and complaining; brimstone
to torment the tongue, hands and feet bound with chains, fire to torment the
whole body; but Oh forlorn wretch! hear more terror yet.

But the most exquisite pain shall be in the soul, because that is the fountain
of sin which being infinitely abhorred by God in his wisdom he will find out,
and by his power execute some grievous punishment on it, and this is termed
fire; a fire proportionable to a Spiritual essence, if not in the nature of it,
yet by the supernatural power of the revenging Judge; exalted to a height of
transcendent efficacy: and the soul though in the nature of it immaterial, yet
made passible by the power of a revenging Judge, that noble celestial
substance, for subjecting it self willingly to brutish sensuality, shall be
unwillingly subjected to a sensual pain; this pain is the more exquisite, being
principally in the soul; that disease tormenteth most, which seaseth upon the
spirits. Cain that felt but one spark of this fire was a perpetual vagabond.
Judas so tortured, as to hang himself, when he did but taste of this cup. Oh
what will their torment be, that drink the very dregs of this cup! and live in
the midst of these flames! Now the intellect shall be perplexed with the
continual meditation of this, mourning that happiness is lost through her own
default, and gnashing the teeth, that others have it, and the soul shall not
choose but reflect upon it self, and behold her deformity and torment; and shall
have nothing to drive away this meditation. The intellect shall represent this
unto the will which shall hate it self, and curse God, that does cause it to be
captivated in those chains of darkness; so that the soul shall for ever be a
burden to it self, desire that it were annihilated, and hate God that supports
her in being; the memory, which is the souls storehouse, shall continually
reflect unto the conscience, the cause of all this misery, with a Fili
recordare, which shall be as a worm continually gnawing; so that the soul shall
hate God who cast it into that place, and the Devil that torments it in that
place, and all the infernal spirits which add unto its torment; and the blessed
Saints and Angels, which are in a better place, as an unthrift looks out at
prison-grate upon men at liberty, and the body, as a companion of sin and woe,
and it self who through her own default is brought unto that place, and by all
shall be brought to those exigences, which no tongue of man, or Angel is able
to relate.

But that which makes all complete, this shall be eternal; heaven and all
comfort are irrecoverably lost, and the worm dies not, though this punishment
cannot be infinite intensively; for then it would annihilate the creature being
finite, yet in regard of duration it is infinite, that so satisfaction may be
made to an infinite justice. If the lives of all creatures were added together,
and spun out into one, and at the expiration of that there might be an end of
their torment, it were some comfort. Were they to expiate their sins with an
Ocean of tears; and yet but every thousand year to shed a tear, the debt in
time would be discharged: And though this be an unconceivable time, yet it
would comfort a little, if then there might be an end, or a mitigation of the
torment; but here the worm dies not, the fire never goes out, here death ever
lives, want knows not how to be desective, the end ever begins, and death
(which we now so fear as (...), the most fearful of all other fearful things;
for it is indeed the king of fears) will they then desire as a Paradise, but it
will fly from them, and that second death will feed on them as grass, which
suffers a continual death being cropped by the cattle, and yet still lives in the
root. If God preserve the three children in the flames that they be not burnt:
if mount Aetna sends forth flashes continually, and it is not consumed. Its St.
Aug. argument, If the Salamander live perpetually in the fire, why cannot he by
his power support their nature to live for ever, that they may ever dye? Oh how
much better were it for them that they had never been, or as they had lived
like beasts, so they might die like beasts, to be no more. So we see the
consolations of the flesh, are the desolations of the soul, Carnis
consolationes sunt animi desolationes. Hell never restores those whom it once
receives, Infernus, quos semel recipit, nunquam restituit, says Cassiod. So
Aug. sins are bound, and loosed here, in the world to come is nothing but
remuneration, and condemnation, Hic ligantur, and solvuntur peccata, in futuro
seculo nihil est nisi remuneratio, and condemnatio; no end, no ease, no
intermission.

And thus you have heard the reward of the wicked, and the fearful doom o them
that live after the flesh. This is the cause why the man is deprived of
comfort, and filled with sorrow in this world; why the soul is deprived of God
in spiritual death, and the body of the soul in corporal: this is the reason
why the soul is deprived both of God, and the world from the natural death to
the resurrection, and why both soul and body are deprived of the vision and
fruition of God to all eternity. Nor must you think this to be a mere fable, or
Poetical fiction, or that we make the matter worse then indeed it is; the
singular purity of God cannot abide sin, therefore it must be purged by blood
or fire. God will have his justice magnified, therefore will not spare an only
Son; he will have truth maintained, who often has declared this in his Word;
its an irrevocable decree that they, who live after the flesh shall dye. In the
first decree, he said to Adam, Moriemini, but his goodness reversed it; to
Nineveh: Ye shall be destroyed, but yet upon their repentance spared, and so
may these; else know this is a branch of the second Covenant which shall not be
abrogated. For what can God give better then his Son on his part? or upon what
easier terms can he capitulate with us? His wisdom has thought meet, that
there should be some bounds to his mercy, else he should seem prodigal of it,
and be thought to have absolute need of his creature: and therefore
notwithstanding Christ his satisfaction to declare his justice against
contemners of his grace, and haters of purity, he has said and sworn that
unbelievers shall not enter into his rest, and has peremptorily decreed,
without hope of repeal, or mitigation of the censure, that If ye live after the
flesh ye shall dye. It Is not finis operantis, but operis; for they would live
after the flesh, and not dye; they would live like Devils, and dye like Saints;
the life of Balaam, but the death of the righteous. But he that sins
voluntarily, must suffer involuntarily, there is a connection of these ab ordine
justitiae divinae, He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption. Let not man then separate, what God has joined; and though he
assay it, he shall never be able to do it. If they will live after the flesh,
they shall dye.

But as St. Gregory upon the Parable of the rich man, Recordatione magis eget
versus iste quam expositione; so I may say of this: therefore we will draw
hence some Corollaries, which may be for our Spiritual direction.

First then, will sin cosen us thus? The Use for Information.
who would have suspected that such beginings that promised such delight, would
have ended thus? that so glorious a Sunshine morning would have closed with
such gloomy blasts, with such thunder, and lightning, storms, and tempests?
then let no child of God envy the wicked their delight in sin, not grudge at
his delicious fare, Silks, and Sattins. Much good may do Nabal with his good
cheer, and Haman with his preferment. I envy not the whole world to Alexander
upon such hard terms; there is poison in their delicates, and clothes are
fafcinated, their advancement prefers them to the gibbet, their very life is
but a continual death; and how bitter shall be the death of these men! Rather
let me have Jacobs pillow, and Canopy, so I may have his dream; let me have
John Baptists hair-cloth, so I may have his conscience; No, I admire those
worthies of old, that would choose to do or suffer any thing rather then split
themselves upon these rocks. Oh happy confessors, and thrice blessed Martyrs,
that passed through fire and water, and refused no torment, no death, that they
might be delivered from the second death. Let me pass under Esayes saw, and
endure Jeremies showers of storms; let me not refuse Zacharies sword, nor the
Lions den with Daniel; let me be beheaded with St. Paul, or crucified with
Andrew, and Peter; let me be flayed with Bartholomew, or my brains dashed out
with St. James; let me be put into a vessel of scalding liquor with St. John,
or broyled on the Gridiron with Laurence; let me suffer abstinence, affliction,
persecution, exile, imprisonment with those holy Fathers of old, Chrysostom,
Athanasius, Ambrose, Hierom; let me be given to the wild beasts with
Polycarpus, and Ignatius; yea, if it were possible, let all these meet, and the
tormentots prompted by the Devil himself, see if they can invent any torment
more exquisite; let me suffer in this world what humane nature is capable of,
rather then be forsaken by God, and dye ever. Oh blessed Christians, that would
offer your selves rather to your persecutors in the days of Tertullian, Ego
sum Christianus, Christianus et ego! I shall ever subscribe to that of holy St.
Aug. Domine hic ure, hic seca, ut in aeternum parcas; and again, Do de me
poenas, ut ille parcat, I had rather suffer Gods chastisement then his
punishment.

And I would to God this might be an advertisement to us all, how we live after
the flesh, though it be pleasing, and profitable for a while, yet the event
should deter wise men. St. Gregory's memento, to keep him from walking after
the flesh, was this, Woe to them that are at ease in Sion; St. Hierom's, that
last trump, Surgite mortui; St. Augustines, Not in surfeiting and drunkenness;
and this may be the Christians, Moriemini. And why will ye dye? God delights
not in your destruction. He has given you this Memento, that you might not
walk after the flesh. Needs must you feel this, if you will not now fear it.
Remember this you riotous eaters of flesh, you that follow wine and strong
drink, till you are inflamed; you that inflame your souls with lust, and drown
your bodies with a dropsy, that forget God, and the operation of his hands,
the Church and the afflictions thereof, your selves, and your latter end.

But now the question is, what it is to be a drunkard? and it must be a fair
print that the drunkard can read, and with Anaxagoras, they will put us to
prove, that the snow is white. Surely he is a drunkard and glutton, and so
lives after the flesh, that eats and drinks inordinately, immoderately,
unseasonably. Inordinately, that directs not these to Gods glory, so that he is
unfit to pray, read, hear on Gods day, or do the works of his calling on other
days. Let them think of this that are so good forenoones men, but so bad
afternoons. Or immoderately, which immoderation is to be estimated according to
diverse particulars; not alone when it is more then the stomach can bear, but
when it is more then their estate, calling, business, or Religion will allow.
Or unseasonably, and when that is, nature it self (as a Reverend Prelate of our
own has observed) will direct us. When any of these four passions are
predominant, we refuse sustenance, anger, fear, grief, desire. 1. For anger,
you see Ahab refused his meat when he was vexed, 1 King. 21.4. When our
stomachs are big with indignation against our selves for sin, it is
unseasonable to pamper the flesh. 2. In fear, so Paul, and his companions in
the ship, cannot eat, Act. 27. So if we have just cause of fear in regard of
public calamities, let wise men judge, Is. 22.12. If there be fear of losing
the soul much more: in the Plague David, in War Jehosaphat, in Famine Joel. If
destruction be impendent, Hester, and the Ninevites will fast; and whether it
be not seasonable for us to fast now, let wise men judge. 3. In grief, fasting
and mourning are joined together, Psalm. 102.4. My heart is smitten and withered
like grass, so that I forget to eat my bread. So David, 2 Samuel 12.15. Much
more when we have cause to grieve for the abominations of our Land, the
desolations of our Neighbour-Countrey, the jeopardy of our own souls, and
lives, the loss of God. 4. In desire, 1 Samuel 14.24. So Esau in hunting; in
regard of better performance of some duty, or to obtain some special favor, it
will feather our prayers, and put life into them. In a word, when God by his
Judgments, or his Substitutes by their Edicts call us to fasting, they that eat
and drink but moderately, live after the flesh.

Nay, I will go one step further: I see no reason, but that the looking upon
Wine with a lustful eye, should be accounted drunkenness, as well as hatred,
and envy, murder; covetousness, theft; or a wanton lustful eye, adultery; and
if this be to live after the flesh, how many embarked in that dangerous Voyage
of eternal death! Many like Dionysius lying at a siege, would be sick if they
might not surfeit, and be drunk now and then. How does our Land abound with
such monstrous hell hounds! now swearing, and scoffing; anon railing, and
blaspheming, disclosing secrets of State, or Family. Will you have the
portraiture of it? Like Circe it turns men into all shapes. Go into Bedlam,
where some rave, some sing, some whoop, and hollow, some cry; or, if you will,
view some filthy puddle, where swine tumble, and wallow themselves, toads and
frogs lie croaking; or, if you will, launch out into the deep, and view the
Sea Monsters. An hospital has not so many Lazars, nor a dunghill so many ill
sents, as you shall see, and smell in their meetings. Nay, suppose all these
together, its not a sufficient expression, you would think devils were come
down in the likeness of men, and entered into the swine, that drives them
headlong into the Sea of Gods wrath. Oh this is a dainty life, thinks the
Jovial companion; but remember what follows, Thou must dye, and come to
Judgment. Hear thy doom written in letters of blood; Woe to drunkards, says
Esaias. Woe, says Habakkuk: Woe, says Solomon; Howl, says Joel: Weep, says St.
James; Ye shall dye, says our Apostle; scarce a Prophet, or an Apostle, but
has thrown a stone at him. Look ere long to have a head full of wind, legs
swollen with water, cheeks blown with air, a face red with fire, ever blushing,
though past grace; eyes running, though not a tear of remorse; trembling in the
joints, though no fear of Gods Judgments.

Needs must he dye, for this draws the heart from God, and makes a man break
all Gods Commandments, makes his belly his God, blasphemes his Name, profanes
his day, despises dominion, and dignity. I have often with indignation seen
his Majesty's portraiture hanged up for a sign, and that sacred name of
Majesty used in an health, when the frothy mouth, and stammering tongue can
scarcely speak a distinct word; it kills more then the sword, fills more full
of prodigious, and Sodomitical lusts, robs God, and Church, poor, family, a
man's self; he is a railer, a reviler, a slanderer, he hardens his heart against
God, believes nothing, lives licentiously, and the more likely to dye, there is
so little hope of amendment; he despises the Magistrate that does correct him;
and for the Minister that reproves him, he is the drunkards song. How can he
repent, that cannot confess? and how can he confess, that forgets when he is
sober what he did when he was drunk? If he be of a more melting disposition, it
is his liquor that does facilitate his tears: but he returns like the dog to
his vomit, shameless, and fearlesse.

Remember this ye furious hot-spurres, For Exhortation.
if anger command, you will kill and slay; hence so much blood. You shall dye
hereafter, and it is pity you should live here.

Oh remember this ye debauched swearers, foul-mouthed hell hounds, that fall
upon the sacred body of Christ, and tear him in pieces, swear him all over from
head to foot, that pull his precious body from his soul, his blood from his
body, that rake in his wounds, and crucify him afresh. The curse shall ere
long enter into your houses, and hearts, and never leave you till it bring you
to ruin.

Remember this, ye ambitious Nimrods, aspiring Hamans, that to attain your
ends, swear, forswear, falter, etc. and climb up this craggy rock, though with
never so much difficulty, etc.

Consider this, ye insatiable stallions, that neigh after your neighbors
Wives, and glory in your shame; you that are perfidious to God and man,
forgetting your Marriage-vow, as if your lust were asleep, rouse it up, and
foment it with lascivious pictures, scurrilous talk, filthy Poems, pictures,
Stage Plays, the seminaries of filthiness; you that are wise to do evil, and
invent prodigious ways to satisfy your lusts. Strange punishments shall be
for such workers of iniquity. Remember Absalom that defiled his fathers
Concubines. Heaven would not receive such a miscreant, nor the earth bear him,
he was hanged betwixt both. Remember Sodom and Gomorrah, that burned in
unnatural lusts; God sent fire from heaven to consume them. But if they escape
that, a worse is preparing, it will be at the last bitter as wormwood, sharper
then a two-edged sword.

Remember this ye haughty persons that speak swelling words of vanity, that
wear Lord-ships on your backs, that spend so much time in trimming up that
house of clay; you men that are so effeminate, and women that are grown
Monsters, wearing apparel against shamefastness, utility, and decency; you in
whom nor Magistrate, nor Minister can work any reformation, but make idols of
your selves; take heed God send not a rent instead of a girdle; and baldness
instead of your borrowed, powdered, brayded hair. Take heed God do not send an
enemy to pull off your ridiculous apparel, and discover your shame to your
reproach; but if you escape here, you shall be sure to smart for it hereafter.

Remember this ye rich men, you that go clothed in purple and scarlet, and fare
deliciously every day. It Is impossible for those that live after the flesh to
enter into heaven; its very difficult for a rich man not to live after the
flesh. You may not do with your own what you will, not be proud of your own
clothes, nor play the gluttons with your own food, nor be drunk with your own
wine, nor lascivious with your own wives. Ere long God will pose yon with these
two Quaeries; How you came by your wealth; and I will not bid you rememmember
how much you have hoarded up by sacrilege, by oppression and cousenage: the
second, How you have employed it, in good cheer, in brave apparel, so much for
the satisfying of my voluptuous pleasure; scarce any for the glory of God in
heaven, and poor Lazarus on earth. Your account will be woeful, you stand in
slippery places; therefore by how much wealth increases, by so much had you
need to be more watchful.

Oh remember this, all ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces when
there is none to deliver. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for these
things sake the wrath of God comes upon the childaen of disobedience; but if
nothing will reclaim you, if you will not fear it, you must feel it. Go on then
thou debauched sinner, let loose the reins to all licentiousness, please the
flesh in all sensuality, eat, drink, and be merry; account our words as wind,
and death, and torment, as some Poetical fiction; cloth thy self in purple,
and scarlet, and fare deliciously every day; let the poor dye for want of thy
superfluities, prefer thy dogs before poor Lazarus, live like an Epicure, like
a beast, like a devil; but remember that destruction will overtake thee as a
whirlwind; unsatisfied hell will ere long send pale death, as an inexorable
Sergeant to arrest thee, and thou shall be cast into prison, and not come
thence till thou have paid the uttermost farthing. Time will come, when having
irrecoverably lost the blessing with Esau, thou will howl; and say; Bless me,
even me also; but there shall be no place for repentance. As a man that sees a
costly feast, when he himself is pined; thou shall see Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, set down at Gods Table, then shall thou think, There is such a one whom
I once scorned, now he is comforted, I am tormented: Ah wretch that I am, I was
invited as well as he; Alas! how much precious time have I now misspent,
wherein I might have gained much to mine own soul? how many admonitions have I
contemned? and now it is irrecoverably come upon me. How ost has Christ opened
his wounds to heal me? stretched out his arms to receive me? entreated me not
to grieve his Spirit, nor to crucify him afresh? With what earnest
solicitations has he wooed me to be reconciled, but I would not? Oh what does
it profit me now that I have been clothed in purple and scarlet! etc. How much
better had it been for me to have been the very offscouring of the world, a
worm and no man? yea, better for me that I had never been, or might yet at the
last cease to be; but all this is now justly come upon me, because I would not
hear my Savior, and his messengers, nor pity mine own soul; but while I was
seeking my venison, have lost my blessing.

But if all this will not avail, to dehort men from living after the flesh,
give me leave to turn my speech to you Reverend Sages, whom under his Majesty,
God has placed at our stern. Let it be your care to revive those gasping Laws
constituted against swearing, and surfeiting, and drunkenness, etc. not only
for the punishing, but for the preventing of this latter: for this purpose
remember your oaths; do not play with the Evangelists, as it is the fault of
too many; else you through your neglect, may bring ruin to the Land, and the
blood of these men upon your heads. Impunitas ausum parit, ausus excessum; so
the sin will be ultimately terminated in you: and principally let your lives be
exemplary, reform your families; let not your Cellars be turned into
Alehouses, nor your houses shops for the devil. Tophet is enlarged for such
that live after the flesh, and by their example draw others.

And you that have the Ecclesiastical power, Oh improve it to Gods glory, and
for his sake quicken discipline against these walkers after the flesh; If they
will needs die, pull them by violence out of the fire. Let not the sword rust
in the sheath, or if you do draw it, think it not enough to flourish it; and if
you will strike, lay on upon these walkers after the flesh. Oh give not
Churchwardens cause to complain, that they still present, but can see no
reformation; nor the delinquent to boast that they can escape with a ten groats
see; nor the souls of these men to complain hereafter, that if the flesh had
been punished, the spirit had been saved in the day of Christ. Let Ministers
preach, and people pray, and Magistrates punish, and delinquents reform, and
all mourn, lest our patient God, for our transcendent abominations cause our
Land to spue out her Inhabitants.

But if none of these will persuade, then let those that live after the flesh,
know, that their destruction is from themselves: God has gathered the stones
out of the vineyard by his preventing grace, fenced thee about, given thee the
sweet influence of his grace, the former, and latter rain; and now judge thou
who art a party, whether there has any thing been wanting on Gods part, to
make thee happy; but thou will needs dye, not because thou love death, but
sin which is the cause of it.

And let us all remember, that our worst enemy is within us. Bern. Ipsi
gestamus laqueum, nobiscum circumferimus inimicum; We carry a snare about with
us, our own enemy is within us. We are beaten like Judah, with our own staff,
and manacled with our own bracelets; yea, with Saul we slay our selves with our
own sword. It Is a Serpent in our own bosom that stings us, Inimici hominis
sunt ejus domestici, A man's foes are those of his own house. He that dips with
us in the dish is it that betrays us. Blame not Satan, or his instruments,
these could not kill us, but that this Traitor opens the doors, their
temptations else would fall like a spark of fire in the Sea, much less let us
murmur against God; though he be the inflicting cause, yet sin is the
meritorious.

Take heed of this enemy so much the rather, for it is a potent and politic
enemy, being an old man that receives influence from the Devil; it is worse then
the Devil, who has some natural goodness, wisdom, and power, which in
themselves are good, though by him abused. But in the flesh dwells no good
thing, it fills the whole man full of impiety; as the mind with wicked
thoughts, making it like a dark filthy Dungeon, full of Snakes and Adders,
destitute of heavenly light and heat; the imaginations of it only evil
continually; and if the best part be so, what is the worst? It Is a storehouse,
or a common sewer of abominations, fills the eye full of Adultery, the
countenance of wrath, makes the throat an open sepulcher, the tongue a world of
wickedness: if a world in that little member; how many worlds in this little
world of ours? fills the hand with extortion, makes the feet swift to shed
blood; in a word, all the Devils brats are warmed, conceived, and bred in that
womb: it is an enemy to all Spiritual undertakings; what is wisdom to the
Spirit, is foolishness to the flesh; what the one wills, the other nilleth;
what the one endeavors, the other crosses; it breaks all Laws, both of God
and man, and makes unreasonable Laws of its own, of sin and death, Romans
7.23.8.2. Of sin, therefore dishonorable to live after them, for it gives
unreasonable command. He that obeys has Chams curse, to be a servant of
servants. But the service is dangerous, in that rewarded with such wages; for
the wages of sin is death; worse then for a man to serve at the Galleys all
day, and be hanged at night. Therefore of all enemies, let us take most heed of
our selves; these lusts within us fight against us, 1 Pet. 2.11. they hunt for
the precious life; and if we yield to them, we dye. He that sows the wind,
shall reap the whirlwind. If we sow to the flesh, we shall of the flesh reap
corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting; For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye; but if ye by the
Spirit mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.

But if ye by the Spirit, The Conolation.
etc. Now I am fallen on the second Proposition, the Consolation. Hitherto I
have tired your patience with a discourse of the works of darkness, and a sad
narration of death, the reward of such works; give me leave now to entertain
your ears with a more pleasing discourse of life, and of the narrow way that
leads thither. If ye by the Spirit, etc. The flesh like a potent King domineers
in a natural man, and makes him yield obedience to it in the lusts thereof;
yea, in a regenerate man it remains, though weakened and wounded, like the
Canaanites; if it cannot dwell in the City, it will lodge in the subburbs;
though it reign not like a King, it will rebel like a Traitor, sometimes
assaulting by open violence; sometimes by secret ambushments, and hidden
stratagems, undermining; so that while he dwells in this tabernacle of flesh,
the flesh will continue in him; his labor shall not end, so long as his life
does continue: while we live then we shall find work enough to keep under this
rebel; and to encourage us herein, God has given us such an help as will
effect it, his Spirit; and propounded such a motive, as may spur on the dullest
Laodicean, Ye shall live.

Here the Apostle does these two things, Divided.
1. Proponit officium, If ye, etc. 2. Promittit mercedem. First the work, then
the wages; first we must do the will of God, then receive the promise: first
God must be glorified by us, and then he will glorify us; the hardest that is
first, and that we must look to, to mortify; the sweetest comes last, and that
God will care for, Ye shall live.

In the first we note these particulars; Subdivided.
1. Octjectum, deeds of the body. 2. Actionem circa objectum, Ye must mortify
the deeds of the body. 3. Causas hujus acticnis, principalem, the Spirit; minus
principalem, we.

First, The deeds of the body what.
for the object about which mortification is conversant, the deeds of the body.
Here we must explicate both the fountain, and streams. Some understand a
metonymie in this word body, so by it understand the natural body, because sin
is acted by the body. Others understand it metaphorically of that old man, and
mass of corruption that is in every man, called the body of sin, Romans 6.6. and
7.24. Col. 2.11. for as the body is a totum integrum, consisting of many
members, so is sin, Col. 3.4. the head of sin, vain imaginations; the heart of
sin, corrupt affections; the tongue of sin, rotten communication; the forehead
of sin, impudent avouching; the hands and feet of sin, wicked executions.
Again, as the body has its dimensions, so has sin; it reaches to heaven, and
burns to the lowest hell; is's of as great a latitude as Gods Commandments,
which are exceeding broad. 3. As the body is knit together by joints, and
ligaments, so is sin. If the foot of sin do but stir, the whole body moves,
as we see in the sin of Adam. He that offends in one, is guilty of all; he sins
against the general equity of the Law, and righteousness of the Lawgiver. As
the body compasses us about, so does sin, it is peccatum circumstans; that for
the first, by the body we mean the body of sin.

Secondly, For the deeds of the body. This old man, though old, yet is very
stirring and operative. When men grow old, their apprehension is weak, their
memory dull, the strong men bow, the whole man is feeble; but it is not so in
the body of sin, the older it is, the more vigorous, and lusty. Nothing in the
world so fruitful; though these are but (...), unfruitful works. Of Elements,
none so fruitful as water; stinking puddles bring forth most troops of vermin.
Some grounds yield two crops every year; some trees bear fruit twice, this all
the year; some creatures breed every month, this every moment; and these brats
are even conceived and born at once. How many kinds are there of sins? and how
many millions of each kind? Gal. 5.21. There is some of the progeny, it is
progenies viperarum; all those irregular thoughts, affections, words and
actions that pass from a man, come from hence. Now this body has its
activenesse from the parents, the father is the devil, a compasser; the soul
the mother, in perpetual motion, and agitation. Now his own will enticeth him
to these deeds; and he that is wilfully bent upon a thing, who can stay him?
The Devil continually spurs him on, and he must needs go whom the Devil drives;
he is further provoked by the world, by the men of the world, their persuasion
as Solomon, their threats as Nebuchadnezzar, their promises as Balaam, their
example as Jeroboam: by the things of the world; there is at least a seeming
luster in the object that does allure; Bathsheba's beauty, the rich wedge of
gold, and the Babylonish garment. When the Vessel sails with the tide, and the
sails blown with such a gale, it must needs go apace. There are deeds of the
body which are natural, to eat, drink, sleep; voluntary, to walk, etc. but
these are motus, and opera carnis peccatricis, these are they that must be
mortified; that is the second thing in the duty.

Mortifie] The body of death must be slain that we may live: What it is to
mortify.
Thus if we will become wise, we must first be fools; if rich, and have a
Kingdom, poor in spirit; if free, put our necks under Christ's yoke; if save
our life; first lose it, if have a true being, old men must be born again; if
have the life of grace here, and glory hereafter, first kill our sinful selves.
To mortify, is a Metaphor taken from Surgeons that use to mortify that
part they mean to cut off; so we must mortify sin, that it may not live; or if
it live such a life as is left in the limbs when the head is struck off, or as
in those that have an Epilepsie, Romans 4.19.
or as in old Abraham's body, which was as good as dead, unfit for generation.
The efficacy and power of these lusts must be slain, that they produce not new
Monsters, and so bring forth fruit unto death; that is, (as Cajetan tells us)
insur gentes compescendo, ne insurgant domando, so mortify them that they make
no rebellion; or if they do make insurrection, beat them down that they
domineer not. So much for the second thing, the act.

I come now to the causes. The efficient cause principal the Spirit.
The principal is the Spirit. By the Spirit here (to omit other acceptations)
we understand either the grace of the Spirit, or the Spirit of grace. If the
former, then so far forth as it is enlivened, and actuated by the latter. The
Spirit dwells in all creatures by a general influence, in Christ by
hypostatical union, in some men by creating in them extraordinary gifts, (...);
in the elect by effectual operation. And if the essence of the Spirit be in us,
it is in us, not as an essential part, that were to deify man; nor united
personally unto us, for then should the third person be incarnate as well as
the second; but dwelling in Christ as the head, in an unspeakable manner
diffused unto us. Thus the devil dwells in the children of disobedience, not by
communicating his essence to them, for then they should be incarnate devils,
but taking possession of them as his vassals, blinding their minds, hardening
their hearts, infusing malice into their wills, leading them captive, till at
the last he bring them to the pit of destruction. But has man the command of
the Spirit? But the Spirit and Gods Ordinances are not separated, unless for
our fault. But is the Spirit our instrument? No, but we the Spirits; for God
infuseth into us this supernatural principle, whereby we are enabled to work,
and then quickens it up by moral persuasion. But how does the Spirit
mortify? It Is that light that does detect those deeds of the body: it is
contrary to them, and stirs up hatred against them: it is the Spirit of grace
which makes us pray against them; it is our remembrance that brings to our mind
the Scripture, that declares the odiousness and danger of them; it is the
mighty power of God, that crusheth these brats in pieces: it is that which does
cooperate with the Word, and prayer, and tears, and affliction, and fasting,
whereby the flesh is beaten down. That the Spirit works, we evidently feel,
but how, we cannot certainly define: for if the operation of the wind, the
framing of the body in the womb be so strange, much more that of the Spirit.

The lesse-principal cause, We. The lesse-principal, We.
The Spirit quickens us being dead, and being quickened we must act by the
Spirit. In the receiving the first grace man is a mere passive, habet se ut
materia: in the second partly active, partly passive; active, we must mortify;
passive, for it must be by the Spirit; and as St. Aug. Gratia non credit, non
resipiscit, non sperat, non obtemperat Deo, sed homo per gratiam; Grace
believes not, repents not, hopes not, obeys not God, but man by grace. So we
say, Spiritus non mortificat, sed homo per Spiritum; The Spirit mortifies not,
but man by the Spirit; that we might not be proud or self confident, not we,
but the Spirit; that we might not be slothful, or negligent, we must do it by
the Spirit; that we might avoid all strains of Popery and Pelagianism, it is
the Spirit which quickens us at the first, and does continually send us fresh
supplies against the flesh; that we might not be taken with the idle fancies or
doting dreams and crotchets of the Familists, we must mortify by the Spirit.
As we cannot mortify without the Spirit, so the Spirit will not without us.

Ye shall live. Having now done with the duty, What life here meant.
we come to the reward, and what is better then life? God is pleased to be
styled a living God. This is that which every eye looks at, every heart breaths
after, in which the vastest desire is satisfied, beyond which the mind knows
nothing, nor the will desires any thing that might make it happy.

By life here we do not understand the uncreated life of God, but the created
life of man, which is twofold: corporal, the union of the soul with the body;
spiritual, the union of God with the soul. Indeed there is a natural life of
the soul, like that of Angels, in which sense damned spirits may be said to
live; this was the eternity the Philosophers knew of. So Aristotle, (...), 3.
de an. c. 5.
this being concreated with the soul cannot be taken away, but by annihilating
of it. The soul considered spiritually may be dead while it thus lives, if it
be separated from God in regard of holiness and happiness.

We will briefly see what this includes, Ye shall live, that is, ye shall not
dye; and how happy would the damned spirits think themselves, if they might not
dye, though they might not live, that indeed they might not be at all rather
then so miserable!

Ye shall live, That is, a happy life here, Natural.
a natural life full of joy and comfort. Godliness, which includes
mortification, has the promise of this life; our clothes shall warm us, our
food nonrish us. Though men out of Covenant have a right to these, if they come
by them lawfully, yet a sanctified use they have not, but by virtue of the
Covenant, as our clothes receive heat from us, and then warm us.

You shall live when you die, and death shall be as the port, after all the
tossings and tumults of this life, the Physician that cures all diseases, the
point that puts a period to all our labors; it is the reward of piety, at the
least an entrance into that reward, and the birthday of eternity, the end of
our sorrow, the way to our Country, the beginning of glory, a general antidote
for all aggrievances. God is their God while they live in the grave, and has
engaged his Word to restore them at the last day. Joh. 11.
He that believes in me shall live, though he dye; and he that lives, and
believes in me, shall never dye. Vitam non eripit, sed intermittit.

But the spiritual life of a Christian is that which is most excellent,
Spiritual, of grace.
and that flows from the union of God with the soul, distinguished into
degrees: the first from conversion to the time of death, when God by his Spirit
breathes on the dead lump of sin and clay, and makes it a glorious creature
after his own Image, Joh. 5.24. This is called the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
because it comes from God as the fountain, insomuch that he does live in them;
and if God be at all the life and soul of the world, (as the Platonists say) it
is meant of Christians principally. The entrance into this life is through the
gate of regeneration, this parallells that vitam plantae, and that first degree
of natural life in the womb. Ye shall live; That is, the life of grace.

Secondly, Ye shall live, Of glory.
the life of glory in the first degree, from the death of the body to the
resurrection of it; When the body sleeps in the grave sweetened by Christ's
burial, the soul shall be carried by the ministry of Angels into Abraham's
bosom, Luke 16.22. Though there be not in this estate a plenary consummation
of happiness, 1 Timothy 4.8. Apcc. 6.9. yet the Spirit returns to God, Eccles.
12.7. to Christ, Phil. 1.23. it rests from labor, is in comfort, so it was
said of Lazarus, Luke 16.25. to Paradise, so to the thief, Matthew. 24.32. Luke
23.43. Without doubt with great solemnity, and joy do the holy Saints and
Angels receive the soul into heaven; into this degree we enter by the gate of
death, and it parallels the life of an animal, and the second degree of natural
life in men, from the birth till they come to the use of reason.

In the second degree, you shall live the life of glory in regard of the
consummation of it, from the day of the resurrection to all eternity, enjoying
the full vision, and fruition of God: where you shall see God sitting on his
throne in inaccessible light, and Jesus Christ sitting on his right hand with
an innumerable company of Saints and Angels attending on him, all shining as
the Sun in the Firmament, where all sorrow cease for ever, and a confluence
of all desirable happiness.

It may be some will enquire what our conversation shall be there; for your
meat and drink, there is Angels food, a tree of life; for your apparel, long
white robes of righteousness; for your music, a quire of Angels; riches and
glory are in this place, the house is made of gold, and the pavements of
precious stones. As for honor, every man shall be a king, and reign in
bliss; and for delight, at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore;
for knowledge, we shall see face to face; and for liberty, the body shall be
made spiritual; Siquidem ubi volet spiritus, ibi erit corpus.

In a word, they shall enjoy God, in whom is eminently contained all
persection, and glory. If a little earthly glory amaze, as it did Herod, what
will that above do? If there be such glory in Gods footstool, what is there in
his throne? Si tanta nobis tribuis in carcere, quid dabis in patria? Si tanta
tribuis inimicis, quid amicis? If, O Lord, thou give us so much in the land
of our pilgrimage, what will thou give us in our own country? if so much to
thine enemies, what will thou give to thy friends? The Hebrews report, how
truly I know not, that when Joseph had gathered much corn in Egypt, he threw
the chafe into the river Nilus, that so floating to the neighbour-Cities, and
Nations, they might know what abundance was laid up, not for themselves alone,
but for their neighbors also: so God to make us know what glory is in heaven,
has thrown some husks to us here, that so tasting the sweetness of these
things we might asspire to his bounty above. And surely, if the outward
pavement of the base Court does so glitter with stars, what is there within?
Though we cannot measure the content of the soul by the outside of the house,
no more then you can measure the comforts of a Christian by the gay outside of
a Church.

If I should undertake a full relation of this, my muddy expressions would
cloud it from you more then declare it; therefore I leave it to your
apprehension, as a thing beyond expression, yea, beyond conceit, while we dwell
in these houses of clay. If Moses his face did shine with conversing with God;
if the Disciples were so ravished in the transfiguratiou; if S. Paul that saw
not all, saw more then he could utter; and if the souls of Gods people are
filled with unspeakable joy, and satisfied as with marrow, and fatness, that
see, and enjoy God but in part here obscurely; there is something transcendent
in the perfect vision and fruition of God. These little baits serve to stay
our stomachs till we come to that glorious repast. Aug. l. 4. de. civil. D^^.
Aug. Quod Deus praepara vit diligentibus, fide non accipitur, spe non
attingitur, charitate non comprehenditur, acquiri potest, aestimari non potest:
Faith cannot comprehend, hope cannot reach, charity cannot fathom, what God
has prepared for those that love him; obtained it may be, but never to its
worth valued, and esteemed. And elsewhere, Facilius possumus dicere quid ibi
non sit, quam quid sit: non est ibi mors, non est luctus, etc. We can more
easily say what there is not there, then what there is: there is no death, no
mourning, etc. Let us labor to walk in the way, then we shall experimentally
feel it, and then even laugh at our scanty expressions when the soul being
filled with admiration shall cry out, How full of glory art thou O Lord, and
this heavenly Paradise of thine! I have heard of thee by thy Prophets, and
Apostles, but the one half has not been resolved. Oh blessed is the man that
hears thy wisdom, sees, and enjoys thy glory.

But by the way note here, that life is referred to mortification, not as the
proper cause. He that lives after the flesh, shall dye, by his own merit; but
he that lives after the Spirit, shall live by Gods mercy, and the merit of
Christ; for he that lives after the flesh, acts by a principle of his own; but
he that by the Spirit, from an hgher principle, and that imperfectly. So, Romans
6. ult. the Apostle shows death is an effect of sin, life a consequent of
righteousness in a different manner: death follows sin as a just reward of
it, as a debt, The wages of sin is death; but righteousness produces life, as
a consequent, not of debt, but of grace. The gift of God is eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord; that as he attributes nothing to man in the
latter, so he wholly clears God in the former.

But ever remember what the good Father says, Acquiri potest, aestimari non
potest: It may be gotten, but cannot be valued. It Is possible for to attain
it, but it will cost thee dear; thou must enter in through many tribulations;
Vnicus qui introivit sine peccato, non exivit sine flagello, thou must deny the
world, and be crucified to that, hate father, mother, life, thine own life; but
that is not all, thou must mortify the deeds of the body. Now if any desire to
enter into life, I must first ask him, whether he can drink of this cup, and
be baptized with this Baptism? he must mortify this body, this old man;
corruption is strong, for it is a man; politic, for an old man; a man that is
naturalized in us, and pleads prescription.

The old man with all his members, pull out the right eye, cut off the right
hand, tear, and re^t the heart asunder, crown the head with thorns, pierce
the hands and feet with nails, and the side with a spear, the face must be
spit upon, buffetted.

The body, and all the deeds of it. Put off the old man with his deeds, Col. 3.
and here mortify the deeds of the body, and the deeds of the body are
manifest. Never tell me of a good heart, if the actions are naught, as the
understanding blind, the will obstinate, the affections disordered, the life
dissolute, this man is out of the way to life. What! a good Christian, and a
drunkard, a swearer, a scoffer at the good ways of God? It Is impossible. Is
the tree good that is fruitless? Do you call that a good ground, that bears
nothing but briars, and brambles? The body with the deeds, all the deeds must
be mortified. Away then with that sweet morsel under the tongue; if thou
willingly entertain but one sin constantly, suppose contemplative adultery,
thou art an unmortified man.

Again, these must be mortified, not trifle, or deal more gently with them,
pull up these weeds by the very roots; therefore it must be with pain, and
shame, and constant; for it is an act of the whole life, prescribed here to the
Romans, so to the Colossians. It may be their acquaintance will reproach thee,
and thy best friends forsake thee.

And all this we must do in our persons, not buy it out, or do it by our
deputies; we, by the Spirit, and there is no other way but this to life.

Nor do I make the way straiter, or the gate narrower, then Christ, and his
Apostles have done. Nor do I here dishearten any, but require them sedulously
to set about the work; better know it now then hereafter when it is too late.
Eternal life is the gift of God, that the Scripture shows, and reason
manifests, that it is in the power of the donor to prescribe what conditions he
will to the receiver; but the wretchedness of the world is such, they desire
the blessing without the condition; like Ruths kinsman, that would have the
land without the woman; like that man in the Gospel, would have eternal life,
but the condition is too strict, therefore go a way sorrowful. Thus, how
contrary are we to our selves, how unreasonable to God? In the former we would
do the work, but not have wages, live after the flesh, but not die; and in the
latter we will not do the labor, yet hope for the reward, as Balaam will
follow the wages of iniquity, yet die the death of the righteous. But if we do
the one, the other will follow. And surely had we made our own terms, how
could we in modesty have made them more easy? God could do no less then
demonstrate his purity, love of virtue, hatred of sin. God delights not to make
us sad without cause. Certainly he cannot require any thing less then
mortification without the impeachment of his honor, therefore we cannot
perform less without the endangering of our happiness.

So then I must tell our debauched sinners, Use. For Repr.
that suffer all manner of abominations to reign, not to be named among
Christians, and are so far from crucifying them, that they harbor, and keep
them close, extenuate, defend them, are careful to satisfy their lusts, and
blow them up to a greater flame, that will be ready to give the stab to those
that cross and contradict them in their ways; there is a thing in Religion
called Mortifying the deeds of the body, which they were never acquainted
withal, without which there is no life.

I must tell our plausible Atheists, that are enemies to the power of
godliness, that have no grace and virtue but what was born and bred with them;
it is not their plausible carriage will do it; there is a mortifying,
crucifying, watching, fasting, striving, denying thy self, or no entrance into
life.

I must tell our careless procrastinators of repentance. It Is not enough to
dislike sin, and so let it alone in time to dye it self, and therefore they
will not task themselves with such an unpleasing torment, but you must mortify
it. The filthy adulterer resolves, when he has no more marrow in his bones,
nor vigor in his body, to leave his adultery; the drunkard his company when
his patrimony is spent; the oppressor his extortion, when his covetousness is
satiated. Sin, though it be left in regard of the outward act, yet in this
case it is not mortified, but retired to the inner closet of the soul, wanting
opportunity to axpresse it self outwardly; and in this case it is damnable; for
lusting is adultery, Matthew. 5.28. hatred is murder, 1 John 3.15. and he that
will inhabit heaven, must have both clean hands and a pure heart, Ps. 24.4. and
the tree is not dead, though it want leaves and fruit; and this conquest (if
there be any) is to be attributed to the weakness of nature rather then the
strength of grace; or else here is a Metempsychosis of sin; whereas a sin
of youth prevailed before, now a sin of age domineereth. Thus a man oft-times
changes his favorites. No man in every estate, and condition is prone to act
the same sins.

I must tell our civil Justitiaries, and painted hypocrites; It Is not enough to
take sin prisoner, and a little to curb and restrain it, as Eli did his sons;
or to cry out, as Pharaoh did when he was upon the rack, and soon return like
the dog to the vomit; we must not only fight, but overcome, if we mean to be
crowned; judge, condemn, and mortify this old man with his deeds.

I must tell our lukewarm Laodiceans, that are half persuaded to be
Christians with Agrippa, it will not serve their turn. If they will almost be
religious, they shall be almost saved, but altogether damned. To spare some fat
sins (as Saul the cattle) for sacrifice, to make ex rapina holocaustum; to rob
the Church, and build an Hospital, or maintain a Free-Schoole; to cast away
some sin, which to them has neither profit, nor pleasure in it, and if it were
commanded would sin in omitting it: this is no mortification. It will not avail
you to abhor Idols, so long as you commit sacrilege; that can endure John
Baptist, till he come to touch the apple of your eye; this is but to pair the
nails, or clip the hair of this old man, not to mortify the body with his
deeds. A Penknife may cut a man's throat, one leake sink a ship, one sparkle
burn an house, one sin slay the soul.

I must tell those that would be accounted professors, that this word does not
sufficiently express the condition of a good Christian; they must be
practisers. It is not enough to say, The Temple of the Lord; the rich man was a
son of Abraham, yet in hell; to hear a multitude and variety of Sermons; the
devil hears more. Though they could hear men of Seraphical spirits; the
Capernaites heard Christ, and notwithstanding this, they were thrown down to
hell. You must mortify. I cannot but with indignation complain to see at least
the outward form of Godliness changed, from what it was in the primitive
times; and I am persuaded should one of our forefathers rise from the dead, he
would as much wonder at the alteration of the fashion in Religion as apparel.
The devotion of the Church of old was to join in public prayer, this is
accounted but Idolatrous Superstition by many, and cold devotion by the most.
Of old it was Religion to keep the body under by fasting, and discipline; this
practice is not known now of many, practiced by few: they will lose their
birthrights, rather then pottage: either they are troubled with wind, or some
infirmity or other, they cannot fast; The truth is they are like Dionysius an
epicure, who when he lay at a siege, and was forced to keep a diet, fell sick
because he might not surfeit. Of old, charity and good works were in fashion,
but now he is almost accounted a Popeling that will preach for charity, and
(God help us) an enemy to the State, that exhorts to peace. I condemn not
all, but the religion of too many consists only in hearing such men; and the
height of their practice, to abstain from some sins, which are cried down. I
honor the public preaching of Gods Word in season, and out of season, and he
that opposes it, is an enemy to Christ, and his king dome: but if he that
preaches unto others may be a reprobate unless he do beat down his body, and
mortify his sin, then he that hears others much more.

I must tell our curious Correctors of things indifferent, that it is not the
eager censuring, and condemning they know not what, nor their envying against
Bishops, and Ceremonies; and in the mean time to harbor pride, and passion,
and uncharitableness; the matter is not what thou can say, or censure in
other men, but what thou have mortified of thine own.

Nor will the keeping of outward orders serve the turn; at the best if they go
no further, they are no better then Scribes and Pharisees, that tithe Mint, and
Cummin, and Anise, and leave the weighty matters of the Law undone.

I must tell our Solifidans, that boast of strange speculations of faith
without sanctity: For ought I know, there are a great many Orthodox men in
Hell, and while they live in lying, pride, and profaneness, their faith
without works will not save them.

I must tell our refined wits, and great Clerks: It will not avail though they
know the abstrusest mysteries that are; yea, all things knowable, as some say
of Berengarius. Knowledge without charity profits nothing: there is neither
true piety, nor charity, so long as men live after the flesh, while they
continue desolate. I never knew such a way to heaven, as from bed to board;
from hoard to play, etc.

I must tell our Popish, and Pelagian Doctors, advancers of free will, that
they cannot mortify themselves by any power of the flesh: for corrupt nature
agreeeth well enough with it self; but walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.6. not by any
Moral or gentle persuasion, or by any violent restraint. They that deny grace,
or call grace by the name of nature; or say, that it is profitable, not
necessary, or necessary for our entrance, not our continuance in the ways of
God. Here we see, that as by preventing grace we are made Saints, so by
subsequent, and cooperating grace we are enabled to work like Saints; and it is
the Spirit that does inchoate, continue, consummate all good in us; whence our
Savior says, Without me ye can do nothing; upon which words, St. Austin
glosseth thus, Non dicit, Sine me parum potestis facere, nec dicit Ardui
aliquid Sine me non potestis facere, vel Difficulter sine me potestis facere,
sed Nihil sine me potestis. Nec dicit, Sine me non potestis perficere, sed
Nihil potestis facere sine me; He does not say, we can do but little or no
great matter, or very difficultly without Christ. He does not say, we can
perfect nothing without him, but simply do nothing without him.

I must tell our Famelistical dreamers, that we must mortify by the Spirit;
they must not think to have these showers of grace, and glory fall into their
laps, while they sit still with a soulded hand. For the getting of the Spirit
we must attend on God in his Ordinances. Though the Miller cannot make a wind,
yet he may set up his sails, and turn them into the wind. When we have
received the Spirir, we are the instruments of the Spirit, yet not passive
ones, but as servants, that work by the direction of their Masters, as the body
works being enabled by the soul. We are not saved altogether, as we were
created. He made us, not we our selves; so he saves us, not we our selves;
that is, as of our selves; but being enabled by his Spirit: and thus, though it
be true, that he works in us both the will and the deed; yet it is as true,
that we must work out our own salvation. A silly Countrey-fellow once bought
Orpheus his harp, and thought it would make melody of it self, without the
touch of a skilful hand: so do these men think of the Spirit, that it will work
in them, though they be idle, resist, or quench the Spirit, and turn the grace
of God into wantonness, thus making God the cause of their sins, if not an
efficient, at least a deficient; and they think they have done as much good,
and omitted as much evil, as God by his grace enabled them.

I must tell our superstitious Baalites, that this mortification, Non fit per
disciplinam Monasticam, aut Baaliticam lanienam corporis, sed per Spiritum
resistentem operibus carnis; is not done by Monastical discipline, or by
Baalitical cutting of the body, but by the Spirit opposing, and resisting the
deeds of the body. Though a man fast till he faint and dye, cover himself with
sackcloth day and night; though he beat himself black and blue, endure heat,
and cold as much as the body will bear, not suffer their eyes to sleep, or
eyelids to slumber; it is not their solitary caves, or tedious pilgrimages;
many that do so nourish pride, vainglory, self-confidence; but it is the Spirit
of God, and yet the Spirit uses other instruments. The Word of God as a two
edged-sword, cuts the throat of our corruptions; in prayer we lay them open to
God; press him with his promise, and get grace and assistance from him, in
voluntary chastning; our selves ordinarily, by sobriety in meat, drink,
apparel, recreation; extraordinarily, by prayer, fasting, weeping: we do as it
were with Gods plough soften our hard hearts, and so extinguish this fire, by
withholding combustible matter, or by those that are imposed by God. In the
former we take up our cross, in this it is laid upon us. In the one we turn
without, in this with a bridle in our jaws: But the Spirit must diffuse it
self through all these to make them effectual; and without it these bodily
exercises profit little, the flesh will still recalcitrare, and therefore
Monasticks, and Anchorites have found corruption as strong in the Cloister, as
in the Court; in the Cell, as in the City. He that will not humble his body,
cannot, will not humble his soul; but he that humbles his body without the
soul, loses his labor.

Yea, For Exhortation.
with your good leave I must tell the best man here, that it is not enough that
he has begun well, but he must go on. So the Apostle writes to converted
Romans; so we speak to converted Christians, you have done it Sacramentally,
make good your vow; you have done it in profession, let your practice be
answerable; you have done it really, but it is but in part, continue in
well-doing. A good progress and conclusion, is necessary to life; as a good
beginning. Take heed of beginning in the Spirit, and ending in the flesh. They
that think they are mortified enough, must mortify that proud conceit, or
perhaps they will come short of life. And for Catharists that boast of absolute
perfection, their reward shall be, they lead themselves into a fools Paradise.

By all this which has been said, we may verify that of our Savior, Matthew.
6.14. Heaven it spued out the Angels that sinned, and will not lick up the
Devils vomit again.

But though it be difficult, yet not impossible, therefore I would not
discourage any. It Is easy to a spiritual man, and me thinks the benefit should
take away the difficulty; Look unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith.
But alas, these joys are far off, and serve but little, or else the taste of
the world spoils our relish. Our teeth are so set on edge with these apples of
Sodom, that we cannot taste the fruit of the tree of life.

See what there is in the Text to encourage us. 1. It Is but the deeds of the
body to be mortified, those which we may well spare; God commands us not to
destroy any faculty of the soul, either to hurt the understanding, or dull the
apprehension, or overload the memory, or clog the conscience; not to kill the
body, or consume the spirits, by a dull, austere melancholy, not to destroy the
form or feature of it Religion it depriveth us of nothing that brings true
pleasure or profit. Adam in innocence, glorified Saints and Angels, God himself
has transcendent happiness, to which nothing can be added; yet it is the
unhappiness of some to think they cannot be merry, unless they are mad, nor
happy except sinful; that mortification abridgeth them of true delight. Again,
these must but be mortified, not utterly abolished. We cannot abolish them, to
have no being, but only mortify them, that they do not reign; so that while
sin does not prevail, but thou groanest under the relics of corruption, God
will accept thee, and that thou may do this, he gives thee his own Spirit to
enable thee to the work, and offers thee a Crown of glory at the end of thy
labor. Surely if he had commanded thee a greater matter upon such terms,
would thou not have done it?

What remains then, but that we set about the work cheerfully. I exhort you
all to be happy. The fullness of glory will answer all the difficulties. I can
say no more; Mortify, and you shall live. If you will not kill, you must be
killed. God has proclaimed these deeds Traitors; they have shed the blood of
Christ, done all the mischief in the world, and, in a word, will undo our
souls. How can we but with indignation see strumpets more careful to adorn
their bodies then we our souls! St. Augustine mournes to see Arius take more
pains to go to hell, then he could do to go to heaven. How can we endure to
see a Papist take more pains to scourge his body, an earth-worme macerate
himself to get wealth, an adulterer dance attendance to fulfill his lust, and
yet in the mean time we do nothing to get to heaven!

Go home then with shame in thy countenance, fasting, weeping, and mourning;
with anger, indignation, and holy revenge, look on that heart of thine that
has offered such indignity to heaven; by an holy Anathema deliver that flesh
of thine to Satan, smite on thy thigh with Ephraim, on thy breast with the
Publican, weep with David rivers of tears because others keep not Gods Law, and
weep bitterly with Peter for denying thy Lord. Make a bath of tears with Mary
for entertaining so many Devils in thine heart; for get a while to eat thy
bread, and by fasting, and abstinence be revenged on thy self for sin past,
and keep under thy body for time to come. It Is one of the nails that crucifies
the flesh, and a means to take down the rankness of this fertile field,
singular putatis aratrum. But if thou can not weep, and command tears, at
least get that dolorem appretiativum. Value your sins at such a rate, that they
deserve tears of blood. Wish that thy head were a fountain, and thine eyes, as
Conduit-pipes. Entreat God to accept the desire for the deed, and the blood,
and tears of Christ for all. But men now adays can mortify without renting
the heart, fasting a day, shedding a tear. But withal remember to mortify
too, else thy tears will be no better then Esaus, thy fasting like Ahabs.
Purge, not that thou may surfeit; repent not that thou may sin; return,
not like the dog to the vomit; if thou do, thy latter end will be worse then
thy beginning. But blessed is the man that sorrows, after a godly manner; for
this works repentance never to be repented of. Blessed are they that mourn
now, that sow in tears; for they shall reap in joy, they shall find triumph
in torment, joy in tribulation, refreshing in fasting, life in death. Bern.
Filii hujus seculi vident cruces nostras, non consolationes: The sons of this
world see our crosses, but not our comforts. If any thing were better then
life, God would not deny it you; he accounts you Martyrs in manner; Mortificare
opera carnis genus Martyrii est, horrore quidem mitius, sed diuturnitate
molestius: To mortify the deeds of the body, is a kind of martyrdom, milder
indeed in its horror, but more troublesome in its long continuance. Certainly
they that keep such a Lent, shall have a glorious Easter at the day of their
resurrection, when all tears shall be wiped from their eyes, and they shall
remain, and reign with God in bliss for ever. And thus I have traveled
through these Propositions in their absolute consideration.

the best, The word considered in their opposition.
and yet sin as bad as the worst; and they fill themselves with unnecessary
fears that live strictly, and carefully, and yet comfort not themselves in Gods
promises.

1. It does no whit prejudice the godly in their comfort, that God is so severe
against the wicked; Cains profaneness does not hurt Abel, he is accepted.
Though Judas be a devil, the rest fare not the worse. So at the last day while
the wicked wish the hills, and mountains to cover them, the godly lift up their
heads. Abraham and Moses make use of their interest with God, even when he is
provoked against Sodom, and Jasrel.

2. The wicked are not privileged by Gods mercies on the godly, as we see in
the Wise and Foolish Virgins. Gods mercies, Christ's merits, the precious
promises and privileges of the Gospel avail them nothing. Gods mercies are
limited to certain conditions, therefore let not wicked men boulster up
themselves in these, heed not lying vanities.

We consider them in their coherence. Therefore we should mortify sin, And in
their coherence.
because if we live after the flesh, we shall die.

It Is not absurd to propound life and death as Motives to obedience. God did so
to Adam in Paradise.

Yea, to men already converted, our Savior does so, Fear not him that can
kill the body, etc. So the Father at banquets would talk of hell, to keep men
from security. So the Apostle here to men already converted, If ye live, etc.
The meditation of death is not unprofitable for them. They are not out of
danger of Gunshot; though they are in a Citadel, or strong Tower, yet they
have some flesh, and are subject to spiritual security, presumption, or
profaneness. The Tower cannot be demolished, but they may look out at the
windows, and battlements, and be wounded.

Hence we may conclude, that a Christian may take comfort in an holy life. Here
is an Antidote against Presumption, and Despair. None can presume, but they
that mortify; and that is not presumption, but hope; none can despair, but
such as live after the flesh; and that is a fear upon good grounds.

And now to draw to a conclusion. The agreement 'twixt Armin. and their
adversaries in the rules of practice.
How happily might these two Propositions put an end to our unhappy
controversies, were men of peaceable spirits. The Areopagites in Athens in a
doubtful case wherein they were loath to pass sentence, differred it in diem
longissimum, it may be for an hundred years. I would to God we could do so in
these that I am sure are doubtful, but this is to suspend men in a Neutrality
to believe nothing. S. Augustine answers some well, that would not believe,
unless all objections were cleared: Sunt innumerabiles objectiones quae non
sunt finiendae ante fidem, ne finiatur vita sine fide: There are innumerable
objections which must not be dispatched and answered before faith, etc.
Moderation in these mysteries is to be shown, if any where. Neutram partem
affirmantes, sive destrueren tes, sed tantummodo ab audaci affirmandi
praesumptione revocantes: Affirming, or denying neither of the two, but only
restraining us from bold presumption in taking either part. But now every
novice can determine in these things, when the wisest men demurre, and can as
exactly chalk out Gods secret ways, as if with S. Paul they had been rapt up
into the third heaven, and taken a transcript of the book of life. Either side
is confident, and it may be in conclusion it will prove neither so nor so, and
so it comes to pass, that religion is turned into nicities and disputation,
bearing things certain, and fastening upon uncertain, like Zeuxes, that
pictured an old woman so to the life, that he laughed to death at the veiw of
her.

So I think our gracious Sovereign has taken a Religious and Wise course to
silence these controversies, more fit for Schools then Pulpits, or rather
fitter for heavens perfection then for earthly frailty to determine; Et Elias
quum venerit solvet haec dubia. If I should enter upon the controversies, I
should contradict authority; or if I might, I would not so far presume upon
mine own weakness; or if I had ability, and liberty, I durst not so far abuse
your patience. Only let me advise all, especially the unlearned, which with
much study cannot so much as attain the stating of the questions, to turn
their cavilling about the Theory into Practice. Surely there is no such vast
difference in the points as they are handled by moderate men on both sides,
whatsoever some say, that either know not what they speak, or will not know.
But howsoever it is in the Theory, unless I much mistake, both sides meet in
the Practice.

If any man should ask me concerning the decree of election and reprobation,
Predestination.
here is a counterpane of it in my text. I will not say this is Gods whole
decree, I dare say no secret decree contradicts it. We need not climb up into
heaven then to see whether God smile or frown, nor wrest open his Cabinet to
see what secrets are there. Things revealed belong to us; if our names be
written here, then infallibly are they there. If we find them not here,
certainly they are not there. I say then, leave disputing about election, and
labor to make your calling and election sure. Begin at the bottom of the
ladder, and add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to
knowledge temperance, etc. Thus our Savior stifles such a controversy,
Master, shall many be saved? Strive to enter in at the strait gate. But what
shall this man do? Follow thou me. Let no man comfort himself with any
illusion, or affright himself with any fatal destiny. If ye live after, etc.
This is Gods Word, and by this we must be judged at the last day.

For the second Controversy, Whether Redemption be universal; I say to that
man Though Christ died for all men, as one side affirm, yet if thou live after
the flesh thou shall dye, notwithstanding the purchase of so precious a
redemption, sufficient in it self, though not effectual unto thee through thine
own perverseness; or if but for some few, as the other side affirm, if thou
mortify the deeds of the body, thou art one that shall surely live.

For the third, and fourth, The manner of receiving grace.
the manner of receiving grace. One side say, it does infallibly, and
necessarily work at such a time, and not before; the other, that through our
perverseness we may turn the grace of God into wantonness. Both agree in
this; that a man may be saved, grace must be received and improved. The Spirit
is the principal cause, but we must cooperate. We are not able of our selves
to think a good thought; our sufficiency is from him. Hence St. Paul, I live;
yet that he might not seem to usurp any of the honor, checks himself, yet not
I. So we say, We must mortify, yet not we, but the Spirit; not we as the
principal cause, but the Spirit; not the Spirit as the solitary cause, but we
by the Spirit; let us look to it that the work be done, and then we shall not
miscarry.

For the last, which is perseverance; one side says, we shall infalliblly
stand, Perseverance.
and as possible for Christ to fall out of heaven, as a Saint from Christ; the
other side, that God will not forsake us, unless we forsake him; and gives us
grace sufficient that we may not fall; but does not so infallibly hold us up,
but we may fall. Both sides affirm perseverance to be necessary unto life, and
the conscionable use of means to perseverance. Take heed then that there be not
in any of you at any time an evil heart of unbelief to depart from the living
God; and that this may never befall thee, put on the whole armor of God, that
thou may stand in the evil day. Thus the Prophet, Ezekiel. 18. justifies God in
his proceedings, and makes the people wary. So the Apostle writing here to
Saints; and if any of you whom in charity I judge to be converted would hear
any thing from me concerning perseverance, I will answer you in the words of my
text; If ye live after, etc. Thus if a man in a modest humility, receive the
known truth in the love of it, and so love it as to practice it, his end shall
certainly be blessed.

And now behold, Deuteronomy. 30.15 The Conclusion.
this day I have set before you life and death, good and evil, blessing and
cursing. There are but two estates in this life, and two after, proportionably.
Some here walk after the flesh, but they shall dye; the delight is present, but
momentany; the pain is future, but eternal; some here by the Spirit mortify the
deeds of the body, and they shall live hereaftes. The task here is sharp, and
present, but momentany; the reward future, but glorious and eternal. Were it
not for that which follows, Ye shall dye, it were a brave thing to live after
the flesh; were it not for that which follows, Ye shall live, nothing more
tedious then to mortify the deeds of the body. Wisdom now will soon deride the
controversy, and pitch upon her choice and inheritance so glorious so durable,
though it be future; and the entrance so difficult is to be preferred to a life
of sin, though it had in it never so much pleasure or profit, being
momentany, and seconded with eternal woe. It Is the fools voice, (...) Give me to
day, take to morrow to thy self. But if notwithstanding what has been said, he
shall still walk in the ways of his own heart, all the curses in Gods book
shall fall on him. God will blot out his name from under heaven, and in heaven
out of the book of life, so that in no place he shall be found but in hell. But
every man here seems to choose life, in that he comes to hear that Gospel,
which is the Word of life. Oh they make it not the savor of death to death.
Labor then by the Spirit to mortify the deeds of the body so shall you live
many Halcion days here upon earth, and when you dye, the Angels shall carry
your souls into Paradise, while your bodies repose themselves in their graves,
as a bed of down, till the Lord of Glory shall return to judge both quick and
dead, where the body being raised and reunited to the soul, both soul and body
shall live in the perpetual vision and fruition of God. To which glory he for
his mercy bring us, who has so dearly bought us, even Jesus Christ, the Author
and finisher of our faith: To whom with the Father, and the blessed Spirit be
ascribed all, honor, glory, praise, thanksgiving and obedience from this time
forth and for evermore.

FINIS.

