Horrible News from LANCASHIRE, Declared in a Letter sent from Lancaster by
one Mr. Benjamin Williamson to Mr. Adam Andrews Merchant and Inhabitant in the
Borough of Southwarke.

Wherein is related what Tumultuous Vprores the Papists in those parts have
lately made to the terror of the Inhabitants of the said County.

Also a true Relation how the Protestants rose in Arms and forced them to fly.

Likewise a large Manifestation of the great care of the Sheriff of Lancaster
to disarme the Papists, and to prevent such Vprores and Tumults.

Together with an Order sent from the House of Commons to the High Sheriff of
Lancaster, touching the suppressing of the abovesaid Tumults.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.

LONDON, Printed for J. Horton, 1642. June 3.

Horrible News from Lancashire.
THe Troubles and distractions of this Kingdom are great and manifold are the
plots and designs, that the Papists have in agitation both against the King
and Parliament, private intentions, and public actions, private designs, and
cunning Stratagems have been long hatching, and now they see such distractions
and disturbances betwixt the King and Parliament, they Presume to put that in
action, which has so long been concealed.

A large and apparent testimony of this, late happened in Lancashire in
Lancashire, on the 25. day of May within 7. Miles of Lancaster, upon a great
Plain, there assembled a great number of Papists, to the vallew of 3. hundred,
with Swords by their sides, waiting as it semes for some more Company, what
their counsels or determination, were is not yet known.

Only this I am informed, that they affrighted the neighboring Inhabitants so
that they gathered together, and put themselves into a Posture of defense, in
the best manner that they could, withal sending with their best speed to the
high Sheriff of the said County to give him information of what they had cause
to fear, but the high Sheriff being rode to Lancaster to cause the Order of
the houses of Parliament concerning the suppressing such meetings, to be
published, by which means they were frustrate of their hopes, nevertheless
they took courage, and with unite consent marched out upon them, and by the
advice of some Gentlemen that were there, sent Massages unto them to demand the
cause of that assembly, it being contrary to the Command of the high Court of
Parliament, withal desiring them to depart by fair means, (withal giving
them this to boo^e, that if they would not by fair means they would (knowing
it to be for the preservation of his Majesty, and the good of the Kingdom, to
quell such uprores) force their departure, or make their Place of meeting a
terrene Golgotha, and bury them and their designs together, which blunt
embassage affrighted so the Papists, that they begun apace to take their
Iourneys each to his habitation, muttering forth words full of despite and
anger, as that the time should come ere long that they should repent those
words, speaking as if they had some plot in agitaton.

This makes the Protestants to keep a wary Watch and look precisely on the
Catholics, the high Sheriff using all speedy means for to disarme them and
take away their force, hoping by that means to hinder any public outrages,
withal promising to studdy and conform themselves to the Commands of the high
Court of Parliament, they being the chief preservers of the King and Kingdoms
peace, whose Counsels God direct for the best, so that true Religion may be
settled, Unity increased, Papistry and Heresy banished the confines of the
Church, and Gods name praised and glorified both in Church and Common Wealth,
so shall the Kings Honor increase, so shall the Parliaments Council prosper,
and the Subjects fear be translated into joy, so shall those distractions
cease, and unity triumph in his majesty's Dominions,

Die Sabbathi 28. May, 1642.
WHereas it appears, that the King, seduced by wicked Council, intends to
make War against the Parliament, and under the color of a guard to secure
his Royal Person, does command troops of Horse and Foot to assemble at York;
All which is against the Laws of the Kingdom, tending to the dissolution of
the Parliament, and destruction of his People. It is therefore Ordered by the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that the Sheriffs of the County of
Lancaster, and all other Sheriffs of the Kingdom of England and Dominion of
Wales, shall by the power of that County, and of their several Counties,
respectively, suppress the raising or coming together of any Soldiers Horse
or Foot, by any Warrant, Commission or Order from his Majesty without the
consent of his Parliament, and that all Persous whatsoever do forbear to
execute any such Commission, or warrant for levying Soldiers, or gathering
them together without consent of the Parliament; And those who shall execute,
or obey any such Commission, or warrant, are hereby declared to be disturbers
of the peace of the Kingdom. And that his Majesty's loving Subjects may the
better understand what the Law, and their own duty is in this behalf, the
said Sheriff of Lancashire, and other Sheriffs of the other Co^nties of this
Kingdom respectively, shall cause this present Order, forthwith to be
published in the several Market Towns within their said Counties.


Sabbathi, 28. Maii. 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that this shall be forthwith Printed and
published.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

