Cor concussum and Contritum: OR, A PRESENT FOR JEHOVA; Showing The Nature,
Excellency, Acts,
of a broken Heart; And also the Marks to know, and Means to procure a Broken
and Contrite Heart. By George Willington, Preacher of God's Word, Formerly at
Bristoll, now of St. Georges in the County of Summerset.

PSALM. 34.18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that are of a Broken Heart: And
saves such as are of a Contrite Spirit.

The Spirit of God delights to dwell in the Heart of the Humble Man. Erasm.
Humilitas animi Sublimitas Christiani. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Milbourn for
Thomas Wall Bookseller, by the Tolzey in Bristoll, 1670.

To my Endeared Kinsman WALDIVE WILLINGTON, of Hurly-Hall at Kingsbury, in the
County of Warwick Esquire;
SIR,
DEdications are in Our Times so frequent, that it is now accounted either
Presumption, or Singurity to appear in Print without it: Your Name is here
prefixed, not only that Custom necessitates me thereto, but because an
Opportunity is given me to tell the Present, and Future Ages, how much I Love
and Honor your Piety and Prudence; And how much I am, my self your Debtor for
the Constancy of your Favor, and the many respectful Acknowledgements I have
received from you, in an Age, when Love waxes cold, even to near Relations,
who are extremely undervalued, or held Contemptible, if Inferior to them.

The design of this present Work is to signify my Love and Gratitude by the
best return which I can make; Which is by an Address of the ensuing Discourse
to your Consideration. Had you all the Accomplishments this Life is capable of,
yet whilst in the World, you cannot be past the need of helps, whatever they
may be. This I commit to your judgment, promising it a Covering large enough
for the Deficiency of the Author; And my self a good Acceptance from him, who
was pleased to encourage it in the Pulpit, with a Christian Respect and
Attention. Sir, This Sermon is your s by many Engagements, and my Prayers, at
the Throne of Grace, cease not, that these Directions may be Yours in the
practical and real Enjoyments of them; That the Nature, Marks, and Acts, of a
Broken and Contrite Heart, may be exemplified in the Conversations of you and
yours; And that the many public Exhibitions of Grace and Virtue wherewith you
have been eminently Honored, may by the Finger of Gods Spirit be Engraven on
the fleshly Tables of your Hearts: That the Lord have made you in some measure
happy herein, I am extremely confirmed, from the Observation of your Zeal for
God, his Church, and the Ministers of his Word; and your Humble, Temperate, and
Friendly Deportment toward all: to which I might add, The Blessings enjoyed by
your Religious and Beloved Consort, in the Comforts of a Well-governed Family.
And now dearest Sir, Because Idespair of opportunity suitable to mine own
Wishes, and your Merit, I have made hold to close with this slender Advantage,
of testifying to the World my deep sense I have of your personal Worth, which
with your other Obligations, has merited abundantly more from me to your
praise, than either your Wisdom or Modesty will acknowledge; or for the
nearness of my Relation to you, may be held convenient for me to enlarge. That
which was Preached with you formerly, and now published for the use of all, may
be especially useful to you and yours: And that the Father of Mercies will
return all your Kindness with a Rich recompense of Reward both of Grace here,
and Glory hereafter, in the World to come, is the unfeigned desire of,

Sir, Your most Affectionate Kinsman, and Servant in the Gospel, Geo.
Willington.
From may Study, the 12th, of Sept. 1670.
A PRESENT FOR JEHOVAH.
PSALM. 51.17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit; a Broken and Contrite
Heart, O God, thou will not despise.


SUch is the necessity of true and unfeigned Repentance, Introduction
that without it even the most Righteous man upon the face of the Earth, cannot
be Saved in the Day of the Lord. John the Baptist began his preaching with
Repentance; Saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Mat. 3.2.
Our Savior Christ followed on, Mat. 4.17. from that time Jesus began to preach
and to say, Repent, For the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. The Apostles followed
his Example, Acts 2.38. To those who were pricked in their hearts is Repentance
preached; Repent, and be baptized every one of you, for the Remission of sins:
And ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost. But Luke 13.5. our Savior
tell those of Galilee, Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

Obj. But these were notable Sinners.

Ans. I, but the Church of Ephesus, Revel. 2.5. which had many good things in
her, is commanded to remember from whence she had fallen, and to repent. So the
Church of Sardis, Revel. 3.3. Remember how thou have received, and heard; and
hold fast, and repent.

Thus you see the necessity of Repentance to all, notwithstanding which, How
many be there in our Church seeming-Christians, who contenting themselves with
the Knowledge of the bare Name of Repentance, never seek after the Knowledge of
the Nature thereof? How many who know the Nature, never practice any part
thereof? Are not our fiduciaries such as those of St. Bernard, who tells of
many ways whereby men Irreligous were wont to excuse their Sins? Aut non feci
quod dicis, aut feci quod dic is, sed benefeci; aut si male, non multum male;
aut si multum male, non mala intention, ut sentis. Either I have not done that
which thou say, or, if I have done it, I did well: But if 'twere evil, 'twas
no great hurt, I pray God I may never do worse; but if it was great hurt, I had
no intent to do it, as thou think. Some stoutly deny their sins, and with a
Whorish Forehead put God (as it were) to his Proof for their sins. They, Mal.
1.6. Wherein have we despised thy Name? Wherein have we polluted thee? Some
with Jonah, Jonah 4.9.
disobediently stick not to tell God to his Face, That He did well to be angry
unto the Death. Some with Abemilech King of Gerar, who when he took the Wife of
Abraham, Genesis 20.5.
said, He did it with an upright Heart.

Some put it off upon others, as Adam upon Eve, Genesis 3.12, 13. 1 Samuel 15.21
Eve upon the Serpent; Saul upon the People.

But thus did not our princely Prophet, he took the Shame to himself, Judged
himself, Judged himself, Condemned himself; came with an Halter about his 1
Kings 20. v. 31, 32.
Neck, as a Condemned Malefactor with his Pecavi, and Misereri mei Deus:
Informa pauperis, Have mercy upon me O God.

This Psalm is a perfect Copy, and exact pattern of true and sound Repentance,
2 Samuel 12.13.
Penned by our Royal Prophet, The title of the Psalm.
when Nathan the Prophet came unto him after he had gone in to Bathsheba, and
had defiled his body in Uriah's Bed, and imbrewed his hand in Uriah's blood.

From the first Verse to the 18, he prays for himself: From the 18. verse to
the end of the Psalm, he prayed for the Church.

In praying for himself, he desired to be washed, and cleansed, and purged.
Verse. 2. Wash me thoroughly from my Wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.
Verse. 7. Purge me with Hysope, and I shall be clean; Wash me, and I shall be
whiter than Snow. q. d. Says Junius; Wash me more, purge me more, cleanse me
more in the Merits of 1 John 1.7. Heb. 9.14.
Christ's blood, from the guilt, and from the filth of all my Transgressions:
Then will I teach Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be Converted unto
thee. verse. 13.9. q.d. O God, if thou will show mercy to my poor Soul, I that
have had my verse 12.
Bones broken, shall be an Instrument 2 Cor. 1.4.
to bind up others; and will tell thy People that fear thy Name, Mal. 3.16.
What Psalm. 66.16.
great things thou have done for my poor Soul.

Further, it will be an occasion of God's glory, when he should come to the
Lord, and offer the Sacrifices of Praise, not Tipical but Real, not Legal but
Evangelical Sacrifices: Cor concussum and Contritum; A Broken and Contrite
Heart. The Sacrifices of God are a Broken Spirit; a Broken and Contrite Heart,
O God, thou will not despise.

The Text contains two general Propositions.

1. Affirmative, The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit.

2. Negative, A broken and contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise.

In the double Proposition, you have,

1. The Subject, Cor concussum and contritum, A broken and contrite Heart.

2. The Predicate, Sacrificia Dei: The Sacrifices of God.

In further handling of these words, I shall propose and follow this my wonted
Method.

To speak to you, 1. By way of Explication. 2. By way of Confirmation. 3. By
way of Application.


1. By way of Explication; Heart and Spirit; by the former is not meant that
fleshly part which is in our breasts, which we commonly call so, though
sometimes the word is so taken in Scripture, 2 Kings 2.24. but by both is here
meant, that which the Scripture sometimes terms Col. 3.16.
the Inner-man; sometimes the Hidden man 1 Pet. 3 4.
of the Heart, and that which we ordinarily call the Soul, with all it is Powers
and Faculties. By Spirits here, is meant the Seat of sorrow; the Spirit Ephesians.
4.23
of the mind.

Doct. If any man will offer acceptable Sacrifice to God, let him prepare the
Spirit of his mind.

God himself is a Spirit, and they that Worship him, must worship him in Spirit
and in Truth. John 4.24. Psalm. 51. v. 6.
He loves Truth in the inward affections. Corpora fecit propter Spiritus;
Ideoque etiam spiritualia, non corporea querit; B. Cooper Super. loc.
says a Learned Prelate. He meant the bodies for the Spirits, and therefore
seeks he not bodily but Spiritual Worship. Some there are, Qui sua dant, non
Seipsos: who offer to him not themselves, Seipsos.
but that which is theirs; but it is a blind folly to think thou can please
him, when thou will not give the service of thy Heart and Spirit unto him,
Prove. 23. verse. 26. Mi sili, da mihi Cor tuum.

But lest we should think that every Spirit is acceptable, What a broken Heart
is.
he adds this Epethet, Broken and Contrite.

A broken heart is such a heart that is humbled through a sight and sense of
sin; and wounded and pricked with the fear of God's anger, grieving for
offending so good and so gracious a God: 1. Bathing his eyes in Tears, and
melting his Soul into sorrow, that ever he has offended so good a God that made
him, displeased so sweet a Savior that redeemed him, grieved so Holy a Spirit
as has striven with him, transgressed so Righteous a Law as was given to him,
broken so gracious a Covenant as was made with him; begging Mercy and Pardon at
the Throne of the Almighty's Grace, with as much earnestness and importunity,
as the Hunger-bitten Beggar does a Morsel of bread, or the Malefactor a Psalm
of Mercy.

This is that poor Spirit St. Matthew speaks Mat. 5.3.
of; this is that Spirit that trembles at God's word, which the Prophet Isaiah
speaks Isa. 66.2.
of; this is that Heart-rent the Prophet Jonah speaks Jona. 2.12.13.
of. By the Prophet Isa. 42.3
and the Evangelist, Mat. 12.20.
it is compared to a bruised Reed; it is also in Scripture called a pricking Acts
2.37.
of the heart; a melting Nah 2.10 Psalm 119.28.
of the heart, and such like.

All which import the inward, unfeigned, hearty sorrow, which is in a penitent
Soul for offending a good and a gracious God.

And he puts the word in the Plural Number, Sacrificia, the Sacrifices; to
show, that a Heart bruised and broken, humbled and pricked, Note.
in the sight and sense of sin, is Instar Omnium, instead of all; all Sacrifice
is nothing without it, all sum'd up in it. Let men offer what Sacrifices they
will, never so many, never so costly, never so excellent; yet if this be
wanting, it is but in vain, God esteems not of it: One broken Heart is more
worth than a thousand Sacrifices of great price. A man may offer many
Sacrifices, Pray much, Preach much, Hear much, receive the Sacrament often, and
give all his goods to feed the Poor; yet if there be not this broken Heart, and
contrite Spirit, all is in vain, and to no Psalm. 1. verse. 11.12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17.
purpose: We cannot please God in any thing we do without a broken and contrite
heart.

The Sacrifices of God. Chap. 66.24.
The adding God's Name to any think in Scripture, gives it an Emminency, a
Luster, a Glory, above all other things. As, there is mention made of the Waters
Psalm. 65.9.
of God; the Mountain Exodus 3.1
of God; the Trees Psalm 104 16.
of God, etc. And in the New Testament, the Peace Phil. 4.7
of God, etc. And here in the Text, The Sacrifices of God; most rare and
excellent Sacrifices, such as God will not despise. A broken and a contrite
Heart, O God, thou will not despise. The Phrase is low, yet has a (...) in it,
as 1 These. 5.20. Despise not Prephesyings, and Heb. 12.5. Despise not the
Chastening of the Lord: And so imports the choycest way of acceptance. A
broken and contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise: thou do love and
like, and art well pleased with a broken Heart.

This broken and contrite Heart is Sacrifice TO GOD; most rare and excellent
Sacrifice; as the Mountains of God are high Mountains: and the Cedars of the
Lord are tall Cedars: So a broken Heart, and a contrite Spirit, being the
Sacrifices of God, are most rare, excellent, and choice Sacrifices.

From the Words thus considered, this is the point of Instruction.

A broken and a contrite Heart is most pleasing, and acceptable.

First, God will graciously look upon such a Heart.

Jehovah by the Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 66.2. Thus says the Lord, Heaven is
my Throne, and the Earth my Footstool: Where is the House that ye build unto
me? And where is the place of my rest? For all those things has my hand made,
and all those things have been, says the Lord: But to this man will I look,
even to him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and that trembles at my
Words. See, how the Lord lifts up himself unto the highest Heavens; Heaven is
my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool. Oh! How shall I come and Appear
before so great a God; a God of such terrible Majesty, and mighty Powers! Why!
Be not afraid poor Soul, the Lord will cast a look of Love upon thee, not only
a look of Pity, but also a look of Complacency. To him will I look says God,
even to him that is poor: 1. Vile and base in his own eyes; and 2d. Of a
contrite Spirit, and that trembles at my Word. q. d. I have more regard to this
poor Trembler at my Word, than I have to the great Temple that was built for my
Worship. Genesis 4.4. God had respect to Abel, and to his Offering. The Sacrifices
of God are a broken Spirit; a broken and contrite Heart, O God, thou will not
despise. That Is the first reason of God's acceptance of a broken Heart, because
God will graciously look upon such a heart.

2. in a broken and contrite Heart, that he not only looks on him, but also
draws nigh unto him. To this purpose the Psalmist very sweetly, Psalm. 34.16,
17. Psalm 34.17, 18.
The Righteous cry, and the Lord hears them; and delivers them out of their
Troubles: The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite Heart: and will
save such as are of an humble Spirit. It Is a great privilege that we can draw
nigh to God, that God does hold out the golden Scepter of his Grace, and allow
us to come and touch the top of it: We might have been in Hell long ago,
roaring under an endless Damnation, far enough from God, had not he spared us,
Numb. 16. verse. 9. said Moses there to Korah and his accomplices: Seems it a
small thing unto you, that the God of Israel had separated you from the
Congregation of Israel, to take you near to himself, to do the Service of the
Tabernacle? Seems this a small thing unto you? Oh! it is a great privilege
that we can draw nigh unto God. It is good for me to draw near to God, says
the Psalmist, with a Probatum est, Psalm. 73. ult. Now then if this be so great
a privilege for you to draw nigh to God, Oh! What a transcendent, unspeakable
privilege is it for God to draw nigh to you! to delight in your Persons! to
delight in your Prayers, to bottle your tears, and to Register your groans! And
this he does to broken and contrite Hearts; the Lord is nigh unto all them that
are of a contrite heart; Nigh unto them in all that they call upon him for.

3. A broken and contrite Heart is pleasing and acceptable to God, for he will
come and dwell in that Soul: Thus says the Holy and Lofty One that inhabites
Eternity, whose Name is Holy: I dwell in the High and Holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble,
and to revive the Spirit of the contrite Ones. God has two chief places of
residence, viz. The highest Heaven, and the lowest Heart; the one he fills with
his glorious, the other with his gracious Presence. He dwells in the High and
Holy place; the Cherubins worship him (though with covering their blushing
Faces) and Thousand thousands Dan. 7.10.
of Angels minister unto him, yet he dwells and holds his Residence in a broken
and contrite Heart; he will not despise, yea, he delights to dwell there.

A broken and contrite Heart is pleasing,and acceptable to God; for he heals a
broken Heart. To this purpose sweetly speaks Jehovah by his Evangelical
Prophet, Isa. 57.15. For thus says the High and Lofty One that Inhabiteth
Eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the High and Holy place, with Note
this.
him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the
humble, and to revive the Heart of the contrite Ones. Verse. 18. I have seen his
Ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also, and restore Comfort unto him,
and to his Mat. 5.4.
Mourners. He heals the broken in Heart, and binds up their Heb. Griefs. Isa.
53.5. 1 Pet. 2 24.
Wounds, Psalm. 147.3. Indeed, sometimes the Lord hides his Face, and with-draws
Isa. 54. verse. 7.8.
the Light of his Countenance; then David cries, Psalm. 6.3.2,
Heal me O Lord, for my Bones are vexed: My Soul is also sore troubled, but
thou O Lord, how long? Then Job cries, The terrors of God Job 6 4.
set themselves in Battle array against me, the Poison whereof drinks up my
Spirits. But then the Lord comes in in due season, and he heals the broken in
Heart, and gives Medicine to heal their Sickness, and binds up their Wounds.
O happy those Sighs, those Sobs, which sin has made in thy Soul, when Christ
himself shall come to bind them up!

Thus you see that of all services and sacrifices presented to God, a broken
and contrite Heart is most pleasing and acceptable.

The Reasons are chiefly two:

First,Because it is a Spiritual sacrifice, therefore an Acceptable Sacrifice.
It is not the Sacrifice of a dead Carcass; it is a living Sacrifice, a broken
Heart, and a contrite Spirit. The heart is the best of Man, and a broken Heart
is the best of Hearts. I beseech you Brethren, by the Mercies of God, (says
the Apostle) That ye present your Bodies A LIVING Sacrifice, Holy, acceptable
unto God, which is your reasonable service, Romans 12.1. where the Apostle (very
pathetically) uses an Obsecration, an Obtestation, a Compellation, an
Abjurgation, and all, to press this duty home upon their Conversations.

The duty is to present their bodies a [living] Sacrifice, living without the
Soul it cannot be, For the body without the Spirit is dead, John 6.69.
James 2.26. Bodily exercise profits little (if it be only bodily) 1 Timothy 4.8.
It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing.

To offer this Spiritual Sacrifice, the Apostle abjures them by the mercies of
God; I beseech you Brethren by the mercies of God. The Apostle might have said,
there is a consuming fire, there are everlasting burnings: There Is a Hell, an
endless Damnation, a place of the Damned, and that must be your Eternal estate
and condition, the portion of your Cup; if you present not your bodies a living
Sacrifices to God. But he does adjure them, and conjure them by the mercies of
God, to perform it: What if Christ were here, and said to thee; Oh! Sinner,
come lay thy Heart in my lap, and I will bind up the Wounds of thy Soul; I will
welcome thee, and I will save thee. Would not this ravish our hearts, to hear a
tender Savior so lovingly inviting us, so graciously promising us? There Is
nothing can break a Soul more in an Evangelical way, than the sight 2 Cor.
7.10. Zach. 12 10.
and sense of God's mercy in Jesus Christ. As Naturallists observe, That the
warm Blood of a Goat, does soften an Adamant-Stone; so does the serious
consideration of the warm Blood of Jesus Christ, our scape-goate, soften an
Adamant-heart. But more of this amongst the means and directions Direction the
sixth.
for getting a broken Heart.

Secondly,Of all Services and Sacrifices presented to God, a broken and
contrite Heart is most pleasing and acceptable, because it is a Believing
Sacrifice. Faith and Repentance (like Hypocrates Twins) are born and bred
together in the sacred Womb of a sanctified Soul, Zach. 12.10. It was promised
concerning Evangelical Converts; I will pour upon the House of David, and up
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of supplication; and they
shall look on me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one
mourns for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one is in
bitterness for his firstborn, Isa. 42.1. Christ is called, Him in whom the
Father delights. God proclaimed him from Heaven, to be his only beloved Son in
whom he is well pleased: Mat. 3. ult. Mat. 17.5.
not only pleased [with] him, but also pleased [in] him, with all
brokenhearted Sinners; they must needs then be the delight of the Lord also.
Thus I have done with Confirmation, and [come in the last place] to Application.

Let us labor to get,and keep; to attain, and maintain such a heart all our
days.

And here (for Methods sake, and your better Understanding) I shall endeavor
to show you these three things:

1. The particular Acts of a broken and contrite Heart.

2. The most infallible marks and signs of a broken and contrite Heart.

3. The most probable means both to attain, and maintain such a heart all your
days; That your end may be blessed.

1. The Acts of a broken and contrite Heart.
There are eight acts of a broken and contrite Heart.

First, A powerful conviction of the heart and conscience of our sinful estate,
and miserable condition, caused by the preaching of the Word outwardly, and by
the working of the Spirit inwardly, when God sets our sins in order before us,
and makes us know our Abominations, Psalm. 50.21. How many are mine Iniquities,
and my sins? make me to know mine Iniquity, and my sins, Job 13.23.

Secondly,an in ward sorrow of the heart in the sight, and sense of sin; when
the eye does affect the heart, Lam. 3.51. when upon the Discoveries of sin, the
heart is pricked with compunction, and godly contrition, Acts 2.37. There is
not the least sin we have committed, but will fetch a tear from our eyes, and a
sigh from our hearts, if we weigh and consider it as we ought. It grieves the
Holy Spirit of God, it procured the Death of Christ: Let us therefore look upon
him whom we have pierced, [by our sins] and weep over him, Zech. 12.10.

Thirdly, Humiliation of the inward man,in the sight and sense of sin. O Lord,
I am but dust and Genesis 18 27
ashes, said Father Abraham. I am less Genesis 32.10.
than the least of all thy Mercies, said the Patriarch Jacob. I am not worthy
to be called thy Son, said Luke 15.19.
the Prodigal. I am not worthy John 1.27
to stoop down, and unloose his shoes Latchet, said John the Baptist
concerning our blessed Savior. Blessed are the Poor in spirit: For theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.3. Oh! How vile and base does a brokenhearted
sinner Job 40.4. and 42.6. Prove. 30 2. Luke 1.48.
seem in his own eyes! To such will God be gracious: He gives grace to the
humble, 1 Pet. 5.5.

Fourthly,An Holy anger and Indignation both against our sins, and against our
selves for our sins. A pregnant place to this purpose is that in Ezekiel. 6.9.
They that escaped of you, shall remember me among the Nations, whither they
shall be carried Captive, because I am broken with their Whorish heart, which
has departed from me, and with their eyes which go a Whoring after their
Idols, and they shall Be displeased with themselves.
loath themselves for the Evils which they have committed in all their
Abominations. And the Apostle speaks of godly sorrow, and of the qualities of
it; amongst the rest, he mentions Indignation against sin, Indignations
2 Cor. 7.11. What Indignations? Such as was in Ephraim bemoaning himself, and
lamenting his sin; who smote upon his Thigh, scil. in token of Indignation, and
an Holy Anger against his sin, and himself for his sin, Jer. 31.18, 19.

Fifthly, Ezra. 9.6. where that Holy man in his Confession thus speaks; O my
God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee my God. For our
Iniquities are increased over our heads,and our Trespasses are grown up to the
very Heavens. Note.
Another pregnant Scripture to this purpose, is Jer. 31. verse. 19. I have heard
Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; surely Mark the Phrase.
after I was turned, I repented; and after I was instructed, I smote upon my
Thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the Reproach of
my Youth. Ezekiel. 16.61. Then shall thou remember thy ways, and be ashamed.

Sixthly,An inward Loathing and Detestation of sin, both in our selves and
others.

We read of Amnon, that after he had Ravished his Sister Tamar, the hatred with
which he hated her, was more than the Love wherewith he loved her before, 2 Samuel 13.15. So does the broken hearted-sinner hate sin, more than ever he loved
it in times past; He hates it with an exceeding bitter hatred. I hate, and
abhor Lying, Psalm. 119.163. I hate every false way, verse. 104. Ye that love
the Lord, see that ye hate the thing which is Evil, Psalm. 97.10. Abhor that
which is Evil, etc. Romans 12.9.

Seventhly,A most strict and firm resolution against all manner of sin for time
to come. A pregnant Text, Ezra. 10. verse. 2.3. when the people had repented for
taking strange Wives, they resolved, saying, Let us make a Covenant with our
God, to put away all the Wives, and such as are born of them. So Hos. 14.8.
Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols? What was the saying
of Elihu in Job, Is the Language of every man and woman who has a broken and
contrite Heart. Job 34.32. That which I see not, teach thou me: If I have done
Iniquity, I will do no more. Ephesians. John 8.11.
4.28. Let him that stole, steal no more.

Finally,This broken and contrite Heart consists in an unfeigned weeping of the
tears of the eyes, caused by the sorrow of the heart for sin. All the Night
wash I my Bed, and water my Couch with my tears, Psalm. 6.6. Ezekiel. 7.16. It Is
said of the Remnant whom God will save, They shall mourn like the Doves of the
Valleys, every one for his Iniquity. And Peter (when he remembered the words of
Christ, and his own denial) went out and wept bitterly, Mat. 26. ult.

But how shall I know that I have this broken and contrite Heart?

Answ. (...): Tentate probate:Examine, prove, the Apostles Counsel, 2 Cor.
13.5. For if a man think himself to be something when he is nothing, he
deceives himself. (As the Church of Loadicea Revel. 3.17.
who said she was Rich, and increased with Goods, and had need of nothing: When
she was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.) But let every
one prove his own works, etc. Gal. 6. verse. 3.4.

I therefore come (in the next place) to lay down the most infallible Marks and
Signs of a broken and contrite Heart; by the sight of which, you may know
whether you have such hearts or no. Oh that there were in us such Hearts!

A broken and contrite Heart does repress censoriousness. Marks of a broken
Heart.
A truly broken and contrite Heart is most sensible of it is own sin, knows most
evil by it self, judges it is own sin greatest, and it is own state saddest:
Has neither list nor leisure to censure others. The Apostle's Caution and
Counsel, Romans 14.13. runs thus: Let us not judge one another, but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling Block, or AN OCC ASION to fall in his
Brothers way. What an excellent instance have we in Joseph, who is called a
Just man for his Labor: He had looked upon Mary formerly as a Godly gracious
Woman; and she being now with Child, he knew not what to think of it; but
having a purpose to leave her (being formerly contracted to her) that he might
not bring Reproach upon himself, and to put her away privately, that the World
might not take notice of any such thing, that so he might not bring Reproach
upon her, Mat. 1.19. Joseph her Husband being a just man, and not willing to
make her a public Example, was minded to put her away privily. That was his
Care, his Honesty, his Righteousness. But where shall we find the like
Righteousness, or Tenderness now a days, to conceal the Failings, and to save
the Credit of our Brethren! We are glad if we have any thing to paradigmatize
them for, and say, as they did of Jeremy, the Lord's Prophet, Jer. 20.10. Psalm.
50. verse. 20.21.
Report, and we will report it That Godly Emperor Constantine, was quite of
another mind (as I find him (z) Omnis nestra sides pendet ab Historia. Owens
Epigrams. lib. 12. chapter 2.
upon Record) who was wont to say; If he should find a Christian-Bishop, or
Pastor, overtaken in any Infamous act, He would pull off his Purple Robe to
throw upon him to cover him, rather then that any should come by his means to
hear of it, to the scandal of Religion. I am sure this is most like to the
Example of Christ, who casts his Purple Robe upon us, that our sins should not
be taken notice of.

2. A broken is a Praying heart. We read, Luke 15. concerning the Verse. 17.
Prodigal Son, that when once he had an humbled Heart, and acontrite Spirit, he
fell to Prayer presently, Verse. 21. The Son said unto him, Father, I have
sinned against Heaven, and Psalm. 71.4
in thy sight; and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. And Christ, Heb.
5.7. In the days of his Flesh offered up Prayers and Supplications, with
strong cries and tears. And Romans 8.26. We read of sighs and groans, that cannot
be uttered or expressed. Now, Where are those Prayers? Where are those Cries?
Where are those Tears? Where are those Sighs? Where are those Groans? Where are
those Jer. 31.18.
Moans? Thou have lived a great while in the World, but oh! When have thou wept
with Jer. 9.1. Lam. 1.16.
Jeremy, for the sins of the times, and thine own Transgressions? When have
thou poured out thy Soul to the Lord? I fear thou art so far from this, that
thy heart is hardened; and if so, the Lord will one day break thy heart with
the fury of his wrath, and hot displeasure, that burns to the lowest Hell.

3. A broken Heart is an humble low heart; Oh very low, it can cast it self in
the Dust at the feet of Christ, and think any thing on this side Hell to be
rich Mercy. He is Mat 5.3
poor, and Mat. 5 7
meek in Spirit. You know how Abraham Genesis 18.27.
treated with God, and pleased him, when he addressed himself to him, with an
Acknowledgment of his Vileness: Behold, Now I have taken upon me to speak to
the great God, who am but Dust and Ashes; You know Christ lay Mat. 26.39. Mark
14.35
grovelling on the ground all Night. I abhor Job 42.6.
my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes, said Job. If then thou have a broken
Heart, thou have a low heart; thou art little and low in thine own eyes; vile
and base in thine own sight. Psalm. 34.6. This poor man cries, and the Lord
hears him. Give this poor man something before he go away; he is such a low
Spirit, that he is one ready to sink to Hell, were it not for the Mercies of
God, the Merits of Jesus Christ, and the sweet Promises of the Gospel. Yea,
remember the Woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. verse. 23. etc.
she was called Dog, and yet would take no repulse, but cried; saying, Lord, I
do beg one drop of Mercy, one crumb of Comfort: One crumb of the bread of
Life, one drop of the water of Life, to satisfy a poor languishing Soul, sweet
Jesu, for thy Mercies sake; some drops of the blood of Christ to soften my hard
heart, and to break it thoroughly.

broken and contrite Heart,that is so acceptable to God, thou do mourn.

1. For thine own Sin. 2. For the Sins of others.
1. For thine own Sins, David did so in this Psalm; he did Penance for his Sin
in a The Robe of Christ's Righteousness. Verse 7. Phil. 3.8.9. Revel. 19. Verse.
8. and 14.
white-Sheet; he mourned daily for his own Sin; scil. For the Root of the
matter within, and for the Fruit of the matter without; for his Original
Corruption, for his actual Transgression; for the Sin of his Nature, and the
Sins of his Life. He opens his Soul to the Lord, and leaves this Psalm to the
Church upon Record; wherein he confesses and mourns for his Sins, Mat. 26. ult.

2. For the Sins of others; Rivers of Tears run down mine eyes, (said
brokenhearted David) because men keep not thy Law, Psalm. 119.136. Many walk
(says the Apostle) of whom I told you often, and now tell you even weeping,
that they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18. And Ezekiel. 9.4. we
read of them that sigh, and mourn, and cry, for the Iniquities and Abominations
that were committed in the Land.

5. A broken Heart is a loving heart; if thou have a broken and contrite Heart,
thou love any thing of Christ's, any thing that bears his Image, and
Superscription. When thou come to that glorious Gospel-Ordinance of the
Lord's Supper so as to discern 1 Cor. 11.29.
the Lord's Body; thou meditatest, Oh, there is the Body and Blood of my Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ! Oh, here is the Son of God that made up the Breach
between God and my Soul! Oh, Jesus Christ, here is the Son of God that was
incarnate for me, And paid a price for my Redemption. The Penitant Woman, Luke
7.47. She loved much, because her great and grievous sins were forgiven.

I will sum up the Acts and Signs of a broken Heart in these eighth following
Particulars, as a famous Divine has contracted them.

1. Eight Signs contracted.
He that is truly broken, will be contented with nothing but Mercy from God, in
Jesus Christ. He has wounded, and he must heal, Hos. 6.1.

2. He judges sin the greatest evil, and the favor of God the greatest good.

3. He had rather hear of Mercy than of a Kingdom.

4. He has mean Conceits of himself: And thinks he is not worth the Earth he
treads on.

5. Toward others, he is not censorious, as being taken up at home; but is
full of Simpathy and Compassion to those that are under God's hand.

6. He counts them that walks in the Comforts of Gods Spirit, the happiest men
in the World.

7. He trembles at the Word of God, and honors the very Feet of these blessed
Instruments that brings Peace unto him.

8. He is more taken up with the inward Exercises of a broken Heart, than with
Formality, and yet careful to use all Sanctified means for it is attainment.

And this brings me to the third things premised, scil. to show the most
propable means to get, and keep, to attain, and maintain, such a heart all our
days.

1. Means to get a broken Heart.
To give diligent attendance to the Word of God, read and preached, 2 Reg. 22.
verse. 11. etc. Is not my Word a Hammer that breaks the Rock to pieces? Jer.
23.29. While Lydia was hearing Paul preach, Almighty God opened her heart, Acts
16.14. So that if we would have broken Hearts, we must wait upon the Preaching
of the Gospel, where the Holy Ghost usually falls upon the hearts of men.

2. Make a Catalogue of thy Sins; which thou may do either by Memory, or by
Book. By Memory thus; Go aside, set thy Soul before the Lord, as if thou were
presently to be judged of him; call to mind particularly whatsoever thou can
remember by thy self; consider thy Omissions of good, and thy Commissions of
evil, in Youth or riper Age, in Heart or Life, in things that concern God or
Man, or thine own Soul and Disposition, Thoughts and Affections, Words and
Actions. By Book, thus: Procure the Labor of some Reverend Divine, that has
briefly gathered the sins against each Commandment, and from thence gather out
so many sins as thou know by thy self, that thou have been guilty of; lay
those sins daily before thy Conscience, and consider how many ways thou have
made thy self guilty.

3. Consider then the justice of God, how he hates all Sin; which thou may
be assured of, if thou remember how he plagued our first Parents, the Old
World, Sodom and Gomorrah; How fearfully he neglected the Gentiles; Cast off
the Jews: yea, how he spared not his own Son Jesus Christ, when he became a
surety for other men's Sins.

4. Force upon thy self the remembrance of thy Memento novissima: Memento quid
erit in novissimo, Eccius. 7.26
latter end, and thy appearance before the Tribunal Seat of Christ, to receive
according to all thou have done in the flesh, Heb. 9.27. 2 Cor. 5.10.

5. Beg an humble heart, a broken and contrite Spirit at the Throne of Grace,
and sue out God's promise made to those who by Prayer issue out it is
persormance, Ezekiel. 36.26. compared with Verse. 31. and 37.

6. Remember the Passion of thy Savior, the the Poverty, Banishment, Ignominy,
Temptation, the Apprehending, Forsaking, Arraigning, Condemning, and cruel
Death which he suffered for thy sins. Look upon him whom thou have pierced,
etc. Zach. 10.10.

7. Lastly, Set sometimes a day apart for Fasting and Prayer. A day of Fasting
was heretofore called, a day of Afflicting or Humbling the Soul, Levit. 16.29.
both because it was the main duty of the day, and because the Lord usually did
bless his one Ordinance, so as he gave an humble Heart to those that sought it
of him.

To break the Stone in thy Heart, besides the aforementioned Directions,
observe this Spiritual Receipt; which will (under God) cure all thy Souls
Maladies.

A Sovereign Cordial against Infection; taken out of the Sacred Herbal of the
Holy Scripture.
DRink a good draught of Josiah's Humility next thy Heart; then take a Dose of
Nehemiah's Repentance, soaked or steeped in the Vessel of a Broken and Contrite
Heart, well seasoned with Truth and Sincerity at the bottom; then let all these
Boil together in a good quantity of David's Tears; and when thou have done
this, then spread a Plaster of God's Grace, and bind it fast to thy Soul, with
the Swaddling bands of Love and pious Consideration, and cast away all thy old
infections garments of Sin, and Iniquity, and put on the Garments of Praise and
Thanksgiving. Then take a a good quantity of Joshuah's Resolution, as thou
can well bear, and so walk up and down in these Wholesome and pleasant Fields
called Newness of Life; and so follow thy Calling in the Fear of God.

All which being carefully done, and truly observed; will undoubtedly preserve
thee from the stink and danger of all places whatsoever.

And so I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an Inheritance amongst them that are Sanctified
in Jesus Christ. Amen.

(...).

Laus Deo.
AN APPENDIX FOR THE CHRISTIANS CONVERSATION.
Whosoever will live Well, and Blessedly, let him follow this Rule, by which he
shall obtain to that which he desires.

Let your Thoughts be Divine, Aweful, Godly. Let your Words be Few, Honest,
True. Let your Works be Holy, Profitable, Charitable. Let your Sleep be
Moderate, Quiet, Seasonable. Let your Diet be Temperate, Convenient, Frugal.
Let your Apparel be Sober, Neat, Comely. Let your Recreations be Lawful,
Brief, Seldom. Let your Prayers be Short, Devout, Often. Let your Will be
Constant, Obedient, Ready. Let your Manners be Grave, Courteous, Cheerful. Let
your Memory be Of Death, Punishment, Glory.
Ecclus. 7.26. Whatsoever thou take in hand, Remember the End, and thou shall
never do amiss.
FINIS.

