A Copy of Mr, HENRY VVILMOTS Letter to M. WILLIAM CROFTS at the Hague,
intercepted at Sea by one of the Ships in His Majesty's service, and sent up to
the Lord Admiral, and was delivered to the Commons by the Lords at a
conference of both Houses.
AMongst other Evidences of the disposition and designs of those in credit
about the KING and QUEEN, a Letter was intercepted at Sea by one of the Ships
now in His Majesty's service, and sent up to the Lord Admiral, was delivered
to the Commons, by the Lords, at a Conference of both Houses, which was dated
the two and twentieth of June, from York, written by M. Henry Wilmot, one of
those who were privy to the conspiracy of M. Jermin and others, about bringing
up the Army the last year; and directed to M. William Crofts a servant of the
Queene's. By this Letter it appears, that they have had often conferences of
dividing the estates of the Parliament Men, and that this is the use they
intend to make of the Forces raised by His Majesty: And that they are grown so
bold upon His protection as to vilisie and deride the Parliament, and not only
to contemn their summons, but shamefully to abuse their Messenger with
violence and scorn. Which Letter follows in these words.

For Mr. CROFTS at the Hague.
Dear WILL,
BY these last Letters to the Queen, you will find a great alteration of
business here; the King, that very lately appeared almost abandoned by all His
Subjects, is now become the Favorite of the Kingdom; yet I believe His
Enemies are not so neglected as not to be able to raise an Army to oppose Him:
and indeed here lies the jest, for they will be followed just enough to forfeit
their estates, which I have heard you often say, were better bestowed on some
of us. Yesterday there came a Messenger from the House, who had Order, (and did
raise the power of the County) to entreat Bartley, Ashburnham, and my self; to
come to speak to the House; but the King gave the Messenger a short Answer,
and an Officer or two gave him a short Cudgel, so he is returned to London (a
fine Gentleman) with his Arm in a Scarf. Dear Will, preserve me in your good
opinion, for I assure you I am,

Your most affectionate humble servant, H. WILMOT.
June 22. York 1642. Pray if M. Jermin be with you, present my most humble
service to him.




H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed by E. G. for E. Husbands and John Frank. 1642.


