The Lord Willoughby of Parham, his Letter to an Honorable Member of the House
of Parliament.

His Majesty's Letter to the Lord Willoughby of Parham.

The Lord Willoughby of Parham his Letter, in answer, to His Majesty's.

WITH The Message of the Lords to the House of Commons upon the said Letters.

As also The Lord of Warwicks Letter to his brother the Earl of Holland.

AND The Declaration or Resolution of the Officers in the County of Essex, to
the Earl of Warwick, Lord Lieutenant of that County.

With the Approbation of both Houses concerning the same.

Printed for Joseph Hunscott, and John Wright.

Die Jovis, 9. Junii, 1642.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That these several Letters, and
Resolutions shall be forthwith Printed and Published.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliament.

My Lord,
I Received a Letter from your Lordship, in which the House is pleased to do me
a very great Honor, far above any desert of mine, and little expected by me:
for my Lord, I well know my obedience ties me to fulfill their Commands, and in
that I have done, I have done but my duty, and that which every honest man
ought to do, and owes of right to the Parliament; and whosoever has that
principle in him, it will dictate to him as much, and keep him from other
by-ways: And for my own part, my heart ever was, and shall ever be, both
forward and ready to obey their Lordships Commands in all things, both with
Integrity and Industry, and Gods curse light upon him and his, that carries any
other heart about him. My Lord, it is too mean a way for me to express my
acknowledgement in paper, to the House for this high favor which I have
received by your Lordships Letter. I hope to make it appear by my actions that
then Lordships see, I am not an ungrateful servant. It is a great
encouragement to these parts, their Lordships Resolutions, in giving their
Commands to have the rest of the Militia put in present execution; and truly,
my Lord, it was out of that regard that I did intimate it to my Lord of Essex,
as holding it a thing much conducing to the public good, and the only remedy
to cure these distractions which the Kingdom is in, not out of any regard to my
self; for I know, if I suffer in executing their Lordships commands, it must be
against their wills, and when that day comes, I will not give a straw for all I
have, were I but a looker on. My Lord, as I was this day at Lincoln, where I
appointed to begin to Muster, there came a Messenger from His Majesty, with
this Letter, which I held it my duty to acquaint the House with, and likewise
my answer, and am for Lincoln, where, as in all other places, I shall be ready
to serve your Lordship,

As your most humble servant, F. WILLOUGHBY.
MY Lord,
ere my Letter was sealed up, I could not but give your Lordship an account, in
how good a Posture I found the Trained Bind of Lincoln, which was far beyond
my expectation, considering the unhappiness in the sickness, being dispersed
in the Town, which hindered the appearance of some; But truly my Lord that was
fully supplied by a Company of Volunteers, equal in number and goodness of
Arms to the Trained Bands.

Lincoln, 6. June. 1642.


(...) SOIT QVI MAL Y PEN^^ royal blazon flanked by English lion and Scottish
unicorn
CHARLES REX.
RIght trusty and welbeloved, We greet you well.
Whereas We understand, That you have begun to assemble, Train, and Muster the
Trained-Bands of our County of Lincoln, under pretense of an Ordinance of
Parliament, whereto We have not given our Consent; Which is not only contrary
to Law, but to Our Command and Pleasure, signified by Our Proclamation sent to
the high Sheriff of that Our County: Wherefore, That you may not hereafter
plead Ignorance of such Our Prohibition; We do, by these Our Letters, Command,
and charge you, upon your Allegiance, to desist and forbear to Raise, Muster,
Train, Exercise, or Assemble together any part of the Trained Bands of that Our
County, either by your self, or by any others employed under you, or by Warrant
from you. And because you may, for what you have already done, concerning the
Militia of that Our County, plead, that you had not so particular a Command, We
shall pass by what you have already done therein, So as presently upon your
receipt hereof, you shall desist and give over meddling any further with any
thing belonging to the Militia of that Our County; But if you shall not
presently desist, and forbear meddling therewith, We are resolved to call you to
a strict Account for your Disobedience therein, after so many particular and
legal Commands given you, upon your Allegiance to the contrary, and shall
esteem and proceed against you as a disturber of the peace of Our Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at York, the fourth of June. 1642.
To Our right trusty and welbeloved the Lord Willoughby of Parham.
SIR,
AS there can be nothing of greater unhappiness to me, then to receive a
Command from your Majesty, whereunto my endeavors cannot give so ready an
obedience, as my affections: so I must confess the difficulty at this time not
a little, how to express that duty which I owe to your Majesty's late
Commands, and not falsify that Trust reposed in me by your high Court of
Parliament; through whose particular directions I am now come into this County
to settle the Militia, according to the Ordinance of Parliament, which by the
Votes of my Lord Littleton and others in the House of Peers, better versed in
the Laws then my self, passed as a Legal thing; and has since been confirmed
(if I mistake not) by his example, and your Majesty's Chief Justice, Sir John
Banks, both in accepting their Ordinance, and nominating their
Deputy Lieutenants: how much farther they proceeded, I know not.

But Sir, if the opinions of those great Lawyers drew me into an act unsuitable
to your Majesty's liking: I hope the wart of years will excuse my want of
judgment. And since the Command of the Parliament, I am now so far engaged in
their service as the sending out Warrants to summon the County to meet me this
day at Lincoln, and afterward in other places: I do most humbly beseech your
Majesty not to impose that Command on me, which must needs render me false to
those that relve on me, and so make me more unhappier then any other misery can
fall upon me.

These things, Sir, I once more humbly beseech your Majesty may be taken into
your gracious consideration, and that you would never be pleased to harbor any
misconceit of me, or of this action, since nothing has yet passed by my
Commands here, or ever shall; but what shall tend to the honor and safety of
your Majesty's Person, to the preservation of the peace of your Kingdom, and to
the content (I hope) of all your Majesty's Subjects in these parts; amongst
which I remain

YOUR MAJESTY'S Most humble, and most dutiful SVBJECT and SERVANT, F.
WILLOUGHBY.

THE MESSAGE OF THE LORDS TO THE House of Commons, UPON The Lord WILLOUGHBY of
Parham, His Letter and service in the execution of the Ordinance, concerning
the MILITIA.
THe Lords have thought fit to let you know, how much they value and approve
the endeavors of this Lord, in a service so much importing the safety of this
Kingdom; and they doubt not of your readiness to concur with them, upon all
occasions to manifest; the sense they have, and shall retain of his
deservings, which appears the greater, by how much the difficulties (by those
circumstances you have heard read) have been greater. And as my Lords resolve
to make his interest their own, in this service, for the public good, and
safe^^ of this Kingdom, so they desire you to join with them, in so good and
necessary a work.

Resolved by the House of Commons to join with the Lords in this vote, and do
make the like resolution for the deputy Lieutenants for the County of Lincoln,
and desire the Lords concurrence therein.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That they agree with the House of Commons,
for the resolution concerning the Deputy Lieutenants of the County of Lincoln.

TO My Noble Brother the Earl of HOLLAND.
Brother.
IN obedience to the order of both Houses of Parliament, I this day repaired to
Burntwood (where about one fourth part of the Trained bands of Essex, were
appointed to meet) for putting of the ordinance for the Militia of this County
in execution. I saw five Compaines drawn out, being of the ordinary trained
Bands (and all that were designed to this place) whole numbers I found full,
and their Armies complete. For though about threescore Arms had been formerly
taken out of each company for the late service about Scotland, yet a full
supply was made by Volunteers, and one of the said five Compaines (being under
the conduct of Sir William Mashams son) was double to the usual list. A
sixth Company was drawn out, which consisted of near five hundred able men,
who came as volunteers under the command of Sir Thomas Baringtons younger son.
I caused the Declaration of both houses made for their indemnity, to be read at
the head of each company. And required the Captains, Officers, and Soldiers
to be obedient to such directions as should be conveyed to them from me, or my
deputy Lieutenants, according to the said ordinance for the service of his
Majesty and the Parliament in defense of the Kingdom. To which they did
unanimously manifest a resolution and respect, and a cheerful readiness,
therein to spend their lives and fortunes. Hereof I thought fit to give your
Lordship this brief account praying you to communicate the same to their
Lordships, I having desired my deputy Lieutenants to do the same to the House
of Commons. I have this day received a petition from the Captains and
Lievtenants of the several companies here assembled, in the name of all the
persons belonging to the said trained bands, and with their full consent
expressed upon the reading of it, by their general acclamations, and applause,
in their several Companies, whereof I send your Lordship a copy here enclosed,
And so desiring from God a blessing upon all your counsels, I rest,

Burntwood the 7. of June, 1642. Your Lordships affectionate Brother, WARVVICK.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT Earl of Warwick, Lord Lieutenant of the
County, of Essex: and to the Right Worshipful and worthy Gentlemen, the Deputy
Li^utenants of the same County, confided in by the most Honorable, the High
Court of Parliament.
WE the Captains and Lieutenants with the full consent of the Trained-Bands
and Volontiers of the said County now assembled, having before the access of
this present Parliament seen our Religion, our Laws our liberties and estates
brought to the brinke of ruin and subversion by the results of most desperate
and wicked Councels, could not but with exceeding joy behold the assembling and
continuance of so great and faithful a Council (the representative body of
this Kingdom) and with most certain confidence commit therero all that was
dear unto us.

And having also seen the late hellish designs and actings of a M^lignant
party of this Kingdom, and the bloody rebellion in Ireland, all working to
retard the progress, or subvert the, being of this worthy Parliament, and
therein to bereave us of all our hopes of Reformation, or future peace or
happiness to th^s Church or Kingdom, We cannot but ascribe all glory and
praise unto the Lord of Lords, and express most hearty thankfulness unto his
blessed Instruments that great Assembly, for their undanted Resolutions,
unparalleld endeavors, and happy proceedings for the common good. And herein
(as not the least means of our safety) for the most necessary and seasonable
Ordinance of theirs touching the ordering of the Militi^, whereby we are put
under the command and guidance of so Noble a Lord, and such worthy Gentlemen,
whereunto We humbly desire this present day and meeting may be an Evidence and
pledge of our free and willing obedience.

And having entrusted our Religion, our Laws, and all into the hands of that
great and most faithful Council the Parliament, whose care and fidelity we
have so abundantly found, we even bleed to see the heart and actions of our
Royal King (contrary to his own Royal expressions) declining from the
Councels of His Parliament, and carried after other Counsels, whom, as the
Laws and Constitutions of this Land have not known, nor reposed upon: so we
(for our own parts) neither will nor dare entrust with our Religion or Laws.
And whom we verily believe, could they prevail against that highest Court
(under God our chiefest Bulwark and defense) would soon deprive us both of
Religion and Law, and (notwithstanding all their specious pretenses) reduce us
to a condition no less miserable then slavish.

From the deep apprehensions of all which we do freely and heartily promise
and tender our persons and estates to assist and defend (to the uttermost) the
high Court of Parliament now assembled, the members, power, and privileges
thereof, and therein His Majesty's person and authority, and the Kingdoms
peace, (according to our late Protestation) against all contrary counsels,
power, and force of Arms whatsoever, which shall be reard up, or attempted
against them.

And this our humble acknowledgement and resolution (which we doubt not will be
accorded unto by all good subjects) we humbly desire your Honor and Worships
to tender on our behalf unto that most Honorable Assembly of Parliament.

For whose happy progress and success we shall daily pray.

Trained-Bands.
Captain Kitely. Captain Henry Far. Captain John Ballet. Captain John
Fleming. Captain W. Marsham. Lieutenant. Tho. Harper. Lieutenant. Jo.
Woodcock. Lieutenant. Rich. Lawrence. Lieutenant. Geo. Colwell. Lieutenant.
Tho. Clarke.
Volontiers.
Robert Barington, Captain. William Burls, Lieutenant.


THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, being advertised by the Lord
Lieutenant, and Deputy Lieutenants of the County of Essex, of their ready,
full, and forward meeting of the Tray-Bands of that County; and of a cheerful
access, of a very considerable number of Volunteers, at their first appearing;
Have thought fit, to express unto them, the good sense they hold of their
proceedings, so much conducing to the General safty of this Kingdom; And
having likewise received from them a Declaration full of affections, and good
inclinations, to maintain our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Priveledges of
Parliament; Which they observe to be invaided by pernicious Council, as indeed
they have been of late, in a more dangerous, and high manner then any age can
parallel: And having very prudently observed, in a right understanding, That
the Kingdom, and the Kings authority and Person, can be no ways maintained,
but by the upholding the power and privileges of Parliament: as by the late
Protestation they acknowledge themselves bound unto, against all contrary
Councils, Power, and force of Arms whatsoever. This just and faithful
resolution of theirs, to the public good; The Lords and Commons do not only
approve, but commend, assuring them, that as their endeavors have been for the
peace and happiness of the King and Kingdom; So they will persist, in
discharge of the great and public trust, which lies upon them; to go through
all difficulties which may oppose the public peace and welfare of this
Kingdom; And will upon all occasions, be ready to express particularly, to
those persons, that respect which is due to persons from whom they have
received such assurance of their affections and fidelities.

FINIS.

