Vera effigies THOMAE WILLSFORD: Aetatis suae 46.

Omnia videntur formata ratione Numerorum: Boethius. Man's shadow often does first
appear.
And so does his Effigies here:
Look in his Books and there you will find.
Him in the Mirror of his Mind.
M: Boteler. Re. vaughan sculp:
portrait of Thomas Willsford

Willsfords ARITHMETIC, NATURAL, AND ARTIFICIAL: OR, DECIMALLS.

Containing The SCIENCE of NVMBERS, Digested in Three BOOKS.

Made compendious and facile for all ingenious capacities, viz: Merchants,
Citizens, Seamen, Accomptants, etc.

Together with The Theorie and Practice united in a sympathetical proportion
betwixt Lines and Numbers, in their Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of
form, figure, magnitude and affection: demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated
by Calculations, and confirmed with variety of examples in every species.

By THOMAS WILLSFORD, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath: Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, 1656.

A PREFACE to all benevolent and pragmaticall Artists who are foes to Faction,
friends to Truth, and ingeniously studious of Sciences Mathematical.
MUst daily Pamphlets still invade the Press,
To vent Romances, almost numberless?
And Printing to usurp, in tumults strive,
To make it by Conquest their Prerogative?
And must I hold my hands, when Truth I see
Oppressed, and Science with her Monarchy
Of mystique Arts? whose secrets some contrives
In vain to make as common, as their Wives:
These think there is a parity of Wit,
And if there be not, they will Level it:
But let them do their worst, and still relate
Diurnall Acts, in seven Nights out of date,
Whence they inform their Saints with things untrue
And telling News, until there is nothing new
But Zealous Errors under Truths disgu^se;
Like Heathens that offered Pluto Sacrifice:
These Vice call Virtue, and by this are known,
They think there is nothing good but what is their own.
I do expect my Works they will disallow:
Or future times, because I writ it now,
And as a general doom, it is understood,
As if there is nothing here that is true or good:
In love to Learning, I will do my best;
And may some Artist vindicate the rest.
Before it is read (lest any censures it)
I show the subject, and the cause 'twas writ,
To help young Students (of the ingenious sort)
I prove each Thesis, yet the Volume short,
Which treats of Numbers, and what Art does do
Both in the Theorie, and the Practice too:
Above a reason, if you love your ease
Reject the Demonstrations if you please
My Rules alone may hidden truth descrie,
But best when as your Judgment dictates why:
From bare effects, why would you gain applause
When Reason prompts you for to seek the cause?
For want of Art does many errors rise
To dazell easily dull, and vulgar eyes:
A Horse, will by the switch, and Tutors eye,
Both Add, Subtract, Divide and Multiply.
A learned beast, outdoes unskilful men
When only guided by another pen:
Which was the motive, I did this impart
Whereby to show the Principles of Art,
From whence that you may raise such structures then
As will prove facile, for ingenious men:
The ground by Lines and Numbers is surveyd,
The basis too by Demonstration laid,
With ease and pleasure thus you may proceed
And plainly understand what it is you read.
By Line and Level here, I Numbers try;
Arithmetic thus proves Geometry. (was best which Tract I thought
Through all my Books
Now at your service ready to be pressed,
Finished long since, and do but only stand
For a Commission, licensed by your hand;
Or approbation from a public vote;
Or by a major part at least, of note,
And that they may the better judge what is fit,
This renders here a Breviate what I writ,
All Heights, or Distances, you can descrie
Are found and proved by sage Geometry:
I writ of War, 'till I was bid to cease,
And by the Muses, who are friends to Peace:
Of Spheres and Stars, and Motions too of these;
The Earth I measure, and the ample Seas:
Forerunning Signs of Meteors I declare,
Their strange effests, and whence their natures were:
Yet all these Books, but my collections be,
The form, and method, only is from me.
All Arts from the Creation did begin,
And all corrupted, through the stain of sin:
For when that Adam fell, then faults in all
As a disease, grew Epidemicall:
And so from thence ('it is to be understood)
Man's knowledge is commixt with bad and good,
Which to select, and orderly to place,
Does all men's actions wonderfully grace:
Like to the industrious Be, that Honey makes,
And from that Bloom the Spider Poison takes:
So it is in Arts: these times too many sees
Star-juglers, that do search for Heavens decrees
Writ in those Orbs, and from their forged skill
Like Gypsies, or like Witches, which you will,
With canting words deceive, and seem to know
As much (I think) as any Star can show:
They do not prove, nor seem to make appear
As what Contingens, they with us have here;
A fatal force of Planets they impart,
Against Free will, an Heresy of Art,
Born an abortive Register of Fate,
A Child of Science, not Legitimate.
Except my Faults, though here be nothing new,
Acceptance (Reader) I do crave of you:
If well, to God the glory I resign,
Of all my works, for as his gift, they are mine,
Who does command our Talents to employ
As for the common good, and so do I:
But as for all the Errors that they have,
They Are only mine; for which I pardon crave,
And wish you would correct, what faults you see
If not more numerous, than my Numbers be:
Or cancel all, if all shall prove amiss,
And please to write a better Book than this;
It will content me (if this cannot do it)
That it has moved a better Wit unto it:
I writ not these, to have a Wreathe of Bays,
But for your profit, and the Almighties praise:
To both these Marks, does my endeavors tend,
And hope in neither for to miss my end.
Yet I could wish (kind Reader) you would look
First on your self, and then upon my Book;
The Optic Science, does directly show,
It Is by reflection, we our selves do know;
And if your errors there you cannot find,
This Distick always place before your mind:
All men have faults, from whence, what e're we do
Our works are humane, thence erroneous too:
My oversights, if you correct them true,
It will be thought humanity in you:
I will with those most cordially dispense,
That think themselves are clear from all offense,
Although they question this; since none we see
But Fools and Children that from crimes are free:
As for the Wise, whose judgment's not exact,
But censures most intentions by the Fact;
I there may suffer much, but know not well
As yet the faults, nor here shall never tell
How to be free; therein I may be crossed,
To all ungrateful men my labor's lost,
If by a rigid Judge it must not live,
Before a Jury can their Verdict give.
I Will write no more, lest you my Verses read
Should be by them deterred for to proceed,
Or having read them over, think the best
To be at first, and nothing in the rest;
My pains of writing 'twill again renew,
That I have lost my time, and troubled you:
If so, then let the Press be quite exiled,
Lest that more virgin paper be defiled;
And where I have the unhappy Author been,
May these be winding sheets to bury'm in,
And bound to rest, from Sects of silly men,
As from assaults of a malicious pen;
May dark Oblivion undertake the trust
To Shrine them up, with other Deeds in dust,
And never suffer more to come to light,
To stand the censure of a Proselyte;
Yet when these Sects of Zoilists shall be dead,
May this revive, and be by Artists read:
Who will my faults with mercy overlook
And find it was no R writ the Book:
Whereas all hackney Writers, future times
Will know their Works are volums full of crimes:
And so (perhaps) with scorn will let them lie,
Or having read them, laugh and throw them by.
I Will here conclude, and plead no more for these
But prostrate them to censure as you please;
And lest that any other bears the blame
To show whose it is I here subscribe my name
A friend of thine As thou art mine, Thomas Willsford.

To his honored Uncle Mr THOMAS VVILLSFORD, On his Tract of Arithmetic.
WHat Numbers may your numerous Art express?
Which as your Ingenie, is Limitlesse:
Whose Corruscations meet the rapt desire,
And Scorch the Eye that Looks but to admire.
Arithmetic a double Basis rears,
For this side Verity; that Reason bears:
But you the middle Column do remain,
By Demonstration you the Arch sustain.
Envy, and Folly, shall as Ciphers stand;
And while they give your Figures the left hand,
Augment th ir value; the success of those
Who by Invectives, do advance their Foes;
I must suspend my sense, since every Line,
Commands our gratitude, and speaks a Mine
Of public good: yet I have hopes I may
Discharge one thought at least, and freely say,
While men the advantage of your Works Divide,
Our profit and your praise is Multiplied,
Edward Boteler.

An INDEX or CONTENTS of the Principalls of the first Book in each Section and
Paragraph of Natural Arithmetic.
Sect. 1. Parag. 1.
THe Definition, Elements, and Species of Arithmetic, page 1 Addition, the
first species of Arithmeticke, parag. 2. page 6 Subtraction, the second
species, parag. 3. p. 15 Multiplication the third, par. 4. p. 26 Division the
fourth, par. 5. p. 40
The second Section
Shows the definitions, terms, and values of fractions, with their Reductions
from one denomination to another, parag. 1. page 63 Addition of fractions,
proper, improper, or compounded, parag. 2. p. 86 Subtraction of fractions
either proper, improper or mixed, par. 3. p. 93. Multiplication of Fractions,
proper, improper or compounded, par. 4. p. 103 Division of Fractions or broken
numbers, either proper, improper or mixed, par. 5. p. 109
An INDEX showing the principal CONTENTS of each Paragraph in the second Book.
DEfinitions of quadrat Roots, page 121 The extracting of the square Root in
whole numbers and fractions, parag. 1. page 122 To extract the quadrat Root
from an irrational number in any proportion assigned, page 128 The definition
of a Cube, p. 136 The extraction of the Cube Root, both in whole and broken
numbers, parag. 2. page 137 General Rules for extracting of Cubique roots,
page 142 The extracting of Cubique roots from irrational numbers in any given
proportion, page 150 The reason and cause of the operation in extracting of
Cubique roots, page 159 How to extract all other Roots in whole numbers or
fractions, as Biquadrats, squared Cubes, etc. parag. 3. page 162 How to extract
all Roots in any proportion that shall be assigned, page 165 A reference of
numbers as in relation to their quantities and qualities, parag. 4. p. 166
Natural progressions and Arithmeticall proportions, with their additions, par.
5. p. 172 Geometrical progressions and proportions with the addition of their
numbers, par. 6. p. 179 Universal Axioms in Arithmetic, accomodated to the
Rules of Practice and proportion, parag. 7. p. 190 Canons in Arithmetic, with
definitions and diverse rules of proportion, single and double, direct and
reverse, par. 8. p. 201 The rules of practice direct and reverse, both in whole
numbers and fractions, par. 9. p. 212 The double Rule of Three direct and
reverst, performed at two operations, or at one, in whole numbers or fractions,
par. 10. p. 220 The rules of society or companies, both single and double, by
whole or broken numbers either in gain or loss, par. 11. p. 226 The rules of
Alligation, or mixture of diverse simples according to a common price, or in
proportion to any quantity, par. 12. p. 233 The rules of Alligation, in
compounding of Physical simples, according to their qualities in any of their
degrees, par. 13. p. 250 The rules of single false positions, or by false
supposed numbers to discover the truth, par. 14. page 262 The double rule of
false, wherein by False positions and errors the truth is discovered, par. 15.
page 269
An INDEX or CONTENTS of all the principalls in each Section or Chapter of this
the third Book of Artificial Arithmetic.
Sect. 1. Chap. 1.
THe definition of Decimalls, and the reduction of vulgar fractions to
artificial numbers, page 287 Annotations of Decimalls, p. 291 Numeration of
Decimalls, p. 293 Addition of Decimalls, with whole numbers and fractions
commixt together, chapter 2. p. 298 Subtraction of artificial numbers compounded
with integers and fractions, chapter 3. p. 301 Multiplication of Decimalls, with
fractions, or mixed with integers, chapter 4. p. 303 Division of Decimalls with
integers commixt, and how to find their quantities, chapter 5. p. 306 Tables of
the Coins, Weights and Measures commonly allowed of in England, chapter 6. p. 314
Decimall Tables of the English Coins, Weights and Measures, and also of
Minutes and Seconds calculated to 7 places, chapter 7. p. 321
A PROEME, or PROLOGUE, to satisfy only the ingenious Students of these
liberal Arts, proving the antiquity, excellency, and use of Arithmetic as an
element and introduction to other noble Sciences.
IN the beginning of time, the omnipotent Creator, and Artificer of the World,
laid the structure of it in Number, Weight and Measure; and although man's
imbecility cannot comprehend this exquisite order, and as the Sacred Records
do testify, Man shall never find it, from the Creation unto the Consummation
thereof, yet delivered this as a Pattern for us to follow; so here I should not
need to make a search, or inquire after the authorities of men, but that some
will rather expect Humane reasons, than what is Divine, which is above the
reach and capacity of mortals; whereas this is but a dark shadow of
Knowledge, made comprehensible to our weak senses, and by methodicall Rules
accommodated to humane use, which is the tract, or common way that I must move
in, and endeavor for to direct all in the nearest path that leads every one to
his desired journeys end, in any of these useful Arts, which I undertake to
render unto the public view, and place Number first as an introduction to the
rest.

Yet candid Reader, expect nothing here of me but a volume compiled out of
others labors, and they formerly from the light of Nature, the dictates of our
first Parent, and he from the inspiration of the Creator who is omnipotent and
eternal, Eccles. 17.5.
whose endowments (conferred on Adam) had continued down as hereditary from
one generation to another, had he not transgrest the just Precepts of his
Maker, for which ingratitude he was expulsed the Garden of Eden and the sight
of God, who withdrew his favors, and then innumerable errors obtenebrated the
understanding of his succeeding Race, by sin made servile, Experience the
Mistress of humane Sciences, and vigilant Industry her Usher; and by these
means, declining ages, illustrated and facilitated Arts to common capacities;
yet so, as that the most learned do find a Plus ultra, which they cannot
apprehend, but as derived from the fountain of all Knowledge, who is
incomprehensible in all his works, and that under the Sun, there is nothing
new. Yet in every age, God has pleased to illuminate some above the reach of
other mortals, and that their inventions seems to Man as new, and those
perhaps in the following age decline again, until enshrined by Oblivion, or
suppressed, while ignorance gets the upper hand, by the assistance of the rude
Vulgar, professed enemies to Art. This phantastike age is so inquisitive after
novelties, that there is few that truth affects, she being old, and still the
same, and if I should please none, then my intentions are frustrated, and part
of my labors lost, for I would not willingly displease any, except the
Proselites of the times, who I know will bring in Apuleus upon his Golden Ass
against me; who says Miserimi est ingenii semper uti inventis and non
inveniendis; and therefore I will endeavor to add something to the method of
these copious Sciences, although it be but as the Wren when she pist in the
Sea, encouraged thereunto by the Adagie which affirms, Facile est inventis
addere, yet not expecting to satisfy Novelists any more, then to see the
stability of a weather Cock; but as an ornament to my work, for to have
something that may seem new to men, and to delight the Reader; and being there
is a natural sympathy betwixt Number and Magnitude, I will delineat my grounds
of Arithmetic, with Geometrical demonstrations, whereby to fortify my self
against the enemies of this noble Art, yet build no Labyrinths, nor make the
approaches intricate, unto the understandings of ingenious men, nor yet a
burden to the memory of the Reader, nor with figurative expressions, or
doubtful senses, like the interpretation of Oracles, but as clear and short
as I can; and in pursuance of this form I will cast by, and obliterate the
errors of many writers, in their tumults of superfluous words, terms,
definitions, prolix, and ambiguous discourses, as Metaphors, Allegories, and
many other implicit speeches, to show their learning, and not the ready ways
to Sciences, and in fine prove nothing with their Dilemmas, but their own
follies, and the Readers loss of time; whereas (I hope) to find a friendly
acceptance, an ample recompense of my labors, and thanks from all young
students of these Arts, who have or might have been perplex't and deterred from
proceeding in rugged paths, where only empty words have been their guides,
until they have lost themselves in obscure Maeanders, almost unextricable with
their Conductors, or unexplicable to the apprehension of many Tutors: whereas
Arts should be delivered plain, pleasant, and perspicuous in themselves, which
if I have with a happy Genius performed, and made more facile than other
Authors have delivered it, render the glory to God, who has given me what I
have, and I do account it a greater honor to have received it from the
Immense Deity, than if it could have been of my own conferring or election, for
he is sole Lord and the Artificer of all, and so St. Augustine calls Him, and
says, Quicquid te in art delectaverit Artificem commendat: And thus the
Regal Psalmist 99. ver. 3. Scitote, quoniam ipse est Dominus Deus noster, ipse
fecit nos, and non ipsi nos.

As for the antiquity of natural Arithmetic in the practice, it is generally
conceived co-Aged with the World, or the infancy thereof, a thing which little
Children do naturally covet to learn, as they do discourse, a property annexed
unto every rational Creature; the first practitioners of this Art are recorded
to be Seth, and his succeeding generation, in imitation of their parent, whom
they esteemed as a God, for his virtue and learning, Josephus lib. 1. Antiq.
cap. 3. affirms, that his race were industrious, and of ingenious dispositions,
and the Inventors of Astronomy, whereof Arithmetic is the ground: thus this
knowledge descended unto Noah, and with the reparation of Mankind revived
again by the industry of the Syrians, who were expert in all the Mathematical
Sciences: the Phoenicians are recorded by Strabo, lib. 16. to be famous in
Arithmetic, Navigation, Josephus lib. 1. c. 16.
and in all Warlike Arts: the Chaldaeans instructed Abraham, and he the
Egyptians in Arithmetic and the Motions of the Heavens: from hence these
Sciences did arrive in Greece, and from learned Athens transported to Rome; and
from thence dispersed over Europe unto the Britains, where all learning
flourished, until suppressed with heresies and heathenish impieties; in the time
of the English Saxons, Religion returned again, with the Liberal Sciences, and
all kinds of Learning attending upon her train, England twice acknowledged the
learned Tutour unto France; and since that, all Arts have flourished here, yet
less in the theorie, than in the practick part, every one not born to be an
Artist according to the Adagie, Non cuivis homini contingat adire Corinthum.

The use and excellency of Arithmetic is manifested by many ancient Writers,
and grave Philosophers, who places the Art of Numbers as the Primum mobile to
all Mathematical Sciences, it clears all difficulties in Quantities, it proves
all Angles, Lines, and Superficies, it measures the magnitudes of all Bodies,
the gravity and proportion of Weights, it discovers the harmony of sounds in
Music, it solves all Aenigmaticall questions and Problemes in Geometry,
Cosmographie, Geographie, Astronomy, Navigation, Fortification, Architecture,
and the Optic Sciences, and in multitude of Military propositions; and that
you may not from empty words only receive some satisfaction herein of many
examples, I will instance a few. Archytas Tarentinus, one of Plato's Disciples
in Geometry, and so famous in Arithmetic, that he was the wonder of the
times, and the glory of his Country, both in public and private affairs, the
People happy under him their victorious General, renowned for his learning,
and recorded to posterity for his knowledge in this Art; and thus writes of
him the most ingenious Poet: Horace, lib. 1. Ode 28. in Archytam, Te maris, and
terrae, numeroque; carentis arenae Mensorem cohibent, Archyta.

Arithmetic is very useful to Merchants, and to all in general that drive a
trade either at home, or in foreigne parts; by this Art, knowing the rates in
exchanging of Coins, Weights, and Measures, and converting one Species into
another; in keeping their accounts of gain or loss, of Debtor and Creditor;
which moves Caelius Rhodiginus, lib. 18. Lectionum Antiq. for to suppose the
Phoenicians exquisite Arithmeticians, by reason of their commerce and trading;
and the Egyptians famous in that, and the knowledge of Geometry, because of
the annual inundations of Nilus, thereby draining their grounds, measuring of
their lands, and placing of their bounds; thus making Necessity the Mistress of
Arts: but howsoever, useful it is, in regulating of most humane actions or
employments, in times of War or Peace; by Arithmetic there may be found any
true proportion in the mixture or composition of Mettalls, as you may see by
Archimedes in examining of the Crown made for the King of Sicilia, in which
this famous Artist did discover how much true Gold there was in it, and how
much adulterate metal; and now by numbers it is commonly to every Artificer in
that kind: of excellent use it is in composition of Simples, and making of
Medicines, according to any quantity or quality propounded, or in respect of
the temperature in any of the 4 degrees, viZ. Hot, Cold, Dry, Moist, but this
is out of my Element; yet lest that any should say I talk like an Apothecary,
Hypocrates the father of Physicians, commanded his Son that he should
studiously labor in Arithmetic and Geometry, not only as for the splendor
of his life, but also for the excellent use they had in composition of Simples,
and in knowing the order and parts of the body, an epitome of the World; and
for this also is Galen recorded another father of the Herbalists.

Divine Plato in his Commonwealth commends the study of Arithmetic, and
attributes so much to the praise and glory of it, that he thinks men mad or
foolish that are quite ignorant of the Art: Aristotle in libro de And.
conceives the Organs of hearing to have great force in figures, in the
difference and distinction of Sounds. Ptolemaeus Alexandrinus, in libro 1 cap.
2. de Musica, affirms as much in honor of it, and in other of his books
says, that (in all humane knowledge) Arithmetic and Geometry obtaines the
first degree of certainty; and as for Natural Philosophy (although studiously
to be labored in by all that would pretend to any knowledge, worthy of a
Rational Creature, or refined from the dregs of the common people) do but
behold (says he) the manner of their demonstrations, they may be rather called
conjectures then a Science, for their many, and diversity of opinions, whereas
these run constant in one channel; and as for Arithmetic and Geometry, they
do concur together in their demonstrations; the first represents it to the
Imagination, the other unto the Sight; the one makes it perspicuous to the
internal Sense, the other visibly demonstrates to the external; thus one
proves the other, and Number exactly discovers all the parts certainly the same
in every operation, and true to 1/10, 1/100, 1/1000, or in any other proportion
greater or less, as shall be required; Decimall Arithmetic extracts its
original from producing the nearest Square and Cubike Roots, etc. out of
irrational numbers, but whose invention at first I find not any where
recorded; of late years it was put into method, that it stands now like an Art
of it self, and has its Axioms and rules in Addition, Subtraction,
Multiplication, and Division, with whole numbers and fractions together: to
search for men's names inshrin'd long since in dust, would prove in vain, or
for those, who have been famous in the Art of Numbers, were like Archytas
numbering the sands of the Sea; for this Science has been facilitated by many
since Theophrastus writ his 2 books of Numbers, in the days of Alexander the
Great; or Pythagoras, one of the 7 wise men of Athens, from whose Tables the
Logarithmes do derive their conception; but in respect of the fo^m, method,
and the excellent use of them in the practick part of all Mathematical
Sciences, they are justly called the invention of John Neper, Baron Marchiston
in Scotland, about the year of Grace 1610. and in the year 1614. the Author
published a book of them, entitled, [Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis
descriptio:] being thus exposed to the public view, it was illustrated by
many, but first in England by Mr. Briggs Professor of Geometry in London, yet
before his masterpiece came from the Press, there arrived one in Folio from
the University of Lovaine: Of these two kinds of Arithmetic I will treat more
at large hereafter, and now proceed no farther in showing the antiquity,
excellency and use of Numbers, but conclude with Socrates: Nunquam
animadvertisti, qui natura Arithmetici sunt, eos ad omnes Arts, percipiendum
perspicaces and acutos esse?

A DIRECTORIE FOR All young Arithmetitians, and Students in the practice of
Numbers; wishing their increase of knowledge, to the wisdom of our
forefathers, and not to deride their Dictates, as new Courtiers their old
fashions, whose sole ambition is; Os Populi meruisse: and theirs was, Ad Laudem
and Gloriam Dei.
THe secret force of Numbers I impart,
And doubtful ways, but for the rules of Art;
Like men at sea (who cannot find a shore)
Without a Compass, Helm, or yet an Oar:
The course in Numbers, dubious is as these,
Ample as Earth, and spacious as the Seas:
Be careful then to keep my Rules in mind,
The hasty Bitch brings forth her Puppies blind,
And so will those, who labor to proceed
Before they understand what it is they read.
Let not your Thoughts without your Judgment run
Like Iades that tire before their journey's done:
And often unskilful men, who ride too fast,
Do lose their ways, or wearied prove the last:
Besides with haste, they will neglect to see
The windings, and the turnings that there be.
Who Goods have lost, or hidden Treasure looks,
Must search by-ways, and all their crooked nooks,
Rocks, Hills, and Dales, and places under ground,
When in the common Road they are not found,
Which way to take, your judgment must direct,
And what it is common Numbers can effect:
If they prove able, then what Rules to choose,
And whether False-positions you must use:
If you in vain have vulgar Figures tryde,
And Rules of False proves an erroneous guide,
The Cossick numbers will direct you right
Through all Meanders, though involved in Night;
They Will search the land, the seas, and every creek,
And will conduct you, to the thing you seek;
For by their strict pursuit I make no doubt,
But what is in Number hid, they will find it out
If known to Art, and that there be a way
No Blood-hound shall hunt drie-foot so as they.
Too far let not your inquisition go,
Examine often whether right or no;
With too much haste, you may ore run the mark
Which often does lie concealed within the dark;
And false conceptions of the sight there be,
For all that glisters is not Gold we see:
This, Error will unmask in Truths disguise
With all her painted train of Fallacies
Which various are, so leave no Rule behind,
For you may be in darkness 'till you find;
Or soon to light, you will this Dilemma bring
From Art, and Nature, that there is no such thing:
Aequation will the thing that is sought produce,
Or show the Quaerie's false, or not of use:
Rules I will give as many, as you will need.
Farewell: and in the name of GOD proceed.
Festina lent. Serius absolvit, qui nimium properat. Natural ARITHMETIC,
Compendiously discussing and explicating the theorie and practice of the Art of
Numbers, divided into Sections, and those again into Paragraphs.
Definitions: Sect. 1
Parag. 1.
ARITHMETIC is the Art, or Doctrine of Numbering; derived from the Greek, and
signifies Number; the subject of Arithmetic, as Magnitude is of Geometry.

Of this Art there are two kinds, viz: Natural and Artificial: the first of
these is so denominated from having proper Figures, and Numbers significant of
themselves; whereas the other is Figurative, or founded upon art: of this
Arithmetic there be several kinds, of which (God willing) I will treat of in
my third Book, and now proceed.

Number is defined to be a discrete quantity, being divisible in its parts,
consisting of Unites, by which every thing is numbered; and in this has proper
and peculiar characters.

Annotation.
This describes the Characters, as the Elements to this Art; by which Number is
expressed, and are in all but ten, which in order are these, viz: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
9 0 one two three four five six seven eight nine a cipher Nine of these are
called significant Figures of themselves; the little circle or Cipher
represented by the letter O, signifies nothing of it self, yet increases the
value of number according to its place or position.

The first of these figures is called 1 A.
a Unite, which simply of it self is no number, but the beginning of all
number or quantity; as a point in Geometry is the first of magnitude
represented by the letter A.

All the other eight significant figures A -- B
are composed of Unites, as a Line in Geometry is the continuation of Points,
represented by A. B so that 2 is composed of two Unites; 3 made of three
Unites, and 4 contains four Unites, and so of all the rest.

NVMERATION.
THis shows the value or quantity of any number given; or how to express in
proper figures any number assigned or propounded, and to declare the quantity
of each figure, according to its place or position, their contents increasing
by degrees ascending from the right hand toward the left, as do the letters
and characters of the Hebrews, and all the Eastern people, from whence this Art
of Number extracts its original.

In this amplification of Numbers you must observe the figure on the right hand
denotes simply it self, as 2 two; 4 four; 6 six; 9 nine; 0 nothing etc. the
next degree, or second figure toward the left hand is ten times its own
quantity; the third place a hundred times; the fourth degree a thousand times;
the fifth place ten thousand times; the sixth figure in order is a hundred
thousand times its own number; the seventh place a million; the eighth ten
millions; the ninth place a hundred millions; and so proceeding without end,
increasing every degree in this manner following, reiterating Unites, Tens, and
Hundreds.

A Table of Numeration, continued.
Degrees. 1 1 One 1 1 Degrees. 2 10 Tennes 21 2 3 100 Hundreds 321 3 4 1000
Thousands 4321 4 5 10000 Ten thousands 54321 5 6 100000 Hundred thousands
654321 6 7 1000000 Million 7654321 7 8 10000000 Ten millions 87654321 8 9
100000000 Hundred millions 987654321 9

By this Table of Numeration you may observe how the figures by degrees do
increase by tennes, proceeding from the right hand toward the left, in value
according to their places; as for example: the sinister Table begins with a
Unite, unto which annexing a Cipher, and then the second degree will be 10,
that is in value ten times the first: unto that annex another Cipher, and
then in the third place it is 100 a hundred, that is ten times greater than
the second degree, the fourth place 1000 a thousand, that is ten times 100,
etc. The second Table I also here begin with a Unite, before which toward the
left hand 1 place 2, and then in the second degree it makes twenty, so both the
figures 21, and 2 in that place 10 times its own number: then put 3 before
them, and it will be the hundredth place; and the character being 3, denotes
three hundred; the three figures making in all 321 three hundred twenty and
one: the fourth degree obtains the thousand place, being ten times greater
than the third degree; and having the first figure before it 4, the value of
the four figures will be 4321, that is, four thousand three hundred twenty and
one: the next degree is ten thousand, and the character being 5, it must be
fifty thousand, and the whole value of those five figures 54321, and so all
others proceeding in order by tennes.

Yet the better for to effect the computation of great numbers, when their
degrees cannot easily be contained in memory; then it is necessary for to put
periods unto every centurie, or three figures, and so numbering them in unites,
tennes, hundreds; and then in expressing of their values, observe their places,
and the quantity of each figure as it is simply of it self, and note that after
the first period, their places are Thousands, and after the second period
Millions; and after the next period Millions of millions: and so proceeding
with reiteration of unites, tennes, and hundreds, until their periods are put
unto them; by this means avoiding errors, arising in numbering of great
quantities, and mistaking their degrees, as in this example shall be
illustrated, and suppose this number given, whose quantity is required, viz: 1,
234, 567, 890 which having pointed, read thus: one Million of millions two
hundred thirty four millions, five hundred sixty seven thousand, eight hundred
and ninety. If this had been the number given 1 0, 0 0 0, 0 0 0, 0 0 0 it would
have been thus expressed, ten Millions of millions: or thus, ten th^usand
Millions. Observe this order well, and then the computation of any Numbers will
prove as easy as they be necessary for to be known or expressed, a cording to
their places in degrees.

Number is also for to be consider^d, whether it be of one, or several
den^minations; those are said of one denomination, when they do consist of one
number, weight, or measure, whether they be all of one entire number, or in the
same parts.

All numbers of several denominations are said to be mixed, when they do
consist both of Integers and Fractions collected in a sum, viz: Pounds
sterling, Marks, Nobles, Shillings, Pence; or in respect of weight in Tons,
Hundreds, Stones, Pounds, Ounces, Drams, and Grains; or in long measures, viz:
Leagues, Miles, Furlongs, Perches, Yards, Feet, Inches; or any other parts or
fractions.

Every number is subdivided into three parts, and is either Simple, Decimall,
or Compound, and are thus distinguished.

1. Simple, are only those, who do consist of themselves, as do the 9
significant figures, viz: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

2. Decimalls or Tennes, are those who do consist of any significant figures,
with ciphers annexed unto them, as 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, etc.

3. Compound numbers are all those which are made by Simple and Decimall
numbers commixt together, viz: 12, 23, 34, 45, 56, 67, 78, 89, 91, and so are
all others which are composed of significant figures.

From Numeration there proceeds four species, viz: Addition, Substraction,
Multiplication, and Division, which in order are treated of in the follow-
Paragraphs or Chapters.

ADDITION. Parag: 2. The first species.
A Species is here defined to be a certain form of working by numbers, in which
four this Art depends, the Rules are framed, and all questions in Arithmetic
performed.

Addition teaches the contracting of many several quantities or numbers into
one total sum.

To effect this; place the greater number first, and right under that the next,
and so in order place the several sums, this is convenient in the respect of
form, but of no necessity; but this is, that you always observe in Addition
for to put unites under unites, tennes under tennes, hundreds under hundreds,
etc. that is, every figure in order underneath one another according to their
degrees or places, from the right hand; this done, underneath them all you must
draw a line, as by the following Paradigma.

Example 1.
Let the three numbers ^ given be A 320 B 241 and C 231, of any one
denomination, but here suppose them grains of Barley, the least denomination of
English measure, four of them making an Inch, and all these a statute Perch,
whose sum is required; and having placed them under one another, as by the
letters A, B, C: begin with the figures first on the right hand, and say 1 and
1 makes 2, which write down beneath the line under unites, the cipher of it
self being nothing: then go to the next place, and say, 3 and 4 makes 7, and
2 is 9; which place in the second rank from the right hand: and proceed to the
next place, where say 2 and 2 makes 4 and 3 will be 7, which place likewise
beneath the line under hundreds: and so continue if there be any more numbers,
the total sum of these is 792, as in the example: and so many grains of
Barley or quarters of inches there be in 16 feet and a half.

An illustration Arithmeticall.

Number consists in the addition of unites, as a Line does in Geometry by the
continuation of points, and is called the first quantity, and so is number
discreet, whose sum is nothing else, but the putting of several numbers
together, as is the addition of Lines: as in the last example, admit three
lines given for to be added together, each line consisting of so many equal
parts respectively, as were the numbers propounded, viz: the line A divided
into 320 parts or quarters of inches, each equal to a grain of Barley: B
containing 241, and C 231 of those equal parts, all which added together will
make the line A B C D, the true sum of the three lines given, being 792, as
in the last Scheme appears, the quarters of inches contained in a Statute Pole:
in the same manner if 12340 were to be added unto 87659, the total sum would
be 99999.

But it will most commonly happen, when great numbers are to be added, that the
sum in most ranks will exceed the quantity of any one significant figure; if
it be a Decimal, place a Cipher under that rank, if a compound number write
the simple significant figure, and add in the decimall to the next place as an
unite; if two tens as 2, three tens as 3 etc. according to the order and
degrees of Numeration, for every figure is no more than its own quantity, but
in respect of the degree and place, as by the following examples will be made
evident.

Example 2.
There was an old man, whose 44 Years 12 44 The total 100 age was required,
to which he replied: I have 7 sons, and there was 2 years between every one
of them; in my 44 year, my eldest son was born, which is just now the age of
my youngest. First set down the Fathers age; after that he had 6 sons which
made 12 years more, write that down, and the age of his youngest, which was
equal to his Fathers age at the birth of his first son, all which together
makes the old man's age: so begin with the first rank, and say 4 and 2 makes 6
and 4 more is 10, and being there are more numbers to come, set down a cipher
in the unite place, the decimal being but 1; in the next add it to 4 which
makes 5 and 1 will be 6 and 4 makes 10; under the second rank place another
cipher, and being there are no more figures, place the decimall, or unite in
the third place: the total sum is 100, the old man's age required, as in the
Paradigma appears.

Example 3.
There was a Traveller at the From Barwick to London.
Miles -- 60 48 55 47 48 The total is 258 Town of Barwick inquired how far it
was to the City of London by computation, and was thus answered: from hence to
Durham it is 60 miles, from thence unto the City of York 48 miles, then to
Newarke 55 miles, from thence to the Town of Huntington 47 miles, and from
thence to the City of London 48 miles: having placed these numbers in order,
their sum will contain the whole distance, therefore say 8, 7, 5 and 8 makes
28, and according to the former rules, set down 8 the simple figure of this
compound number, under the rank of unites, and add the two decimalls into the
next place, saying, 2 and 4 makes 6 and 4 is 10 and 5 will be 15 and 4, 19 and
6 will be 25; write under that rank the simple number 5, and go the two
decimalls, but being there are no more rooms or places, write down the decimall
in the next degree or place to the last figure, and so you will find the
total sum 258 miles, the true distance by computation from Barwick to
London, as in the example.

Yet note when numbers given are of diverse denominations, in adding of those
sums together, you must always observe for to begin with the least first, on
the right hand as before, and when their sums do amount unto any compound
number consisting of integers and parts, subscribe the fraction, or part,
underneath that column, whereon the head is writ the denomination, which is
various both in number, weight, and measure; the integer or integers must be
added as unites, to the next place toward the left hand: of this I will show
you some examples; but to know the parts, I must refer you to practice, they
being over-numerous to be subscribed, as in the numeration of mixed numbers was
already intimated.

Example 4. Addition of mixed numbers in Coin.
This Table is divided into Li. So. De. 14567 8 9 3289 16 3 987 13 4 81 6 8 9
14 11 18935 19 11 3 columns, for so many several denominations: upon the head
of the column to the left hand there is writ Li. denoting Libra signifying a
pound, not here in respect of common weight but money, and for definition is
called Pound sterling; and is an integer, according to the English account in
Coins: the next column is noted with So. for Solidum, a coin of brass used
by the Romans, but with us of silver, and signifies a Shilling, 20 of those
pieces making 1 Pound sterling: the third column, or first on the right hand
is noted with De. for Denarius, which signifies 10 for so many pieces it
contained of the Romans least coin; it has had a various estimate in our
English coins, as it signifies a Penny, the twelfth part of a shilling: for
until the Reign of Henry the sixth a Penny was the twentieth part of an ounce,
and in his Reign made the thirtieth: by Edward the fourth 40 pence in an
ounce: by Henry the eighth there were allowed 45 pence to an ounce: and by
Queen Elizabeth an ounce of silver was divided into sixty parts, called pence,
as at this day; so much for the Coins, and now for the adding of them
together, begin with the least denomination first, where you will find ^5
pence or 2 shillings and a 11 pence, which write down, and add the 2 shillings
to the next column, saying, 2 and 4 is 6 and 6 is 12 and 3 is 15, and 6 is 21
and 8 makes 29, and then reckon down the tennes, saying, 29 and 10 is 39 and 10
will be 49 and 10 more makes 59, that is 2 pound and 19 shillings which
subscribe in the proper column, and add 2 unto the pounds, saying, 2, 9, 1,
7, 9, 7, makes 35, that is 5 and go 3, then 3, 8, 8, 8, 6, makes 33, that is 3
and go 3, which add to the next rank, as 3, 9, 2, 5, that is 19, subscribe
the simple number, and add the decimall to the next place, as 1, 3, 4 makes 8,
which as a simple number set down, and lastly, 0 and 1 is 1, which prescribe
according to its place, and the whole sum is 18935 L. -- 19 S. -- 11 D. as by
the example in the Table.

Example 5. Addition of mixed numbers in Weight.
Of Weights there be two kinds Lb. Ou. Dr. 99 15 7 110 14 6 87 12 5 108 13 4
56 9 3 84 6 1 548 8 2 chiefly u^ed in England, viz: Averdupois, and Troy
weight; the first of these, which is also called the Civil or Merchants weight,
is divided into two kinds, the greater, and the less: the integer of the
greater, is 112 pound to the hundred weight, and those subdivided into
Quarters, Stones, and Pounds etc. by these are weighed the most gross
commodities; or used by Merchants and Wholesale men. The lesser weight by
those who sell by Retaile, whose integer is a pound, and usually marked as is
the head of the first column, or thus lb this integer is subdivided into
ounces and signed as the second column, and often thus 16 making a pound,
every Ounce is subdivided into 8 Drams or Dragmes, noted as in the table, and
often thus, every Dragme into 3 Scruples, which usually has this mark, etc.
But leaving these parts of intigers for some other time, and sum up these in
the Table according to our prescribed method, and begin first with the least
denomination of this mixed number, which here are Drams, which column added
together makes 26, that is 2 Drams, and 3 integers for to be added unto the
next column, which according to the former order of Addition, will make the
next column 72 Ounces, that is 8 ounces, and 4 integers in the next column
being pounds, which being added into the pounds according to the rules of
Addition, will make the sum of the next column 548, and the total 548 lb- 8
Ounces- 2 Drams; which according to the greater or grosser weight may be thus
expressed 4 C. 7 St. 2 lb 8. 2.

Example 6. Addition of mixed numbers in long or radical Measures.
The Measures in England are Pe. Ya. Fe. 318 5 1 299 4 2 48 5 1 167 0 2 98 4 1
319 5 1 1253 3 2 more various than either of the former two, in this example I
will only use Perches, Yards, and Feet, and the least of these admitting of
many subdivisions, but in finding or measuring of great distances quite
unnecessary; as a League containing 3 Miles: one Mile 8 Furlongs: one Furlong
40 Pole or Perches: one Perch 5 Yards and a half: and 3 Feet a Yard: in this
example a statute Perch is the integer, and it is supposed that the distance
measured between 6 stations are here set down, whose sum is required, which
to find, begin first with the least denomination, where I find 8 Feet, that
is 2 Yards or integers in the next column; so setting down 2 feet in its
proper column, I add the other 6 feet as 2 yards or integers to the next
column, which will make the sum there 25, that is 3 Yards and 4 Perches:
where I subscribe the parts, and add the 22 yards as 4 Perches to the next
column, which will make the first rank of figures there 53, and these being in
this column, all of one denomination, I subscribe 3, and go 5 decimalls in
the next rank, as by the former method, and so continue on, until they be all
added together, whose total sum is 1253 Porches, 3 Yards, 2 Feet, for the
distance of the 6 stations; and being 320 Porches make one Mile, containing 8
Furlongs, and every one of those 40 Pole, you may write the total of the
distance thus, 3 Miles, 7 Furlongs, 13 Poles, 3 Yards, 2 Feet: here you must
observe in subscribing the parts to note when you have done, whether the
fractions or parts of several denominations will not make an integer, as
sometimes 'twill happen, when a part of a denomination must be had to make an
integer; as in this case where 5 yards, 1 foot, and 6 inches, makes a Porch, or
16 feet and a half, and so it would have happened here, if the sum remaining
in the column of yards had been 5; and so in diverse other cases might be
instanced.

SUBTRACTION. Parag. 3. The second species.
THe property of this Species, is to find the difference between any two
numbers given; which is found by drawing, or taking one number from another,
the residue or remainder is the difference between them, which consequently
being added to the lesser, will make a number equal to the greater, the
difference being the excess between them: as if 1 were to be taken from 9, the
remainder or difference will be 8, which excess added to 1, will make it 9,
equal to the greater number given: so if 6 were subtracted from 8, the
remainder will be 2, which difference added to 6, makes 8 the greater number,
or equal to it: for nothing that is compounded can be the same: Yet 2 Pintes
will make 1 Quart, and 4 Quarts 1 Gallon, but leaving this for Logicians to
discuss, I will proceed.

When any subtraction is to be made, the lesser must be deducted from the
greater, or equal things from other quantities that are equal, but a greater
from a less cannot be deducted in the whole, yet in particulars they may, when
the praecedent numbers toward the left hand shall be greater, from whence the
subtraction is to be made, as shall be illustrated by examples, and first
observe to write in figures the greater number, and under that the lesser, and
in such order as was prescribed in Addition, according to their ranks and
places, whether they be Ciphers or significant figures as unites under unites,
tennes under tennes, etc. Yet notwithstanding when the lesser number is under
the greater according to their places, a significant figure may be under a
cipher, or a greater under the less; in such cases, take an unite from the
place before it, toward the left hand, it will be 10 in that rank, which add
to it, and then subtract the former number, and keep the unite which was
borrowed, in your mind, and add that to the lower number in the next place;
for the upper number was to have been an unite less, therefore if the lower
precedent number be made a unite greater it is all one: as if 9 were to be
subtracted from 10; and placed according to my direction, it cannot be taken
from a cipher alone, but as a decimall it may, and 1 will remain. Again,
admit 19 to be subtracted from 21, 9 cannot be taken from 1, therefore suppose
an unite borrowed of 2 and then the former 1 will be made 11, from whence take
9, and there will remain 2, now it is all one whether I make 2 in the 21 but 1,
or the Decimall 1 I borrowed be added to 1 in the 19, and so make that 2, which
is the best way, and then take 2 from 2 and nothing remains but 2, the first
subtraction; for the difference betwixt 21 and 19. If several numbers were to
be subtracted, from diverse other sums, collect them all into one by Addition,
and likewise those which are to be subtracted, and then find the difference
between them; for this rule or Species admits but of two sums; these
principles observed, the rest will be cleared by examples following.

Example 1. Arithmeticall and Geometrical demonstrations.
Number in Arithmetic, and a Line in Geometry have an undoubted Symmetrie, or
proportion in all their parts, being both of the first quantity, as was said
and proved already: and here in this example, if the line C were to be taken
from the line A or laid upon it, the line C would extend it self to B; from
whence it is evident, A, B, would be the difference betwixt them, which
remainder is equal to B, Again, suppose the line A were a Statute perch or
Pole, and divided into inches, it would contain 198 of those equal parts, and
admit the line C were 12 foot or 144 inches, to be taken from A, having placed
them right under one an other, begin with the unites, and say; take 4 from 8
and there will remain 4. then go to the rank of decimalls and say, take 4 out
of 9 and there will remain 5, which place under the line in the second rank,
then proceed to the place of hundreds, where you will find 1 taken from 1, and
nothing will remain; so 54 inches is the residue, or difference between the
two lines which was required.

Example 2.
Henry the 8, in the year Anno Domini salvatoris 1653 Anno Domini salvatoris
1536 The difference of years 117 of our Lord and Savior 1536, made himself
the Head of the Protestant Church in his own Dominions, and Thomas Lord
Cromwell his Vicar General under him: and in the year of Christ 1653, Oliver
Cromwell Lord General for the new State, was made Protector over all the three
Kingdoms; and here it is required the annual revolutions, or the years
elapsed between them. First, set down the year present, which is the greater
number, and under that the less, each figure according to his degree or place,
then say, take 6 out of 3, which cannot be done, without borrowing one of 5,
that is 10 in that place, which added to 3 will make 13, so take 6 from 13 and
there will remain 7, which place beneath the line, drawn to part the
remainder, from the numbers to be subtracted, and under 6, then say 1 and 3 is
4, which taken from 5, and there remains 1, which write under 3, then take 5
out of 6 and there will remain 1, which set down in its place, then take 1
from 1 and nothing will remain, so the difference between these years is 117,
and so many annual revolutions of the Sun are elapsed.

Example 3.
There was a Merchant lb. Money borrowed 5000 Money repaid 4975 Remaining due
025 who had borrowed at one time 3200 pound, and yet to go forward with his
designs, was constrained to take up more as 1500, and presently after that 300
l, upon the return of his adventure, the Merchant sold his goods so soon as he
could, to pay his Creditor, whom he brought at one time 4975 li. and it was
required to know what the difference was between the money borrowed, and the
sum paid. First, collect together all the several sums that were lent,
which will make 5000 lb and set it down, and being it is evident, the money
repaid was less, subscribe that under the greater, then draw a line and
subtract them, saying, take 5 from 10 and there will remain 5, and 8 out of 10
there will remain 2, which write in the second place: and proceed, saying, 1
which was borrowed, and 9 will make 10, take 10 from 10 and nothing remains;
then again say 1 and 4 makes 5, take 5 out 5 and nothing will remain: the last
cipher was set down to keep the place, being there were more to be subtracted,
and something might have remained, which is not at the first seen to young
practitioners, and no prejudice to any: the difference is 25 li. and so much
money is remaining due to the Creditor, besides Interest, which according to
the time is to be considered.

Example 4.
There was a Merchant lb. The Bank 1900 The su^me known 892 The difference
1008 who upon a foreign employment made two of his servants Cash-keepers in
his absence, and commanded them to put all the money they should receive into a
Counter or common Bank, whereof he took the key himself, and left in his
treasury 95 li. before his return, one of the Cash-keepers died, and calling
the other to an account of what money he had received, he made it appear by
Bonds and other cancelled Deeds, that there was 797 li. put into the common
Treasure by him; but what his fellow servant had done he knew not: the Merchant
opening his Counter found in it 1900 li. and it is required to know how much
money the servant which was dead had received: first add the stock which was
left, viz: 95 li. to the money received 797 li. the sum is 892, which as in
the example, set underneath the total sum found in the Bank, viz: 1900 li.
the difference will show 1008 li. the true sum, which the other servant had
received.

Example 5. Subtraction of mixed numbers in Coin.
There was a Farmer, who had L S D Q 1000 0 0 0 999 19 11 3 0000 00 00 1
borrowed 1000 li. of an Usurer; or at least wrackt up, by extortion, with
Interest upon interest until extended to that sum as that the Farmer knew
not what to do; the Usurer having more Law of his side than equity, less
mercy than a she Wolf upon her prey, and now an opportunity by the extremity
of Law, and virtue of his Bonds, the day of forfeiture near at hand; not
commiserating the poor man's case, or complaints, or admitting of delays, in
prolonging time, any more than death: the Farmer in this exigent made recourse
to his friends, engaging them, pawning his goods and credit, so at last with
the help of his Wives butter-money, he raised the sum subscribed in the
margent: the Usurer seeing 999 li. refused to receive it, gaping still after
the forfeiture, but in vain, for with the broken money 'twas right to a
farthing, as by Subtraction will appear in the example; take 3 farthings out of
nothing you cannot, then borrow an intiger in the next place which is 1 D, or 4
Q, then say, take 3 out of 4 and 1 Q will remain; again 1 D borrowed and 11 D
is 1 shilling, which take from nothing you cannot, but from an intiger borrowed
in the next column you may, and nothing will remain: then proceed and say, 1 S
borrowed added to 19 S makes 1 Li. or 20 S. and being there is a cipher over
it, borrow an integer in the next place which are L. 1 being 20 S. take 20 out
of 20 and nothing remains, therefore subscribe a cipher as before: then in the
column of pounds sterling, say, 1 borrowed and 9 is 10, take 10 out of 10 and
nothing remains; set down a cipher, and say again 1 borrowed and 9 is 10, take
10 out of nothing I cannot, borow 1 of the next place, as before, (these being
all of one denomination) then take 10 from 10 and nothing remains, and so
proceed till all be subtracted and nothing remains, so in conclusion there is
only remaining 1 Q. which stands for Quadrans; in our Coin it is taken for
the fourth part of a Penny, that is, a Farthing, and he who pays to that, the
Proverb declares an honest man.

Example 6. Subtraction of mixed numbers in Weight.
The letters in the head of this lb O P G 670 3 18 20 369 8 19 4 300 6 19 16
Table denotes in each column the pounds and parts according to Troy weight, lb
pounds; O ounces, whereof 12 makes one pound; P for peny-weight, twenty of
those makes an ounce; G grains, 24 of them do make a peny-weight. There was a
Merchant that brought over two quantities of unrefined silver, one Mass
weighed 670 lb. 3 O. 18 P. 20 G. The lesser Mass 369 lb. 8 O. 19 P. 4 G. when
they were refined, and in Lingots; the lesser quantity at 5 shillings the
ounce, did come but to so much as was their difference in weight between either
Mass, which is here required; having placed them according to their pounds,
and parts, as in the Table; subtract one from the other, beginning with the
least first, as in the other examples, and say, take 4 G. from 20, and there
will remain 16; then to the next column, where 19 Penny weight is to be taken
from 18, but cannot, therefore take 19 from 38, and there will remain 19 P. 1
ounce which was borrowed and 8 will be 9, take 9 from 3 is impossible, take 9
from 15 and there will remain 6 ounces, 1 lib. borrowed and 9 is 10, take 10
from 10 and nothing remains, 1 and 6 will be 7, take 7 out of 7 and nothing
will remain, subscribe a cipher as before; and lastly, take 3 from 6 and 3 will
remain; so the difference is 300 lib. 6 O. 19 P. 16 G. which at 5 shillings the
ounce, that is 3 li. sterling the lib. comes unto into money 901 L. 14 S. 11 D.

Example 7. Subtraction of mixed numbers in Measure.
This examp^e is of Land measure, Acres R P 9012 1 8 912 1 3^ 8099 3 18 wherein
observe generally throughout England, that although there be Customary and
Statute-measure, whereof the first is very numerous, yet in all and every one,
there are 40 square Pole in a Rood, and 4 Rood in an Acre, and the question is
here of a Man who had two sons, and in his last Will bequeathed to his eldest
son 9 Lordships but no Manours, which were in content upon the survey 9012
Acres, 1 Rood and 8 Perches; and to his youngest son he gave Nonsuch and
Drownland in a County of the Moon, containing by supposition 912 Acres, 1
Rood, and 30 Pole, surveyed by Telescopes, and it is required to know how much
one brother had in content more than the other; having placed them, as in the
Table, take 30 P. from 48 and there will remain 18, 1 I borrowed and 1 makes 2,
take 2 from 5 and there will remain 3 R. then say again 1 and 2 is 3, which
taken from 12 and there will remain 9, then 1 and 1 makes 2, that taken from
11, and 9 remains, which subscribe as before; then say, 1 and 9 makes 10, take
10 out of 10 and nothing will remain, there subscribe a cipher, and being there
are no more figures in the lesser number, subtract the last 1 which was
borrowed out of 9 and the remainder will be 8, so the residue or difference
between them is 8099 A. 3 R. 18 P. as in the Table you may see.

An Examine of Addition and Subtraction,

Or a trial whether you have done right or no, there be diverse rules, but the
best and general way, is to make one of these Species prove the other; as when
diverse numbers are added together, from the sum subtract the parts, and you
will produce the former numbers; and where a subtraction is made, to try that;
add the difference or remainder, to the numbers subtracted which is least, and
the sum will give the greater number; or from any number subtracted, take the
difference from the greater given number, and the remainder will be the lesser
number that was subtracted: for always, where there are 2 numbers subtracted,
as the remainder is the difference betwixt those numbers given, so the lesser
given number is the difference between the remainder, and the greater given
number; for every remainder must be less then the greater number, by the
quantity of the lesser, therefore it is the difference between them; yet though
it is evident I will illustrate it with examples in both Species, how they
mutually do try one another.

In the first example of Addition, if from the sum of 792 you take C, 231, the
remainder will be 561, the sum of A and B, from whence subtract either of
their parts, and the other will remain, as take away A 320, and there will
remain 241 for B, or if 241 had been subtracted from 561, there had remained
320 for A, and thus you may proceed in any other, either of one denomination or
of many.

To try whether Subtraction made, be true, take the last example of mixed
numbers, and say 18 and 30 is 48, that is 8 Pole and 1 intiger in the next
column, so proceed, 1 and 3 makes 4 and 1 will be 5, that is 1 Roode and go
11 Acres; then 1 and 9 is 10 and 2 will be 12 that is 2 and go 1 decimall,
which with 9 and 2 will be 11, subscribe 1 and go 1, which added to 9 makes
10, a cipher and go 1, lastly 1 and 8 makes 9, so the sum is 9012 A, 1 R, 8
P, as before: or to try this by subtraction, take the remainder from the
greater number, their difference will be the lesser number which was
subtracted, if it were rightly performed, as take 18 from 48 and there will
remain 30 P, take 4 Roode out of 5 and there will remain 1 R, take 10 Acres
out of 12 and there will remain 2, take 10 out of 11 and there will remain 1,
then take 1 out of 10 and the remainder will be 9, lastly 1 and 8 is 9, take 9
from 9, and nothing remains, and the other figures subscribed will make 912 A.
1 R. 30 P. the lesser given number: and thus by finding either of them by the
remainder, it proves the work undoubtedly true.

MULTIPLICATION. The third Species, and fourth Paragraph.
MVltiplication is the increasing of any number by another, so often as there
be unites in one of the numbers; or from any two numbers given to find a
third, which shall contain one of the numbers as many times as there be unites
in the other.

To Multiplication there appertains three principle members, viz: the
Multiplicand, the Multiplier, and the Product.

The Multiplicand, is the number given for to be multiplied, and is properly
the greater number in respect of order, but of no necessity; for it is all one
whether 4 be multiplied by 3, or 3 increased by 4, 'twill be either way 12.

The Multiplier is usually the least, and always the lower number: it is to
increase the Multiplicand as many times as there be unites contained in the
Multiplier; as if 6 were to be multiplied by 4, they would produce 24, and so
would 6 times 4; that is 4 added 6 times together, for the number of unites
contained in the Multiplier.

The Product is the number produced by the mutual increasing one number by
another, as the Multiplier by the Multiplicand; as if 9 were multiplied by 2,
the Product will be 18, or 8 times 9 is 72.

All numbers increasing but according to the unites contained in them, you may
divide the Multiplier, the Multiplicand, or both of them into what parts you
please, then multiply those parts, and add them all together, they will
produce the same number; for the whole is in the same proportion to the whole
as all the parts are, as in the last example; divide 9 the Multiplicand into
what parts you please, as 2, 3, 4, these making 9 in all, then increase all
those parts by 8 the Multiplier, and they will produce 16, 24, 32, whose sum
is 72, and so is 9 multiplied by 8, which Multiplier divide into what parts you
will, as admit in two, viz: 3 and 5, and then multiply the former parts of the
Multiplicand, which were 2, 3, 4, by 3, and then by 5; the Products will be 6,
9, 12, and 10, 15, 20, all which Products added together make 72, that is 8
times 9 as before, and the like of any other; for as an unite or 1 is to the
Multiplier, so will the Multiplicand be in proportion to the Product, and the
contrary, as by examples shall be illustrated.

A Demonstration.
A Table of Multiplication.
A F B 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 4 8 12
16 20 24 28 32 36 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 7 14 21
28 35 42 49 56 63 8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 9 18 27 36 45 54 63 72 81 D E C

This Table consists of the mutual multiplication of all the nine significant
figures, proceeding from an unite to 9 either way; that is, from A to B, and
from A to D, according to the orderly succession of these numerall characters,
every one having their several Products, or number of unites contained in
their multiplications, which ought for to be learned without book, and
imprinted in your memory; yet to facilitate the labor of young beginners, I
have here subscribed this Table, easy to be understood, and a readily to be
remembered, divided into 91 little squares; every one containing the Product,
made by the simple figure in the head of the Table over it, and that in the
side right against it, on the left hand; every one increasing, or decreasing in
his column, according to the unites in the Multiplier, or Multiplicand; as for
example, admit 5 and 6 were to be multiplied, I look the one number in the head
of the Table, and the other in the side, in their common square or angle you
will find 30, their true Product; and observe how that column under 6
increases and decreases by 6, and that of 5 by 5: thus, 9 times 9 will be found
81, and their columns increased by 9, and so the like of any others.

And farther you may here observe how every simple figure multiplied in its
self, is terminated, until it returns to its own character again; as for
example, 1 multiplies nothing, but still remains an unite, being no number of
it self; 2 multiplied by 2 ends in 4, 8, 6, and fourthly is terminated in 2
its root; 3 by 3 ends in 9, 7, 1, and fourthly in 3 again; 4 by 4 ends in 6,
and secondly in 4, next 5 and 6 multiplied in themselves, are terminated in
their own figures, and from thence are called Circular numbers; 7 multiplied by
7 ends in 9, 3, 1, and fourthly, in its self; 8 by 8 ends in 4, 2, 6, and
fourthly, in its self again; 9 multiplied by 9 will end in 1, and in every
second multiplication is terminated in 9, its own root, or number again
produced.

Multiplication is a quadrature and has this Analogy or proportion with a
superficial square called in Geometry the second quantity, a figure composed
of lines, whose sides are divided into parts, and intersected with paralle's,
or equidistant lines, as is the last figure A, B, C, D, making thus both
Squares, and right angled Parallelograms, equal to the numbers multiplied in
themselves together; as for example, the Table or square A, C, has every side
divided into 9 equal parts, as admit Poles, Yards, Feet, Inches or what you
please; suppose these sides as A, B, and A, D, in Feet, and intersected with
lines, the whole Square will contain 81 square Feet, for the true superficial
content of it, so if 9 were multiplied by 9, the Product will be the same, or
if the long Square A, F, E, D, were given, the superficial content of this
Geometrical figure, called a Parallelogram, would be 45 square Feet; and so is
the product of 9 multiplied by 5: If it were required to know how many feet
there were in a Yard square, 3 Feet makes a yard in length, therefore if every
side of such a square were divided into 3 equal parts, and intersected with
right lines, there will be found 9 square feet, as in the Table will appear;
and so 3 multiplied by 3 will produce 9, and in these, the proportion is
continued; as an unite is unto the number, or side of the Square given, so will
the side be to the whole Square; or as 1 to the Multiplier, so will the
Multiplicand be unto the Product, as in the former examples; as 1 to A, B, 9,
so will A, D, 9 be to 81 the whole Square or Product, or as 1 to A, F, 5, so A,
D. 9 in proportion to 45 the long Square A, F, E, D, and so the like of any
other in this kind whether greater or less, and so much for the Sympathy
betwixt Multiplication, and Geometrical Squares of the second quantity.

The way and form of Multiplication when there is more than one significant
figure in the Multiplicand, Multiplier, or in both of them.
When there be several figures to be multiplied both in the Multiplier and
Multiplicand, set down first the greater number, and under that the lesser,
according to their degrees or places, as unites under unites, tennes under
tennes, hundreds underneath hundreds, etc. as has been directed in diverse
other examples already; this done, draw a line underneath them both whereby to
separate them from the numbers increasing by their mutual multiplications,
proceeding from the right hand in order toward the left; every figure of the
Multiplier, must be increased or multiplied, into every particular figure of
the Multiplicand, from whence there will arise so many Products, as there be
figures in the Multiplier; the first figure in every Product ought to be placed
exactly under that figure which multiplies, and so in order with a convenient
distance toward the left hand, for all the several Products must be added
together, whereby to find the result or total of them: and in every figure as
you multiply, set down the Product if under 10; but if a decimall or decimalls,
subscribe a cipher; if a compound number, write down the significant figure,
and keep the decimall or decimalls in your mind, and as you multiply the next
figure, add them in as unites; and so proceed until every figure of the
Multiplier be increased, by all the figures of the Multiplicand in order as was
said already, and shall be now illustrated with several Paradigma's following.

To find how many days there be contained in a common Year consisting of 52
Weeks and one day. Example 1.
Having set down the 52 Multiplicand 52 The Multiplier 7 The Product 364 The
odd day 1 The total of days in a year 365 Weeks, subscribe underneath it, the
days in one Week, which are 7, and being a simple number, I set it under 2, in
the unite place; and since there are so many days in one week, there must be
52 times so many in a year, besides the odd day: then say 7 times 2 makes 14,
for which subscribe 4 below the line, and right under 7, and keep the decimall
in your mind, they say 7 times 5 (as by the Table of Multiplication) will make
35, and the 1 decimall in mind makes 36, therefore subscribe 6 right
underneath the 5, and keep the 3 decimalls in mind; but since there is no
more, write it down, and the product is 364, the number of days in 52 weeks;
and being there is one day more in a year, add that in, and then the total
will be 365, the true number of days in the Suns annual revolution, the thing
required.

The days and parts of a year being known, to find the number of hours
contained in it. Example 2.
First set down the greater Multiplicand 365 Multiplier 24 The Products 1460
730 The total 8760 number, and then the Multiplier, according to the places of
the figures, in this 24 being the hours contained in a natural day, and then
say 4 times 5 is 20, for which subscribe a cipher, and keep 2 decimalls in
mind; then 4 times 6 is 24 and 2 is 26, that is 6 and go 2, then say 4 times
3 is 12, and 2 in mind is 14, and being there are no more figures in the
Multiplicand, write them down, and then the first Product will be 1460; then
go to the second figure of the Multiplier, which here is 2; and say, 2 times 5
is 10, subscribe a cipher under 2 the Multiplier, and go 1 decimall, then 2
times 6 is 12 and 1 makes 13, that is 3 and go 1, then 2 times 3 is 6, and 1
in mind makes 7, which write down under the 1, and then add the Products
together, the total will be 8760, the number of hours in 365 days, and since
the Julian account, makes the magnitude of the year for to consist of 6 hours
more, add 6 unto the Product, and the total will be 8766 hours contained in a
common year.

To find how many minutes are contained in a year. Example 3.
Here you are to know the Multiplicand 8766 Multiplier 60 0000 52596 Product
525960 parts or minutes of an hour, which are 60, those must be the Multiplier,
and 8766, the hours contained in a year the multiplicand, then say no times
6, or 6 times nothing, is nothing, therefore subscribe so many ciphers, as
there be figures in the Multiplicand, and then begin with 6, and say 6 times 6
is 36, there set down 6 beneath the line right underneath the Multiplier 6;
then say 6 times 6 makes 36, and 3 decimalls in mind will be 39, there
subscribe 9 and go 3, then 6 times 7 will be 42, and 3 in mind is 45, that is
5 and go 4, then 6 times 8 is 48, and 4 decimalls in mind will make 52, which
subscribe, there being no more figures to be Multiplied; the product of these
is 525960, and so many minutes there are in a vulgar year, but this and all
such questions are performed a readier way, as you shall see by the examples
following.

Breviats, or compendious Abridgements in Multiplication exemplified. Example 4.
If any number be given Multiplicand 1000 Multiplier 25 The Product 25000 for
to be multiplied, which has only ciphers, with an unite upon the left hand;
being 1 is no number, and consequently multiplies not, annex all the ciphers to
the significant figures toward the right hand, and the work is ended, as
suppose 1000 Soldiers, and every, one received for his pay 25 Crowns, the
product will be 25000 Crowns for the whole sum paid; and so for any other, as
10, 100, 1000, 10000, etc. but if there be any other number given to be
multiplied, with ciphers following any significant figure or figures, in all
such cases neglect the ciphers, and making the lesser number then Multiplier,
and proceed as before, and to the product annex all the ciphers that were
toward the right hand either in the Multiplier, Multiplicand, or in both of
them, as in the former example where 60 was the Multiplier, if 8766 had been
multiplied by 6, the Product would have been 52596, to which if a cipher had
been annexed, the sum would have been 525960, as before.

When ciphers in any Multiplier are included between significant figures, the
multiplication may be easily abreviated thus. Example 5.
Admit 9080 were a number Multiplicand 908 Multiplier 309 8172 2724 Product
280572 given for to be multiplied by 3090, here according unto the last
Paradigma, I do neglect the ciphers in both numbers, and so set down 908, and
under that 309; then draw a line underneath them as in the Table, and beginning
with 9 the first Multiplier, say. 9 times 8 is 72, both which figures
subscribe, because a cipher follows in the Multiplicand, then say 9 times 9 is
81, which also set down, there being no more to come the cipher is next, which
makes nothing, but only assumes a place; therefore go unto the next
significant figure which is 3, and by reason of the cipher in the Multiplicand
you may say, 3 times 8 is 24, and 3 times 9 is 27, which subscribe in order
observing punctually to place the first figure of that Product under the figure
of the Multiplier, as in this 4 under 3, and so in order proceed toward the
left hand, by this means the place of the cipher is gained, and being between
the first and last Product can be nothing, nor have a place in adding them
together: the Product of these figures is 280572, and being the Multiplier and
Multiplicand had either of them a cipher in the first place on the right hand,
annex the two ciphers to this sum, and then the total will be 28,057,200,
the solution required.

When any number is given for to be multiplied by one figure, or by two, if one
be an unite, it may be performed compendiously thus. Example 6.
It is required to know 112 Multiplicand A 896 The Product B 5376 The total A,
B, 14336 how many ounces there be in 800 li. of the Merchants weight; first set
down their hundred, which is 112 li. then draw a line underneath it, and 8
being the Multiplier, you may keep it in mind, and say 8 times 2 is 16, that
is 6 and go 1: then 8 times 1 is 8 and 1 will be 9, which subscribe, then say
again 8 times 1 is but 8, which having set down, the Product of 8 hundred
weight is 896 lib. as in the Table, which is to be reduced into ounces, 16 of
them making 1 li. an unite being here in the second place toward the left hand
multiplies not, but will produce the Multiplicand, and remove it one degree
farther (according to my former prescribed rules of Multiplication) therefore
in all such cases as these, you may neglect the unite, and keep the other
figure in mind for your Multiplier, and place your Product a degree backward,
as in this example, A is the Multiplicand for to be increased by 16, or 6 kept
in mind, then say 6 times 6 is 36, that is 6 and go 3 decimalls, then 6 times
9 is 54 and 3 will be 57; which is 7 and reserve 5; then say 6 times 8 will
make 48 and 5 is 53, which figures subscribe, there being no more to be
multiplied, so this Product is at B 5376, which is placed one degree toward
the right hand, whereby the unite place in A the Multiplicand, may stand in the
decimall place of the Product, and so it would have done according to the
common way of Multiplication, but then beneath it, as it is now above it: these
two numbers must be added together, whose total is A, B, 14,336, the true
number of ounces in 8 C lib. gross weight; the line drawn between A and B is
here for directions only, and in your work is better omitted.

How to multiply the shortest way with two figures, when the first figure on
the right hand is an unite. Example 7.
It is required to find Multiplicand 6336 Product 25344 The total 259776 how
many inches there be in 41 Miles, one containing 320 Perches, every Perch in
length 16 feet and a half, and 12 inches the length of one Foot; now in a Pole
there is 33 half feet, which multiplied by 6 inches the Product will be 198,
the number of inches in a Perch or Pole, that multiplied by 320, the Perches in
a Mile, or by 32, the Product will be 6336, to which add a cipher and the
Product is then 63,360, the number of inches in a Mile, and 41 is the distance
given: now omitting the cipher, set down 6336 which is the Multiplicand, and 41
is to be the Multiplier, an unite can only produce 6336, and being the 1 is to
the right hand, set the Product of the other figure one degree toward the left
hand, keeping that Multiplier in your mind, and say, 4 times 6 is 24, that is
4 and go 2, then 4 times 3 is 12, and 2 makes 14, that is 4 and go 1, then 4
times 3 is 12 and 1 decimall in mind is 13, that is 3 and go 1, then 4 times
6 is 24 and 1 is 25; the total is 259776, to which annex the cipher omitted on
the right hand, the total is 2,597,760, the number of inches contained in 41
Miles, the thing sought.

Example 8.
If you are to multiply by 11, 28800 28800 28800 28800 316800 316800 it is all
one whether you place the number given as the Product, a degree forward or
backward, for it comprehends both the last examples in one, as in this
Paradigma will appear, there are 11 half Yards or Cubes, in the length of a
Perch, 320 makes a Mile, 3 Miles a League, and the distance from London to
Norwich is 30 Leagues, and how many Cubes or half Yards are there conta^n'd
between those Cities, in one League there are 960 Perches, in 30 Leagues 28,800
Perches, and this Multiplied by 11 is the question required, in all such cases
you have no more to do, but subscribe the same number again, which was to be
Multiplied, observing to remove all the figures one place or degree either
backwards or forwards, the sum of those two numbers will give the product, as
you may see in the example; all these ways are as easy as shorr, if well
observed: but otherwise much more subject to error then the common way.

Two several explications of Multiplication continued. Example 9.
These which some calls continual Multiplication, is nothing but the
Multiplying of several numbers into one product; that is, the third number
multiplied into the product of the first and second, and that into a fourth,
etc. As for example. 4, 7, 10, 13, admit the numbers given, it is all one where
you begin but let it be at 4, and 7 multiplied makes 28, that by 10 will be
280, and this product multiplied by 13 makes 3640, the first question solved;
secondly when the Multiplicand consists of several denominations, as 5 L. 6 S.
8 D. to be increased by 6 produces 32 L. viz. 6 by 8 is 48, a cipher and go 4
S. then 6 times 6 is 36, and 4 in mind is 40 S. a cipher and go 2 L. then 6
times 5 is 30, and 2 is 32 L.

DIVISION. Parag: 5. The fourth species.
DIvision is to separate any quantity given into any parts assigned, or to
find how often one number is contained in any other; or from any two numbers
given to find a third, that shall consist of so many unites as the one number
is comprehended in the other.

To Division there belongs three principle members or parts, viz. the Dividend,
the Divisor, and the Quotient.

The Dividend is the number given for to be divided, and is the greater number.

The Divisor is the number by which you must divide, and is the lesser number.

The Quotient is that number, which is produced by division, and contains so
many unites, as the Divisor is comprehended in the Dividend, from whence this
Analogy or proportion proceeds, viz. as the Dividend is to the Divisor, so will
the Quotient be unto an unite, and the contrary; as the Divisor is to an unite,
so will the Dividend be to the Quotient.

Division proved by Arithmeticall and Geometrical Demonstrations.
To illustrate this Species, there was a man had 6 Daughters, to whom he
bequeathed 30 fields or enclosures, all of equal value and content; and so, as
afafter his death, every one should have an equal portion or share in the
land, and if any died before they married, the rest were to have it divided
amongst them equally; suppose all the fields to be enclosed with the square A,
B, C, D, the Father departed, the land was thus divided: 30 is the number of
fields, which is the Dividend, 6 the number of Daughters must be the Divisor,
as A, B, then will A, D, 5 or B, C, be the Quotient, for 6 is contained in 30,
5 times, that is so often as there be unites in the Quotient, as by the number
of little squares is evident, within a year, 5 of these coheires married, and
the youngest was prevented against her will you know by untimely Death who by
this means caused more divisions in the estate, for now 5 was the Divisor, and
6 the Quotient, for so many times 5 is contained in 30, which is in proportion
to A, D, 5 as A, B, 6 is unto an unite, this is directly contrary to
Multiplication, for A, B, multiplied into A, D, or which is all one C, B, in C,
D, will make 30, for the whole square A, B, C, D, which divided by one of the
sides will produce the other, and so any number whatsoever that is multiplied
by an other, will be divided by the same, and Multiplication and Division, do
try and prove one an other, as shall be shown hereafter. This is the
foundation, and now I will show the operation of it, illustrated with diverse
Paradigmas.

Example 1.
There was a man ^ who by his industry had gained 963 li. and falling sick
(past hope of recovery) made his Will; he had three Sons, to whom he
bequeathed his estate impartially, not swayed by the custom of the Country,
nor overruled by his affection, not knowing which of them would deserve it
best, he distributed his estate equally to them all, which after his departure
was accordingly divided; and first of all in division set down the Dividend,
which in this example is 963 li: the Divisor is 3, which place under the first
figure on the left hand viz. 9, then see how many times 3 is contained in 9,
which will be found 3 times; and having made an arch, or such a line, as in the
example (upon the right hand of the Dividend) set down the Quotient, which
must be multiplied into the Divisor, and the product subtracted from the
Dividend as 3 times 3 is 9, take 9 out of 9, and nothing remains; then remove
the Divisor one place or degree toward the right hand, as under 6; then find
how many times 3 will be contained in 6, which is twice, therefore put 2 in the
Quotient, which multiplied by 3 makes 6, which take from 6 the Dividend, and
nothing remains, remove 3 again to the next place, as under 3, which is there
contained but once, put 1 in the Quotient, which times 3 is but 3, and that
taken from 3 the Dividend, nothing remains; every ones share being 321 L, and
so many times 3 the Divisor is contained in 963 L, the Dividend, if any thing
remains in making of subtraction place it over the figure or figures, from
whence subtracted, and cancel those figures you have done with all, With a
light dash of your pen, and if any thing remains at last, place it beneath
your work, in this example nothing remains, in which you may see the form,
and precedents in those following.

Example 2.
There was a man ^ beyond sea who had received of a Merchants Factor by Bills
of Exchange 1726 Crowns, and it is required to know how many pounds Sterling it
is; 4 of those pieces making 20 shillings or 1 lb. therefore 4 must be the
Divisor, having set down 1726 the Dividend, and made a place for the Quotient,
4 being not contained in an unite, therefore set 4 under 7, and see how many
times it will be had in the compound number over it, viz: in 17, and you will
find 4 times, then put 4 in the Quotient, which multiplied into the Divisor,
the Product is 16, which taken from 17, there will remain main 1, which place
over 7, and cancel 17 of the Dividend; and 4 the Divisor, place again under 2;
then seek how many times it will be contained in 12 (which is over it
uncancelled) and you will find 3, which put into the Quotient, and that
multiplied by 4, the Product is 12, which subtracted from 12 nothing remains,
for order place a cipher over 2, and cancel the 12: lastly, remove 4 the
Divisor under 6, in which, 4 is but once contained, therefore put 1 in the
Quotient, and subtract 4 from 6, and 2 will remain, which write down under all
the work; where you may see 1726 Crowns, being divided by 4 (the parts of a
pound Sterling) the Quotient is 431 lib. and 2 Crowns or 10 shillings more, as
in the operation appears.

Example 3.
Here is given 2000 ^ Drams, and it is required to know how many Ounces there
be contained in that weight; being 8 Drams do make an Ounce, 8 is the Divisor,
which cannot be had in 2, the first figure of the Dividend, therefore set it
under the second place toward the right hand, and then see how many times it
is contained in both those figures, viz: in 20, 3 will be too great, because 3
times 8 is 24, therefore take 2, and set it in the Quotient, and multiply it
into the Divisor, saying, 2 times 8 is 16, which Product subtract from 20 and 4
remains, which place over the cipher; then remove 8 the Divisor to the next
place toward the right hand, and look how often 8 will be contained in 40, and
that is found 5 times just, which put in the Quotient, and say 5 times 8 is 40,
take 40 out of 40, and nothing remains, and cancel as you go all the figures
you have done withal; then remove 8 to the next place, which is under the last
cipher, and being there is nothing more, put a cipher in the Quotient, and the
work is ended, the Quotient 250 Ounces, nothing remaining, and so many will be
found in 2000 Drams, the question solved, hitherto has been examples with but
one figure in the Divisor, the next with many.

How to divide, when the Divisor consists of more figures than one. Example 4.
There is a distance ^ given between two places containing in feet 15000, and
it is required to know how many stadiums it is, one consisting of 625 feet, 8
of them making an Italian Mile, or a thousand paces, 3 of those Miles a League.
Here in this question 15000 feet is the Dividend, or number to be divided, 625
the Divisor, the number of feet in one stadium: observe (as before) to place
the foremost figure of the Divisor under the first figure upon the sinister hand
of the Dividend, if it will contain it, and the other figures following; if
not, remove it one place toward the right hand, and then set down the rest of
the Divisor in order: this done, you are to choose such a figure for the
Quotient, as that being multiplied into all the figures of the Divisor, the
Product shall be equal to the figures over them, or the nearest less; which
you may find by Multiplication, but by the first figure of the Divisor sooner,
and as certain, if you observe the figures following, and by practice will be
made easy, in this example 625 is the Divisor, the first figure 6, cannot be
had in 1, the foremost of the Dividend, therefore place 6 under 5 and the rest
in order, under the other figures: then look how many times 6 will be found in
15, 3 will be too great, for 3 times 6 is 18; then take 2, which put in the
Quotient, and then multiply it, into the first figure on the right hand of the
Divisor viz. 2 times 5 is 10, over which stands a cipher, subtract 10 from 10
and nothing remains, set a cipher and go 1, then say 2 times 2 is 4 and 1
borrowed is 5, take 5 from 10 and 5 will remain, which set over the cipher,
and cancel 0, and go 1, then say 2 times 6 is 12 and 1 borrowed is 13, take
13 from 15 and 2 will remain, cancel 15; and the Divisor as you make
subtraction: this done, remove the Divisor one degree farther, as in this
example, set 6 below 2 of the former divisor, 2 under 5, and 5, under the last
cipher here of the Dividend: then see how often will 6 be in 25 (as yet
uncancell'd) and 'twill be found 4 times, put 4 in the Quotient, and then say 4
times 5 is 20, over which stands a cipher, take 20 from 20 and nothing
remains, set a cipher over it, and keep 2 decimalls in mind, then say 4 times
2 makes 8, and 2 will be 10, which subtracted from 10 nothing remains, place a
cipher over it, and cancel the figures when subtraction is made, then say 4
times 6 is 24 and 1 in mind is 25, which taken from 25 nothing remains, the
reason, of placing ciphers when nothing remains is, that there may be a
significant figure remaining after them to the left hand, which is in value
according to its place or degree; and observe that the remainder is less then
the Divisor, or the work is false in multiplying or subtracting, in this
example 24 stadiums is the Quotient, that is one League, or 3 Miles, for so
many times is 8 contained in 24, the thing required.

To divide a number of diverse denominations, into any parts assigned. Example 5.
To effect this, Li. S. D Q. A 71024 16 3 0 B 3945 16 5 2 there are 2 ways,
the one is for to reduce them into one and the least denomination, and then for
to divide that sum by the number given: and if there be any remainder, you
may reject it, as not of common use: when this is done, reduce the Quotient
into several denominations again: as admit A were the number given in pounds,
shillings, and pence, for to be divided into 18 equal parts: this reduced into
the least denomination of Coin (as Farthings) will be in one sum 68,183,820
Q. this divided by 18, will be 3,787,990 Q. which divided by 4, the number of
Farthings in a Penny, the Quotient will be 946 997 D. 2 Q. the Pence divided by
12 will produce 78916, S, 5 D, the shillings again divided by 20 (so many
making a Pound sterling) the Quotient will be 3945 L, 16 S the remainder, so
the 18 part of A 71,024 L. 16 S. 3 D. will be B 3945 L. 16 S. 5 D. 2 Q. This is
a common way to those who are not conversant in fractions, but this following
is better, shorter and not so subject to error, and thus.

A more compendious way.

First set down the ^ greatest denomination if the Divisor will be contained in
it; if not, multiply it into a less denomination by the parts, and to the
Product add the parts of that denomination (if there be any) and then divide
it by the given Divisor; and if there proves a remainder, multiply that by the
parts of the next denomination, and so proceed to the last, as in this example
71024 li. is the Dividend, 18 the Divisor: the operation will be as in the
former Paradigma's, by which you will find here a Quotient of 3945 li. and the
remainder 14 li.

The last remainder ^ was 14 li. which multiplied by 20 shillings (the parts of
a pound sterling) the Product will be 280 shillings, to which add 16 S. the
sum 296 for the Dividend, which divided by 18, the Quotient will be 16
shillings, and the remainder 8 shillings.

In the last division ^ 8 s. was the remainder, and being there are 12 pence in
1 shilling, that multiplied by 12 the Product is 96 pence, to which add in the
3 D in the question, the sum will be 99 for the Dividend, under which
subscribe the Divisor 18 and divide: the Quotient is 5 D. the remainder 9 D.

The remainder last ^ being 9 Den. which multiplied by 4 makes 36, the Product
in Farthings, which divided by 18, the Quotient is found 2 Farthings, and
nothing remaining, so the 18 part of 71024 Lib. 16 S. 3 D. is found to be 3945
Lib. 16 S. 5 D. 2 Q. as before.

A succinct and perfect way of Division, without removing the Divisor, or
cancelling a figure. Example 6.
This way of all oother ^ that I have seen is the most compendious, facile,
and conformable to practice, this species of Division being contrary to
Multiplication, as in the effect, so in operation, as by their trialls will
more evidently appear, and first of all, you are to observe to set down the
Dividend, and upon the left hand of it (in the same line) the Divisor; then
draw a line right down with your pen, to part the numbers, and draw an other
line unto that, for to separate the Divisor from the Quotient, which is to
stand under it, as in this example, where 1638 years or days are given for to
be divided by 7, make a point with your pen, under that figure of the Dividend,
which first contains the Divisor, reckoned from the foremost figure of the left
hand, supposing the point for to be a period to that number; as here I make a
point under 6, for 7 cannot be had in one, but in 16 it may, and twice, set 2
in the Quotient under the line, beneath the Divisor 7, which multiplied
together is 14, that subtracted from 16 the remainder is 2 which place under 6,
in this form and method you must proceed, never subscribing the products, but
committing them to memory, for they serve but till subtraction can be made,
therefore unnecessary, and would incumber the work, with supernumerarie
figures, for which cause they were omitted in all my former examples, and yet
this a briefer way, as will evidently appear, make an other point even with the
remainder 2, and under the next place of the Dividend as under 3, and ask how
many times 7 will be found in 23, the answer will be 3, then say 3 times 7 is
21, which taken from 23, and 2 will remain, which subscribe under the last
point, and make an other against it under 8; then see how often 7 will be had
in 28, which will be found 4 times, which multiplied by the Divisor 7, the
product will be 28, which taken from 28 nothing remains, the Quotient 234.

To find the Cycle of the Moon, or Golden number. Example 7.
This Prime or Cycle of ^ the Moon is a number proceeding from an unite
increasing every year 1, unto 19, and then begins again, this revolution is to
find the difference betwixt the Solar and Lunary year; for in this period of
time all the Lunations and Aspects of the two Luminaries do return again to
the same places as they had been before; but this computation exceeds the truth
in time 1 hour and a half in 19 years or very near, this number may be
always thus found: Our Blessed Savior was borne in the first year of this
Number, which you will find, if you add one to the year of ou^ Lord Jesus,
and divide the sum by 19, the remainder is the Golden number, and when
nothing remains it is 19, the Quotient is the revolution or period of this
Cycle, since the Sacred Virgin was a Mother, and for the more illustration of
it, take this Paradigma; in the year of Grace, 1654. the Prime is required,
add 1 to it, and then the number is 1655, to be divided by 19, which divisor
place on the left hand of it, parted with a line both from thence, and from the
Quotient to be found, as in the example; then under the first 5 make a point,
for although 1 is contained in 1, 9 cannot be had in 6, this done see how often
1 will be found in 16, if I take 9 (which is the greatest number can be had at
one time) 'twill be too great, for 9 times 1 out of 16, there will remain but
7, when 9 times 9 will be 81 out of 75, therefore set 8 in the Quotient, and
say 8 times 9 is 72, taken from 75, and 3 will remain, which subscribe under
the point, then say 8 times 1 is 8, and 7 decimalls in mind is 15, which taken
from 16, and 1 remains, that subscribed, make another point against 3, under
the next place, and see how often 19 will be contained in 135, or 1 in 13 (the
rest of the Divisor considered) and you will find 7 the nearest, which orderly
place in the Quotient, and with that multiply always by the first figure in
the Divisor upon the right hand, as 7 times 9 produces 63, which taken from
65; or which is all one, take 3 out of 5 and 2 remains, which place under the
point, then say 7 times 1 is 7, and 6 decimalls in mind makes 13, which taken
from 13 nothing remains; so there is only 2 remaining for the Golden number
this present year; and 87 revolutions of this Cycle have been completed, and
1 year more since the Nativity of Christ.

To find the Cycle of the Sun for the Dominicall Letter any year. Example 8.
This is a number proceeding ^ by unites from 1, 2, 3, etc. And so to 28; it
has no relation to the motion of the Sun, but to the Sunday Letter, which
are the first 7 of the Alphaber, serving by turns in a retrograde order, and
every fourth year has 2 Dominicall Letters, so 4 times 7 is the period of
this number, every letter having served in course, both in the common, and Leap
years, and when this number has had a period of 28, the next year it begins
again at 1: the Worlds Redeemer was born in the ninth year of this number;
therefore add 9 to the year of our Lord, in which it is required, divide the
sum by 28, and if nothing remains it is the number sought, and if there does,
that reremainder is the number required for the year current in the Julian
Calendar; and the Quotient will show the revolutions past, as in this example,
where the Cycle of the Sun is required for the year of Christ 1654; unto which
add 9, and the sum will be 1663 for the Dividend, and 28 the Divisor: make a
point under the second 6 from 1, and then see how many times 2 may be contained
in 16; 6 will be too great, for 6 multiplied by 28 the product will be 168,
whereas the 3 first figures are but 166, therefore take 5 for the first
Quotient, which in order multiplied by the former rules into the Divisor, and
the product subtracted from the Dividend, the remainder is 26, before which
make an other point under 3 the last figure of the Dividend, and find a new
Quotient, which in this will be 9, that multiplied, and the product subtracted,
the true remainder will be 11, the number desired for the year 1654 by which
Cycle, the Dominicall Letter will be found A, the Quotient 59, the number of
those Circles revolutions since our Saviors Birth: but here I will say no more
of this, lest I have said too much already, intending here Arithmetic, and not
the computation of Kalenders; but these two questions or propositions I rather
chose, to show how ready for use the remainder stands, being in these the thing
chiefly required, whereas in other questions (excepting such as are of several
denominations) the remainder will be unknown, without the knowledge of
Fractions.

A number of diverse denominations given, for to be divided into any parts
required. Example 9.
Days Hours '''' 730 11 37 0 0 0 A The magnitude of two Years. A Solar Month
contains 30 10 29 2 30 B

Here is given the space of 2 years, and it is required for to know the
greatness of a Solar month, vulgarly accounted the space of 30 days, a
natural day containing 24 hours every hour 60 minutes, commonly noted with
such a dash over it as thus, 60 of them making one Second noted with 2 dashes
of a pen, every Second is divided into 60 parts called Thirds signed with 3
dashes; Fourths with 4 etc. There are in 2 years space 24 Months, therefore
the number given, divided into 24 equal parts solves the question here
propounded; this may be effected by the fifth Example, but better by the way
following, in division of each particular part or denomination thus.

The number of days in ^ 2 years are 730, which must be divided by 24, the
number of months contained in that space of time, having placed your numbers
in order prescribed, make a point under 3 in the Dividend, which done you will
find 3 for the Quotient, that multiplied into the Divisor, and the Product
subtracted from the Dividend, the remainder will be found, then make an other
point a place farther, as under the cipher, and being 24 is not to be had in
10, put a cipher in the Quotient, which is 30 days, and the remainder 10, set
down 30 in the former Table under days.

The last remainder was 10 ^ days, which convert into hours the next
denomination less, by multiplying of it into 24 (the hours contained in a
natural day) the Product will be 240, to which add 11 hours (being parts of
the 2 years given) the sum will be 251 hours: which divide by 24, the
Quotient will be 10 hours, and the remainder 11, place 10 in the first Table
against B under the title of Hours.

The last remainder ^ was 11 hours, which multiplied by 60, the minutes in one
hour, the Product is 660, to which add 37 minutes against A, the sum will
be 697 for the Dividend, which divided by 24 the Quotient will be 29 minutes,
and the remainder 1, set 29 against B in the column of minutes.

In the last operation ^ there was but 1 minute remaining, which is 60 seconds,
that divided by 24, the Quotient will be 2 seconds, and the remainder 12: place
the 2, in the first Table against B, under the title of Seconds.

The 12 Seconds which ^ did last remain, multiplied into Thirds (the next
denomination less) the Product will be 720, which divided by 24, the Quotient
will be 30 Thirds, and nothing remaining, if any thing bad, you might have
continued them in this manner to Fourths etc. The last Quotient put into the
Table, you will find against B, that a Solar Month contains 30 Days, 10
Hours, 29 Minutes, 2 Seconds, and 30 Thirds.

Breviates, or compendious ways and observations in Division exemplified.
Example 10.
If you are to divide by 5754 7101 1 4 2877 789 13701 10,000 2 3 4567 2500 any
significant figure only, it is unnecessary for to set down the Divisor, but to
keep it in mind and the product as before, while subtraction's made, the
Multiplier will be the Quotient in all such cases, as by these 4 Paradigma's
will appear; the first is the year since the Creation of the World, for to be
divided into two equal parts; make a point under 5, wherein 2 is twice
contained and 1 remains; then point forward: 2 will be in 17, 8 times: then 2
in 15, 7 times: and lastly, 2 in 14, 7 times, the Quotient 2877. In the second
Table there is given 13701 Nobles, one being in value 6 s. 8 d. 3 of them makes
20 s. and it is required to know how many pounds sterling it will make in all:
divide by 3, and say 3 will be found in 13, 4 times; in 17, 5 times; in 20, 6
times; and in 21, 7 times; the Quotient is 4567 li. In the third Example 10,000
Crowns are received beyond sea, and it is required to know how many pounds
sterling must be paid for them in England, 4 of them making 20 shillings, make
a point under the cipher where 4 will be had in 10, 2 times; in 20, 5 times;
and being nothing remains but 2 ciphers more toward the right hand, annex them
to it, and it is done, the Quotient being 2500 li. Fourthly, there is 7101 li.
for to be equally distributed unto 9 men; 9 cannot be had in 7, therefore make
a point under the next place, and then 9 will be found in 71, 7 times; and next
in 80, 8 times; and lastly, in 81, 9 times; the Quotient 789 li. And so much
does every one of their shares come unto.

When there is an unite with ciphers annexed unto a Divisor, cut off so many
places upon the right hand of the Dividend, as there were ciphers in the
Divisor: as for example, 120 li. is to be distributed equally to 10 men, for
the cipher in the Divisor cut off one place in the Dividend, and 12 li. will be
every ones part or the Quotient; or if 100 Soldiers were to receive for their
pay 625 li. every ones share will be 6 li. and 25 li. over, which by the former
rules converted into shillings, by being multiplied by 20, the product will be
500 s. from whence cut off the 2 ciphers, and there will remain 5 s. So 6 li.
5 s. every Soldier must receive. And so for any other of this kind: the reason
is evident, for 1 divides nothing, and the Quotient must have so many places
less than the Dividend, by the number of ciphers in the right hand of the
Divisor, as by the common way of Division will plainly appear.

If the Divisor consists of any significant figure or figures in the foremost
place, and a cipher or ciphers to the right hand, leave out the ciphers in the
Divisor, and cut off so many places upon the right hand of the Dividend, and
with the residue divide, and when the division is done, annex the ciphers to
the D visor, and to the remainder, the figures that were severed from the
Dividend, both of them constituting a Fraction, or true part of the Integer.

Example 11.
Admit the distance from London ^ to the City of York were 48,080 Poles or
Pearches, and it is required to know how many miles they are a sunder: 40 Poles
makes a Furlong, and 8 of them a Mile, or 320 Poles, which is here the Divisor,
and cutting off the cipher on the right hand, I must do so in the Dividend,
which will be then 4808 for to be divided by 32, which accordingly done the
Quotient will be 150 Miles, and 8 remaining, to which annex the cipher cut off
it will be 80 Poles, or a quarter of a Mile, for the distance desired.

An Examine of Multiplication and Division.
These two species do try one the other, as Addition and Subtraction did: for
in any number that is multiplied, if the Product be divided by the Multiplier,
the Quotient will be the Multiplicand, as before: and so likewise any number
that is divided, if you multiply the Quotient and Divisor together, and to the
Product add in the Remainder (if there be any) the sum or Product will be
the Dividend again, if your work be true.

Example 12.
The Julian, or old account An. Do^. Bissextiles 1654 413 1652 413 2 Rem. 2
1654 1 2 did make the magnitude of the year for to consist of 365 days and 6
hours; 24 making a natural day, for which cause every fourth year contained
366 days, commonly called Leap-yeare or Bissextile; in one of those was our
sacred Redeemer borne; now to find this Bissextile for any year since, or to
come (according to the old Calendar) divide the year given by 4, the Quotient
shows the revolution of those Leap-yeares, since His happy Birth, the remainder
are the years elapsed since the last; and if nothing remains it is Leap-yeare;
in this example is given the year 1654, which divided according to the tenth
Example, the Quotient is 413, the number of Leap-yeares past, since the blessed
Virgin Mary was a Mother: and the Remainder is 2, and so many years are
elapsed since the last Bissextile, as by the first example in the margent; the
second shows, whether the division be right, or no; the Quotient is 413 the
number of Bissextiles, which now I make the Multiplicand, and 4 (which was the
Divisor) the Multiplier, whose product is 1652, unto which add the Remainder 2
in the Division, the sum will be 1654, as before, in the second Table of the
margent is evident. And thus is Division tried by Multiplication.

Example 13.
By the third example of Multiplication, Minutes 525960 Quotient 8766 Hours
8766 it was desired to know the number of minutes in a vulgar year containing
365 days and 6 hours, 24 making a natural day, that is 8766 hours in a
year, which was there the Multiplicand, and 60, the minutes in an hour, was
the Multiplier, which here I make the Divisor and the Product 525960 minutes,
the Dividend which by the tenth example of Division may be divided by 6 cutting
off a cipher upon the right hand of the Dividend, and then the Quotient will be
found 8766 hours, the Multiplicand as before, which proves the Multiplication
true; and so the like of any other: if any thing had remained, the last place
cut off in the Dividend must have been restored unto it, and the cipher
likewise to the Divisor.

A Memorandum.
Observe in this last way of Division, that how many points there be in the
Dividend, so many figures, or ciphers there must be in the Quotient, and that
every remainder must be less then the Divisor, otherwise the Quotient is too
little, or the operations wrong, and when any number is given for to be
divided, if you can find a number, that will divide both the Dividend and
Divisor, without leaving any remainder, they will remain in the same
proportion, as when ciphers are cut off from either, and if their Quotients do
divide one an other, they will produce an other Quotient equal to the first,
and their remainder (if there be any) shall have still the same proportion, as
for example, if 48 were to be divided by 12 the Quotient would be 4, and 'twill
be so if you take the half of these, as 24 to be divided by 6, or 12 by 3; the
Quotient will be 4, as you shall see more at large hereafter, in all ways of
Division, if the Dividend ends with an odd number in the place of unites, viz.
1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and the Divisor even, there must be a remainder when the
division is done; for any odd number Multiplied by one that is even, the
product will be even, although the Quotient be odd, all numbers may be divided
into 2 equal parts, if the figure be even in the unite place, if odd it
cannot without a fraction; if any number has 5 or 0 in the unite place, 5 will
divide it, without any remainder; but when any thing does remain, after
Division is ended, although it were a part of the Dividend, yet as it has
relation to the Divisor, it must be of the same denomination with the Quotient
as it is a fraction, or part of an integer; as if 10 s. were to be divided
betwixt 4 men, the Quotient will be 2 and the remainder 2 s. but as it has
relation to four men it is but 6 d. or two fourths of a shilling, the Quotients
denomination, and should be annexed unto it as a fraction according to the next
Section and Paragraphs instructions.

The Second SECTION treats of broken numbers, or parts of integers; divided
into 5 Paragraphs, demonstrating Reduction, Addition, Subtraction,
Multiplication, and Divisions, both of proper and improper Fractions.
Paragraph 1.
Explicating the definition, terms, value and qualities of Fractions, and how
to reduce them from one denomination to another, as Fractions to Integers, and
the contrary.

Definitions and Terms.
WHen the Dividend is less than the Divisor it is said to be a part of an
Integer, or the whole, called a Fraction, or broken number, subscribed
underneath one another with a line drawn between them in this manner Fractions
are proper, improper, or mixed.

The terms proper to Fractions are usually these, the uppermost of the two is
commonly called the Numerator of the Fraction, the 1 Numerator. 2 Denominator.
other Denominator, and thus, as in the margent.

Fractions demonstrated.


A Fraction being defined a broken number, or part of any integer; the
Denominator shows into how many parts the Integer is to be divided, the
Numerator denotes the number of those equal parts for to be taken, and for the
farther illustration of it, admit the lines A, B, C, D, E, F, for to be all
alike in length, each containing a Foot by the Standard, and if it were
required to know the value of this fract^on 1/12 of a Foot, the answer will be
1 inch; for according to the Denominator, a foot is to be divided into 12
parts, and the Numerator being an unite, the fraction is one of those equal
parts of the line A, G, containing 1 inch, and part of a foot is 3 inches; for
the foot (according to this fraction) is for to be divided into 4 equal parts
as B, H, and one of those divisions is to be taken, and of a foot is 4 inches;
12 inches being divided into 3 parts as C, I, then one of those parts will be 4
inches, and will be 6 inches, as in D, K, and will be 9 inches as by the pricks
under the lines does evidently appear in E, L, and so in the rest, being
hitherto simple fractions, whose Numerators are always less then their
Denominators.

Compound broken numbers or Fractions of Fractions Demonstrated.
A compound Fraction is a part of an integer subdivided into other parts, and
often those again; and usually subscribed in this manner of, by the
Denominator of the second fraction, the integer is for to be divided into 4
parts, and according to the Numerator 3 of those parts must be taken, and by
the first fraction part of that is to be taken as in the former example of E,
L, 12 was 9 inches, and that subdivided into 3 parts, one of them will be 3
inches, as by the divisions above the line, with 2 pricks does appear: again
of of are the compounded fractions given, whose value is required in parts of a
foot: F, M, is divided by 2 inches into 6 parts, 5 of those divisions is 10
inches; of that, is 2 inches; and the half of that is 1 inch, as is evidently
proved.

Reduction of broken numbers into one single Fraction demonstratively proved.
In all questions of this kind, there is nothing more to do, then to multiply
one Numerator into another, and that product into the next, and so proceed (if
there be any more compound fractions) as in Multiplication continued, and thus
you will produce in fine a common Numerator, and working in this manner you may
find a single Denominator to it, as by this example following.

Paradigma 1.
Here are 5 compound of of of 9/10 of ^/6 Numerator 180 Denominator 2160
fractions given of one Integer, and those for to be reduced into a single
fraction, having but one Numerator and Denominator: begin to multiply where you
please, or upon the right hand, 5 times 9 is 45, twice that is 90, and 2 times
90 produces 180 a common Numerator, and the Denominator to it will be 2160, as
thus 180/2160.

How for to reduce Fractions into their least denominations. Axiom 1.
Fractions that are proportional in their Numerators and Denominators are
equal in themselves.
To prove this general Rule, and explain it farther, suppose 80/100 be a
fraction given for to be reduced: the Numerator is half the Denominator; take
away a cipher from either, and they are divided by 10, and their Quotients are
8/16, which are still the half one to an other, and so if divided by 2 they
would be 4/8, and again by 4 the Fraction would be which is all one with
80/160, and so in the last Question 180/1260 may be reduced by 10 unto 18/126;
and both divided again by 6 unto 3/21; and these by 3 will be reduced unto
1/7, so the Fractions of of of 9/10 of reduced into a single Fraction were
180/2160, or which is all one in the least denomination will be 1/12 or 1 inch:
for if the Numerator and Denominator of the former fraction were divided by 10,
and that Quotient 18/216 by 6 it will be 3/36; and both again by 3 it will be
1/12, or 2160 by 180, this 1/12 may be proved by the former Demonstration, in
the line F, M, as thus.

An illustration.
Begin first with the Fractions upon the right hand, where you will find of 12
inches for to be 10 inches, then 9/10 of that will be 9 inches: of 9 inches is
6 inches, and again of that is 4 inches: and lastly, of 4 inches is 1 inche,
the quantity of this compounded Fraction, of of of 9/10 of; all which when
reduced into a single fraction, and that again into the least denomination, is
but 1/12 part of a foot, or 1 inch, the thing required for to be demonstrated.

To find the greatest number that will divide the Numerator and Denominator of
any Fraction, without leaving any remainder. Paradigma 2.
Subtract the Numerator of Denominator 144 Numerator 96 Remainder 48 Remainder
48 Remaining 0^ the Fraction out of the Denominator, and so continue on
subtracting the lesser from the greater until nothing remains, so you will
find 2 Remainders equal, which are the greatest numbers that can divide the
Numerator and Denominator of the Fraction without leaving any Remainder, as in
this Paradigma 96/144 is the Fraction given for to be reduced into the least
denomination, which to effect, a common number is to be found, that will divide
them both, as thus: subtract 96 out of 144 and 48 will remain, which subtracted
from 96 the Remainder will be 48, which will be a common measure to them both:
for 96 divided by 48, the Quotient will be 2, and 144 by 48 the Quotient will
be 3, and the Fraction equal by the last Axiom unto 96/144; if an unite had
remained, they could not have been reduced: this is demonstrated by Euclide,
but too tedious for practice.

A more compendious way to find a common measure betwixt the Numerator and
Denominator of any Fraction. Paradigma 3.
The quantities of Fractions Divisor 96 144 Quotient 1 48 Divisor 48 96
Quotient 2 00 are according to the proportion of the Numerator unto the
Denominator, whose common measure will be thus found; divide the greater number
by the less, and then the Divisor by the Remainder (if there be any) and so
continue on dividing, making the last Remainder the next Divisor, and the last
Divisor Dividend until nothing remains, and then it is evident the last
Divisor is the common measure; but if an unite remains then they are in their
least denominations, as in the last Example 144 divided by 96 the Remainder
will be 48, with which divide 96 nothing will remain, which shows 48 to be the
common measure between them: again, in the first Paradigma 180/2160 was a
fraction which is thus reduced, divide 2160 by 180, the Quotient will be 12,
and no Remainder, which shows at first that 18 was the common measure, which
will reduce that fraction to 1/12, as before is said and proved.

The shortest way for to reduce fractions into their least denominations.
Paradigma 4
The two last ways of 360 36 18 9 3 840 84 42 21 7 ^ reducing Fractions, I
have shown more for variety and young beginners, then for practitioners in the
Art of Numbers; for those who are conversant in Arithmetic, cannot be to seek
a number, whereby to reduce fractions into their least denominations: but if
any should, let them take a number that will divide both Numerator and
Denominator, and those divide again by some other number until you reduce them
unto their least denominations: and observe, that if there be a cipher or
ciphers, both in the Numerator and Denominator as 100/2000 cut off an equal
number on the right hand and it will be 10/200, or which is all one 1/20 for it
is the same with dividing of them by 10: if one of the tennes has a cipher on
the right hand, and the other 5, they may be reduced by 5, and any even number
by 2, as in this example ^60/840 continue on the line between them, cut off
their ciphers, and then the fraction is 36/84, divide them by 12, or by 4 you
may; but admit by 2 and then it is 18/42, and that again by 2 is 9/21 which may
be reduced by 3 unto 3/7 which is in the least denomination, equal in quantity
to 360/840: and observe, as you do reduce them, draw a line betwixt the former
fraction and that reduced, as in this Example, where you may also find 360/840
reduced by the last Paradigma, and the common measure found 120, with which
divide the former fraction, and the Quotients will be 3 and 7, or 3/7 as before.

Of improper and mixed Fractions. Paradigma 5.
These by an li. li. s. s. s. 1 48375 1125 2 20 10 5 43 1 4 2 1 s. s. d. d. 3
42 21 3 4 10 5 2 12 6 4 2 apt name are called improper, for they are not
fractions but in respect of the form, they serve as broken numbers, when they
are perfect Integers or mixed, with fractions and whole numbers together, being
oppugnant to the definition of Fractions, the Numerators in these being always
greater than their Denominators, as shall be made evident here, and their great
use hereafter: in the margent stands 4 Examples, whereof the first 2 are
improper fractions, the other mixed: these, or any other of this kind may be
reduced by the former Rules (if they be not in their least denominations) and
thus 48375/43 in pounds, wherein 43 will be found the common measure to both
terms, the Quotient will be 1125/1, or so many whole pounds: the second
Example is 20/4 of a shilling; if the Numerator of this fraction 20, be divided
by 4 the Denominator, the quotient will produce 5 s. or Integers: or by the
fourth Paradigma reduced by 2 you will find 10/2 or 5 shillings as before: the
third Example is a mixed fraction, as 42/12 which may be reduced by the former
Rules and by 6 unto 7/2, or by 2 to 21/6 then divide 21 the Numerator, by 6 the
fractions Denominator, the quotient will be 3 3/6 that is 3 Integers or 3
shillings: then 3/6 or which is all one reduced to is 6 d. the value of the
mixed fraction: the fourth Example is 10/4 of a penny, which reduced is ^/2 or 2
d. which is 2 d. half penny: this reduction of fractions is convenient, but of
no necessity, and so I will proceed to other questions of more consequence.

An Integer, or mixed number being given for to be reduced into an improper
Fraction. Paradigma 6.
Reduction of Integers into improper Days Weeks 365 52 1/7 1 365 7 Fractions
is performed by drawing of a line, and placing an unite underneath it, in form
of a fraction, as if the days in a vulgar year were to be made an improper
fraction, it will be 365/1 as in the margent; if an Integer and a Fraction were
to be reduced into one Fraction, equal to the mixed number propounded, multiply
the Integer by the Denominator of the Fraction given, and to the Product add
the Numerator, the sum will be the Numerator of a mixed improper Fraction,
whose Denominator was the former Multiplier: there are 52 weeks, and 1 day in a
vulgar year, which mixed number is to be reduced into a Fraction, set down the
number given 52 1/7 as in the margent, then multiply 52 by 7 (the Denominator
of the fraction) the quotient will be 364, unto which add 1 the Numerator, the
sum is 365; under which draw a line and subscribe the Denominator 7, there
will be 365/7 a mixed improper f^action, equal unto 52 1/7 as in the Table does
appear, or reduced by the last Paradigma in dividing the Numerator by the
Denominator.

Reduction of Integers into an improper Fraction, that has a Denominator
assigned. Paradigma 7.
In all such cases there is no more to 1 2 15 21 135 210 9 10 be done than for
to multiply the Integer propounded by the Denominator that is assigned, which
must be subscribed under the Product, as in the first Example where 15 is
required to be made an improper fraction, with 9 a Denominator, which
multiplied by 15 the Product will be 135, under which having drawn a line
subscribe the Multiplier, which is the Denominator given: again if 21 Integers
were required for to be made a decimall improper fraction add a cipher to it,
and subscribe 10 underneath it, so you will have an improper decimall fraction,
as in the second Table, and in both equal to their Integers: for by the former
Rules, if 135 were divided by 9 the quotient will be 15 Integers, and from 210
cut off the cipher, and it is divided by 10, and reduced again to 21 whole
numbers, and so for any other.

Reduction of Fractions that have unequal Denominators, unto others that are
equal both in value and Denominators. Paradigma 8.
For to effect ^ 1 5/6 7/8 9/10 1 4/8 6/8 2 400/480 420/480 432/480 2 2/4 3
100/120 105/120 108/120 3 any question of this kind, it is convenient when
there are but two fractions given, for to draw a short line from the Numerator
of the one, unto the Denominator of the other like a St. Andrews Cross, or the
Roman letter X, as in the Example where and are given, having several
Denominators, which multiplied by the Numerators crossewise, as 1 by 4, and 3
by 2, their Products are 4 and 6, for two were Numerators: then multiply the
Denominators together, for a common Denominator: so now the fraction is 4/8 and
6/8, the second operation in the first Table, which in the third (by the former
Rules) is reduced to a less denomination as 2/4 and equal in value unto the
fraction given; for is the same as 'twas at first; and 2/4 or is all one in
value or quantity, as is evident if reduced; the Numerator being half the
Denominator in each fraction: the reason of this Paradigma is perspicuous
either fractions containing both denominations. If many fractions of several
denominations were given for to be reduced into a common Denominator, observe
to multiply all the Numerators into every one of the Denominators continued but
its own, this continual multiplication will produce new Numerators: then
multiply all the Denominators together, which continued multiplication
produces a Denominator common to all, the value and proportion of all the
fractions still reserved, as by the last Table in the margent where,, 9/10,
were the fractions given, to be reduced unto a common denomination thus, 5
multiplied by 8 and that product by 10 will be 400; then 7 by 6 and by 10
produces 420, then 9 by 8 and 6 makes 432, for the 3 new Numerators, whose
common Denominator is 480, produced by multiplying of 6, 8, and 10 continually,
as in the second operation, in the 2 Table appears, where in the third
operation, they are reduced to 100/120, 105/120, and 108/120, and all these
equal in proportion to the value of the first, and by the former Rules may be
reduced to the same predicament, and so may improper fractions being all
connexed into one denomination.

To find whole numbers that shall have proportion one to another, as any given
Fractions have to themselves. Paradigma 9.
Numerators of ^/3 ^/3 so will 1 be to 2. ^ (2) 15/20 to 16/20 so will 15 be to
16.
Fractions, that have one common Denominator, are in proportion one to another,
as are the Numerators made Integers, so in this first Example as is in
proportion to so shall 1 be to 2, as in the demonstration of fractions is
evident where of a foot is 4 inches, and is 8 inches, one double to the other,
as 2 is to 1. In the second example and of a pound sterling is given, and it is
required to find two Integers that shall have such proportion one to another
as their fractions are in: their Denominators being unequal, reduce them by
the last Paradigma to 15/20 and 16/20 which must be in proportion as 15 to 16:
or which is all one, as is in proportion unto, so shall 15 be to 16: their
Denominators being taken away and so the Numerators made Integers: the thing is
evident of 20 s. being 15 s. and of 20 s. is 16 s. and thus may you find whole
numbers to proper or improper fractions, and when found, multiply them both by
any one number, and their proportions will remain the same, as was said before
and proved by Reduction.

The proportion of Fractions, as to their Integers and parts.
1] As the Denominator of any Fraction Is to the Numerator of the same, So will
the Integer be in proportion Unto the parts of the same Integer.
Or thus,
2] As the Denominator of a Fraction Is in proportion unto the Integer, So will
the Numerator of the Fraction Be in proportion to the parts required.
An illustration.
To exemplify this, The Fraction given. As 3 is to 2, so 12 to 8. Or, As 3 to
12, so is 2 to 8. admit of a foot were the fraction propounded, which Integer
is divided into 12 inches; and according to the first demonstration of
fractions of a foot is 8 inches, and by these last two Rules, as 3 is to 2, and
12 inches is to 8 inches; or as 3 is to 12 inches, so will 2 the Numerator be
to 8 inches; for the two means multiplied together, will be equal unto the
product of the two extremes, that is, 2 times 12 is 24, and so will be 3 times
8, or as 3 to 12 so 2, which second and third number multiplied together, and
the product divided by the first, the quotient will be 8; for 12 multiplied by
2 will make 24, and divided by 3 the Denominator of the fraction, the Quotient
is 8, the part of the fraction required, and are proportional, as in Lib. 2.
Parag. 7. Axiom 11.

To find the value of a single Fraction according to the proportional parts
of any known Integer. Paradigma 10.
To effect any ^ thing of this kind, observe to multiply the Numerator of the
fraction, by the next inferior known parts of the Integer, the product divide
by the fractions Denominator; if nothing remains, then is the Quotient the true
value of the Fraction required, but if any remainder happen, you must proceed
to the next inferior denomination; and if any thing remains, descend to the
next, multiplying the Numerator by the known parts of that Integer and dividing
by the Denominator, or abbreviate them as you please, and if any remainder be
after the least denomination, subscribe it, as a fraction or part of that
Integer, as by these 3 Examples are evident, wherein the first is given of a
foot, consisting of 12 inches or equal parts; which 12, multiplied by 5 will
produce 60, that divided by 6, the Quotient is 10 inches, the value of the
fraction required: In the second Table 5/16 of a foot is the fraction
propounded, 12 inches multiplied by 5 and divided by 16, the Quotient is 3 and
the Remainder 12/16, which reduced into the least terms is, so the value of
5/16 is 3 inches and, that is, 3 quarters of an inch. In the third Table, there
is 53/66 of a chain for Land measure, whose length is 11 yards, every yard
containing 3 feet, and every foot 2 links of the chain, and the value of this
fraction is required; first 53 the Numerator multiplied by 11 produces, 583
which divided by 66 the fractions Denominator, the Quotient is 8 yards, the
Remainder 55; the Numerator of a fraction as 55/66 which multiplied by 3 the
next denomination less, the Quotient is 165, or thus 165/66 which may be
reduced by 3 to 55/22, as in the Table, which fraction proves 2 feet, and 11/22
remaining, and being that 12 inches is the next least denomination, multiplied
into 11 the Numerator, the product is 132/22 which reduced is 66/11, that is 6
inches or one link, but here you are to note that 11/22 might have been
reduced to a before the multiplication, for after it 'twill be reduced no
lower; and thus the fraction 53/66 is reduced to 8 yards, 2 feet, and 6 inches,
as in the Table: and thus 7/9 of a pound sterling will be reduced to 15 s. 6 d.
2 q: and of a pound Averdupois will be 13 ounces, 2 drams, and 2 scruples: and
thus in time 41/42 of an hour for the parts of this Integer. See the 9
Example, Sect. 1. Parag. 5. the Reduction thus, 58. 34. 17. 8'''' 4/7. the true
value of 41/42 of an hour; but to lose time, and trouble you here with
scruples, were impertinent; Examples are often troublesome, and practice
pleasant, so I will proceed.

Reduction of Integers, from one Species or denomination to another, into parts
required.
By this reduction of Integers, is understood the converting of one Species
into another, as into a less or greater part, and has relation unto Number,
Weight, and Measure, viz: as in reducing pounds sterling into shillings, those
into pence, and them again in farthings, and the contrary; and so pounds into
ounces, drams, scruples, grains, etc. and so in measures, and all other
things, whose lesser parts are usually known; all which parts are Integers as
in respect of their own denomination, place, or column; but in relation as to
the next denomination greater, they are no more than fractions to that Species;
as a farthing in respect of his place is an Integer, but in relation to a penny
it is a fraction of it as, and so are pence to shillings, and those again to
pounds, and so are all other divisible things in the world.

How to reduce Integers of any Denomination, into Integers of a less Species.
Paradigma 11.
Multiply the Integers given, by the known parts; that is, the number of that
denomination, which made that an Integer, the product will be the thing
required: as for example, 1145 li. is to be reduced into farthings; but first
into crowns, 4 making one pound sterling; then 1145 li. will be reduced to
4580; one crown being 5 shillings, multiply that by 5; or 1145 li. the sum
given by 20 s. the product in either will be 22900, that multiplied by 12
produces 274800 pence and that by 4, the number of farthings in a penny the
total product is 1099200; the number of farthings contained in 1145 li. which
if it had been multiplied by 960, the farthings in 1 li. sterling it must have
produced the same, and so the like of any others at one operation, if you
please.

How to reduce Integers of mixed numbers, or several denominations to the
least. Paradigma 12.
This differs nothing from the last, if you do but add to every product, the
Integers (if there be any) in every particular, and inferior denomination, as
you orderly do descend from one to another; as admit 14 li. 13 s. 4 d 3 q were
a sum of money given to be reduced into the least denominat^on, first begin
with the greatest 14 li. which multiplied by 20 makes 280 s. to which product
add 13 s. the sum w^ll be 293 s. that denomination multiplied by 12
produces 3516 d. unto which add 4 d. the sum is 3520 d. that multiplied by
4, the number of farthings in a penny, the product is 14080 q. to which add 3
q. the sum will be 14083 q. the number of farthings in 14 li. 13 s. 4 d. 3 q.
reduced into the least denomination: and thus 12 lb. 10 Oun. 8 Pen. 6 Gra. Troy
weight will be reduced into their least denomination making 74118 Grains, and 2
Pearches, 4 Yards, 2 Feet, and 10 Inches, will be thus reduced into 574 Inches;
and so the like for any other.

How to reduce Integers of the least denomination into the greatest. Paradigma
13.
Integers of any less denomination, are reduced into a greater by Division,
for the number given must be made less, the species being greater, and
contrary to the last; one proving the other, as now the examples, and let
1099200 be a number given in farthings to be reduced into pounds sterling, or
their greatest denominations, reduce them first into pence, 4 being the
Integer, so 1099200 divided by 4, the Quotient will be 274800 d. these reduced
into shillings by 12, the Quotient will be 22900, and these divided by 20 s.
the Quotient will be 1145 li. and no Remainder, the former sum reduced, as in
the 11 Paradigma.

How to reduce Integers that are mixed numbers, from their least denomination to
their greatest. Paradigma 14.
This is performed as the last by Division, and where any thing remains, set
that Remainder in its proper column, and divide the Quotient again by the
parts of the next denomination greater: as admit 14083 q. the mixed number
given, as in the 12 Paradigma: the next denomination greater are pence, one
penny containing 4 farthings, therefore 14083 q. divided by 4, the Quotient
will be 3520 pence, and 3 farthings remaining which place by it self, and then
divide again 3520 d. by 12, the parts of a shilling, the Quotient will be 293
s. the Remainder 4 d. which set down, and divide again 293 s. by 20 s. the
denomination of a pound sterling and the Quotient will be 14 li. and 13 s
remaining; so 14083 farthings in their several denominations reduced will be
the sum of 14 li. 13 s. 4 d. 3 q. as in the 12 Paradigma, and so the like of
any other mixed sum or quantity in either Number, Weight or Measure, etc.

Reduction of Integers that are of several denominations into a single
Fraction of the greatest denomination. Paradigma 15.
This may be performed by what has been said already, yet lest you should be
to seek when there is use of such a question, observe this, reduce the Integers
of several denominations, into the least (by the former Rules) which shall be
a Numerator to the fraction, whose Denominator shall be the next denomination
greater reduced to the least, as 4 s. 4 d. 2 q. in the least denomination is
210 q. for the Numerator, whose Denominator will be 960 q. that is, 1 li.
reduced to q. so the fraction of 4 s. 4 d. 2 q. is 210/960 which reduced is
21/96 or 7/32 of a pound sterling; and thus 2. 3. 1. if reduced to a single
fraction in the denomination of a pound Averdupois the fraction will be 58/384
or reduced 29/192: and so for Measure, or any other question of this kind.

To reduce an Integer of any denomination into a single Fraction of a greater.
Paradigma 16.
All questions of this kind are but fractions of fractions, and so accordingly
to be reduced into any greater denomination: for if 1 farthing were to be made
a fraction of a shilling, or a pound sterling, it must be thus expressed: of a
penny, and in the next denomination of 1/12, that is, 1/48 of 1 s and that
again 1/48 of 1/20 will be 1/960 of a li. and so likewise of a is of to the
next denomination, that is 1/9 of a: and that again 1/72 of an is 1/1152 of a
lb Averdupois; and 2 is of of that is 1/192 lb. and 1 inch is 1/12 of of of a
Fathom, or 1 Inch is of 1/33 of a Perch or Pole, according to the Statute
that is 1/198 of that measure, 16 feet to the Perch: and so you may reduce any
other Integer, as a fraction of a greater or less denomination.

To express or set down an Unite as an Integer to a Fraction, whose value is
unknown. Paradigma 17.
The number of Unites contained in the Denominator of any Fraction, are equal
in value to the parts of the Integer, as in the demonstration of fractions was
evidently proved before; which granted, there needs no more in this case then
to place the Denominator of the given fraction by it self, in manner of a
broken number, and make also the Denominator the Numerator, containing the
other once: as for example, the Integer of it is 3/3, representing an Unite, as
it is a fraction; and so in 9/10, the Integer or unite to it is 10/10 being a
whole one; for the Numerator of a proper fraction is less than an Unite, by so
much as the Denominator is greater than the Numerator, for 19/20 wants 1/20 of
an Unite: and the contrary, both in less and greater numbers.

I have been tedious in explicating the most difficult questions in reduction
of Fractions: and if I have trespassed upon your patience I will endeavor a
satisfaction to your labors, by making the rest which follows (and most
Questions in Fractions) short and easy, if my dictates be rightly understood;
and all of them useful to the ingenious Practitioner, as you shall find
hereafter, and so I will proceed.

Paragraph II. Addition of proper and improper Fractions.
A Demonstration Arithmeticall and Geometicall; proving the addition of
Fractions or broken numbers.


ALL fractions that are to be added together (whether proper or improper) must
be of one denomination, or reduced by the former Rules, and then the
Denominator will be common to the fractions, or to the sum of the Numerators
added together; as for example, admit the line A, D, were a foot in length,
divided into 3 equal parts, as A, B, C, D, then is A, B part of a foot, or 4
inches; ad A, C parts of the whole length A, D, or 8 inches: now if A, B, were
added to A, C, that is to 2/^ their sum will be 3/3 or one Integer as A, D;
for C, D, is equal to A, B, which was added to A, C. Again the line E, I, is a
foot, divided into 4 equal parts, viz.: E, F, G, H, I, every equal part
containing 3 inches: then will E, F, be of a foot, or 3 inches, which added to
E, G 2/4 or 6 inches, the sum is or 9 inches E, H; for G, H, is but 3 inches
equal to E, F, which was added to E, G: in like manner if E, F were added to
E, H, the sum will be 4/4 the Integer E, I, but when fractions have several
Denominators they must be reduced unto one denomination, before they can be
added; as if A, B. of a foot were to be added unto E, F, they must be first
reduced as by the 8 Paradigma before, as A, B, into fourths, and E, F, into
thirds, making the fractions 4/12 and 3/12 which added together is 7/12 of a
foot or 7 inches: for the Integer divided into 12 equal parts (according to
the Denominator of the fraction) 7 of those parts must be taken, for the sum
of the 2 fractions: admit K, L, (equal in length to A, D, or E, I,) were a
line divided into 12 equal parts or inches; and the line M, O, equal to K, L;
then take A, B, 4 inches, and E, F, 3 inches, they will extend to 7 inches in
the line K, L; represented in M, N, being 7/12 of M, O, and so the like of
improper fractions, as if A, C or eight inches were to be added unto E, H, or
nine inches, they will be reduced by the 8 Paradigma before unto 8/12 and 9/12
and being added, their sum is 17/12 or 1 5/12 that is 1 foot or Integer, as
K, L, or M O, more by the fraction N, O, 5/12, and so the like of all other
single fractions, whether they be proper, or improper: And if they do consist
of many figures, you may reduce them if you please by the 2, 3, or 4 Paradigma
above into their least denominations with facility.

To add a single Fraction unto a compound Fraction assigned. Paradigma 1.
In this Example ^ there are 4 columns or rows, whereof the first is a
compound fraction as and 3/6 of to be added together into one sum, the of
being a fraction of a fraction must be reduced into a single fraction, as by
the 2 Sect. Parad: 1. Paragr: 1. will be found 12/40 and reduced to 3/10, which
I place in the second column for to be added to, which will be effected by the
8 Parad: as in this third column 20/50 and ^5/50, and added is 35/50 and
reduced is equal in value to ^7/10, as in the fourth column does appear: and
for the farther illustration of this, admit these fractions were parts of a
pound sterling, then would be 16 s. and of that must be 6 s. for to be added to
of 20 s. that is 8 s. the sum is 14 s. and so will 7/10 of a pound sterling
be 14 shillings, as was requ red to be proved.

Addition of mixed Fractions, in their several denominations given. Paradigma 2.
In this example ^ there is given of a pound sterling, of a shilling, and of a
penny, which Fractions of several denominations are to be added into one sum:
first reduce by the 16 Paradig: that is of 1/20 of a pound, which will be 2/60
or 1/30, as in the second column; and of a penny will be 1/320; for it is of
1/12 of 1/20 of a pound, which makes 3/960 or 1/320, which by the 8 Parad:
added to 1/30 the sum is 350/9600 which may be reduced as in the third
column to 7/192; which is now to be added unto of a pound sterling, by the 8
Parad: whose sum as in the fourth column is made 803/960 as in the 5 column
does also appear; the total sum of li. s. and d. which is thus proved by the
10 Parad: multiply 803 by 20 (the parts of a pound sterling) the product will
be 16060; this divided by 960 or 96 the Quotient produces 16 s. and 70/96
remaining, or 35/48, which Numerator multiplied by 12 the Product is 420, that
divided by 48 the Quotient will be 8 d. and the Remainder is 36/48 or of a
penny, that is 3 farthings: so the total in their several denominations is 16
s. 8 d. 3 q. and of 20 s. is 16 s. the second fraction was of a shilling, that
is 8 d. and of a penny is 3 q. which proves the total of all the fractions
evidently true.

Addition of numbers mixed with Integers and Fractions together. Paradigma 3.
If the mixed number be an improper Fraction, and the Denominators alike; add
the Numerators together (as in the Demonstration) if they be not alike, reduce
them, as in Sect. 2. Parad: 8. and then divide the sum of their Numerators by
their Denominators; as if 11/4 were added to 19/4, the sum will be 30/4, and
30 divided by 4 the Quotient is 7 the sum of 11/4 and 19/4. Again, admit 10/3
and 18/4 were for to be added together by the 8 Parad: Sect: 1. they will be
reduced to 40/12 and 54/12, and by the 3 or 4 Parad: Sect: 1. they may be made
in their lesser denom: 20/6 and 27/6 the sum 47/6, that is 7, or for more
brevity in many cases of improper fractions, having found their Integers, add
them together, and the Fractions by themselves: as in these last examples 11/4
and 19/4 may be reduced to mixed numbers, as 2 and 4; which Integers make 6 and
their Fractions 6/4 or 1 which added to 6, the sum is 7 as before: and so
10/3 and 17/4 or 9/2, are 3 and 4 the sum of which Integers make 7, and then
and reduced to one denomination will be 2/6 and 3/6 their sum, so the total
of the Fractions or mixed numbers 3 3/1 and 4 proves 7 as before, and so 3 and 4
and 5 added together in their Integers first make 12 and the fractions 89/60
that is 1 29/60 so the total is 13 29/60. And so for any other in this kind.

Compendious and useful Rules in addition of Fractions. To add unto a
Fraction any part or parts of a given number or a Fraction to an Integer.
Paradigma 4.
To add a Fraction unto an Integer, or the contrary, needs no operation, more
than prescribing one before the other; as to 1 s. to add is 1 s. that is 15 d.
or to d. to add 9 Integers, it will be 9 d. or 9 d. 1 q. and so to add a
Fraction unto any part of a given number, or the contrary is the same; for it
is but taking the part of the Integer given, and annex the Fraction to it, as
thus: admit of a shilling were to be added unto of a pound, the sum is 8 of a
shilling, or 8 s. 4 d. but in case the number given were not divisible without
more fractions, add an unite to the fractions Numerator according to the 17
Parad: Sect: 2. Parag: 1. and so having made it an improper fraction subscribe
an Unite under the Integer, then multiply the Numerators, and Denominators
together, their products shall be the number required, containing the sum of
the Integers given, and the part of them which was to be added. As for example,
let 12 be a number propounded, and it is required to find an other number,
that shall be 1/7 more, add an unite to this fraction, and it will be 8/7;
then make the other 12/1, these multiplied according to my prescribed order,
will be 96/7 or 13 5/7 the number desired, this will be performed by the former
Parad: but more compendious this way, and as evident; for an unite being added
to the Numerator of the fraction, and multiplied by the whole number given, can
increase it, nor produce any more than it self once, and the fraction, by
which part, the number sought is to be greater: for 8 the Numerator, in respect
of the Denominator 7 is but an unite and 1/7. And so for any other of these
kinds.

To add a part of a given number to any parts of it required. Paradigma 5.
In all such cases add together all the fractions or parts given, and make the
number propounded an improper fraction, then multiply the Numerators and
Denominators by one another, reduce their products and the work is ended: as if
20 were a number given, and that 1/15 of it were required to be added unto of
the whole number, and 1/15 is 50/75, which you may reduce into a less
denomination as, which multiplied by 20/1 or by the 10 Parad: Sect: 2. Parag:
1. will be 13, the thing is manifest, the several proportions of the fractions
being collected into one sum: admit the number propounded had been 20 s. of
it is 12 s. and 1/15 of 20 is 1 s. 5/15 or which is 4 d. so the total is 13 s.
4 d. and so the other proved 13 of 20, to confirm the truth.

Paragraph III. Subtraction of proper and improper Fractions.
A Demonstration Arithmetically and Geometrically proving subtraction of
Fractions, or broken numbers.


ALL broken numbers that are to be subtracted, must be single fractions, or
reduced unto it, with a common Denominator, which done subtract the lesser
Numerator out of the greater, and the remainder will be the difference betwixt
those fractions, under which difference subscribe the common Denominator, and
then reduce both terms unto their least denominations if you please: and for
the farther illustration of this, the line A, D admit a foot, divided into 3
equal parts, from whence part is to be subtracted as A, B, the Integer is 3/3;
from whence take and the remainder will be, that is B, D, or A, C, and is the
same in number, for A, B, 4 inches subtracted from A, D twelve inches, the
remainder is B, D, eight inches. Again, the line E, I is a foot divided into 4
equal parts, as by E, F, G, H, I, then is E, F 3 inches, or of the whole line,
which subtracted from E, H or 9 inches, the remainder will be E, G 2/4 which
reduced is or 6 inches; and so if E, F were to be subtracted from E, I a foot,
that is from 4/4 or 3 inches out of 12 inches, the remainder will prove E, H,
that is 9 inches: but when fractions to be subtracted, have unequal
Denominators, they must be reduced as by Sect: 2. Parag: 1. Parad: 8. and then
subtract the lesser Numerator from the greater, as before; and for the
illustration of this, M, O is a foot divided into 2 unequal parts, as in N,
the part M, N containing 7 inches or 7/12 from whence A, B of a foot or 4
inches is to be subtracted: these fractions by the 8 Parad: reduced, viz: and
7/12 will be 12/36 and 21/36, then take 12 from 21, and the remainder will be
9/36, or reduced to. so if A, B 4 inches should be subtracted from M, N 7
inches, the remainder would be or E F, equal to 3 inches; or in the line K, L
12 inches, the line M, N will extend to 7 inches, and the line A, B to 4
inches, where will be found 3 inches, equal to E, F. and in like manner M, N,
7/12 subtracted from the Integer 12/12 the remainder will be 5/12 N, O. I did
take purposely these examples, to show how Addition of Fractions may be proved
by Subtraction, and the contrary, in Broken numbers, as in Integers if the
Rules of Fractions be carefully observed.

To subtract a single fraction from any compound broken number given. Paradigma
1.
Here is represented ^ to your view an Example containing four columns, the
first is 7/40 and of, to be subtracted from 7/10: first reduce the compound
broken number into a single fraction, Sect: 2. Parad: 1. and this will be 5/40
or, as in the second column; this must be added to 7/40, as in this 2 Parag:
Parad: 1. and by the 8 Parad: Sect: 2. will be reduced to 56/320 and 60/320, as
in the 3 column; which added, will be 96/320, reduced to 3/10; or 56/320 and
40/320 may be reduced unto 7/40 and 5/40 whose sum is 12/40 or 3/10 as
before, the sum of these is to be subtracted from 7/10: and being their
Denominators are equal, subtract their Numerators, and there will remain 4/10
or: to prove this, admit these fractions, parts of a pound sterling; then will
7/40 be 3 s. 6 d. unto which add that is 2 s. 6 d. the sum is 6 s. which
subtracted from 7/10 that is 14 s. the remainder will be 8 s. and so of 20 s.
is also 8 s. the subtraction proved.

Subtraction of mixed Fractions from several Denominations. Paradigma 2.
Here in this 1 1/10 li. and 2/3 s. from 4/5 of a li. 2 1/10 x 1/^0 2/3 of 1/20
is ^/60 or ^^/30 3 ^0/300 ^^/300 or 3/30 and ^/30 added is ^/30 4 2/15 from
12/1^ remains 10/15 or 2/3 Table, is exposed unto your view 1/10 of a pound
sterling: and of a shilling, which mixed numbers are to be subtracted from of a li.
first by the 16 Parad: Sect: 2: reduce of a shilling into the Denomination of a
pound, as in the second row, which will be 1/30, that added to 1/10 of a pound
will be 4/30 as in the operation of the third row, and reduced to the least
denomination is 2/15, as in the fourth row or column, which is to be
subtracted from of a pound, which by the 8 Parad: Sect: 2. will be 60/75 and
10/75 which subtracted is ^0/75 and reduced is of a pound; but in all such
cases, if you can make the Denominators alike, either by Multiplication or
Division it will be the same in effect: as in this Example 2/15 is to be
subtracted from, which if multiplied by 3 the product will be 12/15 of the same
denomination and proportion with 2/15 which subtracted is 10/15 or, as before,
which of a pound sterling is 13 s. 4 d. and now to prove this subtraction true,
you may add to it again 1/10 of a pound, and of a shilling, which is 2/15 of a
pound, and of a pound, their sum by the last Parag: and 2 Parad: will be
found 36/45 or as before; or try them in their several species thus, 1/10 of
a pound is 2 s. and of a shilling is 8 d. this 2 s. 8 d. taken from of a li.
that is 16 s. the remainder is 13 s. 4 d. as was the former.

Subtraction of mixed numbers, when Integers are annexed unto Fractions given.
Paradigma 3.
When the number given is an improper fraction to be subtracted from another of
the same denomination, take the less Numerator from the greater, and beneath
the remainder subscribe the common Denominator, as in the last Demonstration:
if not alike, reduce them, as by Sect. 2. Parad: 8. and then divide the
remaining Numerator by the former Denominator: as for example, take 11/4 from
30/4 the remainder is 19/4, that is 4; or take 19/4 from 30/4 the remainder
will be 11/4 bs before, that is 2; or reduce the improper fractions to mixed
numbers, and then subtract them, as 2 from 4, their terms being alike;
subtract the Integers, the remainder will be only 2; and so will 11/4 taken
from 19/4 be 8/4 or two Integers.

Compendious ways and useful Rules in subtraction of Fractions mixed or
compounded. Paradigma 4.
In all improper Fractions reduce them unto compound numbers by annexing the
fractions to their Integers respectively, and if the greater number has annexed
unto it the greater fraction, subtract the lesser Integer from the greater, and
then the fractions from one another, as in the last Examples: if the fractions
be of several denominations, reduce them by the former Rules to a common
Denominator, and then subtract the lesser Integer from the greater, and so
likewise the fraction annexed to it if there be any, as 6 d. from 9 d., the
remainder will be 3 d. 2/4 or: if the lesser number had no fraction the
remainder would have been only 3 if any number were given for to be subtracted
from a greater number with a fraction annexed to it: subtract one Integer from
the other, and annex the fraction to the remainder; as 8 s. from 13 s. the
remainder will be 5 s., when the lesser number for to be subtracted has a
fraction, and the greater number none, subtract first the fraction from an
unite of the other number made a fraction as by the 17 Parad: Sect: 2. Parag:
1. and having set down the remainder, add the unite unto the lesser number
given to be subtracted, and so proceed as in subtraction of whole numbers, and
for example, take 13 s. out of 3 li. or 60 s. First take the fraction from 3/3,
the remainder is, then say 1 borrowed and 3 is 4, which taken out of 10 the
remainder is 6; then 1 and 1 makes 2, which subtracted from 6 the decimall, the
remainder is 4: the total remaining is 46 s., or 2 li. 6 s. and so likewise if
a fraction only were to be taken out of an Integer, borrow an unite of the
whole number, which makes a fraction of the same denomination with that given
to be subtracted; as from 14 to subtract, the remainder will be 13; and if in
case the fraction were greater than the fraction annexed to the greater number,
take an unite from the greater Integer, and make the broken number annexed unto
it an improper fraction, and then subtract by the former rules; as admit 6 s.
were to be subtracted from 11 s. the greater number, yet has the lesser
fraction; therefore take an Integer from 11, and make the fraction 5/4, then by
the 8 Parad: Sect: 2. Parag: 1. 5/4 and will be reduced to 15/^2 and 8/12 the
difference is 7/12, then the unite borrowed, and 6 will be 7, which taken from
11 s. the remainder is 4 7/12 s. and so will 6 s. 8 d. taken from 11 s. 3 d. be
4 s. 7 d. if the fraction of the lesser number had been less, although of
another denomination, reduce the fractions to equal Denominators, and then
subtract them, and their Integers, the less from the greater, as before: but
if you should be doubtful in any fract^on or mixed number, (of several
denominations) which is the greater fraction, Reduction makes it evident, and
practice will make the most rugged part of Arithmetic plain, pleasant, and
easy.

To subtract any part of a given number, or fraction, from the same broken
number propounded. Paradigma 5.
How to subtract Fractions from Integers, or broken numbers, I have shown
already, and so may these be performed, but yet more concisely thus: if there
be many fractions given, either mixed or compounded, reduce them into a single
fraction by the former Rules, and having subtracted the fraction from an unite,
multiply it by the number or fraction given, whose parts these were required;
the product will bring to light the fraction or part inquired: as for example
to subtract parts from of a shilling take from the Integer, and there will
remain, as by the 17 Parad: Sect: 2. Parag: 1. then multiply by the product
will be 3/12 or s. which is thus proved; s. or 9 d. is the fraction propounded,
and it is required to take parts of the same fraction from it, which parts is 6
d. subtracted out of 9 d. the difference is 3 d. or s. as before. Again 9/10
li. is a fraction given from whence of parts of the same number is to be taken:
this mixed fraction is reduced to 2/12 or, that taken out of the Integer, the
remainder is, which multiplied by 9/10 produces 45/60, and reduced is li. or
15 s. the fraction given was 9/10 which is 18 s. from whence take of, the
remainder is 15 s. as before: for of 18 is 12, and of 12 is 3, which subtracted
from 18, there will remain 15, if and parts of li. and the difference is
required, reduce the parts given into a single fraction, then and will be
11/13: and taken from the Integer are 4/15, those multiplied by li. the given
fraction produces 12/60 or li. the true diff rence required; for of a pound
sterling is 15 s. whereof is 5 s. and is 6 s. the sum 11 s. which subtracted
from 15 s. the remainder will be 4 s. and so was of a li. as formerly; when
more fractions are given, they must be reduced to a single fraction; and then
the operation is the same with these last, which have relation properly to the
fraction from whence they are to be subtracted; as for a farther instance of of
a li. is 8 s. as a fraction of a fraction; But in these cases of is to be
subtracted from, as 8 s. from 12 s. the difference is 4 s. and so multiplied by
will produce li. or 4 s. the true r^mainder.

To subtract a part of any given number, or any parts from a part or parts of
the same number or fraction propounded. Paradigma 6.
In all such cases as these, take the lesser fraction from the greater, and
then multiply the remainder into the Fraction or Integer given (from whence
these parts were to be subtracted) and the product will be the remainder: as
for example, admit from li. you were for to subtract li. take from and there
will remain 7/20, as by the last demonstration: this remainder multiplied by 20
or 2^/1 the number given, the product will be 140/20 or 7 s. and is thus
proved; li. is 12 s. from whence 2/4 of the same number is to be subtracted,
that is 5 s. and then the remainder will be 7 s. Again, from to take the 1/18
part of, that is, from of to take the 1/18 part of the same number given, that
is; subtract first the parts as 1/18 from, the remainder is 16/36 or 4/9, which
multiplied by ^/4 makes 12/36 ot, the true remainder: and for trial of it, let
the fraction given be part of a pound sterling, then will make 15 s. the half
of it 7 s. 6 d. from whence take 1/18 part of the same fraction, that is 4, or
15 s. and the remainder is 10 d. which subtracted from 7 s. 6 d. there will
remain 6 s. 8 d. which is part of a li. as before: if 1/12 were to be taken
from and of 24; reduce the and into a single fraction, as 15/18, or, from
whence subtract 1/12 and there will remain, which multiply by 24 or 2^/^ the
number given, the product is 72/4 or 18 the difference required: for of 24 is
16 and of 24 is 4, the sum of those fractions 20, from whence take 1/12 of
24, that is 2, and then the true remainder will be 18, as before: admit of of
72 were to he subtracted from part of the same 72: first reduce the mixed number
of into a single fraction, that is 1/12, which take from, the remainder will be
4/96 or 1/24, that multiplied by 72 or 72/1 the given number, the Product will
be 7^/24 or three Integers: for of 72 is 18, and of that is 6, which taken from
9 that is 1/0 of 72, the remainder is 3, as before; if there had been more
fractions, thus to be subtracted, reduce them into one, and so proceed.

Paragraph IV. Multiplication of proper and improper Fractions.
A Demonstration Arithmeticall and Geometicall; proving the multiplication of
Fractions, in mixed, and broken numbers.
IN multiplication Multiplication of Fractions.
of broken numbers, whether proper, improper, mixed, or compounded, they must be
reduced (by the former Rules) to single Fractions, both for the Multiplier, and
Multiplicand; and then increase the Numerator of the one, by the Numerator of
the other, and multiply their Denominators by themselves, their Products will
constitute a new Numerator and Denominator, but contrary to the multiplication
of whole numbers, the new Fractions thus produced being always less than
their terms given to be multiplied, yet in their operation they do make a
square, or Geometrical figure as Integers do, with this Analogical equality
or proportion.

As the square made of the Numerators

Is in proportion to the square of their Denominators,

So shall the superficial square of the Fraction

Be in proportion unto the square of the Integer.

An Illustration. Paradigma 1.
In the former Scheme there is described a Geometrical figure or square, as A,
B, C, D; every one of the four sides is divided into twelve equal part^ or
inches; so if A, B, 12 were multiplied by A, C, 12 the product would be 144,
the number of square inches contained in a superficial Foot, as by the figure
will evidently appear; admit a fraction propounded as of the line A, B, to be
multiplied by of A, C, multiply their Numerators by one another, the product
will be 6 for the new Numerator, and 3 times 4 is 12 for the Denominator, so
now the fraction is 6/12 or which is less than e^ther of the terms given, that
is or, for of A, C, is 9 inches, and of A, B, is 8 inches, which multiplied
together produces 72 square inches, the half of 144, and so was the fraction,
and their proportions thus, viz: as the square of the Numerators 6 is to the
square of their Denominators 12, so will the square of the fraction 72 be in
proportion to the integer or whole square 144 inches, that is 1 foot. Again,
the 3 numbers given were 6, 12, 72; and as 6 the half of 12, so is 72 the half
of 144: and consequently 72 multiplied by 12 produces 864, which divided by 6
the Quotient will be 144: and so likewise in all the 4 numbers, the square of
the two means, viz: 12 and 72 will be 864, and so much will the 2 extremes
make, 144 multiplied by 6, Lib: 2. Parag: 7. Axiom 11. In the same manner
multiplied by makes; and so half of the line A, B, 6 inches multiplied by half
A, C, likewise 6 inches, the product will be 36 inches, which is but part of a
foot, containing 144 square inches: and in the same manner and proportion 1/12
of A, B, multiplied by 1/12 of A, C, will produce 1/144, and so the little
square made of the Fraction representing 1 inch is but 144 part of a square
foot, which is the Integer.

To multiply compound broken numbers, or fractions of fractions. Paradigma. 2.
Having reduced the mixed or compound numbers into a single fraction, the rest
of your work is the same with the last, as admit of were to be multiplied by
of: first reduce the fractions, as by Sect: 2. Parag: 1. Parad: 1. and you will
find of to be 3/12 or and of will be 10/30 or, which multiplied by makes 1/12,
the true product of the fractions given; and being reduced are thus proved,
part of A, B, is 4 inches; and of A, C, is 3 inches, which multiplied together
produces 12 square inches; which is but 1/12 part of a foot, or of the square
A, D, containing 144 inches.

Diverse proper Fractions for to be multiplied into one Product. Paradigma 3.
In all such cases you are to add into one sum the fraction for the
Multiplicand, and also the Multiplier; then multiply the single fractions
together, as was said before, and the work is done: as admit and 1/10 were
fractions propounded for to be multiplied by and: first by Sect: 2. Parag: 2.
add to 1/10 the sum is 25/50 or, then add to their sum is 10/24 or ^/12
to be multiplied by the product will be 5/24, the thing required, which may be
proved by the former demonstration.

Mixed or improper Fractions given for to be multiplied. Paradigma 4.
If mixed numbers be given for to be multiplied, (as Integers and Fractions) you
must make them improper fractions, as by Sect: 2. Parag: 1. Parad: 6. and not
multiply the Integers by themselves, and then their fractions, because the
square of all broken numbers are greater or less, according to the square of
the whole numbers to which they are annexed: as 2 and 3 is more than 6 1/12,
therefore make them improper fractions as 7/3 and 13/4; and then their products
will be 91/2 that is 7 7/12. Again 2 is a fraction propounded for to be
multiplied by 1 these reduced to an improper fraction, will be 5/2 and; their
product is 40/10 or 4 Integers: and in the same manner must the operarion be,
if one of the terms be a mixed number; and the other a single fraction or an
Integer only, as 3 to be multiplied by 4; they will stand thus 7/2 and 4/1
their product 28/2 or 14: if an Integer and a fraction only, as 20 to be
multiplied by ^/4; place them thus 20/1 and ^/4: their product 6^/4 or 15
Integers: or 12 by thus 12/1 the product 24/3 or 8; yet here you are to note,
that these last products if several denominations are but fractions, in
respect of the square made of the Integer, which is the Denominator to it; as
8/12 or; and so A, B, 12/1 inches multiplied by of A, C, a foot, viz: A, G, 8
inches, the product will be 96 or 9^/144 to the whole square A, B, C, D, 144,
which reduced unto the least denomination, is likewise, as by the former
Demonstration is made evident, in A, B, E, G, unto A, B, C, D; yet 12 by is 8
Integers, if of one denomination. If any whole number be given for to be
multiplied by a mixed number, add unto the product of the Integers, the
fractionall part of the entire whole number, the sum will be the product
required: As for example, 12 is a mixed number propounded for to be multiplied
by 16, which increased by 12 produces 192, which is defective by of 16 the
whole number, that is 12, the sum 204, equal unto the product of 12 or 51/4
multiplied by 16, according to the Rule of Fractions: for if the mixed number
were made an unite more instead of the fraction, the product would contain the
Integer once, and so much too great, as the fraction was less than an unite:
thus 14 multiplied by 12 will produce 178; and so for any other number of this
kind.

To find any part or parts of a given number or Fraction. Paradigma 5.
In all cases of this kind, if there be many fractions given, reduce them by
the former Rules into a single fraction, then multiply them together and the
work is done. As for example, admit of of 12 were required, the fractions
reduced are 3/12 or which multiplied by 12/1 (the number given) the product is
12/4 or 3 Integers; which is thus proved, of 12 is 9 and of 9 is 3 the number
sought. Again, let the fractions given be and parts of 4/5, first reduce the
broken number into a single fraction, then will and be 12/32 or which
multiplied by produces 12/40 or 3/10 the true numher required: suppose 20 were
the Integer, then were ^/5; of it 16 whereof part is 4, and part is 2 the sum
of them 6, and 3/10 of 20 will be also 6, these differ nothing from the former
prescribed Rules, so needs no more Examples to explain it.

Paragraph V. Division of proper and improper Fractions.
A Demonstration Arithmeticall and Geometrical, manifesting division of
Fractions as well in mixed, as broken numbers.
Division of Fractions.


WHen broken numbers are to be divided, either proper, improper, mixed, or
compounded, they must be reduced to single Fractions both for the Divisor and
Dividend; then place that fraction, which is the Divisor, upon your left hand;
and that for the Dividend toward the right; this done, make a Roman X betwixt
them, as in Addition or Subtraction of Fractions that have several
Denominators: then multiply the Denominator of the Divisor by the Numerator of
the Dividend, the product will be a new Numerator; then multiply the
Denominator of the Dividend by the Numerator of the Divisor, and the product
will be a new Denominator, unto the fractions given which were thus divided,
and this new fraction the Quotient; but directly contrary unto Division in
whole numbers, where the Quotient is ever less than the Dividend, and in
fractions divided, the quotient will be greater than the terms given, and the
Divisor propounded may be greater or less than the Dividend, as by the
Examples following shall appear, they being in proportion thus:

As the Divisor of any fraction propounded

Shall be in proportion unto the Dividend

So will 1 Integer, or an unite

Be in proportion unto the Quotient.

An Illustration. Paradigma 1.
In the last Scheme is described a Geometrical square figure, as A, B, C, D,
representing a Fathom, every side containing 6 feet, and consequently the
content of the whole square 36 square feet, now admit part of A, B, were to be
divided by part of A, C, it will stand thus, X and multiplied crosswise the new
Numerator will be 6, and the new Denominator 6, so the Quotient will be 6/6 or
1, the side of one square being 12 inches, will be contained in 12 inches once:
so is in, and contained in three times demonstrated by the first and second
little squares, and of A, B, divided by of A, C, will be likewise 3/3 that is
an unite, viz: E, C, by E, F, for if A, B, and the line A, C, were equally
divided into 3 parts, one of those parts must be 2 Foot, or 24 Inches: so 2
will be contained in 2 once, or 24 in 24, also one time; and so divided by,
must be 3/3 or 1; and consequently in all fractions, as in Integers, when the
Divisor is equal unto the Dividend, whether the fractions consist in Numbers,
Lines, or in any Geometrical figures, the Quotient is an unite.

Diverse fractions being given for to be divided by a single fraction, or the
contrary. Paradigma 2.
Here is and ^ 3/10 for to be diviced by: first reduce and 3/10 into a single
fraction by the former Rules in Reduction, and they will be 25/50 or for the
Dividend, and then set down the Divisor, which observe to place always toward
your left hand; and having made a Roman X between them, multiply the Numerator
of the Dividend crosswise by the Divisors Denominator, which product will be 4
for the new Numerator: then multiply the Denominator of the Dividend by the
Numerator of the Divisor, the product will be 2 in this, the new Denominator,
so now the Quotient is 4/2 or 2. Again, in the second Example, the Divisor is
made the Dividend; and the Dividend, Divisor; and being multiplied crosswise
(according to the order of Division) you will produce a Quotient of 2/4 or: for
proof of these, in the last Demonstration A, B, is a Fathom or 6 Feet, which
multiplied by A, C, 6, produces the whole square A, D, 36 square feet: now in
the first Example of this Paradig: the half of it was for to be divided by a
fourth part of the same square, that is 18 feet, by 9 feet, the Quotient must
be 2 Foot, that is 2 of those little squares; and this according to the
proportion stated, viz: as the Divisor 9, shall be unto 18 the Dividend, so
will 1 be unto 2: Or in the second Example, as 18 is to 9, so 1 to: and so in
any other thing, as in Coin, admit 12 Pence the Integer, and the of it, were
to be divided by part of the same Integer, then I say 3 d. would be contained
in 6 d. twice; and on the contrary if were to be divided by the of the same
Integer, that is 3 d. by 6 d. the Quotient must be 3/6 or of a penny: in the
same manner if of were a compound fraction given, for to divide parts of the
same Integer; reduce first of to, with which divide, the Quotient will be 12/3
or 4: and on the contrary make the Divisor, the Quotient will be 3/12 or, that
is by the Demonstration as 6 is to 24, so 1 unto 4. And secondly, as 24 is to 6
so 1 unto part of a foot, as in the second square of the Scheme you may see:
and so in money part of 12 d. is 2 d. with which if you divide of 12 d. that is
8, the Quotient will be 4 d. and on the contrary, if you would divide 2 d. by
8, the Quotient will be 2/8 or 2/4, according to the Demonstration.

A whole number being propounded for to be divided by any Fraction, or
Fractions given. Paradigma 3.
When there are many fractions ^ given, of necessity they must be made a single
fraction, before you can divide any number with them, and it is necessary to
reduce them into the least denomination: in the first column of this Scheme
there is given and 1/10; by which fractions, 20 must must be divided: the
broken numbers are made a single fraction, by the former rules of Reduction, as
25/50, and reduced to, as in that column appears: In the second column I
place, the Divisor, and then against that stands the Dividend made an improper
fraction, as 20/^: between them I place the letter X, and having drawn a line
beneath them all and multiplying then the Divisor cross-wise by the Dividend,
the product is the Quotient, which here is 40, which is evident, if the nature
or force of Fractions be well understood, for if 20 s. were to be divided by 1
s. the Quotient must be 20 s. and consequently by it must be 40; for the
fraction being but 6 d. 'twill be contained in 20 s. 40 times, and divided by
20 will be 1/^^.

A whole, or a mixed number being given to be divided, by any mixed number
propounded. Paradigma 4.
In the first column ^ there is given 36 to be divided by 4 which is the
Divisor, and made an improper fraction will be 9/2, the Dividend 36/1, which
multiplied by 2 (the Divisors Denominator) produces 72, for the new Numerator,
then 1 multiplied by 9 is but 9 for the Denominator, so the Quotient is 72/9 or
8 Integers; now if 9/2 should be divided by 36/1 the Quotient would have been a
fraction of 9/72 or, as for these it is evident, that 4 the Divisor multiplied
by 8 the Quotient, the product will be 36, the Dividend as before: and so
likewise 36 the Divisor, multiplied by the last Quotient the product will be
36/8, that is 4 the Dividend. In the second column there are two mixed numbers
given to be divided, viz: 3 and 6, which made improper fractions, will be 10/3
and 20/3: and if 10/3 be the Divisor, the Quotient will be 60/30 or 2 whole
numbers, as in respect of themselves, and by the operation in the Scheme
appears, for 6 contains 3 twice, and is evident in themselves, and consequently
if 20/3 were to divide 10/3, the quotient would be 30/60 or, the Divisor being
twice the Dividend.

Any part, or parts of a number given, to find the Integer. Paradigma 5.
Admit 6 were a number given, which is the part of the number required: in all
such cases divide the number given, by the fraction, the Quotient will be the
number required: as in this Example, with divide 6/1 the Quotient is 24/3 that
is 8: for of 8 is 6, the thing required. Or in any Question of this kind, you
may multiply the number given, by the Denominator of the fraction propounded,
and divide the product by the Numerator of the same fraction, the Quotient will
be your desire; as 6 if multiplied by 4 produces 24, and divided by 3 the
Quotient sought as before: and so if 10 were the part of a number desired, by
either way 12 must be the number found: and so for any other question of this
kind.

The Epilogue to the first Book.
HEre I conclude my first Book of Natural Arithmeticke, having conducted you
through most of the rugged ways both in the Theorie and Practice, in Whole
numbers, as in Fractions: yet but the foundation properly, upon which the
ingenious Arithmetitian must build: I do not mean confined to my Works, or
Rules, any more, than young practitioners shall think fit, as they please, or
their fancies prompt them: but yet it is necessary in all Arts and Sciences, to
state Principles and Elements, which well understood, it will be easy, and
pleasant for the ingenious to proceed, and if these my labors can assist them
in their progress, I shall be joyful of it, if slighted for my endeavors, I
shall comfort my self with the thoughts of many Associats, since few or none,
are quite exempt from censure, and usually the weakest sort of intelligible
creatures are most capricious: but I being encouraged by some that are esteemed
both wise, learned, and expert in diverse Arts, I am from thence armed with
resolution to proceed: and here in the Conclusion of this Book, for the benefit
of the Reader in perusing History, ancient dates of Deeds and Records of
antiquity, I will insert the Characters, or 7 Numerall letters used by the
Romans, and diverse Countries under their subjection, and in many things
frequently continued to these days, and are briefly these, viz: I, 1. V, 5. X,
10. L, 50. C, 100. D, 500. M, 1000. And sometimes thus: D, 500. and M, 1000.
And observe I before V is 4, as thus IV. and before X is 9, thus IX and X
before an L is 40, as thus XL. all other numbers are made by reiteration of
these letters, as II, 2. III, 3. VI, 6. VII, 7. VIII, 8. XI, 11. XII, 12. etc.
then CC, 200. CCC, 300. M M, 2000. M M M, 3000, etc. but no otherwise
increasing, or decreasing, according to their places, as Arithmeticall
Characters do, which are in number only 10, for to express all numbers known
to men; and is undoubtedly the best and readiest way, for Computation, of any:
but those who do condemn it out of ignorance, (as illiterate men do
learning) let them use Pebblestones and Chalk, like Conjuring characters
behind their doors; or reckon upon their fingers, as Juvenall in his tenth
Satyr describes an old man: -- At que suos jam dextra computat annos.
By counting of his Joints, his Age appears:
Thus at his Fingers Ends, he has his Years.


The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK SHOWING THE EXTRACTING OF SQVARE and CVBIQVE ROOTS, etc.

Arithmeticall and Geometrical Progressions: Universal Axioms, and Canons in
Arithmetic: WITH The Similitude and Proportion of Numbers, in relation unto
their Quantities and Qualities: from whose speculation, all Rules in Number are
originally derived.

By Thomas Willsford.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath: Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, 1656.

THE SECOND BOOK, Showing the extracting of Square and Cubique Roots, etc.
Paragraph I. The definition of a Square Root.
A Square is a Geometrical figure of the second quantity, composed of right
lines, multiplied one into another: and the Root is one of those sides, as in
Multiplication and Division was shown before, so to find the Square root of
any number, is nothing else but to find the side, upon which the Square was
composed: or to find a number, which multiplied in it self, shall produce the
number given.

Of these there are 3 several, or distinct species, viz: Single, Compound, and
Irrational numbers.

I. Single, are all Squares which are made of any of the 9 significant figures
only, viz: 1 times 1 is but 1, but 2 times 2 is 4, and the Square of 3 is 9,
the Square of 4 is 16, and of 5 is 25, etc.

II. Compound, are all such Squares that are made of more figures than one; as
if 10 were the Root, the Square were 100; the Square of 11 would be 121, and 12
squared proves 144, etc.

III. Irrational numbers, are all such Squares whose Roots cannot exactly be
discovered by Art, neither in whole numbers, nor in fractions, but some error
will remain, there being no proportion known betwixt the Square and the side or
Root, viz: of 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, etc.

To find the Square made of any of the 9 significant figures, or their Squares
given to find their Roots. A Demonstration in extracting of Square Roots.


Every number propounded (whose Root is to be extracted) is conceived to be a
Square number, and has a Root or side on which the Square was made by
connexing of lines parallel, or multiplication of one number by another, and so
comprehending diverse other little Squares, as by this Scheme appears, A, B, C,
D, the side A, B, and A, C, is divided into 9 equal parts, containing the 9
significant figures; and all the Squares made of them, in each common angle:
and first the Root of 1 is but 1 for its square, because it multiplies nothing;
if 2 were the Root, then is the Square of it 4, as in the common angle, and so
many little Squares are made of that Root: if 9 were a Square given, then would
the Root be 3; the Root of 16 is 4, of 25 will be 5; of 36, 6; of 49, 7; of 64,
8; and the Root of 81 is 9; Or the Square made of the Root A, B, or A, C, 9,
will be 81 little Squares; and so of all the rest; for as the multiplication of
the Root or side, produces the Square, so the extracting of a Root from a
Square number propounded, is to find the side; but if any whole number were
propounded less then 100, and greater than an unite, (yet is not found in this
Table) the number is irrational to man's understanding, whose art is to
imbecile in all such cases, and cannot find a true and exact Root, which
multiplied in it self, will produce the Square number given: so in this defect
of humane art, take a Root that is less, yet nearest to it, whose Square
subtracted from the Square given, the Remainder make a Numerator of a fraction,
whose Denominator shall be the Root doubled, and an unite added to it: As for
example, admit 10 were a number propounded, whose Root is required; in the
Table it is not, therefore I take 3 for the Root, whose Square is 9 the nearest
to it, and less, which take from 10, there will remain 1: the Root doubled is
6, and 1 added to it makes 7; so the Root is thus expressed 3 1/7. Again, the
Root of 80 is not found in the Table, 9 being too great, therefore take 8,
whose Square is 64, the difference 16; so the Root of 80 express thus 8 16/17,
but this is not axactly true, nor yet so near the truth, as I will show
hereafter; for this squared is but 79 273/289, and should have been 80 the
difference 16/289, which is but a small error in ordinary things, and so not
to be rejected.

A Square number given that is greater than 100, the number for extraction must
be prepared after this manner. Example 1.
The number propounded here ^ is 144, whose Square Root is desired; having set
down your number under the first figure upon the right hand make a prick, or
point with your pen, and from thence under every second figure toward the left
hand: as here in this number given 144, the unite and the hundredth place has
points, and so many, as there shall happen in any number given, the Square Root
will consist of so many figures; this done, make a place upon the right hand of
the number given, to set the Roots in, like the Quotient in Division, then
find a number, which multiplied in it self, shall be equal to the number over
the first point, and the figure before it (if there be any) and in case there
is no such number in the former Table, take a Root next less unto it, which
multiplied in it self, and then subtract that Square from the number over the
first point, and set the remainder above that, and if there be none, a cipher;
as here 1 stands over the point and 1 is a Square equal to it, which Root
place in the Quotient, subtract it from 1 and put a cipher over it, then double
the Quotient, and place it betwixt the next two points, then enquire how many
times that figure will be contained in the number over it, for a new Root,
whose Product and Square must be always equal, or the nearest less, to all
the number unto the next point, as here 'twill be 2, which place in the
Quotient, and likewise under the next point, then take the Square of the last
found Root, and the product of that Root in the other number, which here makes
44, that subtracted from the number over it nothing will remain; so 12 is the
Square Root of 144, which is always tried by multiplying the Quadrat Root in
it self as in this, 12 multiplied by 12 produces 144 as before; if there had
been any Remainder it must have been added unto it, and then the sum would
have been the same with the number propounded, otherwise the work is false.

To find the Quadrat of any number consisting of four places or more. Example
2.
Admit the number propounded ^ were 7056, according to the last directions I
make a point under 6, and likewise under the cipher, then find a number which
multiplied by it self shall be 70 or the nearest less; if I should take 9 it
is too great, because the Square of it is 81, then take 8, which place in the
Quotient, that squared will be 64, which subtracted from 70, there will remain
6, which set over the cipher: then double the Root by saying 2 times 8 is 16,
place the last figure on the right hand (which here is 6) betwixt the two
points, and the next figure in order toward the left hand, as under the point;
then see how many times 1 will be contained in 6 if I take 5, it is too great,
because 5 times 6 cannot be had in 15, nor the square of 5 in the last 6:
therefore take 4, which place in the Quotient, and likewise under the next
point: then multiply this last Root in it self, and in the former Root which
was doubled, that is here in 4 and by 16, saying 4 times 4 is 16, that is 6 and
go 1, 4 times 6 is 24 and 1 makes 25, that is 5 and 2 decimals, then say 4
times 1 is 4, and 2 decimals in mind will be 6, which 656 subtracted out of
the figures uncancelled, that is 656 and nothing remains, so the Quadrat Root
of 7056 is 84; for the square Root 84 multiplied in it self, will produce 7056
as before; and thus you may proceed in any other number; yet I will show one
more example of a Square number, where a cipher happens in the Root.

To find or extract a Quadrat Root, consisting of 5 places. Example 3.
The Square number given here ^ to be subtracted is 43264, whose Quadrat Root
will consist of 3 places, denoted by the 3 points, viz: under 4 first on the
right hand, then under 2 in the place of hundreds, and beneath 4 in the
decimall place of thousands: this done find a Root whose Square shall be
equal, or the nearest less unto the number over the first point on the left
hand, which here will be 2, this set down in the place of Roots, but shall not
need to write down the first number underneath those figures to be squared, but
take the Quadrat of it, which subtract from the first figures; as the square of
2 is 4 which taken from 4 nothing will remain; double then the Root, and place
the first figure of it betwixt the next points, as 2 times 2 is 4, which set
under 3, now 4 cannot be had in 3, therefore put a cipher in the Quotient, and
likewise under the next point beneath 2, to supply the place only, and having
cancelled them both, double the Root, saying, 2 times nothing is nothing, for
which put a cipher betwixt the next two points, then double the 2, and place
that 4 one degree to the left hand of it, as under 2, then see how many times,
4 will be found in 32, which will now be 8 times, place it in the Quotient, and
also under the last point, then multiply this by 8, that is in it self, the
product is 64, which taken out of 64 nothing remains, then 8 times nothing is
nothing, but the 6 decimalls borrowed makes 6, which subtract from 6 and
nothing will remain: and lastly, 8 times 4 is 32, which taken from 32, and
nothing will remain: so the Square Root of 43264 is found 208 whose Square will
produce 43264 the number propounded, which proves the extraction to be exactly
true.

To extract a Quadrat Root out of any irrational number; and to find the Root
with a fraction in any proportion assigned, as or etc. Example 4.
Admit the number given (whose ^ Quadrat Root to be extracted) were 5676, which
number being irrational, the Root is required in such proportion, as that the
Denominator of the fraction shall be 3: to perform this, or the like square
the number given, in whose parts the Root is required, then multiply that
Square by the number propounded, from whence extract the Quadrat Root, and then
divide the Root found by the Denominator of the fraction given: then note what
points the number propounded would have had, and the other number, or numbers
shall be the Numerator of a fraction, unto the Denominator given: As in this
example 5676 is the number propounded, 3 the proportion given which multiplied
in it self is 9, and that by 5676 produces 51084, as in the margent, which
number will bear 3 points as under 4, the cipher, and beneath the figure of 5,
whose nearest Root is 2, which being the first Root, you shall not need for to
subscribe under 5, but set it in the Quotient, which squared is 4, and
subtracted from 5 the remainder is 1, which place over it, and cancel the 5;
that done, double the Root as 2 times 2 is 4, which place betwixt the next two
points; then see how many times 4 will be contained in 11, which will be twice,
then set 2 in the Quotient, and under the next point beneath the cipher, then
say 2 times 2 is 4, which place beneath it, and also multiply the Root 2 by 4,
whose product is 8; which 84 subtract from 110 over it, the remainder will be
26, which place overhead (as in Division) then double the two Roots found, and
always place the first betwixt the next two points, and so proceed in order
toward the left hand; then look how many times 4 is in 26 over it, and you
will find 6, which put in the Quotient, and also under the next point, toward
the right hand; then take the square of 6, that is, multiply 6 by 6 the product
is 36, that is 6 and go 3 decimals, then say 6 times 4 is 24 and 3 in mind is
27, that is 7 and go 2: then multiply the last Root by the next 4, which
produces 24 and 2 in mind makes 26, which write down, being there is no more,
and subtract them from the figures above them uncancelled, as 6 out of 14 there
will remain 8, then 1 borrowed and 7 makes 8, which taken from 8 nothing
remains, and so likewise 6 from 6 and 2 out of 2: now the Root is 226. which
being extracted in third^, divide it by 3, the Quotient will be 75 for the
Quadrat Root of 5676; and extracted according unto the Demonstration, the Root
would have been 75 51/1519 but neither of them exactly true, for their Squares
will not produce the number given.

To extract the Quadrat Root from any irrational number, with a Fraction,
whose Denominator shall be a Decimall, as 1/10, 1/100, 1/1000, 1/10000,
1/100000, etc. Example 5.
In extracting of a Quadrat ^ Root from an Irrational number, where no
Denominator is assigned, but the nearest unto truth is required, this way is
better than the first, more compendious than the second, and much more exact
than either: As for example, let 168 be a number given, whose Square Root is
required in Decimals: all that is now to be done, is only to take any even
number of ciphers as you please, annex those to the number given, on the right
hand, as in this Paradigma, where 168 by annexing of ciphers is made 1680000,
the Root 12 96/100, observe what points there will be under the ciphers, so
many figures or places must be severed from the Root extracted, cut off from
the right hand, to make the Numerator of a fraction, whose Denominator shall be
an unite, with as many ciphers annexed unto it, as the Numerator has figures or
places: the reason of this is, first wherefore the ciphers are in couples is
evident, they being Square numbers, as 10 times 10 is 100, which has 2
ciphers, the square of 100 has 4 ciphers, 1000 will have 6 places, 10000 must
possess 8 places, 100000 will have 10 places, etc. Now these Squares
multiplied into any number propounded, can increase it but so many ciphers, as
by the fourth Example in Multiplication of Whole numbers: neither shall you
need for to divide the Root extracted by the proportion given, as by 10, by
100, 1000, etc. as in my Breviats of Division is explained; but sever so many
figures in the Quotient, as there were points under the ciphers of the Square
annexed, as was abovesaid; so according to the Demonstration and the first
Example, the Square Root of 168 will be 12, and the Remainder 24, for the
Numerator of a fraction, whose Denominator is double the Root with an unite
added to it, that is 25, so 'twill stand thus 12 24/25, to try if the Root be
truly extracted, the Square of 12 is 144 to which add the remainder 24, the
sum will be 168, as before; if the Root had been extracted in Tenths, it
would have been 12 9/10, which is less than the former; but here it was
extracted in 1/100, by annexing 4 ciphers to it, and then it was found as in
the Scheme 1296, that is 12 96/100, or reduced 12 24/25, as before; if 6
ciphers had been annexed to it, then it had been 168000000, and the Quadrat
Root 12961, that is 12 961/1000, which comes nearer the truth, erring not an
unite in 1000, and so the greater number of ciphers you take in this kind, the
nearer you will approach unto the true Root; yet not without error in all
irrational numbers, the offspring of works merely humane, and be satisfied
with this.

How to extract a Quadrat Root from any Fraction or broken number propounded.
Example 6.
In this Square given A, B, C, D, each side suppose an unite, divided into
four equal parts, and consequently those parts, or fractions, multiplied in
themselves, will constitute sixteen little Squares, as by the Quadrat of 4, or
by the Geometrical Demonstration is evident, and by construction the Square A,
E, containing 4 little Squares, is part of the whole Square A, C, 16, and the
Quadrat Root of this fraction is required, that is the side A, G, or A, F; now
to find the Square Root of any broken number, differs nothing from the former
Rules but only in this, that in Fractions there are two terms given, viz:
Numerator and Denominator, and the Quadrate Root must be extracted from both;
As here in this Example of the Root of 1 is but 1, and the Root 4 is 2, so the
Square Root of is, that is, the Root of the Square A, E, (which of A, C,) is
the line A, F, or A, G, half the Root, or side of the great Square A, B, C, D,
and in the same manner A, H, is 1/16 of the Integer A, C, whose Quadrat Root is
the side of the little Square A, H, that is A, I, or A, K, which is a fourth
part of the whole Root, or great Square A, B, or A, D, and the Square Root of
16/81 is 4/9, and here observe, that Fractions may be irrational in one
denomination, and yet perfect Square numbers in another: as admit the fraction
given were 200/392, which are irrational in both terms, and yet reduce them
as to 10^/196, and then the Square Root will be found 10/14 or 5/7, but in all
such cases it is best for to reduce the fraction into the least denomination as
200/392 will be 25/49 whose Quadrat root is 5/7, as before.

To extract the nearest Quadrat Root from any Fraction, that is irrational in
both terms, yet reduced to their least denomination. Example 7.
The former Rules which I have delivered might effect what ordinary use can
require, yet lest you should be to seek when more exactness is desired,
observe this general Rule: Annex unto the Numerator of the fraction given so
many ciphers as you please in payres, and those divide by the Denominator, the
Quotient shall be the Numerator of a new fraction, whose Denominator will be an
unite with so many ciphers as the Numerator has places; and for the
illustration of this admit 17/20 were the fraction given whose Quadrat Root is
required, an^ex two ciphers to the Numerator 17, and then 'twill be 1700, which
divide by 20 the Quotient is 85 for the Numerator of a fraction, whose
Denominator is 100, which fraction 85/100 is equal in value to 17/20, the
Quadrat Root of 85/100 is 9/10, but not exactly true; if 4 ciphers had been
annexed, it would have been 8500/10000, and the Square Root 92/100: and so for
any other of this kind.

To find the Quadrat Root of any mixed or compound number, when the whole
number, the terms of the Fraction, or either of them are rational or
irrational. Example 8.
In extracting the Square Root from any compound broken number, you must
convert it into an improper fraction, although the whole number has a perfect
Root, and also the fraction rational in both terms; as 4 9/16 the Root of
this is not 2, but the Radix of 73/16 is required, for the fractions of Square
numbers are greater, or less, according unto the quantity of the Magnitude, of
which the fraction is a part; and therefore they must be reduced into improper
fractions, whereby they may have one denomination: and for the more
illustrating of this, admit 10 9/16 were a Square number given, whose Roo^ is
required; this made an improper fraction will be 169/16, the Root of 169 is 13,
and the Square Root of 16 will be 4, so the Root of ^69/16 is 13/4 or 3, and so
the like of any other; and all improper fractions, as proper, would be reduced
unto their least denominations, before their Roots are extracted; and if their
terms prove then irrational, annex to the Numerator so many ciphers as you
please in payres, and so make it a decimall fraction, and then find the
Quadrat Root, as by the 5, 6, and 7 Example of this Paragraph, which here shall
have a period; only observing that these compound fractions, will have a
Square Root consisting both of an Integer and a broken number, therefore note
well what Square you take of Decimals; As in this Example, where the Root of
73/16 is required, and in 1/100, the Square of a 100 is 10000, which multiplied
by 73, or annex the ciphers to it, the sum will be 730000, under these
ciphers there will be 2 points, and consequently 100 for the fractions
Denominator; As in the 5 Example. But to return, divide 730000 by 16, the
Quotient will be 45625, the Quadrat Root 213/100, that is 2 13/100 the Root of
4 9/^6, the compound number assigned.

Paragraph II. The Definition of a Cube.
A Cube is a Geometrical figure of the third quantity, composed of several
superficies added or connext together, and proceeds from right Lines multiplied
in themselves, so constituting a superficies called the second Quantity; that
superficies, or Product, multiplied by the Line given, (which was the first
quantity) produces a Cube number, representing a body, consisting of 6 equal
sides, having these dimensions, viz: Length, Breadth and Depth.

The Root of any number perfect cubicall, is a right Line of a Solid body
containing 6 equal sides, which constitutes as many square superficies, or a
number multiplied twice in its self, as was said before: and the extraction of
this Root, is the finding out of the side, or first number, which makes diverse
little Cubes, comprehended with a great one, according unto the first line or
quantity propounded.

All Cubicall numbers are either single, compounded, or irrational.

All those which are called single, are to be understood such Cubes as are made
of any one sinificant figure, multiplied twice in it self, viz: 1 multiplies
nothing, and so is both Root and Cube: 2 times 2 is 4, and 2 times 4 is 8; thus
the Cube of 3 will be 27: the Cube of 4 is 64, and of 5 will be 125, etc.
always less then 1000.

Compounded, are all such Cubes, whose Roots do consist of more figures then
one, and are never less than 1000 the Cube of 10; the Cube of 11 is 1331, the
Cube of 12 will be 1728, etc.

Irrational, are such Cubes that want a known proportion to their Roots, that
is all such Cubes, whose Roots cannot exactly be discovered by humane Art,
either in whole numbers or fractions, as are the Cubes of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9,
10, etc.

To find a Cube made of any significant figure; or the Cubes of them given to
find the Root.
A Demonstration For the extracting of Cubicall Roots from all the 9
significant figures. The figure of a Cube.



This Geometrical figure is a solid body of the third quantity, having these 3
dimensions, viz: Length, Breadth, and Depth; as the sides A, B, or B, C.
Secondly, C, D, or D, E. Thirdly, E, F, or A, F, the sides of this Figure are
all equal, and each divided into 9 parts alike, demonstrating the Cubes made
particularly of all the 9 significant figures: and first for the Superficies A,
C, and likewise the squa^e C, E, the sides are divided into 9 equal parts, by
1, 2, 3, etc. containing the superficial square, made of all the significant
figures simply of themselves, as from an unite to 81 at D, and the square A, C,
shows all the perfect cubicall numbers, or solid bodies, made by the
multiplication of any one figure twice in it self: or the product of a
superficies, and any significant figure: the square A, E, contains the 9
numerall Arithmetical characters, to direct your Optic sense from any Root, or
superficies given unto the Cube comprehended by the greater, and also showing
what number of little Cubes it does contain, as by the Scheme is evident.

Example 1.
First, the Cube of 1 is but 1, as it is an Inch, a Foot, a Yard, etc. but as
the Root or side is divided into parts, it does admit of many, as the Cube of
A, C; suppose the Root A, B, or A, F, one quarter of a Yard, whose Cube is A,
C, A, F, and C, E, in 3 sides, bounded with parallel lines, and so consequently
the other 3 sides must be equal: but as it is divided into 9 inches, the
superficial square C, E, contains 81, and the whole Cube 729 of square Inches
or little Cubes, whereof 1 Inch is here the first: the superficial square of 2
is 4, as in E, C, that multiplied by the Root 2, is 8; as upon the plain A, C,
is evident; or number the little Cubes, and you may discover 8; the Cube of 3
is 27: and that of 4 is 64, and 5 multiplied cubically will make 125, and so of
all the rest as by the figures do appear: and as the multiplication of any
number twice in it self produces the Cube of it; so the extracting of any
Cubique Root is nothing else but to find the side by which the Cube was made;
as the Root of 216 is 6: and if the Cube were 343 the side or Root must be 7,
of 512 it will be 8, and the Root extracted from the Cube of 729, will produce
the side 9, as A, F, equal to all the other sides of the whole Cube made of
the 9 significant figures; and if any whole number less then 1000 were
propounded, and the Cube required, but not found upon the plain A, C, and yet
not less than an unite, the Root is termed irrational, as wanting a true
proportion to the Cube, or Man understanding in the perfection of Art, or the
secrets of Nature.

To extract the nearest Root out of any number, whose Cube was less then 1000.
Example 2.
Find first a number which multiplied Cubically in it self, shall be equal
unto the number given, or the nearest less; then subtract the products of the
multiplications from the number given, the remainder will be a Numerator to a
fraction, whose Denominator shall be the Cubique Root tripled or multiplied by
3, with an unite added unto the product, and these added unto the square of the
Root tripled; the total sum is the Denominator of the fraction: and for the
better illustration of this, all single cubicall numbers that have perfect
Roots under 1000 are expressed in the Demonstration, and admit here 800 were the
number given, whose Cube is required: the Root of this is 9, and the Cube is
729, which take from 800 there will remain 71 for the Numerator of a fraction,
the Root tripled is 27; to which add an unite, it is 28; then take the Square
made of the Root, which here was 9, and squared is 81, that tripled is 243, to
which add 28, the sum is 271 for the Denominator: so the fraction stands
thus 71/271, and the Cube Root of 800 in this manner, as 9 71/271: and the
Cubicall Root of 999 will thus be found for to be 9 270/271. And in this manner
you may make a fraction to any compound Irrational number; yet note this Rule
is not exempt from error, nor so exact as you will find the following Rules:
yet these approach so near the truth, as is necessary in common practice, or at
least will be required in things of ordinary use.

To extract a Cubicall Root from any number greater then 1000, and how to
prepare the number, and point out the figures for the Root which is to be
extracted. Example 3.
The Cube Root of 1000 ^ is 10, and all perfect Roots under it, are made
evident in the Demonstration already, and also those irregular, extracted with
a fraction; so that hitherto there needs no farther explanation; but to extract
the Root from a Cube greater than 1000, the number must be prepared after this
manner, First inscribe your number, as here at A 1728, supposed Cubicall
inches, or what you please; and the side or Root from whence this number
proceeds (containing these little Cubes) is the thing required: under the first
figure or cipher, on the right hand make a point, and so underneath every
fourth figure inclusive, as here in this Example under 8, and 1; and so mark
them on, if there be more figures, leaving two figures or places between all
the points; whose number is always equal to the places in the Cubique Root,
as here in this, there are 2 points; and so many figures will be in the
Quotient, which make upon the right hand of your number propounded, as you did
in extracting of the Quadrat Root; the number thus prepared observe these
general Rules.

The general Rules and Canons in extracting of all Cubique Roots.
I. The number thus prepared as before is specified at A, take a significant
figure, whose Cube shall be equal, or the nearest less, to the number over
the first point upon the left hand, with the figure, or figures before that, if
there be any.

II. Place this significant figure in the Quotient, as the first Cubique Root
found, then subtract its Cubique number from the figures over it (if it
consists of more places than one, or that you can commit to memory, subscribe
them) under the first point toward the left hand in order, then make a
subtraction, and write the remainders over them, in their proper places,
cancel the other figures and draw a line under all.

III. Multiply the Root or Roots by 3, and place the first figure of this
tripled number one degree from the next point toward the left hand, according
to the orderly succession of the figures, as B, 3.

IV. Then multiply the whole Quotient by the Triple, and write the Product
underneath the tripled number, as C, 3, with the unite place of it, beneath the
Triples decimall, and then draw a line under both, this I call the Index, from
pointing out the next Root.

V. In the next place find how many times the first figure upon the left hand
of this Index will be contained in the figure or figures over it: but here
observe for to take such a number as shall be equal or the nearest less, to
the remainder over it (from whence the Root is to be extracted) after all the
several multiplications and products; this number found place in the Quotient
as the next Root.

VI. Multiply this last Root cubically in it self, and having drawn another
line under the last Triple and Index, subscribe this Cube under the next point,
as against the letter D, 8.

VII. Next multiply this Root squared in it self, by the Triple, and subscribe
the unite place of it one degree toward the left hand from the Cube, that is,
under its decimall, if the Root be more than 2; and the other figures in order,
as E, 12.

VIII. This done, multiply the last Cube Root found, by the Index only, which
must be subscribed beneath the last number, with the unite place under its
decimall, that is one degree more to the left hand, as F, 6.

IX. Draw a line under these 3 numbers, and subscribe the sum of them, as 728
G, which subtract from the number over it, (whose Cubicall Root is required)
and cancel the rest; if there be no more points, make a fraction of the
remainder, if any, and thus you have the Cube Root of the given number.

X. If the number given requires a Root of more places, set down the figures
(not extracted) in a new place, with the point or points under them, to which
number, in order annex the last remainder unpointed, and so proceed, according
to these Rules excepting the first and second, which only serves for the
beginning of any Cube Roots extraction.

An Arithmeticall illustration of the former Rules and Canons.
Admit the number propounded ^ be 1728 Cubicall inches, as before, whose side
or Root of this great Cube is required, and prepared, as in this last Example,
with a point under the figures of 8 and 1, with two places between them, as in
the number at A; which having two points, will require 2 figures for the Root,
and in this, the first will be 1, whose Cube can be but 1; which subtracted
from the figure over the point upon the left hand, which being but 1 nothing
will remain, so cancel the figure, and place this Root in the Quotient, which
tripled is 3, subscribe this under 2, against B, and multiply it by the Root,
which being but 1, the product is also 3 for the Index, subscribe this beneath
the Triple one degree toward the left hand, as under 7 and against C: here
draw a line, and find how many times this last Index 3 will be contained in
the figure over it, as in 7; which will be found twice, then set 2 in the
Quotient, and multiply it cubically, which subscribe under the next point, as
against D: then square 2 the last Root, which 4 multiplied by the Triple
produces 12, which subscribe beneath the last Cube, one degree toward the
left hand as against E, then multiply the last Root 2 by the Index, and that
produces 6, which subscribe beneath the rest, one degree more toward the left
hand, as at F, the sum of these is 728 as at G, and that subtracted from the
remaining Cube at A 728, there will be no remainder, as you see at H; so
cancel all the other figures, and the operation is ended, 12 being the Root
found, which multiplied cubically in it self, produces 1728: as 12 by 12 will
be 144, and that again by 12 brings forth the former number, the Cubique Inches
in a Cubicall Foot as was required.

To extract a Root out of a Cubique number consisting of 5 places. Example 4.
The extracting of this ^ or any other Cubique root differs nothing from the
former prescribed Rules: but yet since Man is better instructed with a few
examples than many words, for the case of young beginners, I will briefly
insert more of these, viz: A is here a Cube propounded, as 46656, whose Root is
required: and first having pointed it by my former direction, find the Root of
46, or the nearest less as 3, which place in the Quotient as the first Root,
whose Cube is 27, and that subtracted from 46 the remainder will be 19, which
write over the figures extracted, as in the Example; then triple the Root 3,
and place that 9 under 5 against B. Secondly, multiply the Root by the Triple,
the Product is 27 for the Index as against C, under these draw a line, and
find a new Root by examining how often the foremost figure of the Index will be
contained in the remaining figures over it, as in this, how often 2 is in 19;
provided always you take no greater a Root than that the following numbers may
be extracted according to my former Rules, which if you doubt, make the
experiment first in a void piece of paper, for here the Index 2 will be in 19
but 6 times; which 6 place in the Quotient as the second Root, whose Cube 216
subscribe beneath the line, the unite place under the next point, the rest
toward D, then the Square of this last Root 6 is 36, which multiplied by the
Triple makes 324, that subscribe against E, one degree toward the left hand
Lastly, multiply the Root 6 by the Index only, as here 27, the result will be
162, which subscribe under the last number, one degree more to the left hand
toward F, the sum of all is 19656 as G, this subtracted from the number
uncancelled above, there will nothing remain, as at H, the Root required is 36,
which multiplied cubically in it self, will produce 46656 the former number
propounded.

How to extract a Root from any Cube number that consists of six places.
Example 5.
Admit the Cube number ^ propounded be 970299 as at A, whose Root is desired:
having pointed it by my former directions, as under the unite and the thousand
place, find the Cubique Root of 970 which will be 9 being the nearest less,
whose Cube is 729, that subtracted from 970 there will remain 241, which place
over the three cancelled figures: this done the Quotient or Root 9, tripled is
27, which place one degree from the next point toward B; this Triple number
multiply by the Root 9 does produce the Index 243, which subscribe beneath the
Triple, with the unite place one degree more toward C; here draw a line under
all, and by the Index find a new Root, by asking how many times 2 is contained
in 24, or 243 in 2412, the answer will be 9, which set in the Quotient, as the
second Root, whose Cube is 729, which place against D, the last Root squared,
and multiplied into the Triple will produce 2187, which subscribe with the
unite place one degree more toward E, then multiply the Root 9 by the Index,
the product will be 2187, which subscribe one degree more toward F, the sum
of those 3 numbers is 241299 as at G; and if subtracted from the uncancelled
figures over them, nothing will remain as at H. so 99 is the Root, whose Cube
will be 970299 as before was given.

To extract a Root from any perfect Cubique number consisting of significant
figures and ciphers in what number of places soever. Example 6.
The Cube number here ^ given consists of 9 places, viz: 128024064, and pointed
by my former directions, the Root must consist of three figures or places, and
the first will be 5, whose Cube is 125, which subtracted from the numbers to
the first point on the left hand, that is out of 128, the remainder will be 3;
this done triple the Quotient, the product will be 15, which place one degree
from the next point toward the left hand, then multiply the Quotient by the
Triple, the product is 75 for the Index, which cannot be contained in 30,
therefore put a cipher in the Quotient: and here it is convenient to remove the
figures, and so in finding every Root (but the first) according to this Example.

Having found the second ^ Root, the operation is in the same manner as was
exemplified before; but here the second Root proving a cipher, it assumes a
place in the Quotient only (as in Division) but of it self effects nothing:
so here I remove the Root 50 and Remainder with one point as 3024064 at A: next
triple the Root 50, the product is 150, which place against B, one degree from
the next point; this found, multiply the Quotient 50 by the Triple 150, and
they will produce 7500 for the Index, which place one degree more toward C,
then draw a line under all, and find by the Index a new Root, as by looking
how many times 7 is contained in 30, which will be found 4, for the next Root;
this put in the Quotient, multiply it cubically, it will be 64, which place
under the next point toward D, then multiply the Square of it (that is 16) by
150 the Triple, there will be produced 2400, which place underneath the last
number, one degree more toward E Thirdly, multiply the last Root 4 by the
Index, whose product will make 30000, which place in order under the last one
degree more toward F, the sum of these 3 numbers amounts unto 3024064,
equal to the remaining numbers over it, from whence subtracted, there can be
no remainder, this was a perfect Cube, whose Root is found 504, which
multiplied cubically in it self, produces the former Magnitude, viz:
12802^064, the thing required.

From any irrational Cubique number to extract the Root, or the nearest to it,
with a fract on in any given proportion as or etc. Example 7.
The number here ^ propounded is 44 whose Root is required, and being the
number is irrational to the Root demanded in fourths: first take the Cube of
the proportion assigned, which is 4, and the Cube of it 64 must be mult^plied
by the number given, which here is 44, the result will be 2816 as A; which
point by the former Rules, and find the Root of 2, or the nearest less, which
is 1, whose Cube is also 1, and that taken from 2, the remainder will be 1,
which write over 2 being cancelled; this done triple the Quotient, whose
product is 3, to be subscribed next the second point toward B; and multiplied
by the Quotient, is but 3 for the Index C, by which find the next Root, which
will be 4, whose Cube is 64; but first here draw a line underneath the Triple
and Index as before, and then subscribe 64 under 16 as against D, the last Root
4 being squared is 16, and multiplied by the former Triple produces 48, which
subscribe as against E, then multiply the last Root 4 by the Index, the product
is 12, which subscribe as against F; the sum of these 3 numbers is 1744,
which subtracted from 1816 (as yet uncancelled) the remainder is 72, which is
but part of; and 14 is the Root of this number, 2816, which was extracted in
fourths, therefore divide 14 by 4 the Quotient is 3 the Cubique Root required;
and according to the second Example, the Cube of 44 would be 3 17/37 which is
less than; and if the Root had been extracted in any greater proportion, it
would have nearer approached the truth; but every thing should be performed
according unto the state of the quest^on; yet if at liberty, observe the
following Example, being the truest and most facile way.

To extract the Cubique Root from any number that is irrational, and to
produce the Root in a decimall Fraction, viz. in 1/10 1/100 in 1/1000 in
1/10000 etc. Example 8.
There is a Cube consisting ^ of forty little Cubes, and the Root of this
greater body is required, to be extracted in the hundred part of an unite;
observe here to annex unto the number given, ciphers in trines, or by threes,
because the Cube of 10 is 1000, of 100 it is 1000000, and the unite prefixed
before them multiplies nothing: so here the Root of 40 being required in
hundreds, I do annex six ciphers unto 40, making it 40000000 as at A, and
being pointed, I find 3 places in the Root, whereof the first is 3, whose Cube
is 27, and that subtracted from 40, there will remain 13: now find a new
Triple and an Index, viz: 9 and 27, B and C; by this Index 27 find another
Root as 4, But here note that the Index 27 would have been contained 5 times in
136; but then an unite of that number had only remained, from whence the
product of the Root found, and the Index should be subtracted, besides the
following numbers: but to proceed, the Cube of 4 is 64, which subscribe against
D, the Square of 4, that 16 multiplied by the Triple 9 produces 144 as against
E, and the product of 4 (the last Root) and the Index makes 108 as F, the
total G 12304, which subtracted from the number uncancelled over it, viz:
13000, the remainder will be 696; but the total of the Cube remaining is
696000.

The number uncancelled ^ being transcribed as at A 696000, and having made the
Quotient, and inserted the 2 Roots last found, viz: 34, I find the Triple of
it 102 as against B, and the Index 3468 as C, and the new Root 1, whose Cube is
also 1 as against D, under the last point. Secondly, the Square of it is but 1,
which multiplied by the Triple makes but 102 as E, and that multiplied by the
Index is but the same for F 3468; the Total of these is G 347821, which
subtracted is 348179 as H for the Remainder; and the true Root of 40 is 3
41/100: for if all the Root 341 were divided by 100, the proportion assigned,
the Quotient would be 3, and the remainder the Numerator of a fraction, whose
Denominator here is 100; so in all such cases, it is but cutting off so many
places in the Root as there were ciphers in the proportion given: had this Root
been extracted in tenths it would have been 3 4/10, and by the second Example
in this Parag: but 3 23/37, which is not so exact as in tenths, nor yet that,
as in hundreds: although sometimes they will not differ, when little remains
after the extracting of a former Root, as admit 36, the Cubique root in tenths
will be 3 3/10, and in hundreds but 3 ^0/100 which if reduced is all one: and
so in whole numbers let this suffice.

To extract a Cubique Root from any single fraction or broken number propounded.
A Demonstration of a Cubicall Fraction.


Admit A, B, were equal to A, C, and likewise C, D, with all the other sides
divided into 3 feet, and so constituting a Cubicall yard, consisting of 27 Feet
or little Cubes, and so every fraction of this kind is to be understood a
solid body having Length, Breadth and Depth, and part of a greater Cube: and so
one of these supposed Feet or Cubes is 1/27 part of the whole body, and part of
any one side or Root; for in all these kind of fractions, the Cube root of the
Numerator will be a Numerator unto a new fraction, and so likewise the Root of
the Denominator: as here in 1/27 the Cube root of 1 is but 1, and the Cubicall
root of 27 the Denominator is 3: so the Root or side of this little Cube is
part of the Cubicall yard, viz: of A, B, of A, C, or C, D; and so the Root of
8/27 will be found of the whole side A, B, or A, C: yet the fraction of it
self as a Cube contains 8 solid feet, the body being divided according to the
Denominator, into 27 little Cubes; and according to the Numerator, 8 of them
must be taken: so the extracting of any Cubicall root from a fraction, differs
nothing from the former Rules, but only observing this, always to reduce the
fraction propounded into its least denomination, otherwise they will not be
commensurable; as admit the Cubicall root of 81/192 were required; herein is
included a perfect Cube, yet the Root cannot be found or extracted in these
numbers, without another fraction; therefore reduce both Numerator and
Denominator into their least denominations, viz: 81/192 will be reduced by 3
unto 27/64, from which Cubicall fraction extract the Root as the Root of 27 is
3 for a new Numerator, and the Cubique root of 64 is 4, so the true Root or
side of the fraction 81/192 or 27/64 is, and so the like of any other that is
commensurable.

To extract the Cubique root from any irrational fraction, when either the
Numerator, or Denominator, or both, are incommensurable. Example 9.
The fraction here ^ given is and the Cubique root of it is required in
Centesmes or hundreds: which to effect, the Cube of 100 is 1000000; this
multiplied by 2 the Numerator of the fraction, or which is all one, annex the 6
ciphers unto 2, the sum is 2000000, which divided by 3 the Denominator, the
Quotient will be 666666, as A, the number thus prepared and pointed, find the
Root of 666, which is 8, whose Cube is 512, the nearest less unto 666, the
difference being 154, cancel the 3 first figures, viz: 666, and write the
remainder over them: then triple the Quotient 8, and it will be 24 as B, and
multiplied by the Triple produces the Index 192, which place as against C;
under these draw a line, and by the Index find a new Root as 7, whose Cube is
is 343 as against D, the Square of 7, which is 49 multiplied by the Triple is
1176, which subscribe as at E. Thirdly, multiply the Index 192 by the last Root
7, the product is 1344 as F, the sum of these is 146503, which subtract from
the remaining Cube at A, the remainder at H will be 8163, the Root 87, the
Numerator of a fraction, whose Denominator is 100: so it is thus 87/100, the
Cubicall root of required in a centesme fraction; and so in a greater, or less
proportion, or in any other simple fraction.

To extract a Cubique root from any mixed or compounded fraction, when either
Numerator, or Denominator, or both are incommensurable, or the improper
fraction a perfect Cube. Example 10.
The mixed or compound ^ Cube here propounded is 4492, which if reduced into an
improper Fraction will be 35937/8 a Cubique number whose Root is required,
inscribe the Denominator as 35937 at A, and having pointed it, find the Root of
35, which will be 3, set it in the Quotient, and take the Cube of it 27 out of
35 the remainder will be 8; this done triple the Root 3 and find the Index, as
9 and 27 against B, and C, under these draw a line, and find a new Root as 3
again, whose Cube is 27 against D, the Square of it multiplied by the Triple is
81 as at E. Thirdly, the Root and Index multiplied together, viz: 3 and 27
produces also 81 as F, the total G 8937, subtracted from the remaining Cube
8937 nothing will remain in the Numerator of this fraction, whose Denominator
was 8, and the Cubique root of it is 2, so the true Root of 4492, or which is
all one, this improper fraction 35937/8 will be 33/2 or 16; and if supposed
feet, it is the length of a statute Pole, whose Cube made upon this Root or
side is 4492 as before.

Example 11.
In this there is given ^ a mixed fraction, viz: 1, whose Cubique root is
required, and being the number is irrational, it is desired in a decimall
fraction, and in this proportion, as an unite is to 100, whose Cube is
1,000,000; make the number given an improper fraction, viz: 5/4, this Numerator
multiplied by 1000000 will be 5000000, and divided by the Denominator 4 proves
1250000, as A, this pointed shows 3 figures in the Quotient or Root, and the
first an unite only, whose Cube being 1 and subtracted, nothing remains; the
Triple and Index will be alike, viz: 3, which cannot be had in 2, the figure
over it, therefore put a cipher in the Quotient, as for a place in the second
Root.

The remaining part ^ of the Cube being removed, viz: 250000, and 10 placed in
the quotient, which tripled is 30 B, and then the Index will be 300 C, and the
third Root found 7; draw a line under all, and subscribe the Cube of 7, viz:
343 against D, the last Root squared, and multiplied by the Triple makes 1470
as E. Thirdly, the Root multiplied by the Index produces 2100 as against F,
the total at G, is 225043, and remaining as at H 24957, the Root found is
107/100 that is 1 ^7/100 and the Cubique root of 1 according to the proportion
assigned; but whether truly extracted, or no, you may prove by multiplication
of the Root cubically, and adding the Remainder unto the Cube produced, as by
the former Examples may be demonstrated.

The reason wherefore are taken the Triples, Squares, and Cubes of particular
Roots, whereby to extract or find the total Root of any number propounded.
In any Cubique number assigned (whose Root is to be extracted) there is
required no more than such a number, as multiplied twice in it self shall
produce the Cube, viz: 2, is the Root to 8, and so will 3 be to 27, and 4 unto
64, etc. but when a number propounded must have more figures than one in the
Root, it seems almost unexplicable to humane discovery how to effect it at one
operation: upon which our wise Forefathers who laid the groundworks of all our
Liberal Sciences, have given us Principles and Demonstrations for to guide us
by, but these self-conceited times have neglected their Dictates, both in what
is Humane or Divine, where through neglect, many things are lost, the abortive
Saints of these days, having the opinion of our Predecessors, as children
have of old men, thinking them to be fools, when old men know that they are so
indeed: but leaving them, and turning to the Ingenious, whom my endeavor is to
assist, I will (according to my ability) show them some light of reason in this

Example 12.
Divide any number Numbers 10 and 2. The Triples 30 and 6. The Squares 100 and
4. The Cubes 1000 and 8. The total Cubes 1008. The triples product 600. 120.
The total is 1728. given into what parts you please, then add to their Cubes
the Square of one part multiplied by the Triple of the other interchangeably,
the sum of them will be equal unto the Cube of the whole number, as for a
farther illustration, let 12 be a number given, which here I will divide vide
into 2 parts, viz: 10 and 2, their Triples 30 and 6, their Squares 100 and 4,
their Cubes 1000 and 8, their numbers thus prepared, 100 multiplied by 6
produces 600, and 30 by 4 makes 120, which products added to the sum of
their Cubes, viz: 1008 the total will be 1728, and so is the Cube of 12; and
as the Cube here is made of a number divided into several parts, so may the
Root likewise be extracted in parts, or any other number, as 125 divided into 3
parts, viz: 100, 20, 5, the Triples of these are 300, 60, 15, their Squares are
10000, 400, 25, their particular Cubes 1000000, 8000, 125, the sum of their
Cubes is 1008125, next the Square of 100 is 10000, which multiplied by 60 (the
Triple of 20) the product is 600000. Secondly, the Square of 20, that is 400,
multiplied by 300 produces 120000. Thirdly, add the two last numbers
together, their sum will be 120, the Square of it, 14400; which multiplied by
the Triple of the third number 5 that is by 15, the product is 216000. Lastly,
the Triple of 120 that is 360 multiplied by the Square of 5, viz: 25 produces
9000, all these numbers are 1008125, 600000, 120000, 216000, and 9000, whose
total sum is 1953125, equal to the Cube of 125, which is also 1953125: and
as these Cube numbers are made in several parts by their Cubes, Squares, and
Triples, in the contrary manner are the Roots extracted.

Paragraph III. How for to extract all other Roots composed of these, viz: a
squared Square: a squared Cube: a squared squared Square: a Cubique Cube, etc.
The extraction of a Biquadrat Root.
THese Roots do all depend upon the former, and of little use in Natural
Arithmetic; yet to satisfy the curiosi^y of some, I will briefly show the
manner of their extraction, both in whole numbers and fractions, either
rational or irrational, as thus: a Biquadrate number or a Squared square is
nothing else but a number composed of a Square multiplied in it self; and the
Root is thus found, extract the Quadrat Root from the number propounded, and
the Square Root of that extraction is the Root required: As for example, the
Biquadrat Root of 625 is required, the Square Root of it according to our
former Rules will be found 25; and the Square Root of 25 is 5, the Byquadrat
Root of 625 required.

To extract a Root from any Squared Cube.
A Squared Cubique number is composed of any Cubique number squared or
multiplied by it self; and the Root of any such number will be discovered by
extracting the Square Root from the number given, the Cubique Root of that
extraction will be the Root required: As for example, let 729 be the number
given, whose Quadrat Root is 27; and the Cubique Root of 27 is 3; the true Root
of the Squared Cube required.

To extract a Root from a Biquadrat number squared.
A Biquadrat squared is a Square number multiplied in it self, and the product
of that squared again is called a Biquadrat squared, whose Root is thus
extracted, from any number given extract the Quadrat Root (which is a
Biquadrat) whose Root will be discovered as the last: and by this example,
1679616 is the number propounded whole Square Root is 1296, the Quadrat Root of
that is 36, and the Square Root of that is 6, the Biquadrat squared Root of
1679616 as was required.

To extract a Root from any Cubique Cube number.
A Cubique Cube is a number whose Cube is multiplied Cubically in it self,
whose Root will be thus drawn out from any number propounded, and as by this
example 5159780352 is a number given, whose Cubique Root extracted by the
former Rules will be 1728, and the Cubique Root of that will be 12, the true
Root of 5159780352 as was desired: in any of these, to try whether the
operation be right, multiply the Roots extracted according unto the quantity
given, and to the total product, add the remainder (if there were any) the
sum will then prove the number propounded, as in this Example, 12 was the
Root found by extraction, whose Cube is 1728^, and the Cube of that again will
produce 5159780352, the Cubique Cube number given.

To extract any Root out of an irrational number in a Decimall fraction, or in
any other proportion propounded, either in whole or broken numbers.
Admit the number given were 5754, and the Biquadrat Root of it is required to
1/10 of an unite the Biquadrat of 10 (the Denominator of the fraction
propounded) will be 10000, which multiplied by the number given, or annex the 4
ciphers to it, the number will be 57540000 whose Square Root is 7585,
neglecting the remainder, extract the Square Root again out of 7585, whose Root
will be 87/10, that is 8 7/10 the Biquadrat Root of 5754 in tenths; if it had
been required in any other proportion as in, or, or, or, etc. multiply the
Denominator of the fraction to the Quantity given, and those products into the
number given, from whence extract the Root required, and that Root must be
divided by the proportion assigned, according to the seventh Example of this
Parag:

To extract any Root from a simple fraction, or any compounded number that
shall be assigned, and in any proportion, as 1/10, or 1/100, or 1/1000, etc.
Let 3/7 be a fraction given, whose Biquadrat Root is required in tenths: the
Biquadrat of 10 is 10000, therefore annex 4 ciphers unto 3, the fraction's
Numerator it will be 30000 which divided by the Denominator 7 the Quotient will
be 4285, whose Square Root is 65, and the Quadrat Root of that is 8, the
Numerator of a fraction, whose Denominator is 10, so the Biquadrat Root
required is 8/10 or, if it had been a compound fraction, it must have been
reduced to a single fraction: As for example, to extract the Biquadrat Root
from 16, this made an improper fraction will be 50/3 whose Root is required in
a decimall of 100; therefore annex 8 ciphers to 50 and then it will be
5000000000, which divided by 3, the Denominator, the Quotient will be
1666666666, whose Quadrat Root is 40824, and the Square Root of this 202, that
is 202/100 or 2 2/100 the Biquadrat Root of 16 the thing required.

Observe here that fractions in any of these quantities may be commensurable in
their Roots without reduction, but yet being reduced they are the sooner
discovered: As for example, to this fraction 32/512, you will not find the
Biquadrat Root, reduce it therefore by 2, it is 16/256 whose Root is 2/4 or,
and if you reduce 16/256 to their least denomination, you will find 1/16;
whose Biquadrat Root is: and so for all other Roots these Examples well
understood may suffice the ingenious.

Paragraph IV. How Numbers have relation one to another in respect of their
Quantities and Qualities.
The definition of Quantity in Numbers.
ALL Numbers are said to differ in Quantity, as in respect of the excess or
difference betwixt those numbers, and of this kind there are two species, viz:
the Greater and the Less, usually called the Antecedent and Consequent; as
admit the proportion were 6 and 7, or 3 to 9; here 6 i^ the Antecedent, and 7
the Consequent, and so likewise 3 and 9, this is the lesser proportion unto the
greater; and the contrary is when the greater is Antecedent, as 7 to 6, or 9 to
3, etc.

The relation of numbers one to another (as in respect of their Quantities) is
the difference betwixt those numbers found by subtracting the less from the
greater, whether Antecedent or Consequent; as 3 and 9 admit were terms
compounded, subtract the lesser from the greater, the remainder or difference
is 6, and this is the relation of numbers, as in respect of their Quantities.

The proportion betwixt any Numbers in Quantity is the Quotient of the
Antecedent when divided by the Consequent, as the proportion of 4 to 2 is
Double, 9 unto 3 Triple, 16 to 4 Quadruple, etc. and the contrary, as 2 to 4
is, and 3 unto 9 is, or 4 to 16 is, etc. that is the Antecedent divided by the
Consequent, as 4 divided by 2, or 2 by 4.

This proportion of Numbers is defined to be equal, or unequal; Those said to
be equal which are of the same quantity, as 2 to 2, or 5 to 5, or 10 to 10,
etc. And the other is the proportion of unequal Numbers, one to another, and
the greater to the less, or the less unto the greater, viz: 4 to 2, or 2 unto
4, as before: and where the greater is Antecedent, the Quotient must be more
than an Unite; and where the lesser Number is Antecedent the Quotient is a
fraction always less than an Unite, as in the former Examples.

These kinds of unequal proportion, are subdivided into 5 several species,
whereof 3 are simple, and the other 2 are mixed.

The three simple species are these, viz: 1 Multiplex: 2 Superparticulare: and
3 Superpartiens: and the two compounded species are, viz: 1
Multiplex-superparticulare: and 2 Multiplex-superpartiens, which are thus
explained.

I. Multiplex, or manifold proportion, is when the Consequent is contained in
the Antecedent more than once, and exactly without any remainder, as 10 unto 5,
a double proportion: 18 to 6, a triple etc. and the contrary to this, is the
proportion of the less to the greater, and is usually called Submanifold, viz:
5 to 10, double proportion, and 6 to 18 triple etc.

II. Superparticular proportion, is when the Antecedent contains the Consequent
but once with a fraction, whose Numerator is ever an Unite, or may be reduced
unto it, viz: 3 to 2 is 1, and 5 to 4 is 1, and so likewise 12 to 8 is 1, and
15 to 12 is 1; so 20 to 16, or 10 to 8, is as 5 to 4. The contrary to this is
Sub-superparticular, as the less to the greater, viz: 2 to 3, or 4 to 5, etc.
and you may find in many Writers the fractions thus expressed according unto the
Denominator, and in Latin, with Sesqui added to it, as Proportio Sesquialtera:
Sesquitertia: Sesquiquarta: 11/10 Sesquidecima, that is in proportion as 11 to
10, which will be 1 1/10, and so of any other.

III. Superpartiens, is a proportion when the Antecedent contains the
Consequent once with a fraction, whose Numerator is always more than an unite,
as 5 to 3 is 1, or 9 to 7 is 1 2/9: the contrary to this is when the Antecedent
is the lesser number, and is usually called Subsuperpartient, viz: as 3 to 5,
or 7 to 9. Unto these proportions is always added Super, the middle is derived
from the Numerator of the fraction which must be 2 at least: and the word is
terminated with the Denominator of the same fraction, as 5 to 3 is in
proportion 1, and is usually called Super-dupartiens tres; and 7 to 4, is 7
divided by 4, and will be 1, that is Supertripartiens-quartas: and so of all
the rest.

IV. Multiplex Super-particularis, is a proportion betwixt two numbers, when
the Antecedent contains the Consequent twice at least, with a fraction whose
Numerator never exceeds an unite, this proportion is derived from the two
former, and thence denominated, as 9 to 4 is 2, and is called
Duplasesqui-quarta: and 9 to 2 is 4, that is Quadruplasesquialtera: and 26 unto
5 is 5, that is Quintupla Sesquiquinta: and so for any other. The contrary to
this is when the Antecedent is less than the Consequent, and is denominated
sub Multiplex superparticularis.

V. Multiplex-superpartiens, is when the Antecedent contains the Consequent
twice at least, with a fraction, whose Numerator must ever exceed an unite, as
8 to 3 is 2, and this proportion is called Dupla superdupartiens tertia; and 19
to 5 is 3, and is termed Tripla super-quadripartiens quinta: and the contrary
to this, is when the Consequent is greater, then is the Antecedent, but in the
same proportion (and so is to be understood of the rest) as 3 to 8, or 5 to 19,
etc. and is usually termed sub Multiplex super-partiens.

In these 5 species are comprehended all the varieties of proportions betwixt
any two numbers whatsoever; and as for fractions, they are all included within
these 5 kinds, observing (as in whole numbers) for to divide one by another,
according to the 5 Parag: and 2 Sect: of my first Book: and so also in mixed and
compounded Fractions, viz: 3 to, that is 3/1 to, which if divided according
unto the Rules of Fractions is 9/2, that is 4, the proportion is Quadrupla
Sesquialtera, or divided by is 1, that is Proportio Sesquialtera; and so of any
other.

Addition of these 5 Species or unequal Proportions.
Of these Proportions there is great use both in Geometry and Music, and are
called by some Harmonicall Proportions, whose excellency I will leave to the
learned of that Art, and here only explicate the practick part, in the
addition, and subtraction of them; that is, how to express in one sum, any
two or more of these proportions, or how to subtract one from another, which is
easily performed by stating the question according to common fractions: and
first for addition, multiply their Numerators together, their product will be a
new Numerator, and so likewise their Denominators, by this means producing one
sum, comprehending both the former proportions, of which if there be many,
having multiplied the first into the second, and that product into the third
proportion, or term, and so to the fourth etc. as by this following Example
shall be perspicuous.

An Example of Addition in these Proportions.
Admit the Proportions stated were 2, 4, 6, the first and second numbers are in
a double proportion: the second and third, viz: 4 and 6, Sesquialtera, that is
1, which place thus 2/1 and 3/2, which multiplied, as in Reduction of compound
Fractions, Lib: 1. Sect: 2. Parad: 1. the product is 6/2 or 3, which is a
Triple proportion.

All numbers whatsoever differing in quantity or quality, if increased, or
diminished, multiplied, or divided, by any one common number, I say the
differences betwixt their sums, remainders, products, or quotients, will
continue in the same proportion as were the differences of the numbers
propounded, as admit 4, 12, and 20, 36, the difference of 4 and 12 is 8, and
the difference between 20 and 36 is 16, double unto the former difference 8,
and so will the difference of these numbers be, if increased or diminished by
any one, or common number; as add or subtract 3 from them all, the sum or
remainder will be 7, 15 and 23, 39 or 1, 9 and 17, 33; whose differences are in
the same proportion as before, and so likewise if they were multiplied or
divided by any common number.

Paragraph V. Treating of Natural Progressions and Arithmeticall Proportions,
with the addition of them.
Natural Progression consists always of more than two numbers of equal
difference or proportion betwixt them, either ascending or descending in order,
as 1, 2, 3, or 3, 2, 1, the common difference is 1; or 2, 4, 6, 8, the
difference is 2; or in this Progression 1, 4, 7, 10, or 3, 6, 9, etc. wherein
the difference is 3; and so likewise 10, 20, 30, etc. or 100, 200, 300, the one
proceeding by 10, the other by 100: and so of any others where the difference
is equal, and this Progression of Numbers is called Arithmeticall Proportion
continued.

Proportion interrupted is when there are at least 4 numbers propounded, but
the Progression interrupted or broken off, and yet then proceeds again, as 1,
3, 5, -- 6, 8, 10, the difference betwixt 1 and 3 is 2, or 3 and 5; and so
likewise in 6, 8, 10, the difference proceeds by 2; yet where it is broken off
the difference is but 1, as betwixt 5 and 6.

Theoreme 1.
Any three numbers given in Natural Progression continued, the middle number
doubled will be equal un^o the sum made of the extremes, viz: 2, 5, 8, the
difference of these three numbers is 3, the sum of 2 and 8 is 10, and so is
twice 5 also 10. Again 3, 7, 11, which proceeds by 4, if 7 be doubled it will
be 14 equal unto the sum of 3 and 11; and the reason is evident, because the
middle number is the mean proportional betwixt the two extremes, being so much
less than the third number, as it does exceed the first in a Natural
Progression, or in any Arithmeticall Proportion: in which if two numbers were
given for to find a mean, half the sum of the two extremes will be the mean
proportional number sought, as 10 and 20, two extremes, their sum is 30, the
half is 15; and so it is 10, 15, 20, proceeding by 5: the mean betwixt 4 and 9
is 6, so it is 4, 6, 9; and if the mean and one extreme were given, and the
other required, add the difference betwixt the two numbers to the greater, and
the sum will be a third proportional ascending, and subtracted from the
lesser the remainder will be a third descending, as 10 and 13 the difference is
3, which added unto 13 makes 16 a third proportional, viz: 10, 13, 16, or 3
taken from 10 the lesser, the remainder will be 7, the lesser mean, viz: 7, 10,
13, and so the like of any other.

Theoreme 2.
Any four numbers propounded in Natural Progression, the sum of the two
means shall be equal unto the sum of the extremes, whether the Proportion be
continued or interrupted: as for example, 1, 2, 3, 4, the sum of the two
means, that is 2 and 3 makes 5, and so is 4 and 1: and likewise 10, 20, 30, 40,
the extremes make 50, and so 20 and 30 added together will be 50: and so in
Progression interrupted, or broken off, as 4, 10, 20, 26, the sum of the two
means is 30, and so 4 and 26 added together is 30, the reason is the same with
the former; for as 10 exceeds 4 the lesser extreme, so is 20 less than the
greater extreme, from whence consequently the sum of the two means is equal
unto both their extremes.

Addition of Numbers proceeding in Arithmeticall proportion continued. Example
1.
All numbers that are in Arithmeticall proportion may be collected into one
sum, as by Addition of common numbers, in the first species of my
Arithmeticke; but more expeditely thus: add the first and last Progression
together; and then either multiply that sum by half the terms or
progressions; or else with the progressions, multiply half the sum made of
the two extremes, which will be thus explained: as admit it were demanded the
number of orderly strokes that a Clock strikes in 24 hours; 12 of them being
in Arithmeticall Progression, as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, the
sum of the first and last is 13, which multiplied by half the progressions,
or number of terms, that is 13 by 6 produces 78; or which is all one, 12
multiplied by 6 will produce also 78 as before, the number of strokes in 12
hours, which doubled will be 156, the number of strokes in 24 hours, as was
required; and in any number equally proceeding, as 5, 9, 13, 17, 21, 25, the
extreme are 30; and now it is indifferent whether you multiply 30 by 3, or 15
by 6, the sum will be 90 either way; and it is not material whether the
Progression be ascending or descending, so it be continued; the reason of this
proceeds from the two former Theoremes.

A distinction of Progressions continued. Example 2.
Although all Progressions of this kind are numbers increasing or decreasing
wi^h equal differences; yet diverse Authors do use diverse distinctions, which
here I will comprise in two; the one Natural, viz: 1, 2, 3, etc. proceeding by
unites only; and all others denominated from the difference between their
terms, or progressions, viz: 1, 3, 5, 7, or 2, 4, 6, 8, etc. and is called by
2; and 1, 4, 7, 10, or 2, 5, 8, 11, Progressions by 3; and so the like of any
other.

One extreme being given with the order and number of the progressions, to
find the other extreme. Example 3.
In Natural progression (proceeding from an Unite, and so continuing) the
number of them will be equal to the greater extreme; but if the Progression
begins with any other figure, that is the Progressions term, then multiply
that term by the number of Progressions, the product will be the extreme
required: and the contrary, if the greater extreme be given, divide it by the
number of Progressions, the Quotient will give the lesser extreme; as if 2 were
the lesser extreme, and the Progression; what will the 6 place be? The answer
to this is 12, and thus they will stand 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12; if by 3 what the 7
place, the answer will be 21, as it will thus appear 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21,
and if the greater extreme were given to find the less, as 32 whose
Progression is to 8 places, therefore divide 32 by 8, the Quotient is 4, the
less extreme, and the order of Progression, as will thus appear, 4, 8, 12, 16,
20, 24, 28, 32, or 30, the greater extreme in the sixth place, the lesser
extreme was 5; but when the first term is not the difference of the
Progression, then multiply the term of the Progression given by one place less
than the number of Progressions, and to the product add the less extreme, the
total will be the greater extreme; as if 3 were the less extreme of a
Progression by 2 unto 7 places, then say 6 times 2 is 12, to which add 3 the
less extreme, the sum will be 15 for the greater; and thus appears 3, 5, 7,
9, 11, 13, 15.

The greater extreme, with the number of Progressions, and their difference
being given, to find the lesser extreme, observe this as a general Rule:
multiply the difference of Progressions, by one less than the number of the
said Progressions, subtract the product from the greater extreme given, and the
remainder will be the first number of that Progression continued: As for
example, admit 44 were the extreme propounded, which had proceeded by 10 in
five Progressions, 10 multiplied by 4 produces 40, which taken from 44 there
will remain 4, for the first number, and the lesser extreme, as by these
numbers will appear, viz: 4, 14, 24, 34, 44. Again, admit 29 to be the greater
extreme, proceeding by 2, in 13 Progressions, I say 12 multiplied by 2
produces 24, which subtracted from 29 leaves 5 for the first number, as 5, 7,
9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27, 29, and so the like of any other
continued Progression.

With a mean proportional, and one extreme being given, to find the other
extreme, and the number of progressions. Example 4.
Any numbers in Arithmeticall proportion, the sum of the extremes is double
unto the mean, by the former Theoremes; and therefore it is evident, that
either of the extremes taken from the mean doubled will give the other
extreme, as 4, 6, 8, and 6 doubled is 12, from whence take 4 and there will
remain 8; or subtract 8 and there will remain 4: and consequently the two
extremes being given, the mean is also included, being half the sum of two
extremes; and to find the number of Progressions, subtract the lesser from the
greater, and divide the remainder by the difference of Progressions, the
Quotient will be always one less than the number, as if 5 and 29 were two
extremes, whose difference was 2; the difference between them is 24, which
divided by 2 (the difference of Progression) the Quotient will be 12, unto
which add one, the number is 13, the whole series or order of the Progression,
viz: 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27, 29.

For the clearer explanation of this, suppose two men were to go from London
to Edenborough, by computation 292 miles; they took horse together, one
resolving for to travel 30 miles every day; the other 6 miles the first day,
the second day 12, and so proceeding in Arithmeticall Progression of 6 until
he should arrive at his journeys end: and here it is required to know which of
them came first to Edenborough; or in how many days one will overtake the
other: first observe that 30 is here the mean proportional, and 6 the lesser
extreme, and the greater 54, the mean doubled is equal unto the sum of the
extremes, that is 60, as by the former Rules, where the number of progressions
will be found 9, and in so many days these Travelers will overtake one the
other, having gone 270 miles, which is 9 times 30 equal to the other, as by
these numbers 6, 12, 18, 24, 30, 36, 42, 48, 54, in this series you may observe
30 the mean, exceeding the others first days journey, as it is exceeded by the
last, and consequently first at his journeys end, for the next day will be 60
miles, wherein he rides as fast again as the other, and having but 22 miles to
ride, I will leave them, and end this Paragraph, and proceed no farther in
Natural Progressions.

Paragraph VI. Treating of Geometrical Progressions and Proportions, continued
and interrupted, with the addition of those numbers.
Geometrical Progression does consist of more than two numbers, not of equal
difference in numbers, but of like proportion in quality and quantity, viz: 1,
2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, etc. this is called a double proportion, every one being
but half the succeeding number; or these 1, 3, 9, 27, or 2, 6, 18, 54,
denominated a triple proportion, every number containing the precedent 3 times;
so 2, 8, 32, 128, or 3, 12, 48, a quadruple proportion, every succeeding number
being 4 times the precedent, and so of all other numbers, of what quality or
quantity soever proceeding in this kind, and is nominated Geometrical
proportion continued.

Proportion interrupted or broken off, is when the Progression is discontinued
in the proportion of the numbers, and consists of four places or progressions
at the least, viz: 3, 6, 7, 14, wherein the second and the third number (that
is 6 and 7) differs in the proportion, not as 3 to 6, or 7 to 14, which is a
double proportion: and so 1, 3, 27, 81, is a Geometrical progression
interrupted, for 1 and 3 and 27 and 81 are in a Triple proportion, but not the
second and the third, 27 containing 3 nine times.

Theoreme 1.
Geomet^icall progressions are either ascending or descending in the former
proportions; and if continued, and proceeding from an unite: ^he first from 1
is called the Root or first quantity. The second is the Square or the second
quantity. The third the Cube or third quantity. The fourth is Biquadrat, the
Squared square or fourth quantity. The fifth is called the Surde solid or fifth
quantity. The sixth is denominated the Squared Cube, or the sixth quantity, etc.
all which are explained in these numbers, viz: 1 being neither Number nor
Quant^ty: 2 the Root: 4 the Square: 8 the Cube: 16 the Biquadrat, made by the
square of 4: next 32 is the Surde solid, made by the multiplication of the
Biquadrat and the Root, or the product of the Square and the Cube: 64 is the
squared Cube, that is the Square made of the Cube multiplied in it self; all
which numbers proceeding from a Root, are found by multiplying the Root in its
self, and then in the next product or progression, and so proceeding, the next
proportion all above it will be produced, and so to what number of Progressions
you please, making the Root always Multiplier; and the numbers cont nued
betwixt the first and the last, are called Mean proportionals, or Continued
means, in Geometrical progression, as is evident in the last Example: to find
the Root or number on which the Progression was made, div^de any one of the
Progressions, by the next inferior or less unto it, the Quotient will be your
desire: As for example, 3, 6, 12, 24, etc. if you divide 6 by 3, or 12 by 6, or
24 by 12, the quotient will be 2 for the number by which the progression was
made; and so 5, 20, 80, 320, I say any one of these divided by the next less
will show the Progression was by 4; and so for any other.

Theoreme 2.
Any three numbers in Geometrical progression, the Squa^e of the mean or
middle number, is always equal unto the product, made by the multiplication
of the first and third number: As for example, 2, 4, 8, are the three numbers
given in a Geometrical proportion, where 4 is the mean, and being squared is
16, equal to the product of the extremes, viz: 2 and 8, which is also 16; and
so in 3, 6, 12, the square of 6 the mean is 36, equal to the product of 3 and
12 being likewise 36; so 4, 12, 36, the square of 12 is 144, equal to 36
multiplied by 4, which produces also 144, as before; so 3, 6, 12, are in the
same proportion, and the square of the mean is 36, equal unto the product of
the two extremes, viz: 3 and 12, which multiplied produces also 36; and so the
like in any three numbers where the first is contained in the second so many
times as the third contains the second number, and s evident in it self, for
what quantity or proportion the first has to the second, the same has the
second unto the third number, and so consequently the mean squared must be
always equal to the product of the two extremes, otherwise those numbers are
not in any proportion, or progression Geometrical.

In the same manner if 4 numbers be in proportion, the product of the two means
are equal unto the product of both the extremes: As for example, 2, 4, 8, 16,
the product of 4 and 8 is 32, and so is 16 multiplied by 2: or 3, 6, 12, 24,
the two means 6 and 12 will produce 72, equal unto 3 times 24, the two
extremes; and from the former reason, the second being in proportion to the
first, as the fourth number is to the third; and this is general, whether the
Geometrical progression be continued or interrupted, as 4, 12, 14, 42: for as
12 contains 4 thrice, so is 14 (the third number) contained 3 times in 42, and
the product of the two means, viz: 12 and 14 is 168, and so 42 multiplied by 4
will produce likewise 168: and so for any other four numbers that are thus in a
Geometrical progression, as the first is to the second, so the third to the
fourth are proportional numbers.

Proposition 1. Any two numbe^s propounded, for to find a mean proportional
between those numbers.
Multiply the two given extremes one by anoother, the Quadrat Root extracted
out of that product shall be a mean proportional between the two numbers
propounded: As for example, 4 and 9, admit the numbers given, these multiplied
together produces 36, whose Square Root is 6, the mean proportional number
desired, and is evident in it self, for it contains 4 the lesser mean 1, and
so does 9 contain 6; for by the last Theoreme, the product of two extremes
being equal unto the square of the mean, consequently the Square Root of that
product, must be the mean proportional required. And for a farther
explanation, suppose 12 and 1728 be two extremes, whose mean proportional is
required; the product of 12 and 1728 is 20736, whose Square Root will be 144,
but in case the product should prove irrational, that is, wanting a perfect
Root, then extract the Quadrat Root with a fraction, as your occasion shall
require by the 4 or 5 Example, Lib: 2. Parag: 1, or in Fractions, as follows
in the same Parag:

Proposition 2. A mean proportional number being given, with either of the
extremes, to find the other extreme.
To effect this, or any Question of this kind, Square the number propounded
for the mean, and then divide that Square by the extreme given, the Quotient
will show the other extreme: As for example, admit 5 were an extreme
propounded, and 10 the mean, whose Square is 100, which divided by 5 the
product is 20 for the greater extreme required: this may be also proved by the
last Theoreme, for this mean proportional squared contains both the extremes
multiplied together, then consequently if that Square or number be divided by
one extreme, the quotient must needs produce the other. Or by the 2 Theoreme
find the Progression, and with that multiply the mean, for to find the
greater extreme, or by division find the less, as 3, 9, 27, are proportional
numbers, and admit 9 were known and one extreme, the other is easily found, the
progression being discovered to be triple, 9 the mean divided by 3, the
Quotient will be 3 for the lesser extreme, and 9 multiplied by 3 shows the
greater extreme.

Proposition 3. Betwixt any two numbers propounded, for to find two mean
Proportionalls.
To perform this Question, or the like, you must always observe to Square the
lesser extreme given, and that multiply into the greater extreme, from which
product extract the Cubique Root, which will be the least of the two
Proportionals sought; the other must be a mean between that and the greater
extreme, which will be discovered by the second Theoreme, or by the first
Proposition: and for the farther illustration of it admit 2 and 16 were two
extremes, between which, two means are required; the Square of 2, viz: 4
multiplied in 16 produces 64, whose Cube Root is 4 for the lesser mean, and by
the progression 8 must be the other; so these proportional numbers found are
2, 4, 8, 16: so likewise between 3 and 24 to find two means, the Square of 3,
viz: 9, multiplied in 24 produces 216, whose Cube Root is 6 for the lesser
mean, whose greater must be 12, and the 4 proportionalls will stand thus 3, 6,
12, 24, the reason of this differs not from the former, for whereas the single
mean is found by multiplication of the two extremes in their first quantity,
the Square Root being the Medium, which is the second quantity, so in finding
two mean proportional numbers the greater extreme given is to be multiplied by
a term in the second quantity, that is by the lesser extreme squared, from
which product the Cube Root is to be extracted, a term of the third quantity
according to Geometrical progression, which by some succeeding Examples shall
be illustrated.

Proposition 4. Between any two Extremes to find three Mediums or
Proportional numbers.
The solution of this Proposition, or the like is thus, multiply the greater
extreme by the Cube made of the lesser propounded, from thence extract the
B^quadrat Root, which shall be the least of the three extremes required; the
other two will be easily found by Progress^on: As for example, betwixt 2 and 32
there are three proportional numbers required, which will be thus discovered:
the Cube of 2 (the lesser extreme) is 8, which multiplied by 32, the greater
extreme produces 256 whose Biquadrat Root (as by the third Paragr:) is 4, for
the least mean, the rest will be discovered by Progression, as thus, 2, 4, 8,
16, 32, to find 3 Mediums between 3 and 48, the Cube of 3 is 27, that
multiplied into 48 the greater extreme, produces 1296, whose Biquadrate Root
is 6 for the lesser mean, the rest in Progression will stand thus, 3, 6, 12,
24, 48, or more expedite in many Questions; as thus, where the Progressions
consist of an odd number, as of 5 places, 7 places or more, multiply the two
extremes given together, the Quadrat Root will be a mean proportional between
those extremes, then with that Medium, and one of the extremes, find another
Medium as by the 3 Proposition, and so you may continue extracting of Roots
until all the Mediums are discovered: As for example, betwixt 4 and 2916,
there be 5 mean proportional numbers required, the product of 4 and 2916, is
11664, whose Quadrat Root is 108, with which Medium and 4 the lesser extreme,
find the two lesser mean proportionalls by the 3 Propos: the Square of 4 is
16, which multiplied into 108 produces 1728 whose Cube Root is 12 the lesser
mean, and the Progression is by 3, so the whole order or series of them is 4,
12, 36, 108, 324, 972, 2916.

Or thus, here being 5 mean proportionalls required, multiply the less extreme
4 to a Surdesolid which is the fifth quantity, and thus found: the Square and
Cube of any number multiplied together will produce the Surdesolid, that
multiplied by the greater extreme, from whose product extract the squared Cube,
as by the 3 Parag: the Root is the least mean proportional: As for example,
the two extremes, admit 4 and 2916 the Square of 4 is 16, and the Cube 64,
their Product 1024, which multiplied by 2916 the greater extreme, produces
2985984, whose Square Root is 1728, and the Cubique Root of that is 12 for the
lesser mean proportional number, as before. Observe always in finding of mean
proportionalls, that the less extreme given be multiplied by such a quantity
as is equal to the number of the mean proportionalls, as if 2 Mediums be
required, then square the lesser extreme; if 3 Mediums take the Cube etc. these
multiplied by the greater extr^me, must have a Root extracted of the next
quantity, as if multiplied by a Square, extract a Cube; if by a Cube, then
extract a Biquadrat Root, and so still proceeding in a Geometrical
progression; but farther note that the Roots of all Surde numbers cannot be
extracted.

Proposition 5. To find so many mean proportional numbers between an unite
and any number, as shall be required.
To find continual Mediums betwixt an unite and any number given, is with
facility effected, by continual extracting of the Quadrat Root, as by some few
following Examples shall be made perspicuous: and first admit between 1 and
4294967296 a mean proportional be required, an unite multiplies nothing,
therefore the Square Root of 4294967296 is 65536, and to find another Medium
betwixt this and 1, the Quadrat Root of 65536 is 256; and a mean proportional
betwixt 1 and 256 is 16, and between 1 and 16 is 4, and the Square Root of 4 is
2, and so the continual means are these, 1, 2, 4, 16, 256, 65536; 4294967296,
and these are properly continued Mediums between an Unite and the last Root
extracted; if in finding any mean proportion a true Root cannot be extracted, I
refer you then to the first 3 Paragraphs of this Book, whereby you may
extract any of them with a fraction as you please, or as the condition of your
Question shall require. As for example:

Admit 5 such Mediums were required between 1 and 2, annex what number of
Ciphers you please in payres, as admit 6, then the number will be 2000000 whose
Quadrat Root is 1414 the Numerator of a fraction, whose Denominator is 1000,
and so it will stand thus 1414/1000, annex both to this Numerator and
Denominator two ciphers, then extract the Quadrat Root, which will be 376/316
annex to either, two 00 again, the Square Root of 37600/31600 will be 193/177;
annex two ciphers more, then the fourth Medium will be 13^/133. Lastly, annex
two ciphers more, and then from 13800/13300 extract the Quadrat Root which will
be then 117/115, and so the five mean proportional numbers between 1 and 2 are
these fractions viz: 1. 117/115, 138/133, 193/177, 376/316, 1414/1000. 2. These
are all less than 2, and yet greater than 1. Here observe that 2 the greater
extreme was made an improper fraction, as 2/1; and as I annexed 6 ciphers to
either of them, so I had done in the rest but for your ease; for the more
ciphers you connex, the less error will arise in extracting of the Roots
whereby to find these Mediums.

Proposition 6. In any number of Geometrical Progressions continued, to find
the total sum of them.
To effect any Proposition of this kind, the Geometrical progressions being
continued, find first the term of the Progression, as by the first Theoreme,
with which multiply the last Progression or greatest extreme, from whose
product subtract the lesser mean, the remainder divide by a number which is an
unite less than the term by which the Progression was made, this last
quotient will give you the total sum of all the Progressions: As for
example, 4, 12, 36, 108, 324, 972, is a series or order of Progression, and by
dividing any one by the next less, shows the Progression was by 3; then
multiply by 3, the last or greatest extreme, which here is 972, the product
will be 2916, from whence subtract the least extreme 4, the remainder will be
2912, which divide by 2 a number, an unite less than the term by which the
Progression was made, the Quotient will be 1456, the total of all the
Progressions, as you will find by adding them all together to be 1456, as
before: so 4, 20, 100, 500, 2500, 12500, whose total is required; the
Progression is found to be by 5, which multiplied into the greater extreme,
viz: 12500 produces 62500, from whence subtract 4 (the less extreme) the
remainder is 62496, and being the Progression was by 5, divide 62496 by an
unite less, viz: by 4, the Quotient is 15624, the total sum of the last
proportional numbers.

And when there shall happen an unite for the Divisor, the Dividend is the
total required, as if the sum of 2, 4, 8, 16, were required, the Progression
is by 2, with which multiply the greater extreme, viz: 16, the product is 32,
from whence subtract the lesser extreme, viz: 2, there will remain 30, the
total sum; for 1 which is an unite less than the Progression cannot divide:
so 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, the Progression is by 2, with which multiply
128, the product will be 256, from whence subtract the lesser extreme, viz: 1,
the remainder will be 255, for the total su^m of all the Progressions, 1, 2, 4,
8, 16, 32, 64, 128, the reason is, that every Progression in this kind,
contains all the inferior numbers, and the lesser extreme, therefore one
Progression more must be found, from whence the lesser extreme is to be taken,
and if the Progression were by any other number than 2, as 3, 4, or 5, etc. it
must be divided by an unite less, by which means it will be reduced unto the
state of the last Question, where by 2 the Progression is made, and here I will
end, and make no farther a progress in Progressions.

Paragraph VII. Treating of Universal Axioms in Arithmetic, from whence
(with the former Theorie and grounds) proceeds the Practick part, and the
explication of the Golden Rule.
Axioms.
I. EVery thing that is whole, is equal unto all the parts taken together upon
which it consists.

II. What things soever are equal to one and the same, are all equal amongst
themselves, viz: if A be equal to B, and C equal to B, then shall A be equal
to C.

III. The half of any thing has the same proportion to the half of another,
as the whole had unto the whole, viz: as 12 is to 8, so is 6 to 4, or 3 to 2.

IV. If equal numbers or quantities be added unto equal things, their sums
will be equal.

V. Equal things subtracted from equal numbers or quantities, their
remainders will be equal.

VI. All equal numbers multiplied by like quantities or numbers, will have
equal products.

VII. Any equal numbers divided by equal quantities or numbers, their
Quotients will be alike.

VIII. All equal numbers added or subtracted, multiplied or divided by unequal
numbers or quantities, their sums, remainders, products, and quotients, shall
be all unequal.

IX. Any two numbers in what proportion soever, the Square of the lesser number
shall have the same proportion to the product of them, as the propounded have
one to another, viz: 2 and 4 a double proportion, so is 4 and 8, or as 3 to 9,
so 9 to 27.

X. In any two numbers given, the proportion between the numbers multiplied
into the Square of the lesser number, will be equal unto the product of both
numbers, viz: 2 and 6, a triple proportion, and 3 times 4 is 12, equal to the
product of 2 and 6.

XI. In any three numbers propounded, if the product of the second and third
number be divided by the first, the quotient will produce a fourth number in
proportion to the second, as the first shall be unto the third; and the 2
means squared, are equal to the square of the two extremes.

XII. All numbers or quantities whatsoever, if in proportion to a third, they
are all in proportion one to another; this Axiom belongs not so properly unto
Arithmetic as to Geometry, by which it is demonstrated in the 22 Prop: of my
Trigonometrie, and is here thus explicated in the Triangle A, B, C, viz:

A B 15 to B C 9; so will A D 10 be to D E 6.

As A E 8 to E F 4; so is A C 12 to C G 6.

Quae uni tertio convenient, inter sese convenient: Ergo universe sunt. As A B
15 to B G 3; so A D 10 to D F 2.

Or thus,

As A D 10 to D F 2; so A B 15 to B G 3.

Or thus,

As F D 2 to G B 3; so will E F 4 be to C G 6.

Or as

A F unto F D; so will A G be to G B.

Or as

A F to F E; so shall A G be to G C.

XIII. In any numbers given, where there is a Divisor, a Multiplier and a
Multiplicand, the Divisor divided by any number, and one of the other two by
the same number, I say their proportions and quantities will still remain the
same, viz: 24, 18, 8. by the 11 Axiom, the fourth proportional found will be
6, divide 24 and 18 by 3 the numbers will be 8, 6, 8, then by the 11 Axiom the
fourth number will be 6. Or divide them again by 2, as 4, 3, 8, or 2, 3, 4, or
1, 2, 3, the fourth number produced will be 6; and in the second or third
number, it is not material, whether of them is made Multiplier or Multiplicand,
and as these numbers are diminished by Division, they may in the same manner be
increased by Multiplication, the numbers reserving their proportions entire: as
in 1, 5, 3, or 2, 5, 6, the fourth will be 15 in a triple proportion to 5 as 1
to 3, or as 2 to 6, and so will 4, 10, 6, or 12, 10, 18, etc. produce likewise
15.

XIV. Where there As 4 19 8 -- 114 3 9 As 12 19 72 -- 114 As 1 19 6 Facit --
114 are five numbers propounded to find a sixth in proportion to the rest, as
4, 19, 8, 3, 9; this requires the 11 Axiom twice stated, viz: As 4 to 19, so
8. or Axiom 13. As 1 to 19, so 2 unto 38. Again, as 3 to 38, so 9. or as 1 to
38, so 3 unto 114; in this there are two Multipliers, as 8 and 9; and two
Dividers, as 4 and 3; and yet but one Medium to all: therefore in such cases,
if the Multipliers and Dividers respectively be increased by one another, the
Products, and former Medium, will be in the same proportion unto a fourth
number, as the other 5 were unto the sixth number before required, viz: 4, 19,
8, 3, 9, by the 11 Axiom, and twice repeating of that Rule of 3, there will be
114 produced, and so will the fourth proportional be of 12, 19, 72; or by the
13 Axiom, as 1 to 19, so 6 unto 114, from whence this proportion arises.

As the Product of the two Multipliers

Is in proportion unto the given Medium,

So will the Product of the two Dividers

Be in proportion unto the number required.

XV. As the total of any As 9 to 18, so 2 3 4
4 to 6 8 thing shall be in proportion to the total of some other; so will the
particular respective parts of the one be proportionable unto the parts of the
other; as in 9 and 18 being in a double proportion, I then divide 9 into 3
parts, viz: 2, 3, 4, this done, by the 11 Axiom, you may find 3
proportionals, viz: 4, 6, 8, the total 18, and double unto 9 as the parts are:
and the like in any other numbers.

XVI. In any three numbers Diff: Produ: A 9 B 12 2 24 C 7 3 21 45 5 45 given,
or propounded, wherein the first is lesser than the second, and yet greater
than the third, I say the difference betwixt the first and second, multiplied
by the third; and the difference between the first and third multiplied by the
second; the sum of those products will be equal unto the product of the
first number, multiplied by the sum of the aforesaid differences, as admit A,
B, C, were three numbers given, viz: A 9, B 12, C 7, the difference betwixt A
and C, that is 2, multiplied by B 12 produces 24, and the difference of A 9
and B 12 is 3, which multiplied by C 7 will produce 21; the sum 45: and so
will the product of 5 (the sum of the differences) and A 9 increased by one
another make 45; and as it is true in the connection of two numbers, the same it
will be in many, and is demonstrated in my Book of Trigonometrie.

XVII. In any two numbers given, half the difference of them, added unto half
the sum of both numbers, shall be equal unto the greater number: admit 20
and 8 were two numbers given, half the difference betwixt them is 6, the sum
of them both is 28, the half 14, to which add 6, the sum is 20, equal unto
the greater number.

XVIII. From half the sum of any two numbers, take half the difference that
was between them, and the remainder shall be equal unto the lesser number as
by the last, where 20 and 8 are the numbers propounded, half their sum is 14,
from whence take 6 half the difference and the remainder will be 8, for the
lesser number.

XIX. All Fractions whatsoever, if their Num^rators have one and the same
proportion, unto their respective Denominators, they are all equal in their
quantities, as in relation to their Integers, whose parts they are; viz:, 3/6,
5/10, etc. are halfs; 7/3, 3/9, 4/12, etc. are thirds, and therein alike.

XX. Any number propounded if multiplied by two several numbers, the
difference of their products will be equal unto the difference of their numbers
multiplied by the given number; from this Axiom the following Canon is derived.

In any number for to be multiplied by 9, the Product may be discovered by
subtraction only, and thus.
Annex, or suppose a cipher to be annexed unto the Multiplicand, or number
propounded, as admit 45, it is then multiplied by 10, and will be 450; or thus
45 let the other number be an unite (whereby 9 may be the difference) which
multiplies not, from whence subtract 45 (the number given) and there will
remain 405, equal to the product of 45 increased by 9, the difference betwixt
1 and 10 the two Multipliers propounded, and so likewise in all Multipliers
consisting of nines, viz: for 99 take 1 and 100, for 999 take 1 and 1000, etc.
besides in these numbers your labor may be eased, as in 19 the Multiplier, or
Multiplicand take 1 and 20: for 29 take 1 and 30, etc. the difference being the
number propounded according to this Axiom.

How to find two squared numbers, whose difference shall be any number
propounded.
(1) (2) The sum and difference 12 and 8 9 and 1 The half of either is 6 and
4 4 and The squares of them are 36 and 16 81/4 and The difference in either 20
20 (3) The sum and difference 12 and 2 -- 10 The half of those are 6 and 1
-- 5 Their squares will be 36 and 1-1025 The true difference is -- 20

XXI. Divide the given difference by any number at pleasure (yet without
fractions is best (if it may be) add and subtract the Divisor from the
Quotient, the half of that sum and difference are the two Roots, whose
Squares are the numbers sought, As by these 3 following Examples, of two
squared numbers required, whose difference shall be 20, according to
prescription and the first Table, I make 2 Divider, the Quotient will be 10, to
which add and subtract 2, the sum and difference is 12 and 8, the half of
them 6 and 4, their squares 36 and 16, the difference 20. In the second Table I
take 20 again, and divide it by 4, the Quotient will be 5, the sum and
difference 9 and 1, the half 4 and, their squares 81/4 and, and their
difference 20, as before; if 10 had been Divider, and 20 the Dividend or
difference given, the Quotient will be 2, to which add 10, the sum is 12,
now to subtract 10 from 2 is not within the confines of Natural Arithmetic,
yet by the assistance of Art, brought under her jurisdiction thus, 2-10 which
is 2 less by 10, the half of either is 6 and 1-5, that is 4 less than
nothing, their Squares 36 and 1-10 25, the difference of their squares 20, as
in the third Table, which is extracted out of Algebra.

XXII. Several Dividers are made one, by Multiplication continued, and
Fractions avoided, which will happen in every operation, if any thing remains,
as if 500 groats were given for to be reduced to pounds sterling and parts, it
should be divided by 3, and that Quotient by 20; the product of these is 60,
with which divide 500 gr: the Quotient will be 8 li. that is 8 li. 6 s. 8 d.
Again, admit 1656 were for to be divided by 5, the Quotient and Fraction by 6,
and that Quotient with the Remainder divided again by 7, the last Quotient and
Remainder will be 7 31/35; whereas the 3 Dividers, viz: 5, 6, and 7, by
multiplication continued will make 210 for a common Divisor, with which divide
1656, and at one operation the Quotient will be 7 186/210, which reduced will
be 7 31/35, as before. See Lib. 1. Parag: 4. Exam: 9.

XXIII. The Multiplier of a number if divided by any significant figure, and
likewise the Multiplicand, and if nothing remains in either number, the same
figure will divide the product without any fraction; and if there happens to be
a Remainder in both of them, their products divided by the same figure, and
then that Reminder will be equal to the fraction of the whole product divided
by the same significant figure, and in case nothing remains, you shall not
find a Fraction in the first total Product.

An illustration.
Let A 69 be the Multiplicand The proof A^^69 ^ B^^39 621 ^ 207 2691
propounded, and B 39 the Multiplier; and for a common Divider take 9, with
which divide 39; the Remainder will be 3, which for form, place upon the right
hand of a cross, as by the Proof in the upper Table: this done, divide the
Multiplicand A 69 by 9 (the common Divider) the Remainder will be 6, which
place against the former, their product is 18, which divided by 9, nothing
remains; put a cipher over the cross: then with 9 divide the product of A and
B (which is 2691) and nothing will remain, for which place a Cipher beneath
the cross. Again in the second Proof, take any other figure for a common
Divider, as admit 4, with which divide 39, the Remainder will be 3, which place
on the right hand, then divide A 69 by 4, the Remainder will be 1, which place
against it, their product is but 3, which place above the cross, and divide
the total product 2691 by 4, and there will remain 3 to be placed beneath,
equal to that above. This, some do use as a probat to Multiplication.

XXIV. All Integers whatsoever A 1656 ^ B 2444 C 4100 Proof 5-5 of several
quantities, if divided by a common number, and the total of the Remainders
divided by the same (if greater than the Divisor) what then remains will be
equal to the Remainder of their total sum, divided by the common Divisor;
as in the example A, B, C, wherein I take 7, and divide with it A 1656 the
Remainder 4, which place upon the right hand of the cross: then divide B 2444
by 7, and 1 will remain, which place against the other; the sum 5 set above
the cross. Lastly, C 4100 divided by 7, there will also 5 remain as in the
Proof, which some uses for a trial of Addition.

With these Axioms (as in a circular motion) I have returned to my first
species of Addition, and so enclosed my work of Fundamentals, for all Rules in
Natural Arithmetic, yet not to circumvent the Ingenious, nor charm their
fancies within a circle of my own imagination, since there are many more
Principles besides these, which I conceive of sufficient force to prove what is
past, and justify the Rules to come, as a light exposed indifferently to both,
by which means observing my Orders, and viewing the Tract behind, you may
safely proceed without doubt or deviation.

Paragraph VIII. The Golden Rule both direct and reverse demonstratively
proved; upon which Rule of Proportion (as the foundation) are all the other
Rules erected, in framing this Art of Numbers.
A Definition of this Golden Rule of Proportion.
THREE is all, the Christians Axiom; the sage Philosophers Maxim; and the
acute Arithmeticians Fundamental, from whence the Golden Rule is derived, and
so denominated, from the excellent use thereof in numbers, being the Basis, on
which the other Rules do stand: this is called the Rule of Three, it
consisting properly of three numbers known, from whence a fourth in proportion
(though unknown) may be discovered; from which sympathy it is also called the
Rule of Proportion, as shall be demonstrated, and explicitly proved, with
various examples, in several kinds in this following Treatise.

The Golden Rule of Proportion in Numbers, Geometrically demonstrated by Lines.
In any three right lines given, what proportion soever the first has to the
third, the second line will be in the same proportion to a fourth; and the
Square of the two mean proportionalls, shall be equal unto the long Square
made of the two extremes. The Demonstration.
Draw a right line as A, C, E, at the point A make an Angle at pleasure by
drawing the line A, B, D, from A set on the given lines, which suppose to be A,
B, 2. Secondly, A, C, 3. Thirdly, A, D, 4, by the two points at B and C draw
the line B, C, and by the point D draw a parallel line, as D, E; then will A,
E, be a fourth proportional line required: for D, E, being a parallel line to
B, C, they make two equiangled triangles, viz: A, B, C, and A, D, E. then by
the 19 Proposition of my Trigonometrie, the sides are all proportional, so it
is as A, B, 2, to A, C, 3, so A, D, 4, unto A, E, 6; for as 4 the third number
contains the first twice, so shall 5 the fourth number be in a duplicate
proportion to 3 the second number; and the long Square made of the two
extremes, viz: of A, B, 2, and A, E, 6, is equal to the Square made of the two
mean proportionalls, as A, C, 3, and A, D, 4, whose products are 12, as in the
9 Squares T, W, does evidently appear, the thing required for to be
demonstrated.

Canon 1.
The Golden Rule is either direct, or reverse, and those single, or compounded
of more numbers than 3, and consisting of more denominations than 2.

Canon 2.
Any three numbers propounded, a fourth proportional number may be found,
according unto the 11 Axiom before cited in the last Parag: and by an ocular
demonstration made apparent.

Canon 3.
The proper terms belonging to the single Rule of Three, must consist of two
denominations, viz: a Multiplier and the Divisor alike; the other Multiplier of
the same denomination with the Quotient; which is the fourth term required: As
for example, 2 Yards cost 8 Shillings, what 10 Yards? The second number
multiplied by the third, that is 8 by 10 produces 80, which divided by 2 the
first term, the Quotient will be 40 shillings, and the four terms will stand
in this order:

As 2 yards is unto 8; shillings; so will 10 yards be unto 40. shillings.

Canon 4.
The numbers in the Rule of Three direct, should be so ordered, that the known
term (upon which the querie is made) may possess the third place in the Rule:
the other term which is of the same denomination, must stand in the first
place, and consequently the other term betwixt them, which is known, and the
same denomination with the fourth term required; as in the last example, the
Question stated is upon the price of 2 Yards: and the querie is, what any
number of Yards will be worth in the same proportion; as here where the price
of two Yards is known, and the price of 10 Yards is required: in this, the
first and third term are both of one denomination, likewise the second term
given and the fourth found, by multiplying the second with the third term, and
dividing that product by the first; which is always required in the Rule of
Three direct, as if 8 shillings bought 2 yards, what will 40 shillings buy? The
answer will be 10 yards, or the contrary,

As 40 shillings shall be to 10, yards so will 8 shillings be unto 2 yards.

Canon 5.
The third term in the Rule of Three direct proceeds from the first, as the
fourth term required or found, proceeds from the second; so that what
proportion there shall be betwixt the first and third term, the same
proportion there will be between the second known, and the fourth found, As in
the last Example, 40 s. contains 8 s. in a quintuple proportion, that is 5
times, and so many times does 10 contain the fourth number found, viz: 2, and
it is general both in whole numbers and in fractions.

If 3 lb Sugar shall cost 5 shillings= what shall 300 lb Sugar?

The product of the second and third term divided by the first produces 500
s. where it is manifest, that the third term exceeds the first one hundred
times, and so the fourth found exceeds the second known, from whence the third
and fourth term proceeded: and so likewise if the terms be changed.

As if 5 shillings bought 3 lb. sugar then 500 shillings will buy 300 lb. sugar.

Canon 6. Shows the operation of this Golden Rule both in broken and compound
numbers, with the explication of the most compendious and facile way.
The Rule of Three in broken, or compound numbers is the same with Integers,
for as in the Rule direct, the product of the second and third term, must be
divided by the first, observing Multiplication and Division according to the
former Rules of Fractions, and also in compound numbers, for to reduce the
terms into improper fractions, whereof I will show you some examples: As if
yard cost of a pound sterling, what of a yard; the product of and is 2/12 or;
which divided by, the Quotient will be, that is 6 s. 8 d.

As yard to lib. so yard will be unto, lib. that is 6 sol.^^^^8 d.

Or as lib. to yard, so will lib. be unto yard.

Or,

If of a lb cost of a s. what of a lb facit 9/10 s.

Again,

As 2 yards cost 3 lib. what shall 10 yards.

Or,

As 11/4 yards cost 13/4 lib. what 21/2 facit 12 9/22 lib.

That is,

As 11/4 y. to 13/4 l. so 21/2 y. unto 273/22 l. that is 12 l. 8 2/11 s.

If 3 y. did cost 7 s. 6 d. what shall 24 y. cost^, These made improper
fractions will be thus:

As 15/4 y. cost l. what shall 49/2 y. cost? facit 2 l. 9 s. For the second and
third term multiplied together, that is 49/2 by the product will be 147/16
which divided by the first term 15/4 the Quotient will be 588/240 and reduced,
thus 49/20 lib. that is 2 lib. 9 s.

Canon 7. Any Question in Fractions by the Golden Rule direct, may be performed
more compendiously at one operation, and thus:
Multiply the Denominator of the first term by the Numerator of the second
term, and that product by the Numerator of the third term, this last product
will be a new Numerator, whose Denominator shall be the product of the
Numerators first term, multiplied by the Denominator of the second term, and
that product by the Denominator of the third term:

As s. lb s. and a fourth proportional is required; say 3 times 3 is 9, and 4
times 9 is 36, for the new Numerator, and for its Denominator, multiply 2 by 4,
the product is 8, and that multiplied again by 5 (the third terms Denominator)
the last product is 40; so 36/40 or 9/10 is the fourth proportional number
required, and so the like of any other; for it is evident, Multiplication and
Division being both performed, but in a preposterous order, Division being
before Multiplication: As for an example in whole numbers, as 2, 8, 10, the
second term multiplied by the third term, and divided by the first will
produce 40 for the fourth term; so if 8 be divided by 2 the Quotient is 4,
which multiplied by 10 produces 40, as before.

Canon 8. An examine, or trial whether the Rule of Three be truly performed,
either in whole numbers or fractions.
Having found a fourth proportional number by the Rule of Three, you may
easily discover whether the operation be right or no by the 11 Axiom, which
affirms that if 4 numbers be proportional, the Square of the two means will be
equal unto the Square made of the two extremes: As for example,

If 3 lb shall cost 14, Crowns then 27 lb will cost 126. Crowns

The square of the two extremes, viz: 3 and 126 will be 378, and so will the
long Square made of the two mean proportionalls (that is 14 and 27) be 378.
And so likewise in the last of the 6 Canon, there were four proportionalls
found, viz: 15/4,, 49/2, and 49/20, the long Square made of the two means will
be 147/16, and the long Square made of the two extremes, viz: 15/4 and 49/20
will be 735/80 equal to 147/16 for by the first Book, Sect: 2. Parag: 1.
Parad: 4. the improper fraction 735/801 will be reduced by 5 unto 147/16, as
before.

Canon 9. The Rule of Three, or Proportion reverst, and how known from the Rule
direct; with its operation exemplified both in whole numbers and fractions.
This Rule differs not essentially from the former, but in the manner of
operation only, for it consists of three numbers, and a fourth in proportion
is required, proceeding from the second term, as the first does from the third
term; whereas in the Rule direct the third term proceeds from the first, as
by the 5 Canon, which is here a Multiplier, and was there the Divider: but in
any question propounded where it seems ambiguous which way of these two to
take, observe carefully the state of the question, and whether the fourth
proportional number sought, should be greater or lesser than the second term;
and if a greater be required, then the lesser of the two extremes given must be
Divisor, and if the fourth number ought to be less than the second term, then
the greater of the two extremes is Divisor.

I. An example in whole numbers of the Rule of Three reverst.
This is also the Golden Rule, and differs nothing from the former in the
operation, but in making the third number Divisor, and the fourth proportional
sought to proceed from the first; as if 3 Men in 18 Days did reap a certain
number of Acres of Wheat, and it is required to know in how many Days would 12
Men have reaped the corn in the same field; it is evident that if 3 men could
effect this work in 18 Days, a greater number of equal workmen must perform
it in fewer days; then it is the Rule Three reverst, and by the last Canon,
the greater extreme of the three numbers given must be the Divisor, which here
is 12; then 18 multiplied by 3 produces 54, which divided by 12, the Quotient
is 4 Day: so 12 Men may perform the same work in 4 Aequinoxiall days and 6
Hours, as the 3 Men did in 18 Days; for as 12 contains 3 just 4 times, so
does 18 contain 4, and the 4 proportional numbers will stand in the Rule thus:

3 Men -- 18 Days -- 12 Men -- 4 Days.

II. An example in compound numbers of the Golden Rule reverst.
A Lawyer bought 4 yards of Cloth for to make him a Gown; the cloth was 6
quarters wide, and it is required to know how much stuff would line it, that
was but 3 quarters wide: The three numbers will stand thus, the cloth in
breadth 1 of a yard, in length 4 yard, the stuff in breadth, and if made
improper fractions thus, 7/4 B. 9/2 L. B. Here observe, the Stuff being
narrower than the Cloth, there must be more yards of Stuff than Cloth to make
them equal; and being the fourth proportional number required must be
greater, according to the 9 Canon, the lesser extreme of the three numbers
given must be Divisor, which is here the third term; therefore this Question
must be performed by the Rule of Three reverst; so the product of 7/4 and 9/2
is 63/^, which divided by (the third term) the Quotient will be 212/24, that
is 21/2, which is 10 yards of this Stuff equal to 4 yards of the Cloth. This
Question may be performed according to the 7 Canon, but with a contrary
operation, as thus, Multiply the Denominator of the third term, by the
Numerator of the second term, and that product by the Numerator of the first
term will produce a new Numerator, whose Denominator will be found by
multiplying the Numerators third term by the Denominator of the second term,
and that result by the Denominator of the first term, as in this last Example
7/4 B. to 9/2 L. so B. by a reverst proportion unto 252/24, or 23/2, that is 10
yards, as before: the Rule will stand thus, As 7/4 breadth unto 9/2 length, so
will breath be unto 252/24 length or 21/2.

Canon 10. An exact trial of the Golden Rule reverst both in whole numbers, as
in fractions.
The fourth proportional number found according to the Rule of Three reverst;
multiply the third term by the fourth, and that result will be equal unto the
product of the first and second term, if not alike the operation is wrong; as
in the example of the 9 Canon in whole numbers, where the four proportional
terms are these, 3, 18, 12, 4, and the product of 12 and 4, or 12/^ and 9/2 is
108/2, that is 54 equal to 3 times 18, which is also 54. In the second Example
of the same Canon the four proportionalls are these viz: 7/4, 9/2,, 21/2, and
the product of and 21/2 is 63/8, equal to 9/2 multiplied by 7/4, which is also
93/8, as before. This is evident by the 11 Axiom where the Square of the two
Means is equal to the Square of the two Extremes, for the fourth term sound
in the Rule of Three reverst, proceeds from the first term given, and
consequently belongs unto the first place, and so the third number given and
the fourth term found are properly the two extremes, as in the former
examples, Lib. 2. Parag: 8. Canon 9.

So as 12 Men to 18 Days, so 3 Men to 4 Days.

Again,

As unto 9/2, so shall 7/4 be in proportion to 21/2.

Paragraph IX. The Rules of Practice with the Definition, Theorie and Practice
of it, in the Rules of Three direct and reverse, both in whole numbers and
fractions.
THis Rule of Practice is an abstract of the Golden Rule, and the same in
operatian, only it always has an unite for the Divisor, or one of the
Multipliers, or such three proportional numbers as may be reduced unto one of
them: this Rule is thus denominated from the practice, not consisting in many
Questions either of any art or theorie, but even Natures dictates, and commonly
used in the whole Genealogy of Merchants down to the Pedlar, as I will
instance in some Examples; the Coins, Weights, and Measures, supposed to be
known, as they are unto Tradesmen.

Question 1.
If 1 lb of Pepper cost 1 s. 10 d. how much will 1 C and 8 lb come unto? facit
11 lb. First 1 C and 8 lb is 120 lb. then say 120 s. is 6 li. and 120 times 6
d. is half so much, that is 3 li. and 120 groats is 2 li. so the total is 11
li. and stands in order thus: li. s. d. 1 s. 120 shillings makes 6 0 0 6 d. 120
times 6 pence comes to 3 0 0 4 d. 120 groats amounts unto 2 0 0 The total is
11 0 0

Question 2.
If 1 yard of black Cloth cost 1 lb 19 s. what shall 30 yards of this Cloth
cost at the same rate? Here is 30 lb. 30 Angels, 30 Crowns, 30 half Crowns, 30
Shillings, and 30 Testers; which collected together is 58 lb. 10 s. as by this
following example: li. s. d. 1 li. 0 s. for the 30 yards there is 30 0 0 10 s.
then 30 Angels 15 0 0 5 s. next 30 Crowns 7 10 0 2 s. 6 d then 30 half Crowns 3
15 0 1 s. and then 30 Shilings 1 10 0 6 d lastly, 30 times 6 pence 0 15 0 The
total sum is 58 10 0

Question 3.
This Rule of Practice is less vulgar, lb L. lb 30 45 56 6 9 56 3 9 28 1 3 28
facit 84 L. yet more artificial, and of greater use than is the former, and
solves diverse questions, which the other cannot do without some mental
reservation; for here in this Question 30 lb of Commodities cost 45 L sterling,
and it is required what half a C or 56 pound weight will cost? According unto
the Rule of Three direct, the product or 45 and 56 divided by 30 will produce
for the fourth number 84; now by this Rule and the 13 Axiom this Question may
be solved with less Multipliers, and without a Divisor, that being first
reduced unto an unite, as thus, divide 30 lb by 5, See Lib: 1. Sect: 1. Parag:
5. Exam: 10. and Lib: 2. Parag: 7. Axiom 13. And so likewise 45 L. being one
of the Multipliers, the reduction will be 6, 9, 56, then divide 6 and 56 by 2,
the Quotient will be 3, 9, 28, then divide 3 and 9 by 3, and so you will
produce these 3 numbers, viz: 1, 3, 28, in the same proportion that the
Question was stated in, and 28 lb multiplied by 3 L. produces 84 L. the
solution of the Question, as was required.

Question 4.
In all Questions of this kind in the Rule of Three, having reduced the
Divisor unto an unite, if the second number (on which the Proposition stated
does depend) shall consist of several denominations, divide them into what
parts you please, as in the first Quest: of this Parag: but best into such
parts as may successively depend one upon another, either in number, weight, or
measure, as in these following Examples: A man had made a piece of Cloth that
stood him in 1 li. 12 s. 2 d. farthing a yard, and it is required to know what
30 yards would come unto at the same rate? In the first place take 1 li. then
10 s. as the half of that, then 2 s. as the of the last: next 2 d. the 1/12
part of 2 s. and lastly, of 2 d. for the Farthing, the total will be 48 li. 5
s. 7 d, or divide the price into these parts, according unto this example, L S
D L S D 1 0 0 In the first place there is -- 30 0 0 6 8 Secondly, part of the
last is 10 0 0 3 4 Thirdly, take the last as -- 5 0 0 1 8 Fourthly, the last
again -- 2 10 0 0 5 Fifthly, of the last which is 0 12 6 0 1 Sixthly, taken of
the former 0 2 6 0 0 Lastly, of the last before -- 0 0 7 The total is -- 48 5
7

Question 5. If 10 yards of Holland did cost 1 L. 3 S. 6 D. What will be the
price of 1 yard?
In the Rule of ^ Practice, where an Unite is the Multiplier, the other number
is to be divided only by the first in the Rule direct, which is commonly an
unite with ciphers annexed unto it, so there is nothing more to be done in such
cases than to cut off so many figures upon the right hand of the first
denomination, as there be ciphers in the Divisor, and if in case the Dividend
does prove the lesser number, reduce it into the next denomination less, and
having added in their parts; (if there be any) cut off so many places as
before, and reduce that remainder unto the next, and so proceed: but to avoid
mistakes, and to have your work before you, observe the solution to this
question and form of the Table, where first I state the question again, as 10
Y. cost 1 L. 3 S. 6 D, what costs 1 Y? The third being an unite, and the first
denomination of the middle number is 1 L. in which 10 the Divisor cannot be
contained; reduce it to Shillings, and then you will find 23 S. place 3 S. on
the right hand of the line drawn in the middle of the Table: this 3 S. is 36 D.
and 6 pence added to it, the sum will be 42 D. place 2 D. on the right hand
of the Table, and 4 D. on the left: the last remainder is 2 D. which is 8
Farthings, to that add D. the sum is 10, place the cyper on the right hand,
the question solved; and 1 Y. cost 2 S. 4 D. just, as in the Table. See Lib. 1.
Sect: 1. Parag: 5. Example 10.

Question 6. If 10 yards of Linen cloth cost 2 L. 14 S. 9 D: what will the
price be of 6 yards?
In this question 10 Y. -- 2 L. 14 S. 9 D. -- 6 Y. Product L 1 6 L. 8 S. 9 D. S
12 8 D 10 5 Q 2 0 10 yards is the Divisor, and upon 6 yards is the querie made,
which multiply into all the several denominations of the middle numbers, which
is the price propounded, the product will be 16 L 8 S. 9 D. and being 10 is the
Divisor, place 6 upon the right hand of the line, and 1 L. on the left, which
is the Quotient; then reduce the 6 L. (which remains) into Shillings, and add
8 S. unto it, the sum is 128, which subscribe with 8 S. placed upon the right
hand of the line, those converted into pence with the 9 D. added to it, makes
the sum of 105 pence, which set down, placing 5 D. upon the right hand of the
line, which reduced to the next denomination less will be 20 Q. which divided
by 10, as before, by placing the cipher upon the right side of the line, the
Quotient is 2, and so if 10 yards cost 2 L. 14 S. 9 D. then 6 yards of the same
cloth will cost 1 L. 12 S. 10 D, the question solved as was required.

If an unite shall be one of the Multipliers, and the Divisor a greater
decimall, then so many figures or ciphers must have been placed upon the right
hand of the line, as the Divisor shall have ciphers, but if they are not annexed
unto an unite, but as 20, 30, 400, etc. or all significant figures; a division
must be made by those past and the succeeding examples, this Rule of Practice
will be sufficiently illustrated to the ingenious.

Question 7. If any certain number of Men shall perform a piece of work within
a known time; in what time would a greater or lesser number of men have
performed the same?
The Question here stated is 1 Men Days Men 28 12 8 2 7 12 2 3 7 6 1 4 Facit 42
Days. how 28 Men performed a piece of work in 12 Days, and it is required in
what time 8 Men would have finished the same work; it is evident that the
fewer Men must have the longer time, and consequently performed by the Rule
reverse, 8 being made Divisor, which must be reduced unto an unite (if
performed by the Rule of Practice) and may be thus reduced, 8 may be divided by
4; and also 28 (one of the Multipliers.) So in the second row you will find 7,
12, 2, then divide 2 and 12 by 2, and then you will find in the third row
these 3 numbers, viz: 7, 6, 1, the product of the two Multipliers will be 42
Days, the Question solved as in the fourth row; if 8 Men should have performed
the same work in 12 Days, and it had been required in what time 28 Men would
have performed the same, the Question must have been solved by the Rule of
Three reverst, because the greater number of Men would have required a shorter
time, viz: 8, 12, 28; or divide 12 and 28 by 4, then it is as 8, 3, 7, then the
first and last divide by 7 and it will be 1 1/7 or 8/7 3 and 1, that is 3 3/7
Days, and at 12 hours to the day, the time is 3 Days, 5 Hours, 8, 34 etc.
But all Questions of this kind reduced into fractions are as readily performed
by the Rule of Three, as by this of Practice; yet some I will here insert when
an unite is Multiplier. See the 5 and 6 Examples.

Question. 8. If part of any number, weight, or measure, did cost a part of any
sum or integer of money, what shall any quantity of that commodity cost?
In the first place here is Yard. L. yards. 1 78 2 24/32 20/32 78 3 24 20 78 4
6 5 78 5 1 5 13 6 Facit 65 L. 0 s. of a yard of cloth, which cost L. and it is
demanded, what 78 yards of the same cloth will cost, at the rate propounded?
according to the former Rules in Fractions, reduce them unto one common
Denominator, as in the second row, 24/^2 and 20/32 to 78. See Lib: 1. Sect: 2.
Parag: 1. Parad: 8. now according to the former Rules, the Denominators being
alike may be omitted; then in the third row, the proportion is as 24 unto 20,
so will 78 be to a fourth proportional number: but to return, these 3 numbers
may be reduced by dividing 24 the Divisor, and either of the Multipliers by the
same number, according to the 13 Axiom, Parag: 7. and here 24 and 20, divided
by 4, the fourth row will be 6, 5, 78. then divide 6 and 78 by 6, the fifth row
will be 1, 5, 13, which 5 L. multiplied by 13 yards produces 65 L. the
solution of this question, as in the 6 row.

Question 9. When the Divisor is a Fraction, or compound number in the Rule of
Three direct or reverse; it may be reduced to the Rule of Practice by this
following Example.
The state of this Question Broad. Long. Broad. 1 6/4 2 ^/2 3 3/1 1/^ 4 facit
21/8 or 2 yards. is how that cloth 6/4, or 6 quarters broad: yard made a
Childs coat, and it is required to know how much Stuff will make the same
Child a coat when the Stuff is but yard wide? which being narrower than the
cloth, it is evident a greater quantity must be required, and consequently
performed by the Rule reverse: the Question will stand as in the Example 6/4 or
3/2 requires yar. what at yard broad?

Paragraph X. Shows the double Rule of Proportion both direct, reverst, or
mixed, at two operations, or at one in whole numbers or fractions.
A Directory unto the double Rule of Three.
IN this double Rule, there are five numbers or terms propounded, and a sixth
proportional number is required, which must be always of that denomination,
on which the Question depends, which number in this Rule stands in the first
Proposition simply of it self, without relation to any of the other 4 numbers:
this Rule is performed with two operations at the most; the two extremes in
either Rule must be of like denomination, the middle number in either Rule must
be of one and the same denomination, and likewise with that, required, which
the Question demands, as was said before; so the fourth proportional number
discovered by the first Rule of Three, must be the mean proportional in the
second Rule, and the fourth proportional then found is the true number
required, as by Examples shall be made evident.

Question 1. There was a Knight had 5 Sons, and 3 of these in 4 months had
spent him equally 19 L. that is in all 57 L. and it is required what his 5
Sons would have spent at that rate in 12 months?
In this double Rule ^ of Three there are 5 terms or numbers given, whereof
one is simply of it self, viz: the money spent, which denomination is the
proportional number required, and in the Rule of Three direct, as by the
Example; for if the 3 Sons did spend 57 L. then his 5 Sons would have spent
a greater sum, as 95 L. and if the space of 4 months (as by the second Rule)
required 95 L. then 12 months (in a direct proportion) will require 285 L. as
in the Example, the Question solved; being the true expenses of the 5 Sons in
12 months, at the same rate, as the 3 Sons in 4 months time did spend 57 L.
and as in this, so in all other Questions of this kind, according to my former
directions, it is not material whether of these two Rules are first, so long
as the single term be made the mean proportional number in the first Rule: as
4 M. to 57 L. so 12 M. to 171 L. then in the second Rule it will be; as 3 is to
171 L. so 5 unto 285 L. as before.

Question 2. If 12 Pecks of Provender did serve 4 Horses for 3 days, how long
will 24 Pecks serve 3 Horses at the same daily allowance.
In such Propositions ^ two Rules of Three are contained, the one direct, the
other reverst; as in this Example, the first Rule is in a direct proportion,
viz: as 12 pecks to 3 days; so will 24 pecks, be in proportion unto 6 days, a
mean proportional number for the second Rule, in which 4 Horses must be the
first term whereon the Question depends, being of the same denomination with
the third term, upon which the demand is made, and performed by the Rule of
Three reverst, it is evident, because the fewer number of horses must require a
longer time; so it will be as 4 horses to 6 days, so will 3 horses be in a
reverst proportion unto 8 days; and so long time will 24 pecks of provender
serve 3 horses; that is a peck allowance every day for a horse, the thing
required.

If this double Rule of Three (performed at two operations) shall fall in
fractions or mixed numbers, either in the Rule direct or reverse, by these last
Examples it may be solved, with help of the 8 Parag: to which I refer you;
only observing in all double Rules of Three compounded (as in this last
Example) which of the two Rules is reverse, and which direct; this done, (as
reason will dictate) it is not material whether of them be solved first, as 4
H. to 3 D. so 3 H. in a reverst proportion unto 4 D. Secondly, as 12 P. to 4 D.
so 24 P. in a direct proportion to 8 D. as it was before: so in either Rule,
the terms on which the demand is made, must always be the third number, as
these were, viz: 3 Horses and 24 Pecks: so I will say no more of this double
Rule performed at two operations, which by one Rule will be solved with more
facility in less time by these following Examples.

Question 3. If a man's 3 Sons spent 57 L. in 4 months, what would his 5
sons expenses have been at that rate in the space of 12 months?
The first question I have S. L. S. 1 Rule. 3 57 5 M. M. 2 Rule. 4 12 Prod. 12
57 60 Or as 1 57 5 Facit 285 L. here stated again, to satisfy the Reader, in
the operation of this double Rule at one work, by a single Rule of Three at
most, if not reduced unto a Rule of Practice, as in this Example; where in the
first Rule stands 3 S. 57 L. and 5 S. In the second Rule is placed for the two
extremes the time, viz: 4 M. and 12 M. the demand is of the 5 S. and the 12 M.
The other 3 numbers were proposed, viz: 3 S. 57 L. 4 M. if 57 L. were
multiplied by 5 and divided by 3, the Quotient would be 95 for the fourth
number, and a mean proportional in the second Rule, and that multiplied by 12
and divided by 4 will solve the Question: then for brevity, since the number or
sum here required is contained in 57 L. twice multiplied, and as often
divided, I say if the two Multipliers, multiplied into one Multiplier, and the
two Dividers into one Divider, the proportions must be the same; therefore by
the 14 Axiom this Example with two Rules will be reduced to one, the product
of the Multipliers is 60, and the Divisors 12, so the proportion is as 12 to 57
L. so 60 to 285 L. or reduced by the Rule of Practice, as 1 to 57 L. so 12 will
be in proportion unto 285 L. as before, the Question solved.

Question 4. If 4 Horses did eat 12 Pecks of corn in 3 days, in what time
will 3 horses eat 24 pecks of the same corn and daily allowance.
This differs nothing ^ from the second Question, but in the operation it being
reduced unto a single Rule of 3, and in this manner: Here you may observe two
Rules, whereof one is direct, the other reverst; all which rightly
comprehended, the reason is the same as in the 3 Quest: of of this Parag: the
form only differing: for here note, the first Rule is direct, the second
reverst, and not material whether of the extremes in either Rule be multiplied
crosse-wise, viz: 12 by 3, and 24 by 4, their products are 36 and 96, and 3 the
medium: so the proportion is now direct, as 36 unto 3, so will 96 be to 8 a
fourth proportional, and the number of days that 6 bushels or 24 pecks will
serve 3 horses, with the same allowance that 3 bushels did serve 4 horses. Here
note that 12, and 3 in the second Rule were both Divisors; and likewise 24 and
4 were in both Rules Multipliers. And farther observe that if the first Rule
had been reverst, and the second direct, their products set underneath their
Multiplicands, it is always reduced to a Rule of 3, and of the same species
with the first Rule, and the products placed under the Multipliers, is ever the
contrary, and of the same species with the second Rule.

Paragraph XI. Declares the Rules of Society or Companies both single and
compound, in relation to time and quantity, both in whole numbers, or
fractions, either in gain or loss.
Definitions.
THis Rule is either single, or compounded, and those consisting of
multiplicity of parts, or manifold proportions either in gain or loss.

Those are said to be single, when as the terms have a simple relation, either
to Number, Weight, or Measure only.

They are compounded, when each term or part consists of several species, or
has relation both unto time and quantity.

This Rule is of most use in matter of accounts betwixt sundry men, employing
several stocks within unequal times either of gain or loss in proportioning
each man's charge, profit or misfortune, according to every particular
adventure; this Rule consists of 4 terms at least, and is performed by the
single Rule of Proportion recited so often as there be diversity of stocks, or
adventures, according to the 15 Axiom, from whence this proportion arises,
which by Examples shall be made evident, in gain or loss, or in equation of
payments.

A Rule of Society.
As the total of any stock or adventure
Shall be to the general profit or disprofit
So shall each share or particular adventure
Be in proportion to each respective gain or loss.
Question 1. Two men, viz: A and B, joined their stocks together: A had 18 L.
and B had 12 L. with which they bought wares, and quickly sold them again for
2 L. 10 s. profit: how much did either of them gain?
According to Adventure Gain. 18 A 30 As 30 L. unto 50 s. so L. ^ to s. 12 B
20 A gained 30 s. B 20 s. the total 50 the Rule before specified 30 L. the
adventure stands in the first place of the Rule of Proportion: the middle
number or mean is the whole gains, and in the third place stands the
adventures, as the share of A 18 L. and B 12 L. these parts must ever be
multiplied by the gain or loss, and divided by the whole adventure: as 18 L.
increased by 50 s. produces 900 which divided by 30, gives 30 s. for the gains
of A. So 12 L. multiplied by 50 s. and divided by 30, shows 20 s. for the
gains which B has made clear profit: to prove this Rule work them all
backwards, and you will find the first adventure by every one of them; or for
more brevity observe the particular shares, with their gains, the sum of
those particulars, must be respectively equal to the total adventure with the
gain or loss.

Question 2. Five Merchants put their stocks together, as A, B, C, D, and E:
whereof A did adventure 175 L. B. 140 L. C 70 L. D 35 L. E 30 L. this stock
returned them 744 L. all charges defrayed: How much was each man's gain or loss?
In the first place stocks L. s d Stock Advent: 175 A 289 6 8 450 L. 744 L 140
B 231 9 4 70 C 115 14 8 35 D 57 17 4 30 E 49 12 0 The total sums 450 744 0 0
collect all the particular stocks, or adventures together, which is here 450 L.
and being it is less than the stock returned, it is evident they were all
gainers by the adventure, and in proportion according to each stock adventured,
as in the last example; but here note, that all the three terms, are of one
denomination, viz: pounds sterling, yet differing in their qualities, the first
number being the total stock, and the third number, each particular stock, the
mean proportion, viz: 744 is the total return of the adventure, to which a
fourth number is required, to every particular stock; which here will be found
with the profit together, because the middle number is of the same quality,
viz: the whole stock as 450 L. and the profit of the adventure, as 294 L. so in
these two examples there is no material difference, for in either way the
increase of their stocks will be discovered by Addition, or Subtraction: for
having multiplied each particular stock by 744, and the products divided by
450, the quotient will be each man's gain, and his stock adventured too; as the
share of A comes to 289 L 6 s 8 d. so the clear profit he made of 175 was 114
1/^ L. and so for all the particular adventures, as against each letter in the
example will appear.

Question 3. Three men unhappily employed their stocks together, as A, B, and
C: whereof A deposited 20 L. B 30 L. C 60 L. all which they laid out; and
afterward sold those goods for 84 L. 6 s. 8 d. how much was each man's gain or
loss?
As in the former Returned L. No. Adven: 253 No 20 A 46 110 L. 84 L. 6 s. 8 d.
30 B 69 84 L. 60 C 138 The total sums 110 253 Example, set all shares down
in the third place, the sum of the^ in the first place, the money returned in
this adventure must be the middle number as before, which is here 84 L. which
is less than the adventure or total stock, from whence it is evident that the
money was employed ill, and returned with loss, and consequently the fourth
terms found must be less, than was each particular; share which to find,
differs nothing from the former, only the middle term being a compound
number, must be reduced into one denomination, as into Groats, which will be
5060 Gr. or made an improper fraction, as 2^^/^ L. and work it according to the
Rules of Broken numbers, or in any other parts, that are readiest for use, as
in this I will omit the fractions denominator, and so the sum, or stock
returned, is 253 Nobles, which multiplied by each particular share, and divided
by the total adventure, will produce these parts as in the Example, viz: A
must have 46 N. B 69 N. C 138 N. so A had 15 L. 6 s. 8 d. and lost 4 lb. B lost
7 L. and C 14 L. the Adventure being double to B 30 lb.

Question 4. Three men held a pasture in common (as A, B, and C) for which they
paid 44 L. per annum: A kept 10 steares upon the ground 20 weeks, B fed 15
steares 16 weeks, and C kept 20 there 8 weeks: what rent must each man pay?
In all questions of this L s. d L. 5 A 14 13 4 15 44 6 B 17 12 0 4 C 11 14 8
The tot. 15 44 0 0 kind, observe double terms, as in respect of each
particular stock and time, upon which all questions of this kind depend; and
to effect this, or the like: multiply each man's terms together, as here the
stock and the time, viz: for A 10 steares by 20 weeks, the product is 200; for
B 240; and the product for the stock of C and his time, as 20 by 8, will be
160: the sum of these 600 for the first term, the rent 44 L. is the middle
term, and the three last numbers are A 200, B 240, C 160, these multipliers,
with the divider 600 you may reduce by 40 unto 15 the first term: the other
three will be 5, 6, 4; the mean proportional might have been reduced with
the Divisor, but not so conveniently, the three multipliers being made simple
figures, the readier much for use, yet as true without reduction, as by the 13
Axiom, Parag: 7. the parts or shares here to be paid for rent are these, viz:
A 14 L. 13 s. 4 d. for B 17 L. 12 s. and for C 11 L. 14 s. 8 d. all which
sums added together do make 44 L. the whole rent, which shows the work is
true: as by the Example does appear.

Question 5. Four men joined their stocks together, as A, B, C, and D, whereof
A ventured 40 L. B 160 L. C 100 L. D 280 L. by misfortune they were all losers:
upon which they fell at difference, at several times, and broke off from this
society, when D had lost 20 L. C 10 L. and B 30 L. A continued the trade 12
months, and lost 8 L. how long were all their stocks continued at that rate or
proportion?
In all questions of L. M D L 30 B 11 7 8 480 10 C 6 0 20 D 4 8 this nature,
the double proportion must be made one, as here in this it is A, whose stock
was 40 L. the time 12 months, the product 480; his loss was 8 L. for the
first term, so the proportion will be, as 8 L. loss is unto the product of
the time and principle, that is here 480; so shall each particular loss be
proportionable unto the product of his time and principle, and being it
contains them both, and the adventure known, divide that fourth proportional
found by his principle or stock, and the quotient will discover the true time;
as in this last Example, 480 multiplied by 30 L. (the loss which B sustained)
the product will be 14400, which divided by 8 L. the first term, the quotient
will be 1800 the true product of time and principle; therefore 1800 divided by
160 L. the adventure of B, the second quotient will be 11 months, that is, 7
days in all 45 weeks; and so long time did B continue his stock in the same
company; in this manner, C that lost 10 L. will be discovered 6 months, and D
that lost 20 L. kept in this society but 4 mon: and 8 days, as in the
preceedent Example is evident, where 68 L. was lost in all.

Any question of this kind, must be tried by a contrary way; as with each man's
adventure, his time, and the loss of one man's stock, to find the others: and
so likewise in any other question wherein gain is made: and no more questions
will I show here in this Paragraph, lest that I should lose more time, than the
Reader shall gain benefit.

Paragraph XII. Questions resolved by the rules of Alligation, or mixture of
diverse simples; by which are found a common price, and quantity for to be mixed,
or taken, of any particular sort, and according unto any rate, price, or
proportion required.
A Definition.
ALligation consists of two Species, the first admits but of one common rate,
price, or proportion either in respect to the quantity, or quality of the
compositions; the second Species is manifold.

The rule.
Alligation simply in it self is to find a common Medium in the mixture of
diverse things together, which is performed, by taking the sum of all the
given quantities; and for the second number, the total value of all the
simples to be mixed, and then the proportion will be, by the common rule of
three.

As the sum of the quantities to be mixed,

Is unto the price, or value of the simples;

So shall any quantity, or part of the mixture,

Be in proportion to the price of that part.

Question 1. A man mixed for provender 3 quarters of beans at 3 s. the bushel:
3 quarters of pease at 2 s. 6 d. the bushel; with 5 quarters of oats, at 1 s.
6 d. the bushel: what will a bushel of this mistling be worth, when all these
are mixed together.
Reduce all Bushels, L. s. d The value of Beans 24 3 12 0 Pease 28 3 10 0 Oats
44 3 6 0 The tot. 96 and 10 8 0 A ^ the measures into one denomination that is
least, and against every quantity set down the price, or value of them, as in
the margent; then take the total sum of both, as in this Example, the
quantity mixed is 96 bushels, and the total of their several prices, is 10 L.
8 s. or 208 shillings: these place, as at A, according to the Rule, as the
quantity ninety six bushels shall be to the price, 208 shillings; so will 1
bushel be unto the price thereof, viz: 2 s. that is 2 s. 2 d. the bushel, the
common price required: to try any such question, whether it be true or no, the
quantity multiplied by the common price (if true) will be equal unto the sum
of the particular prices; as here 96 times 2 s. 2 d. will be 10 L. 8 s. equal
unto all the particular prices.

Question 2. A Vintner put into a Wine-casck 15 gallons of Canary-sack which
cost 4 L. 10 s. 30 gallons of Mallage 6 L. 5 s. and 35 gallons of Sherry sack 7
L. with 40 gallons of Greek wine 8 L. a pipe thus filled, the price of one
gallon is demanded?
The quantities, Gall. L. S. Canary s. 15 4 10 The value of Mallago s. 30 6 5
Sherry s. 35 7 0 Greek w. 40 8 0 The tot. 120 25 15 A ^ and price of the
several sorts of wine, being set down as in the Table here, take the totalls
of them as 120 gallons which cost 25 L. 15 s. or 515 shill: these place in the
common Rule of 3 as at A. viz: if 120 gall: cost 515 shill: what shall 1 gallon
cost? the fourth proportional number, or common price will be discovered 4 s.
3 d. and will be proved, as was the last example, for 4 s. 3 d. multiplied by
120, (the number of Gallons) and the product will be reduced unto 515 s. or 25
L. 15 s. as before: to find what the particular sorts cost a Gallon, or what
the common price of this mixture is a quart, or in any other measure: were a
question only fit for young beginners: so I will say no more in Questions that
only concerns a common Medium, but proceed.

The second Rule of Alligation.
As the total difference of the prices given, and the price propounded.

Is in proportion unto the total sum or quantity to be mixed:

So shall each respective difference of the price given and the price set

Be in proportion unto the quantity of each particular sort to be mixed.

Question 3. A Druggist had two sorts of Tobacco; the one was Spanish, at 10 s.
the lb; the other Virginia, at 3 s. the pound; of these two sorts, he was to
mix 112 lb weight, and so, as that it might be afforded for 8 s. the lb: how
much must be taken of either sort?
This second A ^ C ^ B D. -- Lb. D Lb 7-112 5 80 2 32 rule differs much from
the former, which, requires only a common price, from the total of several
quantities mixed together; whereas this is confined unto a price and quantity in
general, composed of particulars, from whence the mixture is to be made, and
the parts taken, proportionally according to each price, quantity or quality;
as in this Example, in the Table at A, where 8 s. is the price determined on;
the best Tobacco was 10 s. the pound, the worst 3 s. the pound; which two
prices I set one above another, and couple them together with an arch of a
circle; the price set must be always lesser than the greatest price, and
greater than the least of the particulars, as here 8 is lesser than 10, and
greater than 3: this done the difference between the price set, and each
particular must be found, and counter-changed with the number, to which it is
coupled, as in the first Table, the difference betwixt 8 and 10 is 2, which is
placed against 3. the difference between 8 and 3 is 5, which stands against 10.
the sum of the differences is 7, which according to the Rule above, and the
Table, at B, stands in the first place: 112 pound, the quantity to be mixed the
second number; and each particular correspondent difference the third number:
so it is now in the Rule of proportion, as 7 the total difference, to 112
pound the total quantity; so will 5 (the particular respective difference for
the best price) be to 80 pound, the quantity to be taken of that sort. Again,
as 7 to 112 pound, so 2 unto 32 pound the quantity of the worst sort; and thus
repeating the Rule of 3, so often as there be particular differences, you will
produce particular quantities to them, whose total must be equal to the
sum, or quantity propounded to be mixed, if otherwise, the operation is false.

Yet least in the mixture of these simples, you should remain ignorant of the
reasons; this question, and all of this kind has relation unto the 15 and 16
Axiom, parag. ^7. wherein the total difference of prices, has proportion to
the total sum or quantity to be mixed, as the particular difference or parts,
have to their respective quantities, but here another Querie will be made,
wherefore these differences between the price set, and each particular price is
counterchang'd with a greater and a lesser; by the difference of prices, will
be discovered the several quantities in proportion to those differences; if
the difference were equal, the quantities to be taken of all those sorts would
prove alike: if the rate or proportion propounded, inclines unto the greater
price given, it will have the lesser difference, by how much the nearer it
comes to the greatest price, and yet the greater quantity of that sort must be
in the mixture; and so consequently the least price (in this case) will have
the greatest difference, in which the least quantity is required; and the
contrary will be found by the rule of 3 direct; as by the last example, and the
first table at A, where the price propounded is 8 s. the two prices given are
10 and 3, and the differences are 2 and 5: and being 8 is nearer 10 then 3, the
greatest quantity of the best sort will be required; and the less of the
worser sort; therefore as 7 to 112, so 5 unto 80, and as 7 to 112, so 2 unto 32.

In the other Table at C admit a composition of the same commodity were to be
made at 6 s, with any quantity assigned, 6 the price propounded is nearer 3
then 10, therefore 3 must have the greater difference, whereby to produce the
greater quantity, and the best sort at 10 s. the least difference as 3. the
worst sort 4. and so the proportion would have been, as 7 to 112, so 3 unto 48
lb. or as 7 to 112 lb so 4 unto 64 lb both of them making the just quantity of
112 lb and for a farther trial, the price stated, if multiplied into the
quantity for to be mixed, the product will be equal, unto the products of the
several prices, and their respective quantities: as 6 multiplied by 112 lb.
produces 672; so 48 by 10 is 480. and 64 by 3 makes 192, which added unto 480
the sum is 672, or 33 L. 12 s. as before.

Question 4. A Grocer had 3 sorts of Sugar, one was worth 6 d. the pound,
another sort 10 d. a pound, and the best 15 d. a pound, out of these sorts, he
made two parcells: either of them 56 pound weight, the one thus mixed to be
afforded at 12 d. the pound: the other sort at 10 d. the pound. How many pound
must be taken to be mixed of either sort?


First to prepare the work, set down the price propounded, as 12 d. and
likewise the prices given, viz: 6 d. 10 d. and 15 d. against these I prefix
letters, as A, B, and C, and according to the last Question couple a greater
with a less, whereof A is only greater, which must then be coupled with B 10,
and C 6, and the differences transcribed and counterchanged; so often as there
be numbers coupled to any one; as here the difference of prices betwixt C and
12, and also B and 12, are 6 and 2; which differences must be counterchanged
with A. and the difference betwixt A and 12, which is 3; must be twice
transcribed, as placed against B, and C. the total of differences is 14. thus
the first question is prepared; and as for the second proposition, there are
two numbers the one greater than the price propounded, the other less, viz: A
15. and C 6. with either of which you may couple the other two, and is
indifferent in respect of the proposition, although the quantities will not be
the same, in this I have again coupled them both with A; to avoid fractions,
wherein I find the difference betwixt 10, the price propounded, and B and C to
be 4 and 0. which must be placed against A, and the difference betwixt A and 10
the price propounded, for to be 5, which transcribed against B and C. the sum
of these differences 14, as before.

The differences D lb. D lb. C 3 12 1 As 14 to 56 so B 3 unto 12 A 8 32 The
totalls D 14 56 D lb 4 A 16 2 As 14 to 56 so 5 B unto 20 5 C 20 The totalls 14
56 being found, and the rule prepared, as before; the proportion is as 14 (the
total of the differences) to 56 pound (the sum or quantity for to be mixed)
so will 3 the respective difference for C, be unto 12 pound, for its quantity,
at 6 d. the pound; and likewise 12 pound of that sort for B, at 10 d. the
pound. Then again, as 14 to 56 pound, so 8 to 32 pound: and so much must be had
of that sort at A, of 15 d. the pound: all which 3 quantities makes 56 pound,
as in the Table, which argues it is true, or may be thus proved: the common
price propounded was 12 d. a pound, so 56 pound the quantity mixed comes unto 2
L. 16 s. now for the particulars, A must have 32 pound, at 15 d. the pound,
that is, 2 L. 0 s. then B 12 pound, at 10 d. the pound, comes to 10 s. Thirdly,
C must have also 12 pound, which at 6 d. the pound, comes to 6 s. the total
sum 2 L. 16 s. as before.

In the second composition or mixture, it will be as 14 to 56 pound, so 4 unto
16 pound, for the part to be taken of A. Again, as 14 to 56 pound, so 5 to 20
pound: for B, and so much for the composition must be taken of that sort at 10
d. the pound. then as 14 to 56 pound, so 5 unto 20 pound, the quantity of C.
for being the Multiplicators are alike, C must have also 20 pound, at 6 d. the
pound, the sum of these is 56 pound, in money 2 L. 6 s. 8 d. and so proves
the particulars; for 16 pound of A, at 15 d. the pound, comes unto 1 L. 0 s.
then 20 pound of B, at 10 d. the pound, is 16 s. 8 d. Lastly, 20 pound of C at
6 d. the pound comes unto 10 s. the total of the compound 56 pound, in money
(according to their several rates and quantities) 2 L. 6 s. 8 d. and so much
the 56 pound did come unto, at the set price, viz: 10 d. the pound: had A and B
been coupled with C, the proportions had been changed in respect of their
quantities, as by the following Example will be manifested.

Question 5. A Grocer has 4 sorts of currants; one at 4 d. another 6 d. a third
sort 9 d. the best 11 d. the pound: the worst sort slighted as too mean, the
best thought too dear, so two sorts would not sell: upon which the Grocer
compounded two parcells out of the 4 sorts, each containing 120 pound: and so
mixed, as that he might afford them at 8 d. the pound. How many pound had the
man of every sort, in either parcel?


Here I make two Tables again: in either of them set down the price propounded
in this 8 d. next insert the several prices, viz: 4 d. 6 d. 9 d. and 11 d and
so likewise in the second Tables: which prices you may note with letters
against them, as A, B, C, and D. next couple a greater than the price set with
a less, as in the first Table, 4 with 11, and 6 with 9; In the second Table 4
with 9, and 6 with 11: this done, take the difference between the price
propounded, and the several prices, and transcribe. those differences, with
counterchanging their places as in the former examples, and here are found to
be in the first Table, A 3, B 1, C 2, D 4. In the second Table A 1, B 3, C 4, D
2: the total in either is 10. the quantity to be mixed 120 lb then say, As 10
the total difference is unto 120 lb. (the quantity to be compounded) so shall
3 the respective difference be to 36 lb, the quantity of the worst sort for the
mixture, that is of A, at 4 d. the lb. Again, as 10 to 1^0 lb. so 1 unto 12 lb.
the quantity of that sort for B at 6 d. the lb. As 10 unto 120 lb. so 2 unto 24
lb. for the quantity of that sort at C. As 10 unto 120 lb. so will 4 be to 48
lb. for the quantity of that sort at D, which is at 11 d. the lb. all which
quantities inscribe against each peculiar price, or respective letter, as here
in the Table, whose sum must be equal unto the quantity for to be
compounded; and the whole quantity mixed, at the price set, to be equal unto
the sum of each particular price and quantity, as the total of the
particulars in this examp^e is 120 lb. which at 8 d. the lb comes unto 4 L. now
for the particulars, A 36 groats or 12 s. B 6 s. C 18 s. and D 2 L. 4 s. the
total 4 L. as before.

Now for the second composition, the proportion will be as 10 unto 120 lb. so 1
for A 12 lb. and so proceed as in the first mixture repeating the Rule of 3 so
often as there be differences of several prices, and so these quantities will
be found B 36 lb. C 48 lb. D 24 lb. the total 120 lb. and these particulars,
at their own rates will be 4 L. as before.

Question 6. A composition of several simples to be made in weight 1 C gross;
and to be afforded at the price of 5 s. the lb the particulars at these rates:
viz: A 1 s. lb B 3 s. lb C 5 s. lb D 8 s. lb E 11 s. lb and F 14 s. lb How many
pound must be taken of each sort, not exceeding either the price, or quantity
propounded?
This question differs not from the former, having here connext a greater with
a less, excepting one, which is equal unto the price propounded, and might
have been connexed unto a greater, but for one cause which shall be spoken of
hereafter: so now to proceed in the operation of this Example, which is divided
into several columns: In the first stands only the price propounded, viz: 5
s. In the second is placed each particular price: as 1 s. 3 s. 5 s. 8 s. 11 s.
14 s. with the least, as 1 s. I here connex 14 s. 11 s. and 5 s. and 3 s. is
coupled with 8 s. this done, find their differences betwixt these particulars
and the price set, which transcribe according unto the former Examples, so
against 1 s. the difference will stand 9, 6, 0, against 3 will be 3. and
against 5 stands 4 etc. find the total of these differences which is here 32.
Then say by the Rule of proportion, as 32 is to 168 pound (the quantity to be
mixed) so will 15 be to 78 pound. And thus repeating the Rule of Three so often
as there be differences, the respective quantities to every one will be
produced, as in the last column, whose total is 168 pound, the first quantity
propounded.

In most questions of this kind, having found any one number, the rest may be
discovered without repetition of the Rule of Proportion: for by the Rule of
Practice, Parag: 9. having found the difference and quantity for A or F, as
admit F 21 pound, then must E and C have likewise the same quantity, their
differences being equal, and D. 2 must be half so much, viz: 10 lb, that is
10 lb 8, once that and shall be the quantity for B 15 lb 12, and A being 5
times the difference of B, the quantity of that sort for A must be 78 lb 12,
the totalls as before, equal unto the quantity of the composition propounded:
and 168 Crowns is equal to 42 L. equivalent to the particulars: for A 78 lb
12, at 1 s. the lb, comes unto 3 L 18 s 9 d. B 2 L. 7 s. 3 d. next C 5 L. 5 s.
then D 4 L. 4 s. Fifthly, E 11 L. 11 s. Lastly, F comes to in money 14 L. 14 s.
the total sum in money 42 L. as by the common price, and the quantity given.

The same Question varied thus, with the former prices, and quantity propounded.
In this Example there is the same common price with the particulars, and
quantity to be mixed, which are thus alligated, viz: 1 s. and 14 s. next 11 s. and
5 s. also 8 s. and 3 s. these thus connext, and their differences transcribed
(or counterchang'd accordingly as this rule requires) the sum of those
differences will be 24: so the proportion is as 24 to 168 lb, so 9 unto 63 lb,
the quantity of that sort to be taken: and so proceed according to the last
Example you will find the rest, as 21 lb 42 lb. 14 lb. 0 lb. and 28 lb. whose
total is 168 lb. as before: against these stands the value of them, according
to each particular price, and quantity of that simple, whose total is 42 L. as
in the first example; yet the state of the question is not performed according
to demand, here being no part in the composition of that simple (represented by
E) of 11 s the lb, as was in the last Example, which was the cause, it was
connext as before; and a caution to you hereafter, in any question of this
kind.

These Rules prescribed I hope may satisfy the Ingenious: yet several Arts
have various propositions, one of most note is in the commixing of metals, in
which there is a loss in melting, except in Gold or Silver refined from the
faces, besides an alloy is usually allowed, therefore I will render you one
Example of that kind.

Question 7. A Goldsmiths has several masses, or ingots of Gold, one purer
than another; of 3 sorts he was to make a mixture, whereof one was 16 Carects:
the second 18 Carects: the third was 20 Carects fine: this the Goldsmiths was
to mix with such an aloy, as that the whole mixture of 135 Ounces should be 14
Carects fine: How much must be taken of each sort?
First you are to understand, that an ounce of gold is divided into 24 parts,
called Carects, and an Ounce of silver consists of 20 parts, each called a
Penny-weight: to distinguish the finenesse of metals, those that will endure
the trial of fire, and not diminish in its weight, are said to be 24 Carects
fine: if it loses 2 Carects, that sort is said to be 22 fine: if it loses in
its trial 4 Carects then it is said to be 20 Carects fine, and so still termed
in what remains of 24. and thus silver is valued in Ounces, as the gold is in
Carects: for a pound of Silver tried, and loses nothing, is termed 12 Ounces
fine: if it loses by fire 10 penny-weight, then it is said to be 11 Ounces, 10
p. fine: if it will not stand the trial, but loses 1 Oun: 12 p. weight, then
such a sort will be termed 10 Oun: 8 p. fine: and so for any other sort
denominated by the remainder. Lastly, an Alay or Alloy is nothing but a mixture
of some baser metal, as Brass, or Copper to adulterate the Gold, or abate the
finenesse of it, and so likewise of Silver. And now for the solution of any
question in this kind; set down first the rate propounded and then the
particulars under one another, as before; and for the Alay unknown, place a
cipher under all: with which connex all the others, and counterchange the
differences, which are all alike, and equal to the rate propounded, excepting
the Alay, whose difference is 12, in this Example: and every one of the others
14; so at two Rules of proportion they are all found: for as the total of
differences 54, unto 135: so 12, unto 30 for the Alay: Again as 54 to 135, so
14 unto 35, and so many Ounces must there be of every sort of the Gold, noted
with A, B, C, the Alay with the aspiration H; not that any one aspires to
dross in Gold; but Princes, and their People generally in respect of the
World, whose infatuated Children, do think it is all Gold that glisters.

This last question differs from all the former in two things; the one is, the
compositions or mixtures of them are made out of the simples, or particulars
given, and so the common rate, or price, is always less than the greatest,
and greater than the least propounded: Secondly, those may be varied in their
alligations, whereas all questions of this nature admit of no connection, but
with the Alay; in the operation, and in other things, it differs not from the
former, the total difference being the first number, the quantity given the
second; and each particular correspondent difference the third number; and the
sum of the fourth numbers found, must be equal unto the quantity propounded,
if the operation be true, which is the trial of it.

If Gold of several finenesse were to be mixed together, without any Alay, but
the quantity to be mixed known, and each particular difference, and the rate, or
finenesse of the whole composition to be better than the worst sort, yet not so
fine as the best, the quantity of each particular will then be found by the
former prescribed Rules: so here I will conclude this Paragraph, but not the
subject. Having writ nothing as yet concerning the Apothecarie, which shall be
the next: but not to involve his Simples in conjuring words, to circumscribe
Grammarians and charm the spirits of the Learned with common compositions, as
Children disguised with visards do amaze the Wise and Valiant: but here I will
only show how their Simples may be compounded according to their qualities,
whether Hot, Cold, Dry, or Moist, in sympathy with the Elements, distinguished
in 4 Degrees, and how to make a Medium with either of the two extremes.

Paragraph XIII. Shows the solving of diverse necessary questions by the Rules
of Alligation, in the composition of Physical simples, according to their
qualities, as Hot, Cold, Dry, Moist, with the quantities of those Simples
augmented, or diminished according to any degree prescribed.
ALL Simples are considered in their own natural qualities, as whether Hot,
Cold, Dry, or Moist; betwixt these are contained two Mediums, proceeding from
the two extremes; both these are called Temperate, viz: as the mean between the
Hot and Cold, the others contained betwixt Drought and Moisture: from whence
every Medicine is said to be either Temperate, or else Hot, Cold, Dry, or
Moist, in some one of these 4 degrees, viz: in the first, second, third, or
fourth.

A preparative in the Alligation of Physical Simples, according to their
several qualities or temperatures.
In the first column The Degrees and Qualities. I -- 9 4 H -- 8 3 G -- 7 2 Hot
and Dry. F -- 6 1 E -- 5 0 Temperate. D -- 4 1 C -- 3 2 Cold and Moist. B -- 2
3 A -- 1 4 of this preparative, stands 9 letters of the Alphabet, beginning
with A, and proceeding in order: against A is placed an unite, and so
proceeding unto 9 in Arithmeticall progression, where 5 must be the Medium,
against which stands a Cipher to denote a temperature, from thence ascending
the degrees of Hot and Dry, viz: 1, 2, 3, 4, and from that temperate Mean,
descending again the same degrees, into the other extreme of Cold and Moist; to
both these, the first column here represents the the Index, and might have
been in any other numbers (proceeding in this order) but the least are best;
this done, the form and manner of operation differs not from the last
prescribed Rules of Alligation, for in compounding of these Physical Simples,
there is required to be connext a greater with a less, in respect of their
temperatures, or natural qualities, for which the figures in the first column
do stand, each as an Index to the quality of any simple, which numbers must be
alligated, as were the prices, or quantities in the former questions, as shall
be explained in sundry examples following.

Question 1. Out of two Simples, to make a composition; which Medicine shall be
of any mean temperature between the simples propounded, and of any quantity
assigned.
First you are to Index. Differ: ^ 5 1 2/7 6 6 6/7 1 As 7 to 12, so 3 unto 5 1
1/7 2 As 7 to 12, so 4 unto 6 6 6/7 2 The total of this is 12 0 understand
that the weights used by the Apothecaries are these, and commonly thus noted: a
pound lb, containing 12 Ounces: an ounce 8 Drams: a dram 3 Scruples: a scruple
20 Grains: this done, admit a composition to be made out of two Simples, one
hot and dry in the fourth degree, the other cold and moist in the third
degree, the composition to be temperate, and the weight of this mixture 1 lb or
12. Look in the Table for these degrees, where against 4 you will find the
Index to be 9 I, and for that which is cold and moist in the third degree you
will find at B in the next column the Index 2, and 5 the medium, or mean
temperature for the composition; which first set down, and then either Index,
viz: 9 and 2, then find the difference betwixt them, and the medium 5 which is
here 3 and 4: these must be transcribed with each Index connext as in the
former Examples: this done, the proportion will be as the sum of the
difference, viz: 7, shall be in proportion unto the quantity to be mixed, that
is 12, so shall each particular correspondent difference be unto their
respective quantities to be taken in the Composition; which you may write (as
they are found) against each Index, or proper letter; and these proportions
must be repeated so often as there be particular differences: as in the bottom
of the Table, noted the first and second Rule, whose total in the third row is
12, the quantity given, which shows the work is true. The Simple which was hot
and dry, is least in the Composition, being in the greatest excess, and is
here 5 1 1/7. the other B, cold and moist, but in the third degree 6 6 6/7, the
sum 1 lb. This Rule (and likewise any in Alligation) may be also tried by the
16 Axiom, Parag: 7. by the former Rules in mixtures of Simples.

Question 2. A Composition is required of 3 Simples, whose qualities are
known, and a temperature between one of those three is demanded.
The temperature of this Composition is required in the first degree of Cold
and Moist, whose Index is 4: the qualities of the Simples are these, the first,
4 degrees Cold and Moist, whose Index is an unite noted with the letter A. The
second Simple is Hot and Dry in the third degree, whose Index is 8 H. The
third Simple is Hot and Dry in the fourth degree, noted with I, and the Index
9. there being two qualities greater than the temperature assigned, connex them
both with 1, and find the differences, as in former Examples, which proves
here I 3, H 3, A 5 and 4, that is 9. the quantities of these Simples to be
mixed, is 10 propounded. so the proportion will be (in the second row of this
Table) as the sum of the differences 15, is to the quantity of the
Composition, viz: 10. so 3 the difference is unto 2 for I. then H must have the
same quantity, and A 6, as in the third row, the total of these is 10, equal
to the quantity propounded, and may be also thus tried, by the 16 Axiom,
Parag: 7. multiply each difference by its respective Index as it stands, as 9
by 3, and 8 by 3. And thirdly, 1 times 9, the sum of these is 60. so will the
product be made of the temperature assigned, as in this 4, and the sum of all
the differences 15, which produces also 60 as before, either way is trial
sufficient: yet convenient it is to know them both, our ways being doubtful,
and Man prone to err.

Question 3. A Composition of 4 Simples is required whose qualities are known,
and the quantity of any one is to be mixed with such quantities of the rest,
that the quantity of the Composition may be of any temperature required,
greater than the least, and lesser than the greater given.
Admit the temperature of this Confection were to be Hot and Dry in the first
degree, the Index to it will be found in the former Table 6. the first Simple
Hot and Dry in the fourth degree, whose Index is 9; of this there must be 6
added in the composition to the other three, whose qualities are these, G Hot
and Dry in the second degree, whose Index is 7. D Cold and Moist in the first
degree, the Index 4. Lastly, B Cold and Moist in the third degree whose Index
is 2. the 4 Indices must be coupled, a greater with a less than 6, the Index
unto the temperature required; in this, 9 is connext with 4, and 7 with 2. the
differences are 2, 4, 3, 1, noted with these letters I, G, D, B, the quantity
of I is here given 6, whose Index is 9, and the difference belonging unto that
(as counterchanged with another) is 2, which must be the Divisor, in questions
of this nature, the quantity given the second number (in this 6) and each
respective difference the third number in the Rule of 3, excepting that which
appertains to the quantity given, as in the three Rules of the Table, viz: As 2
unto 6, so 4 to 12; for the quantity of the Simple belonging to G; which write
in its proper place, and so proceed to the rest, where you will find under the
title of the sum of 30. or 3 6: this question having no quantity assigned in
the whole Composition, is proved as was the last: that is, each difference
multiplied by its respective Index, whose total will be equal (if the
operation be true) unto the sum of the differences, multiplied by the Index
of the degree given: as here 6 by 10 produces 60; and so is the sum of their
several products, as in the trial of the Table appears, whose quantity proves
30, or 3 in the temperature of Hot and Dry, and in the first degree as was
desired.

Question 4. A Composition being made of diverse Simples, whose qualities and
quantities are certainly known; and it is required, in what degree of
temperature this Confection is in?
In all questions Index Prod. 5 1 5 As 1 unto 6 so will 2 be to 12 2 3 6 3 4 12
The Index 3 Total 10 35 of this kind, there is no more to do than first to
set down each Index, according to the temperature of the Medicine assigned:
against each quality place the quantity of it, which multiplied by its
respective Index, and the sum of those products divided by the total of the
quantities, the quotient will be the Index unto the temperature of the whole
Composition. As for Example, there is a Confection made of 4 Simples, whose
qualities and quantities are as follows: 1 temperate, whose Index is 5. 2 hot
and dry in the first degree, whose Index is 6. Then 3 cold and moist in the
third degree, whose Index is 2. Lastly, 4 in the second degree cold and moist,
whose Index is 3: the products of these are, 5, 12, 6, 12, the sum of these
is 35; the total of the quantities is 10, with which divide 35, the quotient
is 3 for the Index required, which in the former Table (of degrees and
qualities) falls between C and D subtract the Index 3 from 5 the medium, the
remainder will be 1 Cold and Moist, the question solved: if the Index had been
greater than 5. subtract then 5 from it, the remainder will be your desire, in
the degrees of Hot and Dry. This question depends upon the common Rule of
Proportion, viz: As an unite is to the Index, so will the quantity be unto a
fourth proportional number, as in this last Example does appear.

Question 5. A Confection to be made of several Simples, whose particular
quantities and qualities are known, as in respect of any degree in Heat,
Drought, Cold, or Moisture, how to find the temperature of such a composition.
In Compositions Ind. of hot and cold. Ind. Pro. Ind. to dry and moist Ind.
Pro. 1 5 5 4 5 20 3 4 12 9 4 36 5 2 10 5 2 10 8 3 24 7 3 21 9 1 9 3 1 3 15 60
15 90 of this nature set down the quantity propounded twice, as in these Tables
of Hot and Cold, with the other two extremes Dry and Moist: and according to
the degree of the Simples temperature, write down the Index, which uultiply by
each particular respective quantity, the total of the products divided by the
sum of the quantities, will show the Index for the temperature required: as
in this Composition, whose qualities and quantities are these, one Simple in
weight 5 cold in 4 degrees, whose Index is 1, and moist in the first degree,
the Index 4. then 4 cold in the second degree, the Index 3. and dry in the
fourth degree the Index 9. then was there taken 2 of a Simple in the qualities
temperate, and mixed with 3 of a Simple hot in three degrees, and dry in two,
the Indices 8 and 7. Lastly, 1 of a Simple hot in the fourth degree, and moist
in the second degree, the Index to these is 9 and 3. these multiplied by their
quantities produces 5, 12, 10, 24, 9, and 20, 36, 10, 21. 3. their totalls 60
and 90 these divided by 15, the quotients will be 4 and 6, each an Index to the
quality of the Composition required, viz: hot in one degree, and in the first
degree of moisture, the question solved.

Question 6. To increase or diminish in quality any composition or medicine,
according to any degree of temperature that shall be assigned.
Admit the Composition ^ or Medicine given which was hot in the first degree, and
moist in the first, as in the last question; and suppose that 6 was the
quantity of the Medicine, which by another confection is to be increased or
diminished in either of the qualities, to any degree assigned, as here, the
quality which was hot in the first degree, is to be increased unto the third
degree of heat; or that in the first degree of moisture, to be made temperate.
In this Example there are two Tables, the first is in one degree of heat, whose
Index is 6. yet by the commixture of another Simple is to be increased unto the
third degree of heat. Take any Simple or Composition, which is either equal in
the temperature, or greater, in this I take one in the fourth degree of heat,
whose Index is 9: place this under the Index, whose temperature is known, viz:
6. the difference of these two, and 8 propounded is counterchanged 1 and 2,
then say, as the difference of that known, and that given, or the difference of
the Index 1 propounded to the quantity of the Confection made 6; so shall the
difference of 2 (the Index) be in proportion unto the quantity of the Simple
that is to be mixed: so it is, as 1 unto 2, so 6 to 12; or as 1 to 6, so 2 unto
12. And so much of that which is hot in 4 degrees, commixt with another hot in
the first degree, the temperature will be in three degrees of heat, as will
appear in the Table of their qualities. And so likewise in the second Table of
this Example, the Confection which was moist in the first degree is to be made
temperate: D 4 is the Index unto the quality given, which must be annihilated,
like the common people of these times, as neither hot nor cold. Take the Index
of some required Simple, whose degree is either equal, or greater: as here
admit one, in the second degree of heat, whose Index is 7 G. the difference of
each Index transcribed according to the last, or first Question of this Parag:
the difference D 2. and G 1. now the proportion will be, as 2 to 1 so 6 unto 3,
or 2 unto 6: so 1 to 3. and 3 Drams of a Simple, hot in the second degree,
added to a Confection of 6 Drams, moist in the first degree, in respect of
moisture it would have been in that quality, neither hot nor cold, nor yet dry
or moist, if their qualities correspond.

In the first of these Examples, the Composition 6, hot in the first degree,
being mixed with 12 hot in the fourth degree, the whole Confection was made hot
in the third degree, but yet is held moist in the first degree, as it was
before: although some affirm, not only heat does abate cold, drought and
moisture, but also moisture and drought lessens cold; two of these qualities
being but by accident. So to return, if the last Composition which was made hot
in the third degree, and moist in the first, the whole Confection of 18, may be
increased, or diminished in the degree of moisture by one of the last Examples,
to which I refer you, repetitions being unnecessary: if the quantities of any
Simple, or Composition to be made, should happen in a fraction, or in several
denominations, viz: lb or the like: reduce the given quantity into the least
denomination, and then proceed as before: if there happen a fraction in the
Index, subtract it from 5, or the Index of the mean temperature from that, and
you will find your desire: as admit the Index were 3 subtracted from 5, shows
the degree 1 cold and moist: if the Index were 8, the degree appertaining to it
(by the subtraction of 5) will prove 3 hot and dry, and so for any other
fraction in these degrees and qualities; of this subject I will write no more,
lest the Apothecaries should take me for a simple, or this the worst of their
drugs.

A general Rule.
In all Questions of Alligation wherein a price, without quantity, or quality
is propounded: the difference or differences counterchanged gives a solution
unto the demand; for the sum of all such differences will be both a
Multiplier and a Divisor, as Parag: 7. Axiom 16. and Parag: 12. Quest: 3. In
all Rules of Alligation: in this last I do not question the wise Children of
Aesculapius, nor the learned Disciples of Galen or Hippocrates, or presume to
teach their expert Apothecaries any Rules, but to give an insight of theirs to
please some, and to assist others, who have more Practice than Theorie, and
less Art than Experience.

Paragraph XIV. By false positions to discover the truth; this Rule teaches
how unto a number known to suppose others analogically, and from thence, four
proportional numbers will arise, that shall answer the question, or in
proportion to it.
A Definition of false Positions.
THe Rules of False, or false Positions, consists in supposing of numbers,
representing the quantity or quality proportionable to the thing required, and
is twofold, viz: Single, or Double.

The single Rule of False, shows by one position of proportional, yet
supposed numbers, to resolve a question propounded.

The double Rule requires two positions of numbers: but first for the single
Rule, to be explained by Examples.

Question 1. There was a man had two sons and one daughter, viz: A, B, and C,
the old man (in his last Will and Testament) bequeathed to his children all his
estate (in value unknown) in this manner: to his eldest son A, he gave a
portion double to B, his second son; and his part, treble his daughters C: the
estate after his death was praised at 745 L. What must the childrens parts be?
Most Rules of single position consist of more parts, or proportional numbers
than one, and usuallly differs not Suppos. L s d Suppos. L. 6 A 447 0 0 10-745
3 B 223 10 0 1 C 74 10 0 The totalls 10 745 0 0 in form, from the Rules of
Society, nor yet in the manner of operation: in these questions take such
numbers as may be proportionable, or answer the state of the question, and yet
generally avoiding all fractions: first set down the names, or the thing, upon
which the demand is made, and those underneath one another, as here A, B, C,
take commonly the least number, or part, and in the least denomination; as for
C, I suppose 1. then B must be 3 times so much, against which I place 3. the
portion of A must be twice that, for which I put 6, the sum of these is 10.
then by the 15 Axiom, Parag: 7. the proportion will be, As the sum of the
supposed numbers 10 shall be in proportion to the total sum of the Legacies
given, so will each particular or proportional part be to his respective share
or portion: and this Rule of proportion must be repeated so often as there be
supposed parts for the required shares, that is, As 10 unto 745 L. so will 6 A
be to 447 L and in the same manner proceeding you will find for B 223 L. 10 s.
and for C the Daughters portion 74 L. 10 s. the total 745 L. which shows the
work is true. Many times in these questions you may ease your self in the
operation, as here, 1 being a Multiplier, and 10 the Divider; by diverse former
Rules there needs no other division than cutting off the first figure on the
right hand, so it will be 74 5/10, that is, 74 L. 10 s. for C three times, that
is, B 223 L. 10 s. twice, that is, 447 L. for A, as before.

Question 2. Five Merchants, as A, B, C, D, E, entered into Society with
several stocks, and according to their shares for to stand the pleasure of
Fortune either in gain or loss: profit was their hopes, and proved the end:
their stock unknown, the gain 675 L. their conditions were, that the gains
of A, should be part of B. and part of B, should be part of C. three times A
the gains of D. and twice what B did gain, was the gains of E, each
particular share is required.
The conditions Suppos. L. Suppos: L. 2 A 54 As 25 to 675, so 4 B 108 5 C 135
Or as 1 to 27, so 6 D 162 8 E 216 The totalls are 25 and 675 here being only
of their gain or loss, you may take any proportional numbers in this case;
but such as will solve the question without fractions, is the best, for which
you are not confined to any particular number, as 2, 4, 5, etc. herein I do
take the least, and suppose 2 for the gains of A; since half that is to be
the fourth part of B, in this proportion, B must be 4, and C 5, being five
times the fourth part that B did gain: then D must be 6, being three times A.
and E will gain 8, being twice the adventure of B. these supposed numbers,
being placed under one another, (against each particular profit) find the
sum of them, as in the Table 25. which must be the first number, the whole
gains, or loss the second, in this 675 L. so will 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, each
particular supposed number (according to the 15 Axiom, Parag: 7.) be in
proportion to their respective shares, so A must have 54 L. B 108 L. C 135 L. D
162 and E 216 L. the sum of these 675 L. the whole gains, which is proof
sufficient, as by the Table appears. The common multiplier 675 L. with the
total of the supposed parts; viz: 25, the Divider unto all may be reduced by 5
or 25 (according to the former Rules of Practice, Lib: 2. Parag: 9. Quest: 3.)
unto this, as 1 unto 27, so each supposed number to its particular part; by
which means a division is avoided in all.

Question 3. The sum of 570 L. was to be distributed unto 3 men, A, B, C; but
at several payments, and upon these conditions, that when A received 2 L then
B should have 4 L. and so often as B took 3 L. was C to have 5 L. in this
proportion was the money paid, and here their shares are required.
The Table of 1 ^ 2 A 6 -- B 12-20 C 3 A 3 -- B 6-10 C 4 The total of 3, 6,
10, is 19 5 As 19 to 570 L. so 3 to 90. this Example is divided into 5 rows, as
by the column in the head appears: the state of the question is, where A had
2 L. B must have 4 L. and in that proportion, as if B had 3 L. then C should
have 5 L. in the first row they stand, as A 2. so B 4: and for B 3 then C must
have 5. in all such cases proportional parts may be found in whole numbers
thus: multiply A 2 by B 3, the product is 6 for A. then multiply B 3 by B 4,
the result will be 12 for B. and 4 thus increased by 5, produces 20; that is B
by C, so these three numbers are A 6. secondly, B 12, and C 20, which are
proportional to the state of the question, and the thing required: for B 12 is
in a duplicate proportion to A 6. as A 2 was to B 4. and so 12 is to 20. as B 3
is unto C 5. so in the second row the three proportional numbers are A 6. B
12. and C 20. which you may reduce if you please, as in the third row unto 3,
6, 10, the sum of them, as in the fourth row is 19; this must be the first
number; the quantity or sum, as 570 L. the second, the other the parts of A
3, B 6, and C 10, according to the 1 or 2 Quest: of this Parag: and should be
placed in the same manner, the operation as in the fifth row where the share for
A is 90 L. and so find the rest as B 180 L. and the part for C 300 L. the
total of them 570 L. as before; each share being in proportion, unto the state
of the Question propounded.

Question 4. There came unto a wedding 6 Lords, 8 Knights, 24 Esquires, and 48
Burgesses: these gave at an offering 120 L. in this manner, viz: 2 Lords gave
as much as 4 Knights, 5 Knights equal unto 6 Esquires, and 5 Esquires gave so
much as 10 Bur-Burgesses. How much did each distinct degree offer?
In all questions of this nature you must first find out proportional numbers
answering the state of the question propounded, which to effect, according unto
the last Example, set down the proportions The products 2 and 5 by 5 is 50 2 L
-- 4 K -- 5 and 5 by 4 is 100 5 K -- 6 E -- 5 and 4 by 6 is 120 4 and 6 by 10
is 240 5 E -- 10 B -- The totalls are 50. 100. 120. 240 Reduced are 5-10-12-24
given, as in the Table to this Question, where the offering of 2 L, 5 K, and 5
E are multiplied together, whose product is 50. then 5 K, 5 E, and 4 K, is 100.
next 5 E, 4 K, and 6 E 120. Lastly, 10 B, 6 E, and 4 K, which multiplied
produces 240. the sums of these are 50, 100, 120, 240, and reduced unto
their least denominations, 5, 10, 12, 24, which are proportional numbers, and
manifests that 5 Lords offered equally unto 10 Knights, 12 Esquires, or 24
Burgesses.

These proportions L s d 6 Lords 5 6 0 0 8 Knights 10 4 0 0 24 Esquires 12 10 0
0 48 Burgesses 24 10 0 0 The total is -- 30 0 0 being found, place them in
order, as here you see: then suppose for 1 Lords offering any sum you please,
admit 20 s. then 6 Lords offered 6 L. which set down; the proportional numbers
found were 5, 10, 12, 24, and according to the supposition, 5 L. answers unto
any of the proportional numbers, by which find the rest, as 10 to 5, so 8
unto 4 L. the supposed part for 8 Knights. and in this manner find the rest,
viz: as 12 to 5 L. so 24 unto 10 L. and as 24 unto 5 L. so 48 unto 10 L. the
sum of all the offerings (according unto supposition) amounts unto the sum
of 30 L.

L s Suppos. L. 6 Lords 24 0 As 30 is to 120, so 4 Knig. unto 16 0 10 Esqu. 40
0 10 Burg. 40 0 The total sum -- 30 120 0

This sum discovered by the supposition is but 30 L. and the offering was
certainly known 120 L. therefore institute the Rule of Proportion again, viz:
as 30 to 120 L. so 6 unto 24 L. and so much did the 6 Lords offer, and so
repeating the Rule you will find the 8 Knights offer 16 L. the 24 Esquires 40
L. and likewise the 48 Burgesses offered 40 L. the total is 120 L. the sum
propounded, and the particular parts required.

Paragraph XV. Shows the double Rule of False positions, from whence two
errors will arise, and by those errors, a truth will be discovered, as by
sundry examples shall be demonstrated.
A Definition of the double Rule of False positions.
THe double Rule of False positions, is when the particular quantities, or
qualities of things are unknown, which are supplied by supposing of false
numbers, from whose errors, a truth will be discovered, and the question solved.

From two false supposed numbers, two errors will arise, these errors must be
examined whether they are greater, or lesser, than is the thing required, and
must be noted with a sign usually with these Algebraicall characters, viz:
more: but if either error be defective thus, viz: -- less: if equal thus =
an equation.

The first Rule of proportion in False positions, when the signs of the errors
are alike, viz: both or both -- I. As the difference between the two errors,
II. Shall be in proportion unto the first error: III. So will the difference of
the two supposed (numbers IIII. Be unto a fourth proportional number, and that
added to the first supposition (if the signs be --) or subtracted from it (if
the signs be) the sum or remainder will be the number required.


The second Rule of Proportion in False positions, when the errors have unlike
signs, as one the other --.
I. As the total sum made of both the errors II. Shall be in proportion unto
the first error, III. So will the difference of the 2 supposed numbers IV. Be
unto a fourth proportional number, which added unto the first supposition (if
it be less than the second) but if greater, subtract it from thence: the sum
or remainder will be the number desired.
A Directory unto this double Rule of False positions.
In the first place, the former 8 10 16 Addit. 11 13 19 Subtract. 4 6 12
Multipl. 40 50 80 Divis. 4 5 8 Differenc. in all Rules require the same
proportion between the errors, as there is betwixt the differences of the
supposed numbers, and the true number that is required, and though unknown, it
is always comprehended within these differences, which in this Rule are either
added, or subtracted, multiplied or divided interchangeably by one another, and
so one thing involved is in all their several operations, that is the number
sought: for the Errors in this Rule, are nothing else but the differences
between the true and supposed numbers, by the operation of some common number,
from whence they are in the same proportion, as are the differences of the
supposed numbers, and that required: and according to the fourth Paragraph the
differences betwixt any numbers increased or diminished by a common number will
continue in the same proportion, as in this Example, where 8, 10, 16, are three
numbers given, whereof one is a number required, the other two are supposed
numbers; the differences between 8 and 10, and also 10 and 16 are 2 and 6, that
is, as 1 to 3 or: and so will these differences prove, if increased or
diminished by any one common number, as in the Example does appear.

By these former grounds are all questions solved in this kind, and not
otherwise, unless some Geometrical progressions be employed in the operation,
as Squares, Cubes, Squared Squares, etc. which diverse Authors have introduced,
and amplified this Rule of False positions very much, and to effect that, which
before was not thought circumscriptable, or within any bounds but Cossick
numbers; yet all their Rules involved with such obscurities, that those ways
are more difficult to find, and less certain to continue in, then is the
illustrious Algebra it self, which I have reserved for my next work, if these
my labors and directions be acceptable, and so I will proceed.

The common way, and directions, in the double Rule of False positions.
It is a common Adagie, that there are more ways to the wood than one, the
plainest road, or readiest tract in most things ought to be followed, which in
this I shall endeavor evidently to show, and this way: first draw two lines
(like a St. Andrews Cross) as in this figure: then make two suppositions for
the thing required, but both of one denomination, as in respect of quantity or
quality: the first false position, place at the upper end of the Cross, upon
your left hand; the other on the right, as in this 8 and 12: underneath them
directly, place the errors respectively from which false position it did arise:
as under 8 set 6, and beneath 12 insert 14 note them with the signs, as
whether more, or less: in this both are noted with then multiply the errors by
their contrary supposed numbers, that is crossewise, the first false position
by the second error: and the second position by the first error: as 6 by 12 is
72, and 14 by 8 is 112. thus far it is general. Next observe whether the
signs are alike, or no: if both in excess, or both defective; subtract the
lesser from the greater product, and the remainder shall be the dividend; and
the difference of Errors the Divisor.

In this Example 40 is to be divided by 8, the quotient will be 5 the number
required, which place upon the right hand of the Cross, betwixt the second
supposition, and its error: and if the whole number or quantity known were 20,
the other must be 15, which place against it, upon the left hand of the Cross,
as in the figure; but if the errors be of different kinds, as the one in
excess; and the other -- being defective: the sum of all such products, must
be the Dividend, and the sum of the errors must be Divisor; the Quotient will
be the number sought; and by either way, it will be always in the same
denomination, with the false supposed numbers, as shall be illustrated by
examples.

Question 1. There was an Excise upon all goods, sold by wholesale men: and by
an Edict, if any man rendered not a true account, the penalty (if discovered)
was double the commodity: yet all tradesmen allowed to be as obscure as they
could, the truth being affirmed: it was demanded of one man, what he had sold:
Who replied, 2 pieces of Canvas, 2 of Fustian, and 7 of Holland, every piece a
crown more than other; and one piece of the best, was 3 times the price of the
worst: what was the value of the 11 pieces of cloth?
In this Proposition I take the last Example, in which I choose the meanest
price, and make two suppositions thereof, and supposing the price of that piece
to be 8 crowns, and being there were 10 p eces more, every one dearer by 5
shillings, the best then must consequently be 18 crowns, which according to the
supposition, should contain the worst three times, whereas here 3 times 8 is
24, from whence take 18, the remainder is 6 for the first error, and too much:
for the second supposition you may take a less, but here I will again suppose
a greater, as 12 crowns, and being it is of the same denomination, the best
piece should be worth 22 crowns, and that equal unto three times the
supposition; but 3 times 12 is 36, from whence take 22, the remainder will be
14 for the second error, which place under 12 the supposition with the sign
of more: this second error, multiplied by 8 the first supposition, produces
112: and 6 the first error, multiplied by 12 the second supposition; the
product will be 72: the difference betwixt these products is 40, for the
dividend, the difference of errors 8, the divisor; the quotient 5, for the true
number required, and then the best piece must be 15 crowns; being 3 times the
value of the other, the prices of all the rest will be easily discovered, as
thus:

Two pieces of Canvas, the first 1 L. 5 s. the other 1 L. 10 s. then two pieces
of Fustian, the first 5 s. more than the last piece of Canvas, viz: 1 L. 15 s.
the other 2 L. the piece, then for the 7 pieces of Holland, the first 2 L. 5 s.
the second 2 L. 10 s. the third 2 L. 15 s. the fourth 3 L. the fifth 3 L. 5 s.
the sixth 3 L. 10. the last 3 L. 15. that is 15 crowns, and three times the
first piece in value, according unto the state of the question, the total
sum is 27 L. 10 s. the thing required: this is a sufficient trial; and yet
for to please all, according unto the former Rule, as 8 is to 6, so will 4 be
to 3, which fourth proportional number, taken from 8 (the first supposition)
the remainder will be 5. the number required: the errors being both in excess.

Question 2. To divide any number propounded into any parts that shall be
required; and those parts for to be in any proportion one unto another, that
shall be assigned.
The given number here is 45 for to be divided into 2 parts, and those to be in
a triple proportion one unto the other: the Cross made as before, let 8 be the
first supposition, and the least part, then 24 should have been the greatest,
the sum of them is 32, but the number given is 45, therefore this supposition
is 13 defective, as by the error does appear: then suppose 10 for the number
required, the triple of it is 30, the sum of them both is 40, which shows the
second error for to be 5 defective: these errors multiplied crossewise, into
their supposed numbers, will produce 40 and 130, their difference 90 for the
Dividend: the difference of Errors 8 the Divisor, the quotient 11 for the
lesser number required, three times that is 33, their total 45, the question
solved. By the first Rule, the proportion is as 8 to 13, so 2 unto 3 2/8 or,
which 3 (according to the first Rule) must be added unto 8 the first
supposition, the sum will be 11 as before, answering the state of the
question, for the lesser number which being discovered, the other is easily
found; this question will be performed by the Rules of single position, if you
take proportional numbers, answering the state of the proposition.

Question 3. To divide a given number into any two parts, and those in any
quantity assigned, as to part 10 in two; and so, as that the greater divided by
the less, the quotient shall be 20.
In all questions of this kind, suppose any one number, the other is the
remainder; as here I suppose 2: the other must be 8, both numbers being 10: and
according to the state of the question, the greater should contain the less 20
times, then consequently 20 times the less would be equal unto the greater
number, so 2 multiplied by 20 produces 40, and should have been equal to 8,
the error is 32 too much, then take a second supposition, as admit 1, the other
part must be 9, and the second error 11: and both too much, which note, and
then multiply them into their contrary suppositions, the products will be 22
and 32, the difference 10 for the Dividend, the difference of errors 21 the
Divisor, the Quotient 10/21 for the lesser part, which subtracted from 10 the
remainder will be 9 11/21, which is 20 times the other, and consequently 9
11/21 or ^00/21 divided by 10/21 the Quotient will be 20, the thing required:
and for trial, by the first Rule of False positions, as 21 to 32, so 1 unto 1
11/21; which (according to the same Rule) subtracted from 2, the first
supposition, the remainder will be 10/21 for the true number as before.

Question 4. A vessel of 63 gallons was filled with French wine of two sorts;
the one was at 2 s. the gallon, the other at 2 s. 6 d. the gallon; the wine in
the hogs-head thus filled, did come unto in money 7 L. 4 s. and it is here
demanded how much there was of either sort.
The quality here, and the number of gallons in either supposition, will solve
this question, the denominations being the same in both, as in respect of the
quality, that is, supposing the best, or worst sort, or price in either; yet to
avoid any great number, the quantity of gallons being odd as 63, and the
meanest price or quality being even, I take that in both, and presuppose 23
gallons of the meanest sort, then there was 40 gallons of the best, which at 2
s. 6 d. the gallon comes unto 5 L. and the other sort unto 2 L 6 s. in all 7 L
6 s. the price was 7 L. 4 s. from whence it is apparent, that the first error
was ^ s. too much^ then suppose 33 gallons (or what you please) which granted,
there must be 30 gallons of the best, which comes unto 3 L. 15 s. and 33
gallons of the worst (at 2 s. the gallon) amounts unto 3 L. 6 s. the sum 7 L.
1 s. the error 3 s. defective; these errors multiplied crossewise by the
suppositions, will produce 69 and 66: and according to my former directions
(being the signs are unlike) their sum is 135 for the Dividend, the sum of
the errors 5 for the Divisor, the Quotient 27, the number of gallons, of the
worst sort of Wine, then must there be 36 gallons of the best, the total
quantity 63 gallons; the price of the worst is 2 L. 14 s. and the best comes
unto 4 L. 10 s. the just sum of 7 L. 4 s. according unto the proposition. And
by the second Rule, the proportion is, as 5 unto 2, so 10 to 4, which 4 if it
be added unto 23 (the first supposition) the sum will be 27 gallons, as by
the former, operation in the figure does appear.

Question 5. Hiero King of Sicylia, caused a Crown of Gold for to be made in
weight 10 lb. and it was conceived, that the Workman had put a great Allay of
Silver unto it, which abuse of the Artificer Archimedes detected; and by False
positions may be thus discovered.
lb lb [1] lb lb As 10 Gold to 2 water so 6 Gold to 6/5 water As 10 Silver to 3
water so 4 Silver to 6/5 water The total of these fourth proportionalls 2 lb
lb [2] lb lb As 10 Gold to 2 water so 7 Gold to 7/5 water As 10 Silver to 3
water so 3 Silver to 9/10 water The total of these proportionals is 2 3/10

The making of this Crown is mentioned by Vitruvius, and others; but by what
Rule Archimedes discovered it, is remaining in obscurity, only that the
conclusion he found out by water; the quantity of gold, and the weights then
used at Syracusa, as uncertainly known as the rest; therefore here I will only
state a Question of the same nature, by which the Artificers dishonesty, either
was, or might have been thus by art detected; It is imagined that Archimedes
had of the King a mass of gold equal in weight to the Crown, which here I
suppose might weigh 10 lb. he made also another equal mass of silver, with
which metal the gold was alayd, but in what quantity unknown, but this
granted; it might be thus found: first there was provided a cisterne, and that
filled with water up to a spout, under which there was another vessel for
receiving the overplus of water.

Admit by putting the Crown into the cistern of water, the quantity run out was
2 lb. the mass of pure gold avoided but 2 lb water, and that of silver 3 lb.
which in the first place showed the difference of mettalls, for they being of
equal weight, that most compacted and heaviest of nature will have the lesser
body, and consequently possess the lesser room: by this a great allay appears,
and will be explicitly known, as thus, suppose there was 4 lb of silver, then
was there 6 lb of gold: here institute the Rule of proportion twice for either
metal, as in the first Table, viz: if 10 lb of gold voyded 2 lb of water, how
much will 6 lb of gold void, which will prove 1 lb of water; and so according
to the supposition find how much water the silver will avoid, which is here
also 1 lb, the sum is 2 whereas the water which the Crown forced out was 2
lb. the difference only lb for the first error. then suppose there might be 3
lb of silver in the Crown, there must be of gold 7 lb. and according to the
second Table the fourth proportional number will be 14/10, or 7/5. then again,
as 10 s. to 3 W. so 3 lb silver to 9/10 lb of water, the sum of these is 2
3/10 lb water, the difference of this 2 3/^0 and 2 is 1/10 too much for the
second error. These multiplied by their contrary suppositions, will produce
and, and according to my former directions, the difference is for the Dividend,
the difference of errors 1/10, the Quotient 2 lb of silver, the quantity of the
alay, and 8 lb the weight of gold, that was in the Crown, the thing required.

The examen, or trial.
For the proof of this or the like, ^ take the quantities of both metals
found, and likewise the quantity of the thing or mass propounded; then
institute twice the Rule of proportion; if 10 lb of gold forced out 2 water,
how much will 8 of gold put forth, facit 1 lb water; then by the second Rule,
if 10 lb of silver expelled 3 lb of water, then 2 lb of silver will force out
of the same cistern lb of water, the sum of these is 2 lb of water, and so
much did the Crown it self put forth, or by the first canon to this double
Rule of False positions, as 1/10 to so will 1 be to 2, which according unto the
same Rule (if subtracted from the first supposition) the remainder will be 2 lb
the quantity required as before: this question may be solved by any less
quantity of metal in either sort: for by finding how much one ounce, or any
other quantity shall force out of a cistern, by the common Rule of proportion,
you will easily find what quantity of water shall be expulsed by any greater
or lesser mass of the same metal, therefore I will write no more of this.

Truth by these two last Paragraphs is extracted from False positions, and
gross errors multiplied and divided by errors more and less, obsurd in
themselves, yet in these the thing lies involved, which is inquired after,
though benighted in obscurity, and by correcting the errors will be brought to
light, the Aenigma's solved, the Objections cleared, and I discovered in my
intentions a friend to the Truth, and really wishing this for the common good,
reflecting upon honest ingenious men, to whose candid and merciful censure I
refer my self, and for instructions in the Rules of false, because it is so
generally beloved and daily put in practice, I will recommend this Breviate to
their memories, as a Directorie, whereby to avoid some errors of this kind in
future, and thus conclude the second Book.

The Rule of False Positions to discover the Truth: or by erroneous
suppositions to find things really true, a paradox, and no hyperbole.
AXIOMS in Rules of False, are briefly these:
Take two convenient numbers as you please,
Two errors will arise, from what you guess,
Which note with signs, as whether more or less:
Then multiply those errors you disclose,
Crosse-wise, by both the numbers you suppose:
If in your work, two signs alike you make,
Diffrence of errors then all numbers take:
If signs unlike (as and --) this do,
Add both the errors, and the numbers too;
The sum or difference the errors must divide
Which quotient then, the riddle will decide,
Unless both numbers sought it does contain,
Or both products alike, the Aenigma's vain.
Where naught is to divide, you may descrie
The Question's false, or but a fallacy.
If more than two positions you must need,
The Rule of false will then be false indeed.
Some other notes, and queries might be shown,
Whose use is best to Cossick-numbers known.
The Rules prescribed here will guide you true,
Yet take these caveats too along with you,
Though many say (and will my counsel shun)
What need we Rules, when as this Work is done?
To which I answer: All I here impart
Are but the grounds, and principles of Art.
Some Rules, search tracts, that various ways do wind,
Yet leave not inquisition 'till they find:
Errors, Maeanders are; in which we are led,
That none can well return without a thread.
Make no positions, errors to maintain,
As blind sects do, who seek for truth in vain,
With miscalled Lights, pretend to guide men right,
They Are Faux his lanthorns, and a snuff's their light,
It Is not to such my labors I intend,
But to the good, or those that would amend:
The new, but false inspired Saints suppose,
All things of truth are now revealed to those:
He that from them, can any truth descrie
By false positions; has more art than I:
These, I as errors shun; and do implore
To be Christ's servant, and I wish no more:
The well-dispos'd amend will what is amiss,
And find their errors, as I do in this,
Which found, correct; they will vanish then away,
And Truth will rise from thence, like break of day:
Errors, are mists, that do benight our Spheres,
Withdraw those vapors, and the day appears:
Man did by errors fall, whence Art in vain
Labors, in part, for to restore again.
By false positions, you may errors find;
Who cannot see their faults, are very blind,
By what is false, I hope you will find what is true.
I wish your Errors small; and so Adieu.
All that I know, I know was given to me
For others good, so this I give to thee:
And for my labors, give (if you be eased)
All glory unto God; and I am pleased,
To be the Servant Unto his Servants, THOMAS WILSFORD.

Artificial Arithmetic: OR, NUMBERS, Divided into SECTIONS, And these in
CHAPTERS.

Containing Decimall Arithmetic, with the Definition, Reduction, Annotation,
Numeration, and Construction of these fractions; with their several rules in
Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division; with Decimall Tables of
the Coins, Weights, and Measures, commonly used in England. Also one of Minutes
and Seconds.

THE THIRD BOOK

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath: Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, 1656.

THE THIRD BOOK: Containing Decimall Arithmetic.
SECT. I.
CHAP. I. The Definition of Artificial Arithmetic, with the Reduction of the
Decimall fractions, and the art of framing those numbers.
The Definition.
Artificial Arithmeticke by Decimall fractions, does Add, Subtract, Multiply,
and Divide with whole numbers and fractions commixt together in one sum; and
their Totalls, Remainders, Products, and Quotients, shall produce mixed numbers;
as integers, and fractions, in one total sum; these Decimall fractions have
always for their Denominators, an Unite with Ciphers annexed unto that Unite
toward the right hand; as 1/10, 2/190, 3/1000, or 1/1000, etc. but if any
Fraction propounded shall not have such a Denominator, it must be reduced unto
it by art, from whence this kind of Arithmetic derives it exordium, or name
originally.

Rule 1. The reduction of common or vulgar fractions unto Decimalls, with the
first grounds thereof.
Any vulgar fraction may be reduced unto a Decimall, by division, or very near
the same quantity, without any sensible error, as thus: unto the Numerator of
the fraction given annex ciphers, as in extracting the Quadrat root, Lib: 2.
Parag: 1. Example 5. but in all these cases at pleasure, as 1, 2, or 3 ciphers,
etc. this done, divide the whole by the Denominator of the fraction propounded,
the Quotient will be the Numerator of the fraction, whose Denominator shall be
an Unite, with so many Ciphers, as the Numerator has places: of these there
are two kinds, viz: Rational and Irrational: those are called Rational,
whose Numerators are just quantities, without having any remainder, as all the
others have, and yet those Decimalls retaining a proportion so near their
vulgar fractions, as that humane works can require no more exactness, as shall
be instanced in some following examples.

Example 1. Of some vulgar fractions reduced to Decimalls, retaining true
proportions.
The Denominator of every ^ fraction is in proportion unto the Numerator, as
are the Integers to their parts, according to the Rule of Fractions: Lib: 1.
Sect: 2. Parag: 1. Paradig: 9. then by the first of these 4 Examples, is a
fraction propounded, for to be made a Decimall, of which suppose 10 to be the
integer: then say by the Rule of Three, As 2 is to 1, so 10 unto 5, which are
proportional numbers, Lib: 2. Parag: 7 Ax: 11. that is, as the Denominator of
the given fraction is unto its Numerator, so shall 10, 100, 1000, etc. (the
Decimall Denominator) be in proportion unto the Decimall Numerator required,
which is 5/10 equal to. Thus the second Example is, which is to be converted
unto a Decimall, and thus as 5 to 3, so 10 will be to 6; so the fraction is
6/10. The third Example is of which is made 25/100 equal to. The fourth
Example is reduced to a Decimall of 625/1000 equal to, being in the same
proportion with the vulgar fraction, from whence it was derived: in composing
of these Decimall fractions, there needs no multiplication, as Lib: 1. Sect: 1.
Parag: 4 Example 4. but annex ciphers unto the Numerator of the vulgar fraction
given, as occasion requires, but my second way of Division is best, as Lib: 1.
Sect: 1. Parag: 5. Example 6. by which means you may continue annexing ciphers
at pleasure, and so take no more than you need; for ciphers only after a
significant figure, are quite unnecessary in this kind of Arithmetic, as you
will see hereafter in the following Rules; besides the Denominator of every
Decimall being an unite with ciphers, they must be superfluous in the Numerator.

Example 2. Of some vulgar fractions that are irrational, reduced unto their
nearest Decimalls.
All fractions in this are ^ such numbers as cannot be reduced unto perfect
Decimalls, but something will remain; in all such cases annex ciphers to the
Numerator, as occasion, and the state of the question shall require, let 3 or 4
ciphers be the least, whereby the error may not be an unite in 100 or 1000
parts, then proceed according to the last Example, and find these in this, as
whose Numerator converted to a Decimall will be 3333 that is 3333/10000 which
is very near equal to, as by the first Proposition of this Example. In the
second 2/7 is propounded, whose Numerator 2 multiplied by 100000, or which is
all one, annex 5 ciphers to it, and then it will be 200000, which divided by 7
(the vulgar fractions Denominator) the quotient will be 28570 for the new
Numerator, and will stand thus 28570/100000, or thus 2857/10000 equal to the
former, as Lib: 1. Sect: 2. Parag: 1. Parad: 4. of this last Decimall fraction;
if the Numerator had been required but of 3 places, viz: 285/1000 add 1 unto
the unite place, and so make it 286/1000, and the reason is evident ^86/1000
being 3/10 too much, whereas 285/1000 is 7/10 defective, and of two errors the
least is to be chosen; and so for any other fraction in Decimalls.

Rule 2. The annotation of Decimall fractions, and how denominated.
Decimall fractions are A Table of annotations.
- Unites - 3 3 L 0 Primes 1 1 9 Seconds 2 5 3 S 8 Thirds 3 6 7 Fourths 4 5 1 D
6 Fifts 5 1 5 Sixts 6 0 4 Sevenths 7 4 2 Q 3 Eights 8 1 2 Ninths 9 6 1 Tenths
10 7 I degrees II III IV thus denominated, descending from an unite: the first
place below an integer is called a Prime; the next unto that are Seconds; the
place beneath them are Thirds, etc. denoted according to the degrees, series or
order of the Arithmeticall figures, descending by Tens to what number of places
you please, or the state of the question shall require: this Table is made unto
ten places, although 5 or 6 will be abundan^ly sufficient for most questions:
in the uppermost row of this Table noted I stands o Prime, 9 Seconds, 8 Thirds,
7 Fourths, etc. and so any other numbers reckoned according to their degrees,
descending from an unite, as in the second row II, whose first place must be
always noted with this mark, or a point only prefixed before them, as thus:
25 denoting 2 Primes and 5 Seconds: the third row shows a number compounded of
integers and fractions together, continued unto ten places; and according to
the quality of this Artificial Arithmetic, comprehends (as in the fourth row)
3 L. 3 S. 1 D. 2 Q and all in one sum, as shall be made evident hereafter.

According to this One Unite makes 10 Primes Prime Seconds Second Thirds Third
Fourths Fourth Fifts Fifth Sixts Sixth Sevenths Seventh Eights Eight Ninths Ninth
Tens last prescribed Rule in all Fractions of Artificial or Decimall
Arithmeticke, the degrees proceeds by 10; so that one Unite contains 10
Primes: one Prime 10 Seconds, one Second 10 Thirds, one Third makes 10 Fourths
etc. So an unite of any one denomination makes 10 in the succeeding degree
descending: and 5 is the half of any precedent Decimall, as 5 Second; is half
a Prime; and 5 Primes half an integer or unite whether it be of Number, Weight,
or Measure, that is, of any divisible thing.

Rule 3. The numeration of Decimall fractions without Denominators.


Numerators of all Decimall fractions are numbered from an unite, descending
toward the right hand, contrary to all numbers in Natural Ari^hmetick; as by
the front of this Pyramide will appear: which figure is divided into two parts,
containing upon the right hand the Numerators of fractions, descending in 8
degrees of Decimalls, as by the numerall letters on the right side of the
Py^amide appears, from 1/10 of an unite 1/10000000: Upon the left hand (in this
figure) do stand all the respective Denominators contained between them: At
the basis of these stands letters of the A^phabet: over the capital letters
the 9 significant figures are inscribed, ascending by integers according unto
Natural Arithmetic; viz: over A the unite place; over B the place of tens:
above C the degree of hundreds etc. ascending ten every degree or place toward
the left hand: against these upon the right hand stands as many small Roman
letters, with Arithmeticall figures over them, to show the order of Decimalls,
from an integer or unite descending toward the right hand, viz: a denoting the
unite place over which stands 1, and that under the point, representing the
place of integers: b notes the Primes, being ten times less than the former: c
stands under Seconds the third degree, or place of hundreds descending, being
ten times inferior to the last, and thus these decrease from an unite by tens,
as integers increase: and as from an Unite one ascends, the other descends,
both in the same order, and without end, or limitation, as in Numeration
continued; the Denominators in this kind of Artificial Arithmetic, are
totally to be omitted, observing to make good the places of the Numerator, unto
Primes inclusive, by prefixing ciphers, as thus, 1 for 1/10 and - 01 for 1/100
and - 001 for 1/1000: see Lib: 1. page: 3. by which means the Denominator of any
Decimall is always known being an unite with so many ciphers, as the Numerator
has places, and for finding all Decimall fractions, the following Rule
declares and illustrates with Examples.

Rule 4. A general method for reduction of vulgar fractions unto Decimalls
without any sensible error, as thus:
This differs nothing ^ really from the 1 Rule, and yet depends upon the two
last for here you are notwithstanding farther to observe the Unite place of the
Denominator (which in all questions must be made Divisor) the first figure of
the quotient shall be of the same denomination, as is the figure over it in the
Dividend; and if the Divisor extends it self so, as that the unite place shall
stand underneath the first cipher of those annexed unto the Dividend (which is
the place of Primes) the first figure of the Quotient must be of the same
denomination, viz: Primes, according to the first Example: but if in case the
unite place of the Divisor extends it self, to stand under the second cipher
annexed unto the Dividend, the first figure of the Quotient will be also
Seconds, and so must have a cipher prefixed before it: if unto the third place 2
ciphers: if to the fourth place 3 ciphers etc. because the first figure in the
Quotient will require the same denomination, as has the figure of the
Dividend, over the unite place of the Divisor, and all the other places must be
made good by prefixing of ciphers to Primes inclusive, as shall be illustrated
by these Examples.

First, 15/^6 of an ounce weight is to be made a Decimall; to 15 the Divisor
annex 4 ciphers, the sum is 150000, and that divided by 16 the Denominator,
the Quotient will be - 9375 the true Decimall required: in the second Example
3/40 will be reduced unto - 075, that is - 0^5/1000, the true Decimall.
Thirdly, 1/365 parts of a common year (that is, one day) will be made - 00274:
but this is irrational, yet without any sensible error, for it is not an unite
too much in 100000, the Denominator of the Decimall: for if it were continued
on to another place it would have been - 002739 and the next - 0027397, so this
00274/100000 is sufficient, and exact enough for any use.

A Proviso.
In case the Denominator of any vulgar fraction, shall have a cipher, or
ciphers, after the significant figure or figures, you must note what degree of
the Dividend the unite place of it will stand under; and so accordingly prefix
ciphers if any be required, as in the second Example of the last Rule, and that
done you may omit the ciphers in the Divisor: and if the Numerator of a vulgar
fraction shall have ciphers after any significant figure, as 10/17, or 100/1655
etc. you must note the figure or cipher of the Dividend that stands over the
unite place of the Divisor, as before, for the first cipher on the left hand of
those annexed is always the place of Primes, and according to that denomination
shall the first figure of the Quotient be: as for Example 10/17 the Decimall
will be 588: and the Decimall of 100/1655 shall be - 0604. but when the vulgar
fraction may be abreviated, reduce it unto the least denomination, as in Lib:
1. Sect: 2. Parag: 1. Parad: 4. and then make them Decimalls: if fractions of
fractions are required to be made Decimalls, reduce them first into a single
fraction, as Lib: 1. Sect: 2. Parag: 1. Parad: 1. which done, proceed according
to my former directions: in all vulgar fractions of what kind sover (that are
to be made Decimalls) consider what their integers are, and so accordingly make
their Decimalls, these are but fractions of fractions; as for example, a
Farthing is but, if a Penny be the integer; but of a Shilling, it is of 1/12
that is 1/48, and if a Pound sterling were the integer it will be of 1/12 of
1/20 that is 1/960, and so likewise of all other things in Number, Weight,
Measure, Time, etc. but lest I spend time without measure, this Chapter shall
be here concluded, although it be necessary in this kind of Arithmetic to
have Tables ready calculated; which by the former Rules may be easily
performed, and that in part you shall have at the end of this Section which
treats of Decimalls only: this Chapter was made the longer, whereby to make
all the others short and easy.

Sect. I. Chap. II. Addition of Decimalls with integers, fractions, and
compounded numbers.
THis Table of Addition Money Weight Measure 1 2 3 - 65 - 83333 13 Gall. - 15 -
16667 26 Gall. - 1 - 075 - 5 - 01667 - 025 - 25 - 04167 - 05 - 125 - 03750 -
00087 - 09375 - 00313 - 00009 - 03125 - 99897 1 - 15096 ^ the total the total
the total is divided into 3 parts or columns: the first consists in the number
of several Coins or pieces of money, 1 pound sterling being the integer. The
second column is of Troyweight, whereof 12 Ounces makes 1 lb. The third is of
liquid Measures consisting of whole and broken numbers together, whose integer
is a Gallon, the other Quarts, Pints, and their parts. In the first column is
propounded these several sums of money, to be added together according unto
Decimall Arithmetic, viz: 13 s. 4 d. secondly 3 s. 10 d. thirdly 2 s. 9 d.
and. the Decimalls of these, take in what order you think best, but place them
right under one another according to their degrees whether they be integers,
primes, seconds, or thirds etc. and where there are no such inferior degrees,
make points to keep the fractions orderly in their places under one another: in
this I seek the Decimalls of the greatest denominations first, as 13 s. that is
13/20, whose artificial number by the last Chapter will be found - 65, then for
3 s. or 3/20 the Decimal will be -- 15 the next 1 for 2 s. or 1/10. the
shillings thus entered make points toward the right hand, as in this unto
fifts, and so proceed unto the Pence, where first I find 4 d. whose vulgar
fraction in respect of 20 shillings is of 1/20 that is 1/60 and the Decimal
will be found - 01667 and to 5 places, next 10 d. whose fraction is of 1/20
that is 5/20 or 1/24 the Decimall - 04167. and the Decimall for 9 d. or 3/80 is
- 0375. Lastly, 3 farthings whose compound fraction is of 1/12 of 1/20 that is
3/960 or 1/320 whose Decimall is - 00313, the total of these is 99897. the
true Decimall of these particular sums, which total might have been
inscribed a shorter way, as thus, the total sum propounded is 19 s. 11 d.
whose 3 Decimalls are these; 95 secondly - 045833. thirdly - 003125- the total
of them is - 998958, which differs little from the former, being an unite
less, yet both defective, which is caused by the irrational numbers.

The second example is of Troy-weight, whereof 24 Grains makes a Penny-weight,
20 of them an Ounce, and ^2 Ounces 1 Pound: the particulars here given are
these, viz: 10 Ounces: 18 P. secondly, 2 O. 6 P. weight: thirdly, 12 P. weight:
5 G., the sum of these is 1 lb. 1 Ou: 16 P. 5 G., herein is contained one
integer; and as for the fractions, you may find their Decimalls thus: for 1
Ou: take 1/12 the Decimall - 083333 -- for 16 P. the fraction is reduced to of
1/12 that is 1/1^ the Decimall - 066667. next for 5 G. the vulgar fraction
1/1152 the Decimall is - 000168, the G. is of 1/24 of 1/20 of 1/12. that is
1/^000087 the total is 1 lb - 150955, in the same manner you may take the
particulars, as in the second Table to 5 places, whose sum will be 1 - 15096
not differing an unite from the former in the fifth place: herein you are to
note that although these were fractions given, yet their totalls do make one
integer, parted from the place of Primes with a point. The third Table is of
liquid measures, viz: Gallons, and their inferior parts to be added together,
as 13 G. 2 Q. 1 P. to be added unto 26 G. 1 Q. 0 P. the sum of these is 40
Gall^ns: but to add them according to their particulars begin first with 2 Q
that is whose Decimal is always 5. Next 1 Q. is the Decimall - 25, then 1 P.
is of, that is the Decimall. 125. then of of is 3/32 the Decimall is - 09375.
Lastly, of of is 1/32, and for the Decimall - 03125, these numbers are all
rational, and so no fraction remains. Here observe that all Tens in the place
of Primes, are integers, as was said before, and must be added as Unites (if
there be any whole numbers) or inscribed beyond the point, or Prime line, as in
the second and third Example. Addition of these Artificial numbers differs not
from the common or vulgar way, but in this, and placing them according to their
degrees. And so much for this Chapter, which is proved by Subtraction as in
Natural Arithmetic.

Sect. I. Chap. III. Subtraction of Decimalls with integers and fractions
commixt together.
If several L. 1 - 9260417 2 20 275 - 3989583 8 2875 Re. - 5270834 Re. 11 9875
L. L. 3 40 1666667 4 100 -- - 325 - 008333 Re. 39 8416667 Re. 99 991667 sums
be given to be subtracted, reduce the^ unto Totalls, and place them according
to their degrees, as in the last Chapter, and then subtract the lesser number
from the greater, and if the Decimalls are unequal, that defect may be
supplied with points, or suppose ciphers to be annexed unto them, in all things
else (except their degrees) it differs nothing from the subtraction of whole
numbers, as by these 4 Examples shall be made evident: in the first is
propounded 18 s. 6 d. 1 q. from whence 7 s. 11 d. 3 q. is to be taken in
Decimalls, which to find I have shown already, yet for your ease one more
shall be inscribed, and first for 18 s. the vulgar fraction is 9/10 the
Decimall - 9 then 6 d. is of 1/20 that is 1/40 the artificial number - 025,
then 1 q. is of 1/12 of 1/20 that is 1/960 the Decimall - 0010417. the total
-9260417: and in this manner you will find the second number to be - 3989583
which taken from the former, there will remain - 5270834. which is the
Decimall of 10 s 6 d.. the true remainder of the vulgar numbers if subtracted.
In the second Table 8 L. 5 s. 9 d is given to be subtracted from 20 L 5 s. 6 d.
the Decimall of 5 s. is - 25 of 6 d. - 025 the sum is 20 L 275. the total of
5 s. 9 d. is - 2875, so the lesser sum is 8 L. - 2875 the difference is 11 L.
- 9875 according to the Table, which is 19 s. 9 d. The third Table is 6 s. 6 d.
to be subtracted from 40 L 3 s. 4 d. the sum of the Decimalls answering 3 s.
4 d. is - 1666667 - the Decimalls belonging to 6 s. 6 d. is - 325 to which
annex ciphers or make points as in the Table, and subtract them according to
vulgar or Natural Arithmetic, the difference is 39 L. and this Decimall -
8416667 equal to 16 s. 10 d. The fourth and last Example is of 100 L. from
whence 2 d. is to be deducted, whose Decimall is - 008333: suppose ciphers or
points representing their places, and subtract the Decimall, as in the Table,
where you will find the remainder 99 L. - 991667 the Decimall of 19 s. 10 d.
answering the truth and your expectation too. This Chap: is tried by the last,
and that proved by this, as by subtraction in Natural Arithmetic, to which I
refer you for the form and reason, and for the practick part to this Chapter,
in 4 Examples.

Sect. I. Chap. IV. Multiplication of Decimalls commixt with whole, and broken
numbers.
THe increasing of Decimals 1 2 L 456 - 91875 - 15 - 25 2280 459375 456 183750
6840 - 2296875 by integers or mixed numbers differs nothing from multiplication
in Natural Arithmetic; yet 4 things in this are particularly to be observed:
first for convenience, make that number (which consists of most places) the
Multiplicand, although it be oftentimes the least in quantity. Secondly, you
must distinguish the Decimalls from the integers (if there be any) with a
point, or Prime line. Thirdly, cut off with a Prime line, so many places of the
product (numbered from the right hand toward the left) as there were fractions
both in the Multiplier and Multiplicand: all the figures from thence to the
left hand are integers, and those to the right are Decimall fractions; or this
may be done with a point, to note the place of Primes. Fourthly, if the Product
shall have fewer places than the terms given had Decimall fractions, those
places must be made good by prefixing ciphers on the left hand, this will often
happen when the places of Primes, Seconds, or Thirds shall be ciphers: all
which by Examples will be illustrated.

In the first of these two Tables there is propounded 456 L. to be multiplied
by 3 s. whose Decimall is 15, and according unto Multiplication in whole
numbers the product will be ^, that is 68 L. 4/10 or 8 s. and so will 456/1
multiplied by 3/20, which is the vulgar fraction of 3 s. the Multiplier
propounded: and in the second Example 18 s. 4 d. is to be multiplied by 5 s.
the Decimall fraction of the Multiplicand is - 91875. and 5 s. is - 25 as a
Decimall, these multiplied will produce - 2296875; and being there were 7
places in both terms, the whole Product is but a Decimall fraction, and must
have a point prefixed, as in the example; the fractions of several denominations
may be reduced unto a single fraction, as 1323/1440 or 147/160, and this unto a
Decimall as before is shown in reduction of Artificial numbers.

Example 2.
In the first of these 1 2 ^ ^ Tables, there is given a whole number with a
fraction to be multiplied by a whole number only, viz: 16 and 55 to to be
increased by 132, which is the greater number, but the fewer places, and
therefore is made Multiplier, whose product is ^, and being there are two
Decimalls in the Multiplicand 2 figures or places are cut off from the Product,
as 60: so the true product is 2184 and 6 the thing required, as in the Example,
for 60/100 and - 6/10 is all one, as was said before in the first Chap: in the
same manner, the second Example is multiplied.

Example 3.
The first of these two Tables is 1 2 ^ ^ an integer with a fraction,
multiplied by a fraction, viz: 4 and - 125 multiplied by -0039 whose product is
160875, which contains but 6 places, whereas the Decimalls of both terms have
7 places, therefore ^ prefix a cipher, and then a point, as in the Example. In
the second Table is propounded - 004 for to be multiplied by - 25, the product
is 100, and being there are 5 places in both terms, I prefix 2 ciphers, and
cut off the other two, as unnecessary and independants in this k nde of
Arithmetic, so the true product will be - 001, as in the Table: so - 25
multiplied by - 2 will be - 05, that is 05/100 equal to 1/20 in vulgar
fractions; and 25/100 and 2/10 the terms propounded were equal to and whose
product in Natural Arithmetic is also 1/20 the proposition evidently proved;
and so in any other, if the Decimalls be not irrational, howsoever they may be
tried without sensible error; and Multiplication by Division, as in Natural
Arithmetic.

Sect. I. Chap. V. Division by Decimalls with integers, and compounded numbers
divided into 6 cases or rules.
Case 1.
IN all cases of Division by Decimalls, if the Dividend be greater then the
Divisor, the Quotient will be an integer or mixed number, but if less, the
Quotient will prove a Decimall fraction.

Case 2.
Ciphers may be annexed unto the Dividend at pleasure, or as occasion shall
require, whereby the Quotient may be continued to so many places as are
necessary, according to the state or condition of the question propounded, and
so likewise in whole numbers: as if 45 were to be divided by 7, the Quotient
will be 6 3/7: but if ciphers be annexed, the Quotient may be 6 4/10 or 6
42/100, or 6 428/1000, or 6 4285/10000, or 6 42857/100000; but according to the
Rules of Decimals, the Denominator must be omitted, as was said before, and
then the artificial number stands thus, 6 - 42857 - and so may any other
whole, or broken number be divided, and the remainer (if there be any) made a
Decimall fraction.

Case 3.
All Decimalls or mixed numbers, must be divided as integers are; and if the
Divisor be an integer, or a compounded number, the first figure in the
Quotient, will be of that denomination, as is the figure of the Dividend over
the unite place of the Divisor: the Quotient found, (according unto Division in
Natural Arithmetic) separate the integers from the fractions (if there be
any) and find the quality and quantity of those broken numbers, as by the
following Examples.

Example 1.
An unite or integer here ^ is propounded for to be divided by 95 or 9 - 5 this
whole number for the Divisor, placed as the Rule requires, annex so many
ciphers unto the Unite given as you please, and so proceed unto Division, where
you will find the first point, or the unite place of the Divisor, under the
denomination of Seconds in the Dividend, and the first figure to be 1, which
according to his degree must have a cipher prefixed, or set before it to denote
its place; so the Decimall of 1 divided by 95 is - 01, or by continuing the
Division unto more places you will find this Decimall, viz: - 0105263: but if
in case the Divisor were 9 - 5 the Decimall will be - 105263, because in this
mixed number - 5 are Decimalls, and 9 is the unite place, which stands under
D^cimalls in the Dividend, from whence it takes the Denomination the first
figure being a Prime -- and 1 thus divided by 36 - 5 will be - 0274 -- or 1 by
123 - 45 the quotient will be - 008 or - 0081 -- for the figure 3, being the
unite place of the integers will stand under the place of Thi^ds in the
Dividend, and consequently the first figure in the Quotient must be of the same
denomination, and therefore has two ciphers prefixed; and so for any other this
must be observed, otherwise the Decimall degrees will be confounded.

Example 2.
Here are two compounded ^ numbers given, viz: 1655 - 21 for to be divided by
45 - 2 having set down the Dividend 1655 - 25 - and the Divisor in his place,
I find the integers of it will be twice had in the whole numbers of the
Dividend, and consequently two integers in the Quotient: annex ciphers unto the
Dividend, and then divide as if they were whole numbers, the Quotient will be
36 - 62. the mixed number required, as in the Table does appear: so if 16^845
were to be divided by 14, the Quotient will be 1 - 203. for 4 the unite place
of the Divisor will stand under 6 the integer, and upon the second remove under
8, the place of Primes, so the second figure in the Quotient must be a Decimall
fraction: if 168^45 were to be divided by 24, annex ciphers to the Dividend and
make it 168^45000, and then divide it by 24 the Quotient will be 7 - 01875. an
exact Decimall: but if 16 - 845 should be divided by 24 as before, the Quotient
will be - 701875 a Decimall only, because the unite place of the Divisor, viz:
4 will at the first demand stand under ^ 8 in this question the place of Primes.

Case 4.
If the Divisor he a Decimall fraction only, and the Dividend either a whole
or compounded number, the Quotient (in all such cases) will be Integers unto
that place inclusive where the degrees of the Divisor and Dividend are equal:
and if the Dividend shall want Decimall fractions, annex ciphers, to make their
places equal in degrees, as whether Primes, Seconds, Thirds, etc and having
found what Integers will arise in the Quotient, you may annex more ciphers to
the Dividend at pleasure, as by examples shall be made apparent.

Example 1.
The Dividend in this ^ is a mixed number, viz: 58 - 05 for to be divided by ^
which consists of 3 places, therefore annex a cipher unto the Decimall of the
Dividend which will stand thus, 58 ^ having a Decimall fraction equal in
p^aces unto the Divisor, viz: in Thirds; and the least of these degrees being
equal, there must be so many Integers in the Quotient, as the Divisor can be
contained in the Dividend, and in these cases to avoid any error from the
cipher or ciphers annexed, continue points to supply the defective place of
ciphers, as in the Example; which divide by 96, the cipher being omitted,
standing for nothing but to supply a place, and show the Decimall degrees, so
here the Quotient will be found 604 - 6875, which is apparently caused, the
Divisor not being a tenth part of 1 unite.

Example 2.
In this example the Dividend ^ is 14886, and the Divisor is - 75 which
consisting of Decimalls only, and the Dividend a whole number, viz: 14886,
there must be 2 ciphers annexed unto it, for to make the places of the Dividend
equal in degrees unto those of the Divisor, which are Primes and Seconds; this
done, divide it by - 75 the Quotient will be 19848 Integers or whole numbers,
as in the example does appear.

Case 5.
When both terms given are Decimalls, yet the Dividend the greater number; the
Quotient will be Integers, while both terms are equal in their degrees, and
all the other Decimalls, as by the Examples following.

Example 1.
In this Table there are ^ three Examples propounded, the first is - 18 for to
be divided by - 0045 both Decimalls, the Dividend - 18 is the greater number
consisting of Primes and Seconds, whereas the degrees of the Divisors
significant figures, are Thirds and Fourths, therefore annex two ciphers to the
Dividend, and then it will be - 1800 to be divided by - 45 - the Quotient will
be 40 whole numbers. In the second Example - 24102 is given to be divided by -
16: their degrees being equal in the foremost places, the first figure in the
Quotient will be an Integer, the other Decimalls, viz: 1 - 506 - in the third
Example - 1872 is given to be divided by - 24 these are both Decimall
fractions: but the Seconds in the Divisor will at first demand stand under the
Thirds of the Dividend which is a degree lower, and therefore the first figure
in the Quotient must be a Decimall, which here is 78. and so for all others in
this case.

Case 6.
In all Fractions of this kind, if the terms be Decimalls, and consisting of
equal places, and the Divisor the greater number, superscribe the Dividend as
the Numerator of a fraction; but if the places of the terms be unequal,
supply the defect of the Numerator, by annexing ciphers unto it, and so making
it a proper vulgar fraction, which reduce by the first Chap: unto a Decimall,
if required.

Example.
In this Table are contained 3 I III III ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Examples: the first is - 4
for to be divided by - 12 and that reduced to. The second Table is 48 for to be
divided by 64 which is reduced to. The third Table is 5 to be divided by 16^5,
and reduced to 1/^31, unto the Numerator of it annex 2 ciphers, and then it
will stand as a proper vulgar fraction thus ^00/3^1, these 3 Examples are thus
reduced to Decimalls, viz: unto 3333 - and to - 75 and 1/331 unto - 003. which
you may continue unto more places by the first Chap: if you please: and as for
the trial of Division in Artificial numbers, it will be proved by
Multiplication, and Multiplication by Division, as in Natural Arithmeticke,
only observing the prescribed Rules of Decimalls; and here I will put a period
to this subject, having in a breviate laid the foundation, and described a
little model of a great structure in Decimall Arithmetic, as to the theorie;
and for the practick part it is convenient to have Tables ready calculated,
which shall be the subject (God willing) of the next Chap: for your present
practice of those past, and your ease in future.

A general Rule. Any Decimall, or compounded number being given, to find the
quantity, or parts of the fraction.
By the Tables following L 4 - 990625 S 19 812500 D 9 750000 Q 3 000000 Total
4 L. 19 s. 9 d. this question may be answered: but in case you have no such
Tables, the f actionall parts may be as exactly found, and but with little
trouble by this general Rule: the Integers of any compound number being known,
the quantity of any Decimall fraction will be discovered, as in vulgar
fractions by Natural Arithmetic, as Lib: 1. Sect: 2. Parag: 1. Paradig: 10.
and so here, multiply the Decimall by the known parts of the Integer, and from
the product out off so many places as there be ciphers in the Denominator, for
the Unite divides nothing, as in this Example where there is propounded 4 L.
and this Decimall, viz: - 990625 (which are parts of a pound sterling:) these
multiplied by 20 the product is 19 - 812500, that is 19 S. the Decimall
fraction consisting of 6 places, whose Denominator is 1000000; then descend
unto the next denomination which are Pence, 12 the Integer, so 812500
multiplied by 12 produces 9 D. remaining - 750000, which multiplied by 4 will
produce - 3 Q. and nothing remaining, the true sum required: and if any thing
shall remain after the least denomination, you may cast it by, or make a
Decimall fraction of it, as you please, and be contented with this; a little to
the Ingenious being sufficient.

Sect. I. Chap. VI. Tables of the chief Coins and Weights, with the long dry
and liquid concave measures commonly used in England.
Of English Coins.
THE least 1 Farthing makes 1 Farthing 2 Farthings 1 Halfpenny 4 Farthings 1
Penny 4 Pence 1 Groat 3 Groats 1 Shilling 20 Shillings 1 Pound sterling
Fraction, or part of our English money is a Farthing, from whence these Coins in
scribed do proceed (as by this Table) unto 1 Pound sterling the Integer; these
are subdivided into diverse other parts, necessary to be known, but unnecessary
for the present purpose, some of these being superabundant: for 1 Shilling
being 1/20 of the Integer, the fraction of one Farthing will be written as
thus, of 1/12 of 1/20 which are easily reduced to a single fraction as 2/960.
Lib: 1. Sect: 2. Parag: 1. Parad: 1. and if a compound fraction be made of all
these parts it will be thus, viz: of of of of 1/20, which if reduced will be
1/960 as before: the shortest way is best, yet being there may be use of these
parts, they were purposely inserted: thus one Halfpenny is 1/24 of 1/20, that
is 1/480 and one Groat, of 1/20 that is 1/60: and so for any other Coin, whose
parts of the Integer are known.

Of Troy-weight.
1 Grain of wh: makes in weight 1 Grain. 24 Grains 1 Penny weight 20 Penny
weight 1 Ounce 12 Ounces 1 Pound-Troy 14 Ounces 12 penny Troy 1
Pound-Averdupois

These are in use for the weighing of Bread, Electuaries, Gold and Silver;
whereof a Grain is the least, and in former times 32 Grains of Wheat was
accounted a Penny-weight, Vid: Stat: de compositione ponderum, 51 Hen: 3.31
Edw: 1. and 12 Hen: 7. But times are altered so well as we, and now 24 Grains
is reduced unto a Penny-weight, whereof 20 such Grains did make an Ounce Troy,
as now they do, but termed Pence until Queen Elizabeth's reign, who changed
the value of those Pence unto 3 Pence the piece, as now they stand: so a Grain
of Wheat as a fraction of a fraction to 1 Pound-Troy the Integer, will stand
thus, viz: 1/24 of 1/29 of 1/12^ that is by reduction 1/5760 parts.

Averdupois weight.
24 Grains of wheat 1 Scruple. 3 Scruples make 1 Dragme. 8 Dragmes make 1
Ounce, Averdup: 16 Ounces make 1 Pound Averdup: 14 Pound Averdup: 1 Stone. 2
Stone, or 28 lb Of an Hundred. 4 Stone, or 56 lb a Hundred. 8 Stone 112 lb 1
Hundred weight. 5 Hundred lb 1 Hogshead. 10 Hundred lb 1 Butt or Pipe. 20
Hundred lb 1 Tun or Load.

This is called Civil or Merchants weight, with which is weighed all gross
commodites and Merchandises, ( Malynes lex Market: page: 49. and 252.) of these
there are two kinds, viz: the lesser and the greater, these proceed originally
from a Grain of Wheat, (Georgius Agricola de pond: and men's:) and so in
several parts and denominations they increase to a pound the lesser weight, by
which are sold commodities by retaile, as Butter, Cheese, Flesh, Tallow, Wax,
and what has the name of Garbell, and whence issues Wast or Refuse; of this a
Pound is the Integer, and the least of the greater weight, whose Integer is 1
C, that is 112 lb, and as fractions they may be thus expressed, the lesser weight
proceeding from a grain of Wheat, viz: 1/24 of of of 1/16 which if reduced is
1/9216. and the greater weight proceeding from a pound thus 1/14 of of of, that
is, if reduced 1/1^2: or thus ^/14 of which is the same, 1 stone being part of
a hundred.

Long or radical measures.
4 Barley corns 1 Inch or finger. 4 Fingers or Inches 1 Palm or hand. 12
Inches or 3 Palms 1 Foot. 18 Inches or 1 Feet 1 Cube. 3 Feet or 2 Cubes 1
Yard. 3 Feet and 9 Inches 1 Elle. 5 Feet 1 Pace Geometrical. 6 Feet or 2 yards
1 Fathom. 5 Yards or 16 Feet 1 Perch or Pole. 40 Perches 132 Paces 1 Furlong.
8 Furlongs 320 Pole 1 Mile English. 3 Miles 1 League.

These are named long or radical, by reason the superficies of diverse things
are measured by the Squares composed of their sides, commonly called Roots
(vide 33 Edw: 1. and 25 Eliz:) in Geometry: the least of these is a Barley
corn in breadth, being of an Inch, from whence all the other measures are
derived, as in the Table: the Integers of these are Feet, Yards, Paces, Poles,
etc. the fractions (as to the greatest denomination) may be thus expressed, of of
of of 2/11 of 3/40 of of ^/3; these fractions reduced into a single fraction
will be 1/760320 which may be made out of fewer compositions, or more: for
these proceed from a Barley corn, and so to a Palm, a Foot, a Yard, a Pole, a
Furlong, a Mile, and a League, the greatest denomination here.

Of concave dry measures.
2 Pints or pounds 1 Quart. 2 Quarts 1 Pottle. 2 Pottles 1 Gallon. 2 Gallons 1
Peck. 4 Peckes 1 Bushel Land measure. 5 Peckes 1 Bushel Wat. measure. 4
Bushels 1 Coombe. 2 Coombes 1 Quarter. 4 Quarters 1 Chalder. 5 Quarters 1 Tun
or Wey.

These measures are derived from a Pint, which of Wheat is supposed to weigh 1
pound Troy, from hence proceeding unto Gallons, 8 of them making 1 Bushel,
usually called Land measure: and 5 pecks do make 1 bushel of Water measure; 5
quarters is the greatest denomination, containing 1 Tun, Wey, or sized Load:
the Measures here proceeding from a Pint, may be expressed in broken numbers
or fractions of fractions thus, of of of of of of of, and these fractions by
reduction will be made a single fraction, as 1/512 if 1 quarter were the
Integer: but if a Tun, it must be more, and then it will be 1/2560, the
fraction required proceeding from a Pint unto a Wey: by these are measured
dry commodities, viz: all kinds of Grain, Salt, Lime, Sea-coale, etc.

Of concave liquid measures.
2 Pints 1 Quart. 2 Quartes 1 Pottle. 2 Pottles 1 Gallon 8 Gallons 1 Firkin, of
Ale, Soape or Hering. 9 Gallons 1 Firkin of Beer. 2 Firkins 1 Kilderkin. 2
Kilderkins 1 Barrel, 36 Gallons. 42 Gallons 1 Tierce. 63 Gallons 1 Hogshead. 2
Hogsheads 1 Pipe or Butt. 2 Butts, 252 Gallons 1 Tun.

By these all liquid substances are measured, proceeding from a Pint unto a
Tun: the Integer containg 252 Gallons or 2016 Pints, which will be expressed
by fractions of fractions thus ascending by these particulars, excepting the
Ale Firkin, Kilderkin, and Pipe, viz: of of of 1/9 of of ^/7 of of which is
12/24192, or reduced 1/2016, the fraction made of a Pint, and a Tun the
Integer.

A Table of Time.
60 Seconds makes 1 Minute. 60 Minutes 1 Hour. 24 Hours 1 Day natural. 7
Days 1 Week. 4 Weeks 1 Month. 13 Months, 1 Day, and 6 Hours 1 vulgar
Year. Or 365 D. 5 H. 48 M. and 55 S. The magnitude of a common Year.

This is a Table of Time (but not of these) from hence the Worlds infancy
derives a pedigree, with a continual succession of Days, Months, and Years
unto this declining Age, proceeding here from a Second, and terminated with a
Year, wherein I will conclude, being there is a time for all things. I could
have derived these from Thirds and Fourths, etc. but do conceive Seconds are
sufficient for common use, 60 making a Minute, as in the Table, not perfectly
true, errors increasing as the times; an Hour unlimited in humane
understanding, and is only known to GOD, the sole Creator of all: as I will
instance in a Natural day, generally conceived for to consist of 24 Hours
just, which opinion is reprehensible in humane sense, and found to contain 57
Seconds more, yet one Day not equal unto another, some being greater, and
others less, for which I have inserted (at the bottom of the Table) the
magnitude of a common Intercalary year, according to the opinion of diverse
learned men: the fractions are not here subscribed, being written as the last,
and so pronounced, their terms respectively considered: besides the year is
also divided into 12 Solar months, each containing 30 equal parts, and by some
into 30 days 5/12 or 10 hours, which is 4 seconds, and more to little; so
fearing I should write too much of this, and consequently lose time, I will
here conclude this Chapter and proceed to the next.

Sect. I. Chap. VII. Of Decimall Tables calculated to 7 places, according to
the fractions before, in Number, Weight, and Measure, with Time made apt for
use in this kind of Artificial Arithmetic.
I. The Decimall Tables of reduction of English Coins unto sevenths are these.
An explanation.

THis Decimall Table (of English Coins) is divided into 4 columns, or
denominations, and each of those in two: the first of them contains a row of
Shillings, descending from 19 s. unto 1 s. and from 11 d. unto 1 d. and from 3
farthings unto 1 q. Lastly, from 3 Mites unto one M inclusive, against every
one of these stands their respective ENGLISH COINS.
Shillings. Pence. 19 95 11 0458333 18 9 10 0416667 17 85 9 0375 16 8 8 0333333
15 75 7 0291667 14 7 6 025 13 65 5 0208333 12 6 4 0166667 11 55 3 0125 10 5 2
0083333 9 45 1 0041667 8 4 Farthings. 7 35 3 003125 6 3 2 0020833 5 25 1
0010417 4 2 Mites. 3 15 3 0007812 2 1 2 0005208 1 05 1 0002604 Decimalls: as
for Farthings, they were never lawful money of England, yet each of those is
subdivided into 4 Mites or lesser parts, for more exactness in some questions,
one of these being a fraction to the Integer, thus expressed, of of 1/12 of 1/20
parts of a Pound sterling, which if reduced is 1/3840 whose Decimall will be
0002604, according to the 1 Chap. and 4 Rule of this Book, and all the rest may
be discovered in the same manner: or more compendiously by Multiplication, into
all the other parts ascending; but then calculate the first Decimall in more
places than you intend for the Table, otherwise you may commit errors, and
those beget many more: As for example, the Decimall of 1 Mite is 0002604, which
multiplied by 4 will produce 0010416, which is too little: 1 Farthing being
0010417, so Reduction may be sometimes necessary to regulate your Table, where
the Decimalls are long continued. The Tables thus made, the Decimall for 18 S.
will be expressed with a Prime only, viz: 9 ^ and 19 S. with a Prime and a
Second, as ^ and 6 S. 8 D. thus: for the 6 S. with ^ and for 8 D. 0333333 the
sum 3333333 -- and 19 S. 11 D. 3 Q. 3 M. for 19 S. write ^ for 11 D. ^ for 3
Q. 003125. and for 3 M. 0007812, the total is 9997395, which is true unto an
unite in 10,000,000, the Integer of a pound sterling, according unto these
Tables, and the Rules of Decimalls: one Mite being 0002604, which 9997395 wants
of the Integer, and an unite more in the seventh place. I dilated this, to
abreviate the rest: which observe diligently with the next.

II. The Decimall Tables of reduction of Troy weights, unto 7 places are these.
The construction and use of this Table.
This Table of Troy weight is framed as was the former, according to the 4
Rule, and 1 Chap: of this Book: or having discovered the least Decimall number,
you may find the others by Addition or Multiplication: or having found the
greatest number, you may find any of the other numbers by Subtraction or
Division, yet care must be had in it, especially from those which are irrational:
As for example, in the Decimalls of 14 Penny w. wherein 0041667 and
Troy-weight. Ounces. 11 9166667 10 8333333 9 75 8 6666667 7 5833333 6 5 5
4166667 4 3333333 3 25 2 1666667 1 0833333 Penny-weight. 19 0791667 18 075 17
0708333 16 0666667 15 0625 14 0583333 13 0541667 12 05 11 0458333 10 0416667 9
0375 8 0333333 7 0291667 6 025 5 0208333 4 0166667 3 0125 2 0083333 1 0041667
Grains. 23 00^9931 22 0038194 21 0036458 20 0034722 19 0032986 18 003125 - 17
0029514 16 0027778 15 0026042 14 0024306 13 0022569 12 0020833 11 0019097 10
0017361 9 0015625 8 0012889 7 0012153 6 0010417 5 0008681 4 0006244 3 0005108 2
0003472 1 0001736 0541667, that is the Decimall for 1 Penny and 13
Penny-weight, whose sum is 0583334 which should be but 0583333- or the
Decimal of 7 Penny-weight which is 0291667, this doubled is 0583334 as before:
and the like will be in Subtraction or Division; as for the use in setting down
a sum, as admit these, viz: 11 O. 19 P. 23 G. thus 9166667 and 0791667 and
0039931: the total is 9998265, a Decimall expressing the parts required; this
wants but 1 Grain of an Ounce Troy, which in the Table is 0001736, and added to
the former sum it will be an Integer, and an Unite more in 10000000 as
10000001, and so for any other in this Table.

III. The Decimall Tables of reduction of Averdupois little weight unto
sevenths, are these.
Averdupois-weight. Ounces. 15 9375 14 875 13 8125 12 75 11 6875 10 625 9 5625
8 5 7 4375 6 375 5 3125 4 2^ 3 1875 2 125 1 0625 Drachmes. 7 0546875 6 046875 5
0390625 4 03125 3 0234375 2 015625 1 0078125 Scruples. 2 0052083 1 0026042
Grains. 23 0024957 22 0023872 21 0022786 20 0021701 19 0026616 18 0019531 17
0018446 16 0017361 15 0016276 14 0015191 13 0014106 12 0013021 11 0011936 10
0010851 9 0009766 8 0008681 7 0007595 6 000651 5 0005425 4 000434 3 0003255 2
000217 1 0001085

The use of this Table of Averdupois little weight.
The construction of these I have explained in the two former Tables, and the
use of them little differing from the others, only in the fractionall parts,
whereof this consists in Ounces, Drachmes, Scruples, and Grains, and a weight
by these will be thus expressed: As for example, 8 lb 15 O. 7 D. 2 S. 23 G. the
Decimal in the Table for 15 O. is 9375 for 7 Dr: ^ for 2 S. 0052083, and for 23
Gr: 0024957 the total is 9998915, and the whole number thus inscribed 8 lb
9998915, which fraction wants but 1 Gr: to make it 9 lb, to the former
fraction, add the Decimal of 1 Gr: which is 0001085, the total will be
10,000,000 the unite or Integer unto these Decimalls of 7 places.

IV. The Decimall Tables of reduction of Averdupois great weight, unto 7 places
are these.
The great weight. The Stone or 14 lb 7 875 6 75 5 625 4 5 3 375 2 25 1 125 lb
Pound w. 13 1160714 12 1071429 11 0982143 10 0892857 9 0803571 8 0714286 7 0625
6 0535714 5 0446429 4 0357143 3 0267857 2 0178572 1 0089286

This Table of Averdupois great weight explained.
As for the framing of these numbers I refer you unto the first or second
Table, and as for the use of this it will not differ from any of the former,
only observing 8 Stone, and 112 lb, to be the Integer, 14 lb makes one Stone:
and 1 lb the least Decimall fraction of this gross weight: and by these
artificial numbers 3 C. 7 St. 13 lb. is thus expressed: the 7 St. being 875.
and the Decimall for 13 lb is 1160714, the sum of these is 9910714, or in all
3 C. 9910714, the number required; this wants but one pound of 4 C weight, then
add the Decimall of 1 lb to it (that is, 0089286) the sum is 10000000 which
is 112 lb. to this add 3 C. the total will be 4 C. the thing required, viz:
40,000,000.

V. Decimall Tables of reduction of long or radical measures from a Foot unto
1/10 part of an Inch, and the artificial numbers to 7 places.
The use of this Long measures. 1 Foot or 12 Inches. Tenths of inches. 11
9166667 9/10 075 10 8333333 8/10 0666667 ^ 9 75 7/10 0583333 8 6666667 6/10 05
7 5833333 5/10 0416667 6 5 4/10 0333333 5 4166667 3/10 025 4 3333333 2/10
0166667 3 25 1/10 0083333 2 8666667 1 0833333 Table.

This Table of long Measures consists of Inches, subdivided into ten parts, the
Integer to these is 1 Foot, or 12 Inches, their Decimalls are thus to be
subscribed, as in this example, 2 Feet, 11 Inches and 1^/20, the Decimall of 11
Inches is 9166667, under which place the artificial number of 9/10 which is
075, the sum of these (according unto the second Chapter in addition of
Decimalls) will be 9916667 the true number of those fractions; which wants 1/10
of a foot, then add the Decimal of 1/10 unto it, that is 0083333, the sum is
10,000,000 an Integer, so the total is 3 Feet, and the sum of 9/10 and 1/10
will be 0833333, the Decimall number of an Inch, as in the Table appears.

VI. Decimall Tables of reduction, of long Measures, in Yards, Else, and their
parts unto 7 places.
In this Table is Long measures in Yards and Else. Nails. 3 1875 2 125 1 0625
Quarters. Quarters. 3 75 046875 2 5 ^/2 03125 1 25 015625 expressed long
Measures, as Yards and the parts, the greatest is or 27 Inches, each Quarter is
commonly subdivided into four lesser parts, usually termed Nails, each
containing inches 2, and these Nails are again divided into 4 parts, with
artificial numbers appropriated to them, and are thus expressed, viz: for Y.
75 for 2 N. 125 -- for N. or Quarter 015625 -- and thus are expressed (by the
same Decimalls) all the parts of an Elle: As for example, 3 E. 3 Q. 3 N. and.
the Decimalls to them are these, viz: 75 -- and 1875 -- and 046875 the total
984375 -- in all 3 Else 984375. but here note that one Nail is understood
1/16 part, being of both of Yard and Elle.

VII. Decimall Tables of reduction of long measures in Statute pearches down to
6 inches in 7 places.
By this little Table Long measures foot or 6 inches. 32 9696969 16 4848485 31
9393939 15 4545454 30 9090909 14 4242424 29 8787879 13 3939393 28 8484848 12
3636363 27 8181818 11 3333333 26 7878788 10 3030303 25 7575757 9 2727273 24
7272727 8 2424242 23 6969697 7 2121212 22 6666667 6 1818182 21 6363636 5
1515151 20 6060606 4 1212121 19 5757576 3 0909091 18 5454545 2 0606061 17
5151515 1 030303- are found the Decimall fractions of a Statute Pole or Perch,
containing 16 feet, whereof 33 half feet makes the Integer; so the Decimall of
1 is 030303 -- and that of 8 feet, or 16 halfs is 4848485; and of 32 is
9696969, which if added with an Unite unto the Decimall of 1, v z: 030303 --
will be 1000000 the Integer, if or or were required, their Decimalls will be
expressed generally, as in all other fractions of this nature, viz: 5 or 25 or
75: their use will be the same; if less parts were required, divide the last
by the parts according to the Rules prescribed: as admit to an inch, the
Decimall will be 0050505 being but of the last Decimall in the Table.

VIII. Decimall Tables of reduction of dry concave measures in Bushells,
Pecks, and Quarts, to 7 places.
Dry measures. Bushels. 3 325 2 0625 5 0195313 7 875 2 25 1 03125 4 015625 6
75 1 125 Quarts. 3 0117188 5 625 Pecks. 7 0273438 2 0078125 4 5 3 0937 6
0234375 1 0039063

An explanation of this Table of dry concave Measures.
Here you have the Decimall fractions of Bushels, Pecks, and Quarts; whereof 8
Bushels or 1 Quarter is the Integer; the greatest Decimall (which is 7
Bushells) is 875; and that of a Quart (which is the least denomination here) is
0039063, the half of it will be 0019531, the Decimal of 1 Pint, if it be
required, and may easily descend lower if you please.

IX. Decimall Tables of reduction of liquid concave measures in Quarts, Pintes,
and Quarterns to 7 places.
The use of this Table Liquid measures. Quarts. Quarterns. 3 75 3 09375 2 5 2
0625 1 25 1 03125 Pint. 1 125 differs nothing from the former, either in
construction or use; the Integers of this is a Gallon, the greatest
denomination here is 3 Quarts, whose Decimall is 75 -- the least is a quartern,
or part of 1 Pint its Decimall 03125, and from these a greater or a lesser may
be calculated.

X. Decimall Tables of reduction of hours or degrees, in minutes and seconds
unto 7 places.
A Table of Minutes unto Hours or Degrees. A Table of Seconds continued to one
Minute. M. M. S. S. 59 9^33333 29 4833333 59 0163889 29 0080556 58 9666667 28
4666667 58 0161111 28 0077778 57 95 27 45 57 0158333 27 0075 56 9333333 26
4333333 56 0155556 26 0072222 55 9166667 25 4166667 55 0152778 25 0069444 54 9
24 4 54 015 24 0066667 53 8833333 23 3833333 53 0147222 23 0063889 52 8666667
22 3666667 52 0144444 22 0061111 51 85 21 35 51 0141667 21 0058333 50 8333333
20 3333333 50 0138889 20 0055556 49 8166667 19 3166667 49 0136111 19 0052778 48
8 18 3 48 0133333 18 005 47 7833333 17 2833333 47 0130556 17 0047222 46 7666667
16 2666667 46 0127778 16 0044444 45 75 15 25 45 0125 15 0041667 44 7333333 14
2333333 44 0122222 14 0038889 43 7166667 13 2166667 43 0119444 13 0036111 42 7
12 2 42 0116667 12 0033333 41 6833333 11 1833333 41 0113889 11 0330556 40
6666667 10 1666667 40 0111111 10 0027778 39 65 9 15 39 0108333 9 0025 38
6333333 8 1333333 38 0105556 8 0022222 37 6166667 7 1166667 37 0102778 7
0019444 36 6 6 1 36 01 6 0016667 35 5833333 5 0833333 35 0097222 5 0013889 34
4666667 4 0666667 34 0094444 4 0011111 33 55 3 05 33 0091667 3 0008333 32
5333333 2 0333333 32 0088889 2 0005555 31 5166667 1 0166667 31 0086111 1
0002778 30 5 30 0083333

An explanation of this Table in time.
This Table consists of equal parts of an hour or a degree, each being
divided into 60 minutes, and each of them again into 60 seconds, so the least
fraction here is 1/60 of 1/60, that is 1/3600 whose Decimall is 0002778, the
artificial number representing 1 second of an hour or of one degree; the rest
being discovered, as by the 1 Chap: of this Book, and the Decimalls of 59 S. is
given to be added unto 59 M. whose Decimalls are these 0163889 and 9833333 the
sum is 9997222 the Decimall for 59 M. and 59 S. to which add 000277 S.
(representing 1 second) the total will be 10,000,000 denoting the Integer,
which is either an hour or a degree, by which I have here come unto an end of
this Section, and so in time will put a period to my labors, and your trouble.

A Conclusion.
Benevolent Supervisors,
BY the persuasion of some friends I have presented you here with 3 Books in
the Art of Numbers, containing variety of difficult Questions, and doubtful
Rules, confirmed and made facile by ocular demonstrations; how well I know not,
that is referred to your better judgments, unto whom I do appeal for justice,
against all capricious heads, and sinister calumniatore, en^all'd upon the
times: This little Volume now attends your pleasures, not for an applaudie, but
approbation, hoping you will rather err in the clemency of mercy, than in the
rigor of justice, in which we are all lost: the greatest faults in the Book
you will find at the end corrected, and inserted in a Table by themselves, not
written on the front in capital characters, but, as men carry their crimes
behind them, in a small print: I hope you will not add to the errata, this
being in the nonage, and if born with so happy a fate as to live unto maturity,
by a second impression the errors of the infancy shall be expunged, whereof
some of them will be fathered upon me it is like, although I like them not: but
since errors are originally incident to all humane race, I hope you will with
humanity cover or excuse them so far as you can, without blemish to your
reputations.

The chiefest, and most useful Rules (I hope) you see explicitly delivered,
and so scientifically as my Genius could direct, or dictate to my judgment, and
those delineated by Geometrical demonstrations, extracted from the original
and principles of Art, derived from precedent Ages; yet some (perhaps) will
censure it in particulars, as the Cobbler who questioned Zeuxis about a picture
exposed to the public view, in which Table the figure of a man was
pourtraicted so artificially to life, as there wanted only motion to deceive
the Spectators; the Cobbler found fault with his shoes, and according to the
skill in his own trade made it apparent, which satisfied many of the beholders,
insomuch that the man presumed from thence to give his judgment upon the whole
figure: at which, Zeuxis reprehended him, saying, Suitor, ne ultra crepidam.

Some will make queries, wherefore I used Paragraphs and Paradigma's, for
Chapters and Examples, which I have done for variety and distinction only,
having composed many Books of Mathematical Sciences: others will ask
wherefore I treated of this subject, when the Stationers shops seem oppressed
with them already: to this the Cobbler might reply, another man's shoe may not
fit me so well; as for my Arithmetic, I intend not to teach them how to cast
figures, or to throw others by, since some men's works I cannot with reason
object against, and as for others, I will not, out of humanity, and the
principles of morality, my condition being the same, subject to err as much as
they, or more.

As for this Arithmetic I confess it is old, and so is all what these later
Ages have produced in this kind, yet in respect of method it is new to the
World a^ day (so far as I know) when the model was first cast by me,
pourtrayd by Geometry, in a sympatheticall union betwixt Number and Magnitude,
by Art founded upon Reason, supported by Axioms like Pillars in Architecture:
the cause I writ it, was that diversity of capacities and understandings, will
require diversity of ways to approach their apprehensions; I have seen
ingenious men, and good Arithmeticians, who knew well the practique part, and
almost quite ignorant of the speculative, or any reason what they did, nor
satisfied by the writings or dictates of others, which if I have explicated to
their understandings, and my endeavors prove acceptable, then are my labors
recompensed, my self pleased, my Book graced, I obliged and encouraged to
expose my private Manuscripts unto a public view, according to my first
intentions and sole scope, which is to the glory of God and benefit of my
Country: but if the candid Lectors shall think this too much, I shall be
disanimated, and conceive so of my labors too, and rest.

Being wearied with attending each proof from the Press, and some printed off
before I could peruse them, from hence perplexed with faults, solicitous and
doubtful of a civil entertainment, coming forth in a blustering distempered
Age, I was easily persuaded by the Stationer not to hazard any more at sea in
this bottom, which made me put a period here abruptly, leaving out many Rules
both in civil and rural affairs although finished, which I intend quickly to
adventure forth, if this makes a prosperous voyage, and the public voice prove
auspicious gales to fill my sails, I shall be then encouraged to weigh Anchor
again, fraught with customary Rules in Commerce and Trade, both for Sea and
Land, viz: Society in equation of payments; of Barter, Tare, Neat, Cloffe,
Trett, Reductions of Coins, Weights and Measures, with Exchanges,
Cambi^-Maritimo, Factorage, Interest and Discount of money: diverse Questions
erected upon Geometrical foundations, as the dimension of each Superficies and
solid Body: as Board, Wainscott, Land, Circles, Timber, Stone, Cylinders,
Pyramids, Cones, Segments, Gauging of Vessels, Spheres and Globes, to find the
weight of Bullets, with sundry Military propositions.

I have also finished diverse Manuscripts, as Algebraicall and Logarithmecall
Arithmetic with their applications in there books, viz: Geometry, Altimetrie,
Geographie, Cosmographie, Astronomy, Navigation, both by right Lined and
Sphericall Triangles, with exact solutions to their propositions by addition
only, and all questions in the Sphericall Triangles by two operations at most,
without Rules or Theoremes: besides all these I have composed sundry
Manuscripts of several subjects, expecting to see what hospitality this finds
in the mean time.

Farewell.
FINIS.
Errata Typographica emendata: Lib. I.
PRoeme page 2. line 13. read, with the dictates and p. 9. l. 4. commonly known
to

p. 5. l. 19. r. they are p. 6. l 18. r. following p. 12, l. 12. for a or.
nothing p. 25. l. 19. r. 1 Acre p. 28. l. 12. for 91 r. 81 p. 32. line 17. r.
then p. 33. in the Table 730 1460 r. 730 1460 p. 36. l, 23. for 800 lb r. 8 C.
in the table 5376 896 r. 5376 896 p. 44 in the table 2000 40 r. 2000 40 p 45.
in the table ^ r. ^ p. 55. l. 21. r. found 10 p. 73 l. 7. r. fraction p. 74. l.
19. r (...) p. 77. l. 20. r. so 12 p. 78. table 3. r. 22 p. 86. l. 14. r. and p
90 l. 14. r. Sect: 2. and l. 23. r. 3 p. 95. in the table r. 56/320 p. 97. l.
15. r. as p. 104. l. 23: or r. and p. 108. l. 16. r. 4/5

Lib. II. Page 144. l. 4. r. prefix: in the Table r. 1728 p. 181. l. 17 and 18,
r 26. 18 and l. 20. r. 2 and 18 p. 188. l. 22. r. extreme p. 194 l. 1 and. 3.
r. Multipliers for Dividers. p. 196. l. 7. r. 445, or 450 p. 203. for 9 squares
r. two p. 209. r. Rule of 3 p. 211. l. 19. r. 63/8 p. 213. l. 24. r. of 45 p.
262. l 4. four dele p. 268. r. Knights offered p. 315. l. 7. such grains dele


