GOOD NEWS From the TRAIN BANDS AND AVXILIARS.

Being a true Relation of their meeting with the Lord Generals Forces, and what
exceeding joy was expressed at that instant on both sides.

Likewise the number of the Forces which are so happily met, and with what
cheerfulness they go forward, courageously chasing the enemy before them.

Also a true Narration of the raising the siege at Exeter: and the prosperous
proceedings, successful skirmishes, and good estate and condition of
Gloucester.

With the manner of the Lord Generals marching through the Countries.

Sent from a Soldier there, bearing date September. 2. and writ upon his knee
without doors, wa^^ing house room, lest he (losing that opportunity) had kept
his friends from the truth.

This is l^^enced and Entered in the Hall-Book according to Order.

Pr^nted at London by Bernard Alsop. 1643.

THE TRVE COPY Of a LETTER Sent from his Excellencies Army by an Auxiliar to
his Master in London.
Loving Master,
MY humble service remembered unto you, and to my Mistress, with my love to
Master Newby, and to all my fellow servants. Sir, I had writ unto you before
now, but only I had no news, and now having so convenient a Messenger as this
Bearer, I thought good, as it is my duty, to write unto you, and to inform you
of what News we have in our Army, which is as follows.

Yesterday, being Friday, was the first day that we met with my Lord General
with all his Forces, and our five Regiments: We met upon a place called Byards
Green, where was a gallant show both of Horse and Foot, with extraordinary
great rejoicing: And indeed my Lord General has a gallant and stately Army of
Horse, which amounts to the number of six thousand complete, and more Foot,
so that upon our Muster we were conceived to be betwixt sixteen or seventeene
thousand at the least, besides a brave train of good Artillery. It is not in
my power or ability to express the triumphant rejoicing and ex^raordinary
shouting that was expressed at the time of our meeting. And now my Lord
General and his Army are marching on the one side, and we on the other side of
the Country, but not so far distant one from another, but that we are
always within two miles one of another at night.

Upon our march yesterday there came news throughout to all our several
Companies in the Armies, that the siege is raised before Exeter for certain:
besides, Gloucester is in very good condition, for they have fired the enemies
Salleries, and scattered their foot in abundance, insomuch that it is as much
as the horse can do to keep up the foot to maintain the siege, lest they
should run away. These are the very words that the Messenger related
concerning these two places.

At this present we are in Oxfordshire, some fifty miles from London, but do
not know certainly whether we shall march for Oxford or no; but we hope we
shall forthwith hasten for Gloucester.

We have already coasted all Buckinghamshire round, and I think so we shall
do all the other Countries as we go; for though as yet we are but about some
fifty miles distant from London, we have marched at least threescore and ten
miles, for we cannot march directly straight forward; but yet nevertheless,
thanks be to God, our enemies do fly before us wheresoever we come.

This day it is supposed that my Lord General will set upon Banbury, for we
are not above five miles from it.

We have not laid still but one day since we came forth, so that if far
travel, and hard fare, and no lodging would make us Gentlemen, then we should
be Gentlemen presently. But the Lord be praised we take comfort in it. We hope
to see Gloucester by the next Tuesday at night, and are very confident through
the aid and assistance of Almighty God) to raise the Siege with a great deal
of courage.

All our neighbors, God be praised, are in very good health. And so with my
humble service remembered unto you I rest,

From Soulden in Oxfordshire this 2. of September. 1643. Your faithful servant,
Anthony VValby.
I pray you pardon my bad writing, for I had never a house to write in, but
upon my knee. We look to fight with our Enemy every day.



FINIS.

