Peace, and No Peace: Or, A Pleasant Dialogue Between Phil-eirenus, A
Protestant, A lover of Peace. And Philo Polemus, A Separatist, An Incendiary of
War, Suitable to the times.
By R^chard Williams. Master in Arts of the famous University of Cambridge, and
Preacher in London at Saint Martins Vintrey.
Psalm 123 6,7. Oh pray for the ^eace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
thee. Peace be with^n thy wa^^ and plenteous^esse within thy Palaces, says
Phil-eirenus.

Psalm. 48.22. No peace says my God to the wicked, says Philo-Polemus


Phil-eirenus begins. WEll met good brother Philo-Polemus, you are very early
here this morning, you look very cheerfully! Me thinks the alacrity of your
countenance divines some sudden Accommodation between the King and His
Parliament. What news at Westminster, Is it Peace?


Phil-Pol. I saw indeed a pretended Petition for Peace (this day) with great
acclamations presented to the High Court of Parliament by the City Cavellero^
deceiving and deluding many Orthodox Schismatics, fostered and countenanced by
a company of upstart malignants, that never contributed any thing to the
Parliament, but have been averse to all proceedings: And because the wisdom
of the Parliament had agreed upon an Order for the sessing of the twentieth
part of every man's estate toward the charge of this war, these malignants
therefore (having no resolution to ruin themselves) have raised a party within
the City among themselves, that so they might save their estates, and
contribute nothing to the public weal: that although there may be something
comprised in the petition, hat (in these distracted times) may be tolerable;
yet in that it proceeded from the Academicke malignants at Oxford, even that
alone is sufficient to make it contemptible.


Phil-eirenus. Thou seem to me [ Brother Philo-Polemus] to be too censorious
and prejudicate of the actions and intentions of other men. What though the
religious, loyal, and true-hearted Protestants, in and about the Cities of
London and West minster (in these deplorable times) have petitioned for an
accommodation of peace, does it follow therefore that they are malignants?
Nothing less: For if you rightly understand the term [Malignant] you shall
easily find that it fetches its derivation from malus and ignis, an evil fire;
so that Malignant and Incendiary seem to co-incide in one, as twins borne at
one conception, speaking one and the self same thing: it must of necessity
therefore be granted, that the God of peace having descended into our hearts,
which moved us to carry the petition for peace in our hands hoping ere long (by
the propitiousnesse of Heaven) to bring the Olive Branch of peace in our
mouths [the long wished for accommodation between our gracious King and his
grave Senate] that we are cleate from that scandalous and malicious aspersion
of Malignants or sncendiaries, broached by those who wish ill to Syon, that are
professed enemies to the peace and tranquillity of our Jerusalem, that aim at
nothing more then the overture and subversion of the wholesome Doctrine and
discipline of the Church, and the final extermination of a quiet and peaceable
government from the very bounds and borders of the kingdom, sailing from the
calm Ocean, the still waters, the Crystal streams of the sacred and
eternal Word of God, so long professed and maintained by the Protestant
Tenets, exposing themselves to the dangerous shelves of schism and sedition,
dashing upon the rock of their own pride and presumption, being tossed up and
down with the variable wind of every aerie doctrine, and delighting to plunge
themselves in the troubled waters of schismatic perturbations. Let such
perverters and disturbers of the peace as these, be branded on their foreheads
with the ignominious name of [Malignants] to posterity; may the distempers that
they are hatching in the public weal be retaliated in a perpetual
distraction upon themselves; may the mischief they contrive against the Lord
and his Anointed fall upon their own pates; may they be Vagabonds upon the
face of the earth, and let God scatter the people that delight in war.


Philo-Pol. Patience a while [ Good brother Phil-eirenus] you seem to tax me
of too much censoriousnesse (I suddenly giving up my verdict upon the actions
of other men) and you your self fall to execrations; the remedy proves worse
then the disease, your admonitions are turned into Anathema's; you seem to
reprove me of one error, being guilty of a greater: But (waving those cursed
execrations, as not having any reference to us, or any of the brethren, (who
are the only elect and chosen people of God) I must tell you (brother) you
have overslipt the maine force and binge whereupon the strength of the Argument
turns, viz. The petitioners for peace must of necessity be very malignant,
because their factious and seditious Petition was first drawn up at Oxford,
the contagion of whose malignancie is spread five miles about the University,
where ere the Cavalieroes foame out their infection breath, this Petition was
sent hither to breed distraction in the City, and fostered by a company of
malignants that never contributed any thing to the Parliament for the
maintenance of the Cause, but have been averse to all proceedings.


Phil-eir. Not too hasty [ Good brother Philo-Polemus] let no rash or unadvised
imputation be cast upon that famous University; it is not the place that makes
the thing malignant, but the thing the place; for there is no place so good,
but it may participate of evil, and there is no place so evil, but some good
may proceed from it. Shall I contemn a resplendent Diadem, because happily it
may be cast upon the ground? Shall I scorn a transparent Diamond, because I
find it in a contemptible dunghill? Shall I make no estimat of most precious
and Oriental Gold, because it was raked out of a miry and loathsome channel?
We Will grant, the fountains may be corrupted, the Universities themselves
stained with Arminianisme, and other erroneous Principles (being fallen from
their Original Purity) yet shall there no good thing come out of Nazareth? Or
shall that which is the ravishing joy of Angels, the sweet consociation of men,
the inseparable glue that settles and unites States and Kingdoms in the firm
conjunction and bond of peace, be counted contemptible, because it fetches it is
Original from an University? Nothing more ridiculous! I have observed the Bees
gathering honey from Hemlocke, Hellebore, most venomous and poisonous herbs. I
have known an Alcumist extract some precious distillation from the basest
minerals: And it is the observation of Philosophers, that the purest gold is
most abundant, that grows in a barren and unfruitful soil: For my part, I am
so far from conceiving, that the greatest good may not be extracted from the
greatest evil, that I would willingly embrace wholesome admonition, though it
were fecht from the bottomless pit of hell; But I know (brother) what makes
your rancour swell, it is the very name of an University then which nothing
amongst the vulgar is more contemptible; as the saying goes, Scientia non habet
inimicum, nisi ignorantem, Knowledge has no greater enemy then ignorance,
there seems to be a mortal enmity, a secret antipathy, between the sublime
knowledge of a well grounded Academian, and the incomparable ignorance of a
mechanicke Divine: so then were there nothing more distastefull in the petition
of peace, then that it proceeded from the University, I perceive you would like
it well, it were dangerous to foster it here in the City, away with it, it is
infected with learning.


Philo-Pol. Truly [ Brother Phil-eirenus] it is confessed what you have a leadged
is very material: For we having such an illumination of the spirit, and that
in an abundant manner, have we any reason then (except it be in the society of
women) to descend to carnal knowledge? Being carried by the spirit into the
wilderness of Prayer, is there any sense we should confine our selves to an
University Petition? Besides, what congruity or agreement can there be between
light and darkness, between Christ and Belial, between a constant Separatist,
and a backsliding Protestant? What peace (alas) can be expected, whilst the
whoredom of the Romish Church is yet dispensed withal amongst us?

The profane Lyturgy still babled out by the P. of Baal?

The conjuration of the Letany, by the Magic of infernal Doctors, still
tormenting us?

The abominable Idolatry of the Cross in Baptism, still afflicting us?

Nay, the Lords Prayer it self (notwithstanding the extemporary supplications
that are composed by the help of the spirit) frequently used (by the
Canturburian Mass Priests) in most Assemblies.


Phil eir. Wherein (Brother Philo-Polemus) do thou conceive the whoredom of
the Romish Church principally consists, which you say is as yet dispensed
withal amongst us.


Philo-Pol. In this especially, that the Prelaticall party (notwithstanding
these times of through Reformation) still retain in their Synagogues that
profane custom of wearing surplices, which (indeed) are nothing else but the
remnants of Idolatry, the rags of superstition; and (as my wife very learnedly
and zealously opened the case unto me the last night) they may justly be called
the contaminated smocks of the Romish whore.


Phil-eir. Herein thou art mistaken (Sweet Brother) For our Ministers wear
them not as the rags of Idolatry, but as the Robes of Sanctification; and if
you rightly understand that place of the Revelations, that the Saints are said
to be clothed in white garments, you must of necessity conclude, that it is
very commendable for the Clergy to wear the white vestments of purity in the
Church Militant here, that they may be invested with the shining robes of glory
in the Church triumphant hereafter.


Philo-Pol. You speak so much out of reason (Good Brother Phil-eierenus) that
I have neither sense nor reason to believe what you say; for we work by faith,
not by sight; Away then with all Academicke Divines, those Mercurials of
Religion, that stand condemned of the high Treason of Learning, that stand upon
Philosophical observations, Logical conclusions, reason, sense, and I know
not what; As if the Dictates of Reason the Demonstration of sense, or such like
distractions, were surable to piety and divine Illuminations. We are bound in
conscience (in an holy zeal) to speak in outrageous spleen against the
Lyturgy of the Church, which is generally condemned, even by our most
perspicuous, sage and Orthodox Corch-men, feeling Pelt-makers, and upright
Chimney-sweepers: Nay, it is grown contemptible to our feminine Divines, whose
squinting eyes are scornfully turned another way, as not daring to look upon
such profaneness. It is a Papanish and Miscrean term, I would sooner endure
the Alcoron amongst the Turks, then the Liturgy amongst Christians, it is a
difficult word, and in my shallow apprehension, either Greek, or Latin, or
both: you are a good linguist (brother) let us hear your opinion.


Phil-eire. It is a word composed of both, and if you rightly understood it (
dear Brother Philo-Polemus) you would a atedomething of your censure, the
Liturgy is a word compounded of Li^ a Latin word, which signifies strife, and
(...) a Greek word, which signifies a work, put them together, and you shall
find Liturgy to be nothing else but (...) Lit^^, A work of strife or
contextion.


Philo-Pol. Wretched man! that have been brought up in ignorance all my time;
had I known the Liturgy had been interpreted, A work of strife and divisior,
I should willingly have embraced it long before; for I (with the rest of my
Brethren of Amsterdam) love, like the (...) called Scolopendra, to swim up and
down in troubled waters and Salamander-like delight to live in the fire of
contention: well (Liturgy) for thy works sake) I shall have the better opinion
of thee hereafter. Go and prosper.


Phil-eire. Well then, avoiding this Liturgy, as a thing whereof we are
absolutely ignorant, incapable, and undeferving; Let the Letany speak for it
self, me thinks you seem to lay an imputation upon that, whilst you call it,
The conjuration of the Letany, by the magic of infernal Doctors still
tormenting us? What distractions there? What disturbance of the public Peace?


Phil-Pol. Me thinks (Brother Phil-eirenus) I hear some hideous noise in the
air, the violence whereof offends my chaste ears, like a clap of thunder
that breaks through the clouds, or that dreadful roaring of Lions from their
dens, or rather the bellowing of the Bulls of Basan, when I hear them roaring
aloud in Westminster, and other Cathedrals (though Paul's by the wisdom of the
now Lord Mayor is shut up for fear of further infection) in those conjuring
terms, By thine agony and bloody sweat, By thy Cr^sse and Passion, By thy
precious death and burial, By thy glorious Resurrection, and Ascension, etc.
It would make patience it self impatient, and admiration it self stand amazed
to hear such horrid profaneness? Can there be a greater disturbance of the
peace and unity of the Church then this?


Phil-eirer. I think thou art beside thy self, (brother Phllo-polemus) much
ignorance has made thee mad: Can the violence of Prayer, wherewith we pierce
heaven gates, and approach near the Pavilion and throne of glory, be without
execrable profaneness termed conjuration? or can the fervency of our
supplication, intimated here by the often repetition thereof, By thine agony as
bloody sweat, by thy cross and passion, etc. (without the grossest injury
offered to that sacred performance) be termed the disturbance of the Churches
peace?


Philo-pol. Truly (brother) you have given me good satisfaction in this point,
such as I could never receive from my brethren of Amsterdam; enough of that:
But there is one thing more that plunders my brains, wherewith I Will torment
your patience, and crave your resolution upon the question.


Phil-eiren. Let me pry into the secret crannies of your conscience, let me
know the scruple that so much perplexeth your pericranium; and I will resolve
you with as much discretion as I have done the former.


Philo-pol. That which most distempers my zeal, and gives an ill farewell to my
devotion (which is very small) is that clause at the last gasp of the Letany,
Give peace in our time O Lord, with which I well hoped the Letany would have
expired, but contrary to expectation it is revived.


Phil-eiren. I see what strain you are of now (Philo-polemus) you appear in
the right colors, you are of your father the Devil, that blood-thirsty fiend;
an heretical Schismaticke, a Jesuited Anabaptist, a chip of that old
block-head Brown your ghostly Father, whose fashion is faction, Mr Will.
^rowne an Essex Gentleman, the Author of this Sect, from whom ever since they
were called Browaists.
whose Religion is Rebellion, whose Patrimony is Parricide, your Sanctuaries
are turned into places of Butchery, your Academies into Aceldama's, setting
your pious resolutions upon impious and bloody designs! Away with such bloody
incendiaries and fomenters of war, these fire brands of hell, My soul sit not
thou in their Council; Peace be in our time O Lord: Peace, the sweetest
monosyllable in the world, the breath of our nostrills, the joy and Crown of
our lives, the sweet solacing haven of all perturbations.


Philo-pol. The day is yours, I am forced to yield you have the better of it,
my Phil-eirenus, I see it is as possible sometimes to prevail by strength of
argument, as by the assistance of the Spirit; for this trick alone I shall
have the better opinion of humane learning while I breath; the first thing I
undertake shall be to make my self capable of Reason and Common sense. But
there is one scruple more that crosses my mind, which is, The abominable
idolatry of the Cross in Baptism still afflicting us, which is nothing else
(as I conceive) but a Rellick of Romish Superstition, the Mark of the Beast,
the sign and character of the Purple Whore.


Phil-eiren. It is confessed (brother Philo-polemus) that this Ceremony, in
signing the children with the sign of the Cross, fetches its original from
the Church of Rome: for in the reign of Constantine the Great, who had the
renown to be called the first Christian Emperor, the General Council
concluded, that in defiance of Pagans, Turks, and Infidels, the Children of
Christians and believing Parents should be signed with the sign of the
Cross; which Cross was their Banner, that put courage and magnanimity into
their hearts, when they marched against their enemies: hence it came to pass,
that in process of time this laudable custom was translated from the Romans
to the Britans, when children are baptized to sign them with the sign of the
Cross; which (though opposed by the schismatic faction) is still continued
amongst the orthodoxe Divines, not savouring of any Romish superstition, but
only as an outward sign of their inward Profession: Aug. l. 3. de Baptif.
which made an holy Father cry out in ecstasy and admiration of this laudable
Ceremony, Non occulte loquor, sed front gero, I speak not privately, or
secretly, as though I were ashamed of my self or my Profession but I have
something to show for it, I carry it in my forehead, as the banner of my Lord
and Master, where with I will fight manfully against the Flesh, the World, and
the Devil. I confess the Cross in Baptism makes nothing to the essentiality
of the Sacrament, indifferent in it self, but being imposed by authority of
the Church, I cannot tell how I should excuse the necessary use thereof. Now
because such is the frontles impudence of the Anabaptistical party that they
dare affirm there is no pregnant proof in Scripture of this commendable
Ceremony, to their eternal shame let them look upon that place in the
Revelations, Hurt not the earth, nor the sea, nor the trees, until we have
sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads, Rev. 7.3. which though it be
principally meant of the spiritual and mystical, viz. an inseparable union
and knitting of our hearts to Christ by faith, yet the allusion is made
(according to the most learned Expositors) to the sealing of infants in holy
baptism with the sign of the Cross. Now to those that have in their infancy
bin signed with the sign of the Cross, and humbly acknowledge it to be a
Badge of Christianity, it is the seal of the ever-living God; but to those
that have been signed there with, and term it the idolatrous Cross, to such
it is the mark of the Beast: which I rather believe, because it proceeds from
bestiall and sensual ignorance. Therefore (dear Brother) be not ashamed of
that Cross, which is the renown of Christians, but if thou gloriest in any
thing, let it be in the Cross of Christ lesus.


Philo-Pol. Well (Brother Phil eirenus) thou have almost persuaded me to be a
Christian.


Phil-eire. I would not only you (My Brother) but all the Separatists likewise
that ignorantly oppose the Doctrine and discipline of the Church of England,
were not almost, but altogether converted (as thou art) from their
Anabaptisticall and Atheistical Tenets: But me thinks I read some other doubt
in thy forehead as yet unresolved, tell me what it is.


Philo-Pol. Truly you have convinced me of such manifest absurdities, and
alpable contradictions already, that what I supposed to be the greatest, is now
the least, and scarce worth any scruple at all; but that I may be fully
resolved of a Quaere's before, It is this: Why is the Lords Prayer so
frequently used among us, since every one cannot say; Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them the trespass against us.


Phil-eire. To this I answer, because it is an express command of our Savior,
When ye pray, pray thus, from which no man can be privileged or exempted; so
that he which comes into the Sanctuary with a malicious intent against his
neighbor, is not fit to pray at all; but if any Prayer, let him use the Prayer
of Prayers, that lively pattern of all Celestial Contemplations.


Philo-Pol. Is it not lawful to use any other form of Prayer besides the
Lords Prayer?


Phil-eir. Yes, you may according to your several occurrences and necessities,
so the sense be not dislonant from it, and that (avoiding prolixity, and long
Pharisaicall Prayers) you come as near the concisenesse of our Lords Prayer as
you can, in breathing out your soul (as the custom was in the Primitive
times) in short Ejaculations to Heaven.


Philo-Pol. No better time then now: Since none of these things which I have
mentioned, can be any Obstruction to Peace, and Prayer is the only means to
obtain it, since we are so sweetly reconciled each to other, let us pray for
the peace of Jerusalem.


Philo-Polemus, and Phil-ei^enus conclude in Prayer. OH thou that are the God
of Peace, and make wars to cease in all the world: First, (we beseech there)
send down into our hearts that Peace which passes all Understanding, and then
(sweet Jesus) work an happy union between our Gracious King, and His Loyal
Parliament, that under him we may live a quiet and peaceable life here, and
this life ended, we may be entertained into that soule-ravishing peace and
eternal security in the highest Heavens. Amen.

January 2. 1643.
I Have perused this DIALOGVE, entitled Peace and no Peaece, and find nothing
therein contrary to faith or good manners, and think it fitting to be printed
and published.

John Sidenham.

FINIS.

