A WATCHWORD TO The City of London, AND THE ARMY: WHEREIN You may see that
Englands freedom, which should be the result of all our Victories, is sinking
deeper under the Norman power, as appears by this relation of the unrighteous
proceedings of Kingstone-Court against some of the Diggers at George-hill,
under color of Law; but yet thereby the cause of the Diggers is more
brightened and strengthened: so that every one singly may truly say what his
freedom is, and where it lies.

By Jerrard Winstanly.

When these clay-bodies are in grave, and children stand in place,
This shows we stood for truth and peace, and freedom in our days;
And true born sons we shall appear of England that is our mother,
No Priests nor Lawyers wiles ^imbrace, their slavery we will discover.
LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Sign of the black Spread-Eagle, at
the West end of Paul's, 1649.

To the City of London, Freedom and Peace desired.
THou City of London, I am one of thy sons by freedom, and I do truly love thy
peace; while I had an estate in thee, I was free to offer my Mite into thy
public Treasury Guild Hall, for a preservation to thee, and the whole Land;
but by thy cheating sons in the theeving art of buying and selling, and by the
burdens of, and for the Soldiery in the beginning of the war, I was beaten out
both of estate and trade, and forced to accept of the good will of friends
crediting of me, to live a Countrey-life, and there likewise by the burden of
Taxes and much Free Quarter, my weak back found the burden heavier then I
could bear; yet in all the passages of these eight years troubles I have been
willing to lay out what my Talent was, to procure Englands peace inward and
outward, and yet all along I have found such as in words have professed the
same cause, to be enemies to me. Not a full year since, being quiet at my
work, my heart was filled with sweet thoughts, and many things were revealed to
me which I never read in books, nor heard from the mouth of any flesh, and when
I began to speak of them, some people could not bear my words, and amongst
those revelations this was one, That the earth shall be made a common Treasury
of livelihood to whole mankind, without respect of persons; and I had a voice
within me bad me declare it all abroad, which I did obey, for I declared it by
word of mouth wheresoever I came, then I was made to write a little book
called, The new Law of righteousness, and there in I declared it; yet my mind
was not at rest, because nothing was acted, and thoughts run in me, that words
and writings were all nothing, and must die, for action is the life of all, and
if thou do not act, thou do nothing. Within a little time I was made
obedient to the word in that particular likewise; for I took my spade and went
and broke the ground upon George-hill in Surrey, thereby declaring freedom to
the Creation, and that the earth must be set free from intanglements of Lords
and Landlords, and that it shall become a common Treasury to all, as it was
first made and given to the sons of men: For which doing the Dragon presently
casts a flood of water to drown the manchild, even that freedom that now is
declared, for the old Norman Prerogative Lord of that Manor M Drake, caused
me to be arrested for a trespass against him, in digging upon that barren
Heath, and the unrighteous proceedings of Kingstone Court in this business I
have here declared to thee, and to the whole land, that you may consider the
case that England is in; all men have stood for freedom, thou have kept fasting
days, and prayed in morning exercises for freedom; thou have given thanks for
victories, because hopes of freedom; plenty of Petitions and (...)

A VVatch-word to the City of London, and the Army.
WHereas we Henry Bickerstaffe, Thomas Star, and Jerrard VVinstanly, were
arrested into Kingstone Court, by Thomas VVenman, Ralph Ver^y, and Richard
VVinwood, for a trespass in digging upon George-hill in Surrey, being the
rights of Mr. Drake the Lord of that Manor, as they say, we all three did
appear the first Court day of our arrest, and demanded of the Court, what was
laid to onr Charge, and to give answer thereunto our selves: But the answer of
your Conrt was this, that you would not tell us what the Trespass was, unless
we would fee an Attorney to speak for us; we told them we were to plead our own
cause, for we knew no Lawyer that we could trust with this business: we
desired a copy of the Declaration, and proffered to pay for it; and still you
denied us, unless we would fee an Attorney. But in conclusion, the Recorder of
your Court told us, the cause was not entered; we appeared two Court days after
this, and desired to see the Declaration, and still you denied us, unless we
will fee an Attorney; so greedy are these Attorneys after money, more then to
justify a righteous cause: we told them we could not ^^e any, unless we would
wilfully break our National Covenant, which both Parliament and people have
taken jointly together to endeavor a Reformation. And unless we would be
professed Traitors to this Nation and Commonwealth of England, by upholding
the old Norman tyrannical and destructive Laws, when they are to be cast out
of equity, and reason be the Moderator.

Then seeing you would not suffer us to speak, one of us brought this following
writing into your Court, that you might read our answer; because we would
acknowledge all righteous proceedings in Law, though some slander us, and say
we deny all Law, because we deny the corruption in Law, and endeavor a
Reformation in our place and calling, according to that National Covenant: and
we know if your Laws be built upon equity and reason, you ought both to have
heard us speak, and read our answer; for that is no righteous Law, whereby to
keep a Commonwealth in peace, when one sort shall be suffered to speak, and
not another, as you deal with us, to pass sentence and execution upon us,
before both sides be heard to speak.

This principle in the forehead of your Laws, foretells destruc^^ to this
Commonwealth: for it declares that the Laws that foll^^ such refusal, are
selfish and theevish, and full of murder, protecting ^^ that get money by their
Laws, and crushing all others.

The writer hereof does require Mr. Drake, as he is a (...) man; therefore a
man counted able to speak rationally, to (...) cause of digging with me, and if
he show a just and rational (...) Lords of Mannours have to the Commons, and
that they have (...) power from God, to call it their right, shutting out
others; (...) will write as much against it, as ever I writ for this cause. But
if I (...) by the Law of Righteousness, that the poorest man has as true a
(...) and just right to the Land, as the richest man, and that undeniably the
earth ought to be a common treasury of livelihood for all, without ^^specting
persons: Then I shall require no more of Mr. Drake, (...) that he would
justify our cause of digging, and declare abroad, (...) the Commons ought to
be free to all sorts, and that it is a great (...) pass before the Lord God
Almighty, for one to hinder another of (...) liberty to dig the earth, that he
might fe^d and cloth himself with the fruits of his labor therefrom freely,
without owning any Landlord, or paying any rent to any person of his own kind.

I sent this following answer to the Arrest, in writing into Kingstone Court:
In four passages, your Court has gone contrary to (...) righteousness of
your own Statute Laws: For first it is mentioned in 36. Ed. 3. 15. that no
Process, Warrant, or Arrest should be served, till after the cause was
recorded and entered; but your (...) could not, or would not tell us the cause
when he arrested us, and Mr. Rogers your Recorder told us the first Court day
we appeared, that our cause was not entered.

Secondly, we appeared two other Court days, and desired a copy of the
Declaration, and proffered to pay for it, and you denied us. This is contrary to
equity and reason, which is the foundation your Laws are, or should be built
upon, if you would have England to be a Commonwealth, and stand in peace.

Thirdly, we desired to plead our own cause, and you denied us, but told us we
must fee an Attorney to speak for us, or else you would mark us for default in
not appearance. This is contrary to your own Laws likewise, for in 28. Ed. 1.
11. chap. there is freedom given to a man to speak for himself, or else he may
choose his father, friend or neighbor to plead for him, without the help of any
other Lawyer.

Fourthly, you have granted a judgment against us, and are proceeding to an
execution, and this is contrary likewise to your own Laws, which say, that no
plaint ought to be received, or judgment passed, till the cause be heard, and
witnesses present, to testify the plaint to be true, as Sir Edward Cook 2.
part of Institutes upon the 29. chap. of Magna Charta, fol. 51. 52. 53. The
Mirror of Justice.

But that all men may see, we are neither ashamed nor afraid, to justify that
cause we are arrested for, neither to refuse to answer to it in a righteous
way, therefore we have here delivered this up in writing, and we leave it in
your hands, disavowing the proceedings of your Court, because you uphold
Prerogative oppression, though the Kingly office be taken away, and the
Parliament has declared England a Commonwealth; so that Prerogative Laws
cannot be in force, unless you be besotted by your covetousness and envy.

We deny that we have trespassed against those three men, or Mr. Drake either,
or that we should trespass against any, if we should dig up, or plovv for a
livelihood, upon any the vvast Land in England, for thereby we break no
particular Law made by any Act of Parliament, but only an ancient custom, bred
in the strength of Kingly Prerogative, which is that old Law or custom, by
which Lords of Mannours lay claim to the Commons, which is of no force now
to bind the people of England, since the Kingly power and office was cast
out: and the common people, who have cast out the oppressor, by their purse and
person, have not authorized any as yet, to give away from them their purchased
freedom; and if any assume a power to give away, or withhold this purchased
freedom, they are Traitors to this Commonwealth of England and if they
imprison, oppress, or put to death any for standing to maintain the purchased
freedom, they are murderers and thieves, and no just rulers.

Therefore in the light of reason and equity, and in the light of the National
Covenant, which Parliament and people have taken, with joint consent: all such
Prerogative customs, which by experience we have found to burden the Nation,
ought to be cast out, with the Kingly office, and the Land of England now ought
to be a free Land, and a common treasury to all her children, otherwise it
cannot properly be called a Commonwealth.

Therefore we justify our act of digging upon that hill, to make the earth a
common treasury. First, because the earth was made by Almighty God, to be a
common treasury of livelihood for whole mankind in all his branches, without
respect of persons; and that not any one according to the Word of God (which
is love) the pure Law of righteousness, ought to be Lord or landlord over
another, but whole mankind was made equal, and knit into one body by one
spirit of love, which is Christ in you the hope of glory, even all the members
of (...) body, called the little world, are united into equality of love (...)
serve the whole body.

But since the fall of man there from, which came in by the risin^^ of
covetousness in the heart of mankind (to which Serpent the (...) consented)
and from thence mankind was called Adam: for this covetousness makes mankind
to be a stoppage of freedom in the ^^^tion, and by this covetous power, one
branch of mankind began to lift up himself above another, as Cain lifted up
himself, and killed his brother Abel: and so one branch did kill and steal away
the comfortable use of the earth from another, as it is now: the elder brother
lives in a continual thee very, stealing the Land from the younger-brother.
And the plain truth is, thieves and murderers upheld by preaching witches and
deceivers, rule the Nations: and for the present, the Laws and Government of
the world, are Laws of darkness, and the devils Kingdom, for covetousness
rules all. And the power of the sword over brethren in Armies, in Arrests, in
Prisons, in gallows, and in other inferior torments, inflicted by some upon
others, as the oppression of Lords of Mannours, hindering the poor from the use
of the common Land, is Adam fallen, or Cain killing Abel to this very day.

And these Prerogative oppressors, are the Adamites and Cainites that walk
contrary to the Word of God (which is love) by upholding murder and theft, by
Laws which their Fathers made, and which they now justify; for in the
conquests that. Kings got, their Ancestors did murder and kill, and steal away
the earth, and removed the Land mark from the conquered, and made Laws to
imprison, torment, or put to death, all that would adventure to take the Land
from them again, and left both that stolen Land, and murdering Laws to their
children, the Lords of Mannours, and Freeholders, who now with violence, do
justify their Fathers wickedness, by holding fast, that which was left
them by succession.

For what are all the Laws of the Nations, in this corrupt covetous
Government, lifting up one branch of Adam mankind above another, the Conqueror,
above the conquered, or those that have power above them that are vveak, I say
what are they, but Laws of murder and theft, yea enmity it self, against the
Law of righteousness, which is love, which makes people do, as they would
be done unto?

And so all Kingly power, (in one or many men's hands) reigning by the sword,
giving the use of the earth to some of mankind (called by him his Gentry) and
denying the free use of the Earth to others, called the younger brothers, or
common people, is no other but Cain li^ted up above Abel; the Prerogative
Laws is Beelzebub, for they are the strength of covetousness and bondage in
the creation, lifting up one, and casting down another: the Atturneys, and
Priests, and Lawyers, and Bailiffs are servants to Beelzebub, and are Devils;
their Prisons, Whips, and Gallows are the torments of this Hell, or government
of darkness; ^or mind it all along, and you shall see, that covetousness and
bitter envy gets freedom by these Laws; But the sincere and meek in spirit,
is trod under foot.

And this is that power, that has made such havoc in the Creation, it is
that murderer and Devil that is to be cast one: this power of covetousness,
is he that does countenance murder and theft in them that maintains his
Kingdom by the sword of Iron, and punishes it in others: and so that which is
called a sin in the Common people, if they act such things, is counted no sin
in the action of Kings, because the have they power of the svvord in their
hands, the fear whereof makes people to fear them.

But since this Kingly Office by the Parliament, is cast out of England, and
England by them is declared to be a free State or Commonwealth, we are in the
first place thereby set free from those bonds and ties that the Kings laid upon
us: Therefore this Tyranny of one over another, as of Lords of Manors over the
Common people, and for people to be forced to hire Lawyers to plead their
causes for them, when they are able to plead themselves, ought to be taken
away with the Kingly Office, because they are the strength of the Ancient
Prerogative custom.

Secondly we justify out digging upon George's hill to make the Earth a common
Treasury, because all sorts of people have lent assistance of purse and person
to cast out the Kingly Office, as being a burden England groaned under;
therefore those from whom money and blood was received, ought to obtain
freedom in the Land to themselves and Posterity, by the Law of contract between
Parliament and People.

But all sorts, poor as well as rich, Tenant as well as Landlord, have paid
Taxes, Free Quarter, Excise, or adventured their lives, to cast out that Kingly
Office.

Therefore, all sorts of people ought to have freedom in the Land of this their
nativity, without respecting persons, now the Kingly Office is cast out, by
their joint assistance. And those that do imprison, oppress and take away
the livelihood of those that rise up to take Possession of this purchased
freedom, are Traitors to this Nation, and Enemies to righteousness: And of
this number are those men that have arrested, or that may arrest the Diggers,
that endeavor to advance freedom; therefore I say all sorts ought to have
their freedom.

And that in regard they have not only joined persons and purses together, but
in regard likewise, they took the National Covenant, with joint consent
together, which the Parliament did make, of whom Mr Drake that caused us to be
arrested was one; which Covenant likewise, the Ministers in their Sermons, most
vehemently pressed upon the people to take the int^^^ whereof was this, That
every one in his several place and calling, should endeavor the peace, safety
and freedom of England, and that the Parliament should assist the people, and
the people the Parliament, and every one that had taken it, should ^ssist those
that had taken it, while they were in persuit thereof, as in the sixth Article
of the National Covenant.

Bu^ now Mr Drake that was one that made this Covenant, and the Surrey
Ministers that took it with great zeal at Kingstone, which I was eye witness
to, and shall be of their hypocrisy therein, have set up a Le^^urer at Cobham
one purpose to drive off the Diggers to forsake the persuit of their Covenant
are the most vehement to break Covenant and to hinder them that would keep it,
neither entering into peace themselves, nor suffering them that are entering into
enter.

But in regard some of us did dig upon George's Hill, thereby to take
Possession o^ that freedom we have recovered out of the hands of the Kingly
Office, and thereby endeavor a Reformation in our place and calling a cording
to the Word of God which is Love:) And while we are in persuit of this our
Covenant, we expect both Parliament that made the Covenant, and the Officers
of this Court, and Parish Ministers, and Lords of Manors themselves, and
especially Mr Drake, to assist (...) herein, against all that shall oppose us
in this righteous work of making the Earth a common Treasury; and not to bear
us, imprison us, or take away our estates or lives, unless they will wilfully
break Covenant with God and man, to please their own covetous froward hears,
and thereby declare themselves to be the worst of Devils.

Therefore, in that we do d^g upon that Hill, we do not thereby take away
other men's rights neither do we demand of this Court, or from the Parliament,
what is theirs and not ours: But we demand our own to be set free to us and
them out of the Tyrannical oppression of ancient custom of K^ngly
Prerogative; and let us have no more gods to rule over us, but the King of
righteousness only.

Therefore as the Freeholders claim a quietness and freedom in their
enclosures, as it is fit they should have, so we that are younger brothers, or
the poor oppressed, we claim our freedom in the Commons, that so elder and
younger brother may live quietly and in peace, together freed from the straits
of poverty and oppression, in this Land of our nativitie.

THus we have in writing declared in effect, what we should say, if we had
liberty to speak before you, declaring withal, that your Court cannot end this
Controversy in that equity and reason of it, which we stand to maintain:
Therefore we have appealed to the Parliament, who have received our Appeal and
promised an Answer, and we wait for it; And we leave this with you, and let
Reason and righteousness be our Judge; therefore we hope you will do nothing
rashly, but seriously consider of this cause before you proceed to execution
upon us.

You say God will blast our work, and you say, you are in the right, and we are
in the wrong: Now if you be Christians, as you say you are; Then do you act
love to us, as we do to you; and let both sides wait with patience on the
Lord to see who be blesses; but if you oppose by violence, arrest us judge,
condemn and execute us, and yet will not suffer us to speak for our selves, but
you will force us to give money to our Enemies to speak for us, surely you
cannot say your cause is right; but hereby you justify our cause to be right,
because you are the Persecutors of a loving meek spirited people, and so
declare that the God you say that will blast us, is covetousness, whom you
serve by your persecuting power.

Covetous might may overcome rational right for a time,
But rational right must conquer covetous might, and that is the life of mine.
The Law is righteous, just and good, when Reason is the rule,
But who so rules by the fleshly will, declares himself a fool.
Well, this same writing was delivered into their Court, but they cast it away
and would not read it, and all was because I would not see an Attorney; and
then the next Court day following, before there was any trial of our cause,
for there was none suffered to speak but the Plaintiff, they passed a
Judgment, and after that an Execution.

Now their Jury was made of rich Freeholders, and such as stand strongly for
the Norman power: And though our digging upon that barren Common has done the
Common good, yet this ^ury brings ^n damages of ten pounds a man, and the
charges of the Plaintiff in their Court, twenty nine shil^ing, and a penny; and
this was their sentence and the passing of the Execution upon us.

And 2 days after (for in this case they can end a cause speedily in their
Court; but when the Attorney and Lawyer^ ge^ money they keep a cause depending
seven years, to the utter undoing of the parties, so unrighteous is the Law,
and Lawyers) I say, two days after they sent to execute the execution, and
they put Henry Beckarstaffe in prison, but after three days, Mr Drake released
him again, Beckarstaffe not knowing of it till the release came; They seek
after Thomas Star to imprison his body, who is a poor man not worth ten pounds.

Then they came privately by day to Gerrard Winstanleys house, and drove away
four Cowes; I not knowing of it and some of the Lords Tenants ^ode to the next
Town shouting the digger^ were conquered, the diggers were conquered. Truly it
is an easy thing to beat a man, and cry conquest over him after his hands are
tied, as they tied ours. But if their cause be so good, why will they not
suffer us to speak, and let reason and equity, the foundation of righteous
Laws, judge them and u^. But strangers made rescue of those Cowes, and drove
them astray out of the Bailiffes hands, so that the Bailiffes lost them; but
before the Bailiffes had lost the Cowes, I hearing of it went to them and said
here is my body, take me that I may come to speak to those Normans that have
stolen our land from us; and let the Cowes go, for they are none of mine; and
after some time, they telling me that they had nothing against my body, it was
my goods they were to have; then said I take my goods, for the Cowes are not
mine: and so I went away and left them, being quiet in my heart, and filled
with comfort within my self, that the King of righteousness would cause this
to work for the advancing of his own Cause, which I prefer above estate or
livelihood,

Saying within my heart as I went along, that if I could not get meat to eat, I
would feed upon bread, milk and cheese; and if they take the Cowes, that I
cannot feed on this, or hereby make a breach between me and him that owns the
Cowes, then He feed upon bread and beer, till the King of righteousness clear
up my innocence, and the justice of his own cause: and if this be taken from me
for maintaining his Cause, I Will stand still and see what he will do with me,
for as yet I know not.

Saying likewise within my heart as I was walking along, O thou King of
righteousness show thy power, and do thy work thy self, and free thy people
now from under this heavy bondage of misery, Pharaoh the covetous power. And
the answer in my heart was satisfactory, and full of sweet joy and peace: and
so I said Father, do what thou will, this cause is thine, and thou know that
the love to righteousness makes me do what I do.

I was made to appeal to the Father of life in the speakings of my heart
likewise thus: Father thou know that what I have writ or spoken, concerning
this light, that the earth should be restored and become a common Treasury for
all mankind, without respect of persons, was thy free revelation to me, I never
read it in any book, I heard it from no mouth of flesh till I understood it
from thy teaching first within me. I did not study nor imagine the conceit of
it; self-love to my own particular body does not carry me along in the
mannaging of this business; but the power of love flowing forth to the liberty
and peace of thy whole Creation, to enemies as well as friends: nay toward
those that oppress me, endeavoring to make me a beggar to them. And since I
did obey thy voice, to speak and act this truth, I am hated, reproached, and
oppressed on evere side. Such as make profession of thee, yet revile me. And
though they see I cannot fight with fleshly weapons, yet they will strive with
me by that power. And so I see Father, that England yet does choose rather to
fight with the Sword of Iron, and coveteousnesse, then by the Sword of the
Spirit which is love: and what thy purpose is with this land, or with my body,
I know not; but establish thy power in me, and then do what pleases thee.

These and such like sweet thoughts dwelt upon my heart as I went along, and I
feel my self now like a man in a storm, standing under shelter upon a hill in
peace, waiting till the storm be over to see the end of it, and of many other
things that my eye is fixed upon: But I will let this pass,

And return again to the Dragons Den, or Horners nest, the selfish murdering
fleshly Laws of this Nation, which hangs some for stealing, and protects
others in stealing; Lords of Mannours stole the land from their fellow
creatures formerly in the conquests of Kings, and now they have made Laws to
imprison and hang all those that seek to recover the land again out of their
thieving murdering hands.

They took away the Cowes which were my livelihood, and beat them with their
clubs, that the Cowes heads and sides did swell, which grieved tender hearts to
see: and yet these Cowes never were upon George Hill, nor never dug upon
that ground, and yet the poor beasts must suffer because they gave milk to
feed me, but they were driven away out of those Devils hands the Bailiffes,
and were delivered out of hell at that time.

And thus Lords of Mannours, their Bailiffes the true upholders of the Norman
power, and some Freeholders that do oppose this public work, are such as the
country knows have been no friends to that Cause the Parliament declared
for, but to the Kingly power; and now if they get the foot fast in the stirrup,
they will lift themselves again into the Norman saddle; and they do it
secretly; for they keep up the Norman Laws and thereby Traitors to freedom,
get into places of Law and power, and by that will enslave England more then it
was under the Kingly power.

Therefore England beware; thou art in danger of being brought under the N^rman
power more then ever. The King Charles that was successor to William the
Conqueror thou have cast out: and though thy Parliament have declared against
the Kingly office, and cast it out, and proclaimed England a Common wealth,
that is to be a free land for the liberty and livelihood of all her children;

Yet William the Conquerours Army begins to gather into head again, and the
old Norman Prerogative Law, is the place of their randezvous: for though their
chief Captain Charles be gone, yet his Colonells, which are Lords of Mannours,
his Councillors and Divines, which are our Lawyers and Priests, his inferior
officers and Soldiers, which are the Freeholder^ and Landlords, all which did
steal away our Land from us when they killed and murdered our Fathers in that
Norman conquest: And the Bailiffes that are slaves to their covetous lusts and
all the ignorant bawling women, against our digging for freedom, are the
snap^ack boys and the ^mmunition sluts that follow the Norman Camp.

These are all str^ving to get into a body again, that they may set up a new
Norman slaverie over us; and the place of their randezvous, Prerogative power
is fenced already about, with a Line of Commun^cation. An act made by a piece
of the Parliament to maintain the old Laws, which if once this Camp be
fortified in his full strength, it will cost many a sighing heart, and burdened
spirit before it be taken.

And this Norman Camp are got into so numerous a body already, that they have
appointed their Sutlers to drive away the Cowes which were my livelihood, and
some of them they would sell to make money of to pay the Attorney, Gilder, and
Lawyers their fees, for denying the diggers our privilege to plead our own
cause; for as it is clearly seen that if we be suffered to speak we shall
batter to pieces all the old Laws, and prove the maintainers of them
hypocrites and Traitors to this Common wealth of England, and then the
Atturneys and Lawyers Trade goes down, and Lords Mannours must be reckoned
equal to other men. And this covetous ^^sh and blood cannot endure.

And other of the Cows were to be killed to victual the Camp, that is, to feed
those Normans, Will Star and Ned ^utton, both Freeholders and others the
snapsack boys, and ^mmunition drabs that helped to drive away the Cows that
they might be encouraged by a belly full of stolen goods to stick the closer to
the business another time. Or else the price of these Cowes were to pay for
the sack and Tobacco which the Norman officers of Knights, Gentlemen, and rich
Freeholders did spend at the White Zion at Cobham, when they met the 24. of
August 1649, to advise together what course they should take to subdue the
diggers; for say they, if the cause of the diggers stand, we shall lose all our
honor and titles, and we that have had the glory of the earth shall be of no
more account then those slaves our servants and younger brothers that have been
footstools to us and our Fathers ever since the Norman William our beloved
General took this land (not by love) but by a sharp sword, the power by which
we stand: and though we own Christ by name, yet we will not do as he did to
save enemies, but by our sword we will destroy our enemies, and do we not
deserve the price of some of the diggers ^ow^ to pay us for this our good
service? And do not our reverend Ministers tell us that William the
Conqueror, and the succeeding Kings were Gods anointed? And do not they say
that our enclosures which were go^ by that murdering sword, and given by
William the Conqueror to our Fathers, and so successivly, from them, the land
is our inheritance, and that God gave it us, and shall these broken fellows,
and beggarly rogues take our rights from us, and have the use of the land
equal with us? Thus do these Norman Gentlemen comfort their hearts, and
support themselves with broken reeds, when they meet together in their Counsels.

But stay you Norman Gentlemen, let me put in a word amongst you, does the
murderers sword make, any man to be Gods anointed? Surely, Jesus Christ was
called Gods anointed not because he conquered with a Sword of iron, but
because he conquered by love, and the spirit of patience: therefore your
General was not Gods anointed, as Christ was.

And then the Earth was not made to be the successive inheritance of children
of murderers, that had the strongest arm of flesh, and the best sword, that can
tread others under foot with a bold brazen forehead under color of the Law of
justice as the Norman power does; But it was made for all by the Law of
righteousness, and he gives the whole Earth to be the inheritance of every
single branch of mankind without respect of persons, and he that is filled with
the love of this righteous King, doing as he would be done by is a true
anointed one.

Therefore, that god whom you serve, and which did entitle you Lords, Knights
Gentlemen, and Landlords, is covetousness, the god of this wo^ld, which
always was a murderer, a devil and father of lies, under whose dark governing
power, both you and all the nations of the world for the present are under. But
the King of righteousness or God of love whom I serve, did not call the earth
your inheritance, shutting out others, but gave the earth to be a common
treasury to whole mankind (who is the Lord of it) without respect of person.

This power of love, is the King of righteousness, the Lord God Almighty that
rules the whole Creation in peace, that is the Seed that breaks covetousness
the Serpents head; he is the restoring power, that is now rising up to change
all things into his own nature, he will be your Judge, for vengance is his; and
for any wrong you have done me, as I can tell you of many, yet I have given all
matters of judgment and vengance into his hand, and I am sure he will do
right, and discover him that is the true Trespasser, that take away my rights
from me.

And take notice of this, you Lords of Manors, and Norman Gentry, though you
should kill my body or starve me in prison, yet know, that the more you strive,
the more troubles you hearts shall be filled with; and do the worst you can to
hinder public freedom, you shall come off losers in the later end, I mean you
shall lose your Kingdom of darkness, though I lose my livelihood, he poor
Cowes that is my living, and should be imprisoned; you have been told this 12
Months ago, that you should lose ground by striving, and will you not take
warning, will you needs shame your selves, to let the poor Diggers take away
your Kingdom from you? surely, the power that is in them, will take the rule
and government from you, and give it a people that will make better use of it.

Alas! you poor blind earth mouls, you strive to take away my livelihood, and
the liberty of this poor weak frame my body of flesh, which is my house I dwell
in for a time; but I strive to cast down your kingdom of darkness, and to open
Hell gates, and to break the Devils bands asunder, wherewith you are tied, that
you my Enemies may live in peace, and that is all the harm I would have you to
have.

Therefore you Lords of Manners, you Freeholders, you Norman-Clergy,
oppressing Tith-mungers, and you of the Parliament men, that have played fast
and loose with this poor Nation, for what is past let it go; hereafter advance
freedom and liberty, and pluck up bondage; and sin no more by Lording it over
your Lords and Masters, that set you upon those Parliament Seats, lest worse
things befall you then yet has.

But to return again to Mr Gilders advice, the Attorney of Kingstone Court, and
the proceeding of that Court with the Cowes; you hear how they did judge,
condemn and execute me, not suffering me to speak; and though those four Cowes
were rescued out of their hands by strangers, not by me; and so by their own
Law, they should have looked after the Rescuers, yet contrary to their own Law,
they came again to Winstanleys dwelling a fortnight after, and drove away
seven Cowes and a Bull in the night time, some of the Cowes being Neighbor's
that had hired pasture; and yet the damage which their Norman Jury, and their
covetous besotted ignorant Attorney Mr Gilder, had judged me to pay for a
Trespass in digging upon that barren George's Hill, was but eleven pound nine
shillings and a penncy charges and all, which they are like never to have of
(...), for an empty carrier will dance and sing before these Norman thieves and
pick-purses: And thus you see they judged and passed sentence upon me but once
at their prerogative pleasure, which they call Englands Law: but they executed
me twice, that they might be sure to kill me. But yet th^se (...) likewise are
brought home again, and the heart of my Enemies is put into the pound of
vexation because the Cowes are set free. Surely, these Lords of Manors and the
Attorney Mr Gilder, that gave advice to Arrest us for digging, have burned
their Bibles long ago, because they have so quite and clean forgotten that
Petition in the Lords prayer, forgive (...)our trespasses as we forgive them;
for they make this a trespass against them, for digging upon the wast land of
our mother the Land of England for a livelihood, when as their Law it self
says, That the Commons and Wastes bylong to the poor.

So that you see the Norman Camp is grown very numerous and big that they want
much beeffe to vituall them and they are such hungry ones, that they will eat
poor lean Cowes that are little better then skin and bone; and poor Cowes if I
keep them in the winter, they are like to be poorer for for want of Hay; for
before the report of our digging was much known, I bought three Acres of grass
of a Lord of a Manor, whom I will not here name because I know the council of
others made him prove falls to me; for when the time came to Mow, I brought money
to pay him before hand; but he answered me, I should not have it, but sold it
to another before my face; this was because his Parish Priest, and the Surrey
Ministers, and sorry ones too they are that have set up a Lecture at Cobham for
a little time, to preach down the Diggers, have bid the people neither to buy
nor sell with us, but to beat us, imprison us, or banish us; and thereby they
prove themselves to be members of the Beast that had two horns, like a Lamb,
and yet speak like a Dragon, and so they fulfill that Scripture in Rev. 13. 16.
that no man might buy and sell, save he that had the mark of the Beast. Or else
surely, they do it on purpose to quicken unto our work, and to drive us to
Plant the Commons with all speed as may be.

But though the Cowes were poor, yet they care not, so the skins will but pay
the Lawyers and Arturneys Gilder his Fees, and the flesh to feed the snapsack
boys, either to eat and make merry with, or else to sell to make money of, to
pay those that drive away the Cowes for their pains or charges they have been
at, in this 18 weeks striving to beat the Diggers off their work: But the bones
will serve the Bailiffs to pick, because their action will be both proved
thievery in stealing another man's cattle, and their trespass very great
against the same man, in opening (...) round about the ground, where Winstanley
dwells, and let Hegs and common Cattle* into the standing barley and other corn*
which the right owner will seek satisfaction for.

So that the fury of this Norman Camp against the Diggers is so great, that
they would not only drive away all the Cowes upon the ground, but spoil the
corn too, and when they had done this m^schief, the Bailiffs, and the other
Norman snapsack boys went hollowing and shooting, (...) if they were dancing
at a whitson Ale; so glad they are to do mischief to the Diggers, that they
might hinder the work of freedom.

And why are they so furious against us? but because we endeavor to dig up
their Tithes, their Lawyers Fees, their Prisons, and all that Art and Trade of
darkness, whereby they get money under couller of Law; and to plant the
pleasant fruit trees of freedom, in the room of that cursed the nbush, the power
of the murdering sword; for they say, they do all they do by the Law of the
Land which the Parliament has confirmed to them by an Act: And if so, Then
Soldiers where is the price of you^ blood? and Contrymen, and Citizens,
Where is the price of your Taxes and Free Quarter? If this be the freedom, you
are like to have, to be beaten and not be suffered to say why do you so, and
shall have no remedy, unless you will Fee a Lawyer (an Enemy) to plead for
you, when you are able to plead your own cause better your self, and save that
charge, and have your cause ended sooner and which more peace and quietness.

And you zealous Preachers, and professors of the City of London and you great
Officers and Soldiery of the Army, Where are all your Victories over the
Cavaliers, that you made such a blaze in the Land, in giving God thanks for,
and which you begged in your Fasting days, and morning Exercises; Are they all
sunck into the Norman power again, and must the old Prerogative Laws stand;
what freedom then did you give thanks for? Surely, that you had killed him that
rid upon you, that you may get up into his saddle to ride upon others; O thou
City, thou Hypocritical City! thou blindfold drowsy England, that sleps and
snorts in the bed of coveousnesse, awake, awake, the Enemies is upon thy back,
he is ready to scale the walls and e^ter Possession, and will thou not look out.

Does not the streams of bondage run in the same river that it did, and with a
bigger stream of Norman power; so that if you awaken not betimes, the flood of
the Norman Prerogative power, will drown you all; here is more rivers comes into
the maine stream, since the storm fell and the waters of fury rises very high,
banked in by Laws; and while you are talking and disputing about words, the
Norman Soldiers are secretly working among you to advance their power again;
and so will take away the benefit of all your victories by a subtle act of
intricate Laws, which the swor^ in the field could not do against your and
when you have lost that freedom, which you boasted of that you will leave to
your posterity, then who must give thanks you that vapoured in words, or they
that lay close in action, waiting to trip up you heels by pollioy, when the
sword could not do it.

I tell thee thou England, thy battles now are all spiritual. Dragon against
the Lamb, and the power of love against the power of covetousness; therefore
all tha^ will be Soldiers for Christ, the Law of righteousness join to the
Lamb. He tha^ takes the iron sword now shall perish with it, and would you be a
strong Land and flourish in beauty, then fight the Lambs battles, and his
strength shall be thy wall and bulwarks.

You Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders, that sat in council at the whi^ Lion
it Cobham to find out who are our backers, and who stirs us up to dig the
Commons I Will tell you plainly who it is, it is love, the King of righteousness
ruling in our hearts that makes us th^^ to act that the creation may be set at
liberty, and now I have answered your inquiry, do what you can to him and us
his servants: And we require you in his name, to let our cause have a public
trial, and do not work any longer in darkness, set not your Bail^ffes and
slaves to come by night to steal away the Cowes of poor men under color of
justice, when as the cause was never yet heard in open Court.

He that backs you; and that sets you to work to deny to us our younger brother
the use of the common land, is covetousness, which is Beelzebub the greatest,
devil so that there is the 2 generals known, which you and we fight under,
the 2 great Princes of light and darkness bondage and freedom, that does Act all
flesh in the great controversies of the world. These are the 2 men that stir in
this business, that is, the wicked man that councels, and broke you to be so
envious and furious against us, and the righteous man Christ, that backs and
counsels us to love you our enemies* And do we not see that Gebal, Ammon and
Amaleck, and all the rabble of the nations, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Lawyers,
Bailiffes, Priests, and all the Norman snapsack boys, and ammunition women to
the old Norman Camp do all combine together in the art of unrighteous fury, to
drive the poor diggers off from their work, that the name of commmunity and
freedom which is Christ, may not be known in earth. Thus I have deal plainly
with you all, and I have not flattered Parliament, Army, City, nor Country,
but have declared in this, and other writings the whole light of that truth
revealed to me by the word of the Lord: and I shall now wait to see his hand to
do his own work in what time, and by what instruments he pleases. And I see the
poor must first be picked out, and honored in this work, for they begin to
receive the word of righteousness, but the rich generally are enemies to true
freedom.

The work of digging still goes on, and stops not for a rest*
The Comes were gone, but are returned, and we are all at (...)*
No money's paid, nor never shall, to Lawyer or his man
To plead our cause, for therein we will do the best we can.
In Cobham on the little Heath our digging there goes on.
And all our friends they live in love, as if they were but one.
Thus you Gentlemen, that will have no Law to rule over you (...) your
Prerogative will must be above Law, and above us that are the younger brothes in
the Land; but if you say, no, your will shall be subject to Law: then I demand of
you Mr Drake, Mr Gilder, and other the Bailiffes and Officers of Kingston
Court, why will you ^^rest us, and trouble us, and say we trespa^^e against
you, and though we came to answer to your arrest, and to plead our own cause,
yet contrary to the equity ^ay contrary to the bare letter that the Law, as I
showed you before, you denied me th^^ privilege, but went on and did condemn
and execute a forceable power upon body and goods, is not your will here, above
Law? do you not hereby uphold the Norman conquest?

Mr Drake, you are a Parliament man, and was not the beginning of the quarrel
between King Charles and your House? This the King pleaded to uphold
Prerogative, and you were against it, and yet must a Parliament man be the
first man to uphold Prerogative, who are but servants to the Nation for the
peace and liberty of every one, not conquering Kings to make their will a Law?
did you not promise liberty to the whole Nation, in case the Cavalier party
were cast out? and why now will you seek liberty to your self and Gentry, with
the denial of just liberty and freedom to the common people, that have born
the greatest burden?

You have arrested us for digging upon the common Land, you have executed your
unrighteous power, in distraining cat^el, imprisoning our bodies, and yet our
cause was never publicly heard, neither can it be proved that we have broke
any Law, that is built upon equity and reason, therefore we wonder where you had
your power to rule over us by will, more th^n we to rule over you by our will.
We request you before you go too far, not to let covetcousnesse be your (...)
not others under your fear, under color of Law, as if none knew equity of Law
but you^ for we and our estates shall be horns in your eye^, and pricks in your
sides, and you may curse that Council bid you beg our estates, or imprison our
persons. But this we request that you would let us a have a fair open trial,
and do not carry on the course of Law insecret, like vicodem^^ that is afraid
to have his business come to light; therefore I challenge you once more,
seeing you profess your selves Christians, to let us be brought to a trial of
our cause; let your minister^ plead with us in this scriptures, and let your
Lawyers plead with us in the equity and reason of your own Law; and if you
^rove us transgressions, then we shall lay down our work and acknowledge we have
trespassed against you in digging upon the Commons, and then punish us. But if
we prove by Scripture and reason that unden^ably the land belongs to one as
well as another, then you shall own our work, justify our cause, and declare
that you have done wrong to Christ, who you say is your Lord and master, in
abusing us his servants, and your fellow creatures, while we are doing his
work. Therefore I knowing you to be (...) of moderation in outward show, I
desire that your actions toward your fellow creatures may not be like one
beast to another, but carry your selves, like man to man; for your proceeding
in your pretense of law hitherto against us, it both unrighteous, (...) and
d^^velish, and nothing of the spirit of man seen in it. You Atturnies and
Lawyers, you say you are ministers of justice, and we know that equity and
reason is, or ought to be the foundation of Law; if so, then plead not for money
altogether but stand for universal justice and equity; then you will have
peace; otherwise both you with the corrupt Clergy will be cast out as unsavory
salt.

FINIS.

