LONDONS Love to her neighbors in general and in particular to the six
associated Counties, namely Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge, Hartford, and
Bedford.

Wherein is plainly laid open the danger which is like immediately to fall upon
them, unless they with firm resolution stand to their Arms to withstand the
blood-thirsty Cavaliers.

Parliament For Religion, Laws and Liberties we will strive,


depiction of a heart atop two hands shaking Commonalty with heart and hand,
and purse, whilst we remain alive.


roundheads armed with sword, musket, and holding a money bag face cavaliers
shaking hand, while a man reads from a book

Printed by John Hammond, 1643.

To the true Religious, and well affected, Inhabitants of the six associated
Counties, whose loving hearts, and liberal hands, have not been slack in
seting forth and sending at every needful occasion both men, money, and
furniture.
FOR this so good a purpose as to with stand the bloody and unhumane Cavaliers,
which are now swarming up and down our Kingdom like so many devouring Drones,
which continually life lurking to rob the provident Bees of that sweere honey
which they with much care and pains have been a long time geting together.

Experince has often taught us this Lesson that he is truly wise that can
beware by other men's harms: another saying is this how that he that is warned
is half armed, which two sentences may fitly serve in these desperate and
dangerous time to encourage every man to look well into his own estate, and to
strive disligently whereby to prevent all evil occasions, which otherwise may
pull down mischief and calamities on our heads.

Therefore the better to avoid the terrable usage of the destroying enemy I
will endeavor my self to rouse up your drooping hearts, to resist the plundring
foe, be showing you the misery which is like in a seven fold manner to seize
upon you unless you prove valliant courageous and resolute in your actions.

See therefore that you play the men and behave your selves bravly e^or now
your Religion, your Liberties, your Goods, yea and your Lives, and all is laid
at stake as shall plainly appear by what is past; now therefore is the time to
stand up for the truth: if you let slip this opportunity you may bid farewell
to your Liberties for ever.

Although the Cavaliers says and swears dam them and sinck them, they fight
for Religion we have no cause to believe them, and this we may well be sure of
one thing they mean us no good, when every day they are preparing all manner
of bloody ingines to destroy us.

Let them profess what they will I shall never think them our friends that
have provided Grenades to set our houses on fire, and after to enter our
Cities and Towns, perforce, and then to rob, pillage, and plunder, steal, and
murder, all that they can lay hands on.

Yet there are some that say O would the Cavaliers were here, we are sure they
will do us no harm; but alas if they had felt but one small part of the cruel
usage that Bristoll men, and Exceter men, have felt, those I say which do now
wish the Cavaliers nearest to them, would surely wish them farthest from them.

For if the Cavaliers once get the upper hand of your Cities, Towns, and
Houses, you may well bid farewell Religion, farewell Laws, farewell the
Liberties of us poor Protestants for ever.

For why, they speak neither for one nor other but all goes to wrack and
ruin; where they come there is no difference made between them that let them
in, and them that kept them out, for what they can catch and carry away they
say is their own by Law.

Now let them that take their parts so highly behold their dealings, and then
judge whether the Cavaliers are fit men to be let come in, to a City or County,
or not.

I have here no long time limited me, in this one sheet of Paper, to express
the cruelty of the Cavaliers, yet some few passages of theirs shall herein be
related, understand this beloved friends and neighbors, he that writes these
lines to you has not only seen, but also felt the heavy blows and bloody
hands, and now does bar the bloody marks of them which may serve as a
witness to testify of their cruelty and unhumane dealings.

I saw them cut, wound, and mangle Gentlemen of good worth and quality, and yet
they promised both me and them fair quarter,

I felt the punishment of hunger, and cold in prison being fast fettered in
Iron Chains with my hands, neck, and my heels bound fast together.

A punishment seldom heard of for poor Prisoners* especally for Captains,
yet this and more I endure: besides I saw them strip men, women, and children
naked out of clothes. I saw the people go with bleeding bodies and fainting
hearts, whilst their houses were fired to the ground, and their goods consumed.

I saw men carried Captives away, whilst their wives, children, and famlies
went weeping, wayling and wringing their hands up and down the streets, having
no place wherein to put their heads: these bloody usages and many more have I
beheld allthough by Gods great providence my life is yet preserved.

All these were doleful fights to beho'd yet have I not told you the worst, I
have not told you of their rauishing of women, nor killing of maids which by
them was done in Staffordsheire and other Ceuntries: yet are all those
cruelties nothing in regard to what they threaten against London, Norfolk,
Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge, Hartford, and Bedfordshoire if they can gain what
they aim at: for this they make bargans they knew 'twas you that first sought
to prevent them to their purposes, they knew 'twas you that set forward your
hands to hinder their pretenses, they knew 'twas your moneys that maintaned
wars against them, they knew 'twas you that were first movers in the way of
reformation, they knew that you oppose I Bishops and Revenues, and they knew
'twas you that caused the Grand Malignant to loose his heads.

And therefore they say and swear that you shall be sure to cast of the
deepest cup of their fury, I pray God they may never live to have their wills
in such a bloody way.

Thus you see my dear friends what mighty enemies you have and how resolute
they are in their proceedings, they are grown so insolet that they grievously
oppress all Countries where ever they become, and daily brings them into
slavery, some of them being Jrish Cavaliers, some Vallouns some Blackmoores,
and others which name themselves to be of the Queens Army, they do more
harms then any of the rest.

Rouse up your spirits therefore you noble minded Citizens and Countrymen, ^ye
no longer under the burden of oppession be valiant and courageous: show your
selves like men, and let it not be said that you suffered such a crew once to
set foot in your Countries, take sword in hand and fight valiantly against
them that seek the utter ruin and destruction of you and all that belong unto
you, fight I say for King and Parliament, Laws, Liberties, and Rights, and for
your (...) enlargements, least another day you repent the neglection of your
opportunity, Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk, it is you that are most threatened it
behooves you therefore to look to your selves for if the boasting enemies be
let to have their wills their's no more mercy to be found then is in the teeth
of a mad Dog.

Then may you as many other Countries have done before, even see the perpetual
downfall one of another, and so become a prey to the merciless enemy.

Consider this I pray you; for your own sakes, would it not grieve your hearts,
to depart from your soft beds, and to be carried away to some loathsome prison
where is nothing but hunger and cold chains, and irons, bloody stripes, and
all manner of cruelties used: would it not grieve you, to see your goods,
cattle, and all that you enjoy taken violently from you: would it not pierce
your tender hearts to see your wives abused, your daughters ravished, and your
chilren turned out of the doors. An children! what torment will it be to you
to see your loving Parents thus barbarously dealt withal? it wounds my heart
to think what will become of you: your homes will be the streets, the blocks
your beds, water your drink, and your food will be what you can beg of the
merciless enemy.

This is like to be your usage if the tyrannical enemy once gets possession of
your estates for so have they dealt by the famous Cities of Bristoll; Exceter,
and all the Western parts Gloucester only excepted: and had not Gloucester
manfully withstood them having God on their sides, they had utterly been
overthrown, and brought in slavery as other famous Cities and countries have
been, therefore my friends, let Gloucester be your president, who courageously
defended themselves by day and night, for many woeful days and nights
together, yet such was the valor of the inhabitants of the City of Gloucester,
having almost spent all their victual and ammunition, and but few men left to
strengthen the City in regard of the great number of the enemy which daily
increased.

Two hundred valiant hearted wowen of the City magnanimously took up arms,
namely, both Pyke and Musket, and kept true watch at the Courts of Guard, and
so relieved their wearied husbands, and so by that means the City was preserved
from the fury of the Cavaliers, till such time the noble Lord General the Earl
of Essex came with his warlike bands of Soldiers for the relief of the City of
Gloucester, which when the Cavaliers perceived they broke the siege and fled
from thence, with all the speed that they could make.

Now beloved friends, know this, our case is in a manner as Glocesters men's
case was* and although they are not as yet come so near as they were
Gloucester, yet they have vowed they will be with us before we are aware of
them: therefore as I said before, it is very meet and needful that we provide
and make ready every day for their coming: and yet let us not altogether depend
upon our own strength, for it is the mighty God of Heaven that must stand for
us, or else we are all in a miserable case thus have I told you I can testify
by experience, and also warrant, by the example of others to strive to prevent
your destroying enemies.

Now I pray to the true God of all consolation to preserve you from the hand,
of the persecutiers Amen.

Your servant till Death. Captain John Williams.

Now let us therefore, consider if such virtue, such Religion, such courageous
hearts remained in women, much more does it belong to men, to stand in defense
against the enemies of the Gospel and true Religion.

Therefore I would advertise you all in general to take up arms in this so
good and lawful a cause.

Let not your hearts droop, though Bristoll, Exceter, and some other parts be
overturned by the domineering Cavaliers, for we have a warlike navy of ships at
Sea, and many strong Forts by Land, besides we have two noble Generals, as the
Earl of Warwick by Sea and the Earl of Essex by land, which will fight it out
for the Gospels sake, till the last drop of blood be spent, rather then let the
enemies of Christ subdue us.

Masters, Servants, Apprentices, all sorts of men; rich and poor, that are
able to bear arms, I desire you to stand up for true Religion, and those that
are not able to bear arms, let them show their bounty and liberality in sending
money, and maintenance, to the setting forward of those that are ready, able and
willing to go in this most noble and religious design.

And let us strive to remove drunkards, swearers, and scoffers at Religion, and
such vile persons, for those men that break covenant with God, will surely
break covenant with you, if ocasion be offered, which is not unattempted till
now: when you have removed disorder, set your selves in order, put your selves
every one into a posture of defense, fit for war, get every company Captains,
let every man list himself, and get as good arms as he can.

That so if an onset should be given every man may be ready to do something and
fight in some order: look to your works make them strong both in Cities and
Countries where you come, get men of Judgment, to view them and let them not be
slighted for they be the best safeguards you have, loose them and then the
Cities and Towns where you are be lost, for the Enemy works by policy, have
a watchful eye over them that you trust, see that they be Religious, and well
grounded men, I speak boldly and plainly after cour ountry manner, because I
knew upon this City especially depends immediately the safety of our Laws, our
Liberties, our Lives, our Religion, our Parliament; most noble Citizens as you
tender these things, so show it in your reasons contending for these things,
wives put on your husbands to love themselves, you and their children, and as
they love you, and would have you safe, so let them use a means to keep you
safe to rise in a body, and fight against these cursed men that intend nothing
but our destruction, up quickly, and be doing, for the cause and the love of
heaven, the mover of all hearts, stir you up to the work, and prosper you in
it, that we may see an happy end of this unhappy War, and this shall not
only be the prayer, but as hitherto it has, so always it shall be to the
utmost indeavoar of your poor servant,

FINIS.
This Book is Printed according to Order.


