THE BLOODY TENENT YET More Bloody: BY Mr Cottons endeavor to wash it white in
the BLOOD of the LAMB; Of whose precious Blood, spilt in the Blood of his
Servants; and Of the blood of Millions spilt in former and later Wars for
Conscience sake, THAT Most Bloody Tenent of Persecution for cause of
Conscience, upon a second Trial, is found now more apparently and more
notoriously guilty.

In this Rejoinder to Mr Cotton, are principally I. The Nature of Persecution,
Examined; II. The Power of the Civil Sword in Spirituals Examined; III. The
Parliaments permission of Dissenting Consciences Justified.


Also (as a Testimony to Mr Clarks Narrative) is added a Letter to Mr Endicet
Governor of the Massachusetts in N. E.

By R. WILLIAMS of Providence in New England.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the
black-spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's, 1652.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
Most Noble Senators,
ONE of the greatest Spirits, and as active as later times have yielded,
Charles the fifth, tired out with Affairs of State, resigns up all, and sits
down to The Parliaments Labors and Labyri^ths,
end his days in quiet Contemplation. I doubt not but many of your Honorable
Heads have felt the thorny Crown (of these late years troubles) so sharp, so
weighty, that your tired Spirits would joyfully embrace, if not (with Charles
the fifth) a total Cessation, yet like some faithful tired Judge, (after so
long and troublesome a Term) at least some breathing short Vacation.

Although I dare not (as to Englands peace and safety) admit desires of your
Total. Cessation, or long vacation: yet common Gratitude for such incomparable
labors, expenses, hazards, etc. from whence the God of heaven has vouchsafed
such rare and incomparable preservations, deliverances, enjoyments, etc. I say
common gratitude cannot only wish you heartily and pray for earnestly your
eternal Rest, and most joyful Harvest in the Heavens, but also, all the
possible breathing hours, and cool retired shades of Contemplation and
self-enjoyment amidst the scorching Travels of so many vexing and tedious
Actions. You cannot (ever renowned Patriots) but like some grave Commanders of
Fleets and Armies, who have brought their Ships and followers through
tempestuous st^rms and bloody fights, to joyful Rest and Harbors! You cannot
but look back with Admirings, with Praisings, with Resolvings to cast you
Crowns, and Heads, and Hearts, and Hands, (for the remaining Minutes of the
short Candle of your life) at his Feet, in whose most High and most gracious
Hands have all your Breaths and ways been.

In the review of the multitude of your Actings and Sufferings, your Battles
and Victories, Dangers* and Deliverances, you cannot, (no man can) but observe
and see (a naked)* Arm from Two Subsidies granted by the Parliament to the King
of Kings.
Heaven fighting for you, but most especially since the times and hours you
gratified the most High Eternal King of Kings (now more then ever Englands
King) with these two famous Subsidies (if I may in humble Reverence so call
them.)

The first, of Mercy and Moderation to the The first Subsidy.
poor oppressed Consciences of the English Nation, amidst the throng of which
he graciously will, yea he has acknowledged, that some of his own dear
Children (the Sons and Daughters of the God of Heaven) have been relieved and
succored by you.

The second your high and impartial drawing The second Subsid^.
of the Sword of Justice upon the great and highest offenders: Since which two
wonderful Subsidies, the most wilfully blind must be forced to see the
glorious Goings of the God of Heaven with your Councels and Armies, and the
discharge of his holy promise in honoring you, who have so highly, (in so rare
and unparalleld Travels and Hazards) honored him.

Concerning the first of these Subsidies, I was humbly bold some few years
since, to present you with a Conference between Peace and Truth, touching a
most bloody Murtherous Malefactor, The Bloody Tenent a common Pyrat.
the bloody Tenent of Persecution for cause of Conscience: (a notorious and
common Pyrate, that takes and robbs, that fires and sinkes the (Spiritual
Ships and Vessels) the Consciences of all men, of all sorts, of all Religions
and Persuasions whatsoever.

It has pleased Master Cotton, (a Man incomparably too worthy for such a
service) to attempt the washing of this bloody Tenent, (as he speaks) in the
blood of the Lamb Mr. Cottons Reply.
CHRIST JESUS (though one part of the Conference, to wit, the Examination of a
N. English Model of Church and Civil Power, he leaves to the washing of some
other of the N. English Ministers, the Authors of that Model, of whose
washings as yet I have not heard of:) This present discourse presents your
Honors with the second part of the Conference between Peace and Truth, and
has examined Mr. Cottons Reply and washings.

I sum up the multitude of my Thoughts touching your Honors Consideration of
this point, in these three most humble Petitions.

First, I most humbly and earnestly beseech your The first Petition.
Honors to mind the Difference between State Necessity of Freedom to
different Consciences, and the Equity and Piety of such a Freedom.

State Policy and Necessity of Affairs drew from Difference between the Piety
and Mercy, and State-necessity of granting freed^m to men's Consciences.
great Constantine (with his Colleague Licinius) that famous Edict of Freedom
to all men's Consciences, whom yet afterward he persecuted: But a Successor of
his (of late years) Maximilian the second, comes nearer the Life of the
Business, when he conscientiously professed in a solemn Speech to the Bishop
Constantines and Maximilians acts compared,
of Olmuts in Bohemia, There is no sin ordinarily greater against God, said he,
then to use violence against the Consciences of men.

Your Honors will find (if the Father of Spirits please to spare you time and
Spirits, to mind this Cause and Controversy, that all violence to Conscience
turns upon these two Hinges.

First, of Restraining from that worshipping of a Two ways of oppressing
conscience in Religion.
God or Gods, which the Consciences of men in their respective worships (all
the world over) believes to be true.

Secondly, of Constraining to the practicing or countenancing of that whereof
their Consciences are not persuaded.

In the practice of both these, the Histories of our own Nation will tell us
(besides the foreign) how sharp and zealous the strongest Swords of England
have ever used to be.

And yet of the practice of both, what a Prophetical The late King Charles his
conscience to oppress the consciences of others, no small occasion of the
ruin of him and his.
passage of our late troubles and King, did the foresaid Maximilian express to
Henry the third of France, (in his passage from Poland to France to claim the
French Crown) to this effect, Sir, remember that when men think to get Heaven
by using violence to the Consciences of men, they oftentimes lose The Bishops
killed the King.
that which they might peaceably have kept on Earth. Some have said that
worldly policy persuaded, as well as State-necessity compelled the States of
Holland to a prudent permission of different Consciences. Hollands policy.
And that the said State-Policie persuaded some Dutch to wish that England
might not tolerate, least a permission of Conscience in England should break
down the Bridge and Passage into their parts of Freedom in causes of
Conscience.

Those prudent and prosperous States have gone The permission of conscience in
Holland.
far (though driven by Spanish persecution) to it) in taking off the yoke from
the necks of Dutch and English, French yea, Popish and Jewish consciences. For
all which (though but Mercy, though but Justice and humanity to fellow mankind)
he that runs may read the truth of Gods never failing Promises, Blessed are the
Merciful for they shall obtain Mercy.

Their own Chronicles tell us of a wonderful walk of the God of Heaven between
three of their most Gods wonderful goings in Holland from Stafore, undone by
Pride and Unthankfulness,
eminent Towns or Cities, First Stafore was the wondrous Wealthy City, their
golden City, til a proud wealthy, Merchants widow, caused a whole ships
loading of wheat (which her ship brought home and she despised) to be thrown
over into the Harbor, which (with other Accidents of water and weather, Gods
most righteous providence) so choked up the Haven, that Vessels of Burden
durst never frequent that City (by this occasion) most wondrously
impoverished) since.

From Stafore God carries all the Shipping and To Enchuysin, undone by the
bloody Tenent of Persecution:
wealth to Enchuysin, whose Zealous, over-zealous and furious Clergy provoke
the Civil Magistrates to persecute dissenting, non conforming consciences:
Amongst the rest it is rare (if ever) that the most glorious Son of God himself
escapes.

From Enchuysin therefore (a Den of persecuting From Enchuysin to Amsterdam,
raised to its present hight and glory, by mercy to the persecuted.
Lions, and mountain of Leopards) the persecuted fled to Amsterdam, a poor
fishing Town, yet harborous and favorable to the flying, though dissenting
consciences: This confluence of the persecuted, by Gods most gracious coming
with them, drew Boats, drew Trade, drew Shipping, and that so mightily in so
short a time, that Shipping, Trading, wealth, Greatness, Honor (almost to
astonishment in the Eyes of all Europe, and the world) have appeared to fall as
out of Heaven in a Crown or Garland upon the head of that poor Fisher-Town.

O ye the prime of English men and English worthies, whose senses have so often
perceived the everlasting Arms of the Invincible and Eternal King, when your
Ships Hold has been full with water, yea with Blood, when storms without,
fires and mutinies within, whence he has beaten upon some Rocky Hearts
Englands ship got into Harbor.
and passages, as if she would have staved and split into a thousand pieces;
yet this so near stav'd, so near fired, so near split, foundred, sinking
Nation, has the God of Heaven (by your most valiant and careful hands)
brought safe to Peace her Harbor! Why now should any duty possible be
impossible? yea, why not impossibilities possible? Why should your English Seas
contend with a neighbor Dutchman Striking of Colors.
for the motion of a piece of Silk, etc* and not ten thousand fold much more
your English Spirits with theirs for the Crown of that State-piety and Wisdom
which may make your faces more to shine, not only with a common luster after a
Dutch Presisident, but (if it be the holy will of God, and I humbly hope it may
be) with a glory far transcending all your fairest neighbors Copies.

The States of Holland having smarted deeply, and paid so dearly for the
purchase of their freedoms, reach to the neighbor Nations and the world, a
taste of such their dainties. And yet (with due reverence to so wise a State,
and with due thankfulness for mercy and relief to many poor oppressed
Consciences) The States of Holland yet to seek in the matters of liberty of
Conscience.
I say their Piety nor Policy could ever yet reach so far, nor could they in
all their School of War (as their Countries have been called, learn that one
poor Lesson of setting absolutely the consciences of all men free.

It Is true, they vouchsafed to the Papists and Arminians the liberty (as I may
so speak) of the prison, and sometimes to go abroad (as I may say) with a
Keeper, etc. But why should not such a parliament as England never had, (and
who knows whether ever Touching absolute freedom to every man's conscience
impartially.
will the like) why should not the piety and policy of such Statesmen out
shoot and teach their Neighbors, by framing a safe communication of freedom
of Conscience in worship, even to them to whom with good security of Civil
peace) it is as due as to any other Consciences or Worshippers in the World)
the Papists and Arminians themselves. Of the Piety and Policy of such a
freedom I have discoursed more largely in the answering of Freedom of Popish
consciences. S^^ Chap. 59 more particularly.
some Objections of Mr. Cotton in Chapter 59. of this Book: and proved that
such a freedom of the Conscience of each member of the Commonweal, and such a
Commonweal as Englands now is, especially, cannot in all probability prove so
dangerous and prejudicial as many do imagine and discourse, but contrarily
many ways prove beneficial, and marvellously advantageous.

Your Honors know what bloody bickerings and bloodsheds have been in later
times in Germany, in the Low Countries, in France, in England, in Polonia, in
Hungaria, Bohemia, Transylvania, etc. about the Freedom of men's Consciences
and Worship?

The God of Heaven may also please graciously to remember you, that it has
been the fatal error of all Reformers that England or other States have seen,
to do as the Portugals did in the Old images pulled down, and new set up.
East Indies, who pulled down the Images of the Pagans whom they conquered, and
set up their own Images of Portugal in their stead and places.

It is agreed on all hands that subscribe to one GOD, that his worship is but
one, and that all besides that one true GOD, are idols, and all worship All
Images must down.
beside his own (but one) are Images: And you know the fiery jealousy of the
Eternal will not ever endure an Image (though never so fair) his Rival: Hence
in the many former Changes of estates, and State-worships (by Gods just and
jealous permission) the childrens work has been to tumble down their fathers
buildings. Nor can your most prudent Heads, and potent Hands possibly erect
that Fabric, which the next Age (it may be the next Parliament) may not tumble
down. And yet so may the God of Heaven so please to guide you in the high
matters that concern the worship of God, and the Consciences of men, that (what
ever be the present or future consequences) your own Consciences may reap the
joyful harvest of their present and eternal Requiems.

The Pope, the Turk, the King of Spain, the Emperor, and the rest of
Persecutors, build among the Eagles, and the Stars, yet while they practice
violence to the Souls of Men, and make their Swords of Steel Corrivals with
the twoedged Spiritual Sword of the Son of GOD: the Basis of their Highest
Pillars, the Foundation of their glorious Palaces, are but Dross and
Rottenness. And however in our poor Arithmeticke, their Kingdoms Number seem
great, yet in the All violent courses must break.
only wise account of the Eternal, their Ages are but Minutes, and their
short Periods are near accomplished; for herein the Maxim is most true (in the
matters of Religion and Consciences of men, especially:) the violent motion
must break.

But Light from the Father of Lights has shined on your eyes: Mercy from the
Father of Mercies has softened your breasts, to be tender of the tenderest part
of Man, his Conscience: for indeed The Act for Civil Engagement of great
necessity.
there is no true Reason of Policy or Piety (as this Discourse discovers) why
that man that will subscribe (and give assurance for honest meaning) to that
most prudent Act of Civil Engagement, (what ever his Conscience be) should be
deprived and robbed of the liberty of it, in Spiritual and Religious matters.

I have (I fear) been long in my first Petition, my second shall be brief, is
this.

I most humbly and earnestly beseech your Honors The second Pettion.
in all the straits and difficulties which yet you are to pass (concerning
this great point of men's Consciences, or other high affairs) steer carefuly
off from one sunk Rock, on which so many gallant Vessels have miscarried. This
Rock lies deeper then others, and seldom has appeared but at some Deadlow
water, when the most high Judge of the whole world reckons with Men or States;
in low condititions and debasements.

I humbly beg from God the gracious continuance of his mighty Angels guard
about your sitting, to preserve your Honors from the flames of Wars abroad,
and from such flames at home: from Risings, from Tumults, from Mutini^s, from
Pistols, from Stabs, Worldly wisdom in straits a most dangerous rock.
from Powder-plots, from Poison, etc. but above all, from your own Wisdom and
Policies in straits and difficulties.

The holy History tells, that on this Rock (in a State strait) struck the great
Statist Jeroboam, to the ruin of himself and his posterity.

On this Rock split that famous and zealous Reformer Jehu.

This plucked the Crown from Saul's high head, when his own wisdom in straits
made him presumtuous about the worship of God.

This plucked off the Crown, and pluck out the eyes of Zedekiah, when in a
strait he trusted not in God, as Solomon speaks, but leaned to his own
understanding for his safety.

To which purpose my third Petition is, that in the The third Petition.
midst of so many great Negotiations of Justice, of Mercy to the Bodies and
Estates, or Spirits and Consciences of so many thousands and ten thousand, you
forget not to deal justly, and to show mercy to your selves: Oh how lamentable
and dreadful will it prove, if after all your high Employments (as the
State-Agents and Soul shipwreck.
Factors for the Commonweal!) if in the midst of all your cares and fears, and
tossings about the Souls and Consciences and salvations of others, your own
most dear and precious selves make an eternal shipwreck?

Your Honors know, that although men have chosen and culled you out as wise and
noble, yet God has not chosen (if Paul say true) many wise and noble to
eternal life and blessedness.

Who can love and honor you, and not cry to the God of Heaven for you, and to
your selves for your selves: Be not so busy about the Earthly estate, no nor
the Heavenly estate of others, as to forget to make sure your own vocation and
election, and to work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.

Oh let not this bold cry offend, and though offend, yet let it thoroughly awake
your noble spirits to know your dangers and hindrances (more then other men's)
Dangers of Parliament men.
from a world of distractions from without, from pride and self-confidence from
within, from the flatteries of such who (hoping for rewards and morsels from
you) proclaim abroad (that you may hear it) O blessed Christian Magistrates,
Christian Kings and Queens, Christian States, Christian Parliaments, Christian
Armies, so lulling your precious souls into an eternal sleep.

I need not remember your Honors of that most wonderful summa totalis of all
the castings up of Solomon's choice particulars (his wisdom, works, riches,
peace and pleasures,) Vanity and vexation of spirit. I need not Wonderful
Confessions of two mighty Kings.
remember you of that wonderful Confession of Philip the 2nd of Spain (near
his last) to his successor and son Philip the 3rd, to this effect: I have had
and expended (about the time of these 30 years) 594. millions of Treasure, and
yet gained nothing for my self but heart sorrow, and vexation of Spirit. Your
own observant eyes and ears (in the late most wonderful changes and tossings
of all affairs and things) cannot but read a thousand Lectures to your most
serious midnight and morning Thoughts of the most certain uncertainties of
Friends, Treasures, Revenues, Armies, Forts, Magazines, Castles, Ships and
Navies, Crowns and Lives.

Why then should your renowned wisdom and prudence excel the folly of others as
much as light excels darkness, in searching of the root and causes of
matters, in foreseeing Events and Consequences, in True Heavenly wisdom.
raising Moneys and Armies, in choosing Agents, in framing Laws, in managing
great affairs at home and abroad, in discovering plots, in preventing dangers,
and final overthrows by sure retreats, etc. If yet, alas, that wisdom make
not out a saving discovery of the most holy and only wise, the Alpha and Omega,
the first of causes and last of Ends (in whose hand is all your breath and
ways:) in raising spiritual supplies against your spiritually devouring
adversaries, in discovering their methods, designs, deceits, in preventing
that (that) fatal overthrow, and eternal defeat ( remediless, hopeless) where
the worm never dies, and the fire never goes out?

O why should your renowned valors so glory in the The only valor or
cowardice.
conquest of Cities, Castles, Ships and Armies, if your selves are led capti^e
in the spiritual chains of lusts and passions, a more lamentable, and more to
be deplored object, then the poorest slaves in the Spanish and Turkish Galleys.

What shall avail your admired diligence and activity in managing and quick
dispatching so many and so high True and best diligence.
affairs, by day and night, catching hold of all occasions, redeeming all
oportunities, improving all advantages, if you lose the fair Gales, and oreslip
and sleep away the precious and inestimable seasons and calls, and knocks and
offers of your own eternal Mercies?

What boots your exemplary and impartial justice on so many and so high
Delinquents, if your own bosoms True Justice and Righteousness.
are found traitorous to the State of Heaven, rebellious to the King, to the
God of spirits, and if in that most high Court of Justice from Gods most
dreadful tribunal you hear that thunder (which oh that you may never hear) ^o
ye cursed, etc.

It Is true your mercies have been eminent to the poor, to the opressed, to the
captive, to the maimed, to the Heavenly mercy.
wounded, to the fatherless, widows, etc. But will you now be cruel to your
selves, incompassionate to your own bowels, insensible of your own wounds and
miseries? O search and see, and be persuaded of your infinite want of Crummes
falling from your Table of Mercy! of the infinite price and value of the wine
and oil of the merciful (though despised Samaritan) to ease and supple, to
cleanse and heal your broken Hearts and wounded Spirits.

The flames of your zeal for the God of Israel (as that famous Iehu said) have
been so bright, and mounted so high against two mighty Factions of the Kings
and Queens (the Prelates and the Popes) that those flames have not only dazzled
and amazed all British eyes (the English Late zealous Reformations.
and the Scotch) but over the Seas, and over the Alps, and over the Pirenean
mountains, and Romes own 7 hills have flown and filled all Protestant and Popish
ears, and hearts, and tongues, with either admiration and exulting, or furious
rage and indignation! Yet what avails these glorious flames, and furious
whirling of your zealous Chariots, if yet they are but Jehu's? If Satan the
God of this world possess the Throne of Pride and Ostentation in your bosoms
(Come see my zeal which I have for the God of Israel) yea though you should go
on where Jehu left, and shoot home where he fell short, yet what avails it that
the God of Israel be in Iehu's mouth, when Godselfe, God-honour, etc. fill his
breast and heart? What gains he by the slaughter of Princes, Priests and Gods,
when Israel it self is but an Apostate state from the true worship Jehu his
zeal and reward.
of the God of Israel, and Iehu himself (according to the purity of Gods word
and ordinances at Jerusalem) reformed not so much as his own priv^t heart and
censcience?

Alas, what solid joy (most zealous Worthies) shall a Crown of leaves (a
temporal reward, Iehu's wages) bring to your Noble Heads and Breasts, if you
hear not at last that saving Call to all humble and selfe-denying Followers of
Jesus Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world.

Your admired public patience so wonderfully assaulted, so wonderfully laden
with such mighty Trials from Man's, from Gods hand, with such mighty Losses,
mighty Defeats, mighty Labors and Hazards, Of the Parliaments patience.
mighty Reproaches, etc. I say your unwearied Patience has stood (like some
mighty Rock, or Anvill) invincible: Yet who can style this Patince, or
Statepolicie! if your private Howses and Breasts swell and swarm with
rebellious Passions, Impatiences, Revenges! If in the furnaces of your own
private afflictions, and in the powrings out and changes of the most High upon
you, your Dross and Lees of unmortified, unsanctified Spirits remain
uncleansed! if you most humbly kiss not the Rods of the most High chastising
you by sicknesses, by lesses, and other trialls, humbly thankful, and longing
to declare the Spirits of true Children, truly desiring more and more to
partake of his Divine Nature and Holiness?

Yea, what avails the Crown of your enduring Constancy, that have rid out so
long a storm, held out Of the Crown of true Constancy.
so long a siege, not fainted in such tedious Travels, Labors, Oppositions,
Treacheries, Discouragements, but gloriously cast Anchor in the Port of
Patience; if yet your personal Righteousness pass away as the morning dew
melted with the warm beams of victorious and prosperous Success? If your own
professions of Christ Jesus prove but a fading color, and not died in the
right Grain of the precious blood of the Son of God?

Your Honors well remember, that the main point of Luthers Reformation, (and
before him of the Hussites in Germany and Bohemia, and before them of the
Wicklevists in England, and before them of the Waldenses in France, consisted
chiefly about Repentance and Faith in the blood of Christ: That the main
Contentions of Calvin, and since him of the most Reformers, have turned upon
the hinge of The Controversies of late years about Religion.
the Form of the Church, and the Administrations thereof, the lamentable though
precious Fuel of those fires of strife among the wisest, holiest, and
learned of the Followers of Christ Jesus in these times. You know the Lord
Jesus prophesied, That So many opposite Churches, so many opposite Christ's to
the only true.
many false Christ's should arise, and the Scriptures more then once give the
title of Christ to the Ghurch; whence it is evident, That every several
Model, Platform, and profession of a Church, is the profession of a various
and different Christ. Your Honors also know he spoke most true (being Truth it
Self) that said, That which is most highly esteemed amongst men, is
abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. Hence, such may the glorious
profession of Christ's or Churches be, as may ravish the eyes and hearts of men,
and from which the jealous eyes of the true Lord Jesus turn away as from the
false and counterfeit with indignation. Beside the Counterfeit in holy
Scripture, how famous was the Pageant of that counterfeit King of England,
which so The Pageant of Perken Warbeck in K. H. 7. his days, a picture of
false Christ's, or Churches.
haunted with long vexations one of the wisest of Englands Kings ( Henry the
seventh?) How wonderfully (even to astonishment) did the imposture of Richard
Duke of York (proclaiming Henry an usurper and ^alse.) I say, how wonderfully
did that monstrous imposture take, that not only Foraigners where that
Counterfeit most kept (the Archduke, the King of France, the King of Scots,
the King of Romans, the Irish Nation, etc.) were deceived with that feigned
King, but also so many gallant men of our own Nation, even to the wisest and
highest (as that famous Stanley Lord Chamberlain, the Preserver and R^iser of
King Henry himself) lamentably lost their Heads and Lives about that pretended
King? Now counterfeit Spiritual delusions of false and counterfeit Christ's, as
they are deeper and stronger, so they find more easy possession of the Ears
and Souls of men, so woefully prepared by natural self-deceivings.

On six principal Pillars or (...). The six fundamentals of Christian
Religion. Heb. 6.
Foundations (says the holy Spirit, Heb. 6. 6.) is built the fabric of of
true Christianity: On Repentance, on Faith, on Baptismes, on laying on of
Hands, on the Resurrection, and the Eternal Judgment.

Concerning the two middle ones of these there are and have been mighty and
lamentable differences among the Scholars of Jesus, who yet agree in the other
four, of Repentance and Faith, the Resurrection and Eternal Judgment.

Whatsoever your Honors apprehensions are of with or without the first two,
salvation or no salvation.
the four last, I beseech you (as you love your lives to Eternity) make sure
of the two first, and ply (with Sails and Oars) day and nights, and give not
rest to your souls till you have anchored in some blessed assurance, that
although you find not satisfaction in the many frames of Churches pretending;
yet that you have saved (as once you know a wise and honorable personage said)
the Bird in your Bosom: and that those your very eyes which have seen so much
of Christ Jesus, and so many wonderful changes, and have been rotten awhile in
their holes (in Death) shall joyfully possess, and fill their holes again, and
be gloriously blessed with the sight of a Redeemer, when these Heavens and this
Earth shall pass away. For which humbly and uncessantly prays

Your Honors most unworthy, yet unfainedly devoted, Roger Williams.

Your Honors (wanting time to read much) may please to view in a few minutes
the Portraicture and Map of the whole Bloody Tenent in the latter end of the
last Chapt. Chap. 79.

To the several Respective General Courts, especially that of the Massachusetts
in N. ENGLAND.
Honored and beloved Friends and Countrymen,
WHile You sit dry on your safe American N, England Privilege.
Shoars (by Gods most gracious Providence) and have beheld the doleful
tossings of so many of Europs Nations, yea of our dearest Mother, aged England,
in a Sea of Tears and Blood, I am humbly bold to present your Eyes and Hearts
with this (not unseasonable) discourse of Blood, of the Bloody Tenants of
Persecution, Oppression, and Violence, in the Cause and matters of Conscience
and Religion.

It is a Second Conference of Peace and Truth, an Examination of the worthily
honored and beloved Mr. Cottons Whole Nation of Lions or Persecutors.
Reply to a former Conference and Treatise of this Subject. And although it
concern all Nations, which have persecuted and shed the Blood of Jesus, the
Bloody Roman Empire, with all the Savage Lions thereof, Emperors and Popes,
the bloody Monarchies of Spain and France, and the rest of Europs Kingdoms and
States (which under their several Vizards and Preteness of Service to God, have
in so many thousands of his Servants, Murdered so many thousand times over,
his dear Son) yea although it concern that Bloody Turkish Monarchy, and all
the Nations of the World who practice violence to the Conscience of any
Christian, or Antichristians, Jews or Pagans; yet it concerns your selves (with
all due respect otherwise be it spoken) in some more eminent The Bloody Tenent
more especially concerns N. E.
degrees: Partly, as so many of yours of chief note (beside Mr. Cotton) are
engaged in it; partly as N. England (in respect of Spiritual and Civil State)
professes to draw nearer to Christ Jesus then other States and Churches, and
partly as N. England is believed to hold and practice such a Bloody Doctrine,
notwithstanding Mr Cottons Vails and Pretenses of not persecuting men for
conscience, but punishing them only for sinning against conscience! and of but
so and so, not persecuting, but punishing Heretics, Blasphemers, Idolators,
Seducers, etc.

It is Mr. Cottons great mistake and forgetfulness, to charge The occasion of
the present con^^^versie.
me with a public examination of his private Letter to me; whereas in Truth,
there never passed such Letters between himself and me about this Subject; as
he alleges: But the Prisoners Arguments against Persecution, with Mr. Cottons
Answer thereunto (which I examined) I say these were unexpectedly, and solemnly
sent to me, as no private thing, with earnest desire of my consideration or
Animadversions on them.

These Agitations between Mr. Cotton and others, so sent unto me, as also the
Model of Church and Civil Power by Gods Providence coming to hand, I say they
seemed to me to be of too too Public a nature: And in which my soul not only
heard the doleful cry of the souls under the Altar to the Lord for Vengeance,
but their earnest solicitations, yea and the command of the Lord Jesus for
Vindication of their bloods and lives spilt and destroyed, by this Bloody
Tenent, though under never so Fair and Glorious Shows and Colors.

The most holy and allseeing knows how bitterly I resent This Contestation is
not with persons, but against their bloody Doctrins and Tenants.
the least difference with Mr. Cotton, yea with the least of the followers of
Jesus, of what conscience or worship soever: How mournfully I remember this
stroke (as I believe) on Mr. Cottons eye, and the eyes of so many of Gods
precious children and servants, in these and other parts; that those eyes so
peircing and heavenly (in other holy and precious Truths of God) should yet be
so over-clouded and bloudshotten in this: I grieve I must contest, and maintain
this contestation with (in other respects) so dearly beloved and so worthy
Adversaries.

And yet why mention I or respect I man that is but Grass, and the children of
men that must die, whose Brains, Eyes and Tongues (even the holiest and the
highest) must shortly sink and rot in their skuls and holes.

Without remembering therefore who my Adversary is, nor all the Wormwood and
the Gall so frequently in Mr. Cottons Reply against me; I fully and only level
with an upright and single eye (the Lord Jesus graciously assisting) against
that fowl and monstrous bloody Tenent and Doctrine, which has so slily (like
the old Serpent the Author of it) crept under the shade and shelter of Mr.
Cottons Patronage and Protection.

My end is to discover and proclaim the crying and horrible The end of this
Treatise.
guilt of the bloody Doctrine, as one of the most Seditious, Destructive,
Blasphemous, and Bloudiest in any or in all the Nations of the World,
notwithstanding the many fine Vails, Pretenses and Colors of not persecuting
Christ Jesus, but Heretics, not Gods Truth or Servants, but Blasphemers,
Seducers: not Persecuting men for their Conscience, but for sinning against
their Conscience, etc.

My end is to persuade Gods Judah (especially) to wash their hands from Blood,
to cleanse their hearts and ways The cry of the Lord Jesus.
from such Unchristian practices, toward all that is man, capable of a Religion
and a Conscience, but most of all toward Christ Jesus, who cries out (as he did
to Saul) in the sufferings of the least of his Servants: Old England, Old
England, New England, New England, King, King, Parliaments, Parliaments,
General Courts, General Courts, Presbyterians, Presbyterians, Independents,
Independents, etc. Why persecute you me? It is hard for you to kick against the
Pricks.

My end is to prepare the Servants and Witnesses of Jesus (what Truth soever of
his they testify) for that great and general and most dreadful slaughter of
the witnesses, which I cannot but humbly fear, and almost believe, is near
approaching, and will be Vshered in, provoak'd and hastened by the preud
security, worldly pomp, fleshly confidence, and bloody violences of Gods own
children, woefully exercised each against other, and so rendered woefully ripe for
such an Universal and dreadful Storm and Tempest!

My end and scope is to put a Christian bar, and just and merciful A Bar
against Persecution.
Spoaks in the wheels of such zealous reforming Jehues, who (under the Vizard
and Name of Baals Priests) may possibly be induced to account it good service
unto God, to kill and burn his precious Servants.

My end is, that the greatest Sons of Blood (the Papists) may know, when ever
(as the Saints in Queen Mary's days confessed) when ever it shall please the
jealous God for the Or a Testimony against it, especially in the Papists.
sins of his Saints to turn the Wheels of his most deep and holy Providence,
and to give the Power to the Paw of the Beast, against his Saints and Truths,
for their last dreadful slaughter (as Daniel and John do clearly seem to tell
us) I say those Sons of Blood, the bloody Papists, may know, that their bloody
Doctrine of persecution, was disclaimed by some, whom they call Sectaries: That
equal and impartial favor was pleaded to the Catholics, as well as to their
own or other men's Souls and Consciences: And that if that great Whore shall yet
proceed not only to drink the wine of their carnal Jollitie, in the Bowls of
the holy Ordinances of Christ's Temple and Sanctuary; but also to drink more
drunk in the blood of his Saints and witnesses! This Testimony may stand as a
Character of Blood, fixed by the hand of Gods eternal Truth and Peace, upon the
Gates of their bloody Courts, and upon the forehead of their bloody Judges,
who (under what pretense soever) hunt and persecute the Souls and Consciences
of any Child of God or Man.

My truly honored and beloved Countrymen, vouchsafe me A double prison, of
prejudice and Conscience.
I beseech you that humane and Christian Liberty to say, that I fear your
Spirits are locked up in a double prison from any serious Audience to ought of
mine presented to you. The first of Prejudice against such and such a person.
The second of Conscience, against such and such a matter; and that while my
Conscience or another man's says, Let me be Heretic, Blasphemer, Idolater,
Seducer, with Christ Jesus, with his Apostles, Saints and Witnesses: Let me
(for his sake) bear Frowns, Censures, and Persecutions, from men so dear, so
excellent, so holy! Your Consciences plead for equal Liberty of opposing in
your way, all such erroneous or wandering Consciences.

For answer, It is but Humanity, it is but Christianity to exercise meekness
and moderation to all men: It is humane and Christian Wisdom to listen to a
serious Alarm against a Common Enemy: Prove the Alarm false, it may be but
troublesome: Prove it true, it may be Destruction to have despised it.

As the wounds of a Lover are better then the Kisses of an Enemy: So says the
same Spirit, an open Rebuke is better then secret Love.

But yet your Consciences (as all men's) must be satisfied, 2 Foundamentall
Hints against Persecution.
I have therefore in all these Agitations humbly presented (amongst others) two
Foundamental Hints or Considerations.

First that the People (the Original of all free Power and Government) are not
invested with Power from Christ Jesus, to rule his Wife or Church, to keep it
pure, to punish Opposites by force of Arms, etc.

Secondly, that the Pattern of the National Church of Israel, was a Nonesuch,
unimitable by any Civil State, in all or any of the Nations of the World
beside: In this latter hint I insisted more largely in my former Considerations
upon Church and Civil Power in N. E. unto which Mr. Cotton replied not (and of
any other Replies of any (to whom Mr. Cotton refers it) do I yet not know of.)

I Add, it is a glorious Character of every true Disciple or Scholar of Christ
Jesus, to be never too old to learn.

It is the Command of Christ Jesus to his Scholars, to try all things: And
Liberty of trying what a Friend, yea what an (esteemed) Enemy presents, has
ever (in point of Christianity) proved one especial means of attaining to the
truth of Christ.

For I dare confidently appeal to the consciences of Gods most knowing
servants, if that observation be not true, to Liberty of trying forbidden
Books, etc.
wit, that it has been the common way of the Father of Lights, to enclose the
Light of his holy Truths, in dark and obscure, yea and ordinarily in forbidden
Books, persons and Meetings, by Satan styled Conventicles.

New English Voyages, have taught most of our Old English spirits, how to put
due prices upon the most common and ordinary undervalued mercies; how precious
with some has New Englands Lessons.
been a little water? how dainty with others a piece of bread: How welcome to
some the poorest howsing? Yea the very Land and Earth, after long and tedious
passages?

There is one commodity for the sake of which most of Gods children in N.
England have run their mighty hazards; a commodity marvellously scarce in
former times (though in some late years by Gods most gracious and mighty hand
more plentiful) in our native Country: It is a Liberty of searching after
Gods most holy mind and pleasure.

Out of this most precious and invaluable Jewel, if you suffer Satan (that
grand thief and cheater to bereave you, and that it shall be a crime, humbly
and peaceably to question even Liberty of searching our Truth, hardly got, and
as hardly kept.
Laws and Statutes, or what ever is even publicly taught and delivered, you
will most certainly find your selves after all your long Run (like that little
Frenchman who killed the Duke of Guise, and was taken next morning near the
place from whence he had fled upon a swift horse all night) Jan le petit.
I say you will most certainly find your selves, but where you were, enslaved
and captivated in the Chains of those Popish Darknesses, [to wit, Ignorance is
the mother of Devotion, and we must believe as the Church believes, etc.]

Remember therefore (O ye the Cream and Flower of English Plantations in
America) what a black and direful a cole it was with which it pleased the
Spirit of God in Habacuck, to brand the Assirian Monarchy, to wit [a Bitter
and hasty Nation] but in the spirit of meekness, in the meekness of wisdom,
be pleased to remember that possible it is for Gods The wonderful
deceitfulness of the hearts of Gods only people.
visible, only people in the world to have very foul and bloody hands, full of
Blood (Isa. 1.)! To build up Zion and Jerusalem (that is, to erect the Visible
Church and Kingdom of God) with Blood (Mic. 3.) and with Iniquity, That the
Heads and Judges of Gods People, may judge for a reward (and the deceitful
heart of man graspeth at rewards more then of one sort) that the Priests and
Prophets thereof may teach and Prophecy (and it may be frequently and
excellently, but yet for) an hire and for money; And that yet their consciences
may lean upon Jehovah, and they may say with confidence, is not the Lord
amongst us? None evil shall come unto us; etc. O remember that your Gifts are
rare, your Professions of Religion (in such way) rare, your Persecutions Mic.
3. N. England must be singular, as in Mercies, so in Judgments.
and hidings from the storms abroad, rare and wonderful: So in proportion your
Transgressions, estate and publicksins cannot but be of a rare and
extraordinary Guilt: Nor will New England's sorrows (when sins are ripe and
full) be other then the Dregs of Germanie's, of Ireland's, of England's, and of
Scotland's Tears and Calamities.

Amongst the crying sins of our own or other sinful Nations: those two are
ever amongst the lowdest, to wit, Invented Devotions to the God of Heaven.
Secondly, Violence and Oppression on the Sons of men (especially (if his sons)
for 2 of the loudest State. crying sins.
dissenting, and against both these, and that the impartial and dreadful hand
of the most holy and Jealous God (a consuming fire) tear and burn not up at
last the Roots of these Plantations, but graciously discovering the Plants
which are not his, he may graciously fructify and cause to flourish what his
Right hand will own: I say this is the humble and unfeigned desire and cry (at
the Throne of Grace) of your so long despised Outcast:

ROGER WILLIAMS.

To the Merciful and Compassinate READER.
WHile the unmercifull Priests and Levits turn away their cruel Eyes and Feet
from their Soul wounds, the deepest.
poor wounded neighbors (the oppressed for matters of Religion and Worship) it
will be no ungrateful act to present thy tender heart and Ear (Compassionate
Samaritane) with the doleful cry of the Souls under the Altar [How long Lord
before thou avenge our blood on them that dwell upon the Earth] and to pray thy
mournful view of the Akeldemae's and fields of Blood, where thousands and ten
thousand times ten thousands of the precious Saints (Servants and Witnesses of
Jesus) lie slaughtered in their bloody Gore, in all Ages and in all Nations,
where the Trumpet of the Son of God has sounded:

Here and there among these slaughtered heaps of Saints lie (thin and rare) the
slaughtered Carcasses of some poor Arrians or Papists, or other poor deluding
and deluded souls: This seeming color of Impartial Justice serves (woefully)
The Akeldamaes, or fields of Blood, caused by the Bloody Tenent of Persecution.
that murtherous enemy of all Mankind for a Stale or Covert under which his
bloody Game goes on, of persecuting (or hunting) the harmless Deer, the
children of the living God.

For the sake then of the dear Saints and Followers of Jesus, for his holy sake
and Truth, for the holy name and Truth of the most holy Father of Lights, the
God of it, thy compassionate eye is here presented with a Second Conference and
view of Mr. Cottons Reply, and artificial bloody washing of the Bloody Tenent.

The Battle about any Truth of God in Christ, is fought and managed by that
most high and glorious Michael the Archangel and Son of God, attended with all
his Holy Angels, the Messengers and Witnesses of his Truth on the one side: On
the other side by that great red Dragon, whose bloody Followers, Michael, the
son of God, and Satan the red Dragon, the two great Generals.
Devils and men of all sorts and Nations, but especially the Roman bloody
Emperor, and Roman Popes (with Lyon-like Fury, and Fox-like craft) have sucked
the Blood and broke the Bones, and devoured the Flesh of so many hundred
thousand, thousands of the King of Kings his spiritual Hinds and Roes in this
their bloody hunting: So that aptly (I had almost said Prophetically) wrote
one of their own Roman Poets of the lamentable condition of the harmless Deer
above other Creatures: Dente tuetur Aper, defendunt, Cornua Taurum, Imbelles
Damae quid nisi Praeda sumus?

It Is a lamentable and cruel sight to see the sons of one poor man and woman,
(all the Globe of the world over (like Babels builders) so vastly disagreeing
about a God and his Worship.

It Is lamentable to see these one Man's sons Murdered and Massacred (in mutual
slaughters) as for other pretended Causes: So this especially of Conscience and
Religion.

It Is yet more lamentable and never enough to be lamented, Lamentable discord^
about Religion, even among the servants of the true and living God.
that while the Sons of Men do but their kind! the Sons of God, the sons of the
God of Place, the Lillies, Doves and Spouses of Jesus should thus discord and
jart about this Christ their hope! that (like the very Turks and Persians
contending about their Mahomet his Successors) the Children of God should tear
out each others Throats about the last Will and Testament of the Son of God
their elder brother: That Ephraim should be against Manasseh, and Manasseh
against Ephraim, and both against Judah; yet all sons of one, and professors of
one God of Israel:

But oh the low and shallow comprehensions of the sons of The Israelites
divided.
men, who as a Rotten thing (says Job) consumes* Oh the depths of the
Councels and workings of the most High, most Holy, and only wise, outshooting
all the Generations of men, who heat and know no more then Jonathans Lad, Is
not the Arrow beyond thee? etc.

His holy Wisdom has an heavenly Reason (to touch a little upon this
sorrowful string) of that bloody Device and Joseph sold by his brethren.
Sale of innocent Joseph by his own Brethren, the sons of one Israel and God.

He knows why so holy a Leader of such a miraculous People (as I may truly
call them) why Aaron (I say) was so left to the horrible, ungrateful, and
outrageous importunities Israel force Aaron to make them Gods.
of this (then the only) People of God, as to frame a Beastly worship, and to
turn the most glorious and dreadful Godhead into the similitude of a Beast
that ea^eth grass.

He knows why the Israel of God) Rebels, as Moses passionately called them)
should so often grieve the holy Spirit of Isreal's murmurings.
God with their murmurings, and be so near to dash out the brains of their most
faithful Leaders.

He knows why two Parts or Angles of that Heavenly Triangle (Moses, Aaron, and
Miriam so near in Earthly and Heavenly Relations) I say why that rare Pair,
Aaron and Aaron and Miriam against Moses.
Miriam should yet envy and mutiny against their so dear a Brother, and so
meek and heavenly a Ruler, Moses.

His heavenly wisdom has a reason of that wonderful Shrinking of an Army of
32 thousand Israelits, into one poor 300 left behind, and found only fit for
Gods battles against An Army of 32000 Israelites shrunk into 300.
the Midianits.

A reason why those two famous Champions, Samson and David should find so great
discouragement to their fighting of Gods Battles, the men of Judah basely
binding Samson, Samson and David discouraged by their own brethren. Benjamin
almost destroyed by the 11 Tribes. Isreal's rejecting of Samuel and the Lord
himself.
and the chief of David's own Brethren flying in his face with open Railings.

A reason of that all most utter consumption of one whole Tribe of Isreal's 12.
by the furious flames of the Zeal and Indignation of the eleven.

These things happened not by chance, but as the Apostle speaks in Types (in
curious and wonderful figures) so that his holy wisdom knows: why Israel must
be so weary of Samuel and himself, and (like the Nations of the World) must
have a King to be their Champion and fight their Battles:

Why Saul this desired King, the King of Gods own choice and Isreal's, why yet
he must hunt an innocent David, as a Saul persecuting David.
Flea in the bosom, or a Partridg on the mountains, until he has slain himself
to set the Crown on David's head.

A reason of that long continued Faction of so many Tribes against this David's
Crown, and that Israel (so importunate, so impatient for a King) should now
power out each others Ishbosheth and Israel against David and Judah.
blood about a Successor, whether a David, or (the son of Persecution, Saul)
Ishbosheth.

A reason (when David wears both Crowns in one, and has all that a most
gracious God could epsy out fit for David to receive, that yet he wants a wife
that had so many, and rather then a David's sinful Desires and Whordomes shall
David stabbing Vriah with his Pen.
want a Covering, the blood of Vriah (that is fire or zeal of God) shall die
and make up one to cover them.

O the Depths of the Councels of the holy one of Israel why (there being but 12
Tribes in all) 10 Tribes of his own The divisions and dispersions of the Tribes.
people should tear away from 2, and after many Captivities of the one and the
other, both the one and the other now are scattered from each other upon the
face of the Earth, and as yet no certain Tidings what is befaln to the 10 Tribes
of the Israel of God.

He knows why to leave an upright perfect Asa^'s heart to such folly and
wrath, as to lay a Faithful Prophet (admonishing him from God) by the heels.

Yea, why the Followers of the meek Lamb of God, should Asa imprisoning the
Prophet.
burn in such Unchristian Flames, as to call for fire from Heaven to consume
the contemners and despis^rs of their Lord Christ's Disciples destrous of fire
from heaven, etc
and Master, who quenches the fire of their rash zeal with this mild Check,
You know not of what Spirit you are of.

Why such (...) ( Bitterness as the Word is) should rise between two Turtle
Doves, Paul and Barrabas, and that about Bitterness between Saul and Barrabas.
their most laborious and most dangerous Ministeries.

Why one cries Paul, another Apollo, another Caphas, another Christ, even in
the first established Churches.

This holy Plot, this heavenly design of the most holy and only wise God, thus
to permit the contentions and divisions Gods mercy draws one many sweet fruits
from the bitter contentions of his servants.
of his own Servants, as it displaies Himself only Perfect and Excellent, and
all (the best of) men in all Ages, but farthingcandles, yea smoking
Firebrands: As it brightly proves the admirable consent and Angelical Harmony
of the holy Scripture, relating Histories, and in those Histories enfolding
Prophesies, fulfilled before men's daily view thousands of years after: As it
makes us see our spiritual Poverty and Beggary, and infinite need of Mercy and
Grace, and Peace from Heaven, and drives us to continual Prayers and cries, for
merciful supplies from thence! As it disrelisheth this present sweetest life,
yea the very life of Spiritual Love, in the Communion of the Saints of God
themselves, if compared with the most pure and spiritual and absolute Joys and
Life approaching.

So does this heavenly Council of the most High, abundantly stop the mouths of
all malicious, who (although they delight to scratch their Athenian Itch of
hearing Novelties, new things, News, yet) stumble they at this stumbling block
of Novelties, new Churches, new Ministers, new Discipline, new Baptism, new
Light: The ancient of days (say they) the God of Peace and Love cannot be in
such Divisions: The old Bishops were better, the old Popes themselves more
tolerable.

But this is but the barking of malice against Gods holiness which his true
servants desire to partake of! Against Gods Truth, which his servants must
contend for, (yea though it be one against another) against Gods Councels who
has so laid his holy project, that what he now sets out in a clear Light and
fairer Print, is the very same (had we enlightened eyes to see it (with the old
edition of former times, more dark and rude in Ceremonies, Types, and figures.

I cannot but foresee variety of diverse Passions and Affections, Various
affections of Readers expected.
in a Variety of Beholders of this present Controversy: Some will please
themselves and their curiosities in the Noveltie of such discourses: some will
rejoice to see the light appear, and yet mourn in the lamentable differences of
such who profess the same God and Christ about it: Some will be angry and cry
out of Blasphemy against their Gods, their Bellies, and their Titles, etc. Some
will fear disturbances of the Civil, and some of the Spiritual peace and
Christianity: Yet some will truly desire, to search and know the will of God,
humbly desirous to do it on earth, as the Angels do it in heaven.

The Courteous Reader may please to see, that in the The Model of N. English
Church and Civil Power.
first Conference of Peace and Truth, there was Discust, a Model of New
English Church and Civil Power, which Mr. Cotton in his Reply waved and
referred to others of the New English Elders to Reply unto, which whether they
have so done as yet I have not heard:

Together with Mr. Cottons Reply to the Bloody Tenent, Of Mr. Cottons Reply to
the Answer to his Letter.
there was also added a Reply of Mr. Cotton to an Answer of his Letter: The
Examination of this Reply I desired, and intended should have been here
presented; But the streights of time (being constantly drunk up by necessary
Labors for bread for many depending on me, the discharge of Engagements, and
wanting helps of transcribing) I say the streights of time were such, that the
Examination of that Reply could not together with this, be fitted for Public
view, though with the Lords assistance will not delay to follow:

Touching Mr. Cotton I present two words: First for his Person, Secondly for
his Work.

For his Person, although I rejoice that since it pleased Gods wisdom adored in
the Discussing of the Bloody Tenent.
God to lay a Command on my Conscience to come in as his poor Witness in this
great Cause: I say I rejoice it has pleased him to appoint so able, and
excellent, and Conscionable an Instrument to bolt out the Truth to the bran: So
I can humbly say it in his holy presence, it is my constant heaviness and souls
grief as to differ from any fearing God; so much more ten thousand times from
Mr: Cotton, whom I have ever desired and still desire highly to esteem, and
dearly to respect, for so great a portion of mercy and grace vouchsafed unto
him, and so many Truths of Christ Jesus maintained by him. And therefore
(notwithstanding that some (of no common Judgment and respect to him, have
said, that he wrote his washing of the Bloody Tenent in Blood against Christ
Jesus, and Gall against me, yet) if upon so slippery and narrow a passage I
have slpit (notwithstanding my constant resolution to the contrary) into any
Term or Expression unbeseeming his Person, or the Matter (the cause of the
most high in hand considered) I humbly crave pardon of God, and Mr. Cotton also.

Secondly concerning his Work, I call to mind a speech of one of eminent Note
in N. England (observing a disposition in men for one man to deifie another,
and that some of A memorable Speech touching Mr. Cotton.
no small note had said they could hardly believe that God would suffer Mr.
Cotton to err) the Speech was this [I fear that God may leave Mr. Cotton to
some great error, that men may see he is a man] etc.

But concerning his Work, the observant Reader will soon discover, that
whatever Mr. Cottons Stand is, yet he most weakly provides himself of very
strange Reserves, and Retreats: to point with the finger at 2 or 3 most
frequent and remarkable.

First when he seems to be overwhelmed with the lamentable and doleful cries of
the Souls under the Altar, crying The strange retreats Mr. Cotton makes in this
controversy.
out for Vengeance on their Persecutors that dwell upon the Earth! He often
retreats, and professes to hold no such Doctrine of persecuting the Saints, no
nor of any for cause of Conscience, nor that the Magistrate should draw forth
his Sword in matters of Religion.

When it is urged that through this whole Book he Persecutes or Hunts (by name)
the Idolater, the Blasphemer, the Heretic, the Seducer, and that to Death or
Banishment: The rearing of Lion like persecution, page
and amongst other Expressions uses this for one [If there be stones in the
streets, the Magistrate need not run for a Sword to the Smiths shop, nor to the
Ropier for an Halter to punish Heretics, etc.] Mr. Cotton retreats into the
Land of Israel, and calls up Moses and his Laws against Idolaters, Blasphemers,
Seducers, etc:

When he is Challenged (and that by his own frequent confession in his Book)
for producing the Pattern of a National Church when he stands only for a
Congregationall! for producing that national church of Israel, so miraculous,
so typical, as a Copy or Samplar for the Nations and Peoples of the World (who
have no such miraculous and Typical respect upon them) Mr. Cotton retreats to
Moral Equity, that the Seducer and he that kills a Soul should die.

When it is urged that Christ Jesus at his so long typed out coming, abolished
those National shadows, and erected The strange reluctancies of the Lamb. like
spirit of Mr. Cotton forced to against the Persecuting Lion.
his Spiritual Kingdom of Israel, appinted Spiritual Officers, Punishments,
etc. and that those Scriptures, Tit. 3* against the Heretics; and Rev. 2.
against Baalam and Iezabel prove only a spiritual death and cutting off from
Christ Jesus his holy land of life and peace, his church and kingdom. Mr.
Cotton retreats and confesses Christ's Kingdom is spiritual, not national, but
congregational, and that those Scriptures hold forth a Spiritual cutting off,
and he so produces them to prove the heretic so to be cut off, alleging that
the question was put in general terms, that he knew not what Persecution
should be intended, and that an unjust excommunication is as sore a persecution
as an unjust banishment. When he is urged with the nature of the consciences
(even of all men to God or Gods in their worships, he professes that he is
wronged, and that he does not hold that any man should be persecuted for his
conscience, but for sinning against his conscience. When all the consciences in
the world cry out against him for setting up the civil power and officers, and
Courts of civil Justice, to judge of the conviction of men's souls and
consciences! Mr. Cotton retreats to his last refuge, and says that although
this be the duty of all the Magistrates in the world, yet not any of them must
meddle to punish in Religion, until they be informed which is (upon the point)
until he is sure they will draw their swords for his Conscience, Church, etc.
against all other as heretical, blasphemous.

The monstrous Partiality of such suspending, etc. of Monstrous partiality, as
touching the Magistracy.
hanging up all the Magistrates in the world, (except a few of his own
persuasion) and that from so principal and main a part of their Office, and
that so many thousands in the Nations of the world all the world over, and that
constantly and perpetually all their days. If it please the most jealous and
righteous God to hide it (I say the monstrousness of such a Suspension) from
Mr. Cottons eyes, yet thousand and ten thousands will behold and wonder at it.

But (fearing to exceed in discourse at door) let every merciful and
compassionate Reader freely enter in, and search the in most Rooms and Closets:

If thou truly love the Truth and Peace, thou art too near of kin to the Prince
of Peace and Truth it self, long to escape the Hunters. If the forty two
months of the The slaughter of the Witnesses, Revel. 2. 10.
Beasts reign, and the two hundred and threescore days of the prophecy of the
Witnesses of Jesus in Sackcloth be expired: yet I fear the three days and a
half of the greatest slaughter of the Witnesses is not over: Yet fear not what
must be suffered, although the Devil cast (not only some, but) all Christ's
Witnesses into Prison: yea, although he murder and fling out the Karkasses of
the Saints to shame and injury, yet the mighty Spirit of God will raise them on
their feet again, and into heavenly glory, out of this shame shall they ascend
in the sight of their bloody enemies.

How many and how various are the Disputings, etc. about what should be this
three days and a halfes calamity? How many hope this storm is over? how many
fear it is now a breeding? Yet why should we fear so short a draught (though)
of a bitter Cup, when tempered by the gracious hand of an Heavenly Father,
begun by so dear an Elder Brother, so sweet a Savior? The Revelations of John,
and the Revelations of Gods wonderful Providence, seem to proclaim wonderful
and dreadful Discoveries of the Son of God approaching. And it is as sure as
that there is a Lord Jesus Christ, that God will subdue all his enemies, that
he will shortly break Christ Jesus shortly ruining the two dreadful Empites of
the bloody Turk and Pope.
(and make all his followers tread on) the proudest Necks born up this day in
the world, even the grandest Seigniories of the Turkish and Popish Empires, the
two so mighty opposers of the Son of God. And it is not improbable, both their
ruins and downfall must be from some top and pinnacle of glorious prosperity
and furious outrage against their (Antichristian and Christian) enemies.

The chiefest European enemies of the All devouring Turk (though all that bear
the name of Christ The Turks sorest enemies in Euope.
are his enemies) are more especially the Pope, the Emperor, the King of Spain
and the Venetians, by whom Christ Jesus (probably) will dash that mighty Empire
into pieces, as he seems to have prophesied of old by his servant Daniel: yet
probably, as I said before, this downfall must be from some more eminent height
of Turkish bloody pride and glory, which that blasphemous and bloody Monarchy
shall immediately before attain unto.

The sorest enemies of the Roman Popes, are the The Popes sorest enemies.
witnesses of the Truths of Jesus, whom he has not left himself without,
during the 42 months of the reign of this mighty and dreadful Beast. Against
these blessed followers of the Lamb must (probably) the rage of this bloody
Beast rise high in that his great slaughter of them and triumph three days and
an half over them, ( Rev. 11.) and this not long before his own eternal
downfall.

Many have been the Interpretations of that prophecy, and some late
Applications of the witnesses and Time to particular persons and Times of late.

But (with all due respect to the Apprehensions of any studious of the truth of
Jesus) I conceive the matter is of a more general consideration.

For in all that world over that wondered after the Beast, has Christ Jesus
raised up a Generation or kind of Witnesses bearing testimony against him. This
witness (more or less) to the several Truths of Jesus, he has been pleased
to maintain, before and since Luthers time, especially: The finishing of the
Testimony must (probably) be general, not only in England, but in the rest of
the Protestant Nations; which finishing of the witness (probably) will consist
in the matters of the purity of his worship, and the Government of the Lord
Jesus in his own holy Appointments and Institutions. The slaughter of these
witnesses must also (probably) be general, and in the three days and half
triumph over them general: upon which follows that most glorious and general
rising of the witnesses unto their glory promised, Rev. 11.

I confess in this plea for freedom to all Consciences Freedom of Conscience
in worship due even to the Papists themselves. See Chap.
in matters (merely) of worship, I have impartially pleaded for the freedom of
the consciences of the Papists themselves, the greatest enemies and persecutors
(in Europe) of the Saints and Truths of Jesus: Yet I have pleaded for no more
then is their due and right, and (what ever else shall be the Consequent) it
shall stand for a monument and testimony against them, and be an aggravation of
their former, present, or future cruelties against Christ Jesus the Head, and
all that uprightly love him, his true Disciples and Followers.

It is true, I have not satisfaction in the clear discovery of those holy
Prophesies and Periods set down and prefixed by the holy Spirit in Daniel,
John, etc. concerning the Kingdom of Christ Jesus: Yet two things I profess in
the holy presence of God, Angels and Men.

First, my humble Desires and Resolution (the Lord assisting) to contend for
the true and visible worship of the true and living God, according to the
Institution and Appointment of the last will and Testament of Christ Jesus.

2. I believe and profess, that such persons, such Churches are got nearest to
Christ Jesus, on whose forehead are written these blessed characters of the
true Lord Jesus Christ; First, content with a poor and low condition in worldly
things. 2. An holy cleansing from the filthiness of false worships and worldly
conversations. 3. An humble and constant endeavor to attain (in their
simplicity and purity) to the Ordinances and appointments of Christ Jesus. 4.
Are so far from smiting, killing, and wounding the Opposites of their
profession and worship, that they resolve themselves patiently to bear and
carry the Cross and Gallows of their Lord and Master, and patiently to suffer
with him. In the number of such his poor servants who as unfeignedly desire
(notwithstanding my plea against Persecutors and Persecution) I say as
unfeignedly desire to suffer as cheerfully with Christ Jesus, as gloriously to
reign with him, desires to be,

Thine unfeigned, though unworthiest of all the Followers of JESUS. Roger
Williams.

The Bloody Tenent yet more Bloody, By Master Cottons attempting to wash it
with the Blood of the Lamb.
Examination of CHAP. I.
Truth. Blessed be the God of truth and peace (sweet peace) that once again, we
find a corner and a few hours to entertain our sweet embraces and discourses
about that Bloody Tenent of Persecution for cause of conscience.


Peace. It is indeed Jehovah's work, and it is mavelous in our eyes, that
'midst this worlds combustions, such a corner and such hours are found.


Truth. Dear friends, the longer absent, meet the sweeter; and Truth and peace
rarely meet in this vale of tears.
have cause to spend each minute to his praise, who wonders works, and this not
the least, that we two see each others face at all in these tempestuous days
and vale of tears.

How harshly were our last conferrings entertained by some? How were our selves
suspected, and traduced for counterfeits; and our pious and peaceable
Meditations, cruelly condemned to the devouring flames?


Truth. That ever was our portion, ever since the earthen pots arose against
their glorious Potter; and no better lot we must expect, while the time does
last that is determined.


Peace. Mean while it is yet our lamentation, that so many of Many dear Saints of
God plead for persecution: Oh how righteous is it with God to send them
persecution!
our darlings, whom we have tendered as our eyes, have both in Print and Pulpit,
cried out against us; and amongst the rest, one of thy dearest eldest children,
(too too worthy to be) the defender of the Bloody Tenent of Persecution.


Truth. Our love shall cover his shame and nakedness; and our wisdoms pity his
heavy labor, Blackamore-washings, and so great expense of precious time and
spirit, in laboring to wash this so deeply bloody, and Blackamore- Tenent, in
the blood of the Lamb of God.


Peace. So parents and true friends love and pity theirs, though sick, though
froward and distracted; and let our Bowels yearne over him, who tears out
ours: who knows but once before he sleep his last, in the pit of rottenness, he
may awake and give glory to the God of peace and truth, of patience and long
suffering; whose thoughts, whose ways, whose love, whose pity has no bounds,
nor limits, toward them whom he has loved before the worlds foundation.

O let these blessed buds, of hope and sweet desires (dear Truth) put forth in
pious fruits of renewed endeavors, and let me once again prefer my suit for
your impartial weighing of what replies, objections, pleadings, he has brought
against us.


Truth. For the God of Peace, for the Prince of Peace his sake, yea for his
servants sake, for Zions sake, I will not be silent, and know (at last) I shall
prevail to scatter and dispell the mists and fogs, that for a while arise to
cloud and choke us.


Peace. First, then, what cause should move this so able a defendant Quaere why
Master Cotton leaps over the Epistles to the Parliament and Reader.
to leap over all our first addresses both to the high Court of Parliament, and
to every Reader? and what may be conjectured, why himself directs a word to
neither in this controversy?


Truth. I desire my Rejoinder may be as full of love as truth; yet some say
Master Cotton is wise, and knows in what door the wind blows of late; he is not
ignorant what sad complaints in letters, printings, conferences, so many of
Gods people (and of his N. E. Persecution guilty of the persecution in old,
especially (since this Rejoinder) by their Law for Banishing such as hold not
childrens Baptism, and their late fourscore and ten bloody lashes to the body
of the Lord Jesus in the sufferings of his faithful witness, Obadiah Holiness at
Boston, merely about that point of Baptism.
own conscience and judgment of Independency) have poured forth against New
Englands persecuting, etc. He knows what Bars New Englands bloody Tenent and
practice may put to his brethrens just desires and suits for moderation and
toleration, to nonconforming consciences.

It Is true, his conscience, and the credit of his way, compels his reply, but
the times advise him, with as little noise as may be, and it seems with no
great willingness, that that high and searching house of Englands Parliament
should search and scan his Meditations.


Peace. Well, if the name of God were truly called upon them and (as his title
intimates) the great controversies of these present times are herein handled;
If all that is here presented, be truly practiced; and he desire to buy and
sell by one measure and to be no otherways measured unto, then he measures
unto others: why should not that renowned Court be more particularly and
expressly attended with so high and needful examinations? But now enough of
that, I long to see that weighed, which is presented, take up those holy
weights of thine, which may faithfully discover how light or ponderous each
parcel is in Gods most holy presence. Master Cotton first complains against
the publishing of his private letter, with an Answer thereunto: he faulteth the
discusser for punishing his conscience, against the discussers own Tenent of
liberty of conscience, for breach of rule, in first publishing to the world
before private admonition, and telling the Church.


Truth. How justly may I begin with the defenders own conclusion of this first
Chapter! He that sets forth of his way in the first entrance of his journey,
no marvel if he wander all the day after. For,

First, the discusser never wrote any such letter to Master Cotton, as Master
Cotton so often affirms, and mentions throughout his Book.

The like mistake he falls into, in some other passages, which shall be gently
touched at, and passed by, as the failing of memory.


Peace. It is often seen, that small matters in the first steps and entrance of
a business, prove ominous; and although love bids us lay the blame on memory:
yet since Nil sine providentia and Deus est maximus in minimis, and not a
Sparow nor a Hair falls without him; methinks such a stumble in the threshold
should have one sad consideration in Master Cottons breast, so long as he
resides in the chamber of this discourse.


Truth. To my knowledge there was no such letter or intercourse passed between
Master Cotton and the discusser; but what I have heard, is This* One Master
Hall of Roxbury, presented the prisoners Arguments against persecution to
Master Cotton, who ^he occasion of ^^blishing the ^^oody Tenent.
gave this present controverted Answer; with the which Master Hall not being
satisfied, he sends them unto the discusser, who never saw the said Hall, nor
those Arguments in writing; (though he well remember that he saw them in print
some years since) and apprehending no other, but that Master Cottons Answer was
as public, as Master Cottons profession and practice of the same Tenent was
and is, what breach of rule can Master Cotton say it was, to answer that in the
streets which Master Cotton proclaims on the House top?


Peace. But grant it had been a private letter, and the discourse and the
opinion private: yet why does he charge the discusser with breach of rule, in
not using orderly ways of Admonition, and telling the Church, when Master
Cotton himself in this Book Master Cotton blames the discusser for not walking
in contradictions.
blames the discusser for disclaiming Communion with their Church, and they
also (after he was driven by banishment from civil habitation amongst them) had
sent forth a bull of excommunication against him in his absence.

Such practice the Lord Jesus and his first Apostles or Messengers never
taught, nor any that are truly their successors ever will. But to end this
Chapter, in the last place, why does Master Cotton complain of the loss of the
liberty of his conscience, and of the punishing of his conscience, by the
publishing of his letter; aggravating it, because the discusser pleads for
liberty of conscience? Unchristian partiality.
Is he indeed on the Lord Jesus mind for the sparing men's bodies, and present
life, for their souls and eternal lives sake? Does he indeed plead for liberty
of conscience? Let the following discourse, and this present passage manifest
how tender he is of his own conscience, and of the liberty of it; But how
censorious and senseless of the pangs and agonies of other men's conscience and
spirits, and sorrows? As if his alone were the Apple of his eye, but Theirs
like the brawny hoofs of the roaring Bulls of Bashan.


Peace. Complains Master Cotton of persecution for such Master Cotton
complaining of being persecuted by the discusser.
dealing against him? I never heard that disputing, discoursing and examining
men's Tenants or Doctrines by the word of God, was (in proper English
acceptance of the word) persecution for conscience: well had it been for New
England, that no servant of God, nor witness of Christ Jesus, could justly take
up no other complaint against New England for other kinds of persecution:
surely the voice of Christ Jesus to Paul; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
was for another kind of persecution.


Truth. Dear Peace if the Bishops of Old England or new had never stirred up
the Civil Magistrate to any other suppressing of men's consciences, nor no other
persecuting, then discussing, disputing etc. they should never have needed to
have been charged so publicly in the face of the world, with the bloody Tenent
of persecution for cause of conscience.


Examination of CHAP. II.
Peace. IN this Chapter Master Cotton much complains, that he is charged in
the Title to maintain persecution for cause of conscience, and professes,
That he would have none be punished for conscience, unless his error be
fundamental, or seditiously; or turbulenly promoted, and that after due
conviction of conscience, and that it may appear he is not punished for his
conscience, but for sinning against his conscience.


Truth. Persecution for conscience, is in plain English, hunting for
conscience; and Master Cotton being a son of wine (as the Jews speak in their
Proverb) is loath to be counted a son of Persecution in plain English is
hunting.
vinegar, and therefore would avoid the word persecuting or hunting (as
something too wild and fierce an expression, more suitable to the bloody sons
of vinegar and gall the Roman Emperors, Popes and Bishops) and he much desires
to have the word persecuting changed for the word punishing, a term more
proper to Master Cottons tender conscience, can hardly digest to be a
persecutor, but a punisher.
true Justice.

But is not this the guise and profession of all that ever persecuted or hunted
men for their Religion and conscience? are not all histories and experiences
full of the pathetical speeches of persecutors to this purpose? You will say
you are persecuted for your conscience, you plead conscience; Thou art a
heretic the devil has deceived thee, thy conscience is deluded, etc. And

2. Whether such punishing as Master Cotton assigns to that threefold degree
of heretical wickedness, chap. 5. to wit. To hold a fundamental error, To
persist therein after conviction, and lastly, To seduce others thereunto, Or
these five summed up ( page 186 of his book) subverters of the Christian Faith,
persisters therein after conviction, blasphemers, idolaters, seducers; I say,
such a punishing which he affirms to be death and killing, will not amount to
make up a persecution for cause of conscience let the Spanish Inquisitions be
an instance, who when they torture and rack, and kill and burn for such crimes,
yet varnish they and guild all over with the painted Title of Gods Glory, holy
zeal, just punishment of heretics, blasphemers, etc.


Peace. But Master Cotton blames, that he should be charged with the Doctrine
of persecution by consequence.


Truth. Let his whole book, and the prosecuting of this controversy be judge,
whether it be only drawn from consequences, and not express Terms. And for the
washing of this bloody Tenent in the blood of the Lamb, Time has and will
discover that such a Blackamore cannot be washed in the blood of Christ
himself, without Repentance; for they that washed their robes in the blood of
the Lamb (Revelations the 7.) were true penitents: until therefore that
persecutors repent of this bloody Doctrine and practice, they must hear (as the
men of Judah did) the prophet Isaiahs thunder, Isa. 1. Your hands are defiled
with blood; wash you, make you clean. etc.


Examination of CHAP. III.
Peace. BUt what knot in a Bulrush is that, which Master Cotton observes the
discusser finds in his first distinction of persecution for cause of
conscience?


Truth. For the matter upon the point, they both agree, as Master Cotton has
penned himself, that persecution for cause of conscience, is not only when a
man is punished for professing such Doctrines and Worships, as he believes to
be of God, but also when he is punished for renouncing such Doctrine, and not
practicing such Worships, which he believes are not of God, etc.

All the difference is this that the discusser says. This should have been
expressed in the distinction; Master Cotton says, it was implied, and
therefore the observing of the not expressing of it, was but a knot in a
Bulrush.


Peace. It Is woefully true, that the peace of the Saints, and the peace of the
world, has been lamentably, broake and distracted, in punishing or persecuting
of men, but especially the Saints, upon both these grounds: but yet the records
of time and experience will tell us, that since the Apostasy from the truth of
Jesus, the Gods children commonly persecuted for not yielding to State-worships.
rising of Antichrist, and the setting up of many State- Religions, the forest
and frequentest punishing or hunting of the children of God has been (as in
the case of Nebuchadnezzars Image) for not bowing down to the State-Images, for
not coming to Church, for not obeying the Laws, for withstanding the Kings, o^
Queens, or Parliaments proceedings.


Truth. Your observation is most serious and seasonable, and your complaint as
true as lamentable: for since all States and Governments of the world (which
lies in wickedness) set up their State or Commonweal-Religions, Nebuchadnezzars
golden Images, and Jeroboams golden Calves (the types of the State-Worships of
after Ages) whereby others are made to sin and bow down to their seeming
glorious worships; and since the dissenters, refusers, nonconformers,
non-covenanters (the witnesses of God against such abominations) are but few;
and what positive worship they hold or practice (commonly) is most retired, and
flying into private corners by reason of the violence of the persecution; they
are hence, soonest in all places of their abode, and more speedily and
immediately called for and sought out, in the several Parish-towns where they
live to bow down to the common-Image, the beastly and Calvish inventions of the
Ieroboams of this perishing world; and for refusing to subscribe, to conform,
to come to Church, to do as their neighbors, for being wiser then their
Teachers, their Fathers, their Magistrates, the Country, the Parliament, the
Kingdom (and sometimes the whole world, in their Ecumenical, or worldly
Councels) they are thus punished and hunted for their conscience, for Gods, for
Jesus sake; which is a point Master Cotton will say (if the blood of his dear
Redeemer split in the blood of his servants, kindly affect him) of greater
weight then knots in bulrushes.


Examination of CHAP. IV.
Peace. IN the second distinction (to wit, of fundamentals, without right
belief whereof, a man cannot be saved) Master Cotton upon the point confesses
it was a just reproof, and says, that he meant only of the first sort of
foundations, that concern salvation, and not of those that concern the
foundation of the Church, and Christian Religion.


Truth. It is strange that Master Cotton should so distinguish of foundations,
when the holy Scripture attributes salvation to those foundations of the
Church, and the order of it: The Lord Act. 2. 2 Pet. 3.
added to the Church such as should be saved, and the like figure whereunto
Baptism now saves us; and concerning the resurrection that we are saved by
hope, Romans 8.

Besides, are not those first foundations, which he says concern salvation,
foundations also of the Christian Religion? If not of the Christian, then I
demand of what Religion are they foundations?


Peace. It cannot therefore be denied, but that his distinction of
fundamentals, was most dangerous, tending directly to condemn the generation
of the righteous, who have been generally for many generations ignorant of the
Christian way of worship. But what say you to this reply, touching how far the
New English (implicit) Parishes compare and partake with those of old?


Truth. How far those Churches cannot be cleared from not coming out from the
Parish-worship, from being themselves (implicitly) Parish-Churches
(notwithstanding their Fig Leaves, etc.) and from being persecutors of such as
endeavor to cover their nakedness with better clothing, will appear, with
Christ's assistance, in the examination of his reply to the Answer of his Letter.


Examination of CHAP. V.
Peace. THe discourse of this chapter is larger and more controversial, and
therefore ( dear Truth) requires your most serious and deeper examination of
it. Master Cotton here distinguishes worship into true and false, and infers,
that if true worship, fellowship with God is held; but if false, fellowship
with God is lost. And whereas he was thereupon minded by the discusser to have
lived in a false Ministry in England, and to have practiced the false worship
of the Common Prayer, he labors to clear both, and in particular he says, It
is not truly said, that the Spirit of God makes the Ministry one of the
foundations of the Christian religion, (Heb. 6.) For it is (says he) only a
foundation of Christian order, not of faith or religion: and he adds, The
Apostle puts an express difference between faith and order, Col. 2. 5. What can
be said thereunto?


Truth. 1. Alas, what buildings can weak souls expect from such
Master Builders, when Master Cotton is so confounded about the very
foundations? In the former Chapter, he distinguishes between foundations that
concern salvation, and those that concern the the Church and Christian
religion: here he distinguishes between those of Christian order, and those of
Faith, or Christian religion. In the former, he opposes faith against religion
and order; here he opposes faith and religion to order. Grant his memory (in
so short a turn) failed him, yet doubtless his mistakes about the foundation of
Christian religion, are most gross and inexcusable.


Truth. 2. I find no such distinction in the Testament of Christ Jesus,
between the Christian order, and the Christian religion; as if the order of the
Church of God (I might say, the Church it self, and the Ministry of it) were
no part of the Christian religion.

It is true, Coloss. 2. speaks of faith and order, but yet denies not the
Christian Church, and the order of it, to be any part of the Christian
religion. It is true, that sometimes faith implies the particular grace of
believing, and yet sometimes it is put for the whole Christian religion (as
Jude 1. contend for the faith once delivered) so that if Master Cotton
confesses the Ministry of the Word (Heb. 6.) to be a foundation of Christian
or Church Order, he cannot deny it to be a foundation of the Christian religion
or worship reduced to those two, of Faith and Order.


Peace. What answer you to his saying, It is not a true and a safe speech, to
call the fellowship and blessing of God vouchsafed to corrupt Churches or
Ministers, or ministrations unpromised, or beyond a word of promise, of God?
Against which he alleges ( Ier. 13.) That God will be merciful to his
peoples iniquities, and 2 Chronicles. 30. Gods mercy to every one that prepares his
heart, etc. although he be not cleansed after the preparation, etc.


Truth. The promises hold forth no blessing or fellowship of God to false
worships; against which all the holy Scripture denounces cursings, both in the
old and new Testament; nor in particular does that of Jeremy promise any pardon
of sin, but to the repentant, though most true also is that distinction of
particular repentance for known sins, and general for sins unknown. Such was
the sin (it may be) of the Israelites, 2 Chronicles. 30. in their want of such their
legal cleansing.

But I add, how can that one act of covering or conniving at ceremonial
uncleanness (about a true worship) be brought to prove a promise of Gods
blessing and fellowship, to a constant course of a false and invented way of
prayer by the Latin or English Masse-book, as some have rightly called it?


Peace. Concerning Ordination, Master Cotton says, that it is no essential
part of a call to the Ministry; no more then Coronation is essential to the
Office of a King* And Jehoshua the high priest did not lose fellowship with
God, though he was clothed with filthy garments, Zech. 3.


Truth. I answer, Ordination or laying on of hands, comprizeth the whole
Ministry, Heb. 6. wherein if Election or Ordination be false, I see not how
the Ministry is true, any more then a marriage can be true, where either
consent o^ solemnity by a true power is wanting: or a King rightly instituted
in his Kingly office, when either election or coronation is given or made by a
false power.

2. But further, Ordination is not well represented by a Kings Ordination of
Christ's Ministry undfily compared to the coronation of Kings.
coronation (to say nothing of the statcliness of the simile) for a King may
administer by successive election and consent (in some States) before
coronation, and coronation is but for public state and ceremony; but a
Minister cannot administer before ordination (no more then a husband enjoy his
spouse before marriage) which is the putting of him into, and the investing of
him with his Authority, as we see both in the priests of the law, and the
Ministers of the Gospel.

Concerning Jehoshua his garments; This kind of confession is not after the
pattern of Ezra, Nehemiah, David, Daniel. etc. but with mincing and excusing.
Moreover, in this place of Zechary, God only comforts his people with the
promise of better times, and more new and costly garments: for the High priest
now returning from captivity, his garments were torn, foul and filthy.

Lastly, These were the garments of the Lords appointing, though in a poor and
afflicted condition: what is this to a fools cap or coat (the cap or surplice)
what is this to the office of Ieroboams priests, which never were of God,
though happily some of them might studiously give themselves to attain and
teach the knowledge of God, and might (in a kind) separate from the false, 2 Chronicles. 13. and some good thing might be found in some, as in Ieroboams child,
and happily many others as in these our times?


Peace. Concerning common prayer, he pleades the time of their Master Cotton
pleads for Common prayer.
ignorance; as also that the high places were removed, 2 Chronicles. 14. and knows
not of any such faithful admonition as was mentioned.


Truth. God winketh at some ignorance, but is not blind to pass by all: The
high places were an high sin, and in Gods time discovered, repented of, and
removed; but ever by God disclaimed, etc. And although the discusser
acknowledges himself unworthy to speak for God to Master Cotton or any, yet
possibly Master Cotton may call to mind, that the discusser (riding with
himself and one other of precious memory (Master Hooker) to and from
Sempringham) presented his Arguments from Scripture, why he durst not join with
them in their use of Common prayer; and all the Answer that yet can be
remembered the discusser received from Master Cotton, was, that he selected the
good and best prayers in his use of that Book, as the Author of the Council of
Trent was used to do, in his using of the Masse-book.


Peace. Yea but further (says Master Cotton) Numbers 20. Moses used an
unwarrantable way of prophesying, and yet God Examination of Number. 6. 20.
gave water; therefore set forms of prayer may bring a blessing down.


Truth. Moses his calling was true in a true Church; his failing was in point
of passion and unbelief. What is this to the Common prayer, where all were
Idols, both the society or communion; in which the priest himself, and the
worship were but inventions? etc.


Peace. But, says he, Common prayer is not such a fundamental error.


Truth. The word and prayer are those two great services of Acts 6.
God, which even the Apostles themselves gave themselves unto: And if Master
Cotton intend not that his Argument shall stand good against Master Ball, to
prove the falseness of such a maine worship of God, let him show what that
worship of God is, which he intends, when he so distinguishes of some false
worship wherein fellowship with God is lost.


Peace. To end this Chapter, Master Cotton, to clear himself from partiality,
and that he never uses to measure that to any, which he would not have
measured to himself* He proposes a threefold wickedness, which he says God
never left him to fall into.

First, Any fundamental error. Secondly, persisting therein after admonition
and conviction. Thirdly, seducing of others. And lastly, he professes; that if
he should so fall, it were better for him to be cut off by death or banishment,
then the flock of Christ to be seduced by his heretical wickedness.


Truth. I here first observe (as also in other places) Master Cottons
acknowledgement and profession of what a man may be punished Three causes for
which Master-Cotton maintains persecution.
for: to wit, a fundamental error, persisting in it, and seducing others; all
which are spiritual matters, of religion and worship, for which he decrees from
the Magistrate, death or banishment; and yet elsewhere in many other passages,
he professes against all persecution for conscience.

Secondly, If Master Cotton should so fall, and be so dealt withal by the
civil state.

First, would not Master Cotton conscientiously be persuaded of the Truth of
what he held, though accounted by others fundamental error, obstinacy, heresy?
etc.

Secondly, Will Master Cotton think that death or banishment would be wholesome
and Christian means and remedies to change and heal his conscience?

Thirdly, He (to prevent the infection of others) granting the civil Magistrate
must punish him with death or banishment, does he not make the Magistrate, yea
the Civil State (what State soever he live in) the Judge of his conscience and
errors?

Fourthly, Confessing it now, that to worship God with a Common prayer, was his
sin, and yet it was his conscience, that he might so do: If the Magistrate had
judged it to be a fundamental error, he grants he might then have put him to
death or banishment, if persisting, etc. though yet he has a proviso, and a
retreat against this assault, professing, that if the Magistrate be not rightly
informed, he must stay his proceedings: of which afterward.


Peace. What is this, but, in plain English, to profess that all the
Magistrates and Civil powers, throughout the whole world, although they have
command and power from Christ Jesus, to judge in matters of conscience,
religion, and worship, and live in daily sin, that they do not cut off the
heretic, blasphemer, seducer, etc. yet except they be of Master Cottons mind
and conscience, to account and judge to be, they must suspend their duty and
office in this case, until they be better informed, that is, until they be of
his mind?


Examination of CHAP. VI.
Peace. BUt to proceed to the sixth Chapter, in which is handled that which
more especially concerns my self. It is too lamentably known, how the furious
troops of persecutors in all States, Cities, Towns etc. have ever marched
under my name, the white colors of peace, civil peace, public peace.


Truth. Yet Master Cotton confesses, that the Cities peace is an humane and
civil peace, as was further explained in many instances from Babylon, Ephesus,
Smyrna, etc. against which Master Cotton excepts not.


Peace. The difference or controversy in this Chapter lies in two things.
First, In the similitudes used from companies and societies, voluntarily
entering into combinations, which are distinct from the City.

2. In the nature of the Church, which he maintains to be a society, whose
order the City is bound to preserve, as well as any of their civil orders or
societies.


Truth. To begin with the first, Master Cotton replies, That although such
societies be not of the essence of the City, yet they are of the integral and
conservant causes of the City, and so the disturbance of any of those orders or
societies in the City, disturbes the City it self.

But I answer, The similitude was used more especially from a Christ's Church
may be gathered and dissolved without disturbance of civil Peace.
college of Physicians, or a society of Merchants, Turkish, East-Endies, etc.
and consequently any other of that kind, voluntarily combining together for
the better enriching of themselves in the improvement of their faculties for
public good (at least so pretended.) It was never intended, that if such
necessary Trades, Callings etc. as he mentions, be dissolved and ruined, that
there would be no disturbance of the peace of the City: But that if such o^
such a way and order of men of those faculties I mentioned, voluntarily
combine, and voluntarily also dissolve; yet all this may may be, without any
breach of civil and public peace.


Peace. If so, much more the church of Christ, which is a spiritual society
voluntarily uniting, may dissolve; I say, much more, without the breach of the
peace of the city, which is of a civil and humane nature, as is confessed, and
was urged in the instances of Ephesus etc.


Truth. 2. We are wont when we speak of keeping or breaking the Peace, to
speak of Words or Actions of Violence, Sedition, Vproare, etc. for, Actions of
the Cases, Pleas, and Traverses may be, and yet no peace broken, when men
submit to the Rule of State, for the composing of such differences, etc.
Therefore it is that I affirm, that if any of Christ's Church have difference
with any other man in civil and humane things, he ought to be judged by the
Law: But if the Church have spiritual controversies among themselves or with
any other, or if God take away the Candlestick as he threatened the Church in
Ephesus, all this may be, The doctrine and practice of Persecution, breaks the
peace wherever it comes.
and yet no civil peace broken: Yea, amongst those that profess the same God
and Christ, as the Papists and Protestants, or the same Mahomet, as the Turks
and Persians, there would no civil Peace be broken, notwithstanding their
differences in Religion, were it not for the bloody Doctrine of Persecution,
which alone breaks the bounds of civil peace, and makes Spiritual causes the
causes of their bloody dissentions.

I observe therefore, a twofold Fallacy in Master Cottons reply. First, he
fallaciously mingles Peace and Prosperity together: for though it be true, that
under the term Peace all good things are sometimes concluded, yet when we
speak of Heretics or Schismatics The Civil peace of a place or people is one
thing, and the welfare or presperity in health wealth, etc. another.
breaking the civil peace, or strowing Doctrines tending to break the civil
peace, we must understand some such words or acts of violence, wherein the
bounds and orders of the City, Laws, and Courts are violated; taking it for
granted (for this is the Supposition) that the Laws of the City be merely
civil and humane. Hence then I affirm, that there is no Doctrine, no Tenent so
directly tending to break the Cities peace, as this Doctrine of persecuting or
punishing each other for the cause of conscience or Religion.

Again, it is a second Fallacy to urge your order of the Church, and the
Excellency thereof, and that therefore it is a Breach of the civil peace, when
the Order of the church is not preserved: For although it is most true, that
sooner or later the God of heaven punishes The Cities of the world enjoy peace
and prosperity, where Christ is not heard of.
the nations of the world* for their Idolatries, Superstitions, etc. yet Master
Cotton himself acknowledges (as was affirmed) that many glorious flourishing
cities there are all the world over, wherein no church of Christ is extant:
Yea, that the Commonweal of Rome flourished five hundred years together,
before ever the name of Christ was heard in it; which so great a Glory of so
great a continuance, mightily evinceth the distinction of the civil peace of a
State from that which is Christian Religion.

It is true (as Master Cotton tells us) that the Turks have plagued the
Antichristian world, for their Idolatries: Yet History tells us, that one of
their Emperors (Mahomet) was the man that first broke up and desolated two
most glorious ancient cities, Constantinople (which had flourished 1120 years
(since its first building by Constantine) and Athens, which from Solons giving
of it Laws, had flourished two thousand years, notwithstanding their
Idolatries, etc.


Truth. It is apparent that then the Christian Religion gloriously flourished
(contrary to Master Cottons observation) when the Roman Emperors too not power
to themselves to reform the Christianity lost most under such Emperors as
claimed Christ's power to reform the Church, etc.
abuses in the Christian Church, but persecuted it; and then the church was
ruined and overwhelmed with Apostasy and Antichristianism, when the Emperors
took that power unto themselves: And then it was (as Master Cotton elsewhere
confesses) that Christianity lost more, even in Constantines time, then under
bloody Nero, Domitian, etc.


Peace. It cannot be denied (dear Truth) but that the Peace of a civil State
(of all States, excepting that of typical Israel) was and is merely and
essentially civil. But Master Cotton says further, Although the Inward Peace
of a church is Spiritual, yet the outward Peace of it, Magistrates must keep in
a way of Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1.


Truth. The Peace of a church of Christ (the only true Christian State,
Nation, Kingdom, or city) is Spiritual, whether internal in the Soul, or
external in the administration of it; as the peace of a civil State is civil,
internal in the minds of men, and external in the administration and
conversation of it; and for that place of Timothy, it has been fully spoken to
in this discourse, and the Discusser has as yet seen no exception against what
has been spoken.


Peace. But further, says Master Cotton, although the peace of a Country be
civil, yet it is distracted by disturbing the peace of the Church for God cut
short the Coasts of the civil State when Jehu shortened his Reformation, 2 King.
10. 31, 32.


Truth. Master Cotton denies not (but confessed in his discourse concerning
Baptism) that Canaan was Typical, and to be cast out of that Land, was to be
cast out of Gods ^ight: which proves thus much, That the church of Christ, the
Israel now, neglecting to reform, God will cut this Israel short. But what is
this to a merely civil State, which may flourish many hundreds, yea some
thousands of years together (as I before instanced) when the Name of the true
Lord Jesus Christ is not so much as heard of within it?


Peace. Lastly, (says he) the church is a Society, as well as the Societies of
Merchants, Drapers, etc. and it is just to preserve the Society of the church,
as well as any other Society.


Truth. When we speak of the balances of Justice, we must distinguish between
the Balances of the Sanctuary and the Balances of the World or civil States. It
is spiritual justice to preserve spiritual right; and for that end, the
spiritual King thereof has taken care. It is civil Justice to preserve the
civil rights; and the Rights of a civil society ought justly to be preserved by
a civil State: (and yet if a company of men combine themselves into a civil
society by voluntary agreement, and voluntarily dissolve it, it is not justice
to force them to continue together.)


Peace. The church can least of all be forced: for as it is a spiritual The
Societies or Churches of the Saints are merely voluntary in combinning or,
dissolving.
society, and not subject to any civil Judicature; (though some say that a
church in New England was cited to appear before a civil Court:) so is the
combination of it voluntary, and the dissolution of it in part or whole is
voluntary, and endures no Civil violence, but as a virgin (in point of
marriage) nec cogit, nec cogitur, she forces not, nor can be forced by any
civil power.


Truth. But lastly, if it be justice to preserve the Society of the church, is
it not partiality in a mere civil State to preserve one only society, and not
the persons of other Religious societies and consciences also? But the Truth
is, this mingling of the church and the world together, and their orders and
societies together, does plainly discover, that such churches were never called
out Christ's Church is called out of the world.
from the world, and that this is only a secret policy of flesh and blood, to
get protection from the world, and so to keep (with some little stilling of
conscience) from the Cross or Gallows of Jesus Christ.


Truth. Yea, but hear (says Master Cotton) those excellent penmen of the
Spirit (both the Father and the Son) David and Solomon. First David (Psalm
122) They shall prosper that love the peace of Jerusalem: and Solomon, Where
the righteous rejoice, there is great glory, Prove. 28. Now (says he) what is
the church but a congregation of righteous men? If the rejoicing of the Church
be the glory of a Nation, surely the disturbing, and destroying, and dissolving
the church is the shame and confusion of a Nation.


Truth. The outward prosperity of a Nation, was a typical figurative blessing,
of that national and figurative church of Israel in Canaan. It is now made good
spiritually to them that love the spiritual Jerusalem: for though godliness
has a promise of things of this life convenient; yet persecution is the common
and ordinary portion of the Saints under the Gospel, though^ that cup be The
flourishing of civil states.
infinitely sweetened also to them that drink of it with Christ Jesus, by the
measure and increase of a hundred fold for one, even with persecution in this
life.

2. It is true, the rejoicing of a Church of Christ, is the glory of any
Nation, and the contrary a shame: yet this proves not that God vouchsafes to
no state, civil peace, and temporal glory, except it establish and keep up a
Church of Christ by force of arms; for the contrary we have mentioned, and
Master Cotton confesses the flourishing of States ignorant of Christ, from Age
to Age, yea, and as I have mentioned, even to two thousand years in Athens; six
generations before it heard of Christ, and fourteen generations since* with the
sprinking (for some time) of the knowledge of Christ Jesus in it.


Peace. 2. But consider (says Master Cotton) the excellency and pre-eminence
of the church, that the world is for it, and would not subsist but for it, etc.


Truth. It Is true, glorious things are spoken of the City of God, etc. yet for
many Ages together Master Cotton confesses the No Civil state can either by
Christ's Testimony, or true reason, be judge of the Ecclesiastical and spiritual.
Nations of the world may subsist and flourish without it; and though it be the
duty of the Nations of the world to countenance and cherish the church of
Christ; yet where is there any commission, either in the New or Old Testament,
that the Nations of the world should be the judges, governors, and defenders of
Christ Jesus his spiritual kingdom, and so bound to take up Arms and smite
with the civil sword (among so many pretenders) for that which they believe to
be the church of Christ?


Peace. 3. (says he) It is matter of just displeasure to God, and sad grief of
heart to the church, when civil states look at the state of the church, as of
little or no concernment to themselves, Zech. 1. 19. Lam. 1. 13.


Truth. Grant this, and that the most jealous God will awake in his season, for
these sins, and for the persecutions, idolatries, and blasphemies; which the
Nations live in: yet what is this for warrant to the Nations (as before) to
judge and rule the church of Christ, yea, and under the color of defending
Christ's faith, and preserving Christ's church pure, to tear Christ out of
heaven, by persecuting of his Saints on earth; and to fire the world with
devouring flames of bloody wars, and this only for the sweet sake of the
prince of peace?


Peace. Dear Truth, we are now upon an high point, and that which nearly
concerns my self, the peace of the world, and the Nations of it. Master Cotton
says further, God winketh at the Nations in the time of their ignorance, and
suffers the Nation to flourish many hundred years together, as did the Empire
of Rome; yet when the church of Christ comes to be planted amongst them, then,
as he brought the Turks upon the Romans, for their persecuting the church, and
not preserving it in purity; so consequently will he do unto the Nations of the
world.


Truth. I answer, the most righteous Judge of the whole world has plauged the
Nations of the world, both before Christ's coming, and since, for their pride
and cruelty against his people, for their idolateries, blasphemies, etc. Yet
Master Cotton acknowledges that many states have flourished many hundred years
together, when no true church of Christ has been found in them: and Master
Cotton will never prove, that God ever commanded the Nations and governments of
the world, to gather or constitute his churches, and to preserve them in
purity: For God gave his ordinances, both before and since Christ, to his
people only, whom he chooses and calls out of the World, and the Nations of
it: and he has punished and dissolved them for their obstinate neglect
thereof. And for the Roman Empire, and the Emperors thereof, the Christian
Religion, and the purity thereof, never lost so much, as when the Emperors were
persuaded of Master Cottons bloody Tenent, as Master Cotton and all men seen in
History and Christianity must confess.


Peace. But further, although (says Master Cotton) the peace of the church be
a spiritual inward peace, yet there is an outward peace of the church due to
them from Princes and Magistrates, in a way of godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.
But in a way of ungodliness and idolatry, it is an wholesome faithfulness to
the church, if Princes trouble the outward peace of the church, that so the
church finding themselves wounded, and pricked in the house of their friends,
they may repent, and return to their first husband, Zech. 13. Hof. 2.


Truth. The peace of the Church is not only inward, between God and themselves;
but as the Argument imports, to which Master Cotton answers, the peace of
the Church external and Difference of spiritual and civil peace.
outward, is spiritual, essentially differing from the peace of the civil
state, which is merely civil and humane. When the peace of the churches,
Antioch, Corinth, Galatia, was disturbed by spiritual oppositions, the Lord
never sent his Saints for civil help to maintain their spiritual peace,
though the Lord did send Paul to the higher civil powers, to preserve his civil
peace, when he was molested and oppressed by the Jews and Romans.

2. For that place of Timothy, though I have fully spoken to it in this
discourse elsewhere, yet this now: It proves not, because the church must pray
for civil Rulers, that so they may live a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty, that therefore civil rulers are supreme rulers and
judges Ecclesiastical, next unto Christ Jesus, of what is godliness, holiness,
etc. since God has chosen few wise or noble, to know godliness: And although
it is true that Gods end of vouchsafing peace and quietness, is, that his
Churches might walk in his fear, and in the ways of godliness; yet it does not
hence follow, that Magistrates were the causes of the Churches walking in the
fear of God, and being edified, but only of enjoying Rest from Persecution,
Act. 9.

3. Although Gods chastisement call to repentance, and although the false
Prophet in the church of Israel was to be wounded and slain (as they are now
to be cut off spiritually from the church of spiritual Israel) yet was it so in
all the other Nations of the world? Or did Christ Jesus appoint it to be so in
all the Nations of the world, since his coming, which is the great question in
difference?

4. And indeed, what is this, but to add coals to coals, and wood to fire, to
teach the Nations of the world, to be briars and thorns, butchers and
tormentors to the Lilies and Lambs of the most holy and innocent Lamb of God
Christ Jesus?


Peace. But God (says Master Cotton) cut Israel short in their civil state or
Nation, when they cut short their reformation, 1 King. 10.


Truth. Master Cotton elsewhere denying a National church, which is bounded with
natural and earthly limits, it is a wonder how he can apply that instance of
National Israel, to the now spiritual Nation and Israel of God? May he not as
well promise earthly peace and prosperity then most to abound to Gods people,
When Gods people flourish most in godliness then most persecuted.
when they most prosper and flourish in holiness, zeal, etc. The contrary
whereof, to wit, persecution, is most evident in all the New Testament, and all
men's new and fresh experience.


Peace. To end this Chapter, Master Cotton affirms, that civil peace (to speak
properly) is not only a peace in civil things for the object, but the peace of
all the persons in the City for the subject. The church is one society in the
City, as well as the society of Merchants, Drapers etc. And if it be civil
justice to protect one, then the other also.


Truth. Civil peace will never be proved to be the peace of all the subjects or
Citizens of a City in spiritual Things: The civil state may bring into order,
make orders, preserve in civil order all her members: But who ordained, that
either the spiritual estate should bring in and force the civil state to keep
civil order, o^ that the civil state should sit, judge, and force any of her
subjects to keep spiritual order?

The true and living God, is the God of order, spiritual, civil and natural:
Natural is the same ever and perpetual: civil alters according to the
constitutions of peoples and nations: spiritual he has changed from the
national in one figurative-land of Canaan, to particular and congregational
churches all the world over; which order spiritual, natural or civil* to
confound and abrogate, is to exalt man's folly against the most holy and
incomprehensible wisdom of God, etc.


Examination of CHAP. VII.
Peace. IN his description of Arrogance and impetuousness, Master Cotton tells
us, that he that refuses to subject his Spirit to the Spirit of the prophets,
that shall oppose such as dissent with clubs swords and censorious reproaches,
or reject communion with the church, etc. his practice tends to the disturbing
of civil or church-peace, or both.


Truth. It is a fallacious mingling of clubs, swords, reproaches, etc. with
refusing to submit to the Spirit of prophecy in the Prophets, and rejecting of
communion, etc. For a man may out of true and upright conscience to God (as
Master Cotton will not deny) A monstrous mingling of spiritual and civil
resistance or disturbance.
refuse to submit to a whole true church, having the Truth of God on his side;
and may withdraw from communion with a church obstinate in sin, and this
without breach of civil peace; and therefore the mingling or confounding of
these spiritual resistances or disturbances with guns, swords, etc. is a
mingling and confounding of heaven and earth together.

2. In that he says, these ways tend to the disturbance of either civil or
church-peace, or both; he speaks too like the doubtful oracles of Apollo,
which will be true however the event fall out; but yet he touches not the
Truth of the question, which concerns civil peace only; against the disturbers
of which, I grant the civil powers to be armed with a civil sword, not in
vain, and concerning which diverse cases were propounded of seeming Arrogance
and impetuousness in Gods servants, and yet they fell not justly under any
censure of breach of civil peace.


Peace. It Is true (says Master Cotton) because they were not ways of Arrogance
not Impetuousness.


Truth. But will Master Cotton give way that any conscience but his own may
freely preach and dispute against the state-religion, freely reprove the
highest, in sharpest language, for matter of religion, refuse conformity to the
common established religion Six instances of holy zeal in Scripture, far from
arrogance or impetuousness. These were aleadged from Scripture in the bloody
Tenent and acknowledged by Master Cotton.
and worship, disclaim subjection to the civil powers, in spiritual cases,
preach against the common policy and seeming wisdom of the State, even to a
seeming hazarding of all, and lastly occasion great tumults and uproars (which
were the six cases alleged?) If Master Cotton grants this freedom to other
consciences beside his own, why preaches he persecution against such a
liberty, which other consciences beside his own, believe they justly challenge?
If to no other conscience then his own, it is not his saying ten thousand
times, that his conscience is true, and others false, nor any other distinction
in the world, can clear him from most unrighteous and unchristian partiality.


Examination of CHAP. VIII.
Peace. IN this Chapter (dear Truth) lies a charge concerning thy self. For
whereas thou answerest an objection, that this distinction concerns not Truth
or error, but the manner of holding or divulging, Master Cotton affirms the
distinction to speak expressly of things unlawful and erroneous, and therefore
that it cannot be said with Truth, that the distinction concerns not truth and
error.


Truth. The truth is this, the former distinction speaks of matter, and this
distinction seems wholly to intend the manner of holding forth. The words were
these: [Again, in points of Doctrine and Worship less principal, either they
are held forth in a meek and peaceable way (though the things be erroneous and
unlawful) or they are held forth with such Arrogance and Impetuousness as
tends to the disturbance of civil peace.] In which although things erroneous
and unlawful are mentioned; yet who sees not but that those words are brought
in by the way of Parenthesis, which may or may not be left out, and the
distinction be whole and entire? And therefore Master Cotton does not well to
spend precious time and life upon seeming advantages.


Peace. Yea, but (says he) why is this distinction blamed, when the discusser
himself acknowledges, that there may be a way and manner of holding forth,
which may tend to break the civil peace.


Truth. That which was excepted most against in the distinction, was the
persecuting language of [ arrogance, impetuousness, boisterousness,] without
declaring what that was: to which Master Cotton answers, that the discussers
request, was not that he should compile a discourse, but return an answer to
the letter of his friend; as also that he charged none of Gods children with
such things.

I reply (as formerly) Master Cotton's memory (though otherwise excellent)
herein fails; for, such a request the discusser never made unto him, by
letter or otherwise. 2. Although he charged not Gods people with arrogance and
impetuousness, yet mostly and commonly Gods children (though meek and
peaceable) are accused to be arrogant, impetuous etc. and it is the common
notorious language of persecutors against them.


Peace. Concering those six instances wherein Gods children were occasion of
great opposition and spiritual hostility, yea and of breach of civil peace,
notwithstanding the matter delivered was holy, and the manner peaceable, Master
Cotton answers, they nothing concern the distinction which speaks of holding
forth things erroneous and unlawful for the matter, and for the manner in a way
of arrogance and impetuousness, to the disturbance of civil peace.


Truth. I reply, first, it speaks not only of erroneous and unlawful things
(though erroneous and unlawful things be admitted in way of Parenthesis, as
before.) 2. He describes not what this arrogance and impetuousness is, but
wraps up all in one general dark cloud, wherein the best and most zealous of
Gods Prophets and servants are easily wrapped up as proud, arrogant, and
impetuous.


Examination of CHAP. IX.
Peace. IN this Chapter I remember you affirmed, that one cause of civil
dissension and uproar, was the lying of a State under false worship, whence it
endures not the preaching of light and truth, etc. Master Cotton answers, This
is not to the purpose, because this is by accident.


Truth. It is as much to the purpose to declare (in the examination of the
breach of civil peace about matters of Religion) I say, to declare the true
cause of such troubles and uproares, as it is in the search after the leaks of
a ship, to declare where the leake is indeed, when many are said to be where
they are not.

2. Whereas he confesses that vigilant and faithful ones are not so troubled
at the false Religion of Jew or Gentile, as not to The Indians prosessing
subjection to the English in New England permited in their devilish worships,
when English fearing God, persecuted.
tolerate them amongst them in a civil body, he alleges for instance, that
the Indians subjected to their government, are not compelled to the confession
or acknowledgement of their Religion: I reply, first, who sees not herein
unchristian partiality, that Pagans, Barbarians (who happily might more easily
be brought from their natural Religion to a new form, then any other) I say,
that they should be tolerated in their hideous worships of creatures and
devils, while civil people (his countrymen yea it may be the precious sons and
daughters of the most high God) shall be courted fined, whipped banished etc. for
the matters of their conscience and worship to the true and living God?

2. Is not this passage contradictory to all Master Cottons whole discourse in
this book, which pleades for the purity of Religion to be maintained by all
Magistrates and civil governments within their jurisdictions, and the
suppressing of the contrary, under the penalty of the destruction of their
lands and countries, and accordingly has not the practice of New England
answered such a doctrine? and yet, says he, we tolerate the false Religion of
Jew or Gentile.


Peace. Possibly (Dear Truth) the distinction between Jew, Pagan, and
Christian, may satisfy (for the present) Master Cottons conscience so to write
and practice: for thus he adds, But if Christians shall apostate, or if Jews
and Pagans be blasphemous and seducing, then etc.


Truth. Who knows not but that the very Religion of Jew or Pagan is a
blaspheming of the true Religion? Revel. 2. I know the blasphemy of them that
say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue or church of Satan.

And whereas Master Cotton alleges for proof of this, Paul's blaming of false
teachers, for being troublers to the churches of Galatia, Gal. 5. and Acts 15
etc. Who, that puts this inference into Christ's balance, but will see the
lightness of it, thus? The Unchristian conclusions.
churches of Christ are to draw forth the sword and power of Christ, and are
not to suffer such as with false doctrine trouble their peace, Ergo: Therefore
the civil state must not permit such persons to live in the world, etc.


Peace. The second cause I remember, you alleged of civil disturbances and
hubbubs about Religion, was the praeposterous way of healing of corruptions in
Religion, as by whips, stocks, imprisonment, etc. unto this Master Cotton
answers, Then the Mariners Jonahs casting over-boord, a ground of persecution,
etc. examined.
casting Jonah over-boord, for his sin was the cause of the storm.


Truth. I answer, if that extraordinary and miraculous instance, be sufficient
ground for Magistrates casting over-boord whomsoever they judge Heretics, then
all civil states and ships must so practice in storms and troubles on sea or
shore, to wit, throw over-boord, put to death, not only Heretics, Blasphemers,
Seducers etc. but the best of Gods Prophets or servants, for neglect of their
duty, Ministry, etc. which was Jonahs case.

And if so, does not this set up (and all the world over) by land or sea, all
Kings and Magistrates, all Masters of ships and captains, to be the spiritual
and Ecclesiastical Judges of the religion and spiritual neglects of all their
subjects or Passengers? Such doctrine I cannot imagine would have relished with
Master Cotton in his passage to New England; and I humbly desire of God, that
he may never taste the bitter fruit of this Tree, of which yet so many thousands
of Gods servants have fed, and himself not a little (to the Lords praise and
his own) in former times.


Peace. Whereas you argued it to be light alone, that was able to dispell and
scatter the mists and fogs of darkness in the souls and consciences of men,
Master Cotton answers, The judgments of God are as light that goes forth,
Hos. 6. 3. Isa. 26. 9. and the false Prophet repenting will acknowledge this
Zech. 13. 6. Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends.


Truth. But does Master Cotton indeed believe that not only The killing of the
false Prophet. Zech. 13. 6. examined.
public Magistrates, but also each private father and mother (as that place of
Zechary, literately, taken carries it) must now in the days of the Gospel
wound and pierce; yea run through and kill their Son the false Prophet? would
he justify a parent so practicing though it were in the neglect of the public
Magistrate, who happily may be of the same Religion with the false prophet?
Will not this doctrine reach and extend to the pulling down deposing and
killing of all such governors and governments, which God in his gracious
providence has set up amongst all peoples in all parts and dominions of the
world, yea and harden the heart of Pharaoh, the very Pope himself, in his
King-killing and State-killing doctrine?


Peace. If ever Master Cotton wake in this point, he will tell all the world,
that it is more Gospel-like that Parents, Brethren, Fathers, Friends,
impartially fulfill this of Zechary 13. and Deuteronomy. 13. spiritually, in the
friendly wounding, yea and zealous slaying by the two-edged sword of the Spirit
of God, which is the word of God coming forth of the mouth of Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 5. Revel. 1.


Truth. And it is most true (as Master Cotton says) that the judgments of
God, legally executed, or more terribly poured Esa. 26. and Hos. 6. 2. examined.
forth in the vials of sword, plague, and famine, they are as heavenly lights
shining out from the Father of lights, teaching the inhabitants of the world
righteousness.

Yea the creation it self, or each creature, are as candles and glasses to
light and show us the invisible God and creator: but yet these are not the
ordinances of Christ Jesus given to his church. These are not the Preachings of
the word, and the opening of the mysteries of salvation, which give light and
understanding to the simple, and convert the soul: These are nor that
marvailous light unto which the call of Christ Jesus, in the preaching of the
word, had brought the Saints unto whom Peter writes: The weapons of Paul's
fighting, whereby to batter down the high thoughts and imaginations of the sons
of men against the sons of God, were of another nature, 3 Cor. 10. and his 2
Cor. 10.
directions to Timothy and Titus, how to deal with Heretics and Gainsayers
were never heard of to be such, till the son of man, and son of perdition,
brought forth such bloody weapons and bloody doctrines in the affairs of
Christ Jesus.


Examination of CHAP. X.
Peace. IN this passage Master Cotton will subscribe to the whole matter,
saying, This Chapter may stand for us without impeachment, and yet in this
Chapter is reported the persecution, which both rightly informed and erroneous
consciences suffer, and the blind estate of such blind guides and blinded
consciences who so preach and practice.


Truth. These first words [ We approve no persecution for conscience] fight
against his whole endeavor in this book, which is to set up the civil throne
and judgment seat over the consciences and souls of men, under the pretense
of preserving the church of Christ pure, and punishing the evil of heresy,
blasphemy etc.

2. They fight against their fellows, which follow, thus [unless the conscience
be convinced of the error and perniciousness thereof] which is all one, as to
say, We hold no man is to be persecuted for his conscience, unless it be for a
conscience which we judge dangerous to our Religion. No man is to be persecuted
for his conscience, unless we judge that we have convinced or conquered his
conscience.

It Is true, all error is perniciots many ways to Gods glory, to a man's own
soul, to other men's souls and consciences: yet I understand Master Cotton to
say, Except we judge the error to be conviction of conscience.
so and so mischievous. It Is true, there is a self-conviction which some
consciences smite and wound themselves with? But to submit these consciences to
the tribunal of the civil Magistrate, and Powers of the World, how can Master
Cotton do this, and yet say no man is to be persecuted for his conscience?


Peace. Alas, how many thousands and millions of consciences have been
persecuted in all Ages and Times i^ a judicial war, and how have their Judges
pretended victory and triumph, crying out, We have convinced (or conquered)
them, and yet are they obstinate.


Truth. Hence came that hellish Proverb, That nothing was more obstinate then a
Christian: under which cloud of reproach has been overwhelmed the most
faithful, zealous, and constant witnesses of Jesus Christ.


Peace. But says Master Cotton, Some blinded consciences are so judicially
punished by God, as his in Irelond that burnt his child in imitation of Abraham.


Truth. In such cases it may be truly said, the Magistrate bears not the sword
in vain, either for the punishing or preventing The violation of civil peace
though out of conscienc^* to be punished.
of such sins, whether uncleanness, theft, cruelty, or persecution.

And therefore such consciences as are so hardened by Gods judgment, as to
smite their fellow servants, under the pretense of zeal and conscience (as in
the instance of Saul his zeal for the children of Israel against the
Gibeonites) they ought to be suppressed and punished, to be restrained and
prevented.

And hence is seasonable the saying of King James, that he desired to be
secured of the Papists concerning civil obedience, which security, by wholesome
Laws, and other ways: according to the wisdom of each state, each state is
to provide for it self even against the delusions of hardened consciences, in
any attempt which merely concerns the civil state and Commonweal.


Examination of CHAP. XI.
Peace. IN this Chapter Master Cotton takes himself wronged, that he should be
thought to lay this down, as a conclusion, viz. that it is not lawful to
persecute Jesus Christ.


Truth. What difference is there in saying, It is not lawful to persecute a
conscience rightly informed, and to say, It is not lawful to persecute Christ
Jesus; was it not all one in effect for Christ to say, Take up thy bed and
walk, as to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee?


Peace. He adds, It is no matter of wonder to lay down the principles of
Religion for a proof, as Gamaliel did.


Truth. Who sees not a vast difference between Master Cottons and Gamaliels
speech? Gamaliel speaks of that particular controversy concerning Christ's
person and profession, which the Jews so gainsayed and persecuted. Gamaliel
fitly aggravateth An overruling finger of God, ordering Master Cotton to
allege Gamaliel, sure he had forgotten Master John Goodwins excellent labor
in his (...) or fighting against God.
their opposition by the danger of their course, if possibly it might prove to
be the Truth, which they persecuted. Master Cotton is to lay down not a
particular answer, but general conclusions; and notwithstanding that in the
course of his Book he maintains such and such persecution, yet he lays this
down as his first conclusion: It is not lawful to persecute a conscience
rightly informed, that is, Christ Jesus in his Truths and Servants; and that, I
say never persecutor professed to do without a Mask or covering.


Peace. What of that says Master Cotton, for although they do not persecute
Christ as Christ, yet they do it, and it is no matter of wonder to tell them as
Christ tells Paul, It is not lawful for them so to do.


Truth. Doubtless whatever persecutors profess, and what Apologies soever they
make in all the particular cases for which Gods servants are persecuted; yet
the Saints of God have dealt faithfully to tell Persecuters that they persecute
Christ himself, and to breath out the fire of Gods judgments against them,
even out of their own mouth.

But what is this to a conclusion laid down? for so Christ laid not down his
expostulation with Paul as a conclusion, as Master Cotton does by way of
teaching, but as a conviction, by way of reproof.


Peace. Yet persecutors (says he) have persecuted Christ as Christ; for the
Scribes and Pharisees said, This is the heir, come, let us kill him: and Julian
persecuted Jesus as Jesus: And if a Christian in Turkey shall seek to gain a
Turk to Christianity, they will persecute such a Christian, and in him Jesus
as Jesus.


Truth. It is said Acts 3. that the Jews persecuted Christ out of ignorance;
for though they had sufficient knowledge to convince Christ Jesus never
persecuted as Christ but as a deceiver, brasphemer, seduced.
them, yet did they not persecute Christ out of a clearly convinced
conscience, for then it could not be out of ignorance. And yet it was
sufficient, that so great a power of Gods Spirit appeared in the evidence of
Christ's works, as to make their sin to be against the Spirit of God: yet had
they their mask and covering (as is evident:) For, this is not the true Christ
or Messiah, say they, but a deceiver, a witch, working by the power of the
devil, a blasphemer, a seducer, a Traitor, etc.

Again, although wretched Julian persecuted the very name of Christ and Jesus
(whom formerly he had acknowledged and professed) Yet was it still under a mask
or covering, to wit, that he was not the true Son of God, nor his worship the
Truth, but his Roman gods were true etc. And the same say the Turks in
persecuting Christians, and in them Christ Jesus as a^ Prophet inferior to
their only great and true Prophet Mahomet.

And lastly, neither Scribes, nor Pharisees, nor Julian, nor Turks did or do
persecute Christ Jesus otherwise then as they were and are bound so to do by
Master Cottons doctrine, as shall further appear, notwithstanding his plea,
that such Magistrates must forbear to punish until they be better informed.


Peace. But let tyrants and persecutors profess what they will (says Master
Cotton,) yet this varieth not the truth, nor impeacheth the wisdom of the
conclusion.


Truth. Sweet peace, how can I here choose, but in the first Cant. 5. I sleep
yet my heart waketh.
place observe that great mystery of the waking sleep of the most precious
servants of the most high God, in the affairs of his worship; and the Kingdom
of his dear Son? Awake; for what fiery censures justly pours forth this our
excellent Adversary against the oppressors of conscience, entituling them
with the names of tyrants and persecutors, notwithstanding their vain
professions, pretenses, apologies and pleas for their tyranny and Bloodshed?
Again, how fast asleep, in his so zealous pleading for the greatest tyranny in
the world (throughout his whole book) though painted and washed over with fair
pretenses etc?

2. He grants upon the point the truth, which was affirmed, and he denied, to
wit, that no persecutor of Christ ever persecuted him as the Son of God* as
Jesus* but under some mask or covering as thousands of black and bloody clouds
of persecuting witnesses in this case most lamentably make it evident and
apparent.


Peace. Master Cottons next charge is very heavy against the discusser, for
exalting himself above God in the discerning of Master Cottons fellowship with
persecutors, notwithstanding his profession against such persecution.


Truth. The Lord Jesus saw in the Jews such a contrariety between their
professions and practices (even in this case of persecution) Mat. 23.

2. Himself in effect, but even now, said the same of all persecutors: What
ever pretenses they make, says he* and they will pretend great things of love
to Christ, and kiss him ten thousand A deep mystery in persecution.
times, when treasons and slaughters are is in their courses. And will Master
Cotton say that Christ Jesus exalted himself above God, inspying out so great a
mystery? It is no new thing, that Master Cotton should be apt to say with
David. That man that has done this thing shall die, not duly considering and
pondering that our selves are sons of blood, and children of death, condemned
by our own mouth, if the righteous Judge of the whole world should deal
severely with us.


Peace. But Master Cotton (for a close of this Chapter) complains of his own
suffering of bitter persecution, and the Lord Jesus in him, being unjustly
slandered, except the discusser can prove, that any doctrine of his tends to
persecute any of the servants of Christ.


Truth. Let a man's doctrine and practice be his witnesses, and let every soul
judge in the fear of God, whether the doctrine of this Book maintaining such
and such a persecution to be an holy truth washed white in the blood of the
Lamb, agree not lamentably with all their imprisonings, banishings etc.
inflicted upon so many several sorts of their own countrymen friends and
brethren in the wilderness, for matter of Religion and conscience; amongst
which the Lord Jesus will be heard at last to have said, Why persecutest thou
me? why banishest and whippest thou me* etc?

2. Will not all persecuting prelates, Popes etc. take heart from hence
(according to their several religions and consciences) to persecute the
heretic, blasphemer, seducer etc. although they all will say with Master
Cotton, It is not lawful to persecute a conscience rightly informed, that is,
Christ Jesus in his truths or servants?


Peace. But the discusser (says Master Cotton) is a bitter persecutor, in
slandering him, and Christ Jesus in him, for a persecutor.


Truth. I see not but Master Cotton (though of David's spirit) may be guilty of
Saul's lamentable complaint, that David persecuted him, and that he could find
none to pity him? Who knows not that all and our own Popish Bishops in Queen
Mary's, yea Wolves complaining that the sheep persecute them.
and of late times our Protestant Bishops against the non-conformists have been
wont to cry out, what bitter persecution themselves have suffered from the
slanderous censures and reproaches of the servants of Christ Jesus against
them? Who yet have shot no other arrows at them but the faithful declarations
and discoveries of Gods holy truth, and the evil of the opposing and
persecuting of it, and the professors of it? And how near will Master Cotton be
found to close with that late bloody Woolfe (so far as his chain reached)
Bishop Laud, who being an instrument of the bloody hunting and worrying of
those three famous witnesses of Christ, Master Prin, Master Bastwick, and
Master Burton; yet at their public sentence in the Star Chamber, he lamentably
complained that those poor Lambs did bark and bite him with unjust reproaches,
slanders, etc,


Examination of CHAP. XII.
Peace. MAster Cotton here first complains that his words are misreported
concerning the punishment of the heretic after once or twice admonition, Tit.
3. 10.


Truth. I desire that others may judge in three particulars.

First, whether the sum and pith of the words are not rendered.

2. Whether this Titus 3. was brought by Master Cotton to prove (as is now
pretended) that an Heretic might be persecuted with an excommunication after
once or twice admonition: or whether the question be not of another kind of
persecution.

3. Whether that Tit. 3. 11. do hold forth, That although a man be a heretic,
blasphemer, seducer, he may be punished with a Civil or corporeal punishment,
yea though he sin against his own conscience.

I add a fourth, whether indeed (as Master Cotton intimates) the discusser
makes this Tit. 3, a refuge for heretics. Great sound and noise makes this
word heretic, heretic. I dare appeal to The blood of the souls under the
Altar is a sealed mystery, Rev. 6.
Master Cottons conscience and memory, whether the reading of histories, and
the experience of time will not evince and prove, that heretics and
Christians, heretics and Martyrs (or witnesses of Christ) have not been the
same men and women: I say again, that such as have been ordinarily and
commonly accounted and persecuted for heretics, have been the servants of the
most high God, and the followers and witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ.


Peace. You know ( dear truth) the catalogues of heresies and heretics extant
etc.


Truth. Grant it (sweet peace) that some in all times have suffered for
erroneous conscience. Yet I dare challenge the father of A challenge to the
devil himself.
lies himself to disprove this assertion, That the most of such (beyond all
comparison) that have ever suffered in this world for heretics, have been the
disciples and followers of Christ Jesus. And on that not only the Lions,
Leopards, the Bears, Woolves, and Tigers (the bloody Pharoahs, Saul's, Herod's,
Neroes, Popes, Prelates etc.) should fetch from hence, their persecuting arrows
and All Antichristian (...) persecutors make Tit. 3. their den and Fortress.
commissions, but that even the David's, the men after Gods own heart, the Asa's
(whose hearts are perfect with God) that such as are the sheep and lambs of
Christ, should be so monstrously changed and transformed into lions, bears,
etc. yea and should fly to this holy Scripture of Tit. 3. for this their
unnatural and monstrous change and transformation.


Examination of CHAP. XIII.
Peace. IN this 13 Chapter, dear truth, you argue the great mistake of the
world in their common clamor, an heretic, an heretic, a Tit. 3. Discussed.
person obstinate in fundamentals; and you prove that this word heretic
intends no more then a person obstinate against the admonitions of the Lord,
although in lesser matters: upon this Master Cotton concludes in this 13
Chapter, that the discusser gives a larger allowance for proceeding against
erroneous persons then himself did.


Truth. I must deny that the discusser gives a larger allowance then Master
Cotton, or any at all, that the heretics or obstinate person should be dealt
withal by the Civil Magistrates of Crete, but only by the spiritual power of
the Lord Jesus.

1. For first, What though I granted that an obstinate person, contending about
Genealogies, ought not to be suffered, but after once or twice admonition ought
to be rejected? And,

2. What though I grant that after such faithful admonitions once or twice, he
cannot but be condemned of himself? yet according to his third answer, how will
it appear that I grant, that an heretic is rightly defined to be one obstinate
in fundamentals, when I maintain, and Master Cotton seems to grant, that the
heretic may be such an one as is obstinate in lesser points and practices?

3. Further, let the word (...) imply an overturning, yet will it not follow,
that therefore an heretic is he, who is wilfully obstinate, in holding forth
such errors as subvert the foundation of the Christian religion: For however
that Master Cotton says, That such disputes may tend to overthrow
Christianity, yet that is but in remote possibility, as the prick of a finger
may kill the heart, if it ranckle and fester, and so go on from member to
member without means applied: yet this cannot be said to be a mortal wound at
first. So is it in the body of Christ.


Peace. The Apostle discoursing of meats and drinks, of eating and drinking
with offense, calls an offensive eating a destruction of the soul for which
Christ died* and yet I suppose he will not say that that difference was a
fundamental difference.


Truth. It has been a gross and barbarous mistake of the monopolizers of
learning, both divine and humane, The Clergy both of Popish and Protestant
factions and worships: And how The horrible abusing and profaning of that word
Heretic. Great sins of Gods own children.
many are the thousands of millions of abuses, prophanations and blasphemies
against the God of heaven in all (the Antichristian) Christendom, in all
preachings, writings, proceedings, and processes, touching this name heretic,
heresy, etc? By the impartial censure of the Lord, he is an heretic, who
wilfully persists in any sinful doctrine against the due admonitions of the
Lord; for every bit and parcel of leaven is to be purged out of the house of
God, as well as the greater and fundamental lumps.


Examination of CHAP. XIV.
Peace. IT is a falsehood (says Master Cotton) that I call the slight listnings
of Gods people to the checks of their consciences, their sinning against their
conscience: for I speak not (says he) of the sinning of Gods people against
conscience, but of an heretic subverted, much less do I call their slight
listening to conscience an heretical sinning against conscience, least of all
do I say, that for slight listening to the checks of conscience, he may
lawfully be persecuted as for sinning against his conscience. And he adds this
gall to the former vinegar, Thus men that have time and leisure at will, set up
images of clouts* and then shoot at them.


Truth. Master Cotton, elsewhere, grants that Gods children may (through
passion, etc.) be carried on to despise admonition, and may be excommunicated,
and if so, how can they refusing of Christ's admonition in the church, be
excused from sinning against the self- condemning of themselves? For if a child
of God may possibly be excommunicated for obstinacy in some passion,
temptations etc. then may he be this heretic or wilful man in this Tit. 3.

It Is true, that in an hour of great temptations, Gods people may sin against
clear light of conviction, and sentence of conscience, as David and Peter, etc.
But (as I conceive) the holy Spirit of God in this 3 of Titns intends not such
a clearness of self-condemning, but either that the admonitions of the Lord are
so evident and clear, that either if he in his own conscience before God
improved them seriously and duly, they would clear up the truth of God unto
him: or else the checks of conscience are such as are recorded to have been (
Cant. 5.) in the members of Christ, in the Church of the Jews; and Master
Cotton cannot render a sufficient reason, why they may not also be found in the
members of the churches of the Christians.


Peace. I perceive indeed (dear truth) the wonderful effects of a strange
tongue, in the church of Christ: The noise and sound of a Greek word heretic,
in poor English ^ares, has begot a conclusion that a person refusing once or
twice admonition for some A child of God may possibly be an Heretic.
point of Doctrine, is such an heretic or monster, that he cannot possibly be
a child of God; whereas Master Cotton granting that a child of God may possibly
refuse once and twice admonition, and so come to be excommunicated; What does
he then in plain English, but say, that a child of God may be obstinate to
excommunication or rejection (that is in Greek) be an heretic? And what is
this but contrary to his former Assertion, that a child of God cannot be
heretically obstinate to rejection, etc.


Truth. Questionless no child of God, but in temptation, may sin heretically,
that is, obstinately upon once or twice admonition, against the checks and
whisperings of his own conscience, and against that evidence of light, which
(afterward) he wondreth how he could despise* and this rejecting or casting
forth of the visible society of Christ Jesus and his servants, is not for
destruction but humiliation and salvation, in the day of the Lord Jesus.


Peace. I judge, that no son of peace, in a sober and peaceable mind, can
judge, as Master Cotton here does, this to be an image of clouts.


Truth. Nor can I learn, that the discusser so abounded in time and leisure, as
to make such images (as Master Cotton insinuates.) It is not unknown to many
witnesses in Plymmouth, Salem, and Providence, that the discussers time has
not been spent (though as much as any others whosoever) altogether in spiritual
labors, and public exercise of the word, but day and night* at home and
abroad, on the land and water, at the How, at the Oar, for bread; yea and I
can tell, that when these discussions were prepared for public in London, his
time was eaten up in attendance upon the service of the Parliament and City,
for the supply of the poor of the City with wood (during the stop of coal from
Newcastle, and the mutinies of the poor for firing.) It Is true, he might have
run the rode of preferment, as well in Old as New England, and have had the
leisure and time of such who eat and drink with the drunken, For which service
through the hurry of the times, and the necessity of his departure, he lost his
recompense to this day. The straights of the discussers time in composing of
the Bloody Tenent.
and smite with the fist of wickedness their fellow servants; But God is a most
holy witness, that these meditations were fitted for public view in change of
rooms and corners, yea sometimes (upon occasion of travel in the country,
concering that business of fuel) in variety of strange houses, sometimes in
the fields, in the midst of travel; where he has been forced to gather and
scatter his loose thoughts and papers.


Peace. Well (notwithstanding Master Cottons bitter censure) some persons of no
contemptible note nor intelligence, have by letters from England, informed the
discusser, that these Images of clouts it has pleased God to make use of to
stop no small leakes of persecution, that lately began to flow in upon
dissenting consciences, and (amongst others) to Master Cottons own, and to the
peace and quietness of the Independants, which they have so long, and so
wonderfully enjoyed.


Truth. I will end this Chapter, with that famous distinction of the Lord
Jesus; I prejudice not the free and comfortable supplies of temporals, which
the Saints ought to make so their Teachers in spirituals* only I affirm, that
such as will not teach will out money, they must and do beg or steal.
Digging, Begging, Stealing, are the three ways by the which all that pretend
to be Christ's Stewards are maintained. They that cannot digg can beg the
glittering preferments of this present evil world, and the wages of Balaam.
They that cannot dig, can steal, in the ways of fraud oppression, Christ Jesus
his distinction of Diggers, Beggars, Stealers.
extortion, etc. But by the mercy of the most high, the discusser has been
enabled to get his bread by as hard digging, as most diggers in New or old
England have been put to: and let all men judge, whether such as can beg or
steal and cannot dig; or such as choose neither to beg nor steal, but dig, have
most time and leisure to make such images of clouts, etc.


Examination of CHAP. XV.
Peace. IN this passage (Dear Truth) we hear a sound of Agreement; Master
Cotton consents, that this third of Titus evinceth no civil rejection, but
excommunication out of the Church of Christ; and he says, That no syllable of
his conclusion looks at more.

And whereas it might be objected, That excommunication cannot fitly be called
persecution: he answers yes, and quotes Luke 21. 12. John 16. 2.


Truth. Were it not for the fierce hands of angry Esaus, this shril sweet voice
might pass for Jacobs. What ever Master Cottons ends and intentions were (of
which I cannot but judge chatitably) the eye of God alone discerns, but for
Master Cottons words, sillables and arguings, let all impartial readers and
consciences judge of these four considerations.

First, Whether the word persecution, do not in all proper and ordinary speech
signify penal and corporal punishment and affliction.

2. Whether the point in question agitated between the prisoner and Master
Cotton throughout the book, concern not only penal Persecution, not properly,
no^ usually taken for any spiritual punishment.
and corporal afliction: and whether it can be imagined, that the prisoner, or
the discusser, or any that plead for the purity of Christ's ordinances, could
ever plead against excommunicating an heretic or wilful offender out of the
Church of Christ: And although the Scriptures by Master Cotton quoted, do
mention excommunication, as an unjust oppression; yet they speak also o^
corporal afflictions, imprisonments, bringing before judgementseats, and
killing also.

3. It could be told in what country, at a public sentence of banishment of a
certain person, a text of Scripture, Romans 16. 17. (parrallel with this of Tit.
3.) was alleged by the chief judge in court for a ground (not of spiritual
excommunication, but) of civil, out of the Commonweal.

4. Were it not more for the name of God, for the honor of his truth, and the
comfort of Master Cotton, plainly and ingenuously to acknowledge his
misapplying of this holy Scripture of Tit. 3. then to cover it by so thin and
poor a plea, viz. that he intends by persecution, excommunication out of the
Church of Christ?


Examination of CHAP. XVI.
Peace. MAster Cotton here grants a toleration to Jews, Turks, Pagans, yea and
Antichristians, with one exception, to wit, so that they continue not to seduce
etc.


Truth. But it must be remembered, that before and after he maintains
persecution against Apostates, blasphemers, and idolatours, and then who knows
not how all these four sorts, Jews, Turks, Pagans, and Antichristians, are
full of blasphemy and idolatry? Now in case rhey seduce not, they are to be
persecuted as idolaters and blasphemers, how then are they to be tolerated?


Peace. It could not be (had not this holy man been caught with sipping at the
bloody cup of the great whore) that Master Cottons affirmations and doctrines
should thus quarrel among themselves.

But further, I see not the equality of his yoaking the Ox and the Ass
together, when he further coupleth seducing of people into worship of false
Gods, confidence of a man's own merit, etc. (which are spiritual matters) with
seducing into seditions conspiracies against the lives and estates of such
Princes as will not submit their conscience to the Bishop of Rome.


Truth. Your observation ( dear peace) is seasonable; the former are mere
Religious and spiritual, the latter are merely civil, against which the civil
state is bound to defend it self with civil weapons.


Peace. In the next place Master Cotton charge the discusser with want of
reason truth, and candor, for observing how unfitly those Scriptures of Phil.
3. Romans 14. are produced to prove a tolleration of lesser errors: And he
affirms, that he never intended, that what the Churches might not tolerate,
the Cities might not, etc.


Truth. The point is tolerating or persecuting by the civil state; whatever
therefore be Master Cottons intentions, it is apparent, unless the Cities and
Churches of Rome and Philippi be Examination of Phil. 3. and Romans 14.
confounded together (as commonly they are in case of persecution) I say it is
then apparent that there is no Scripture brought for the civil state its
tolerating of points of lesser moment, nor are these Scriptures brought to any
purpose in hand, but profaned.


Peace. But observe his Argument, The civil state tollerates petty thieves and
liars, to live in Towns, Cities etc.


Truth. No well ordered State or City can suffer petty Thieves and liars
without some punishment, and we know how severely in the State of England, even
thieves have been punished even Very severe, but not Christian, more then
Judaical punishment of Thieves in England.
with death it self; but Master Cotton is against such cruelty, for he pleades
for tollerating of lesser errors, even in points of Religion and worship.

2. If tollerating of lesser errors be granted upon this ground, viz. till God
may be pleased to manifest his truth; is not the same a ground for tollerating
of greater, as the holy spirit of God argues 2 Timothy 2. trying if God may be
pleased to give repentance?


Peace. Yea but (says he) the greater will infect, and so is more dangerous,
and the tolleration is the more unmerciful and cruel to the souls of many.


Truth. Liars and Thieves infect also, even the Civil state, and a little
leaven will leaven the whole lump, and therefore as the Commonweal ought not
upon that ground to tolerate petty thieves and liars, so has Christ Jesus
provided in his holy kingdom and City against lesser evils, and upon this
ground, that a little leaven will leaven the whole lump. But yet Christ Jesus
has not spoken (where he gives command for this thing to the Corinthians or
Galatians, that such persons so leavened, should (together with their being put
out of the Church for obstinacy in a little leaven) be put out of the world or
civil state: (The one (the Church (being his Garden, the other, the Commonweal,
being the high ways, Field, etc. the proper place for men as men to abide in.)


Examination of CHAP. XVII.
Peace. COncerning the holding forth of error with an arrogant and boisterous
spirit to the disturbance of civil peace, Master Cotton moderates the matter,
that he would not have such put to death, unless the civil peace be destroyed,
to the destruction of the lives and souls of men.


Truth. I cannot but here first observe the confounding of heaven The civil and
spiritual life confounded.
and earth together, the Church and the world, lives and souls, etc. as if all
were of one nature.

2. Neither blessed Paul, nor I, need to be accused of cruelty in that grant of
Paul, if alleged ( Acts 25.) for there will not be found ought but a
willingness to bear a righteous sentence of death in some crimes committed
against the civil state.

3. Master Cotton may here observe, how justly (as he speaks of the heretic)
he condemns himself, for it is too bloody a Tenent (says he) that every man
that holds error in a boisterous and arrogant way, to the disturbance of
civil peace, ought to be punished with death. Is not this the whole scope of
his discourse from Deuteronomy. 13. and other abrogated repealed laws, to prove (what
was just and righteous in the land of Israel) so bloody a Tenent and course to
be enforced in all Nations all the world over?


Peace. Master Cotton excepteth against that speech [But if the matter be of a
spiritual or divine nature.] There is no error, says he, can be of divine
nature, though it may be spiritual.


Truth. Master Cotton may hear Solomon here saying unto him. Be not overwise
etc.

For first, the words are not, If the error be of a divine nature, but if the
matter (that is, the controversy, cause etc.) be of a spiritual or divine
nature: which distinction between humane and God and Caesar.
divine things, I conceive is the same with that of wisdom it self dividing
between God and Caesar: Give to God, etc. And so, though no error be of a
spiritual or divine nature (taking the words in their highth) yet the matter in
question may be of some spiritual or divine consideration, belonging to God,
and his worship; and not concerning the Commonweal or Civil state of men, which
belong to Caesar's care.

2. Taking spiritual as it is used sometimes in the holy Scripture as opposite
to flesh and blood, I see no ground for that distinction, between spiritual and
divine: God is a spirit, and the spiritual man discerns All things: In such
places and their like (to my understanding) spiritual and divine are the same
thing.


Peace. But I marvel at the next passage: how can Master Cotton with any color
of reason or charity conceive the discusser so reasonless and senceless, as to
intend by these words, *Such only break the Cities or Kingdoms peace, as call
for prison, and sword against heretics?* as if (as Master Cotton infers and
says) that murderers, seditious persons, rebels, traitors, were none of them
such, viz. Peace-breakers.


Truth. This word [onely] can only have a fair respect to such as are charged
by their opinions of Religion and worship to break the Peace of the
Commonweal, who (of what conscience soever they are) may freely enjoy their
conscience and worship (either The great peace breakers.
of many and false Gods, or of the true God in a false way) and yet not be
guilty of the breach of civil peace, but only they (I say they only in this
consideration) who by their doctrine and practice cry out for prison, and fire
and sword, against heretics, etc.


Peace. As the devil appeared an Angel of light in Samuels mantle, So John Hus
and Jerome of Prage, are declared for devils with the pictured devils upon
their heads; and under this cloud of heresy and black name of heretics, most
commonly have suffered in all ages the true messengers of Christ Jesus. Thus
cried they out, Acts 17. These are they that have turned the world upside down,
and are come hither also; and thus did they set the City all on an uproare. And
Acts 19. not the worshippers of Christ filled the whole City with confusion,
but the worshipers of Diana, who filled the heavens with that Bedlam Outery of
two hours continuance, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.


Truth. With as little reason and peaceableness of spirit has English Diana's.
our English Nation used to cry Great is the Church of Rome, Great is our holy
Father the Pope, Great the Mass, Great the Virgin Mary, Great the General
Councels etc. And in later times, Great the Church of England, Great the
Christian Magistrate, Great the Ministry and Bishops of England, Great the
swearing and covenant of the people, etc. and such as dissent from us in these
points and practices, persecute them as heretics, and disturbers of the common
civil peace.


Peace. In the rest of this Chapter, Master Cotton makes three grants with his
exceptions annexed.


Truth. Please you ( dear peace) to mention them in one, and accordingly I
shall weigh them in the balance together.


Peace. 1. Says he, The many causes which the discusser before wrote of, are
all of them allowed, but none of them concern holding forth of errors, which is
the point in hand.

2. Says he, It is easily granted that they do break the Cities Gross
partiality to private interests.
or kingdoms peace, who cry out for prisons and swords against such who cross
their judgment or practice in religion, to wit, says he, unless their
religion be of God, and the crossing of it be such as destroys and subverteth
the Religion of God.

3. It is also easily granted (says he) that many complain most who are most
in fault themselves.


Truth. To these three I may answer thus in one. The Mystery of preaching or
holding forth the witness of the Truth of Jesus, is interpreted by many to be
the Mystery of the first seal, the white horse; and the being persecuted or
slaughtered for the word of God and testimony of Jesus, to be the Mystery of
the third seal, where the souls under the Altar cry to the Lord for vengeance
against their persecutors. These mysteries are sealed up, and they are the
Lords letters, not to be opened and read by every one, but (as sealed letters
be) by such to whom they are directed.


Peace. It follows therefore, that in the midst of all the cries of Jews,
Pagans, Turks, and Antichristians [Our Religion is the Religion of God: You
are an heretic, you are a persecutor, We are true Christians, we are
persecuted, etc.] that the hearts of Gods children must be comforted and staid
up with the sight of this Mystery. And doubtless it is most commonly (though
not always) true, that the imprisoned, fined, whipped, banished, hanged, burned,
etc. in point of Religion have been so inhumanely oppressed for the word of God
and the Testimony of Jesus.

Our own Chronicles, Records of England, and blessed Master Fox will in part
evidence to us, that scarce a King or Queen of England in all Ages guilty of
much persecution.
England has past since Richard the second his time, but the blood of the
witnesses of Jesus more or less has been spilt in their Reigns, as the blood
of Heretics, Schismatics etc. and but few drops of the blood of any Heretic
indeed have fallen to the ground.


Truth. The discusser therefore humbly (to my knowledge) desires according to
Master Cottons wish to reflect upon his own Two seasonable petitions of any
pers^outed.
way, and humbly to beg of God two things for himself, and all in any measure
censured and persecuted as heretics.

First, Joseph's innocence, purity, chastity, in all those points and questions
wherein they are charged and condemned unclean.

Secondly, Iesephs patience to bear the accusations, censures, imprisonments
etc. from the tongues and hands of them who are notoriously unclean and guilty
before the zealous and revenging eye and hand of God.


Examination of CHAP. XVIII.
Peace. MAny of the following leaves and Chapters ( dear truth) are spent upon
that great and heavenly parable of the Tares, a knot about which so many holy
fingers, dead and living, have been so laboriously exercised, all professing to
unty, yet some by seeming to untie, have tied the knot the faster.


Truth. It is no wonder ( sweet peace) to find Master Cotton so entangled both
in his answers and replies touching this Parable; for men of all sorts in
former ages, have been so entangled before The Parable of the Tares.
him: To which purpose, with thy patience I shall relate a notable passage
recorded by that excellent witness (or Martyr) of God, Master Fox in his book
of Acts and Monuments: it is this. In the story of Master George Wisehart (that
famous Scotch witness of Christ Jesus) in the days of King Henry the eighth,
there preached at the arraignment of the said Wiseheart, one John Winryme,
subprior of the Abbey of Saint Andrews, he discoursed on the Parable of the
Tares, he interpreted the Tares to be heretics; and yet contrary to this very
Scripture (as Master Fox himself observes, though elsewhere himself also
maintaining it the duty of the civil Magistrate to suppress heretics) I say
the said Winryme The Parable of Tares grossly abused.
concludes that heretics ought not to be let alone until the harvest, but to
be suppressed by the power of the civil Magistrate: So that memorable it is that
both the Popish Prior, and that truly Christian Fox, were entangled in
contradictions to their own writings about the interpreting of this Heavenly
Scripture.


Peace. O what cause therefore have all that follow Jesus to beg of Jesus (as
the Disciples did) the blessed Key of David to unloose this holy mystery? In
the entrance therefore of this discourse, the discusser observing Master
Cottons exposition to be fallacious, and the Tares to be interpreted, either
persons, or doctrines, or practices, he blames that Master Cotton gives no
argument for proof of such an interpretation: Master Cotton replies.

First, Neither did the Author of the letter give reason for his
interpretation. 2. That they both gave one interpretation. For the Author of
the letter said, that some expounded the Wheat and Tares, to signify such as
walk in truth, and such as walk in lies: now are not (says Master Cotton)
hypocrites and some corrupt doctrines and practices coincident with such as
walk in lies, etc?


Truth. I answer, First it might be both their failing, not to strengthen their
interpretations with some light and evidence from Scripture or reason, although
the Prisoners failing the less, as being forced to write by shifts and
difficulties in prison, and so the shorter, when Master Cotton had free liberty
to enlarge and confirm without control, etc.

2. When the prisoner interprets the Tares to be such as walk in lies, it will
be found evident upon examination, that he means such as manifestly, openly,
visibly walk in the true profession of Christianity; and such as openly and
visibly walk in the lies of Hypocrisy secret and open hypocrisy.
false and Antichristian doctrine and worship. That distinction of secret and
open Hypocrisy is seasonable: secret, implies such a dissimulation as may lie
hid under the true outward profession of Christ Jesus, as in Judas, Simon
Magus, Ananias and Sapphira etc. Open hypocrisy implies the profession of the
man of sin, sitting in the Temple of God (or over the Temple of God) pretending
the Name of Christ, and yet apparently and visibly, false and counterfeit, and
but pretending, when such pretenses and shows are brought to the Touchstone of
true Christianity.


Peace. Your observation is true, as also a second, That these hypocritical
doctrines and practices are to be tolerated to the end of the world, this he
sets down in general, not instancing in particular what doctrine and practices
are to be tolerated: and on the other hand, the whole drift of his Book
maintains, that such persons, doctrines or practices, that are idolatrous, or
blasphemous, or infectious, are not to be tolerated or permitted at all; which
passages to my understanding have not harmony among themselves: For what is all
the whole Religion of every Antichrist, but a Mass or Chaos of Hypocrisy,
Idolatry, Heresy, Blasphemy, Poisons? etc.

Besides, Master Cotton had dealt more plainly with this holy Scripture, if he
had explained what he meant by such doctrines and practices [comming near the
truth] and set down the bounds, how near as to make them Tares.


Truth. Dear Peace, Who knows not that the weeds of the wilderness come near
the flowers of the Garden, the counterfeit may come near the life, and the
false metal the true gold? And though it be true that some doctrines and
practices be not so gross as other, yet they differ but (as the Scripture
speaks) as whores and whoremongers, amongst themselves; some are more proper,
and fine, and young, and painted; some are old, deformed etc. And yet the
finest weeds, counterfeits and whores are unsufferable in the Garden, Spiritual
whoredom in worship may and does in all Nations subsist with Civil Beings,
Relations, etc.
in the Commonweal, house, and bed of Christ: Though yet in the civil
Commonweal, the vilest spiritual strumpet may challenge a civil Being, if in
civil things unreproveable.


Examination of CHAP. XIX.
Peace. BUt in this Chapter, Master Cotton in the issue grants, that the
Tares signify persons, by Christ's own interpretation: For [them that do
iniquity] may seem to be an explanation of (...), All scandals, that is,
persons holding forth of scandalous and corrupt doctrines and practices, like
unto true and sound.


Truth. Yet withal he charge the discusser with lightness and inconstancy,
for endeavoring to prove that corrupt doctrines and practices* are not to be
tolerated, and yet, says he, the discusser pleades that such persons ought to
be tolerated. Whereas the discusser twice in this Chapter expressly
distinguishes between toleration in the Church, and tolleration in the world,
and affirms, that although the Church of Christ Jesus cannot tolerate either
persons or practices which are false and Antichristian, yet the civil state,
the world, ought to tolerate and permit both.

And therefore Master Cottons inconsiderate charge of contradiction will not
stick, because of those diverse respects or States, the spiritual and civil, as
it was no contradiction in Christ Jesus, to affirm that John Baptist was
Elias, when John himself affirms, that he was not Elias* For in several
respects the Negative of John, and the Affirmative of Jesus were both true.


Examination of CHAP. XX.
Peace. IN this passage (to my understanding) Master Cotton after much seeming
contestation and disagreement, yet in conclusion he shakes hands and agrees
with the discusser in the maine point in question.


Truth. Your observation reaches home; for let it be granted, that the Greek
word (...) should not signify All weeds sprung up with the wheat, but one kind
of weed, and that in special which Master Cotton says Dioscorides describes:
Let it be granted to be the same with Lolium, and that there is a great
similitude between the Tares and the Wheat, while they are in the Of the Tares.
blade (some of which particulars are controversial:) yet it no way opposes
that which the discusser maintains, to wit, the easiness of discerning these
tares to be tares, when they are grown up to blade and fruit. And therefore
Master Cotton at the last, confesses that even these tares (unknown
hypocrites) (according to his own exposition) ought to be suffered in the
church of Christ to the harvest or end of the world.


Peace. I cannot but wonder how Master Cotton should once imagine, that it
might possibly stand with the order, piety, and safety of the profession of
Christ Jesus, that such a generation of known hypocrites should be perpetually
suffered.


Truth. Doubtless the Lord Jesus was not of Master Cottons mind, who so
vehemently warned his followers to take heed of the leaven of hypocrisy.
Beside, if known hypocrites may be suffered and not cast out, Why may not known
hypocrites be taken in? And what is then become of the true matter of the
church, to wit, true living stones of a spiritual life and nature, so far as
outwardly can be discerned?


Peace. This assertion has so foul a representation, that Master Cotton is
forced to draw this veil over, and therefore he adds, until the fruits of
hypocrites grow notoriously scandalous.


Truth. I cannot fathom how these two agree: First, known hypocrites may be
tolerated until the worlds end; 2. Tolerated no longer, then until the fruits
of the hypocrisy grow notoriously scandalous: For will not all reason and
experience ask this question: How comes it that this friend, subject, and
Spouse of Christ is now a known dissembler, traitor, whore, unless by some
scandalous fruits so declaring and uncasing of them? If the shameful fruits of
the unclean person, 1 Cor. 5. were sufficient to denominate him a wicked
person, why were they not sufficient to warrant Paul to say, Put away therefore
that wicked person from amongst you?


Peace. But let us mind the Scripture quoted: If (says Master Cotton) foolish
Virgins be cast out of the church, the wise Virgins may be found sometimes
sleeping as well as they.


Truth. Neither good wheat, nor wise Virgins are to be cast out of the church
of Christ, while they appear to be so: yet since Of the wise and foolish
Virgius.
Master Cotton elsewhere grants, that a child of God (good wheat, and a wise
Virgin) may so stand out against the church of Christ (in some passion) that he
may be cast out. etc. How much more then ought the tares and foolish Virgins
(while so appearing) be excluded?

2. If the wise Virgins be received into heaven, as the foolish shut out, will
it not evidently follow (even the contrary to that for which Master Cotton
alleges this Scripture) to wit. That when hypocrites are discovered, they
are to be kept out, and consequently to be cast out of the church of Christ?
except Master Cotton will say, that the kingdom of Christ on earth, may
receive and keep in her bosom such stinking weeds, declared so to be, which
the kingdom of Christ in heaven abhors.

Who questions, but while the hypocrisy of these foolish Virgins lay hid in
their empty vessels, that outwardly they appeared as wise as the wise Virgins?
But when the fruits of their hypocrisy discovered them to be fools, how can
Master Cotton (according to the truth as it is in Jesus) affirm, that foolish
Virgins (known hypocrites) are to be kept in and not cast out of the church of
Christ unto the end of the world?


Peace. O how contrary is this to the very fundamentals, essence, nature and
being of a church or Spouse of Christ Jesus, which is (by the confession of
Papists and Protestants) a society of wise Virgins, visibly Saints holy and
faithful persons, a society of such persons as outwardly profess to love Christ
Jesus uprightly ( Cant. 1.) and to be espoused to him, 1 Cor. 11.


Truth. Yea, and how contrary is this to the nature of Christ Jesus, whose
heart is all one fire toward the daughters of Jerusalem (Cant. 4.) and how
contrary to the charge, that great and No true church of Christ consisting of
visible hypocrites.
solemn charge of the Lord Jesus to all his followers, to take heed of that
leaven which is hypocrisy, which if suffered, will leaven the whole lump, and
render the garden and spouse of Christ a filthy dunghill and whore-house of
rotten and stinking whores and hypocrites.


Examination of CHAP. XXI.
Peace. MAster Cotton here endeavors to prove (as many have done before) that
the Field which the Lord Jesus interprets the world, was meant by him to be the
Church, as he is said to love the world, John 3. to be propitiation for the
sins of the world, 1 Ioh. 2.


Truth. In these and many other places of like nature, it pleases the Spirit
of God to set forth his love to mankind, distinct from all other creatures: As
also the impartiality of his love, calling his chosen out of all sorts of
sinners, mankind all the world over: and yet it cannot be denied, but that the
Scriptures speak frequently The field of the World.
of the world and of the church in a far distinct and contrary acceptance. So,
as when he names the church, it cannot signify the world; and when the world,
he cannot be said to intend the church, the reasons therefore on either side
must be expended and weighed in the fear of God, why the Field here called by
Christ the world, cannot be intended to be the church of Christ.


Peace. Your right distinguishing, is a right dividing of the word of Truth;
but (says Master Cotton) it cannot be the world in proper signification; for
which he aleadgeth three reasons.

First. Because there had been (says he) no place for the servants wonder at
the appearing of the tares verse 27. for what wonder that the world should be
so full of fornicators, etc? Was it ever otherwise?


Truth. It is true, that the world lies in wickedness, and is full of
fornicators, idolaters etc. and yet it was some thousands of years when the
world was not full of Christian, that is, anointed, or holy fornicators, holy
idolaters etc. That is indeed and truth Antichristian, and that alone is the
point in question, about which this answer of Master Cotton hovers, but comes
not near it. This is indeed a most dreadful and wonderful point of the wisdom,
justice, and patience of God, so to suffer so many millions of The mystery of
Antichristians or false Christians.
men and women, to arrogate to themselves the name and profession of the most
holy living God, and his holy Son Christ Jesus, to be called Christians,
anointed or holy, and yet upon the point to hate the holiness, truth, and
spirit of Christ Jesus.


Truth. This is doubtless to me (what ere Master Cotton imagines) a wonderful
mystery in all Ages since these tares were first sown, to see, I say, so many
millions of holy idolaters, holy murderers, holy whoremongers, holy thieves
etc.

The blasphemy of this is so wonderful and dreadful, that I cannot sufficiently
wonder at him that wonders, not how this comes to pass.


Truth. The like I answer to his second Reason, that it is true that we read
not that ever any of the Ministers or Prophets of Christ ever essayed to pluck
up all such vicious notorious persons out of the world, as they demanded
concerning the tares, for then indeed as the Spirit implies, 1 Cor. 5. the
whole state of the world would be overthrown; but yet this hinders not, but
there may be a desire in Gods servants to pluck up this or that sect or sort of
people, Jews, Turks, or Antichristians.


Peace. Dear Truth, you make me call to mind the desire of Christ's disciples,
that fire might descend from heaven, not to consume all fornicators, idolaters,
all cruel and unclean persons out of the world, yet that particular,
unmerciful, superstitions Town of the Samaritans, they desired that fire might
come from heaven and consume them.


Truth. Indeed this desire of the disciples is no strange desire, for what else
do All they desire, which permit not in the civil state, Master Cotton knows
not his own desire.
any Religion, worship or conscience but their own? Nay far beyond that, were
the whole worlds neck under their imperial yoke (the many millions of millions
of blasphemers, and idolaters of all sorts) if they will not be convinced at
their word, must be cut off from all natural and civil being in the world, by
Fire and Sword.


Peace. His third reason is, That the discusser reckoned up as parallel goats
and sheep, wheat and tares (as generally, said he, others do) and he adds,
that in the purest church after the ruin of Antichrist, there shall be goats
and sheep, wise and foolish Virgins, until the coming of Christ to judgment,
Mat. 25.


Truth. Although the discusser spoke of that eternal separation between wheat
and tares, sheep and goats approaching; yet he never said, that the tares and
goats signified hypocrites in the Church, which is the point in question: Nor
dare I subscribe to that opinion, that after the destruction of Antichrist,
when purest times of the church shall come, that there shall be such a mixed
estate in the church of Christ, until the coming of Christ to judgment.

For first, Although goats were clean for food and sacrifice, yet it is
apparent, that as they are for the left hand, So they are visibly known by
every child, where goats and sheep are kept. And to image that visible
hypocrites, such as tares goats, unprofitable servants, foolish Virgins etc.
shall in a mixed way make up Christ's churoh, and that in the purest times of the
church, of which there are so many and wonderful prophecies, is to me not only
to frame a church estate point blank cross to the purity of those churches, but
even to the first Apostolical churches, yea and against that frame of church
estate in New England, where Master Cotton has professed (though now it is
said the door is wider) against* receiving in such members as are visibly
foolish Virgins, goats etc.


Peace. Master Cottons second answer is, that if the Field be the world, as the
tares Antichristians and false Christians, yet they were first sown in the
field of the church.


Truth. Not so: for although there might be many infirmities and distempers,
yea some great corruptions in the first Christian body the church of Christ;
notwithstanding that Antichrist is an Apostate, yet it will not follow, that
the tares were first sown in The first rise of Antichristians argued.
the true church, because Satan might easily raise up some professors of the
name of Christ, which the true church would never admit. And as Satan might
raise up persons, congregations, worships, which were not according to Christ;
So might he easily raise up churches, congregations and societies of such tares
with whom the churches of Christ might refuse society. So says John, There are
many Antichrists, whom yet we cannot well imagine that they were in the
churches of the Lord Jesus.

There came false Apostles to the Church at Ephesus, but yet that church
examined and found them liars. And so long as the churches were watchful, those
tares kept in the world. But when the churches began to be sleepy, the Tares
might undiscerned creep into the church

This may be as well, as when Apostates fall off from the church, go out from
it, because they were never of it: and also as well as that the church of
Christ may drowzily neglect to purge out the old leaven of persons and things,
which may soon overspread and overrun the whole lump and garden of the church
of Christ, until it be turned again into one common field of the world
together.


Peace. Master Cottons third answer is, That Antichristians must not be
tolerated unto the end of the world, because God will put it into the heart of
faithful princes to hate the whore; and after that, we read of a visible state
of New Jerusalem before the end of the world, Rev. 20. 21, 22.


Truth. It is not said, that those princes that shall hate the whore shall be
faithful princes: and since Master Cotton seems to hold that by way of
ordinance (and so in obedience) the Kings of the earth shall with the sword
destroy Antichrist, I desire his proof for any such prophecy. For,

1. It is not said, that God will put it into their hearts, to hate the whore.
And we find that they shall hate the lamb, as well as hate the whore. For
they shall make war with the lamb, and the lamb shall overcome them, as comes
to pass after the ruin of the who^e, Rev. 19.

2. Judgment may be executed upon the whore by way of mutual judgment each
upon others, when in the midst of their spiritual whoredoms, and drunkenness
with the Saints blood, The judgment of the great whore.
they shall fall out with the whore (as uses to be in whoredom) and turn
their whorish loves into outrageous fury; and the very description of their
fury looks this way, for it is not the property of sober and faithful men
(though repenting of their whoredoms) to make a woman naked (though a whore)
and to eat her flesh, as it is said, those shall do.

But grant (as we most hopefully do) the whores consumption by the ten horns
of the Beast, and the flourishing of new Jerusalem upon the earth ( Rev. 20.
21, 22.) before the end of the world (all which are great disputes among the
people of God) yet I judge it necessary that two or three queries be satisfied
for the further clearing of the holy mind of the Lord in this particular.

1. Whether (as some have and do argue) the end of the world in this Parable
and other Scriptures do expressly and undeniably signify the end of the world
and judgement-day literally, and not some other mystical period of time, since
the word (...) (usually translated world) is of various signification, and
sometimes signifies and Age.

2. Whether those ten Kings which shall destroy the whore, shall be absolutely
Christian, true Saints, followers of Jesus they and their Armies, or else
remaining Antichristian horns of the Beast, shall yet execute the judgment of
God upon the great whore: as Jehu remaining both hypocritical and idolatrous,
yet dashe out the brains of that great whore Iezabel, and executed judgment
upon Baals Priests: yea and even as Henry the eighth tumbled the Pope out of
his chair in England, and thousands of his Popelings with him, he suppressed and
threw the whore Iezabel the church of Rome out of Englands window, and yet
continued to burn the Saints of Jesus upon his six Popish and bloody Articles.

3. Whether that mighty Army of Gog and Magog, which is mustered up after the
thousand years reign of Christ, be not in part made up of the ^en horns, even
after the whore of Romes consumption (as before in Henry the eighth his case)
which horns with their peoples Christ will have yet to be tolerated as Tares in
the field of the world, though not in the Church of Christ.


Peace. What think you of Master Cottons grant, that the first fruits of
Antichristians may be tares sown in the field of the church, which afterward
grow to be Briars and Thorns?


Truth. I observe that to be tares, of Antichristian worshippers, and briars
and thorns (oppressers and persecutors) are both of them of a false and
Antichristian nature, which ought to be far from imitation of the Rose of
Sharon, or the Lily of the valleys.

But 2. Are there no tares, that is, hypocrites, but in the church; and must
all the briars and thorns (oppressors and persecutors, etc.) have no root from
the wild world, but from the garden of Christ's church?


Peace. Now whereas it was urged, that it stood not with the wisdom and love
of Christ, interpreting this parable, and opening what the field was, to call
the field the world, when he meant the church: Master Cotton answers, that Paul
by the same wisdom uses the same word, 2 Cor. 5. God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself.


Truth. Paul in using that figure of the world for all sorts of men in the
world, does not undertake to interpret a Parable, which before he had proposed
unto (and at the request of) the Corinthians, as the Lord Jesus does at the
request of his disciples.

And where Master Cotton says, that it is no more an improper speech to call
the church the world, then to speak of Christ as dying for the world, when he
dyed for the church.


Truth. I find it not to be said, that Christ died for the world, but grant
that it has pleased the Lord in his most infinite wisdom, to cause the term
of the world to be used in various significations; yet let any instance be
given of any Scripture, wherein the Lord opposing the church to the world, the
wheat to tares, does not distinguish between the church redeemed out of the
world, and the world it self, which is said to lie in wickedness, and to be
such as for which Christ Jesus would not pray, John 17.


Examination of CHAP. XXII.
Peace. IN this Chapter was urged the scope of the Lord Jesus, to wit, to
foretell the Antichristian state opposing the true Christian Christ's Church by
(...) properly consisting of good ground.
church and worship as also to comfort and strengthen the hearts of his
followers, against the grievances ari^ing therefrom; and where it was urged
that the church consists only of good ground, and that the three sorts of
Bad ground visibly so declared, are properly in the world, and not in the
church, Master Cotton answers,

First, Did not Christ preach to all these sorts of hearers in the church of
the Jews?


Truth. That national church of the Jews, in its first visible constitution,
consisted only of good ground. Now that the other The ^^^u^e of Jewish Church.
three sorts of hearers were in the church of the Jews, it was an accident and
corruption: when they grew incurable, and received not the admonitions of the
Lord, by the Lord Jesus and his servants, preaching unto them, the Lord cast
them out of his sight, destroyed that national church, and established the
Christian church.

Now what is this to the permitting of known hypocrites in the Christian church
to the worlds end? since that the proper seat of known hypocrisy, and of all
other wickedness, is the world, which indeed properly consists of the three
sorts of Bad ground, as the church and Garden of Christ, of the honest and good
ground.


Peace. But further, If (says Master Cotton) the children of the
church members be in the church, then they growing up to years, become some of
them like the highway, and some like the stony, and some like the thorny
ground.


Truth. Admit the Christian church were constituted of the natural seed and
offspring (which yet Master Cotton knows will never be granted to him, and I
believe will never be proved by him:) yet he knows, that upon the discovery of
any such portion of ground in the church, the church is bound to admonish, and
upon impenitency (after admonition) to cast them into the world, the proper
place of such kind of hearers and professors.


Peace. Master Cotton proceeds to a third answer, to wit, Though it be not the
proper work of the church to bring up their own children to become the sincere
people of God, And Christ has given his Church and his Gospel preached to it,
to lie like leaven in three pecks of meal, till all be leavened, Mat. 13. 31.
And he has given Pastors and Teachers, as well for the gathering of the
Saints, as for the edification of the Body of Christ.


Truth. I answer, the proper work of the Pastors and Teachers, is to feed the
sheep and flock, and not the Herds, the wild Beasts in the world. And although
it is the duty of parents to bring up their children in the nurture and fear of
the Lord; yet what if The nature of Christ's true Apostles.
those children refuse to frequent the Assemblies of the Church, and what if
those three sorts of bad ground or hearers will not come within the bounds of
the Pastors and Teachers feeding; has not the Lord Jesus appointed other
Officers (in the same Ephesians. 4.) for the gathering of the Saints, that is
sending out of the Church of Christ, Apostles, or Messengers, to preach Christ
Jesus to the three sorts of bad ground, to labor to turn them into good ground?

But alas, to salve up all this, the civil sword is commonly run for, to force
all sorts of ground to come to church, instead of the sending forth ( Romans 10.)
the heavenly sowers, according to the Ordinance of Christ Jesus.


Peace. But what say you to his fourth answer, viz. There is no such
Resemblance between the high-way-ground and good ground, as between the Tares
and the wheat, nor would the servants wonder at Tares in the highway, nor ask
about their plucking up.


Truth. I answer, Let the highway, stony, and thorny ground be considered in
their several qualities of profaneness, stouiness and worldliness, and all the
sons of men throughout the whole world naturally are such; and it is no wonder,
nor would the servants of Christ be so troubled, as to desire their plucking up
out of the world. But yet again consider all these sorts of men as professing
the name and anointing of Christ Jesus in a false and counterfeit Antichristian
way, and then it may well be wondered, whence such monstrous kind of Christians
or anointed ones Antichristians monsters in rereligion.
arose: And Gods people may easily be tempted rather to desire their rooting
out of the world, then the rooting out of any such sorts of ground or men
professing any other Religion, Jewish, Mohammedan or Pagan, Antichristian and
false Christians being more opposite to the kingdom of Christ Jesus, and more
dangerous, by how much more a counterfeit and Traitor is worse then a professed
Fox, an Antichristian (whether Papist or Protestant) worse then a Jew, a Pagan,
Whether Indian, Turk or Persian.


Examination of CHAP. XXIII.
Peace. Still of the Tares. THese tares (says Master Cotton) are not such
sinners as are opposite and contrary, for then none should be opposite or
contrary but they.


Truth. I acknowledge (as Master Cotton here observes) two sorts of persons
opposite and contrary to Christ Jesus and his Kingdom.

First, All sorts of sinners scandalous in their lives and Two sorts of sinners.
courses.

2. More especially opposite in point of Religion and worship, as all
idolaters, and especially Antichristians.

Now every man by nature, the best and wisest, is opposite and contrary to
Christ, his word and kingdom; but an idolater and Antichristian is more
especially opposite to his glorious Name, Truth, and Ordinances.

And therein properly lies the mystery of iniquity, brought in by the man of
sin, that lawless person, 2 Thessalonians. 2. most opposite or contrary to Christ Jesus
the Son of God, and Son of Righteousness.


Peace. But this is a begging of the question (says Master Cotton) for the
question is about visible worshippers, such as were discovered and declared to
be what they were, as well by their fruit as by their clads, and therefore
again (says Master Cotton) these tares were the seed and children of the
Devil; for why should they be called the seed of the One, and the children of
the Other?


Truth. I answer, the Lord Jesus distinguishes, thus, He that sows the good
seed, is the Son of man; and the good seed are the children of the Kingdom: he
that sows the tares is the devil, and these tares are the children of the
evil or evil one; Hence by way of opposition, these children of evil or evil
ones being visibly such as are opposite to the children of the kingdom, they
cannot be hypocrites in the church, until they are discovered: These children
therefore of the evil one opposite to the visible kingdom, and so to visible
Christ Jesus in point of his kingdom, church, and worship (though they be the
children of the devil in a sense, yet) can they be no other, but the children
of the false Christ or Antichrist, in the way of a false church and worship.


Peace. Yea but lastly (says Master Cotton) that word (...) translated the
children of the wicked one or wickedness, will agree to hypocrites.


Truth. It will indeed, if we respect their inside, which is only visible to
the invisible King, as Judas in his profession: but it Two sorts of hypocrites.
cannot agree to such hypocrites as are undiscovered by their fruits in the
church, but unto such hypocrites as are discovered in their blades and fruit,
and so consequently are not fit to live with other sinners in the world: I
doubt not but Master Cotton will say, That although a member of a Church prove
a theife, adulterer, murderer, in the eyes of a Brother, that sees and knows
his secret wickedness, yet that brother is censurable as a slanderer, if he
should report these evils, though to the Church, until according to visible
order he could produce good proof and evidence.


Examination of CHAP. XXIV.
Peace. Still of the Tares. MAster Cotton here seems to me (with the Familists)
to confound heaven and earth together, the matters of Worship, and Ordinances
of Religion, with the affairs and businesses of this life: for says he, such
as stand for the kingdom of Satan (as all evil men do) they stand in
opposition to the Kingdom of Christ.


Truth. Master Cotton is not now to be taught the distinction between the
church and Commonweal; nor that a national church is not of Christ Jesus his
institution: yet as this discourse strongly inclines to erect a national
church, so does this present answer to the confusion both of Church and
Commonweal.

It is true, a covetuous Jew, that blasphemeth Christ Jesus, stands for Satan
against Christ. But by his covetousness in one kind, as covetousness is
opposite to Righteousness and contentation, etc. and for Satan against Christ
in another sense, that Two sorts of opposites to Christ Jesus.
is in a Religious and Spiritual sense, as he prefers Moses before Christ
Jesus, and denies the true Messiah to be yet come in the flesh.

A cruel Turk stands for Satan against Christ, by his cruelty in one sense, to
wit, in opposition to Christ's mercy, gentleness, patience, etc. but by his
belief in Mahomet, preferring him before Christ, he opposes him in his
Kingdom and Worship.

To come nearer, a drunken English, Dutch or Frenchman, stands for Satan
against Christ, as their drunkenness is opposite to Christ's sobriety,
temperance, etc. but against Christ in another sense, as they profess the ways
of Antichristian idolatry and superstition: And not to observe this
distinction, is (with some Familists) to run upon quicksands of confounding
the spiritual kingdom of Christ Jesus, his worship and ordinances, with the
kingdoms of this world, and the common affairs thereof in natural and civil
consideration.


Peace. But though Christ (says Master Cotton) should command other offenders
to be let alone beside Antichristians, yet he should not contradict any
ordinances for the punishment of offenders etc. because, says he, No law of
God, nor just law of man commands the the rooting out of hypocrites, though the
church be bound to endeavor (as much as in them lies) to heal their
hypocrisy.


Truth. Hypocrisy discovered in the fruit of it, is not to be let alone in the
church or State: For neither church of Christ nor civil state can long continue
safe, if hypocrites or traitors (under what pretense soever) be permitted to
break forth in them, without due punishment and rooting out; this hypocrisy
being especially that great sin against which Christ Jesus so frequently and so
vehemently inveighed, and against which he denounced the sorest of plagues and
judgments.


Truth. By whose command, and by what means and ordinances, by whose power and
authority, but by the command, means and power of Christ Jesus?

And I further ask, If faithful admonition be not one good means of healing,
and if that lie not in the churches power; and if the hypocrite after faithful
admonition once or twice, submit not to the voice of Christ Jesus, I ask where
the Lord Jesus commands to make a stop, and not to cast forth and reject
whomsoever wilfully obstinate?


Peace. Doubtless (dear Truth) many will be apt to say Master Cotton intends
secret and close hypocrisy.


Truth. And I doubt not but himself will say, That this is not our question,
but of known and unmasked hypocrisy, as himself has formerly declared, and
such as here he expresses come under ordinances of healing.


Peace. But further (says Master Cotton) it is not true, that Antichristians
are to be let alone until the end of the world, Why? Because Christ commanded
excommunication, etc.


Truth. I am astonished, and wonder why Master Cotton here speaks of
excommunication, a spiritual ordinance of Christ Jesus in his spiritual
kingdom or city, when the dispute only concerns temporal excommunication or
cutting off? Let them alone, that is, in civil State?

I wonder also how he should imagine the discusser in this Chapter to affirm,
that Antichristians are to be let alone in the church unto the end of the
world, when it was the very scope of his argument in this Chapter, to prove,
that the speech of Christ Jesus, [let them alone] must needs be understood of
letting idolaters and Antichristians alone in the civil state, and in the
world, because otherwise, if he had meant, [Let them alone in the church] he
should contradict himself, who has appointed means for the disturbing and
purging out the corrupt leaven both of persons and practices out of his church
and kingdom.


Peace. The same answer indeed will easily be returned to his last supposition
of any Popish spirit conspiring against the life of King and Parliament. The
whole scope of this book professes, and in this Chapter the discusser
professedly argues, that Christ Jesus has appointed that civil offenders
against the civil state, ought not to be let alone.

But Master Cotton adds, If Popish Priests and Jesuits be rightly expounded to
be the Rivers and fountains of water, which drive the dead sea of
Antichristian pollutions up and down all Nations in Europe, and in some cases
are to drink blood; Then are they not to be let alone, but duly suppressed and
cut off from conveying up and down idolatrous, heretical and seditious
wickedness, Rev. 16. 4. 7.


Truth. The exposition of this Scripture will be further examined The rivers
and fountains of blood, Rev. 16.
in the sequel, and found no true exposition* That Rivers and fountains of
water drive the sea up and down: For rivers and fountains however they come
from the salt water, yet lose they the savor of the salt-sea, and yield a
savor of the earth through which they make their passages; and again they run
into the sea, and are themselves driven up and down, and swallowed up in the
sea: Nor will it be found a true exposition according to Godliness and
Christianity, which commands patience and waiting, not fire and sword to
gain sayers and opposites: Nor lastly, will it be found a true exposition
agreeing with Master Cottons own profession in some passage of this book,
wherein he holds forth great toleration and gentleness to other consciences,
both English and Barbarians.


Examination of CHAP. XXV.
Peace. IN this Chapter Master Cotton affirms, that hypocrites (even) they that
are discerned to be such, yet they are not to be purged out, except they break
forth into such notorious fruits of hypocrisy as tend to the leavening of the
whole lump: for otherwise (says he) we may root out the best wheat in Gods
field, etc.


Truth. I answer, s^^^^ hypocrites and all hypocrisy is so odious in Gods
sight, and so vehemently inveighed against by Christ Of hypocrites in
profession of Christianity.
Jesus, what should be the cause why the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy, should find greater favor and connivence in the church of Christ,
then the leaven of any other sin, since all ought to be purged out? 1 Cor. 5.

2. Contrary to what Master Cotton says, [to wit, That no man merely for
hypocrisy and want of life and power of Godliness ought to be proceeded
against] the Spirit of God by Paul says, That such kind of professors of the
name of Christ should arise, that should pretend a form of godliness, but not
show forth the power thereof, from which he commands us to turn away, 1 Timothy
3.


Peace. But Master Cotton excepteth, Except (says he) they break forth into
some notorious scandalous fruits of hypocrisy.


Truth. How shall an hypocrite be discovered and known to be an hypocrite or
traitor in church or civil state, but by some such notorious scandalous fruits
as tend to the leavening of the whole lump? Come to particulars; was Judas,
Ananias and Sapphira, Simon Magus, Demas, or any other discovered to be
Hypocrites, when they broke forth into treachery, lying, covetousness? and
might the church proceed against such? If it be denied, I ask to what end the
Lord has given those holy rules of admonition? etc. will it prove ought but
profaning of the name of the Lord, to pretend our clear discerning of the
Scripture and ordinances, and not to practice them? If it be yielded against
these fruits of hypocrisy, discovering men to be hypocrites, why do we plead
for a dispensation, and (not for the wheat of the Field, and flowers of the
garden, but) for the most stinking and loathsome tares and weeds to be
continued in the holy garden of Christ Jesus?


Peace. But many hypocrites (says Master Cotton) fall not within the censure
of that Scripture, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Withdraw from every brother that walks
disorderly; for many hypocrites follow their callings, and are so far from
being burdensome unto others, that they are after choked with the cares and
businesses of the world, and yet are not behind in liberal contribution to
pious uses.


Truth. But is not this halting between God and Baal? yea is not this pleading
for Baal, for hypocrisy, hypocrites and dissemblers, false and Antichristian
counterfeits, to be permitted not only in the wilderness of the world (which I
contend for) but also even in the Garden, House, Bed, and bosom of God? What
if men be civil and follow their callings? Men that know not God, so do. What
though they be liberal to pious uses (millions of Papists are and have been so
according to their consciences) when as yet they are choked with cares and
businesses of this world?

How express is the charge of the Lord Jesus, to withdraw from such,
notwithstanding their form of Godliness, and contribution to Godly uses, when
they declare not the power of godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Not to eat with them,
and therefore to separate from such a brother as is covetuous, 1 Cor. 5. as
well as from an idolater, drunkard, etc.

The Church of Christ is a congregation of Saints, a flock of sheep, humble,
meek, patient, contented, with whom it is monstrous and impossible, to couple
cruel and persecuting lions, subtle and hypocritical Foxes, contentious biting
dogs or greedy and rooting swine, so visibly declared and apparent.


Examination of CHAP. XXI.
Peace. IN this Chapter four answers were given by the discusser to that great
objection of the mischief that the Tares will do in the field of the world, if
let alone and not plucked up.

The first was, That if the tares offend against Civility or civil state, God
has armed the civil state with a civil sword, etc.

Master Cotton replies, what if their conscience incite them to civil offenses?

I answer, the conscience of the civil Magistrate must incite him to civil
punishment, as a Lord Mayor of London once answered, That he was born to be a
Judge, to a Thief that pleaded he was born to be a thief. If the conscience of
the worshippers of the Beast incite them to prejudice prince or state, Although
these consciences be not as the conscience of a thief (commonly convinced of
the evil of his fact, but) persuaded of the Corrupt consciences distinguished.
lawfulness of their actions; yet so far as the civil state is endammaged or
endangered, I say the sword of God in the hand of civil Authority is strong
enough to defend it self, either by imprisoning or disarming, or other
wholesome means, etc. while yet their consciences ought to be permitted in
what is merely point of worship, as prayer, and other services and
administrations.

Hence the wisdom of God, in that 13 Romans (reckoned by Master Cotton the Mag^a
Charta for civil Magistrates dealing in matters of Religion) I say, there it
pleases God expressly to reckon up the particulars of the second table,
chalking out (as it were) by his own finger, the civil sphere or circle, in
which the civil Magistrate ought to act and execute his civil power and
Authority.


Peace. The second answer of the discusser was, that the church or spiritual
City has laws and Armories to defend it self.

Master Cotton excepteth, saying, That if their members be leavened with
Antichristian Idolatry and Superstition, and yet must be tolerated in their
idolatry, and superstitious worship, will not a little leaven leaven the whole
lump? and how then is the Tolleration of idolaters considered.
church guarded?


Truth. The question is, whether idolatrous and Antichristian worshippers may
be tolerated in civil state, in the City, in the Kingdom, etc. under any civil
power: Master Cotton answers no, they will do mischief. The reply is, against
any civil mischief (though wrought conscientiously) the civil state is strongly
guarded. Secondly, Against the spiritual mischief, the church or City of Christ
is guarded with heavenly Armories, wherein there hang a thousand Bucklers*
Cant. 4. and most mighty weapons, 2 Cor. 10. In the church of Christ such
worshippers ought not to be tolerated, but cast out, etc.

That is true, says Master Cotton, but yet their leaven will spread.

I answer, What is this, but to make the most powerful appointments Civil
weapons in spirituals, blur and flight the spiritual.
of Christ Jesus, those mighty weapons of God, terrible censures and soul-
punishments in his kingdom, but as so many wooden daggers and leaden swords,
childrens Bull-beggars, and scarcrows, and upon the point so base and beggarly,
that without the help of the Cutlers shop or Smiths forge, the church or
kingdom of Christ cannot be purged from the leaven of idolatry and
superstition?


Peace. Me thinks the Lord Jesus was of another mind* Mat. 18. when he
accounted it sufficient to cut off the obstinate, Let him be as a Gentile or
publican: and in the very similitude of leaven (here used by Master Cotton)
Paul counted it sufficient to purge out the leaven, 1 Cor. 5. if that evil
person were put away from the midst of them, that is, from their holy and
spiritual society. Paul never asks (as Master Cotton does) since we have not to
our spiritual arms, arms of flesh, and a civil sword to help our spiritual,
how shall the safety of the church be guarded?

But let us proceed. The third Answer was, That the elect cannot be finally
deceived: Master Cotton replies. It is true, but God provides means of
preservation, etc. And Jezabels tolerating in Thiatira made the church guilty.


Truth. This Argument was not used in derogation of Gods means, spiritual in
spiritual things, civil in civil, etc. but by way of supposition of the worst,
as Job spoke in another case, How helpest thou the Arm that has no strength?
Not but that in ordinary submission to means, man ought to help the Lord
against the mighty. The sum is this, rather let the Lord alone to help himself
without means, then to help the Lord to save his elect (who cannot by virtue
of his love and decree finally be deceived) by any such means as are none of
his own appointing.

2. It is true, that the church at Thyatira, tolerating Jezabel to seduce, was
guilty, yea and I add the City of Thiatira was guilty also if it tolerated
Iezabel to seduce to fornication. But The tolleration of Jezabel in Thyatira.
what is this to the point of the issue [to wit, Whether the City of Thiatria
should be guilty or not in tolerating Iezabel in that which the City judges to
be idolatry and false worship? Jezabels corporal whoredoms (sinning against
civility or state of the City) the City by her Officers ought to punish, lest
civil order be broken, and civility be infected etc. but Iezabels spiritual
whoredoms, the civil state ought not to deal with but (there being a church of
Christ then in Thiatria, and the spiritual whoredoms there taught and
practiced) I say the church in Thyatira, which in the name and power of Christ
was armed sufficiently to pass and inflict a dreadful spiritual censure, which
God will confirm and ratify most assuredly and undoubtedly in heaven.


Peace. Two reasons more were alleged out of the Text. The first was, that by
plucking up the tares, the good wheat it self by such hurries and persecutions
about Religion, should be endangered to be plucked up; which Master Cotton
salveth thus: to wit, If Gods people themselves, for their idolatry and
superstition, should be cut off, it will be for warning unto others, etc.


Truth. Oh ungodly, unchristian, that is bloody and Antichristian doctrine, by
which (under pretense of punishing heretics, schis^aticks, and seditious
persons) the Son of God, the Lord of Christ Jesus under pretense persecuted.
Lords, and King of Kings, has so many millions of times, in his servants been
persecuted, slain, and crucified! As for the world, it lies in wickedness, is
a wilderness of sin overgrown with idolatry and superstition. The
Antichristian (falsely called Christian world) in most abundant and overflowing
measure has wondered after and magnified the Beast, Rev. 13. The two witnesses
prophecy in sackcloth against this beast, in all parts of his dominion, by
whom also they are persecuted and slain, and yet we read not that they judge
or censure, or fight for themselves The weapons of the Saints, Rev.
with any other weapons then by the word of their prophecy, the blood of the
Lamb, their patient sufferings, the not loving of their lives unto the death.


Peace. The second reason out of the parable was, That the* Angels of God have
in charge to bundle up these tares for the burning. Master Cotton replies two
things. First, so these Angels will gather into bundles for the burning
murderers robbers, etc. who are not yet to be tolerated.


Truth. I answer, If a man call Master Cotton murderer, witch, etc. with
respect to civil matters, I say the civil state must judge and punish the
offender, else the civil state cannot stand, but must return to barbarism. But
if a man call Master Cotton murderer, witch etc. in spirttual matters, as
deceiving The difference between civil and spiritual slander.
and bewitching the peoples souls, if he can prove his charge, Master Cotton
ought to give God the glory, and and repent of such wickedness. If he cannot
prove his charge, but slander Master Cotton, yet is the slander of no civil
nature, and so not proper to any civil court, but is to be cast out (as we see
commonly suits of law are rejected, when brought into Courts which take no
proper cognizance of such cases.)


Peace. What relief then has Master Cotton or any so charged in this case?


Truth. The court of heaven, the church of Christ, calls such a slanderer to
repentance (whether he be within the church or without, though orderly
proceeding lies only against him that is within) If he be obstinate, how
dreadful is the sentence against such a slanderer, both in earth and in heaven?
how dreadful the delivering up to hardness of heart (a greater plague on
Pharaoh, then all the devouring plagues of Egypt) how dreadful the The dreadful
nature of Christ's spiritual punishments.
delivering up to Satan, the paw and jaw of the roaring Lion (infinitely far
more terrible, had we eyes to see it, then to be thrown with Daniel to the
devouring Lion:) There is no reason in the world therefore, for thieves and
murderers to be tolerated unto the last day without sentence and punishment,
because transgressors against spiritual state may be tolerated to live in the
world, yet punished for spiritual transgression with a greater censure and
sorer punishment, then if all their bones and flesh were rackt and torn in
pieces with burning pincers.


Peace. Master Cotton and others will say. The idolaters and seducers were
censured spiritually under Moses, and yet were they also put to death.


Truth. I desire Master Cotton to show me under Moses, such spiritual censures
and punishments beside the cutting off by the civil sword: which if he cannot
do, and that since the Christian Church antitypes the Israelitish, and the
Christian laws and punishments Not such spiritual punishments in the national
church of Israel.
the laws and punishments of Israel concerning religion, I may truly affirm,
that that civil state which may not justly tolerate civil offenders, etc. yet
may most justly tolerate spiritual offenders, of whose Delinquency it has no
proper cognizance.


Peace. Lastly, Master Cotton urges, that (...) (2 Thessalonians. 2.) should rather be
translated presence then coming.


Truth. Admit it (though many able translators in diverse languages rather
translate it coming) and that Antichrist shall not be consumed by the breath of
the mouth of the Lord Jesus before his last coming to judgment; yet then
Master Cotton must give another interpretation of this end of the world, and
the Angels, and the fire, then is usually given: however the tares shall be
bundled up for the everlasting burnings, and are at present under a dreadful
sentence and punishment, and therefore (not offending in civil things) the
civil state may the better tolerate them in matters of religion and conscience;
and Paul himself (if opposed by them) might the better wait with patience, if
God peradventure will give them repentance etc.


Examination of CHAP. XXVII.
Peace. IN this Chapter, those three particulars by which the Ministers of
Christ are commanded to let the Tares alone, Master Cotton evades by calling
them so many slippery evasions, etc.


Truth. I believe neither the interpretations nor the intentions of the Author
were evasive: for a faithful witness will not lie though a false witness will
utter deceit; however the fire shall try. The truth is, the greater part, and
especially the former of Master Cottons answer in this Chapter, comes not near
the point of the issue, for that is not whether the Saints may pray or prophecy
against idolaters and false worshippers, but whether or no for their present
temporal destruction and extirpation.


Perce. Unto this Master Cotton says, Yes, for the present destruction of some
or other Antichristian idolaters in every age: and he adds, it might as well be
said, that a Minister of Christ Prayer against present destruction of tares.
should not denounce present or speedy destruction to any murderers,
whoremongers, etc. because though some of them may fall under grievous plagues,
yet there will never want a company of such evil doers, until the great
harvest or end of the world.

Again, says he, Though a Minister denounce not present destruction, yet he
cannot let them alone, no more then the feller of an Oak, that gives many a
stroke before the last, etc.

2. It is not credible (says he) that some of the Angels that pour out their
vials upon the Antichristian state, shall not be Ministers: And when the ten
horns shall burn the City of Rome, it is not credible, that they will do it
without some excitement from the Angels.


Truth. The instance brought of murderers, whoremongers etc. is most improper,
because we all agree that present corporal or civil punishment is due to
murderers, whoremongers, etc. and other like transgressors against the civil
state of all Nations and peoples all the world over, and this in all Ages and
Times: but Master Cotton himself acknowledges, that many prophecies and
periods are set for the continuance of the Antichristian state, and the
idolatry and desolations thereof, and that those perieds shall be accomplished
before the judgment day: nor will it appear that those ten Kings that shall in
the fulfilling of this prophecy burn the whore, shall do it by way of ordinance
and obedience to Gods command, otherwise then he permitted Nebuchadnezzar and
Cyrus, and other Tyrants of the world (as the fishes of the sea one to devour
and swallow up another.) And for that instance of the wood-man selling of the
Oak, I grant that the prayers of the Saints* hasten the whores downfall, and
the opening of these prophecies make way for Gods time; but what is this to a
present downfall before the time appointed?

Again, That it is not credible but that some of the Angels Pastors and
Teachers not Apostles and messengers.
should be messengers of the Gospel, I answer, Master Cotton knows that the
English word messengers, and the Greek word Apostles, are the same; but no such
messengers Master Cotton allows of: And that the word messengers in the
Apostles sense should imply. Pastors and Teachers (which Master Cotton now only
allows of) I find not in the Testament of Christ Jesus. That those Angels
should be the witnesses, and the Prophets in sackcloth, seems more credible.

And I may well affirm the contrary to Master Cottons credible, that it is
incredible that any servant or messenger of the King of Peace should stir up
the civil Magistrate to cut off those by the civil sword, whose repentance he
is bound to wait for with patience, bearing in the interim their oppositions
and gainsayings, 2 Timothy 2.


Peace. It Is most true, according to the testimony of Christ Jesus (and most
contrary to the tenants and practice of the Romish bloody Popes, and their
followers) that Christ's Ministers are wisdoms Maidens (Prove. 9.) sent forth in
heavenly Beauty and chastity, with meek and loving, yet vehement persuasions,
to call in the foolish of the world to partake of wisdoms dainties: but (dear
truth) deliver your mind concerning the last passage, to wit, Elijah stirring
up Ahab to slay the Baalites.
Elijahs act in stirring up Ahab to kill all the Priests and prophets of Baal:
This act (says Master Cotton) was not figurative, but moral; for (says he)
Ahab could not be a figure of Christ, nor Israel after their Apostacy, a type
of the true Church: Beside, blasphemers ought to die by the law, and Ahab
forfeited his own life, because he did not put Benhadad to death for his
blasphemy, 1 Kings 20.


Truth. Christ Jesus is considered two ways, Christ in his person, and Christ
mystical in his church, represented by the Governors thereof. Some say, that
Israel was not in Ahabs time excommunicated Concerning Israel in the Apostasy
of Jeroboam.
and cut off from Gods sight, until their final carrying out of the land of
Canaan, 2 Kings 17. and that Israel remained (though none of Gods in respect of
her apostasy, yet) Gods in respect of covenant, until the execution of the
sentence of excommunication or divorce: And therefore that Ahab, as King of
Israel, Gods people (until Israel ceased to be Israel) was a figure of Christ,
that is, Christ in his presence, in his governors, in his church, though fallen
to idolatry under admonition, not yet cast off.

But (2.) grant the church false, and Ahab King of a false church, how will it
appear that Elijahs Act was a moral act, and so presidential to all Kings and
Nations?


Peace. Because (says Master Cotton) it is moral equity, that blasphemers, and
apostate idolaters, seducing others to idolatry, should be put to death; Levit.
24. 16. Deuteronomy. 13. 5.


Truth. Those Scriptures concern a ceremonial land in a ceremonial time, before
Christ; and in the same Lev. 24. the command is equally given for the lamp in
the Tabernacle, and the shewbread, as well as for the idolater.


Peace. But Benhadad (says Master Cotton) was no Israelite, nor was his
blasphemy belched out in the land of Israel.


Truth. It is most true, that blasphemers in Israel, and blasphemers against
Israel and the God of it, were put to death. It is also true in the antitype
and substance since the coming of Christ, that blasphemers in Israel, and
blasphemers against Israel (the church of God) are spiritually to be put to
death by the twoedged sword coming forth of the mouth of Christ, Rev. 1. and
this Gospel-punishment is much more dreadful and terrible, then the punishment
of the first blasphemers under Moses or the prephets. * Hence Baalls Priests,
Monks, Friars, and Bishops have not been civilly actually slain in England,
etc. but spiritually by Gods word, the sword of his spirit cashiered and cut
off eternally.



Peace. Methinks also, if Ahab were now presidentiall, and that which he should
have done to Benhadad presidential* then is there now no spiritual or mystical
Israel, no spiritual Canaan, but the letter, ceremony, and figure yet in force,
and Christ Jesus the mystical and spiritual King of Israel is not yet come in
the flesh.


Truth. Yea then not only a few in a City or Kingdom (suppose hundreths or
thousands) but millions of millions of blasphemers, idolaters, seducers,
throughout the whole wide world, ought corporally to be put to death.


Peace. Against this methinks Master Cotton should be* and I am sure against
this Christ Jesus was, who professed in answer to the rash zeal of his
disciples (Luke 9.) That he came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them:
but how relish you Master Cottons interpretation, of Let them alone (which he
sees pleases some so well) to wit, Let them alone is no precept, but
permission?


Truth. I answer, If let them alone were only by permission in way of
providence, Why is also a word of prohibition added, to wit* That such should
not be meddled with, for these and these reasons, whereas although God
permits evil doers in spiritual and eivil state in the world, yet there lies
a word of ordinance to purge them out. Here is no ordinance for their plucking
up, but for their letting alone, and that in a merciful respect of sparing the
good wheat* who might be endangered to be plucked up by the roots out of the
world, by such rash and furious zeal of plucking up the tares.


Examination of CHAP. XXIX.
Peace. MAster Cotton referring the 28 Chapter to former agitations, seems to
invite us to pass on to Chapter 29.


Truth. Let the 28 Chapter recapitulating the former, and the whole
controversies, be referred to the consciences of such to whom these passages by
any providence of the most holy wise shall be presented, and let it graciously
please the Father of lights, to help all his sons of light, to be truly
studious of his truth in the love of it, to cast up all particulars aright in
his fear, by the only Arithmetic of his own most holy and unerring spirit.


Peace. In this Chapter first arises a question concerning the Apostles
privacy.


Truth. Master Cotton acknowledges them to be called to a public Ministry,
let others judge then of their privacy.


Peace. But they were not sent (says Master Cotton) ^o the Scribes and
Pharisees, and so consequently were to let them Touching Christ's Apostles or
messengers.
alone.


Truth. I answer, Let it be considered, how he that grants men are sent to the
sheep, can rightly say they have nothing to do with the Wolves and Foxes.


Peace. In this controversy, Master Cotton elsewhere, will not only have
sheep sed, but the Wolves driven from the sold, their brains beaten out, etc.
and that not only by the Pastors or sheapherds spiritually, but also by the
civil Magistrate, and to that end, he is to be stirred up by the Shepherds and
Ministers of Christ.


Truth. Such exciting and stirring up of the civil Magistrate if it were
Christ's will, how can the Apostles be excused, or the Lord Jesus himself, for
not stirring up the Civil Magistrate to his duty against these Scribes and
Pharisees, the Wolves and Foxes, as Master Cotton here calls them?


Peace. Neither the doctrine, nor their offense at it (says Master Cotton) was
fundamental; nor had the civil Magistrate a law established about doctrine or
offenses of this nature. Besides, Touching fundamentals.
Christ gave his disciples a charge to be wise as Serpents, and himself would
not meddle with the Pharisees, until the last year of his Ministry, lest
their exasperation might have been some hinderance to his Minstery before his
hour was come.


Truth. I should desire Master Cotton again to ponder whether the notorious
hypocrisy of the Pharisees (now brought into a Proverb) and also whether the
notorious transgressing (and upon the point abolishing) of the fifth
commandment, and so consequently of all civil obedience (with the Papists)
under pretense of Gods service (although indeed but their own superstition) be
not of a fundamental guilt, both against spiritual and civil state.


Peace. I remember Master Cotton argued against tolleration of the Papists,
because their conscience excites them against the civil powers.


Truth. And whither tended these principles of the Pharisees, but to overthrow
all Family, yea and (if they be followed home) all Town, or City, and
Kingdome-Government?


Peace. Yea, But the Roman Magistrate (says he) had no established law about
doctrines or offenses of that Nature.


Truth. Master Cotton in all this controversy, pleades, that they ought to
have: and though he says, that Magistrates may suspend their duty* until they
be informed, yet he never says, that the Ministers of Christ may suspend their
duty of humble information, and stirring up them up to so high a part of their
Duty; as concerns the souls of their subjects and the worship of God*


Peace. I remember, that Gardener and Boner, etc. could not make the fire burn
to consume the people of God, and witnesses of Jesus, until Edwards laws were
repealed, and Mary's bloody Laws for persecuting of Christ Jesus.
laws were established; and so they were forced to suspend a while until they
had conjured up a Parliament to do both the one and the other, as their slaves
and drudges, for them: And it is true, what the Spirit of God in David
pronounces ( Psalm. 82.) that under the mask or color of a law (which carries
with it the name and sound of reason and righteousness) the wickedness of the
world is established: And hence the people and servants, and Saints of the most
high God, feel the weight of the violence of the Nimrod persecutors or hunters.

But this I wonder at, that Master Cotton subjoyneth, that Christ Jesus
himself, and his disciples (under the notion of not exasperating the Pharisees)
should not reprove the Scribes and Pharisees.


Truth. It cannot sink with me, That the Spirit of God in Christ Jesus himself,
and his messengers, should so far differ from himself in all his former
messengers and prophets, who spared not to reprove the highest Priests,
Princes, Kings and kingdoms; nor does the practice of the Lord Jesus in so many
places of Matthew (before his thunder bolts shot forth against them, Mat. 23.)
give any countenance to so loose an opinion.


Peace. Master Cotton, who argues so much against the permitting* of
blasphemers to live in the world, may here call to mind, that if The Pharisees
blaspheming of Christ Jesus.
ever blasphemy were uttered against the Son of God, it was uttered by the
Pharisees in the 12 of Matthew, when they imputed the casting out of the devils
to the power of the devil in Christ Jesus, and yet we find not that Christ
Jesus stirred up the civil Magistrates to any such duty of his to put the
blasphemers to death, nor the heretics the Sadduces, who denied that
fundamental, the resurrection.


Truth. It is most true, that the cause needs no such weapons, nor spared he
the Pharisees for fear of their exasperations, but poured forth on their faces
and bosoms the sorest vials of the heaviest doom and censure that can be
suffered by the children of men, to wit, an impossibility of repentance and
forgiveness of sins either in this or the world to come. And for the present,
at every turn he concludes them hypocrites, blind guides, which could not
escape the judgment of Hell.

So that all other senses of those words [ Let them alone] that is, of not
reprooving them cannot stand: nor if it were the duty of the Ministers of
Christ to stir up the civil Magistrate against such hypocritical and
blasphemous Pharisees, could Christ Jesus himself or his servants the Apostles
be excused for not complaining to the Roman State against them; So leaving the
blame upon the conscience of the governors, if the land were not purged of such
blasphemers and fundamental opposers of the Son of God.

Let me me end ( sweet peace) with the bottom of all such persecutions, Satan
rages against God and his Christ; that devil that cast the Saints into prison,
Rev. 2. ( Magistrates, kings, high priests: Herod, ^ad kings, good kings, etc.
what instruments soever he uses) would cast Christ himself into prison
again, and to the gallows again, if he came again in person into any (the
most refined) persecuting state in the world.


Examination of CHAP. XXX.
Peace. I Doubt not ( dear truth) in the first place, but you cast an observant
eye on Master Cottons collections in this Chapter, from Paul's words Acts 25.
11. I will mention the two first.

1. That a man may be such an offender in matters of Religion against the law
of God (against the Church) as well as in civil matters against Caesar, as to
be worthy of death.

2. That if a servant of God should commit any such offense, he would not
refuse judgment to the death, verse. 11.


Truth. Paul only says in the general* If I have committed ought worthy of
death, I refuse not to die: Now therefore as Acts 25. 11. considered.
Paul said, No man (that is, no man justly) may deliver me to the Jews; So say
I, no man from these words of Paul (without wronging him and his Master the God
of Truth) can draw such a conclusion, as if Paul had acknowledged it evil in
him to have preached against the laws of the Jews or the temple, which the Lord
Jesus and his servants after him, so abundantly did, although at this time (in
point of fact) Paul might well say, he had not done ought against the law of
the Jews. I mean the ceremonial law and the Temple, for he had now observed the
ceremonies of the Law, and the holiness of the Temple: although for this some
use to blame him* not discerning that Paul knew there was a time to honor
those ceremonies, even after Christ's death, and a time as much to debase,
dishonor, and abolish them.


Peace. His third collection is, That it is lawful even in Ecclesiastical
causes to appeal to a Pagan Magistrate.


Truth. As I utterly renounce such a conclusion (any otherwise then in respect
of civil violence offered for a man's conscience, which violence Caesar ought to
see revenged and punished) so neither will this instance of Paul prove it: for
in appealing to an higher Judge, a man always presupposes (if not skill
perfect, yet) No appeals to the civil powers in matters merely spiritual.
competent skill, and a true power committed from God, to judge in such cases,
which Paul for many reasons, both in this Chapter, and elsewhere manifested,
could not suppose in the Roman Caesar's, or any civil Magistrate.


Peace. Master Cotton urges, that these words ( verse 9.) [These Things] imply
matters of Religion as well as civil things.


Truth. Those words [These Things] were not the words of Paul, but the words of
Festus.

2. Grant them Paul's words, yet if for those things the Jews seek his life,
Paul well appeals to Caesar against them, for Caesar is bound to protect the
bodies, goods, or good names of his subjects, either from false accusations in
civil things, or persecution for matters of conscience, which is a violence
against the civil state, of which Caesar was the supreme officer.


Peace. His fourth collection is, that civil Magistrates may and ought to ^e
acquainted with all matters of Religion, especially capital.


Truth. In twenty five parts of the world of thirty, civil Magistrates cannot
possibly be thus acquainted; for the sound of Christ Jesus is not there to be
heard, as the best Historians and Cosmographers yield.


Peace. It seems strange, if Christ Jesus had intended any such delegation of
spiritual power to civil Magistrates, that he should keep the very sound of his
name from them.

Again, in the other five parts of the world* where his name Few Magistrates
in the world know Christ Jesus.
is sounded, how rarely has he acquainted any civil Magistrate with the saving
knowledge of his will?


Truth. I add, that such rare ones, that savingly know Christ Jesus and his
will, are no judges in such cases over the consciences of their brethren, or
any, by way of civil judicature, this very instance of Paul's appealing to
Caesar has and shall further declare and mainfest.


Peace. But what should be the reason why Master Cotton affirms, That the
civil Magistrate ought to be able to judge of all capital offenses against
Religion, but not of all questions?


Truth. The truth is, if the civil Magistrate were a Surgeon appointed of
Christ Jesus to judge in causes that concern cutting of life and limb, etc. he
would beyond all question be able to judge of petty cuts, wounds, etc. But
Satan that old deceiver, that Mystical and cruel Surgery.
knew (by Gods permission) how to cozen Adam, David, Solomon, Peter (the most
perfect, wise, and holiest of Gods servants) is not now to learn how to cheat
Master Cotton also: Satan well ^ees, if Master Cotton should grant it the
Magistrates duty to judge in lesser questions, the hope of Benefices and
Livings were gone, and the trade of Synods would down: And if he should not
grant it to be the Magistrates duty to judge in capitals, the Pope, the
Bishops, and all persecuting priests, would want the secular power, the servile
executioners of their most wicked and most bloody decrees and sentences.


Peace. In the next place Master Cotton seems to charge a contradiction upon
the discusser, for saying, that civil Magistrates were never appointed by God
defenders of the faith of Jesus, and yet every one is bound to put forth his
utmost powers in Gods business.


Truth. Love has charged the discusser to spare the ^^^rm of contradiction in
many passages of Master Cottons writing, where he has (to his understanding)
observed them, to prevent exasperations etc. contrarily Master Cotton against
the discusser, strains the text and Margin to sound out contradictions,
contradictions, to all passengers.

But let us examine. And first, Master Cotton will not deny, but The title of
defender of the faith.
the son of perdition, the Pope of Rome (whose coming and practice is by the
work of the devil) was the blasphemous author (he and his Cardinals in Council
together) of that title defender of the faith sent with great gratitude and
solemnity to Henry the eighth, as a kingly popelike reward, for penning (or
bearing the name of) a blasphemous writing against Christ Jesus in his holy
truth proclaimed by Luther.


Peace. With what eyes and ears such blasphemous and bloody titles are to be
looked upon and heard by the chaste eyes and ears of Christ's Doves, Christ Jesus
will one day, and shortly make appear.


Truth. But what contradiction will be in the later, to wit, [That every one
must do his utmost in Gods business] when this former (to wit, to be a defender
of the Faith) is constantly denied to To serve God withal our might, literally
taken, horribly abused.
be any of the businesses of civil officers, and the preservation of the civil
state, which charge and work by the civil state can only lawfully (and
therefore possibly) be committed to them? For otherwise to take these words in
a literal sense, without respect to the rules and limits of Gods order and
righteonsness, what is it but to fire the world with wildfire of blind zeal,
and to tumble down all Gods beauteous structures and buildings into a Chaos and
confusion of Antichristian Babylon? And this especially by the means of such
who think and say, that they cannot serve God with all their might except they
punish blaspemers, and fight against blasphemous nations, and subdue (not only
the holy land from the Turk, but) even all the world from their idolatries and
blasphemies, if it lie in their power; which spirit whether it be the spirit of
the Son of God, and Prince of peace, or the spirit of the world, the spirit of
the son of perdition, let every man's own spirit search and judge in the holy
fear and presence of God.


Peace. But further (says Master Cotton) it was unnecessary, yea folly and
preposterous to have complained to Herod, Pilate, Caesar, against the Heresies
of the Pharisees: For if a poor sheep should complain to the Wolves of the
Wolves heresies, would not the whole kennel of Wolves rise up against him, etc?
Would it not have disturbed the civil state, by putting them into jealousies of
a new kingdom, and it was necessary the Gospel should first be known and
received, believed and professed, before any could be complained of for
Apostacy from it into heresy.


Truth. Master Cotton cannot deny, but that most of the Magistrates of the
world (by far) are such as Herod, Pilate, Caesar Christ Jesus has rarely
furnished his people with godly Magistrates.
were, without God, and enemies to him, yea also in that little part of the
world which is called Protestant. Now if they are but kennels of Wolves
(compared with Christ's sheep) as Master Cotton expresses, I first demand how
poorly has Christ Jesus in all ages provided for and furnished his people
with such main pillars of their spiritual joys, light and confidence, as godly
and Christian Magistrates?


Peace. It is as clear as the Sun beams, that if ever Christ Jesus had intended
such an ordinance in and over his church, he would never have been so mistaken,
as to supply his sheep in all ages, and in all parts of the world, with kennels
of Wolves in stead of godly and Christian Shepherds.


Truth. But secondly, Grant them to be kennels of Wolves in Master Cottons
sense, yet what bar is this to any from presenting, and to them from receiving
such complaints as are proper to their cognizance, to their duty and calling
(were they truly called of God and Christ to such a service) to wit, to govern
in spiritual, Ecclesiastical or Church causes? what though a Magistrate be a
drunkard, whoremonger, opperssour, is it not the duty of the people to complain
to him of drunkards, thieves, whoremongers, oppressors? whom if he punish not,
but countenance, etc. yet have such petitioners discharged their consciences,
and left the guilt upon the right head, who should be an head of civil
righteousness, but is an head of wickedness and iniquity.


Peace. By this argument of Master Cottons, the poor widow, that sued for right
to the unjust Judge, that neither feared God, nor regarded man, took a foolish
and a prestoperous course, though commended by the Lord Jesus, Luke 18.


Truth. Indeed (as Master Cotton says) If we look at the probability of any
wholesome fruit from such trees, we cannot expect grapes from such briars, not
figs from such thistles: But looking at the providence of God, who rules and
over rules the hearts of Kings and all Magistrates (as in the case of the poor
widow and thousand others) as also at what is their Duty and profession, to
wit, to invite cheerfully their subjects to bring their complaints to them; as
also what is the duty of the wronged and oppressed, to wit, to deliver and
discharge their own souls* I see not but it is safe, sea sonable, and a duty,
to cry even to the unjust Judge for Justice, as that poor woman did.


Peace. Yea, were Caesar, Herod* Pilate (by virtue of their places, offices,
and duties) Ecclesiastical Judges, and ought to have suppressed the heresies
and blasphemies of the Pharisees? why should it be impossible, but they might
have removed the Pharisees offense, as many Kings of England and France (though
evil themselves) have stirred mightily upon complaints of their subjects
against the Popish Pharisees of their times, yea the highest of them the Pope
himself? And if Master Cottons doctrine be true, why must not the Magistrate be
sought unto, that a true Gospel be received and believed? Why may not the civil
power be a judge in the first receiving of the Gospel, as afterward for the
preserving and restoring of it?


Truth. Such is the brightness of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and the dread and
the power of the two-edged sword coming out of his mouth, subduing and slaying
the highest opposites and adversaries, that it will prove to be unnecessary,
foolish and preposterous to run to any other sword or censures, then those
alone of Christ's, so mighty, and so powerful, were they rightly administered, as
the Popish and Protestant world pretends.


Peace. Lastly, Master Cotton professes he knows not how Magistrates can know
the Son, and kiss him, and acknowledge his kingdom, and submit their crowns to
it, love his truth, be nursing Fathers and Mothers to his church, and yet not
be defenders of it.


Truth. If kings must submit their crowns to this kingdom of Christ, must it
not undeniablly follow, that the kingdom of Christ Jesus is far greater and
higher then their thrones and crowns? (for none will submit to the lesser,
weaker, etc.) And if so, what weakness is it yet to expect, that the inferior
power and authority, to Defendor of the faith.
wit, civil and earthly, must defend the highest and most glorious crown and
throne of Christ Jesus? Like as if a poor Indian Canon should submit it self to
some Royal Navy, and yet must be this Navies defender; or a few naked Americans
submit to some Army or kingdom, and yet these poor naked ones must bear (and
that seriously without I^sting) the title of their defenders.


Truth. Master Cotton and those of his bloody judgment are not contented that
the civil powers defend the bodies and goods of the Saints from oppressors,
from persecutors, etc. that love and affection by all gracious means be expressed
more to the Saints then to other people of their dominions, that all true
Christian means be used for the spreading of the name and truth of the Lord
Jesus; I say, this serves not the turn, and gives not content, except also the
Magistrate defend by civil sword, the purity of the doctrine, and the
ordinances of Christ Jesus in his church, in punishing and suppressing the
contrary by arm of flesh, whether within or without the church.


Peace. In this last respect I must speak an high and bold word, to wit, That
the poorest youth or maid, who has more knowledge A bold, but a true word.
and gra^e of Christ then a king or Emperor has (as well sometimes it has
and may come to pass) may be a greater contender for the truth, and a great
defender of the faith of Jesus, then the king or Emperor, and so consequently
then all the kings of the whole world.


Truth. Paul was set for the defense of the Gospel and consequently every
believer in Jesus (according to his measure of grace received) and therefore,
your word is not more bold then true. For spiritual defenses are most proper to
a spiritual estate, and so accordingly most potent, prevalent, and mighty.


Examination of CHAP. XXXI.
Peace. HEre first Master Cotton will not own it, that the title of Judges of
spiritual causes be given to Civil Magistrate.


Truth. The Parliament of England established King Henry the eighth supreme
head and Governor over the church of England, and what is this but supreme
Judge in all Ecclesiastical causes? What though the term judge be stumbled at
by some, and the term head will not down with others? yet take but what Master
Cotton grant^: And (as the devil himself, lay hid under The title of supreme
head, oath of supremacy, etc.
Samuels mantle, so) under Master Cottons term of fathers, mothers, shepherds
(that is, spiritual fathers, mothers, shepherds) must of necessity be concluded
an headship, and power, and office of judging, when this child does a miss,
when these sheep go astray, who are schismatics, who heretics, who sheep, who
Wolves, that the sheep may be corrected and reduced, and the Wolves brains
knocked out.


Peace. They may judge (says Master Cotton) but (not with a church) but
politic power, and for want of which, and for giving their kingdom to the
Beast (Revel. 17. 12, 13.) God (says he) opened a way for the Turks to break
in and destroy the third part of Christendom, Rev. 9. 14. to 21.


Truth. Let it be under what cloak, or color, or notion soever, let it be
politic (indeed) and subtle, or plain and simple, yet it seems it is true,
that he must judge, which will not be owned in plain terms, but as a
Protector, a Father or a Shepherd.

Secondly, Those Scriptures quoted do not lay a guilt upon the ten horns or
kings for suffering the beast in their dominions, but for giving their power
and authority unto him.

Thirdly, the civil peace was not dissolved but preserved for many hundred
years before the Turks rose, to punish either the Eastern or Western part of
Antichristian Christendom: So that a false religion does not immediately and
instantly dissolve the civil peace, but kingdoms and states professing false
religions The plague of the Turks upon the Antichrististian world.
may flourish. It Is true, God in his deep councels and times brings judgments,
eternal and temporal, upon false worshipping states, especially where the truth
of Christ is presented and persecuted; Yet diverse ages of temporal prosperity
to the Antichristian kingdom, prove that common Assumption and maxim false, to
wit, that the church and Commonweal* are like Hipocrates twins, weep and
laugh, flourish and fade, live and* die together.


Peace. I cannot reach the bottom of this next passage of Master Cotton, viz.
that Magistrates may be subject to the church, and lick the dust of her feet,
and yet be supreme governors of the church also: In spiritual matters (says
he) and in a right administration of them, he is subject; but is civil things,
and in the corrupt administration of church-affaires (so far corrupt as tends
to the disturbance of civil peace) there the Magistrates (says he) are supreme
governors, even over the churches in their own dominions.


Truth. Who sees not here, but by this Doctrine Magistrates must judge, when
the church is rightly administered, and when it is corruptly administered: And
that whatever the Ministers of the The Civil Magistrate no governor over the
spiritual kingdom of Christ.
church, or the whole church judge, that is nothing, for the Magistrate if he
be supreme governor, he must judge? and what is this but even in the very same
respect, I say in one and the same respect, to make them high and low up and
down, mountains and valleys? supreme governors, and so above the church, anon
age^ to lick the dust of the feet of the church; which Master Cotton will as
soon make good, as bring the East and the West together.

Besides (as elsewhere I observed) what if the people will have no kings,
governors etc. nay no Parliament, nor general courts, but leave vast
interregnums or Ruptures of government, yea conclude upon frequent changes (as
all nations of the world have had great changes this way) shall the churches of
Christ Jesus be without an head, a governor, defender, protector? What a
slavery does this bloody doctrine bring the fair Spouse of Christ into?


Peace. In the passage concerning Saul, Master Cotton observes, that Saul was
not taken away for exercising civil power against spiritual wickedness in the
case of witches*


Truth. Saul was king of Israel, the church of God, and a typical king, the
anointed or Christ of God; and Master Cotton himself will subcribe to the
confession of Nathaniel to Christ Jesus* Whether Saul a type of Christ.
Thou art the king of Israel, which he was and is in his own most holy person,
as also in his Ministers and governors during his absence. It was now Saul's
duty to put literal witches to death in his Christian Israel, his church and
Congregation.

It is true, Saul forsaking the God of Israel, perished for other wickedness,
and among other his sins* for persecuting or hunting righteous David, and
therein Saul is a type and warning to all the apostates and persecuting Saul's
of the earth, that desperation and desperate self-destruction attend them.


Peace. But whither tends this last passage concerning David? We read not
(says Master Cotton) that he did exercise any spiritual power as a King, but
as a prophet. Will he commend Saul's kingly acting in spiritual things, as just;
and shall not David (whose name and throne were most eminently figurative of
Christ Jesus) be found a king in Israel, the house and church of God?


Truth. The pattern of David, Solomon, and the good kings of Israel and Judah,
is the common and great argument of all that plead for Magistrates power in
spiritual cases: And indeed, The kings of Israel and Judah types.
what power was that but spiritual, which he exercised in bringing up the Arc,
expressly said to be done by king David? 2 Samuel 6. What power was that but
kingly, put forth in ordering and disposing the services of the Priests and
Levites, and singers, 1 Chronicles. 16?


Peace. Master Cotton not ignorant of this, it may be was not pleased with that
passage, viz. [That God will take away such stays, upon whom Gods people rest
in his wrath, that king David, that is, Christ Jesus the Antitype, in his own
spiritual power in the hands of his Saints, may spiritually, and for ever be
advanced.]


Truth. This power the General Councels, the Popes, the Prelates, the kings of
the earth, the civil courts and Magistrates, lay claim unto, and most of them
with bloody hands, yea and Gods servants have too long leaned unto, and longed
after, such an arm of flesh, which proves (most commonly) but Saul's arm, an
oppressing and persecuting, and a self- killing and destroying power at the
last.


Examination of CHAP. XXXII.
Peace. THis Chapter contains, a twofold denial: First (says Master Cotton)
we hold it not lawful for a Christian Magistrate to compel by civil sword,
either Pharisee, or Pagan, or Jew, to profess his religion.


Truth. He that is deceived himself with a bad commodity, puts it off as good
to others: Master Cotton believes, and would make others believe, that it is no
compulsion, to make laws with penalties for all to come to church, and to
public worship; which was ever in our fathers days, held a sufficient trial
of their religion, and of consenting to or dissenting from the religion of the
times. Hence by some is that of Luke 14. alleged Compel them to come in,
sufficiently fulfilled, if they be so far compelled, as to be conformable to
come to church, though it be under the pretense and mask of coming only to
hear the word, whereby they may be converted.

But it is needless to stand guessing and guessing at the weight, when the
scales are at hand, the holy word of God, by which we all profess to have our
weight, or to be found too light.


Peace. Master Cotton therefore (Secondly) denies that a blind Pharisee may be
a good subject, and as peaceable and profitable to the civil state as any,
since they destroyed the civil state by destroying Christ.


Truth. When we speak of civil state, and their administrations, it is most
improper and fallacious to wind or weave in the consideration of their true or
false religions.

It is true, idolatry brings judgment in Gods time (and so do other sins, for
we read not of idolatry in Sodoms punishment, Ezekiel. 16.) notwithstanding there
is a present civil state of men combined to live together there in a
commonweal, which Gods people are commanded to pray for ( Jerm. 29.) whatever
be the religion there publikly professed. Beside, the Pharisees destroying
Christ, were guilty of blood and persecution, which is more then idolatry, etc.
and cries to heaven for vengeance.


Peace. It cannot therefore with any show of charity be denied, but that diverse
priests of Babel, might be civil and peaceable, notwithstanding their religion
and conscience.


Truth. Yea it is known by experience, that many thousands of Mahumetan, Popish
and Pagan Priests are in their persons both of as civil and courteous and
peaceable a nature, as any of the subjects in the state they live in.

The truth is, that herein all the priests in the world, Mahumetan, The priests
and Clergy in all Nations the greatest peacebreakers.
Pepish, Pagan and Protestant, are the greatest peace-breakers in the world as
they (fearing their own cause) never rest stirring up Princes and people
against any (whether Gods or the devils instruments) that shall oppose their
own religion and conscience, that is in plain English, their profits, honors
and bellies.


Examination of CHAP. XXXIII.
Peace. THe entrance of this Chapter ( dear truth) looks in mine eye like one
of the bloody fathers of the inquisition, and breaths (like Paul in his mad
zeal and frenzy) slaughters against the Son of God himself, though under the
name or brand of a seducer, as all persecutors have ever done: For (says
Master Cotton) he that corrupts a soul with a corrupt religion lays a
spreading leaven Touching the seducer.
which corrupts a state, as Michals idolatry corrupted Laish* Judge. 19. and
that Apostasy was the captivity of the land; and the worshipping of images
brought the plague of the Turks, and therefore it is lex talionis, that
calls for not only soul for soul, but life for life.


Truth. Thy tender brain and heart cannot let fly an arrow sharp enough to
pierce the bowels of such a Bloody Tenent.


Peace. The flaming jealousy of that most holy and righteous Judge, who is a
consuming fire, will not ever hear such Tenants, and behold such practices in
silence.


Truth. Sweet peace, long and long may the Almond-tree flourish on Master
Cottons head in the arms of true Christianity and true Christian honor; And
let New- Englands Colonies flourish also (if Christ so please) until he come
again the second time: But that he who is love it self, would please to tell
Master Cotton and the Colonies, and the world, the untrueness,
uncharitableness, numercifulness, and unpeaceableness of such conclusions* For
is not this the plain, English and the bottom, to wit, If the spirit of
Christ Jesus in any of his servants, sons o^ daughters, witnessing against the
abominations or stinks of Antichrist, shall persuade one soul, man or woman, to
fear God, to come out of Babell etc. to refuse to bow down to, and to come out
from communion with a state-golden-image, and not to touch what it is persuaded
is an unclean thing.

That man or woman who was the Lambs and the Spirits instruments thus to
inlighten and persuade one soul, he has (says Of seducing.
this tenent) laid a leaven, which corrupts the state, that is, the laud,
town, city, kingdom, or Empire of the world; that leaven shall bring the
captivity, ruin and destruction of the state, and therefore Lex Talionis, not
only soul for soul in the next, but life for life also in this present world.


Peace. All thy witnesses (dear truth) in all ages have borne the brand and
black mark of seducers, and still shall, even Christ Jesus himself, to the last
of his holy army and followers against his enemies.


Truth. How famous, or rather abominably infamous has been the practice of all
persecutors this way? I shall pick out one instance, a very stinking weed out
of Babels desert (to let pass all the bloody, bulls and their roarings and
threatening of Councels, Popes and Emperors, Kings, Bishops, Commissaries etc.
against the Waldensians, Wicklevia^s, the Hussites, Hugonites, Lutheraus,
Calvinists etc.) their infections and seducings. To let pass former and latter
persecutions in our own English Nation, which has been (as France, Spain,
Italy, Low Countries, etc. also) a slaughterhouse of Christ's lambs; one
instance more pertinent then many, we have (in the reign of that wise and
mighty prince Henry the eighth) of bloody Longland, Lincolnes Bishop, acting to
the life Master Cottons Tenent against seducers throughout his Diocese. What
oaths did he exact? what articles did he invent, Bishop Longlands subtle Oaths
of inquisition.
to find out the meetings the conventicles, the conferences, of any poor
servants of God, men and women, day or night; whether the father read to the
child, or the child to the father, the husband to the wife, or the wife to the
husband? Yea, whether they spoke any thing (though never so little) out of any
line of holy Scriptures, or any of Wickliffes books, or any good English
writings: By which abhorred practices, the fathers (caught in this bloody
Bishops oath, vehemently forced upon all suspected) the fathers, I say were
forced to accuse and betray their children, the children their fathers,
husbands their wives, wives their husbands, for fear of horrible death on the
one side, or else of running upon the rocks of Perjury on the other side.


Peace. Hold ( dear truth) and stop; my spirit is wounded with such relations.


Truth. O how were the Saints, and Christ Jesus in them, wounded with such
tenants and practices!


Peace. Master Cotton will salve this up (with what he elsewhere says) thus:
Longlands, and the Papists religion, and the religion of England, was then
false in that kings time.


Truth, What then? No pious and sober man can hold all m^n devoid of conscience
to God, except himself. In all religions, sects, and consciences, the sons of
men are more or less zealous and precise, though it be in falsehood.

2. But let it be granted, that the religion persecuted is false, and that a
false religion like leaven, will spread, as did this idolatry of Michal,
Jeroboam, and others; and grant that this idolatry will bring judgments from
heaven in the end, yet I desire Master Cotton, or any knowing man, to answer to
these two questions.

1. Where find we, since the coming of Christ Jesus, a land like Canaan, a
state-religion, a City, or Town-religion, wherein the Towns, or Cities, or
kingdoms apostacy may be feared (as Master Cotton here writes of L^^sh) and
consequently the Towns or Cities captivity for that sin?

2. Where read we of the destruction of a land for idolatry, or images, without
a ripeness in other sins, and especially of violence and oppression (of which
persecution is the greatest?) And therefore to follow Master Cottons instance
of the Turks beside idolatry Canses of destruction to a Nation.
(which says Master Cotton brought the plague of the Turks, Rev. 9.) read we
not also in that Scripture, and in all histories, of their detestable and
wonderful whoredoms, witchcrafts, thefts, slaughters, and murders, amongst
which this bloody Tenent of persecution was ever in most high esteem? etc.


Peace. Indeed B^^^^ has been filled with blood of all sorts R^^^lations the
18. but in especial manner has the wh^re been drunk with the blood of the
Saints, and witnesses of Jesus, Revel. 17.


Truth. Hence then not idolatry only, but that bloody doctrine of persecution
(the great firebrand and incendiary of all Nations and Commonweals) brought in
the bloody Turks to revenge Gods truth and witnesses slain by the idolatrous
and bloody Antichristians.


Peace. I something question, that it can be proved, that the most righteous
Judge of the whole world ever destroyed state or nation for idolatry; but where
this bloody doctrine of persecution was joined with it, that is, until he had
graciously sent witnesses against such idolatries, and till such witnesses were
despised and persecuted, and therefore here comes in seasonably the sad
exprobration of the Lord Jesus, against Jerusalem, threatening the ruin and
desolation of it, Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets; and
stonest them which were sent unto thee etc!


Truth. I add lastly, Let it be granted that a soul is corrupted with a false
religion, and that that false Religion, like a leaven, in time has corrupted
the state;

Yet first, that state or land is none else but a part of the world, and if so
(since every part more or less in degree follows the nature All nations Cities,
Towns, etc. are part of the world.
of the whole) it is but natural, and so lies as the whole world does in
wickedness; and so, as a state or part of the world, cannot but alter from one
false way or path to another (upon this supposition (as before) that no whole
state, kingdom, City, or Town is Christian in the new Testament.

Secondly, Grant this state to be so corrupted or altered from one corrupt
religion to another, yet that state may many ages enjoy civil peace and worldly
prosperity, as all histories and experience testifies.

Thirdly, That idolatry may be rooted out, and another idolatrous religion of
the conqueror (as in the Ro^a^e and other conquests) Change of Religions.
brought: in or the religion may be changed something to the better* by the
coming of new Princes to the crown, as we see in Henry the eighth, King Edward,
and Queen Elizabeth, in our own Nation, and of late times*

Lastly, A soul o^ souls thus leavened, may be reduced by repentance (as often
it pleases God so to work, why then should there (as Master Cotton intimates)
such a peremptory bloody sentence be thundered out as life for life, etc.


Peace. But, says Master Cotton, false prophets, in the old Testament, were to
die, but for attempting; and the reason was not from any typical holiness of
the land, but from the dangerous wickedness of the attempting to thrust away a
soul from God, which is a greater injury, then to deprive a man of bodily life.


Truth. The reason to me appears plainly typical, with respect to that holy
nation, and the seducers seeking to turn the soul away from the Lord their God,
who had brought them forth from the land of Egypt, by such signs, miracles,
etc. Let Master Cotton The state of Israel unparlleld.
now produce any such nation in the whole world, whom God in the New Testament
has literally and miraculously brought forth of Egypt, or from one land into
another, to the truth and purity of his worship, etc. then far be it, but I
should acknowledge that the seducer is fit to be put to death. But draw away
the curtain of the shadow, and let the substance appear, not a whole Nation,
City, etc. but the Christian church, brought by spiritual signs and wonders
from the Egypt of this world in all nations of the The punishments of Christ
sorer then the punishments of Moses.
world, where the Gospel comes. Justly therefore he that seduceth a soul from
his God in Christ, and so endangereth to leaven that only true Christian state
or kingdom the church of Christ, he ought to die (upon his obstinacy) without
mercy, as well under Christ, as under Moses. Yea, he is worthy of a sorer
punishment (as says the Spirit of God) who trampleth under feet the blood of
Christ: such a deceiver or seducer (except he repent) is to be cut from the
presence of the Lord, and to lose an eternal life: He that is cut off from
material Israel, might yet repent and live eternally, but he that is cut off
from mystical Israel under the Gospel, that is, for obstinacy in sin (the
proper heretic) he is cut off to all eternity; which punishment as it is
infinitely transcendent and more dreadful in the nature and kind of it, so
answers it fully and infinitely that clause of Master Cotton, to wit, To
thrust a soul from God is a greater injury then to deprive a man of his bodily
life.


Peace. Now whereas the discusser added, That dead men cannot die, nor be
infected with false doctrine, and such is the State of all men, all nations,
all the world over, until the life of Christ Jesus quicken them; Master Cotton
replies,

First, Dead men may be made worse, and more the children of hell then before,
Mat. 23. and therefore such as so corrupt them, are worthy in a way of due
proceeding of a twofold death. Secondly, Such as profess the truth of the
doctrine and worship of Christ, they live a kind of spiritual life, though not
such as accompany salvation, else how are false teachers, and such as are led
by them, said to be twice dead, plucked up by the roots, Jud. 12.


Truth. Dead men may be made worse, that is, more to rot and stink; yet this is
no taking away of any life. And therefore there is no proportionable reason,
why the seducers should suffer a temporal death, having neither taken away
spiritual nor natural life; Of Seducing.
only thus he may be justly liable to a spiritual death, for endeavoring to
hinder a spiritual life, by furthering any in their natural state of spiritual
death.

2. For that place of Jude, Master Cotton knows that Beza What meant by twice
dead.
propounds two senses.

First, Twice dead, that is a certain number for an uncertain.

Secondly, This sense urged by Master Cotton, which if it be to be admitted,
yet is it but in appearance, as his life which in hypocrisy he professed, was
but in show and appearance, he being never raised up from the spiritual death
to a spiritual life, and therefore really never suffered the loss of a
spiritual life, which he never had: And yet as in typical Israel, it stood with
Gods justice to take away the life of the seducer, which seduced an Israelite
from the God of Israel, or but attempted to do it: so stands it with the holy
justice of God, to cut him off eternally, who but attempteth to take away or
hinders the spiritual and eternal life of any.


Peace. Master Cotton in the next place presumes on advantage that the
discusser should say, that none are infected with natural plagues or spiritual,
but such are thereto appointed, etc.


Truth. It is plain that the discusser alleged not that, to diminish or
lessen sin (let it have its due aggravation) but as was said before in case of
the not final deceiving of the elect, so was it here spoken not to derogate
from Gods means and remedies against natural or spiritual infection, but to
abate the needless fears of men, who are apt to cry out, Except the civil
sword be drawn (and so therewith the world set together by the ears) the world
cannot be preserved from infection.


Peace. Whereas the discusser had affirmed, that Christ Jesus had not left his
people destitute of spiritual means against spiritual infections; This is true
(says Master Cotton) but it falls out sometimes, that when the church has
cast out an heretic, yet he may destroy the faith of many, as did Hymeneus and
Philetus (2 Timothy 2. 17.) and if the Magistrates sword do here rust, etc. such
leaven may leaven the whole country etc. as Arrianisme leavened the world by
Constantines indulgence.

Again, says he, it may be the heretic was never a member of the church; how
then shall the church do?


Truth. Who can marvel at this, that the dunghill of this world, worldly men
under the power of Satan, unto whom the obstinate person the heretic is cast,
I say, that they, many of them, receive worldly doctrine, which the church as
filth casts out? etc.

2. As Paul says concerning the salvation of Gods children: Let the world
perish, yet the foundation of God remains sure, he knows who are his, and how
to provide means to save them, though the world still act it self, wallowing
and tumbling Of Infection.
(like Swine) in one puddle of wickedness after another.

3. Master Cotton should read a little further in the same Scripture quoted by
him, where he finds not a tittle of Paul's directing Timothy to stir up the
secular power (as the Pope speaks) to cut off Hymeneus and Philetus, to
prevent infection; but tells him, that the servants of God must not strive, but
must quiet themselves with patience, waiting if peradventure God will please to
give repentance.


Peace. Methinks this Answer may also ^ully satisfy his second supposition* to
wit, if that the heretic was never of the church.


Truth. Yea what has the church to do (that is, judicially) with him that is
without? and what has the civil state to judge him for who in civil matters
has not transgrest? In vain therefore does Master Cotton suggest a
persecuting or hunting after the souls or lives of such, as being cast out of
the church, keep private conventicles etc.


Peace. How grievous is this language of Master Cotton, as if he had been
nourished in the chapels and cloisters of persecuting prelates* and priests,
the Scribes and Pharisees? As if he never had heard of Jesus Christ in truth
and meekness: For surely (as the discusser observed) Christ Jesus never
appointed the civil sword an Antidote or remedy in such a case, notwithstanding
Master Cotton replies that the civil sword was appointed a remedy in this case,
by Moses, not Christ, Deuteronomy. 13.


Truth. Moses in the old Testament was Christ's servant, yet Moses being but a
servant, dispensed his power by carnal rites and ceremonies, laws, rewards and
punishments in that holy nation, and that one land of Canaan: But when the Lord
Jesus the Son and Lord himself was come, to bring the truth, and life, and
substance of all those shadows, to break down the partition wall between Jew
and Gentile, and to establish the Christian worship and kingdom in all Nations
of the world, Master Cotton will never prove from any of the books and
institutions of the New Testament, that unto those spiritual remedies appointed
by Christ Jesus against spiritual maladies, he added the help of the carnal
sword.


Peace. But Christ (says Master Cotton) never abrogated the carnal sword in
the new, which he appointed in the old Testament, and the reason of the law, to
wit, an offense of thrusting away from the Lord, is perpetual.


Truth. If it appear (as evidently it does) that this king ( Jesus the King of
Israel, wears his sword (the Antitype of the Kings of Israel their swords) in
his mouth, being a sharp two-edged The sword of typical Israel a type of
Christ's spiritual sword.
sword, then the answer is as clear as the Sun, that scatters the clouds and
darkeness of the night.

Besides, Master Cotton needs not fly to the Popes argument for childrens
baptism, to wit, to say that Christ never abrogated D^^^. 13. therefore, etc.
For Master Cotton knows the profession of the Lord Jesus, John 18. that his
kingdom was not earththly, and therefore his sword cannot be earthly: Master
Cotton knows that Christ Jesus commanded a sword to be put up when it was drawn
in the cause of Christ, and adds a dreadful threatening, that all that take
the sword (that is the carnal sword for his cause) shall perish by it.


Peace. And for the perpetuity of the reason of the law, you formerly fully
satisfied, that even in the days of grace, for him that shall thrust away an
Israelite from his God, there is upon his obstinacy a greater punishment beyond
all imagination (to wit, a spiritual cutting off from the land of Canaan) then
under Moses, which was but from the temporal, the type and shadow.

But Master Cotton proceeds, alleging, that the Minister of God must have
in a readiness to execute vengeance on him that does evil; and evil it is
(says he) to thurst away Gods people from him.


Truth. Every lawful Magistrate, whether succeeding or elected, is not only the
Minister of God, but the Minister or Magistrates cannot receive from the people
a spiritual power.
servant of the people also (what people or nation soever they be all the world
over) and that Minister or Magistrate goes beyond his commission, who
intermeddles with that which cannot be given him in commission from the people,
unless Master Cotton can prove that all the people and inhabitants of all
nations in the world have spiritual power, Christ's power, naturally,
fundamentally and originally residing in them (as they are people and
inhabitants of this world) to rule Christ's Spouse the church, and to give
spiritual power to their officers to exercise their spiritual laws and
commands; otherwise it is but profaning the holy name of the most high. It is
but flattering of Magistrates, it is but the accursed trusting to an arm of
flesh, to persuade the rulers of the earth, that they are Kings of the Israel
or church of God, who were in their institutions and government immediately
from God, the rulers and gavernors of his holy church and people.


Peace. Grant (says Master Cotton) that the evil be spiritual, and concern the
inner man, and not the civil state, yet that evil will be destructive to such
a City, it shall not rise up the second ^ime, N^h^^s. 1. 9.


Truth. Although that it pleases God sometimes to bring a people to utter
destruction for their idolatry against himself, and cruelty against his people;
yet we see the Lord does not presently and instantly do this, but after a long
course of many ages and generations, as was seen in Nineve her self, and since
in Athens, Constantinople, and Rome both Pagan and Antichristian. And therefore
the example here by Master Cotton produced, gives not the least color of
warrant for the civil state presently and immediately to execute vengeance for
idolatry or heresy upon persons or Cities now all the world over, as he gave
commandment to that typical nation of Israel, which is now also to be fulfilled
spiritually upon the spiritual Israelite, or Israelitish City, a particular
church or people falling away from the living God in Christ Jesus.


Peace. Whereas it was said by the discusser, that the civil Magistrate has
the charge of the bodies and goods of the subjects, The charge of the civil
Magistrate.
and the spiritual officers of the church or kingdom of Christ, the charge of
their souls and soul safety, Master Cotton answers, First, If it were so that
the civil Magistrate had the charge of the bodies and goods only of the
subject, yet that might justly excite to watchfulness against such pollution of
religion as tends to apostasy, for God will visit city and country with public
calamity, if not with captivity, for the churches sake. The idolatry and
worship of Christians (says he) brought the Turkish captivity upon the citys
and countries of Asia.


Truth. By soul and soul safety, I think Master Cotton understands the same
with the discusser, to wit, the matters of religion and spiritual worship. If
the Magistrate has received any such charge or commission from God in
spiritual things, doubtless (as before) the people have received it originally
and fundamentally as they are a people: But now if neither the nations of the
world, as peoples and nations, have received this power originally, and
fundamentally; nor can they derive it Ministerially, to their civil officers
(by what name or title, high or low, soever they be distinguished) Oh what
presumption, what profaning of Gods most holy name, what usurpation over the
souls and consciences of men, though it come under the veil or vizard of
saving the City or kingdom, yea of saving of souls, and honoring of God
himself?

Beside, God is not wont to visit any country or people in general for the sin
of his people but for their own idolatries and cruelty toward his people, as
all histories will prove. And for this instance of the Turks, I say it was not
the idolatry and image worship The plague of the Turks.
alone of the Antichristians, but joined with their other sins, which brought
Gods vengeance by the Turks upon them as was said above, from Revel. 9. and
especially their Antichristian cruelty grounded upon this bloody doctrine of
persecution.

Both these Antichristian states, and since also the Turkish Monarchy, have
flourished many generations in external and outward prosperity and glory,
notwithstanding their religion is false, and although it is true, that in the
time and period appointed, all nations shall drink of the cup of Gods wrath,
for their national sins, both against the first and second table, in matters
concerning God and man.


Peace. How satisfy you Master Cottons second answer or question, to wit, Did
ever God commit the charge of the body to any Governor, to whom he did not
commit in his way the care of their souls also?


Truth. There is a twofold care and charge of souls manifested in holy
Scripture.

First, That which in common belongs to all, to love our neighbor as our
selves, to endeavor the present and eternal welfare A twofold care and charge
of souls.
both of superiors, inferiors, equals, friends and enemies; and this by
prayers, exhortations, reproofs, examples of justice, loving kindness,
sobriety, godliness etc.

But what is this to the second charge by way of office, which in the old
Testament was given* not only to Priests and Levites, but to the governors and
rulers of the Jewish state: of which state (being mixed of spiritual and civil)
they were the head and governors, as it was Israel, a nation of worshippers of
the true God: And therein were they the types and forerunners of Christ Jesus
Christ the true King of Israel.
the true King of Israel, as he is called, Joh. 1. The cure and charge of
souls, now (says Master Cotton) in this Chapter, belongs by virtue of office
to the spiritual officers of Christ's kingdom: I add, and during the desolation
of Zion, and the time of the apostasy from Christ's visible kingdom, belongs
to the two Prophets and witnesses of truth, Rev. 11. but not to the kings,
rulers, nations, and civil states of the world, who can be no true parallel or
antitype to the Israel or people of God.


Peace. Master Cotton objects Jehosaphat sent abroad preachers throughout all
the Cities* of Judah; and if that were a type of Christ, it were to act that
now, which typed out Christ, and he fulfilled in his own person.


Truth. Christ Jesus sends out preachers three ways. Christ's threefold sending
of preachers.


First, In his own person, as the twelve and the seventy.

Secondly, By his visible, kingly power, left in the hand of his true churches,
and the officers and governors thereof: In which sense that church of Antioch,
and the governors thereof, rightly invested with the kingly power of Christ
Jesus, sent forth Paul and Barnabas with prayer and fasting, and saying on of
hands: And Paul and others of Christ's messengers* being furnished with this
kingly power, not only planted churches, but also ordained elders visited these
churches or visible cities of Judah; that knowledge and teaching, and the word
of God might dwell plenteously among them.

Thirdly, Christ Jesus as king of his church, and head of his body, during the
distractions of his house and kingdom under Antichrists apostasy, immediately
by his own holy Spirit, stirs up and sends out those fiery witnesses (Rev. 11.)
to testify against Antichrist and his several abominations: For as for lawful
calling to a true ordinary Ministry, neither Wickliff in England, nor Wald^^
in France, nor John Hus and Jerome of Prauge in ^o other true office of the
Ministry, since the apostacy, but that of prophecy and opening the Testament
of Christ against the falsehood of Antichrist.
Bohemia, nor Luther in Germany, nor multitudes more* of famous preachers and
prophets of Christ, both in these countries and also in Spain, Italy etc. I
say, no true ordinary Ministerial calling can they ever show; but Christ Jesus
by the secret motion of his own holy Spirit extraordinarily excited, in
couraged and sent them abroad as an Angel or messenger (Rev. 14.) with the
everlasting Gospel etc.


Peace. To apply these three ways, or any of them, to the civil Magistrates
and rulers of the world (of whom Iehosaphat in that his act should be a type)
is but to profane the holy name of God, to lean upon and ^dolize an arm of
flesh, etc.


Truth. I grant, the civil Magistrate is bound to countenance the true
Ministers of Christ Jesus, to encourage, protect, and defend them from
injuries, but to send them armed (as the Popes Legates and Priests) with a sword
of steel, and to compel people to hear and obey them, this savours more of the
spirit of the Pope, his courses and practices, Yea of Mahomet his Mussel-men,
D^rg^es, etc. then the Lamb of God and his followers.


Peace. What Iehosophat. Asa. Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. did, they did not only by
persuasion, countenance, example (by which all are bound to further the
preaching of Christ Jesus) but also by force of arms and corporal punishments.


Truth. Yea even to the death it self* and this is not a bare sending out of
Ministers (as Master Cotton gives the instance:) For by his argument, all
rulers, kings, and Emperors, and other states of the world ought to embrue
their hands in the blood of the many thousands and millions of millions of the
poor people, if they forsake not their idolatry and embrace the religion which
they say is Christian and the only true.


Peace. No, says Master Cotton, this ought not to be, because only godly and
truly Christian Magistrates may so put forth this power of Christ; others must
stay until they be informed.


Truth. Can it enter into any Christian heart, to believe, that Christ Jesus
should so loosly provide for his affairs, so slightly A foul imputation put
upon Christ Jesus.
for his name and Fathers work and so regardlesly for his dearest Spouse, as to
leave so high a care and charge with such as (generally and constantly
throughout the whole world) are ignorant of, yea and opposite to the very name
of Christ and true Christianity?


Peace. Surely if this payment were offered to the governor (as Malachy says)
to the world, or governments of it, it would not pass.


Truth. I never knew a king or captain councellor or constable, officers of
high or low condition, rightly called according to to God, who were not
invested with ability more or less for the maine and principal points of their
charge and duty.


Peace. It seems indeed a marvelous, and yet it is Master Cottons) conclusion,
that such Magistrates, yea all or most of the Magistrates that ever have been
since Christ, and now extant upon the face of the earth, must sit down, stay
and suspend, and that all their life long, from the executing of the maine and
principal part of their office, to wit* in matters concerning the conscience,
religion, and worship* of the people.


Truth. Yea (Secondly) in a due survey of the whole universe and globe of this
world, will one of a thousand or ten thousand (according to Master Cottons
disabling of them from the chief part of their office) be found* I will not say
fit to be, but to be at all lawful civil Magistrates or rulers according to
Gods ordinance of Magistracy but mere shadows or images set on high with empty
names or titles only of Magistrates?


Peace. Master Cotton adds, Although the good of souls is the proper or
adequate object of the spiritual officers of Christ, and the bodies and goods
of the people, the proper or adequate object of the civil Magistrate; yet in
order to the good of their souls* he ought to procure spiritual helps, and to
prevent spiritual evils.


Truth. I reply, If he mean (as it is clear he does) that the civil Magistrate
ought to do this not only as a Christian by spiritual Pretended order,
mo^^t^o^s disorder.
means, but as a civil Magistrate by force of arms, It is not in order, but
monstrous disorder, for then he (the civil Magistrate) must sit Judge
(judicially and formally) in those spiritual causes and cases, which Master
Cotton grants are proper and adequate objects of the spiritual officers which
Christ has appointed.


Peace. Yea, why may not (says Master Cotton) the Magistrate use his power
(spiritually) in order to the good of bodies, as the officers of Christ dehort
from idleness and intemperance of meats and drinks etc. in order to the good of
souls?


Truth. The spiritual officers in dehorting from these evils or any other of
that kind, interfere not, nor take cognizance of that which belongs not to
their spiritual court; for holiness in all manner of conversation is the circle
wherein they ought to see all their spiritual subjects to walk. If the
spiritual officers should cause by force of arms their people to walk justly,
temperately, etc. as Master Cotton says the civil Magistrate in order to the
good of bodies ought to deal in spiritual and soul-matters, I say then the eyes
of the civil Magistrate would begin to open and to see the horrible disorder
and Babylonish confusion of that which is here masked under the abused name of
order.


Peace. Master Cotton closes up this chapter with very bitter censures against
the discusser.


Truth. The discusser may well reply, that although since the apostasy he sees
not the visible thrones and tribunals of Christ Jesus (according to his first
institution) erected, and although the civil Magistrate has not the power of
Christ in matters of religion, yet they that slay the Lords sheep are not
exempted from The Parliaments high justice aggainst oppressors.
all judgment: For, if the offenders slay them corporally, the Lord has armed
the civil Magistrate with the sword of God to take vengeance on them. In which
respect God has crowned the supreme court of Parliament with everlasting
honor, in breaking the jaws of the oppressing Bishops, etc. Oh that such
glorious Justice may not be blemished, by erecting in their stead a more
refined, but yet as cruel an Episcopacy.

2. If the offense be of a spiritual nature, is there no spiritual way of
judging, except the church of Christ be granted visible during Antichrists
Apostasy? Has not Christ Jesus given power to his two prophets (even all the
Reign of the Beast) to speak fire, Revelations the 11. to shut up heaven, to
turn the waters into blood, to smite the earth with all manner of plagues, and
this until the time of the finishing of their prophecy or Testimony, when
their great slaughters shall prepare the way for the downfall of Antichrist and
their own most glorious raising and exaltation?

There was no Chapter 34 (which probably was Master Cottons oversight, or the
Printers) therefore I pass to Chapter 35.


Examination of CHAP. XXXV.
Peace. HEre, whereas it was said, if it were the Magistrates duty or office to
punish heretics etc. then he is both a temporal and Ecclesiastical officers:
Master Cotton answers, It follows not: except the Magistrate were to punish
with Ecclesiastical censures, his punishment is merely civil, whether
imprisonment, banishment, or death.


Truth. I reply, first, the statutes of the English nation, and the oath of
supremacy, have proved the Kings and Queens of England heads and governors of
the church of England: And if The title head of the Church.
to be an head or governor be not an office, let Master Cotton be again
requested to ponder the instance given, which he passes by in silence; deny it
ingenuously he cannot, and to justify it I hope his light from heaven will not
suffer him, although yet he would ^aine excuse it, by saying, they punish only
with civil punishment, imprisonment, banishment or death. Therefore,

2. Here lies the mystery of iniquity, and the Babel and confusion of it, that
either according to Popish Tenants the kings of the earth must give their power
to the beast, and enslave themselves under the name and vizard of the secular
power to be the Popes executioners, or according to Protestant Tenants, to wit,
that Kings and Governors be heads of the church and yet be furnished with no
Church Power nor spiritual censures.


Peace. It would be thought some mystical and monstrous thing, that Kings and
Governors should be obliged to act in civil Judicature, and yet be furnished
with no civil power, but ought to punish only with spiritual or
Church Censures.


Truth. The blind and the lame man's robbing the Orchard is here verified. The
Minister (though a blindeguide) he is the seer, but wanting legs and strength
of civil power, he is carried upon the civil Magistrates shoulders, whose
blindness the subtle Clergy abuses, etc. but both together rob the Orchard of
the most high and surea^enging God.


Truth. I conceive it true, that the Kings and Governors of the national church
of Israel had a national power; and had the The civil Megistrate no spiritual
officer, now as in Israel.
Kord Jesus been pleased to have continued national churches the Lings and
governors of such states might well (as they of Israel were) have been both
Temporal and Ecclesiastical officers.


Peace. But now the Lord Jesus abolishing that national state, and instituting
and appointing his worshippers and followers to be the Israel of God, the holy
nation and proper Antitype of the former Israel; it seems most unchristian,
that either the work or the title should remain, whether with open or a masked
face or vizard.


Truth. Therefore as it pleased God in wonderful wisdom and inconcei^eable
depths of council for a while to continue a national church national covenant
etc. and to take them away as unsufficient, beggarly, and weak, either for the
further advancement of his own glory, or salvation of men: so has he taken
away the administration thereof by carnal weapons, arms of flesh etc. In stead
of fire and sword, and stoning the opposit^es in stead of imprisonment,
banishment death, he has appointed exhortations, reprehensions, denunciations*
excommunications, and together with preaching, patient waiting, if God
peradventure will give repentance.

Lastly, If the civil Magistrate must imprison and banish* and put to death in
spiritual cases; and the civil Magistrate, is but a Minister or servant of the
people (and so of God) and if the The peoples power.
people make the laws, and give the Magistrate his commission and power; does
it not follow by this doctrine, that the people of the nations of the world*
are fundamentally and originally both Temporal and Ecclesiastical? And then
what is become of the foundations of the Christian faith? And also are not
hereby the people and nations of the world (whatever care be had to the
contrary to restrain) encouraged, according to their several consciences, I
say encouraged and hardened in their bloody wars, imprisonings, banishings, and
putting to death for cause of conscience?


Peace. Whereas it was said to be Babel or confusion, for the church to punish
the offenses of such as are not within its jurisdiction with spiritual
censures, or the civil state spiritual offenses with corporal or temporal
weapons, Master Cotton answers, No confusion, for so Paul directs the church of
Corinth.


Truth. That very Parenthesis which Master Cotton stumbleth at, takes away his
answer. For as it would be confusion for the church to censure such matters,
and of such persons as belong not to the church: So is it confusion for the
state to punish spiritual All Commonweals that ever have been, are or shall be
in the World (excepting that of typical Israel) merely civil.
offenders, for they are not within the sphere of a civil jurisdiction. The
body or Commonweal is merely civil, the Magistrate or head is a civil head, and
each member is a civil member: and so far forth as any of this civil body are
spiritual, or act spiritually, they and their actions fall under a spiritual
cognizance and judicature.


Peace. The reason (says Master Cotton) is the same, for there be offenses
which tend to provoke wrath against the civil state, Ezra 7. Why should there
be wrath against the king or his sons?


Truth. This reason indeed Master Cotton often inculcates and beats upon it,
that the Pagan kings of Persia were of his mind ^ The Decrees of Pagan kings
for Israel, and the God of it, considered.
I believe Master Cotton out of a zeal to God, but the Pagan kings out of a
slavish terror, which never prevailed so far (that I know of) as to bring them
to a kindly repentance of their own idolatries, or a true love to the God of
Israel or his people.


Peace. However your former answer is to me sufficient; to wit, that thousands
of famous Towns, Cities and Kingdoms have flourished in peace and tranquillity
for many ages and generations, where God has had no house, and not only where
it was by the civil state neglected, but also wholly persecuted.


Truth. In the time appointed and full ripeness of their sins, the vengeance of
God (after patience many generations abused) has surely and fearfully
visited, yet in the interim, it is clear it is no ground of a necessity of
present punishing of false worshippers and idolaters, least present wrath fall
upon the King or his Son.


Peace. Now whereas it was said an intolerable burden laid The Ministers lay
heavy loads upon the Magistrates back.
upon the Magistrates back, together with the care of the Commonweal to be
charged also with the spiritual, etc. Master Cotton answers, 1. That the
Magistrate ought to seek out meane^ of grace for the people. 2. To remove
idolatry and idolatrous Teachers. 3. It is commonly added, that he ought to
preserve the church pure by reformation.


Truth. I reply, This work charged upon the kings, governors, and Magistrates
in the world, makes the weight of their care and charge far greater, then ever
was the charge of the kings of Israel and Judah, For their people were
miraculously brought into covenant with God, to their hands, like a bridge, or
house, or ship ready built; and needed only keeping up in reparation: yea an
heavier yoke* then either their or our fathers were able to bear, considering
all the several different consciences, religions, and worships of all mankind
naturally, and the many different opinions, factions, and sects, which daily do
arise, and that conscientiously and zealously unto death: All these must by
Master Cottons doctrine) lie before the bar, beside all civil cases, etc.


Peace. It Is memorable that Paul himself, that had the care of all the churches,
would not be entangled with civil affairs, further then his own necessities
did call for; and sometimes the necessities of his companions: but this yoke
put upon the necks of Magistrates, is as full of temporal as spiritual care:
And as it is impossible for them to bear* So the Lord in his holy season, may
please to teach them (as he has taught some already through his grace) to lay
that spiritual Burden upon the shoulders of their only King of Saints Christ
Jesus, to whom the supreme power and care of souls and churches does alone
belong.

Whereas it was further said, that the Magistrate is to cherish, and to cleave
unto the Saints, and to defend them from civil violence, but the spiritual care
of them belongs to spiritual officers appointed by Christ Jesus to that end,
Master Cotton replies, this is but a pretense, because the discusser
acknowledges no churches extant, etc.


Truth. Although amongst so many pretending churches, the discusser be not able
to satisfy himself in the rightly gathering of the Churches, according to the
true order of Christ Jesus, yet this is far from a pretense* because the
institution of any state government, order, etc. is one thing, and the
administration and execution, which may be interrupted and eclipsed, is another.


Peace. Indeed Jeremy could not rightly have been judged a pretender, when he
mourned for, and lamented the desolations of A time when no visible Church of
God in the world for the right form and order, etc.
the temple, priests, elders, altar, sacrifice, etc. and neither he nor Daniel,
nor any of Gods prophets or servants, could (during the time of the desolation
and captivity) acknowledge either temple, or altar, or sacrifice right, extant
upon the face of the earth.


Truth. He that says the Sun (Christ Jesus) is not to be seen in our Horizon
or Hemisphere, in his absence, or when he suffers an Eclipse, cannot be said to
deny that the Lord Jesus his holy ordinances ought to be visible in the worship
and service of God: Although the discusser be not satisfied in the period of
the times, and the manner of his glorious appearing, yet his soul uprightly
desires to see and adore, and to be thankful to Master Cotton, yea to the least
of the disciples of Christ Jesus, for any coal or spark of true light, amongst
so many false and pretended candles and candlesticks, pretending the glorious
name of the Lord Jesus Christ.


Peace. Next, Master Cotton demands what reason can be given, why the
Magistrate ought to break the teeth of lions (ought to suppress such as offer
civil violence) and not of the Wolves, that make havoc of their souls, who are
more mischievous then the lion, as the Pope of Rome, then the Pagan Emperors?
He wonders the discusser should favor the Pope more then the Emperor, except
it be that he symbolizeth rather with Antichrist then with Caesar.


Truth. It may here suffice to say two things (not to repeat other passages.)

First, The civil state and Magistrate are merely and essentially civil; and
therefore cannot reach (without the transgressing the bounds of civility) to
judge in matters spiritual, which are of another sphere and nature then
civility is: Now it is most just and proper, that if any member of a civil body
be oppressed, the body should relieve it: As also it is just and proper, that the
spiritual state or body should relieve the soul of any in that spiritual
combination oppressed.

Therefore (Secondly) for spiritual and religious oppressions, the king of
kings Christ Jesus has sufficient providedly in his spiritual kingdom:
therefore ( Acts 20) Paul gives the charge against those spiritual Wolves to
the elders of the church at Ephesus, The wolves at Ephesus, Act. 20.
and not to civil Magistrates of the city, which Paul should have done
(notwithstanding they were worshippers of Diana) if it had been their duty to
have broke the teeth of those spiritual Wolves etc.


Peace. It is (indeed) one thing to prohibit the Pope, the prelates, the
Presbyterians, the Independents, or any from forcing The duty of civil power in
matters of Religion.
any in the matters of their respective consciences, and accordingly to take
the sword from such men's hands, or (as their executioners) to refuse to use it
for them: It is another thing to leave them freely to their own consciences, to
defend themselves as well as they can, by the two-edged sword of the spirit,
which is the word of God, which all the several sorts of pretenders say they
have received from Jesus Christ.


Truth. The renowned Parliament of England has justly deserved a crown of
honor to all posterity, for breaking the teeth of the oppressing Bishops and
their courts; but to wring the sword The changing of persecutors is onething,
the abolishing of persecution another.
out of the hands of a few prelates, and to suffer it (willingly) to be wrung
out of their own hands, by many thousand Presbyterians, or Independants, what
is it but to change one wolf or lion for another, or in stead of one, to let
loose the Dens of thousands?


Peace. But why should Master Cotton insinuate the discusser to glance a more
obsequious eye upon the Pope, then upon the Emperor?


Truth. I fear Master Cotton would create some evil opinion in the heart of the
civil Magistrate, that the discusser is (as the bloody Jews told Pilate) no
friend to Caesar: whereas upon a due The persecuting Clergy no cordial friends
to Magistracy.
search it will be sound clear as the light, that it is impossible that any
that subscribe ex animo to the bloody Tenent of persecution, can ( ex animo) be
a friend to Magistracy. The reason is, all persecutors, whether priests or
people, care only for such Magistrates as suite the end, the great bloody end
of persecution, of whom they either hope to borrow the sword, or whom they hope
to make their executioners. Their very principles also ( Papist and Protestant)
lead them necessarily to dispose and kill their heretical, Apostate,
blaspheming Magistrates.


Peace. But why should Master Cotton ^^ sinuate any affection in the discusser
to that Tyrant of all earthly Tyrants, the Pope?


Truth. To my knowledge Master Cotton and others have thought the discusser too
zealous against the bloody beast: yea, and who knows not this to be the ground
of so much sorrowful difference between Master Cotton and the discusser, to wit
that the discusser grounds his separation from their churches upon their not
seperating from that man of sin? For Old England having Neither Old nor New
England statechurches separate from the Pope.
compelled all to church, compelled the Papists* and the Pope himself in them:
The daughter New England, separaring from her mother in Old England, yet
maintains and practices communion with the Parishes in Old* Who sees not then,
but by the links of this mystical chain, New England Churches are still
fastened to the Pope himself?


Peace. Master Cottons third reply is this* that it is not like that such
Christians will be faithful to their prince, who grow false and Master Cotton
and Bellarmine all one, for the deposing heretical princes, etc.
disloyal to their God* and therefore consequently the civil Magistrate must
see that the church degenerate and apostate not, at least so far as to provoke
Christ to depart from them.


Truth. This is indeed the down right most bloody and Popish Tenent of
persecuting the degenerate, heretical and Apostate people: of deposing, yea and
killing Apostatical and heretical princee and rulers.

The truth is, the great Gods of this world are God-belly Godpeace* God-wealth,
God-honour, God-pleasure etc. These Gods must not be blasphemed, that is* evil
spoke of, no not provoked, etc. The gods of this World.
The servants of the living God being true to their Lord and Master, have
opposed his glory, greatness, honor etc. to these Gods, and to such religions,
worships, and services, as commonly are made but as a mask or veil, or
covering of these Gods.


Peace. I have long been satisfied, that hence proceeds the mad cry of every
Demetrius and crafts-Master of false worship in the world, Great is our Diana
etc. These men blaspheme our goddess, disturb our City* They are false to our
Gods, how* will they be true to us?

Hence that bloody Act of Parliament in Henry the fifth his days made
purposely against that true servant and witness of The Lord Cobham his troubles
in Henry the 5. days.
God (in those points of Christianity which he knew) and other servants of God
with him, the Lord Cobham, concluding Lollardy not only to be heresy, (that
is, indeed true Christianity) but also treason against the Kings person: whence
it followed, that these The best of our late Bishops, as Bishop Hall have not
spared to render heretics and Traitors all one.
poor Lollards (the servants of the most high God) were not only to be burnt as
heretics, but hanged as traitors.


Truth. Accordingly it pleased God to honor that noble Lord Cobham, both with
hanging and burning, as an heretic against the church, as a traiter against
the king: And hence those divelish accusations and bloody huntings of the poor
servants of God in the reign of Francis the second in Paris, because it was
said that their meetings were to cousult and act against the life of the king.


Peace. If this be the touchstone of all obedience, will it not be the
cutthroat of all civil relations, unions and covenants between Princes and
people, and between the people and people? Civil society plucked up by the
roots.
For may not Master Cotton also say, he will not be a faithful servant, nor she
a faithful wife, nor he a faithful husband, who grow false and disloyal to
their God? And indeed what does this, yea, what has this truly-ranting
doctrine (that plucks up all relations) wrought but confusion and combustion
all the world over?


Truth. Concerning faithfulness, it is most true, that godliness is profitable
for all things, all estates, all relations: yet there is a civil faithfulness,
obedience, honesty, chastity, etc. even amongst such as own not God nor Christ:
else Abraham and Isaac Civil honesty may stand with dishonesty against God and
Christ in matters of Religion.
dealt foolishly to make leagues with ungodly Princes. Besides, the whole
Scripture commands a continuance in all Relations of government, marriage,
service, notwithstanding that the grace of Christ had appeared to some, and the
rest (it may be an husband, a wife, a Magistrate, a Master, a servant) were
false and disloyal in their several kinds and ways unto God, or wholly
ignorant of him.

4. Grant people and Princes to be like Julian, Apostate from the true service
of God, and consequently to grow less faithful in their places and respective
services, yet what ground is there, from the Testament of Christ Jesus, upon
this ground of their Apostacy, to prosecute them, as Master Cotton says, The
civil Magistrate must keep the church from Apostatizing so, as to cause Christ
to depart from them.

5. Can the sword of steel or arm of flesh make men faithful or loyal to God?
Or cares God for the outward Loyalty or Faithfullness, when the inward-man is
false and treacherous?

Or is there not more danger (in all matters of trust in this A turn-coat in
Religion more faithless then a resolved Jew, Turk or Papist.
world) from an hyyocrite, a dissembler, a turncoat in his religion (from the
fear or favor of men) then from a resolved Jew, Turk or Papist, who holds
firm unto his principles? etc.

Or lastly, if one Magistrate, King or Parliament call this or that heresy,
apostacy, etc. and make men ^ay so will not a stronger Magistrate, King,
Parliament, Army (that is, a stronger arm, or longer and more prosperous sword)
call that heresy and Apostacy Heresy and apostacy often change their names
to truth, and Christianity, etc.
Truth and Christianity, and make men call it so? and do not all experiences,
and our own most lamentable, in the changes of our English Religions, confirm
this?

6. Lastly, As carnal policy ever falls into the pit, it digs and trips up its
own heels, so I shall end this passage with two paradoxes, and yet (dear peace)
thou and I have found them most lamentably true in all ages.


Peace. God delights to befool the wise and high in their own conceit with
paradoxes, even such as the wisdom of this world thinks madness: but I attend
to hear them.


Truth. First then, The straining of men's cinsciences by civil Who knows not
that the many turnings of Do. Pearne in Cambridge, brought it into a proverb,
to wit, to p^^nifie.
power, is so far from making men faithful to God or man, that it is the ready
way to render a man false to both: my ground is this: civil and corporal
punishment do usually cause men to play the hypocrite, and dissemble in their
Religion, to turn and return with the tide, as all experience in the nations of
the world does testify now.

This binding and rebinding of conscience, contrary or without its own
persuasion, so weakens and defiles it, that it (as all other faculties) loses
its strength, and the very nature of a common honest Consciences yielding to be
forced or ravished, loosen all conscience.
conscience: Hence it is, that even our own histories testify, that where the
civil sword, and carnal power, has made a change upon the consciences of men,
those consciences have been given up, not only to spiritual, but even to
corporal filthiness, and bloody, and mad oppressing each other, as in the
Marian bloody times etc.


Peace. Indeed no people so enforced as the Papists and the Mahume^ans: and no
people more filthy in soul and body, and no people in the world more bloody and
persecuting: but I listen for your second paradox.


Truth. Secondly, This Tenent of the Magistrates keeping the church from
Apostatizing, by practicing civil force upon the consciences of men, is so far
from preserving Religion pure, that it 2 Paradoxes.
is a mighty Bulwark or Barricado to keep out all true Religion* yea and all
godly Magistrates for ever coming into the World.


Peace. Doubtless this will seem a hard riddle, yet I presume not too hard for
the fingers of time and truth to unty, and render easy.


Truth. Thus I unty it: If the civil Magistrate must keep the church pure, then
all the people of the Cities, Nations, and kingdoms of the world must do the
same much more, for primarily and fundamentally they are the civil Magistrate:
Now the world (says John) lies or is situated in wickedness, and conscquently
according to its disposition endures not the light of Christ, nor his golden
candlestick the true Church, nor easily chooses a true Christian to be her
officer or Megistrate, for she accounts such false to her Gods and Religion,
and suspects their faithfulness etc.


Peace. Hence indeed is it (as I now conceive) that so rarely this world
admit^eth or not long continues a true servant of God in any place of trust
^^d credit, except some extraordinary hand of God overpower, or else his
servants by some base stairs of Flattery or worldly compliance, ascend the
chair of Civilpower.

But (to proceed) says Master Cotton, It was the duty of Jehosaphat* Hezekiah
etc. to reduce the people of Israel from their backslidings because they were
an holy people, and is it not the duty of godly Princes to reduce their
backsliding Churches to their primitive purity? It is true (says he) David and
Solomon were types of Christ, but so were not the other Kings of Israel and
Judah, who were the one (the kings of Israel) all Apostates, and the other (the
kings of Judah) many of them Apostate from Christ: And Secondly, If they were
(says he) all types of Christ, yet Christ being the Antitype, Christ has
abolished them all, and so it were sacrilege or Antichristian usurpation for
any king to be set over Christians: Or if they were types of Christ in respect
of their kingly office over the Church alone was it typical in Solomon to put
Joab a murderer to death, or Adonijah a traitor? and so consequently unlawful
for Christian Princes to put murderers and traitors to death? Further, says
he, What those kings might do in type, Christ Jesus might much more do in his
own person, as the Antitype: but he put no man to death in his own person, and
therefore they were not types but servants of Christ, and paterns and examples
to Christian Magistrates, yea, Ahab, who should have put Benhadad to death for
his blasphemy.


Truth. I understand those kings of Israel and Judah, until How the kings of
Israel and Judah were types and figures of Christ to come.
their cutting off or excommunicating out of the land of Canaan, to be yet
visible members of the church of Israel and Judah, and as kings of Israel and
Judah types of Christ Jesus, partly in his own person, who did that (being the
true spiritual king of Israel) which they did or should have done, in that
typical national church or land of Israel* and (2) partly in the officers of
his kingly power and government of his church, which officers and church
falling away, until an absolute cutting off, are the Antitypes (in respect of
visible government) of those former kings of Israel and Judah.


Peace. Can it be imagined that those wicked Kings, Jeroboam* Baasha, Ahab etc.
were figures of Christ Jesus?

Truth. Master Cotton himself grants David and Solomon types of Christ Jesus,
and yet, how abominable and monstrous some of their practices? we must
therefore distinguish between their persons, and sins, and frailties.

As kings of Israel (Gods Church and people) doubtless they were the figures of
(the K. of Israel) Christ Jesus: yea it is probable that the land of Canaan,
with the officers and governors thereof, before Christ time, was but a figure
of the spiritual land or Christian church, with the officers governors and
administrations thereof good and evil: Although the applying of the times and
persons each to other The types of the old Testament many and deep.
requires a more then ordinary guidance of the finger or holy Spirit of God.


Peace. I remember that some of eminent note for knowledge and godliness have
not stuck to affirm, that the Gentile Prince Cyrus called Christ, a figure of
Christ.
Cyrus as he was called Gods servant, anointed, or Christ (Isa. 44) I say, that
he in a respect, as a restorer of Gods people was a figure of Christ Jesus.


Truth. It is not improbable, but that the most holy and only wise (whose works
are known unto himself from the beginning of the world) did by such famous
instruments of mercy to the literal Jew, type out Christ Jesus and his heavenly
instruments, mercy and goodness to the mystical and spiritual, Christian Jews
etc.


Examination of CHAP. XXXVI, and XXXVII.
Peace. IN these passages Master Cotton first questions (having not his copy by
him) the truth of some expressions printed as his.


Truth. It is at hand for Master Cotton or any to see that copy which he gave
forth and corrected in some places with his own hand, and every word verbati^^
here published.

2. To the answer it self, or reproof of the Lord Jesus given to his disciples
for their bloody and rash zeal desiring fire to come down from heaven, etc. we
both agree that Christ's rebuking of his disciples did not hinder the Ministers
of the Gospel from proceeding in a Church Way etc. 2. That false ^persecution
in a churchway is as odious and dreadful a persecution, as any prosecution ^ a
court of civil justice, as also that this is not the point intended, though it
be reckoned up with the rest.


Peace. I marvel at that which follows, where Master Cotton says, that it
never fell from his pen in any writing of his, viz. that it is lawful for a
eivil Magistrate to inflict corporal punishment upon such as are contrary
indeed in matters of Religion: and therefore he passes by the discussers
reasons as which might well have been spared, being brought but against a
shadow of his own fancy.


Truth. I am not able to imagine what Master Cotton means by such as are
contrary minded, against whom he will not (in this Chapter) maintain any
corporal punishment to be inflicted, when in so many of his writings, and
throughout his whole book he maintains corporal punishment, and that to death
it self in many cases, against the idolatrous, the blasphemous, the heretical,
the seducing, yea the degenerate and Apostate.


Peace. Love bids us take this passage as a pang of reluctance The fire from
heaven, Rev. 13
(in his other wise-holy and peaceable breast) against such unholy bloody
Tenants.

But what say you to the passage about the second beast, bringing fire from
heaven? (Rev. 13.) This was no wonder (says Master Cotton) for Constantine had
done the like before to heretics, the Arrian Bishops against the Orthodox
Saints. Also, it is related as a different matter from the former ( verse. 15.)
that he had power to cause, that as many as would not worship the image of the
beast should be killed. And this fire comes not down upon the Saints, but the
earth.


Truth. Master Cotton I think knows that the discusser is not alone in this
interpretation: If he propose any other more suitable to Christ Jesus, I hope
the discusser desires thankfully to embrace it. But this fire being not
literal, but mystical, in imitation of the true prophet Elijah, and also as the
true witnesses cause fiery judgments descend from heaven upon the enemies of
the truth: so the false witnesses cause fire to descend against the faithful:
and sure it is (as the discusser related) that the Popish Bishops in France,
and England and other places have ever constantly cried out, that the just
judgments of God are brought down by them upon the heretics, which is no small
wonder that the hearts of the sons of men should be so hardened against the
light of truth in truths witnesses, notwithstanding the acts of Constantine and
the Arrian Bishops long before.


Peace. But this fire (says Master Cotton) comes down from heaven upon the
earth.


Truth. True, but it may well imply no more, then in the open view and face of
all men in this world.


Peace. And lastly (says he) it is said, that he causes that as as many as
would not worship the Image of the Beast should be killed, which is a different
effect.


Truth. Because it comes from a different cause, with respect, not to the first
Beast himself, but only to his picture or image, and implies, that fiery
judgments descend not only upon such as refuse to worship the first or second
beast, but the very picture of the beast likewise.


Examination of CHAP. XXXVIII.
Peace. MAster Cotton here first observing the discussers agreement with him,
that this instruction (2 Timothy 2.) to be meek and patient to all men, is
properly directive to the Ministers of the Gospel, he concludes that therefore
hitherto his answer was not perplexed and ravelled.


Truth. Many plain threads may be drawn forth of a perplexed and ravelled
string, as it seems to me the many particulars of different natures here wrapped
up together were.


Peace. Yea, but he seems to disown those words [ unconverted Christians in
Crete) and more then once in the Chapter touches the discussers credit, etc.


Truth. I know the discusser desires unfainedly (with the Lords assistance)
rather to die a thousand deaths, then willingly to impeach the least of holy or
civil truths; and therefore affirms in this case, that at his pleasure the
copy (not which he received from All Truth, heavenly, moral, civil, etc.
precious.
Master Cotton for there never passed such writings between them as Master
Cotton often affirms, but) which he received from another, with the
correction of Master Cottons own hand to it, shall be ready for himself or any
to view.


Peace. However, Master Cotton maintaining the terms of unconverted converts
from Ier. 3. 10. (Judah turned unto me, but not with all her heart, but
fainedly:) so Judas, An^^^as, and Sapphira, Balaam, the Ni^^laitans, Iezabel in
Thyatira, as also the children of believing parents born in the Church, who
though holy, yet cannot be conceived to be truly holy.


Truth. Were the question about hypocrites, counterfeits and trayters in the
church and kingdom of Christ, these words might here rightly be alleged; but
Master Cottons words being Unconverted Christians visibly a paradox.
these [ unconverted Christians in Crete* whom Titus as an Evangelist was to
seek and to convert] I conceive that Master Cotton will not affirm that the
office of an Evangelist was to seek to convert the church (though possibly an
hypocrite may be turned from his hypocrisy by an Evangelist or private man in
the church.)

2. He makes in the very words a distinction between these, unconverted
Christians, and those Jews and Gentiles in the Church, who (says he) though
carnal, yet were not convinced of the error of their way.

And to conclude this Chapter, the discusser readily with thanks acknowledges
Master Cottons words, that it is not probable that Timothy was now at Ephesus,
and that the subscription added to the second Epistle of Timothy in the English
translation, is justly to be suspected.


Examination of CHAP. XXXIX.
Peace. MAster Cotton here argues, That if the Magistrate be a Prophet, Many
excellent Magistrates of the Parliament, of the Council, of the Army, of the
City, of the Country, are also excellent prophets or interpreters of Scripture,
and yet may not use a civil but a spiritual sword in spirituals.
and opposed in his doctrine, he ought (from this Scripture, 2 Timothy 2.) meekly
to bear the opposition, waiting if God peradventure will give repentance; yet
withal by the way he observes, that if the Magistrate be a prophet, he may do
some things as a Magistrate, which he may not do as a Prophet.


Truth. Of this no question? but what is this to a coercive Magisterial power
in spiritual things, which is the question?

2. Since that Master Cotton acknowledges that Magistrates may be prophets,
and that diverse Magistrates of New English churches have spoken as prophets
(eminently able in their Magistrates may be prophets in Christ's Church.
churches) what should be the reason (I ask by the way) that their Churches
hear no more of such their prophetical gifts, but that their talent's wrapped
up? etc.


Peace. Of this let their consciences give account to Jesus Christ* whom they
call the King of their churches, and the fountain of such heavenly abilities:
But to proceed, Master Cotton grants that Magistrates ought to bear in the
church oppositions against their prophecyings, but not continued opposings nor,
seduings etc.


Truth. What is then the waiting here commanded, until God peradventure will
give repentance?


Peace. It is true (says Master Cotton) it is not in the power of man to give
repentance but God alone: Neither is it in man's power (says he) to give
repentance to scandalous persons against the civil state; and yet the discusser
acknowledges that the civil Magistrate ought to punish these.


Truth. It is not the Magistrates work and office in the civil state, to
convert the heart in true repentance unto God and Christ: More confidence
commonly put in the civil sword then the spiritual.
The civil state respects conformity and obedience to civil laws, though
indeed the works and office of the Ministers of Christ Jesus are commonly laid
upon the Magistrates shoulders, and they pretending themselves the Ministers of
Christ Jesus, armed with the two-edged sword of the Spirit of God (the Word of
God) do commonly fly unto and put more confidence in the sword of steel in the
hand of their civil Ministers, the Magistrates.


Peace. The sword of steel has done wonderful things throughout the whole
world in matters of Religion* and woeful and wonderful (as was formerly
observed) has Religious changes Engl. changes in Religion excused by those of
Judah, but not justly.
been in the English nation, and that by the power of the civil sword* backward
and forward* and that in the space of a few years, in the reign of four or
five Princes: But this (says Master Cotton) is no more then befell the church
of Judah in the days of Ahaz, Hezekiah, Manasseh, and Josiah.


Truth. Englands changes will be found upon examination incomparably greater,
and wrought in the eighth part of the time that the changes of the church of
Judah were. And yet this instance will not infringe that the civil sword of the
Magistrate, in a national way, is ordinarily able to turn about a Nation to and
again, to and from a truth of God, in national hypocrisy, and therefore most
wisely has the most holy and only wise, by the most golrious brightness of his
person and wisdom of the Father (Christ Jesus) abolished his own national and
state- church, whether explicit or implicit, that the two-edged sword of the
word of the Lord in the mouths of his true messengers, might alone be
brandished and magnified.


Peace. Master Cotton concludes this Chapter with the observation* that the
revolt of England again to Popery wants Scripture Light.


Truth. He that loves Christ Jesus in sincerity, cannot but long* Whether
England may ^^^ receive the Po^^ again.
that Christ Jesus would speedily be pleased with the breath of his mouth to
consume that man of sin: But yet that worthy servant of God (according to his
conscience) Master Archer* does not barely propose his opinion* but also his
Scripture-grounds, which I believe, compared with all former experiences, will
seem to be of great and weighty consideration, and call all that wait for
Christ Jesus to beg his Spirit deeply to weigh and ponder them.


Examination of CHAP. XL.
Peace. TO the several allegations concerning the woeful slavery of all
opposites of Christ Jesus, and the mighty power of free grace, only able to
release them; Master Cotton replies* So is it with scandalous offenders against
the Civil state* and yet this does not restrain Magistrates from executing
just judgments upon them etc. And he adds, that better a dead soul in a dead
body, and that seducers die without faith, then murder and seduce many
precious souls from the faith.


Truth. The Lord Jesus commanding to give God the things that be Gods* and to
Caesar the things that be Caesar's* gives all his followers a clear and glorious
torch of light to distinguish Things of God and Caesar.
between offenders against God in a spiritual way, and offenders against
Caesar, his Laws, state and government in a civil way.

It Is true, slatterers and time-servers use to make Religion and justice, the
two pillars of a State, and so indeed do all such states in the world as
maintain a state-Religion, invented and Religions of the world, politic
inventions to maintain a civil state.
maintained in civil policy to maintain a civil state. But all men that have
tasted of history or travel, are witnesses sufficient of these two particulars.

First concerning justice, that if the sword and balances* of justice (in a
sort or measure) be not drawn and held forth, against The a^so^u^e necessity of
some order of government all the world over.
scandalous offenders against civil state, that civil state must dissolve by
little and little from civility to barbarism, which is a wilderness of life
and manners.


Peace. Yea the very barbarians and Pagans of the world themselves are forced
for their holding and hanging together in barbarous compaines, to use the ties
and knots, and bands of a kind of civil justice against scandalous offenders
against their Commonweal and profit.


Truth. But too many thousands of Cities and states in the world have and do
flourish for many generations and ages of men, wherein (whatever Caesar gets)
God cannot get one penny of his due in any bare permission or toleration of his
religion and worship.


Peace. Dear Truth* these two points being so constantly proved, I can but
wonder that Master Cotton or any servant of Christ Jesus, should cry out to the
Caesar's of this world to help the eternal God to get his due, because Christ
Jesus grants them a civil sword in civil cases, to preserve their civil states
from barbarism and confusion.


Truth. That worthy Emperor, Antoninus Pius, in his letters for the Christians,
plainly tells the governors of his provinces, that the gods were able to punish
those that sinned against their worship; Antoninus Pius his distinction.
evidently declaring, by that light of conscience and knowledge which God had
lighted up in his soul, the vast difference between offenders in the civil
state, and offenders against the true and only religion and worship, about
which the whole world disagreeth, and is hist together (by this bloody tenent)
I say hist together by the ears and throat, in blood and fire, as the tide of
times, major vote armies and arms of flesh prevail.


Peace. Ah (Dear truth) is there is no Balm in G^^ead, no balances, no sword
of spiritual justice in the City, and kingdom of Christ Jesus, but that the
officers thereof must run to borrow Caesar? Are the Armories of the true king
Solomon Christ Jesus disarmed? Are there no spiritual swords girt upon the
thighs The degeneracy of Christianity now professed.
of those valiant ones, that should guard his heavenly bed, except the sword of
steel be run for from the cutlers shop? Is the Religion of Christ Jesus so poor
and so weak and feeble grown, so cowardly and base (since Paul spoke so
gloriously of it, and the weapons of it (2 Cor. 10.) that neither the soldiers
nor Commanders in Christ's Army have any courage or skill to withstand
sufficiently in all points a false teacher, a false prophet, a spiritual
cheater or deceiver?


Truth. This must all that follow Jesus bitterly lament, that not a spiritual
sword or spear is to be found in the spiritual Israel of God, but that his poor
Israelites are forced down to the Philistines of this worlds Smiths* etc. And
that the princes of Zion are become feeble like hearts without pasture, as
Jeremy complains in his Lamentations.


Peace. Now whereas it was added, that a civil sword hardens the followers of
false teachers in the suffering of their leaders, and begets an impression of
the falsehood of that religion, which cannot uphold it self all the world over,
but with such instruments of violence, etc. Master Cotton replies, that the
Magistrate ought not to draw out his sword against seducers, until he has
used all good means for conviction, etc. and then (says he) he should be cruel
to Christ's Lambs in sparing the Foxes, etc.


Truth. Who knows not this to be the plea and practice of all Popish
persecutors in all ages, to compass sea and land to reduce the heretic to the
union and bosom of the church, not only with The loathsome hypocrisy of
persecutors.
promises* threatenings* etc, but oftimes with solemn disputations, and
sometimes writings and waitings, before they come to the definitive sentence
and deliver him to the secular power* and so to the use of those desperate
remedies of hanging, burning, etc. How do the bloody Popes and the bloody
Bonners in their hypocritical letters and bloody sentences, profess their
lamentable grief at errors and heresies; their clemency and mercy, and great
pains taken to reduce that wandering, to return the lost child, to heal the
scabbed sheep? yea and when they are forced (as they say) for the saving of the
flock from infection to deliver such sheep to the secular power, as their
butchers and executioners; yet beseech they that power, and that (most
hypocritically without shame) in the bowels of Christ Jesus* to Minister
justice with such moderation, In their bloody sentence, and proceedings with
the persecuted.
that if it be possible the heretics soul may be saved* but however the flock
may be preserved from such ^damnable Doctrine.


Peace. Master Cotton will here blame the alleging of this: for the Popish
Religion is false, but their true etc.


Truth. It Is true, the Papists Religion is false, yet Master Cotton cannot pass
without suspicion to be too near of kin to the bloody Papist, to whom they are
so near in practice: The Lord Jesus gave an everlasting rule to his poor
servants, to discern all false prophets by, to wit, their fruits and bloody
practices. But,

Secondly, The holy Spirit of God in this 2 to Tim. now insisted on, not only
commands Timothy to exhort the opposite, but patiently to wait and attend Gods
will* if peradventure God will give repentance, and that they may recover
themselves etc.


Peace. Master Cotton will not deny, together with meek exhortation, patient
waiting, etc.


Truth. Why then does he limit the holy one of Israel to days or months?
Three months was by the law (in Massachusetts in New England) the time of
patience to the excommunicate, before the secular power was to deal with him:
But we find no time Too short a time set for repentance in New England.
limited, nor no direction given to Timothy or his successors to prosecute the
opposite before Caesar bar, in case God vouchsafed not repentance upon their
means and waiting.

3. Christ Jesus has not been without bowels of compassion in all his gracious
care and provision he has made for his sheep and lambs, against the spiritual
Wolves and Foxes; although we read not a word of the arm of flesh and sword of
steel appointed by himself for their defense in his most blessed last Will and
Testament.

4. Lastly, to that instance of the Donatists and Papists suppressed False
teachers commonly hardened by persecution.
by the civil sword, no question but (as before) a civil sword is able, among
civil people, to make a whole nation, or world of hypocrites: and yet
experience also testifies (however Master Cotton makes it but accidental) that
it is the common and ordinary ^ffect of the civil sword drawn forth (as they
speak) against heretics seducers etc. to harden the seducers and seduced by
their sufferings, and to beget no other opinion in their hearts, then of the
cruelty and weakness of the heart and cause of their persecutors.


Peace. There has been no small noise of Master Go^^ons and The great
sufferings of Master Gorton and his friends in New England.
his friends being disciplined (or as the Papists call it, discipled in the
School of the New English churches: It is worth the inquiry to ask what
conviction and conversion has all their hostilities, captivatings, courtings,
imprisonings* chainings, banishings, etc. wrought upon them?


Truth. Shall I speak my thoughts without partiality? I am no more of Master
Gortons Religion then of Master Cottons: and yet if Master Cotton complain of
their obstinacy in their way, I cannot but impute it to this bloody tenent and
practice, which ordinarily does give strength and vigor, spirit and resolution
to the most erroneous, when such unrighteous and most unchristian proceedings
are exercised against them.


Peace. Touching the Edict of Antoninus Pius concerning Antoninus Pius his
Edict against persecution.
persecution of Christians, and the opinion it begat in their hearts of the
cruelty of their persecutors, Master Cotton answers, first the Pagan Religion
is not of God but the Religion of Christians came down from Heaven in the
Gospel Truth.


Truth. This is most true, to him that believes that there is but one God, one
Lord, one Spirit, one baptism, one body, etc. according to Christ Jesus his
institution; and that from that blessed estate the Apostasy has been made; and
that all other Gods, Lords, Spirits Faiths, Baptisms or churches, are false:
But what is this to many millions of men and women, in so many kingdoms and
nations, Cities and parts of the world, who believe as confidently their lies
of many Gods and Christ's, all which they believe (as the Ephesians of their
Diana, and of the image of Jupiter, and (as Master Cotton of the way of his
Religion) that they come down from heaven?


Peace. Doubtless, according to their belief, all the peoples of those nations,
kingdoms and countries, wherein the name of Christ is sounded, whether of the
greek church or the latin, whether of Popish or Protestant profession, will
say as Master Cotton, my religion came down from heaven in the Gospel of Truth,
etc.


Truth. Now then either the sword of steel must decide this controversy
(according to the bloody tenent of persecution) in the suppressing of
heretics, blasphemers, idolaters and seducers, by the strength of an arm of
flesh: or else the two-edged-sword of the Spirit of God, the word of God coming
out of the mouth of Christ Jesus in the mouths of his servants, which will
either humble and subdue the Rebels, or cut most deep, and kill with an eternal
vengeance.


Peace. But (says Master Cotton) it will beget an opinion of cruelty to
murder innocents, but not to put to death murderers The difference between
spiritual and corporal murder.
of souls.


Truth. I answer, beside that great and common difference of civil murder, and
spiritual* there is a second, to wit, that in the murder of an innocent, the
conscience of a murderer is opened, and commonly the mouth confesses I am a
murderer, I have killed an innocent: but run through all the coasts and
quarters of the whole world, and the very consciences of so many thousands of
soul- murderers are rootedly satisfied and persuaded, that they are so far
from being murderers as that they are so many saviors of the souls of men,
and Priests and Ministers of the most high God or Gods, etc.


Peace. For instance, if a man say Master Cotton is a subject of the state of
England, and a Minister of that worship, which he believes to be true,
confirmed by argument and light sufficient to his understanding soul and
conscience: How many thousand are there fellow- subjects with Master Cotton to
the English state* yet of a contrary mind to Master Cotton in matter of Gods
worship? yea how many are there (it may be thousands) professing a Ministry
contrary to Master Cottons? and the like may be found in other nations and
parts of the world.


Truth. What true reason of justice, peace* or common safety of the whole, can
be rendered to the world why Master Cottons Civil justice ought impartially to
permit one conscience as well as another.
conscience and Ministry must be maintained by the sword, more then the
consciences and Ministeries of his other fellow subjects? Why should he be
accounted (I mean at the bar of civil justice) I say accounted a soul Savior,
and all other Ministers of other Religions and consciences, soul-murtherers,
and so be executed as murderers, or forced to temporize or turn from their
Religion, which is but hypocrisy in Religion against their conscience, which
is ten thousand times worse, and renders men, when they sin against their
conscience, not only hypocrites, but Atheists, and so fit for the practice of
any evil, murders, adulteries, treasons, etc?


Peace. Master Cottons second Answer is that the persecuting Emperors and
governors of Provinces under them, attended not The difference of the
persecution of the Roman Emperors and the Roman Popes.
to the conviction of christians* nor did they endeavor to make it appear that
the Christians sinned against the light of their consciences, and therefore no
marvel if it bred in the people a just opinion of the cruelty of persecutors,
and of the innocence of christians.


Truth. Let it be granted that the Roman Emperors did not attend to, nor
endeavor this, yet the Roman Popes, and all the Antichrist governors of their
mystical Provinces, Bishops and Priests, have professedly compassed Sea and
Land to make a Proselyte.


Peace. It Is true, the history of the death of the Saints, slaughtered by such
persecutors abundantly testify this, and yet their persecution will be found
no other then cruelty and murder, and the opinion of it will never be razed
out of the heart of Gods people, whatever the whole world (which wonders after
and worships the beast) think to the contrary.


Truth. And I add, that herein Master Cottons former position, to wit [that
heretics must be punished by the civil sword, for sinning against the light of
their own conscience] accords fully with the Popish clamors, [the heretics
mouths are stopped, they are convinced, they have not a word to say, and yet
they are obstinate; away with them, hang them* burn them.]


Peace. Master Cotton says, It is an untrue intimation of the discusser, that
Antoninus forbod the persecuting of christians upon any such ground.


Truth. That it may not rest upon the discussers credit or discredit, I think
it not unseasonable if I present to English eyes the English testimony of the
diligent and praise worthy-Chronicler John Speed, who also ingageth Eusebi^s
his credit, and thus relates the effect of Antoninus his mind in these words*


The Emperor Caesar, Marcus, Au^^l^us, Antoninus, etc. Unto the Commons of Asia,
Sends Greeting.
I Doudt not, but the Gods themselves have a care that wicked persons shall be
brought to light; for it does much more appertain to them, then it does to
you, to punish such as refuse to yield them worship: but this course which you
take, does confirm them whom you persecute in this their opinion Antoninus
Pius his famo^^ ^^^dict for liberty to the Christians related by that
praiseworthy Master John Speed out of Eusebi^s.
of you, That you are impious men, and mere Atheists; whereby it comes to
pass, that they desire in the quarrel of their GOD, rather to die then to yield
to the will of such as you are, and to embrace your form of Religion: Let it
not seem unseasonable to call to your remembrance the Earthquakes which lately
have happsned, and which are yet, to your great terror and grief; because I
understand, that in such like Accidents, you ^ast the Envy of such common
misfortune, upon their Shoulders; whereby their confidence, and trust in their
GOD is much the more increased: Whereas, you being ignorant of the true causes
of such things, do both neglect the worship of the other Gods, and also banish
and persecute the servants of the immortal GOD, whom the Christians do worship;
and you persecute to the death all the embracers of that profession. In the
behalf of these men, many of the Provinces President have written before to my
Father of famous memory, to whom he answered, That they should not be molested,
unless they were proved to have practiced Treason against the Imperial State;
and concerning the same matter, some have given notice to me, to whom I
answered with like moderation as my Father did before me: And by our Edict, do
ordain, That if any hereafter be found thus busy in molesting these kind of
men, without any their offense, We command that he that is accused upon this
point, be absolved; albeit he be proved to be such an one as he is charged to
be, that is, a Christian; and he that is his accuser, shall suffer the san^e
Punishment which he sought to procure unto the other.


In this passage the wise and experienced Emperor observes many reasons for
the toleration of Christians, and insinuates that the persecuting of the
Christians, confirmed them in their opinion, that their persecutors were not
only cruel (for that is the least that can be implied in persecution) but also
as the words run, impious men and mere Atheists.


Peace. Dear Truth, your observation forces from my peaceable The persecuted
ever no^^ish an h^rd con^^it of (...) and Tyranay in their persecutors, whereas
Malefactors confess frequently the justice of their condemners.
mind, this Testimony, which often to my grief and horror, mine ears have heard
many persons (I hope in their persons chosen of the Lord) having as they
conceived, suffered persecution from the hands, and by the means of many worthy
men both of Magistracy and Ministry of New England: I say, they have been by
such persecution so far from being wrought on etc. that they have been molded
into a strong apprehension, that it was impossible that such their persecutors
should be men of any fear of God* but mere dissemblers, time-servers, Jehues
reformers, for their own ends of honor ease, and liberty from the cross of
Christ: which apprehension although the discusser (to my knowledge) has often
labored to root out of many, yet could he hardly prevail to stir it, so
groslly, odious* unchristian, or antichristian, appears the ugly face of
persecution etc.


Examination of CHAP. XLI.
Peace. IN the discussing of the prophecy of Isaiah and Micah, concerning the
breaking of swords into plowshares, and spears into pruning hooks, truly
interpreted to foretell the meek temper of Christians in bringing others to
Christ Jesus, Master Cotton excepts against the discussers observation upon
Master Cottons similitude from Wolves which he would have driven out from the
sheepfold: The observation was this, or to this effect, [That if civil power
might force the wolves out, it might force the sheep in.]


Truth. The discusser denied not the use of Christ's spiritual power for the
life of his sheep, and destruction of the Wolves: but heaven and earth shall
fall before this truth, to wit, [That power that drives Wolves out, may drive
sheep in.] If spiritual power drive out the wolf spiritual, also drives in the
sheep* but if If Civil power may force cut of the church, it may also force in.
civil power (to wit, by swords whips, prisons, burnings etc.) drives out the
spiritual or mystical Wolf, the same undeniably must drive in the sheep.


Peace. Yea, but Master Cotton (too too weakly) would please himself upon the
word [ same:] a father, says he, with a staff or sword may drive away dogs
that might by the way worry or bite his children going to School, may he
therefore with a staff or sword drive his children to School? and are wolves
to be driven away, and sheep brought into the fold by the same instruments? The
dog that tears a wolf, if he tear the sheep also, will find an halter, etc.


Truth. Master Cotton has had a name for a man of Moses spirit, of a meek and
gentle temper; he cannot but know he has lost that name with thousands ^earing
God, by not putting that difference, between the Wolves and the sheep, the
Egyptians and the Israelites, as Moses did: Moses killed the Egyptian, he
reproves the Every true Moses will make a difference between Israelites and
Egyptians.
Israelite: All that contradict Master Cottons church way (though before dear
brethren, familiar and intimate) he not only drives them out, as wolves
blasphemers* seducers etc. by his pretended spiritual weapons of Christ Jesus,
but also by civil sword, imprisoning banishing, whipping etc.

But more particularly, The discusser indeed uses this word the same power,
but not as Master Cotton seems to understand it, for the same weapon. He has
in this very place printed the discussers words, that a staff is for the wolf,
and a rod or hook for the sheep. The dog that tears the wolf, is but to
affright the sheep and consequently the father that has a stick or rod for the
child; But yet these swords, staves-sticks, and rods, are all of the same
nature in general, that is of a material, temporal and civil nature, which may
be used about natural wolves* sheep, children etc. And if they may be used also
about spiritual or mystical wolves, to force them out; it is as clear as the
Sunbeams, that they may be used, that is such civil weapons as are fit for
mystical wolves, to force them into the sheepfold: And thus have all Popish
persecutors practiced in our own and other countries, to wit, by civil power
(as well as by their own pretended spiritual) in forcing their supposed sheep
to church, and to conformity, as well as by whips, and Prisons, Ropes and
Fires, driving out the supposed wolves or heretics.


Peace. In the close of this, Master Cotton adds* that ( Rev. 6. 6.) the
Antichristian wolves shall drink blood, for they are worthy.


Truth. I have in former passages declared the misconceit of Master Cotton and
others* as touching that Scripture and that, although they shall drink blood
filled out of the cups of Gods righteous vengeance, yet not by judicial
prosecution in civil courts for spiritual offenses, although yet it is most
righteous for the kings and powers of the earth* merely with respect to these
wolves their oppressions and bloodsheddings, to repay them again with the like
smart and pain, and kinds of punishment.


Peace. Yea and it is for ever memorable, that while the kings of the earth have
given their power to the beast, against the bodies of the Saints, what cups of
blood has the righteous hand of the Cups of Blood given into the hand of
persecuting nations.
most high filled to Antichristian kings and kingdoms, by the bloody Turks,
and by their own more bloody wars* sometimes for the empty puffs of their
titles and honors, but as frequently for God (as they pretend) and for his
Religion.


Examination of CHAP. XLII.
Peace. IN this Chapter Master Cotton charge the discusser for making Whether
a commonweal prosper in diverse religions permitted.
work, to wit, for examining more particularly the similitude of wolves brought
in by Master Cotton himself: yet he consents with him in the first quaery,
that those Wolves of which Paul warns the elders at Ephesus, were mystical and
spiritual wolves; yet he adds that such cannot be good subjects, loving
neighbors, fair dealers, because they spiritually are not such; and he argues,
that then it will be no advantage to civil states* when the kingdoms of the
earth shall become the kingdoms of the Lord: and that then they may do as good
service to the civil state, who bring the wrath of God upon them by their
apostasy, as they that bring dow blessings from heaven by profession and
practice of the true religion in purity.


Truth. I desire that this reply be well pondred, for it will be found
dangerously dest^^ctive to the very roots of all civil relations, converse and
dealing; yea, and any civil being of the world it self.

For, if none be peaceable subjects, loving neighbors, fair dealers, but such
of Master Cottons conscience and religion (which Men may be very fair and
peaceable, though not of the only one religion.
he conceives to be the only true religion) what will become of all other
states, governments, cities, towns, peoples families neighbors, upon the face
of the earth? I say, what will become of them (especially if power were in
Master Cottons hand to deal with them as Wolves?)


Peace. Alas, too too frequent experience tells us in all parts of the world,
that many thousands are far more peaceable subjects, more loving and helpful
neighbors, and more true and fair dealers in civil conversation, then many who
account themselves to be the only religious people in the world.


Truth. But again, What the state of things shall be, and what the manner of
the administration of Christ's kingdom, when the kingdoms of the earth shall
become the kingdoms of the Lord Master Cotton does not express: and for wrath
brought upon civil states for their apostasy, IN desire Master Cotton to show,
where ever God destroyed any Nation in the world (one only excepted) for
Apostasy from his truth and worship? Yea and where was ever Israel (the only
true national church that Master Cotton will acknowledge) merely for apostasy
destroyed, without general ripeness in other sins also, and especially for
their persecuting of such, as declared their apostasy, superstition, and
will worship from God unto them.


Peace. In the next place Master Cotton granting that the charge given to watch
against these Wolves, was not given to the Magistrates of the City of Ephesus,
but to the elders of the church of Christ in Ephesus, he yet charge the
discusser with a palpable and notorious slander, for saying, that many of those
charges and exhortations given by the Lord Jesus to the shepherds and Ministers
of the churches, are commonly attributed by the answerer in this discourse to
the civil Magistrate.


Truth. This heavy charge of Master Cottons against the discusser, will be
found to be a fruit of Anger and passion, and not of reason and moderation; as
also his denial that one of those charges given to Ministers, were directed by
him to Magistrates.

For if Master Cotton, or any please to view over Master Cottons allegations
from the New Testament in this discourse, he shall find Scriptures perverted
from the church to the civil state.
that ( Tit. 3.) reject the heretic a charge given by the Lord Jesus to Titus
and the church at Crete is brought for the proof of the Magistrates punishing,
imprisoning banishing, killing the heretic idolater etc.

The like charges of Christ Jesus sent to the Ministers and churches of Asia,
for tolerating amongst them Balaam and Jezabel* are produced to prove
prosecutions against false Prophets and professors in the City and Commonweal.

Yea although Master Cotton name not Act. 20. yet in that Master Cotton
affirms that Magistrates with the civil sword must drive away Wolves from the
sheepfold of Christ the church, meaning spiritual wolves, false teachers, he
may be truly said to quote all such Scriptures as give charge against such
Wolves.


Peace. Indeed Master Cotton more then once pleases himself with this
similitude of Wolves* to prove the Magistrates piety and pity to the sheep, in
slaying and driving away the wolves* false teachers, etc.


Truth. Hence was it (for commonly where state-Religions are The Magistrate
usually the Cleargies Cane, etc.
set up, the Magistrate is but the Ministers Cane through whom the Clergy
speaks) I say probably hence from such misapplyed Scriptures in their churches,
that in their solemn civil general court, at the banishment of one poor man
amongst them, hunted out as a wolf or heretic, the governor who then was,
standing up alleged for a ground of their duty to drive away such by
banishment, that famous charge of Christ Jesus to his Ministers and Church at
Rome (Romans 16) Mark them that cause divisions contrary to the doctrine which
you have received, and avoid, Romans 16. 17. grossly abused by a governor in New
England.
that is, by banishment: By all which and more it may be found, how Satan has
abused their godly minds and apprehensions in causing them so to abuse the holy
writings of truth and Testament of Christ Jesus, and that how ever they deny it
in express terms, yet by most impregnable consequence and implication they
make up a kind of national church, and (as the phrase is) a Christian state and
government of church and Commonweal, that is, of Christ and the world together.


Peace. To proceed, it being further inquired into, whether in all the New
Testament of Christ Jesus there be any such word of Christ, either by way of
command, Promise, or example* countenancing the civil state to meddle with
these mystical Wolves, if in civil things peaceable and obedient. Master Cotton
replieth, that this condition of peaceable and obedient, implies a
contradiction to the nature and practice of wolves. How can, says he, wolves
be peaceable and obedient, unless restrained? Can there be peace, Jehu* so long
as the whoredoms of Jezabel and her witchcrafts are so many? And when it might
be objected that spiritual whoredoms and witchcrafts might stand with civil
peace, He answers, No verily* for the whoredoms and witchcrafts of the Jezabel
of Rome took away civil peace from the earth, and brought the Turks to oppress
both the peace of Christian churches and Commonweals, Rev. 9. 15, 21.


Truth. I wonder since Master Cotton in this very passage mentions the
spiritual wolves, whores, and witches, as well as natural and moral* How he can
imagine that a spiritual wolf or witch (to wit so or so in matters of spiritual
worship and religion) might not possibly be peaceable and obedient in civil
things.


Peace. Yea but he alleges the whoredoms of the Jezabel of Rome.


Truth. Why, was not the State of England, the Kings and Queens* and
Parliaments thereof, lawful as kings and states, though overwhelmed and
overspread universally with the Romish abominations? If such wolves, whores,
and witches could yield no civil obedience, could they then exercise (by the
same argument) any civil authority? And shall we then conclude all the The
bloody Tenent plucks up the nations and all civil being, etc.
former Popish kings and Parliaments (and consequently laws) unlawful, because
in spiritual things they were as Wolves, etc. tearing and burning the poor
sheep of Christ? will it not then be unlawful for any man, that is persuaded
the whole nation where he lives is idolatrous, spiritually whorish, etc. I say
unlawful for him to live in such a state, although he might with freedom to
his own conscience? whither will such kind of arguing drive at last, but to
pluck up up the roots of all states and peoples in the world, as not capable to
yield civil obedience, or exercise civil authority, except such people,
Magistrates, etc. as are of Master Cottons church and religion.


Peace. Methinks experience (were there no Scripture nor reason) might tell us
how peaceable and just neighbors and dealers many thousands and millions of
Jews, Turks, Antichristians, and Pagans are to be found, notwithstanding their
spiritual whoredoms* witchcrafts, etc.


Truth. Yea, and why does Master Cotton allege the Jezabel of Rome, and the
coming in of the Turks? It is true, God The plague of the Turks.
brought in the Armies of the Turks upon the Eastern Empire, which yet
flourished many ages (even in their apostacies) before their destruction by the
Turks. And how many ages and generations has Iezabel of Rome sitten as a
Queen in triumphant Romes glory and downfall.
peace and glory, even since the rising of the Turks (and so shall sit probably
in greater and greater, until the time of her appointed judgment and downfall?
If Christ Jesus were a true Prophet ( John 16.) outward peace, prosperity*
riches, honor, is the portion of this world, notwithanding their idolatries,
apostacies, blasphemies: But the portion of Christ's followers (like his own,
and both like a woman in travel) pain and sorrow, yea poverty and persecution,
until the great day of refreshing, near approaching.


Peace. Master Cotton again sends us to Revelations the 16. 4, 5, 6, 7.


Truth. And I must also send Master Cotton and the Reader to our disproving of
that proof abovesaid.

Further, whereas he calls Romans 13. the great Charter for all Magistrates to
deal in spiritual matters, I have and shall manifest in the examinations upon
that place, how weak a warrant it is for the civil state* and the officers
thereof, to conceive themselves spiritual Physicians, by virtue of their
office, appointed by God, in spiritual and soul-evils.


Peace. Whereas it was urged, that Magistrates beside their skill in civil laws
and government, must be able (if Master Cottons The civil state and officers
thereof cannot be spiritual judges.
bloody tenent be true) as judges and heads to determine spiritual causes and
controversies* and that by the sight of his own eyes, and not other men's;
Master Cotton replies, that Magistrates ought to be skilled in the fundamentals
of religion, and that their ignorance excuses not.


Truth. In this passage Master Cotton wa^eth that inference [That then
Magistrates must be heads and judges in spiritual causes:] That inference
cannot possibly be avoided if we grant it their duty (as Master Cotton seems
to do) to pass sentence in the fundamentals of religion, and in those points
which have been and are so greatly controverted among all sorts of men that
name the name of Christ.

2. If Magistrates must thus judge, reform etc. where has been the care of
Christ Jesus to appoint in all parts of the world, such Magistrates as might
take care of his religion and worship? Foul neglects cast upon Christ Jesus.
why has he not furnished them with some capacity and ability to the work?


Peace. It is lamentable to think that most of the Magistrates in the world
(beyond compare) know not so much as whether there be a Christ or no.


Truth. If Christ Jesus had forgotten himself for three hundred years together,
furnishing his church with no other heads, but of Wolves, Bear, Lions, and
Tigers, the Roman Emperors yet (after a little refreshing by Constantine,
Theodosius etc.) why should he still forget himself (even a thousand years
together, providing no other heads, but bloody and Popish kings and Emperors?


Peace. What think you ( dear truth) of Master Cottons grant The case of Gallio.
of Gallios not being bound to judge in matters of religion, because he had no
Law from Caesar whose deputy he was?


Truth. I answer what if he had not a law from Caesar, if yet he had a law from
Christ Jesus, as Master Cotton implies? Or will Master Cotton suspend the
execution of Christ's will, upon the kings states, or peoples minds that choose
such Magistrates to be their deputies in the Commonweal? But the truth is,
concerning Gallio* whatever he was in his person, and however he did evil in
suffering the peace to be broken; yet will Master Cotton never prove, that he
had calling from either God or man, to go beyond his civil Magistracy and
office to intermeddle with matters of a spiritual nature and that Gallio knew
well enough, and other Magistrates of the world shall know in the Lords most
gracious appointed season.


Peace. The discusser ending this Chapter with the infallible safety of Gods
chosen, notwithstanding all ravenous wolves, etc. Master Cotton replies from
Deuteronomy. 13. that God was able to keep his sheep in Israel, yet they that seduced
them were to be put to death.


Truth. That argument was not alleged with the derogation to any of Gods holy
ordinances, which concern the calling or preserving of such whom God has
chosen to salvation, but only to discover the over-busie fear of Gods loosing
any of his chosen to salvation, by the jaws of spiritual wolves, etc. For Deuteronomy.
13. Let Master Cotton produce such a miraculous nation or people (as I may call
it) so brought out of the land of Egypt into covenant with God etc. and I shall
readily grant that seducers of such a people from such a God, are worthy to die
a thousand deaths: But if Master Cotton will now tell me that the Christian
congregational church is the Israel of God, and the coming forth of Egypt is
now mystical and spiritual, why will he not content himself with a mystical and
spiritual death to be inflicted upon him that shall seduce an Israelite from
the Lord his God?


Examination of CHAP. XLIII.
Peace. UPon the fifth query to wit, whether the elders of the church at
Ephesus were not sufficiently furnished by the Lord Jesus to Shameful weakness
cast upon the spiritual Artillery of Christ Jesus.
drive away these spiritual and mystical wolves, Master Cotton replies, by
granting, that they were furnished with sufficient power to cast them out of
the church; but being cast out, they had not sufficient power to drive them
away from conferring and corrupting the members of the church, or other godly
ones out of the church; and he adds, that it is no dishonor to Christ, nor
impeachment to the sufficiency of his ordinances left by Christ, that in such a
case the minister of justice in the civil state, should assist the Ministers of
the Gospel in the church state.


Truth. This grant and this addition do as ill agree, as light and darkeness,
Christ and Belial together. For, is the church or kingdom of Christ Jesus
sufficiently furnished (that is, in it self without the help of the civil
Magistrate) to excommunicate, to cast these wolves out of the Fold: Oh let M.
Cotton then, and The spiritual liberties of Christ's people in spiritual causes.
all that love Christ Jesus in truth, observe what evidently follows* then is
this church of Christ sufficiently furnished to receive such persons in again
upon repentance, then sufficiently furnished at first to be congregated
together by Christ's means to ordain their officers, to judge of doctrines and
persons, and all this (necessarily upon Master Cottons grant) without the help
of the civil Magistrates.


Peace. Yea, and it seems to me incredible, and unreasonable, that Christ
Jesus should have left power and authority sufficient to take and bind a rebel
against his kingdom, to arraigne him and pass sentence upon him* yea and
execute him in the cutting off such an offender from the land of the living,
delivering him over into the power of that roaring Lion the devil; And yet that
The mighty power of spiritual weapons.
Christ Jesus should not have left power sufficient (in such public* high and
solmne actions of his kingdom) to declare sufficient cause of such
proceedings, by which all men may see, the goings of the Son of God in his
church and kingdom, or if wilfully blind, may justly be further hardened.


Truth. The place from Titus alleged (unto which many other Scriptures
testify) I say that place does evidently show, that the power of Christ Jesus
left in the hand of his churches and elders, was not only sufficient to cast
out such wolves, but even to stop or muzzle their mouths (whatever their
gainsaying be, whether by conferring, preaching, printing etc.) which takes off
the plea of the great need of the civil sword, to correct the conference A
vain fear of false teachers.
of such persons etc. when by the words of Paul it is here plain, that they
can perform such conferences, no otherwise, but with a stopped or muzled mouth.

Let it be produced where Christ Jesus in such cases writes to the Magistrates
(either of Crete, or Ephesus, or any other civil jurisdiction Christ Jesus nor
Paul adrest themselves to the civil state.
where the churches were resident) to help the Ministers and churches with
their civil powers, after they had cast forth any person obstinate: Doubtless
Christ Jesus in Paul and other of his servants would have written to some or
such Magistrates in some place or others having occasion to write to so many
churches about such cases.


Peace. It will (possibly) be said, it had been in vain, for they were
idolaters and persecutors.


Truth. The Lord is pleased throughout the whole Scripture in the mouths of his
servants and prophets to call for duties at the hands of all men,
notwithstanding their natural hardness and inability, that so he might drive
them to see their duty and misery, and remedy alone in God by Christ Jesus.


Peace. I see now, that this hindering of conference etc. by the Turk and Pope
and all Prostants against free conference.
civil sword is nothing else but a conformity with the Pope in defending his
Canons, and with the Turk in guarding his Alcoran by fire and sword; with whom,
and their ways Christ Jesus has no conformity nor communion, nor with their
carnal sword, his two-edged sword that proceeds out of his mouth Rev. 1.
Beside* Christ Jesus has not only furnished his church with power sufficient
to excommunicate, but every one of his followers with The ammunition of Christ's
soldiers.
a complete armor from head to foot (helmet* breast plate sword and Target,
and and spiritual shoes ( Ephesians. 6.) in which respect the least of Christ's
servants are enabled to stop the mouth of Papists, Pope, Turks and devils.


Peace. Yea all experience shows how Christ Jesus (little David) in the least
of his servants, has been able with those plain David and Goliath types.
smooth stones out of the brook of holy Scripture, to lay grovelling in their
spiritual gore, the stoutest Champions (Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Doctors) of
the Antichristian Philistines.


Truth. I add, if the elders, and churches, and ordinances of Christ have such
need of the civil sword for their maintenance and protection (I mean in
spiritual things) sure the Lord Jesus Christ cannot be excused for not being
careful either to express this great ordinance in his will and Testament, or
else to have furnished the civil state and officers thereof with ability and
hearts for this their great duty and employment, to which he has called them;
the contrary whereof in all Ages, in all nations, and in all experience, has
ever been most lamentably true.


Peace. I am not clear ( dear truth) in the distinction, Master Cotton makes of
Christ's Ministers in the Gospel, and Christ's Ministers in the civil state.


Truth. There is a mistake in it, for although Christ has all power delivered
to him in heave and earth, yet as touching his spiritual church or kingdom he
disclaimes it to be of the world, or worldly. Hence cannot the civil state or
officers thereof be called Christ's* as if they were of Christ's institution and
appointment, himself being their spiritual head. And therefore it is that
Difference between spiritual and civil Ministers.
the Spirit of God calls him the head of the body, which is the church, and the
Ministers and officers of this his kingdom and body Christ's Ministers or
servants. Beside, Master Cotton will not say that the kingdoms of the world
are yet become the Lord Christ's: In what manner also those kingdoms shall
become his, we have need of the holy Spirit to evidence and demonstrate to us.


Peace. To the fifth query, whether (as men deal with wolves) these wolves at
Ephesus were intended by Paul to be killed, their brains dashed out with
stones, staves, halberts, guns, etc. in the hands of the elders of Ephesus:
Master Cotton replies, Elders must keep within the bounds of their calling: But
such courses were commanded the people of God by order from the Judges, Deuteronomy.
13. And where it was added, that comparing Things spiritual with spiritual,
spiritual and mystical wolves should be spiritually and mystically slain.
Master Cotton replies True, but in destroying religion they also disturb the
civil state, and accordingly are to be dealt withal by civil Justice, as Achan
was for troubling Israel, Josh. 7. 25.


Truth. This acknowledgement of Master Cotton, that these wolves must
spiritually be killed, their brains dashed out by the elders and Saints might
(if the Lord should graciously so please) Isreal's corporal killing types of
spiritual.
easily satisfy himself and all men, that the type of Israel stoning and
killing corporally, is here fulfilled in all dreadful abundance spiritually.


Peace. Yea, but says Master Cotton, they disturb the civil state as Achan
did.


Truth. I answer, Achan troubling of Israel, the people of the Lord, must
figure out any such like troubling Gods Israel, the Achans troubling of Israel
a figure of troubling the Israel or Church of Christ now.
church of Christ, for which he is accordingly to be spiritually stoned or
executed: For, as touching the civil state of the nations of the world, who can
prove (and Master Cotton will not affirm) that they are as the national church
of the Jews was? but being merely civil, are armed with civil power and weapons
for their civil defense against all disturbers of their civil state, as also
Master Cotton confesses the spiritual state is furnished with spiritual power
against all the disturbers of its spiritual peace and safety.


Peace. Now whereas it was further added, that under pretense The day of the
civil state in ma^ters of worship.
of driving away the wolves, and preserving the sheep that streams of the blood
of Saints have been spilt etc. Master Cotton replies, belike it is a milky, and
peaceable, and Gospel-like Doctrine, that the wolves ( heretics) are to be
tolerated, not an hair struck from their heads; but for the poor sheep, for
whom Christ died, let them perish, unless Christ mean to preserve them alone
with his immediate hand and no care of them belongs to the civil Magistrate.


Truth. I have here in this discourse showed with what honorable and tender
respect every civil Magistrate is bound to honor and tender Christ Jesus in his
christian sheep and shepherds, but withal, that it is against christianity for
the civil Magistrate or civil state, to imagine that all a whole nation was or
ever will be called to the union of Gods Spirit in communion with God in
Christ: Also, that it is against civil justice for the civil state or officers
thereof to deal so partially in matters of God, as to permit to some the
freedom of their consciences and worships, but to curb and suppress the
consciences and souls of all others of their freeborn people etc.


Peace. To end this Chapter: whereas it was said, is not this to take Christ*
and to make him a temporal king by force? Is not this to make his kingdom of
this world, and to set up a civil and temporal Israel? To bound out a new holy
land of Canaan? yea and to set up a Spanish inquisition in all parts of the
world, to the speedy destruction of millions of souls, and to the frustrating
of the sweet end of the coming of the Lord Jesus, which was to save men's souls
(and to that end not to destroy men's bodies) by his own blood.

To this Master Cotton replies, when the kingdoms of the earth shall become
the kingdoms of the Lord (Rev. 11.) it is not by making Christ a temporal
king, but by making temporal kings nursing fathers to the Church. Concerning
the kingdoms of the world becoming the kingdoms of Christ Rev. 11.



Truth. If the Scripture [At the sound of the seventh trumpet] which is the
last of the great woes, when the time of Gods wrath shall be come, be to be
understood of the removing of the kingdoms of the world unto Christ, Master
Cotton cannot excuse Christ Jesus from being a temporal king, and the kings of
the earth to be but as inferior and subordinate officers: For if they
administer Christ's kingdom temporally, as deputies officers or Ministers
temporally, he is much more then himself a temporal king and Monarch.


Peace. Methinks also; if that committing of all judgment to the Son (John 5.)
be meant of Temporal judgment in spiritual things, then can he not be said,
not to be a temporal king, then can he not be said (when those words were
spoken and ever since) not to have exercised a temporal government. The
contrary whereof Christ no temporal King.
is most true, both at his first coming, and ever since, in all generations, it
having been his portion, and the portion of his followers to be judged by this
world, although himself and his judge the world spiritually, and will shortly
pass an eternal sentence upon all the children of men.


Peace. Master Cotton adds, this will not set up a civil or temporal Israel,
unless all the members of the Commonwealth be compelled to be members of the
church.


Truth. If that will do it then Christ must be a temporal king, I say* then,
when the kingdoms of the earth shall become the kingdoms of the Lord, for
shall not the kings of the earth compel all Christ's sheep to submit unto Christ
Jesus their heavenly shepherd?


Peace. Yea secondly, will it not prove that all those commonweals, where men
are compelled explicitly or implicitly to be members of the church, are holy
lands of Canaan, and if so, Oh that Master Cotton and other worthy servants of
God, may timely consider, whether an explicit forcing of all men to come to
Touching forcing men to church.
church, because men cannot be denied to be members (at least by implication)
with such members and congregations, with whom they do ordinarily assemble and
congregate* although they be injuriously (indeed but injuriously) kept off from
communion and participation of all ordinances, which is indeed their right and
due if they be (though but implicitly) constrained and forced to partake of any.

Again (says Master Cotton) it is no Spanish inquisition to preserve the
sheep of Christ from the ravening of the wolves, but this rather (which is the
practice of the discusser) to promote the principal end of the Spanish
inquisition, to advance the Romish tyranny, idolatry and apostacy* by
proclaiming impunity to their whorish and wolvish emissaries.


Truth. If the Nations of the world must judge (as they must by Master Cottons
doctrine) who are Christ's sheep, and who are wolves, which is a whore
(spiritually) and which the true Spouse of Christ, and accordingly persecute
the whores and wolves, this then they must do according to their conscience, or
else (as Master Cotton elsewhere) they must suspend. What is this A Spanish
Inquisition all the world.
but either to set up a Spanish inquisition in all territories, or else to hang
up all matters of religion (by this suspension he speaks of) until the civil
states of the world become christian, and godly, and able to judge, etc. and
what is this in effect, but to practice the very thing which he charge on the
discusser, to wit, a proclaimning an impunity, all the world over, except only
in some very few and rare places, where some few godly Magistrates may be found
rightly informed, that is according to his own conscience and religion.


Peace. Yea further (which I cannot without great horror observe) what is this
but to give a woeful occasion at least to all Magistrates A twofold fire kindled.
in the world (who will not suspend their bloody hands from persecuting, until
Master Cotton shall absolve them from their suspension, and declare them godly,
and informed, and fit to draw their swords in matters of religion) I say
occasion (at least) to all the civil powers in the world, to persecute (as most
commonly they have ever done and do) Christ himself, the Son of God in his poor
Saints and servants.


Truth. Yea, if Master Cotton and his friends of his conscience should be cast
by Gods providence (whose wheels turn about That may consume the kindlers.
continually in the depth of his councels wonderfully) I say should they be
cast under the reach of opposite swords, will they not produce Master Cottons
own bloody tenent and doctrine to warrant them (according to their consciences)
to deal with him as a wolf* an idolater, an heretic, and as dangerous an
emissary and seducer as any whom Master Cotton so accounts?

But lastly, Master Cotton has no reason to charge the discusser with an
indulgence or partiality toward Romish and wolvish emissaries, his judgment
and practice is known so far different, that for departing too far from them
(as is pretended) he suffers the brands and bears the marks of one of Christ's
poor persecuted heretics to this day: All that he pleaded for* is an impartial
liberty to their consciences in worshipping God as well as to the consciences
and worships of other their fellow subjects.


Peace. When Mathias the second king of Hungary Bohemia etc. (afterward
Emperor) granted to his Protestant subjects the liberty of their consciences,
doubtless it had been neither prudence Mathias the second Emperor granting
liberty of conscience.
nor justice* to have denied equal liberty to all of them impartially. But to
finish this Chapter, Master Cotton lastly affirms, that it is not frustrating
of the sweet end of Christ's coming which was to save souls, but rather a direct
advancing of it, to destroy (if need be) the bodies of those wolves, who seek
to destroy the souls of those for whom Christ died, and whom he bought with his
own blood.


Truth. The place referred to, was Luke 9. where the Lord Jesus professes unto
the rash zeal of his Disciples (desiring that fire might come down from heaven
upon the refusers of Christ) Christ came not to destroy men's bodies, though to
save their souls.
that he came not to destroy men's lives but to save them: from whence it
appears that Christ Jesus had no such intent (as Master Cotton seems to make
him to have had) to wit, to save souls by destroying of bodies: but to save
soul and body, and that for soul sake, for religion sake, for his sake, the
bodies of none should be destroyed, but permitted to enjoy a temporal being*
which also might prove a means of their eternal life and salvation, as it may
be was the very case of some of those Samaritans.


Examination of CHAP. XLIV.
Peace. THe next Scripture produced by the prisoner against persecution
Christian weapons considered.
for cause of conscience was 2 Cor. 10. The weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God, etc. unto which Master Cotton answers, that he
speaks not there of civil Magistrates.

It was replied, True, for in spiritual things the civil weapons were improper,
though in civil things most proper and suitable.

Master Cotton now replying grants, that it is indeed improper for a Magistrate
to draw his sword in matters spiritual, yet says he, about matters spiritual
they may, as to protect in peace, and to stave of disturbers and destroyers of
them: And he adds, if it were unfitting for carpenters to bring axes and
hammers to build up the spiritual kingdom of the church of Christ, yet their
tools are fit to build Scaffolds for hearing.


Truth. It is strange, and in my understanding suits not with the rest of
Master Cottons discurse, to wit, that which Master Cotton here acknowledges,
that a Magistrate is not to draw his sword in spiritual things, but only about
them: when throughout the discourse he maintains, that the Magistrate must
suppress the heretic* blasphemer, idolater, seducer* that he must reform the
church, punish the apostate, and keep the church in her purity; which whether
they be spiritual matters or no, let such as be spiritual judge.


Peace. He is (says Master Cotton) to draw his sword about spiritual matters,
to protect in peace, as a carpenter may build Scaffolds, etc.


Truth. If Master Cotton mean civil peace, he knows we A fallacious distinction
of using the civil sword, not in, but about spiritual matters.
agree, for all the officers of peace and justice ought to attend that work:
But if he mean spiritual, to wit, that by his sword he is to provide, that no
man dispute against his religion, that no man preach nor write against it, let
it be well weighed, whether the sword be not now used in spiritual matters: As
also whether in such cases and others before mentioned; the civil Magistrate be
not bound by Master Cottons doctrine to interpose as Judge in these
controversies, to pass sentence and to punish whom he judges delinquent,
notwithstanding that both parties and both religions are right, and righteous
and holy in their own persuasions and consciences.


Peace. Beside, I know you deny not civil conveniences in Gods worship, and
(therefore when there is need upon occasion) the help of a carpenter to build
Scaffolds.


Truth. True, but since Master Cotton compares the work of Strange Carpenters.
the Magistrate to the building of a carpenters Scaffold, let us in the fear of
God consider, if this similitude (like some Scaffolds) be not all too weak*
whereon to hazard so mighty a weight and burden: For what should we think of
such a carpenter, that after he has built his Scaffold for people more
conveniently to hear the word of God suffers no man to preach in the whole
country (where his Scaffolds are set up) but whom he pleases, nor no doctrine
to be taught but what he likes; no church to be gathered, no persons to make
up this church, no persons to receive the Sacrament but what he approves of:
yea and further with broad axes and hammers* and other tools of violence*
should compel all persons (directly or indirectly) to come to church, to make
use of his Scaffold etc. Whether this be not the true state of the business*
the Carpenters Son Christ Jesus will shortly more and more discover, and break,
and tumble down those painted Scaffolds and fairest houses* which are not built
and framed according to the first most blessed line and rule of his holy
institution and appointments.


Examination of CHAP. XLV.
Peace. UPon the unfitness (alleged) of spiritual weapons to batter a natural
or artificial hold, and consequently the unfitness of natural and carnal
weapons to batter the spiritual strong holds in the heart, Master Cotton
replies, that he allows not the civil state to make use of their civil weapons
to batter down idolatry and heresy in the souls of men: But if (says he) the
idolater or heretic grow obstinate, worseand worse, deceiving himself, etc.
Now, he makes not use of stocks and whips (which will but exasperate the
malady) but of death and banishment, that may cut him off from the opportunity
of spreading his leaven, etc.


Truth. Methinks in this passage, Master Cotton resembles an armed man, who
being almost convinced, or overcome by the Spirit of God in the former part of
this passage (granting how unproper and unfit carnal weapons be in spiritual
matters) yet being The bloody tenent in plain English.
loath to yield, and holding up the goodness of his cause, he recovers again,
and grows more fierce and violent: for bearing more gentle strokes of stocks
and whips, he cuts deeper with no less then quick and dreadful gashings of
death or Banishment, that the world (were he one of the worlds Monarchs) may be
rid of such (...)


Peace. Oh, How can Master Cotton wash this Tenent from blood!


Truth. Yea whether this tenent be not invented (as once that learned
chancellor of England said of all violence against conscience) All civil
violence in spirituals, is for interest.
for an end or interest: or as (that incarnate devil) the Pope said more
plainly of the fable of Christ, for honor and profit, shall further be examined.


Peace. But who can read the bloody color in this book, and yet believe what
Master Cotton elsewhere says, that he holds not persecution for cause of
conscience?


Truth. Lastly, I ask, whether is it not the same skill and power of Physic
and Surgery, that preserves the body and each member in health and welfare,
with that which cuts off (as Master Cotton speaks) the Gangrene etc? and (since
also it is in vain to go about when the next way is as good or better) what
means then Master Cotton to bring in the Magistrate using spiritual means in
all lenity and wisdom against heresy and idolatry in the souls of men, since
death or banishment will effect the cure so quickly?


Peace. To proceed, whereas it was urged, that although civil weapons were
proper in spiritual matters, yet they were not necessary etc. Master Cotton
replies, this is but a mere pretense, because the discusser (says he) denies
all Church officers and Church weapons.


Truth. This formerly was cleared from all appearance of pretense, because
during all the reign of the beast* the discusser grants the impregnable power
of the spiritual weapons of Christ's Christ's spiritual weapons never wanting.
witnesses, Rev. 11. although he see not extant the true form and order of the
kingdom of Christ Jesus which at first he was pleased to establish.


Peace. Master Cotton adds, Although spiritual weapons are mighty to purge out
leaven, and to mortify the flesh of offenders* yet that is not a supersedeas
to civil Magistrates to neglect to punish those sins, which the church has
censured, if the person censured do proceed to subvert the truth of the Gospel,
or the peace of the church, or the souls of the people.


Truth. Why must the Magistrate stay until the party censured do proceed so and
so? Why could not he have spared the drawing forth of any spiritual weapons;
since they are so effectual to do that which was not in the power and reach of
the spiritual? Why The civil* sword esteemed more powerful then the spiritual.
was not the first obstinacy (which merited the spiritual strokes and cersures)
worthy of the exercise of the civil Magistrates power and zeal?


Peace. Me thinks this is an evident demonstration that men repose more
confidence (however they deceive themselves to the contrary) in the sword of
steel that hangs by the side of the civil officer, then in the two-edged sword
proceeding out of the mouth of Christ Jesus, Rev. 1.


Truth. The truth is, such doctrine makes Christ's spiritual sword but
serviceable and subordinate unto the temporal or worldly powers: and presents
the church but making essays and trials of that cure which death and
banishment (gilded over with pretense of Gods glory, etc.) they think will not
fail to effect, etc.


Peace. More plainly therefore writes another Author (of Master Cottons mind)
thus: It is known by experience that one reproof or threatening from the
Magistrate, has been known to do more then an hundred admonitions from the
Minister.


Truth. Yea no question, to force a nation or a world of men to play the
idolaters* hypocrites, etc. but Gods true servants (of whom these three famous
Jews are type* Dan. 3.) know that God whom they serve is able to deliver them
from such fiery threatenings and executions. But if he please to try them (as
his gold) in such fiery trials, they will not bow down to invented gods or
worships.


Peace. Methinks (dear truth) such Ministers deal upon the point and in effect
with the civil Magistrate* just as that ambitious Pope with the Emperors to
wit, make them hold the stirrup while they mount, etc. But I grieve etc. What
think you therefore of Master Cottons censure of the rest of the discourse in
this Chapter, to wit, that it is but (as Jude speaks) clouds without waters,
words without matter, etc.


Truth. I will say no more, but this* Happily (through Gods mercy) Master
Cottons censure may occasion some to view what he despises, yea and happily to
find some heavenly drops out of those contemned empty clouds*


Examination of CHAP. XLVI.
Peace. THe 13 to the Romans which the answerer quotes, is a fort of of such
importance* in so many controversies depending between the Papist and the
Protestant, and between many Protestants Romans 13. Considered.
among themselves, that all seek to gain and win it: In this present
controversive I find a wonderful wresting of this holy Scripture even by many
holy and peaceable (though herein violent and sinful) hands: and let the charge
be examined in the fear of God, whether slanderous (as Master Cotton intimates)
or true and righteous.

Master Cotton freely grants, that this 13 to the Romans exhorts unto
subjection to Magistrates, and love to all men, which The great fort of The
civil Magistrate not charged with the keeping of the seed tables.
are duties of the second table: But yet withal he answers, that is will not
follow, that Magistrates have nothing to do with the violation of the first
table; and further says, that it is a plain case that amongst the duties of
the second table, people may be exhorted to honor their Magistrates, and
children may be exhorted to honor their Parents; but will it (says he) thence
follow, that Magistrates have nothing to do with matters of religion in the
church, or parents in the family?


Truth. I answer, the scope of the discourse was to prove, that it pleases the
Spirit of God in Paul here only to treat of the duties of the second table,
unto which limitation or restriction Master Cotton speaks not at all, but only
grants in general, that it speaks of the duties of the second table: And I
still urge and argue, that the spirit of God discoursing so largely in this
Scripture of the duties of Magistrates and people, and treating only of civil
things, in that civil relation between Magistrates and people, points as with a
finger of God at their error, that wrest this Scripture to maintain the power
of Magistrates and civil states in the spiritual and church estate of the
kingdom of Christ.


Peace. But what may be said to Master Cottons argument?


Truth. I answer, If people are bound to yield obedience in civil things to
civil officers of the state, Christians are much more bound to yield obedience
(according to God, to the spiritual officers of Christ's kingdom: But how weak
is this argument to prove that therefore the civil officers of the state are
constituted rulers or governors, preservers and reformers of the Christian and
spiritual state, which differs as much from the civil, as the heavens are out
of the reach of this earthly Globe and Element?


Examination of CHAP. XLVII.
Peace. AGainst the Judgment of those blessed worthies alleged, ( Calvin and
Beza) confining this passage of Romans 13. to the Calvin and Beza's judgment on
Romans 13.
second table, Master Cotton here opposes their judgment for the Magistrates
power in matters of religion in other writings of theirs* yea and from this
very Scripture.


Truth. This their judgment for the Magistrates power was granted and premised
before; yet let the expressions of those worthy men (produced by the discusser
on this Chapter) be faithfully weighed, and it will clearly appear, that (as
James speaks) those excellent men endeavored to bring from the same fountains
sweet water and bitter, which is monstrous and contradictory.


Peace. The pith of what Master Cotton further says in this Chapter, I
conceive is couched in these demands: Are not (says he) all duties of
righteousness to man commanded in the second table, as well as all duties of
holiness to God are commanded in the first table? Is it not a duty of
righteousness belonging to the people of God, to enjoy the free passage of
religion? etc. Is it not an injurious dealing to the people of God, to disturb
the truth of religion with heresy, the holiness of worship with idolatry, the
purity of government with tyranny? and he concludes, If so, then these ways of
unrighteousness are justly punishable by the second table.


Truth. I answer, It has pleased the Father of lights to open the eyes of
thousands of his servants in th^se later times to discern Vn^ighteousness
civil and spiritual.
a fine spun fallacy in the term of unrighteousness and injury which being
twofold spiritual against religion or spiritual state, civil against the
worldly or civil state: It is no civil injury (which he grants is the business
of this 13 to the Romans in matters of the second table) for any man to
disturb or oppose a doctrine worship or government spiritual: Christ Jesus and
his Spiritual wars without civil disturbance.
messengers and servants did* and do profess a spiritual war against the
doctrine, worship and government of the Jewish the Turkish and other Pagan and
Antichristian religions of all sorts and sects, churches and societies: These
all again oppose and fight against his doctrine, worship, government: And yet
this war may be so managed (were men but humane civil and peaceable) that no
civil injury may be commieted on either side.


Peace. We may then well take up (as Master Cotton does) Beza's own words on
Romans 13. 4. The civil sword must take vengeance on them that do evil: It must
therefore follow that heretics are not evil doers (which is gross etc.) Or
else that Paul's speech is to be restrained to a certain sort of evil deeds, to
wit, such as they call corporal sins, of which he says, he disputes largely
elsewhere.


Truth. And so (through the help of the most high) shall I* in proving, that
the second sort, to wit, external, corporal, civil evils between man and man*
city and city, kingdoms and Nations (in this fallen estate of mankind* wherein
all civility, and humanity it self are violated) are alone, and only intended
in this Scripture by the holy Spirit of God and Paul his penman.


Examination of CHAP. XLVIII.
Peace. TO the second argument, to wit, the incompetency of those higher powers
to which Paul requires subjection, which in his time were the ignorant and
Pagan persecuting Emperors, and their subordinate governors under them, Master
Cotton replies.

First, It is one thing to yield subjection to the righteous decrees of
ignorant and Pagan Magistrates: And another thing to obey their ordinances in
matters of faith and worship, and government of the church: The former of
these, Christians did yield unto the Roman Magistrates, even subjection unto
the death; the other they did not, nor ought to yield, as knowing God was
rather to be obeyed then man.


Truth. Subjection may be either to lawful governors, or but pretenders and
usurpers: Again subjection to lawful rulers may be in cases pertaining to their
cognizance, or in cases which belong not to their* but another court or
tribunal; which undue proceeding is not tolerable in all well-ordered states.

We use also to say, that subjection is either* active or passive: Now although
we find the Lord requiring and his servants yielding, The nature of twice
subjection to civil powers.
all active or passive obedience to the Roman Emperors, and their deputies,
yet find we not a tittle of the Lords requiring, or his people yielding any
kind of subjection to those Roman Emperors or their deputies in the matters of
Christian religion, except it be of so many hundred thousand of their bodies,
as the bodies of Lambs to the devouring jaws of those bloody lions and
devilish Monsters, of more then barbarous cruelty.


Peace. But (Secondly, says Master Cotton) although the Roman Emperors were
incompetent Judges, yet the Word of Christ Of the Roman Emperors power in
spirituals.
which commands a duty, commands also the necessary means which tend to
that duty, and therefore giving them a power and charge to execute vengeance on
evil doers, and that in matters of spiritual unrighteousness against the
Church, as in matters of civil unrighteousness against the Commonweal, it
behooved them to try and listen after the true Religion, to hear and try all.


Truth. Master Cotton may here be entreated to take notice of his own
distinction of unrighteousness (which a little before he seemed to me to
forget) for here he rightly distinguishes between spiritual matters of
unrighteousness against the church, and civil unrighteousness against the
Commonweal: I therefore urge (as before) that the civil Magistrate, although he
punish (according to his civil place and calling) civil unrighteousness against
the state, yet he has no warrant from Master Cottons argument, nor any from
the Lord Jesus Christ, to punish spiritual unrighteousness against the church;
and why then should that term of unrighteousness so generally and fallaciously
go undistinguished, and Master Cotton thus promis^uo^sly proclaim idolatry is
unrighteousness, heresy is unrighteonsness, and therefore the civil Magistrate
is bound to punish, etc?

2. But oh that this maxim alleged by Master Cotton might receive its due
weight and consideration! has Christ commanded all means, as well as the duty?
what then is the reason that since (as Master Cotton argues) that Christ has
commanded all the civil powers of the world such a spiritual duty, and yet (I
say) Foul imputations against Christ Jesus.
that all or most of the civil states of the world (beyond comparison) are not
furnished by Christ with those chief means, of grace and light, whereby to try
and search, as Master Cotton exhorts? Or* (in some few places, where means of
light are vouchsafed) with hearts and spirits unto such a duty? May we not here
say, that men make Christ Jesus (in appointing such officers, such a duty,
without furnishing them accordingly) to forget that maxim of his Type Solomon
(Prove. 26.) He that sends a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off the
leg, and drinks damage? Did not Christ know (as well as John) that all the
world lay in wickedness, that all the world (in a respect) was then Roman
Paganish* and that all the world in after-ages would wonder after the beast,
and become Roman Popish? Or can we imagine Christ permiteth Tyrants over his
churches Saints, but appoints none but his true spiritual Ministers.
that Christ Jesus did not foresee the cutting off of legs, and the cup of
damage and loss which he must drink, in sending his mind and will into the
world by such foolish instruments?


Peace. Surely Master Cotton would never advise the civil state ty send a
weighty cause and the lives of soldiers with such captains: Nor will he set
an unruly child under the rod of such teachers or reformers: He will not set
forth his Farm or betrust his cattle no not his very hogs to such keepers.


Truth. On the other hand* let the government of Christ's Christ Jesus his
careful and most wise provision for his kingdom.
kingdom be laid upon the right shoulders, and we shall find the admirable
wisdom and care of Christ, in the affairs of his kingdom, in appointing such
messengers or Apostles to gather and found his churches, as also ordinary
Pastors Shepherds or teachers, for their feeding and building up etc.

The qualification of these the Spirit of God has expressly and exactly
recorded wherein (according to the principle mentioned by Master Cotton) Christ
Jesus his highest care and wisdom shines most gloriously in appointing the
means as well as the duty it self.


Peace. But Master Cotton adds, that the causes of religion, wherein we allow
the civil Magistrate to be Judges, are so fundamental and palpable* that no
Magistrate studious of Religion in the fear of God, cannot but judge: such as
cannot, they ought to forbear, etc. the exercise of their power, either in
protecting or punishing matters of Religion* till they learn so much knowledge
of the truth, as may enable them to discern of things that differ. This
forbearance of theirs (says he) is not for want of authority in their
callings, nor for want of duty in their consciences* but want of evidence to
them in the cause: In which case Magistrates are wont to forbear their exercise
of power and judgment even in civil cases.


Truth. O the miserable allowance which Master Cotton has brought the kings
and governors of the world unto! We allow them (says he) to judge in such
fundamentals and palpable The Cleargies evil dealing with the civil Magistrate.
causes, etc. Oh with what proud and domineering feet do all Popes tread upon
the necks even of the highest kings and Emperors! The Magistrate must wait at
their gates for their poor allowance: They shall judge, and they shall not
judge: They shall judge that which is gross and palpable, and enough to hold
the people in slavery, and to force them to sacrifice to the Priests belly; but
the more sublime and nicer mysteries they must not judge or touch, but attend
upon the tables of the Priests infallibility.


Peace. Concerning fundamentals (dear truth) you have well observed, that since
the apostasy, and the worlds wondering after The nature of a church, but lately
discovered since the apostasy.
the beast, even Gods servants themselves (until yesterday) have not so much
as heard of such a kind of church (and so consequently of such a Christ the
head of it) as Master Cotton now professes: For* no other matter and form of
a church (about which Master Cotton justly contends) was known I say among Gods
people themselves, (till yesterday) then the matter and form of the stone or
wooden Parish Church.


Truth. Yea an happy man were Mr. Cotton could he rectify and settle those
foundations which are yet so controverted amongst Gods servants, to wit, the
Doctrine of Baptismes, and laying on of hands.


Peace. You may also mention other foundations, which want not their great
disputes among the servants of Christ.


Truth. But further, that Christ Jesus the wisdom of the Father, should commit
his wife, his church* to be governed in his absence by such who generally know
not the church and Saints but cruelly and blasphemously persecute them with
fire and sword, and this with charge to suspend most Magistrates of the world,
and Monstrous Suspentions.
that all their days from generation to generation, as appears in all parts
of the world which is such a monstrous and blasphemous Paradox, that common
reason cannot digest, nor suffer.


Peace. If Merchants and owners of ships should commit their vessels to such
men as wanted ability to steer their courses, nay could not tell what a ship
was yea were never like to know all their days surely it were not only matter
of admiration, but even of laughter and derision, among all the sons of men.


Truth. But further, How weak is that distinstion which Master Cotton makes
between authority of calling, and duty and evidence in the cause, when in all
judicatures in the whole world, even amongst the Pagans, there is necessarily
supposed beside these three, Spiritual courts and Judges.
a fourth to wit, ability or skill of discerning or judging in such cases: Now
cognizance of the cause or evidence of the cause may be wanting in most able
judges, where matters are not proper or not ripe for hearing and trials;
whereas our dispute is of the very ability or skill of judging, which Master
Cotton himself confesses is wanting, except in such Magistrates as fear God,
which will be found to be but a little flock, especially compared with the many
thousands and ten thousands of those who neither know God nor Christ, nor care
to know them, and this in all the states, regions and civil governments of the
world.


Eamination of CHAP. XLIX.
Peace. COncerning Paul's appeal to Caesar* it was argued that Paul appealed to
Caesar even in spiritual things; which that Paul did not nor could not do
without the committing of five great evils, was pleaded in this Chapter, Master
Cotton ^^phes no more but this The reasons are but Bulrushes.


Truth. Whether they are so or no, or rather the Bulrushes and weak things of
God, which the gates of hell shall never be able to shake* let the Saints judge
in the fear of God.


Peace. Master Cotton adds further in this Chapter* that Paul pleads he was
not guilty in any of those things whereof the Jews accused him: those things
(says he) concerned the Law of the Jews and the Temple, which were matters of
religion; and for trial thereof he appealed to Caesar.


Truth. Lysias the chief captain in his letter to Felix the Governor (Chap.
24.) distinguishes (verse. 29.) into questions of the Jews, Law* and (secondly)
matters worthy of death or bonds: Touching Paul appealing to Caesar.
Now it is true the Jews charged Paul with offenses against religion their Law
and the Temple: Secondly, against the civil state, and with sedition. For the
first although it is apparent that all the scope of Paul's preaching* was to
exalt Christ Jesus, and to preach down Moses ^aw; yet at this present time of
his apprehension, he had seen cause to honor Moses his institutions at
Jerusalem (which was the wisdom of God in him for a season, for the Jews sake,
and his own glory-sake:) And he had not at this present so much as disputed
with any in the temple (which was not so heinous a matter in Paul's eye, as it
is well known by his constant practice.) Secondly, for matters of civil crime,
he pleads that he stirred up no m^n* ^o^ in the Synagogue nor City, and
prefesseth (Chap. 25.) that if he had committed ought worthy of death, he would
not wave death: It Is true that Paul was charged by the Jews with both these
kinds of offenses, religious and civil (according to Lysius his distinction)
but that Paul appealed to Caesar for trial, that is, for trial of his person
and cause in any religious respect, as it cannot be collected from the
Scripture or Paul own words: so those five reasons against it* will evidently
disprove it, if they be well and thoroughly weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary in the sight and fear of God.


Peace. I cannot in my understanding clear Master Cottons own Paul's appeal to
Caesar.
words from destroying one another. It Is true (says he) those five sins might
have been charged upon Paul with some color, if he had appealed to Caesar
whether his religion or Ministry, or Ministration were of God or no? But yet
(says he) he might appeal whether his religion, Ministry or Ministration were
guilty of any capital crime against the Law of the Jews, or the temple, or
against Caesar.


Truth. Indeed what difference is there between the judging whether this
Ministry deserve death (supposing a false Ministry is worthy of death) or
judging whether it be of God, or false and idolatrous? must not he that sits
judge of the desert and punishment, judge also of the crime and fact, whether
so or not?


Peace. When Master Cotton shall affirm (and truly) that the Magistrates of
Israel were to judge a false prophet to death, will he not also grant that they
were to judge whether such persons so charged were false prophets or no?


Truth. Yea, and when Master Cotton shall affirm (as unjustly) that civil
Magistrates in all nations of the world ought to kill or banish heretics,
blasphemers, seducers, out of their dominions and jurisdictions, does he intend
that they shall try and examine, whether they be such and such or no? But
blessed be the Father of lights, who has now opened the eyes of so many
thousands of his people to discern the difference between the Forts and
Bulwarks of God* here called Bulrushes, and those strong holds and high
imaginations of men (erected against the crown and kingdom of the Lord Jesus)
which in Gods holy season shall more and more be found to be but straws and
Bulrushes.


Examination of CHAP. L.
Peace. TO the arguing against the Magistrates civil power in Spiritual causes
taken from the nature of the Magistrates weapons (a material earthly and
worldly sword, distinguished from the two-edged sword of Christ's spiritual
power in the mouth of Christ) Master Cotton replies.

First, the Magistrate must govern his people in Righteousness, and it is
Righteous to defend his people in their Spiritual Rights, as well as in their
civil Rights.

This distinction of spiritual and civil Righteousness does Spiritual rights
and civil.
truly anatomize the cause; It is righteous for the Magistrates to defend
their subjects in their civil Rights, for it is within the compass of his
calling, being essentially civil: And unless we also grant him a spiritual
calling and office (which is the Point denied) it is beyond his calling and
compass to judge of what is spiritual Right and wrong, and accordingly to pass
a spiritual sentence, and and execute and inflict spiritual punishment.


Peace. Methinks I may add, if the Magistrate be bound to defend his Subjects
in their spiritual rights, then as he is bound impartially to defend all his
subjects in their several and respective civil Rights, so is he bound as
impartially to defend all his subjects The civil Magistrate not bound to defend
spiritual rights.
in their several and respective spiritual Rights; and so accordingly to defend
the Jews, the Papists, and all several sores of Protestants in their several
and respective consciences; or else, he must sit down in Christ's stead, and
produce a Royal charter from the New Testament of Christ Jesus to judge
difinitively which is the only right, to pass sentence, and execute spiritual
punishment on all offenders etc.


Peace. But Master Cotton adds a second, the sword was Material and civil in
the Old Testament.

I answer, If Master Cotton granted a national church under the Gospel* his
Argument were good; but when he grants that national church under the Jews (as
afterward in this chapter he does) did type* out the Christian church or
churches in the Gospel, why must he not grant that material Sword of the Church
of Israel types out the spiritual sword of Christ Jesus* proceeding out of his
mouth, and cutting off offenders spiritually with spiritual Israel a type of
the Chrristian Church.
and soul- punishments? And I add, As the sword was material, so also was the
Tabernacle and Temple worldly and material; which he denies not to be typical
of the spiritual Temple of Christ and his Church in the New Testament.


Peace. Master Cotton adds (Thirdly) that the Magistrates Sword may well be
called the Sword of God, as the Sword of War, Judge. 7.


Truth. As it was called Iehovahs Sword in that typical Land; The ^^me and
odely Christendom.
So must it needs be typical as well as the Land it self, which is also called
by the Prophets Ichovah's Land Emanuels land; which names and titles I think
Master Cotton will not say are competent and appliable to any other Lands or
Countries under the Gospel but only to the Spiritual Canaan or Israel, the
Church and people of God, the true and only Christendom.


Peace. But (Fourthly) says he, they are called Gods, and shall they not
attend Gods work?


Truth. In the state of Israel they were Gods deputies to attend the causes of
Israel, the then only Church of God: But Master Cotton can produce no parallel
to that, but the Christian Churches and people of God, not national but
Congregational* etc.

2. Grant the Magistrates to be as Gods, or strong ones in a Resemblance to God
in all Nations of the world, yet that is still within the compass of their
calling, which being confessed to be essentially civil the civil work of these
servants of the Commonweal is Gods work, as well as Paul calls (in a sense) the
work of the servants of the Family, Gods work, for which he pays the wages,
Ephesians. 5.

Lastly, for spiritual causes we know the Lord Jesus is called God, Psalm. 45.
Heb. 1. whose Scepter and Kingdom being essentially spiritual* the
administrations which he has appointed are also spiritual, and of an heavenly
and soul Nature.


Peace. Master Cotton (Fifthly) adds, Revel. 17. The Kingdoms of the World are
become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ.


Truth. How the Kingdoms of the World* shall become the Kingdoms of Christ,
is no small mystery and controversy; but grant it to be true, that either
Christ Jesus personally, or by his Deputies the Saints, shall rule all the
Nations of the world in hearing and determining all civil Controversies: Yet
why does Master Cotton draw an Argument from this Prophecy, of what shall be
in one Age or Time of the World, and to come, to prove an Universal power and
Exercise of such power in all Ages and times since Christ Jesus his first
coming to this day?


Peace. Me thinks Master Cotton may as well argue, that because it was
prophesied that a Virgin should conceive, and bring forth a child in Gods
appointed season, that therefore all Virgins must so conceive and so being in
forth all ages of the world.

But, (Lastly) says Master Cotton* although the nations have not that typical
holiness which the nation of Israel had; Yet all the Churches of the Saints
have as much truth and realty of holiness as Israel had: And therefore, what
holy care of Religion lay upon the Kings of Israel in the Old Testament, the
same lies now upon Christian Kings in the New Testament, to protect the same
in their Churches.


Truth. Oh how near the precious Jewels, and Bargains of Christ Jesus in
himself and his spiritual officers the only Key of Israel.
Truth, come sometimes Gods Saints, and yet miss of the finding and going
through with it! The chucrhes of the New Testament, Master Cotton grants
succeed the Church of Israel; The Kings and Governors therefore of the
churches of Christ must succeed those Kings What King and Governors of Israel
are now to be found in the Gospel, but Christ Jesus and his Servants, deputed
in his absence, which are all of a spiritual consideration? What is this to the
Nations, Kings, and Governors of the world; where few Kings* few Nobles, few
Wise, are called to profess Christ? Is not Christ Jesus the only King of Israel;
and are not all his holy ones made Kings and Priests unto God? And unto his
Saints* and his spiritual officers Administration in the midst of them, is his
Kingdoms power committed in his absence. This spiritual power, however the
Pope and prelates, Kings and Princes. Parliaments and General Courts, and their
respective Officers of Justice (to be honored and obeyed in civil things,) I
say however they have challenged and assumed this Kingly Power Christ Jesus
ro^d of his crown.
of the Son of God* yet the King* of Kings* Christ Jesus has begun to
discover, and will never leave until he has made it clear as the Sun Beams
that he is robbed of his crown, and will shake, and break* all the nations and
Powers of the world until his Heavenly crown be again restored.


Examination of CHAP. LI.
Peace. TO the fourth Argument (Romans 13.) from the civil rewards due to
Magistrates; to wit* custom* Tribute etc. Master Cotton replies* That even the
contributions of the Saints, are called carnal things; shall therefore their
work be called carnal? Of custom tribute, etc.
It is true (says he) the contributions of the Saints are called holy, because
they are given to God for his service about holy things; So the reward given to
Magistrates, is for their service about Righteous things: And it is righteous
(says he) to preserve the purity of Doctrine Worship and Government* which if
Magistrates do not, they do not deserve all their wages.


Truth. It is true that money or monies-worth is the same for value in the
contribution of the Saints, and in that of custom, tribute etc; and yet Master
Cotton grants a Holiness of the Saints contribution, which he does not affirm
of custom, tribute, etc.

There is also a two fold way disputed, of preserving of the purity Spiritual
defense for spiritual right, etc.
of Doctrine* worship, etc.

First, That which I plead for, by spiritual weapons appointed by Christ Jesus.

Secondly, that of Civil weapons, Force of Arms etc. which Master Cotton
affirms, and I deny to be ever appointed by Christ Jesus, or able to
accomplish a spiritual end, but the Contrary.


Peace. Me thinks Master Cottons addition not a little concerns my self in the
peace of all Cities and Kingdoms: for if (as Master Cotton says) Magistrates
shall not deserve all their wages except they preserve the purity of Doctrine,
worship etc. (which upon the point is that Doctrine Worship and Government
Master Cotton approves of) what is this (in effect) but to deny tribute,
custom subsidies, etc. to Caesar, the Kings and Governors of the Earth, if
they prove Heretics, Idolaters? etc. I cannot see, but this in plain English
tends to little less then the Popish bloody Doctrine of deposing heretical
Kings etc.

But Master Cotton further adds, that spiritual wages are to be paid to
Magistrates. 1 Timothy 2. to wit, Prayers, Intercessions etc. Touching prayer for
all authority ^ Tim. ^.
If therefore (says he) the Magistrates suffer their Subjects to live a quiet
life in ungodliness and Dishanesty, the Magistrate falls short of returning
spiritual recompense for the spiritual Duties and services performed for them.


Truth. Those prayers are not the proper wages paid to Magistrates for their
work; for then should they not be paid (as the Spirit of God there exhorts)
to all men, whether Magistrates or not.


Peace. And I may add, nor paid to those Magistrates that are Idolatrous,
Blasphemous, Persecutors: But those prayers were to be poured forth for such
Magistrates (such as most of the Magistrates in the world then were and are.)
Those prayers then were a general Duty to be paid to all men, and especially to
the chief and principal, Kings and all that are in Authority.


Truth. Now further, wherein it is said, that such Magistrates as suffer the
people to live in ungodliness, fall short in returning spiritual Recompense: I
answer, By this Doctrine, most of the free Inhabitants Cross Slavery.
of the world who live in ignorance of God and in abominable Religions without
him must yet be supposed to choose and set up such Ministers or Servants of
civil Justice amongst them, who during their terms of administration or
service, should not suffer their Choosers and Makers to enjoy their own
Conscience, but force them to that, which their Officers shall judge to be
Godliness; but the neck of no free people can bow to such a Yoke and Tyrany.


Peace. But (lastly) to that Argument of Romans 13. from the title which God
gives to Magistrates to wit, Gods Ministers, and to the Distinction of
Spiritual Ministers for spiritual, and civil Ministers for civil matters;
Master Cotton replies. If Magistrates be Gods Ministers or Servants then must
they do his Civil Ministers and Spiritual.
work, and be for God in matters of Religion: And further says he, Magistracy
is of God, for light of Nature, and not only for civil things* but also in
matters of Religion* and he produces diverse instantces of Pagans zeal for
their Religion, and worship.


Truth. Because Magistrates are Gods Servants* or Ministers civil, and receive
civil wages for their civil service; will it therefore follow that they must
attend, and that chiefly, and principally The God of heaven has several sorts
of Ministers.
a spiritual work? That nobleman or Lord, that sets one to keep his children,
and another to keep his sheep* expects not of him appointed to keep his sheep
(though a Minister or Servant) to attend upon the keeping of his children, nor
expects he of the waiter on his children, to attend the keeping of his sheep.

It Is true, that Magistrasie is of God, but yet no otherwise then Marriage is
being an estate merely civil and humane, and lawful to all Nations of the
World, that know not God.

It Is true that Magistrates be of God from the light of nature; but yet, as the
Religions of the World, and the worlds zealous contending for them, with
persecuting of others, are from Ordinarily the Truth is persecuted.
the Father of lies and murder from the beginning; so seldom is it seen, that
the nations of the world have persecuted or punished any for error, but for the
truth, condemned for error.


Peace. Alas, who sees not that all nations and people bow down to Idels and
Images (as all the world did to Nebuchaduezzars Image.) If any amongst them
differ from them, it is commonly in in some truths, which God has sent amongst
them, for witnessing of which they are persecuted.


Truth. Your observation (dear peace) is evident from the cases of those
Philosophers, by Master Cotton alleged; how weak and poor therefore is that
Argument from the zeal of Pagans, etc. It is evident that such Builders, frame
by no other then that of nature depraved and rotten, and not by the Goulden
reed of the glorious gospel of Christ Jesus.


Examination of CHAP. LI.
Peace. IN the discourse concerning that term, Evil, Master Cotton produces
Pareus, who makes that Evil punishable by the Magistrate, fourfold, natural,
civil, moral, and spiritual.

Truth. That excellent and holy witness of Christ Jesus (in many of his
precious truths) Pareus being here produced without Scripture or Argument, for
the Magistrates punishing of the fourth sort of evil; to wit spiritual: nor
answering my Arguments brought against such an Interpretation, gives me
occasion of no further answer to Master Cotton or him in this place.


Peace. Whereas it was alleged, that the Elders of the New English Churches,
in the model prohibit ( expressly) the Magistrates from the punishing or taking
notice of some Evils, and that Touching the ^^ar^^ Evil, Romans 13.
therefore as they ascribe to the Civil Magistrates, more then God gives, so
they take away and disrobe him of that Authority, which God has clothed him
with: Master Cotton replies, when we say that the Magistrate is an avenger of
evil, we mean of all sorts or kinds of evil, and not every particular of each
kind; and further he says, that domestic evils may be healed in a domestic
way.


Truth. I readily concur with him, that the Magistrate may not punish evils
that he knows not of in a due and orderly way sufficiently proved before him;
as also, that many domestic evils are best healed in a domestic way; but yet
that Limitation added, to wit, without acquainting the Church first) seems to
bind the Magistrates hand, where no true Church of Christ is, to acquaint The
civil Magistrate robbed of his civil power.
with such things) yea and further where it is why should the Magistrate be
denied, to exercise his power in cases merely civil (the old practice of the
Popish Church?) And to whom should the Servant or Child or Wife, petition and
complain against oppression, unless to the public Father, Master, and Husband
of the Commonweal? And therefore from their own Interpretation* they may well
spare that strict and literal aception of the word evil* and cease to cry
Heresy is evil, Idolatry evil, Blasphemy evil, etc.


Examination of CHAP. LIII; Answering to Chap. LIII, LIVE, LV.
Peace. IN these three Chapters, the last Reason which the Author of the
Arguments against persecution produced was discussed; to wit, that the
dis^^ples of Christ should be so far from persecuting, that contrariwise they
ought to bless such as curse them, etc. and that because of the freeness of
Gods grace, and the deepness of his counsels, calling home them that be
enemies, persecutors, no people, yea some at the last hour. In answer to which,
Master Cotton complains that two of his Answers were omitted; and suspecteth
that as children skip over hard places, so they were skipt over, etc.


Truth. It is true, those two answers were omitted, not because the chapter was
too hard etc. but because the Discusser saw (nor sees) not any controversy or
difference between Master Cotton and himself in those passages; and also
studying brevity and contraction, as Master Cotton himself has done omitting
far more, and contracting three Chapters in one in this very passage.

Upon the same ground, I see no need of mentioning his Reply in these three
Chapters, wherein Master Cotton concurs in the point of the necessity of
tolerating even notorious offenders in the State in some cases.


Peace. The result of all agitations in this passage is this: Master Cotton
denies not but that in some cases a notorious malefactor may be tolerated, and
consequently (as I understand him) an ^^re^i^k, Of tolleration which Master
Cotton in cases makes large enough.
seducer, etc. But that ordinarily it is not lawful to tolerate a seducing
teacher, and that from the clearness of Gods command Deuteronomy. 13. and from the
reason of it, verse. 10, Because he has sought to turn thee away from the Lord
thy God. Withal he concludes, that all Moses capital Politics are eternal.


Truth. Thus far is gained, that it was no vain exception against Master
Cotton's general proposition* to wit, that it is evil to tolerate notorious
evil doers, seducing teachers, scandalous livers, because he sees cause of
toleration in some cases.


Peace. Yea but, says he, In ordinary cases it is not lawful to tolerate, from
Deuteronomy. 13.


Truth. I am of Master Cotton's mind: It is not lawful for Israel The land of
Israel a type.
that is, the Church of God, to tolerate: and the reason it pleases the Lord
to allege, is eternal. But what is this to the nations of the world, the
states, cities* and kingdoms thereof? Let Master Cotton find out any such land
or state that is the Church and Israel of God: Yea Master Cotton confesses in
a foregoing passage, that the Church is the Israel of God: Then must he with
me acknowledge that this Deuteronomy. 13. only concerns the Israel or Church of God,
whom Christ Jesus furnished with spiritual weapons against such spiritual
offenders.


Peace. But I wonder that Master Cotton should say that Moses capitals are
eternal.


Truth. I wonder not, because I have seen in print sixteen or seventeen capital
evils (a great part of them of a spiritual nature) censured with death in New
England.

And yet again, me thinks it is wonderful, since Master Cotton knows how many
of Moses capitals were of a ceremonial nature. The breach of the sabbath, the
not coming to keep the passover, (for neglect whereof the Israelites were to
be put to death) how can Master Cotton make these eternal in all nations?


Peace. How many millions of millions of Heads (and not a few of the highest)
in our own and other Nations, would soon feel the capital calamity of such a
capital bloody Tenent, if Master Cotton swayed the Scepter of some of the
worlds former or present Caesar's?


Truth. And yet I readily affirm, that spiritually and mystically in the Church
and Kingdom of Christ, such evils are to be spiritually (and so eternally)
punished.


CHAP. LIVE, Replying to Chap. LVI. Examined.
Peace. IN this 56 Chap. were observed two evils in Mr. Cottons conjoyning of
seducing teachers, and scandalous livers, as the proper and adequate object of
the Magistrates care and work to suppress and punish: Unto which Master Cotton
replies, First, That he no where makes it the proper and adequate object of the
Magistrates care and work to suppress seducing teachers, and scandalous livers
saying, that it ought to be the care of the church to suppress and punish
seducing teachers, and scandalous livers in a church way, as well as the
Magistrates in a civil way.


Truth. By this Doctrine, Master Cotton will seem to deny it, Touching false
and seducing Teachers.
to be the Magistrates proper and adequate object to punish scandalous livers,
because the church also (says he) is to make it her work also.

It is true, if a scandalous liver be of the church, and fall into any scandal,
she by the ruls and power of Christ ought to recover him in the spirit of
meekness: but yet the punishing of him with temporal punishment, who will deny
it to be the proper work of the civil state?

But (Secondly) what if the seducing teacher, or scandalous liver, be neither
of them members of the Church (and the church has naught to do to judge them
without) will not Master Cotton then affirm the seducing Teacher, or
scandalous, liver to be the proper and adequate object of the Magistrates care
and work?


Peace. When it was excepted against that things of such a different nature and
kind, as seducing Teachers, and scandalous livers, should be coupled together
at the civil Bar? Master Cotton replies* that both these agree in one common
kind, to wit, they are evil and destructive to the common good of Gods people,
which ought to be preserved both in church and Commonweal: If a man shall say
(says he) that the work of creation on the sixth day, was either of man or of
Beast, is here any such commi^ture. Monstrous Mixture.



Truth. Were Master Cotton the worlds Monarch, what bloody reformations or
destructions rather, would he fill the world withal* if he walk by such rules
and principles? for, what religions or almost men (all the world over) would he
find not opposite and destructive to Gods people.

2. But (Secondly) an historical narration of Gods works on man or Beast,
Birds, Fishes, and all creatures Celestial and Terrestial The great difference
of evil and sin, as against the civil or spiritual estate.
is one thing: But to mix them together in doings or sufferings inconsistent
with* and improper to their kinds is another thing, far different and
insufferable: As for a man to affirm that a man and a beast ^in'd against
their Maker, and therefore were justly punished with spiritual blindness and
hardness of heart, loss of Gods Image etc. The same difference and no less is
between transgressors against the heavenly state and kingdom of Christ, and
the earthly state or Commonweal of Cities, kingdoms, etc.


Peace. Master Cotton adds, that it is more tolerable for seducing Teachers to
seduce those who are in the same gall of bitterness, as for Pagans to seduce
Pagans etc.


Truth. That is but in the degree, and so (according to his supposition) must
be punished gradually; but what is this to prove seducing Teachers as well as
scandalous livers, the joint object of the civil sword?


Peace. Why does Master say it is more tolerable for Pagans to seduce Pagans
Antichristians Antichristians? What Scripture does he produce for this
toleration this indulgence, this partiality? All that is here said, is this, We
look at it as more tolerable?


Truth. One thing is shroudly to be suspect in this matter, and Gross
partiality the bloody doctrine of persebution.
that is a most unchristian partiality, in directing the sword of the
Magistrate to fall heaviest on such seducers only, as trouble his conscience,
his Doctrine* Worship, and Government: suppose in some of the Cities of
Holland, Poland, or Turkey (where some freedom is) that Jews* Pagans,
Antichristians and Christians (that is Christians of Master Cottons conscience)
together with Turks were commingled in civil cohabitation and commerce
together: Why now shall that Turk that has seduced one of Master Cottons
conscience to Mahumetani^me be more punished for that crime then for turning a
Jew* Pagan or Papist to his Relief and worship? What warrant shall the
Magistrate of such a city or place find to their souls, either for striking at
all with the civil sword in such a case? or else in dealing such partial blows
among the people?


Peace. I fear that Gods own people (of this opinion) see not the deceitfulness
of their own heart, crying up the Christian Magistrate, the Christian
Magistrate, Nursing fathers, Nursing mothers* etc. when all is but to escape
the bitter sweeting of Christ's Great shifting ^o ^s^^^: Christ's cross.
cross, so dashing in pieces the most wise councels of the father, concerning
his blessed Son and his followers, to whom he has (ordinarily) allotted in this
world, the portion of sorrow and suffering, and of reigning and triumphing,
after the battle fought and victory obtained in the world approaching.


Peace. But Master Cotton will say, that in such forementioned cases, such
Magistrates must suspend punishments for religion, etc.


Truth. I say, consequently all or most of the Magistrates in the world must
suspend and none but some few of his conscience (by his doctrine) shall be
found fit, to use the civil sword, in matter of Religion, and that is (in
plain English) to fight only for his conscience.


Peace. But to proceed it will be hard (says Master Cotton) for the discusser
to find Antichristian seducers clear from disobedience to the civil laws of
the state, in case that Antichrist (to whom they are sworn) shall excommunicate
the civil magistrate, and prescribe the civil state to the invasion of his
followers.


Truth. Most properly seducing teachers sin against the church and spiritual
kingdom of Christ Jesus, which if erected and governed according to Christ
Jesus, she is a Castle or Fort sufficiently Christian weapons.
provided with all sorts of heavenly ammunition against all sorts of her
spiritual adversaries: yea and in the desolation of the churches (during the
Apostasy) Christ Jesus (as I have elsewhere observed) has not left his
witnesses destitute of terrible defense against all gainesayers: But grant
(what Master Cotton supposes) such seducers from obedience to the civil state
etc. Such as the Seminaries and bringers over of Pope Pius the 5 his Bull
against Queen Elizabeth etc. The answer is short and pla^^* civil officers bear
not the sword in vain, when the civil state is assaulted as the spiritual
officers and governors of the church bear not in vain the spiritual and
two-edged sword coming out of the mouth of Christ.


Peace. Whereas now (secondly) there* was observed by the Discusser in such
coupling of [ seducing teachers and scandalous livers] a silent and implicit
justification of the Jews and Gentiles their coupling Christ Jesus and his
followers, as seducing teachers with scandalous livers, Christ between two
thieves, etc. The sum of what Master Cotton replies, is* that the Lord Jesus
and his followers suffering under those names, weakens not the hand of
Authority to punish such who are seducing teachers and scandalous livers.
Christ Jesus between two Thieves.



Truth. It has ever been the portion of the Lord Jesus and his followers (for
the most part theirs only) to be accounted seducing teachers, deceivers and
cheaters of the people, blasphemous against God, seditious against the State;
and accordingly to be numbered (as Christ Jesus between two thieves) both in
esteem and punishment with scandalous and notorious malefactors; and this for
no other cause, but cause of conscience in spiritual matters, and most commonly
for differing from and witnessing against the several State and City-Religions
and Worships wherein they lived.


Peace. If the Jews (notwithstanding their fair colors to the contrary)
walking in the doctrine of Persecution for conscience, justified their fathers
for murdering the Prophets, etc. I cannot ( dear Truth) but subscribe to your
sorrowful observation that Master Cotton and others (otherwise excellent
servants of God) in coupling seducing teachers and scandalous livers, as the
proper object for the civil sword to strike at, they do no other but act the
Jews true Antitype, coupling Christ Jesus the seducing teacher with Barabbas
the scandalous liver and murderer.


Truth. Yea, and who sees not how often Barabbas the scandalous liver is cried
out of the Magistrates hands by the scandalous people, while Christ Jesus in
his servants is cried to the Cross, to the Gallows, to the Stake, to
Banishment, etc. Their Persecutors also are applauded, for (not persecuting men
for their Consciences, but) righteously, legally (and with great sorrow)
punishing them The horible Hypocrisy of all persecutors
for sinning against their own conscience, for disturbing of the civil State
and peace, for contemning of Magistrates, Kings Queens, and Parliaments, for
blaspheming God, and for seducing and destroying the souls of the people.


CHAP. 55. Replying to CHAP. 66. Exam:
Peace. THe Discusser admired in this Chap: how Mr. Cotton Christ's charge to
Pergamus and Thiatira against. Tolleration examined.
should allege ( Revel. 2.) Christ's charge against the Church of Pergamus for
tollerating them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, and against the Church of
Thiatira for tollerating Jezabell to teach and seduce: Mr Cotton here replies,
that he meant not in alleging those Scriptures to prove it unlawful for
Magistrates to tolerate seducing Teachers, but unlawful for Churches: adding
that the Letter of the Prisoner was so stated, in general terms that he knew
not (upon the point) what Tolleration or Persecution should be meant or
intended, otherwise then general against all Persecution for Conscience,
withal affirming that an unjust Excommunication is as true Persecution as
unjust Banishment.


Truth. It is true what Mr Cotton says, An unjust Excommunication False
Excommunication one kind of persecution.
is as true Persecution as an unjust Banishment, and therefore some may justly
complain against Mr Cotton and others, for practicing such persecution in both
kinds, being not only banished from their civil State, but unjustly (and
after the Popes way) Excommunicated also, from their Churches, but of that more
elsewhere.

2. We do not in ordinary English read, but that the word The word
Persecution how ordinarily it is taken.
Persecution is taken for civil corporal violence and punishment inflicted on
the body for some spiritual and religious matter; according to the Lord Christ
his words to Paul, Act^ 9. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

3. The passages in the Letter show that the whole scope of the Letter was to
contend against outward violence and corporal affliction in matters of
Conscience*


Peace. It may not be a lost Labor (Dear Truth) to draw a taste of some
passages in the Letter.


Truth. For further satisfaction, my pains shall be a pleasure; and first

From the Arguments from holy Scripture, observe Luc. 9. the Lord Christ
reproving his two zealous Disciples, You know not of what Spirit you are of:
The Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Again, That of the Prophets, Isaiah and Micah, They shall Persecution
ordinarily implies corporal violence.
break their Swords into Mattocks, and their Spears into Sithes.

Again, Christ's charge unto his Disciples, that they should be so far from
persecuting those that would not be of their Religion, that when they were
persecuted, they should pray and bless, etc.


Peace. These holy Passages (Me thinks) are not unlike the Stones in David's
sling, smooth and plain enough, yet powerful and dreadful, both against this
Goliath Tenent of persecution, and also prove a corporal persecution intended.


Truth. Now a taste of the speeches of several Kings produced by the prisoner.

1. That of King James; God never loves to plant his Church by Violence and
Bloodshed.

2. That of Stephen King of Poland; I am King of Men, not Speeches of Princes
against Persecution.
of Consciences, of Bodies, not of Souls.

3. Of the King of Bohemia; When ever Men have attempted any thing in this
violent course, the issue has been ever pernicious, and the cause of great and
wonderful Innovations.

4. Another of King James; That he was resolved not to persecute or molest, or
suffer to be persecuted or molested any Person whatsoever, for matter of
Religion.

In the third place, a taste of the Speeches of the ancient Writers produced by
the Prisoner.

1. That of Hilarious: That Church which formerly by enduring misery and
imprisonment, was known to be the true Church, does now terrify others by
imprisonment, banishment, and misery.

2. Of Jerome; Heresy must be cut off with the Sword of the Spirit, Let us
strike through with the Arrows of the Spirit; implying, not with other weapons.

3. Of Luther in his Book of the Civil Magistrate; The Laws of the Civil
Magistrate extend no further, then over the Bodies and Goods. And again upon
Luke 22. It is not the true Catholic church which is defended by the Secular
Arm or humane Power.

Lastly, The Papists in their Book for Tolleration; When Christ bids his
Disciples to say, peace to this house, he does not send Pursevants to ransack
or spoil the house.

Lastly, The Prisoner in answering some Objections, concludes; It is no
prejudice to the Commonwealth, if Liberty of Conscience were granted to such
as fear God indeed: He also alleged that many Sects lived under the
Government of Caesar, being nothing hurtful unto the Commonweal.


Peace. From these several Tastes (Dear Truth) I cannot imagine how the
Prisoner can be understood to cast the least glance unto spiritual persecution
or prosecution, as Mr Cotton in this Chap: calls it: But to end this Chapter:
When as the Power of Christ Jesus in his Church was argued sufficient for
spiritual ends, Mr Cotton grants both for the healing of sinners, and for
keeping of the Church from Guilt, but not for the preventing of the spreading
of false Doctrine, among those out of the Church, and in private among
Church Members: nor sufficient to clear the Magistrates of a Christian State
from the Guilt of Apostasy in suffering such Apostates amongst them, etc.


Truth. I have in other Passages of this Discourse proved;

1. That Christ Jesus (whiles his Churches and Ordinances flourished, and since
the Apostasy of Antichrist in the hands of his Witnesses) has gloriously and
sufficiently furnished his Servants for all spiritual cases of all sorts,
defending, offending, etc.

2. That there is no other Christian State acknowledged in No Civil Christian
State.
the New Testament, but that of the Christian Church or Kingdom, and that not
National but Congregationall.

3. That the Apostles or Messengers of Christ Jesus never addressed Christ's
Sword.
themselves by Word or Writing to any of the Civil States wherein they lived
and taught, and were mightily opposed and blasphemed. I say they never ran to
borrow the Civil Sword, to help the two edged Sword of Christ Jesus, against
Opposers, Schismatics, Heretics. The Lord Jesus was a wiser King then
Solomon, even Wisdom it self, and cannot without great Dishonor and
Derogation to his Wisdom and Love, be imagined to leave open such Gaps, such
Leakes, such Breaches in the Ship and Garden of his Church and Kingdom.


The Exam: of Chap. 56. replying to 58. and 59.
Peace. TO the first observation, that Mr Cotton urges that Princes are
nurcing Fathers to feed and correct (and consequently must judge of feeding
and correction, and all men are bound to submit to such their feeding and
correction:) Mr Cotton says, This is false and fraudulent so to collect, and
these are devised Calumnies.


Truth. It will evidently appear, how greatly Mr Cotton forgets the Matter and
Himself, when he so deeply charge, for all this he grants in this his
Reply, only with this Limitation, that Subjects are bound to submit to them
herein when they judge according to the Word. This Limitation takes not away
the observation, for it is always employed in subjection to all Civil Rulers,
Fathers, Husbands, Masters, that it be according to the Word.


Peace. Yea but says he, it is a Notorious Calumny so to represent Mr Cottons
dealing with Princes, as if he made his own Judgment and practice the Rule of
the proceeding of Princes.


Truth. Let it be laid in the Balance, and seen where the Calumny or slander
lies: Princes or Civil Rulers, says Mr Cotton, are Fathers to feed and
correct, and their Judgment ought Nurcing Fathers-dealt withal as children.
therein to be obeyed according to the Word. Now some Princes and Rulers
declare themselves against Mr Cottons Tenent of persecution for conscience. Mr
Cotton will answer; The profession and practice of Princes is no rule to
Conscience. I reply, and ask, who shall judge of Princes profession and
practice, when they thus feed and judge in spiritual matters? whether their
profession and practice be according to the Word or no? Mr Cotton (when Princes
are alleged against his judgment and conscience) pleads, that Princes
profession and practice is no rule: Let all men judge whether his judgment and
conscience be not made the Rule to the consciences and practices of Princes,
whom yet he makes the nurcing Fathers.


Peace. When it was further demanded, whether Mr Cotton and others of his mind
could submit in spiritual cases to any Magistrates in the world, but only to
those just of his own Conscience? He answers, they will submit to any in
Active or Passive obedience.


Truth. But how can Mr Cotton suppose Active obedience in Active obedience
cannot be given but to a competent Judge.
spiritual things to such Magistrates, who are Pagans, Turkish, Antichristian,
and unable to judge, and bound (by his Doctrine) to suspend their Dealings upon
matter of Religion, until they be better informed? What Active obedience can I
be supposed to give to him that has no Activitie nor Ability to command and
rule me? And must it not evidently follow, that Active obedience in these cases
(according to his Judgment) must only be yielded to such Magistrates as are
able to judge the true Religion and way of Worship; That is, the Religion and
Worship which he takes to be of God.


Peace. Whereas it was said, will it not follow that all other Consciences in
the world, besides their own must be persecuted by such their Magistrates
(were power in their hand)? Mr Cotton replies, no; except all Men's consciences
in the world did err fundamentally against the Principles of Christian
Religion, or fundamentally against Church Order, and Civil Order, and that in
a tumultuous and factious manner; for in these cases only (says he) we allow
Magistrates to punish in matters of Religion.


Truth. I have and must observe the Evil of that Distinction between Christian
Religion and Christian Order, as not finding any such in the Testament of the
Son of God, but finding Church Order a principal part of the Christian
Religion, as well as Repentance and Faith, Heb. 6.

But (2.) grant once Mr Cottons Religion and way of Worship Persecutors, if it
were in their power, would, and are bound to persecute all Consciences and
Religions in the World.
to be the only true Religion and way of Gods Worship, and all other Religions
and ways of Worship false, how can that Error be otherwise then fundamental?
And if other men's Consciences attend not to Mr Cottons convictions, but
obstinately maintain their blasphemous Religions, how can the Magistrates of
his conscience be dispensed with and absolved from persecuting such obstinate
Consciences throughout the whole World beside?


Peace. When it was further demanded* if this were not to make Magistrates
Stairs and Stirrops for themselves (the Clergy) to mount up in the seats and
sadles of their great and settled Maintenance? Mr Cotton replies, this is rather
to make them Swords and Staves to punish them (if need be) for Heretical
Delinquencie: 2. Their Magistrates themselves fall short of great and settled
Maintenance: And lastly, Himself lives upon no great and settled Maintenance.


Truth. It is true Mr Cotton allows the same Power to Magistrates to punish
all Heretics, Blasphemers, Seducers, one as well as another: But what if it
should fall out that his Magistrates should declare themselves for the Pope, or
for the Prelates, or for the Presbyters, yea, or for some other way then is
professed: and left it free for each man's conscience to worship as he believed,
and to pay or not pay toward this or that Worship or All persecutors hold the
Popes traiterous Doctrine of deposing haereticall Princes.
Ministry, according to his own persuasion more or less, any thing or
nothing, will not Mr Cotton then plead that such Magistrates themselves
(Apostatizing from the Truth of God, and turning Enemies (as the Pope clamours)
to the holy Church) I say, that such ought not only to be accursed with the
lesser and greater Censures of Suspention and Excommunication, but also
punished with Imprisonment, Banishment, and Death: Or if they find the mercy
of Life and Favor of an Office (by some overruling Providence) will not Mr
Cotton then plead that such Magistrates ought to suspend their Power to hold
their hands, and not to meddle until they be better informed, etc. Into such
poor withered Strawes and Reeds will the Allowance of Swords and Staves, Mr
Cotton here speaks of come to? Concerning the seats and sadles of great and
settled maintenance of Magistrates, the Discusser spoke not, but heartily
wishes their Maintenance as great and settled, as he knows their Labors and
Travells and Dangers be: He spoke only of Ministers great* and settled
maintenance.


Peace. O Truth, this is the Apple of the Eye, the true cause of so much
combustion all the World over, especially Popish and Protestants.


Truth. Indeed this was the cause (as Erasmus told the Duke of Saxony, that
Luther was so stormed at) because he meddled The Popish and Protestant Clergy
set the Popish and Protestant World on fire for their Maintenance.
with the Popes Crown and the Monks Bellies. To obtain these warm and soft
and rich seats and sadles (who ever stand or go on foot, or creep, or beg,
or Starve) the Prelates practices all Ages know. Yea and other practices of
some of late, who (with the Evil Steward providing wisely) first made sure of
an Ordinance of Parliament for Tithes and Maintenance, before any Ordinance for
God Himself.


Peace. This is that indeed which the Politic State of Holland The Dutch
device to win their Clergy to Tolleration of other Religions.
well foresaw, when they were lamentably whipped by the King of Spaines (and
Gods) Scourge, Duke D'alva, into a Toleration of other men's Consciences: The
Politic Statesmen, I say, saw a necessity of stopping their Dominies Mouths
with sure and settled Maintenance out of the States purse. Hence it is the Dutch
Ministers zeal is not so hot against the Toleration of Heretics in the Civil
State, as the English has been.


Truth. To this purpose (sweet Peace) how fitly did that All that profess to
be Christ's Ministers, must Dig, or Beg, or Steal.
learned Prideaux once tell his Sons the Oxford Doctors, at one of their
Superstitious Creations, that since they could not dig, and were ashamed to
beg, they had great need (therefore) of settled Maintenance, This was but the
Evil Stewards device, and (I add) little better then stealing.


Peace. Yea but says Mr Cotton, I live not so, etc.


Truth. One Swallow makes not a Summer: what others have done and do, and what
practices have been and are for a forced settled maintenance (as firm and
settled as ever was the Parish maintenance of Old England) has been, to the
shame of Christianity, too apparent: For Mr Cotton himself, as I envy not
the faines of his morsells, nor the sweetness of his Cups, but wish him as large
a purse, as I believe he has an Heart, and a desire to do good with it: Yet
it has been said, that his case is no Praesident, because what he loses in
the Shire, he gets in the Hundredth, and sits in as soft and rich a sadle as any
throughout the whole Country, through the greatness and Richnes of the
Merchandise of the Town of Boston, above other parts of the Land. The truth
is, there is no Trial of the good or Evil Servant in this case, until it
comes to Digging or Begging, or the third way, viz: of couzening of the great
Lord and Master Christ Jesus; by running to carnal means and carnal weapons,
to force men's purses for a rich and settled Maintenance.


Chap. 57. (replying to Chap. 60.) Examined.
Peace. COncerning Princes Mr Cotton adds, that Princes out of State policy,
do sometimes tolerate what suits not with Christianity (as David did Joab)
against their wills.

Unto this it was answered, that this agrees not with his former general
Proposition, to wit, that it was evil to Tolerate seducing Teachers, and
scandalous livers; Mr Cotton replies; Yes, for Moses laid down in general,
Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; yet Joab was
tolerated to live, etc.


Truth. If Moses had said; It is not lawful to tolerate a Murderer; and yet
afterward had tolerated a Murderer, his later practice would not have seemed
harmonious to his former speech, but Moses did not so, and therefore I conceive
is not rightly alleged.


Peace. Whereas it was further alleged, that that State policy, and State
necessity, which permitted the consciences of Men, will be found to agree most
punctually with the Rules of the best politician that ever the world saw (the
Lord Jesus himself) who commanded the permitting of the Tares.

Mr Cotton replies, that he is not against the permitting of some
Antichristians, or false Christians, unless they maintain fundamental
Heresy against the Foundation of Religion, and that obstinately after
conviction, and withal seduce others: But for such Heretics and seducing
Teachers, they are none of those Tares, of which Christ says, Let them alone.

Besides, says he, If by Tares are meant gross offenders: then the speech of
Christ, Let them alone, is not a word of command, but a word of permission and
praediction; like that Luc. 22. 36. He that has no Sword, let him sell his
Garment and buy a Sword.


Truth. I answer, that there should be Antichristians, or false All
Antichristians are fundamentally opposite to Christ Jesus.
Christians, which maintain not fundamental Heresy against Foundation of
Religion, I think is new to the New Testament of Christ Jesus, and to the
Trials the holy Spirit proposes by John in his Epistles, discovering such to
be the Heretics and Apostates, as deny the Lord Jesus (as all Antichristians
or false Christians do more or less) to be come in the Flesh the true
Messiah, and anointed King, Priest, and Teacher to his Church.


Peace. If Mr Cotton will make good his word, to wit, that he will permit some
Antichristians or false Christians, methinks, the whole Trial of this matter
might well turn upon this Hinge, so that the true or false Christian be tried
by the Rules of the New Testament.


Truth. If so, he must undeniably subscribe to this great and Christian policy
of permission or Tolleration: As for the Exceptions following [Unlesse they
maintain Fundamental Heresy, and unless they sin actually] These pull back
again with the Left hand what merciful Freedom he had given before with the
Right.

3. But lastly, by this Interpretation of, Let them alone, by Touching the
Tares.
way of permission and praediction, it appears that Mr Cottons Thoughts are
not without checks and doubtings what these Tares might be: For (says he) [if
by Tares are meant gross offendours] whereas before he spent much precious
time to prove the Tares to be a kind of closer Hypocrite.

Moreover, all permission is of Evil, for some Good, so he, the permission of
Tares for the Wheat sake: In which respect (as I conceive) the good Wheat is
not so tendered, nor the Word of Christ so attended to by such, as presume (in
pretense for the good wheat sake) to pluck up those Tares, unto whom Christ
Jesus for* the good Wheat sake, has for a Time granted a permission.


Exam: of Chap. 58. replying to Chap. 61.
Peace. Whereas the Discusser professedly waved any Argument from the number
of Princes witnessing in profession or practice against persecution for cause
of Conscience, Mr Cotton replies, that this is a yielding of the Invaliditie of
the Argument: But 2. that he urges not the number, but the greater piety and
presence of God with those Princes who have professed and practiced against
Tolleration.


Truth. As I would not use an Argument from the number of Princes about an
heavenly matter (as knowing that the Kings and Rulers of the Earth commonly
mind their* own Policy store, but Piety rare in Princes.
Crowns, Honors, and Dominions, more then Gods; and such Princes as are
called Christian, use Gods Name, Crown, and Ordinances, as Jeroboam used Gods
Name, and Jezabell used Fasting and prayer, for the advancement of their own
Crowns, and persecuting of the Innocent and Righteous) So neither would I rest
in the Quality, Greatness or Goodness of any. That which I attend in this
Argument is the Ground and Reasons of their Speeches; which may also have this
Consideration to boot, that they are the Speeches of such who sit at the helm
of great States, and were not ignorant of the Affairs of States, and what
might conduce to the peace or disturbance, to the wealth or woe of a
Commonweal. To their Ground and Reasons therefore I attend in the next
Chapter.


Exam: of Chap. 59. replying to Chap. 62.
Peace. IN this Chap. the Consideration of the Speeches themselves, Mr Cotton
says, he passed by, because, either the Reasons wanted weight, or did not
impugn the cause in hand, as

First, That Speech of King James; God never loved to plant his A Speech of
King James considered.
Church by Blood: It is far from us (says Mr Cotton) to compel men to yield
to the Fellowship of the Church by bloody Laws or Penalties: Nevertheless,
this hinders not but that his Blood may justly fall upon his own head that
shall go about to supplant and destroy the Church of Christ.


Truth. How light or how impertinent soever these Speeches may seems to Mr
Cotton, yet to others (fearing God also) they are most sollid and weighty.

This Speech of King James seems impertinent in this cause* because (says Mr
Cotton) we compel no man by bloody Laws and Penalties to yield themselves to
the Fellowship of the Church.

I answer, as Saul by persecuting of David in the Land of Canaan, and thrusting
him forth of Gods Heritage, did as it were bid him go serve other Gods in
other Countries: So he that No Man to he forced from his own worship, (...)
etc.
shall by bloody Laws and Penalties force any man from his own Conscience
and Worship, does upon the point, say unto him, in a language* of blood, Come
be of my Religion, etc.


2. Peace. Why should not Men as well be forced to the Truth, as forced from
their Errors and Erroneous practices? Since (to keep to the Similitude) it is
the same Power that sets a plant, and plucks up weeds, which is true
(mystically) in the spiritual work of Christ Jesus, in his heavenly planting
by his Word and Spirit.


3. Truth. I add, if men be compelled to come to Church Touching compelling to
come to Church and to hear.
under such a penalty, for Absence (as has been practiced in Old and New
England) How can Mr Cotton say, there is no forcing to the Fellowship of the
Church; when (howsoever with the Papists) he makes so great difference, which
Christ never made, between the Lords Supper, and the Word and Prayer, and say,
that men may be forced to the hearing of the Word, but not to the Supper. Yet
the consciences of thousands will testify, that it is as truly grievous to
them to be forced to the one as to the other, and that they had as lief be
forced to the meat as to the Broth, to the more inward and retired chambers and
closets, as into the Hall or Parlor, being but part^ of the same house, etc.


Peace. And I may add (Dear Truth) that the bloody Imprisonments, Whippings
and Banishments, that have cried, and will cry in New England, will not be
stild until the cry of Repentance, and the blood of the Lamb Christ Jesus,
put that cry to silence. But to the second Speech of King James, No marvel A
second Speech of King James.
(says Mr Cotton) that I past by that Speech, to wit, [that Civil obedience
may be performed by the Papists,] for I found it not in the Letter; and beside,
how can Civil obedience be performed by Papists, when the Bishop of Rome shall
Excommunicate a Protestant Prince, dissolve the Subjects Oath, etc.


Truth. I answer; King James professing concerning the Papists may yield Civil
obedience.
Oath of Allegiance (which he tendered to the Papists, and which so many Papists
took,) that he desired only to be secured for Civil Obedience* to my
understanding did as much as say, that he believed that a Papist might yield
Civil obedience, as they did in taking this Oath, as quiet and peaceable
Subjects, some of them being employed in places of Trust, both in his and in
Queen Elizabeth's days*

What though it be a Popish Te^e^^, that the Pope may so do, and what though
Bellarmine* and others, have maintained such bloody Tenants, yet it is no
General Tenent of all Papists, and The Parliament at Paris, although Popish,
yet condemned Books and Tenants against Civil obedience.
it is well known that a famous Popish Kingdom, the whole Kingdom of France
assembled in Parliament in the year (so called) 1610. condemned to the Fire the
book of Johannes Marianus for mainteining that very Tenent. And two months
after Bellarmines book it self was condemned to the Fire also, by the same
Parliament for the same detestable Doctrine, as the Parliament called it, as
tending to destroy the higher Powers, which God has ordained, stirring up the
Subjects against their Princes, absolving them from their Obedience, stirring
them up to attempt against their Persons, and to disturb the common peace and
quiet: Therefore all Persons who ever under Pain of High Treason, were
forbidden to print, sell, or keep that book, etc.


Peace. This passage being so late, and so famous in so near a Popish
Country, I wonder how Mr Cotton could chain up all Papists in an
Impossibility of yielding Civil obedience, when a whole Popish Kingdom
breaks and abhorres the chains of such bloody and unpeaceable Doctrines and
Practices.

2. Experience has proved it possible for Men to hold other All England
Papists, and yet the Pope renounced.
maine and fundamental Doctrines of that Religion, and yet renounce the
Authority of the Pope, as all England did under King Henry 8. when the six
bloody Articles were maintained and practiced, and in them the Substance of
that Idolatrous Religion, although the Power of the Pope of Rome was generally
acknowledged no other, then of a foreign Bishop in his own Diocese.

3. But grant the English Catholics maintain the Supreme Authority of the
Pope, even in England, it must be considered and declared how far: If so
far, as to own his Power of absolving from obedience (against which the
aforesaid Parliament A twofold holding the Pope as Head.
of Paris declared) the wisdom of the State knows how to secure it self
against such Persons. But if only as Head of the Church in spiritual matters,
and they give Assurance for Civil obedience, why should their Consciences more
then others be oppressed?


Peace. Mr Cotton, (as all men and too justly in this Controversy) alleges
the Papists practices, what ever professions otherwise have been* So long as
they hold the Pope, they are sure of a Dispensation to take any Oath,
subscribe to any Engagement, and of Absolution for the Acting of any Crime of
Treason or Murder against the chiefest Statesmen, and the State it self.


Truth. What is it that has rendered the Papists so enraged and desperate in
England, Ireland, etc? What is it that has so imbittered and exasperated their
minds, but the Laws against their Consciences and Worships?


Peace. The two Sisters Laws compared, Mary's and Elizabeth's, The two Sisters
Laws concerning Conscience.
concerning men's Consciences, while Mary's were certainly written with blood
against the Protestants, Elizabeth's may seem to be written with milk against
the Papists.


Truth. Dear Peace, Chains of Gold and Diamonds are chains, and may pinch
and gall as sore and deep, as those of Brass and Iron, etc. all Laws to
force even the grossest Conscience (of the most besotted Idolaters in the
world, Jew or Turk, Papist or Pagan) I say, all such Laws, restraining from
or constraining to Worship, and in matters merely Spiritual, and of no Civil
nature, such Laws, such Acts, are chaine^, are yoakes, not possibly to be
fitted to the Souls neck, without oppression, and exasperation.


Peace. It is no wonder indeed that the Brains of those of the Popish Faith are
so distempered and enraged by yoakes clapped on the neck of their Consciences,
when Solomon the wisest observes it common: that Civil oppression (how much
more Soule-oppression, the most grievous and intolerable) does use to render
the Brains of men (otherwise most sober and judicious) mad and desperate.


2. Truth. I answer (secondly) grant the Practices of the Ceales of moderation
and kindness, may melt an Enemy, as David melted Saul, etc.
Papists against the Civil State, foul, dangerous, etc. yet why should there
not be hope (according to the rules of piety in Scripture, and policy in
Experience) that the coals of mercy and moderation may melt the Head of an
Enemy, as hard as any stone or metal, and render imbittered Enemies, loving
Friends, combined and resolved for their common safety and Liberties.

Thirdly, Against the fear of Evil practices the Wisdom of Cautions for
preventing of disturbance by Papists, etc.
the State may securely provide, by just cautions and provisoes, as of
Subscribing the Civil Engagement* of yielding up their Arms, the Instruments
of mischief and disturbance; of being noted (as the Jews are in some parts)
by some distinction of or on their Garments, or otherwise, according to the
Wisdom of the State. And without such or the like sufficient cautions given,
it is not Civil Justice to permit justly suspected persons, dangerous to the
civil peace, to abide out of places of Security and safe Restraint.


Peace. If such a course were steered with the Consciences of that Religion,
yet are there some Objections weighty concerning the Body of the People.

First, There will be always danger of tum^l^s and uproares between the
Papists and the Protestants*


1. Truth. Sweet Peace, thou may justly be tender of the quiet repose and
secure Tranquillity of all men, and with All men (if it be possible, as the
Scripture speaks) as thou art ^n Sufficient Provisions are made in other
Nations, against Distractions and Tumults from opposite Consciences and
Worships.
heavenly daughter of the God of peace and love. But yet thou know the
Wisdom of the English State need^ not be taught from abroad (where Li^ertie
abroad is granted to the Popish o^ Protestan^ Consciences) of making safe and
sufficient provision against all Tumults, and fear of uproares.

2. But secondly, it is too too fully and lamentably true, that the
Congregations or Churches of the several sort^ of such as in whole or in part
separate from the Parish worship and ^orshipper^, are ^arr^ more odious to, and
do more ex^sper^^e a thousand times, the Parish Assemblies, then the Papist^
or Catholics themselves are or do: So that if the People were let loose to
take their choice of exercising violence and fury, either upon* a ^opish o^ a
Protestant Separate Assembly, it is clear from the greater corrivation and
competition (made by the Protestants that separate*) to the true Church, true
Government, true Worship, true Ministry, true Seals, etc. the rage of the
People would mount up incomparably fiercer against the one then the other.
Hence i^ was the Papists ever found more favor with the last N^er^^
Com^^tition* and homebred oppositions most of all ex^sperate, etc.
two Kings and their Bishops, then the Puritants (so called) did, and the
separate Assembl^es were not so maligned by them as the Noncon^ormists, no^
they so much as the very conforming Puritants. And therefore suitably it was
b^lcht out from a fowle-mouth (...) a Chapl^ine to one of the late Bishops;
A^plagu^ (said ^^) on all Conforming Puritants, they do us most mischief*
Notwithstanding all this, and the bitter Indignation of People against these
Sectaries (so called) and their Assemblies, yet the most holy wisdom of the
Father of Lights The admired Prudence of the Parliament in preserving Civil
Peace.
has taught the Parliament of England that wonderful skill (in the midst of
so many Spiritual oppositions) to preserve the Civil peace from the danger^
and occasions of civil Tumults and Distractions.


Peace. Admit the civil peace be kept inviolate, yet how satisfy we the
fears and jealousies of many who cry out of danger of Infection, and that
Jezabels Doctrine will leaven and seduce the Land, etc.


Truth. I will not here repeat what in other parts of this book I have
presented touching that Point of Infection. At present, I answer;

First, It is to me most improbable, that (except the Body Increase of Papists
unlikely in England.
of the Nation face about from Protestanisme to Popery) (as in Queen Mary's
days) that the number of Protestants turning Papists, will be great in a
Protestant Nation, especially if such security be taken, as was
abovementioned, and otherwise, as the State shall order, etc. together with
such public notes and marks (before mentioned) on the People of that Way,
because of their former practices.

Secondly, Yea, why should not rather the glorious Beams of the Sun of
Righteousness in the free Conferrings, Disputings and Preachings of the Gospel
of Truth, be more hopefully like to expel those Mists and Fogs out of the
minds of Men, and that Papists, Jews, Turks, Pagans, be brought home, not
only into the common road and way of Protestanisme, but to the grace of true
Repentance and Life in Christ. I say, why not this more likely, by far, then
that the mists and fogs of Popery should over cloud and conquer that most
glorious Light.


Peace. It Is true, the holy History tells us of one Sampson laying heaps upon
heaps of the proudest Philistims; of one David, and of his Worthies,
encountering with and slaying their stoutest Gyant^ and Champions, yet it is
feared such is the depraved nature of all mankind (and not of the English
only) that like a corrupted full Body, it sooner sucks in a poisoned breath of
Infection, then the purest Air of Truth, etc.


Truth. Grant this, I answer therefore (thirdly) If any of many conscientiously
turn Papists. I allege the Experience of a holy, wise, and learned man,
experienced in our own Mr John Robinson (deceased) his Testimony in a Manus:
from Holland.
and other States affairs, who affirms that he knew but few Papists increase,
where much Liberty to Papists was granted, yea fewer then where they were
restrained: Yet further, that in his Conscience and Judgment he believed and
observed that such Persons as conscientiously turned Papists, (as believing
Popery the truer way to Heaven and Salvation) I say, such Persons were
ordinarily more conscionable, loving, and peaceable in their dealings, and
nearer to Heaven then thousands that follow a bare common trade and road and
name of Protestant Religion, and yet live without all Life of Conscience and
Devotion to God, and consequently with as little love and faithfulness unto
Men.


Peace. But now to proceed; a third Speech of King James A third Speech of King
James considered.
was, [ Persecution is the note of a false Church, the wicked are Besiegers,
the Faithful are besieged, upon Revel. 20.] Mr Cotton here grants, that it is
indeed a Note of a false Church, but not a certain One; for, says he, which
of all the Prophets did not the Church of the Old Testament persecute?


Truth. Mr Cotton granting persecution to be a degree of Falsehood Persecution
ordinarily the mark of a False Church.
and Apostacy, as he does in his following words, he must also grant, that
where such a Doctrine and practice prevails, and the Church grows obstinate
after all the Lords means used to reclaim, such a Church will proceed to
further degrees, until the whole be leavened with Falsehood and Apostacy, and
the Lord divorceth her, and casts her out of his Heart and Sight; as he dealt
with Israel and Judah: And it will be found no false, but a dutiful part of a
faithful child to abhor the whoredoms of such an one, though his own
Mother, who for her obstinacy in whoredoms is justly put away by his heavenly
Father, but of that (the Lord assisting) more in its place.


Peace. Further, Whereas it was said, that Mr Cotton had passed by King Stephen
of Poland his Speech, to wit, the true Difference between the Civil and
Spiritual Government, Mr Cotton answers, that it is true, that the Magistrate
cannot command Stephen King * Poland his (...)
their Souls, nor bind their Consciences, nor punish their Spirits: All that
he can do is to punish the Bodies of Men for destroying or disturbing Religion.


Truth. It is true, the Lord alone reaches the Souls or Spirits of Men, but
he does it two ways.

First, Immediately stirring up the Spirits of the Prophets, by Visions,
Dreams, etc.

Secondly, By instituted Means and Ordinances: of which The Spiritual Power
of Christ Jesus betrusted not with Civil but spiritual Ministers.
is the Question: Now Stephen King of Poland professed that he was King of
bodies, and not of Consciences: It being most true, that the Lord Jesus has
appointed spiritual Rulers and Governors, to bind and loose Souls and
Consciences, to wound and kill, Comfort and save alive the Spirits and
Consciences of Men. This power Christ Jesus committed to his true Messengers;
but oh, how many are there that pretend to this Apostleship or Ministry, who
yet have sold away this spiritual Power to the Earthly or worldly powers, upon
an (employed secret) Condition or Proviso, to receive a broken Reed an Arm of
Flesh, (in stead of the Everlasting Arms of Mercy,) to protect them.


Peace. With your leave (Dear Truth) let me add a second: If the Magistrate
(as Mr Cotton says) punish the body for a spiritual offense, why does he not
punish by a spiritual power as a spiritual Officer, with a spiritual Censure
and punishment?


Truth. Mr Cotton will tell us that the bodies of the Israelites were punished
for spiritual offenses: And we may again truly affirm, that the very
cutting off by the material Sword out of the typical Land of Canaan, was in
the type, a spiritual punishment.


Peace. Mr Cotton is not ignorant of this, and has often taught of these Types
from Passages on Genesis and other books of Moses, etc.


Truth. The Father of Lights graciously be pleased to set home the light he
has vouchsafed him, and fix and imprint the beams thereof in his heart and
affections also.


Peace. This Argument (of punishing the body for the souls An Argument used in
Parliament against the Persecuting Bishops.
good) I remember was feelingly resented by an honorable Gentleman in the
parliament against the Bishops, urging how contrary unto Christ Jesus those
Prelates were; for Christ Jesus did make way for his working upon Men's souls,
by showing kindness to their bodies, etc. but Prelates contrarily, etc.


Truth. All the Angells' of God will one day witness, that Christ Jesus was
never Captain to Pope, nor Prelate, Presbyter, no nor Independent, Emperor nor
King, Parliament, nor General Court, who punish and afflict, persecute and
torture the bodies of Men under pretense of a spiritual and religious medicine.


Peace. Yea, but says Mr Cotton, Religion is disturbed and destroyed, what
shall be done?


Truth. Religion is disturbed and destroyed two ways. Of disturbance of
Religion.


First, When the Professors or Assemblies thereof are persecuted, that is
hunted and driven up and down out of the world: Against such Destroyers or
Disturbers (being Tyrants and Oppressors,) the Civil Sword ought to be drawn.


Peace. The drawing of the Sword of Justice against such Tyrants, The Bishops
as Tyrants justly suppressed, and the Parliament therein prospered from Heaven.
I believe has prevailed in Heaven, for the Parliaments successes and
prosperity: The turning from the violence that was in the hands of those Men
of Blood the Bishops, (as in the Men of Ninivies case) has laid the long and
violent storm of Fire and Blood, etc.


Truth. Yea let the most renowned Parliament of England, and all England know,
that when they cease to listen to Daniells counsel to Belshazzar, to wit, to
show Mercy to the poor, (even Daniells Counsel to Bel-shazzar preserves
Parliaments and Kingdoms.
the poorest and most afflicted in the World) the Consciences of Men, then is
their Parliamentarie Glory and Tranquillity ecclipsed: Till then I confidently
believe, their Government (which has now so many years with so many Wonders
continued) shall not be numbered, nor another fatal change surprise them.

But now (2) the Disturbance or Destruction of Religion is spiritual, by false
Teachers, false Prophets, by spiritual Rebels and Traitors against the
Worship and Kingdom of Christ Jesus: Against which Disturbers or Destroyers,
if Christ Jesus have not provided sufficient spiritual Defense, let Moses (his
ancient Type,) be said to exceed him in Faithfulness, David in holy zeal and
affection to the house of God, and Solomon in wisdom and heavenly prudence, in
ordering the Affairs of the holy Worship of God.


Peace. But further, whereas it was said, that to confound these (to wit, a
Civil and Spiritual Government) was Babell and Jewish: Mr Cotton replies,
That is Babell to tolerate and advance Idolatry. 2. (Says he) though Christ
has abolished a National Church State, which Moses set up in the Land of
Canaan, yet Christ never abolished a National Civil State, nor the Judicial
Laws of Moses, which were of Moral Equity, and therefore (says he) If the
true Christ's blood go for the planting of the Church, let the false Christ's
go for supplanting it.


Truth. I answer; Babell was infamous for Pride, for Confusion or Disorder, for
Idolatry, for Tyranny: Now let all persecuting Cities and Kingdoms be
examined and see if they have been Touching the National Church of Israel.
clear from any of these: and especially from Babells confusion and disorder,
from monstrous mingling of Spiritual and Civil, the Devils Worship with Gods
vessels: It was no Confusion in the National Church of Israel for the Power
of that Nation, in the hands of Kings and Civil Rulers, to purge that
National Church by National force of weapons and Death: But since Mr Cotton
acknowledges that Christ has abolished that National Church, and established
Congregationall Churches, (in some of which possibly may be no Civil
Magistrate fearing God, for few wise or noble are called, and consequently few
godly or Christian Magistrates professing Christ Jesus*) What is this but
Babell or a Babylonish mixture of the Old and New Testament, National and
Congregationall Churches power and practices together?


Peace. 2. What if Christ Jesus have not abolished a National Church State, it
is sufficient that he has abolished a National Church. And if so, then in
Church matters those National Judicialls, and the use of those National
Weapons and Punishments, in Israel a miraculous Nation.
attending upon such a National Church: Yea what color of Moral Equity is
there that all the Nations of the World (most of which never heard of Christ)
should be ruled by such Laws and Punishments as were peculiarly and
miraculously given and appointed to one selected and culd out Nation,
conceived, borne, and brought up (as I may so speak) from first to last, by
extraordinary, and miraculous dispensation?


Peace. There may be (says Mr Cotton) difference between the Nations
professing Christianity, and other Nations.


Truth. There is indeed great Difference: There are two Two sorts of the
Nations of the World.
sorts of Nations or Peoples of the World, which shall be Fuel for the
devouring flames of the Lord Jesus, 2 Thessalonians. 1. First, such as know not Christ
Jesus, of which sort the greatest part of the Nations of the World (beyond all
color of comparison) consist. 2. Such as have heard a sound, and make some
profession of the Name of Christ Jesus, and yet obey him not as Lord and King,
etc.

Now it is true at the Tribunal of this dreadful Judge, Tire and Sidon,
Sodom and Gomorra, shall find an easier doom, then shall Bethsaida,
Chorazin, Capernaum, Jerusalem, etc. And Mr Cotton need not fear the escaping
of a false Christ, when all Nations professing Christianity (Papist or
Protestant*) (if yet found disobedient to the true Christ) shall pass under a
more fiery Sentence then all Mahumetane and Pagan Countries.


Peace. Mr Cotton will not stick to subscribe to this; But, the false Christ's
blood (says he) ought now, to be spilt.


Truth. Since there are so many false Christ's (as the true Christ Touching the
true and false Christ's.
Prophesied) Mr Cotton must unavoydably name and detect and convict those false
Christ's, Popish and Protestant, etc. upon whom he passes such a present
Sentence. He must also direct the way how the true Christ may shed the blood of
the false Christ's. When Mr Cotton has done this faithfully and impartially
(according to his Conscience and present Judgment) what Reader will not at
first view see rising up from such Premises these four Conclusions?

First, Amongst so many Christ's extant (that is visible Christ's Head and Body)
in the Christian Antichristian World, there can but One Christ be found to be
true.

Secondly, That Christ which Mr Cotton professes (according to his Conscience)
will be He.

Thirdly, All such Christ's as are extant, beside Mr Cottons, Head and Body,
ought impartially to be put to Death, as false, counterfeit, blasphemous, etc.

Fourthly, Such as embrace his Christ, that is, be of his Church and
Conscience, are bound (if they once get power in their hands) to pursue with
fire and sword, and to shed the blood of all the false Christ's, that is, the
several sorts of false or Antichristian Worshippers.


Peace. Oh how wise and Righteous is the Lord, in letting loose the Wolf and
Lion (persecutors and Hunters) upon his Sheep and People, that by their own
painful sense of such bloody violence and cruelty, he may graciously purge
out the Malignant venomous Humors of such foul Antichristian and bloody
Doctrines? But to the next, the King of Bohemia his saying. Whereas it was said
that in this Kings Speech Mr Cotton King of Bohemia his Speech.
had passed by that Foundation in Grace and Nature, to wit, that Conscience
ought not to be violated or forced, and that such forcing is no other then a
Spiritual Rape.

Mr Cotton replies, It was not passed by, but prevented in stating the
Question, where it was said, It is not lawful to Censure any, no not for
Error in Fundamental Points of Doctrine or Worship, till the Conscience of
the offendour be first convinced (out of the Word of God) of the dangerous
Error of his way, and then if he will persist, it is not out of Conscience,
but against his Conscience, as the Apostle says, ( Tit. 3. 11.) and so he is
not persecuted for cause of Conscience, but for sinning against his Conscience.


1. Truth. I answer, the forcing of a Woman, that is, the violent Spiritual
Rapes.
Acting of uneleannesse upon her body against her will, we count a Rape: By
Proportion that is a Spiritual or Soule-rape, which is a forcing of the
Conscience of any Person, to Acts of Worship, which the Scripture entitles by
the name of the Marriage bed, Cant. 1.

This forcing of Conscience was in an high measure the branded sin of that
great typical Machiavel Jeroboam, who made Israel to Worship before the Golden
Calves: And this is the abominable practice of the Second Beast, who compells
all to take the Mark of the first Beast, and this is the sin of (the
mystical Ammon) the Princes of Europe, and of the Antichristian World, those
mystical effeminate Ahabs, who give their power to the Beast, themselves
(together with that Man of Sin and Filthiness (the Pope) Practicing most
odious spiritual uncleanness upon the Consciences of the Nations of the Earth.


2. Peace. Dear Truth, who knows not whose voice and All persecutours
contumeliously object against Conscience.
Song this is, but that, of all the bloody Bonners, Gardiners, and most
devouring persecutours that ever have or shall legally in way and pretense of
Justice, persecute. [You pretend Conscience that you dare not come to Church
because of Conscience, that so to swear, submit, subscribe, or conform, is
against your Conscience, that you are persecuted for your Conscience, and
forced against your Conscience.


Truth. Indeed, what is this before the flaming eyes of Christ; but as (
Amnon-like in the type) some lustful Ravisher deals with a beautiful Woman,
first^using all subtle Arguments and Amnon his ravishing of Tamar, a Type.
gentle persuasions, to allure unto their spiritual Lust and Filthiness, and
where the Conscience freely cannot yield to such Lust and Folly (as Tamar said
to Amnon) then a forcing it by Penalties, Penal Laws and Statutes? Yea, what
is this but more filthy and abominable then is commonly practiced against
ravished Women, to wit, a persuading a Conscience that it is obstinate,
obstinate against its knowledge, that a man might lawfully have yielded, that
he is convinced of the lawfulness of the Act, and therefore may justly be
punished for repelling such Arguments, and resisting such persuasions against
the Conviction of his own Conscience.


3. Peace. It is a common Question, made by most, who shall be Judge of this
Convicted Conscience; shall the lustful Ravisher (the Persecutor) be Judge?
Will the burning Rage of his Spiritual A Query, who shall judge, whether
Conscience be convict.
Filthiness and Antichristian Beastialitie cause no shaking of the scales of
Justice? And will Mr Cotton indeed (except he suspend them) have all the Civil
Magistrates, or Civil States, or General Assemblies, or Courts of People in
the World (according to their several Constitutions) sit Judges over
Conscience, to wit, when the poor ravished Consciences of Men are convinced.


Truth. What is this, but (in truth) to submit the Souls and Consciences of
the Saints (yea the Conscience of the Lord Jesus in them,) unto the World that
lies in wickedness (and to the Devil in it) out of which God has chosen; but
few, that are wise, or that are Great, Rich, or Noble.

4. And to end this Passage, what is this, but to destroy that distinction of a
true and false Conscience, which the holy Spirit expressly makes, relling (2
Thessal: 2.) of Antichristians that make Conscience of Lies, believing them
conscientiously for Truths. What is it now to force a Papist to Church, but a
Rape, a Soule-Rape? he comes to Church, that is, comes to that Worship, which
Church Papists and Protestants also ravished.
his Conscience tells him is false, and this to save his Estate, Credit, etc.
What is this in a Papist, but a yielding unwillingly to be forced and ravished?
Take an instance of holy Cranmer, and many other faithful Witnesses of the
truth of Jesus, who being forced or ravished by terror of Death, subscribed,
abjured, went to Mass, but yet against their Wills and Consciences. In both
these Instances of Papist and Protestant, Mr Cotton must confess a
Soule-Ravishment; for, the Conscience of a Papist is not convinced that it is
his Duty to worship God by the English common Prayer-Booke, or Directorie,
etc. And the Consciences of many are not convinced but that it is their sin
to come at either the Papists or common Protestants Worship. So both Papist and
Protestant are forced and ravished by force of Arms, (as a Woman by a Lustful
Ravisher) against their Souls and Consciences.


Peace. Again, in that King of Bohemia's Speech Mr Cotton passed by that most
true and lamentable experience of all Ages, to wit, that persecution, for cause
of Conscience, has ever proved pernicious, and has been the cause of great
Alterations and changes in States and Kingdoms. To this Mr Cotton replies, No
experience in any Age did ever prove it pernicious to punish Seducing
Apostates, after due Conviction of the Error of their way: And he asks,
wherein did the burning of Servetus prove pernicious to Geneva, or the just
Execution of many Popish Priests to Queen Elizabeth, or the English State?


Truth. I answer, though no History did express what horrible and pernicious
mischiefs the persecuting of the Arians and others caused in the World: yet is
it lamentably sufficient Wars for Religion.
to the Point, that all Ages testify (and I had almost said all Nations) how
pernicious this Doctrine has been in raising the devouring flames of Fire and
Sword, about Heretics, Apostates, Idolaters, Blasphemers, etc.


Peace. Later Times have rendered the observation of that King most lamentably
true, in the many great Desolations, in Germany, Poland, Hungaria,
Transylvania, Bohemia, France, England, Scotland, Ireland, Low Countries (not
to speak of the mighty wars between those dreafull Monarchies of the Turks
and Persians, and other Nations) to the Flames where of although other causes
have intermingled, the Matters of Heresy, Blasphemy, Idolatry, etc. have
been the chiefest sparks and Bellows.


Truth. It is true (as Mr Cotton says,) it has pleased the God of Heaven to
spare some particular places, and to preserve wonderfully for his Name and
Mercy sake, Geneva, England, etc. etc. When they have been besieged and
invaded: Yet Mr Cotton confesses, that Queen Elizabeth by that course had
like to have fired the Christian World in Combustion, which though it pleased
God to prevent, yet later times have shown how pernicious The bloody Tenent
Guilty of all the blood of Papists and Protestants lately spilt.
this Doctrine has proved unto England, Scotland, Ireland, etc. in the
slaughter of so many hundredth thousand Papists and Protestants, upon the very
point (principally) of Heresy, Idolatry, etc.


Peace. To end this Chapter: To that observation that Persecution for cause of
Conscience was practiced most in England, and such places where Popery
reigns, implying that such practices proceed from the great Whore, and her
Daughters: Mr Cotton replies, it is no marvel he passed by this observation
in the Kings speech, for it was not the Speech of the King, but of the
Prisoner, and it was not the persecuting of Antichristians, but of Nicknamed
Puritans, and of them too without Conviction of the Error of their way: He
adds that he could never see Warrant to call that Church an Whore, that
worshipped the true God only in the name of Jesus, and depended on him alone
for Righteousness and Salvation, and that it is (at least) a base part of a
child to call his Mother whore, who bred him and bred him to know no other
Father, but her lawful Husband the Lord Jesus Christ


Truth. Whether the Observation was the Kings, or the Prisoners, yet it was
passed by: And if those Puritants or Protestants persecuted, were not
convinced, Himself (as he here says) never saw Warrant, that is, was
convinced, for to call such a The strongest Arm and sword the ordinary Judge
of the Conviction of Conscience.
Church as he here describes, an Whore, yet not a few of his opposites will
say, and that aloud, that He and they were or might have been convinced, what
ever He or they themselves thought. The truth is, the carnal Sword is commonly
the Judge of the conviction or obstinacy of all supposed Heretics. Hence the
faithful Witnesses of Christ, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, had not a word to say
in the Disputations at Oxford: Hence the Non-conformists were cried out as
obstinate Men, abundantly convinced by the Writings of Whitgift and others: And
so in the Conference before King James at Hampton Court, etc.

But concerning the Church of England, whether a daughter or no of the Great
Whore of Rome, It is not here seasonable to Touching the National Church of
England.
repeat what the Witnesses of Christ to Bonds, Banishments, and Death (whom Mr
Cotton here calls the rigid Separation) have alleged in this case. I think it
here sufficient to say two things. First, Mr Cotton himself is thought to
believe that it is not a profession of words containing many fundamental
Doctrines that makes a people a true Church, who professing to Real denying,
the greatest denying of Christ Jesus.
know God, yet in works deny him; notwithstanding that amongst them by Gods
gracious Dispensation much good may be wrought by many.

2. Mr Cotton himself will not say that ever Christ Jesus was married to a
National Church* which all men know the Church of England ever was, and Mr
Cotton elsewhere acknowledges (as National) to be none of Christ's, but only
Churches Congregationall.


Exam: of Chap. 60. Concerning the Roman Emperors, which did or did not
persecute.
Peace. Whereas it was answered, that Godly Persons (as some Godly Emperors)
might do evil, to wit, in persecuting: And ungodly Emperors in not
persecuting, might do well, etc. Mr Cotton replies, This begs the Question, to
say that Kings alleged by the Prisoner did that which was good, but Kings
alleged by Mr Cotton (though better persons) did that which was Evil.


Truth. I think Mr Cotton mistakes the poor Prisoner if he conceives him to
have argued from the Number, or (by way of comparison) the Quality or
Goodness of the Kings. I am sure he mistaketh the Discusser, who argues
neither from their Persons, nor Number, nor Practices, but from the weight of
their Speeches, qualified only with the consideration of their State: Their
Speeches Mr Cotton passed by, but now has waighed, though not so fully as it
may please God to cause Himself, or others to do hereafter.


Peace. I conceive it to be a further mistake, to think the Discusser
accounted the Persons alleged by Mr Cotton better Persons then those alleged
by the Prisoner.


Truth. The Discusser compared them not, but desired that their Speeches and
Arguments might have their just and due weight, and then I believe it will be
found, not a begging, but a winning of the Question, even from the Testimony
of some Kings themselves.


Chap. 61. replying to Chap. 64. Examined.
Peace. IN this Chapter God is pleased to leave Mr Cotton to fall into two
Evils, then which (ordinarily) greater cannot be among the sons of Men: I
speak not of the Aggravations of malice and obstinacy, which I hope the most
gracious Lord will keep him from, but of the sins themselves in themselves:
The One is monstrous Blasphemy and abominable profanation of the most holy
Name of his most High and holy Maker, etc. The second extremest Cruelty and
Tyranny against Men his fellow Creatures.

For the first, after a new refined fashion and dress, he projects Two high
Transgressions objected against Mr Cotton.
how to turn this whole Dunghill of the corrupt and rotten World, into a most
sweet and fragrant Garden of the Church, or Dove of Christ.

For the second, he contents not Himself with the Severitie and Cruelty of
former times exercised by the Emperors professing the Name of Christ, against
such, whom they reputed Heretics, but blames them for applying too favorable
and gentle Medicines of Exile and Banishment, and in plain terms he says,
It had been better they had put them to death.


Truth. Your observation (sweet Peace) is full of piety and Mercy: It is most
true, that a private opinion, or an Act of Antichristianisme and Idolatry,
like a dead fly, may cause a sweet pot of Christian Ointment, to yield a
stinking savor, but such a Doctrine, of such a general Nature and extent, as
reaches to all men, to all the World (in my apprehension) should cause Men to
fear and tremble at such Rocks, against which such Gallant vessels may
strike, and split, if the most holy and jealous God, be pleased a little to
withdraw his holy hand from the steering of them.


Peace. Let me (Dear Truth) sum up the Heads, to which I shall request your
Consideration.

It is true (says Mr Cotton:) when God advanced Constantine Touching the
Roman Emperors practices in Religious. Affairs.
and other Christian Emperors to sit on the Throne, the Church soon became a
Wilderness, and he also seems to consent that the unknowing zeal of
Constantine and other good Emperors did more hurt to Christianity, then the
raging fury of bloody Neroes: But withal he adds that their unknowing zeal
did not lie in punishing notorious Heretics, Seducers, etc. And he says, that
the Church never had hurt by such punishments. He affirms that it is no
Sollecisme in Religion for the whole World to become Christian: that the World
became Antichristian by the tolleration of Princes, and their advancing of
Church affairs, together with the unwatchfullnesse of such being advanced:
that if the World had renounced Paganism, and professed Christ to be the Son
of God, but yet had been kept from the Fellowship of the Church till they had
approved their profession by a sincere conversation, it had been no Sollecisme,
etc.

Further, He says, the Christian Emperors did permit Heretics;to live in the
field of the World, that they seldom or never put them to Death for heretical
pravitie (though it had been better (says he) they had so done with some of
them, but only expelled them from populous Cities and Countries, where the
Gangrene might spread, etc.


Truth. You have well summd up ( Sweet Peace) I shall Christ's Garden gains by
violent Storms, and loses by sweet Sunshines.
briefly touch these Heads, with Gods assistance; and first concerning the
zeal of the Roman Emperors. It is confessed by Mr Cotton, that upon the good
Emperors coming to the Throne, the Church soon became a Wilderness, and that
was a greater hurt and mischief then ever befell the Saints and Churches under
the fiery persecution of the most bloody Neroes; surely such zeal that
brought forth such fruit to Christianity might seem justly to be suspected
not to be kindled from Heaven, but from Men.

2. It seems not reasonable to the weakest understanding, nor The Roman
Emperors.
suitable to the wisdom and constant care and love of Christ Jesus to his Wife
and Spouse in his absence, that the Roman Emperors should be such Godly
Persons, and that also neither by Christ Jesus nor his Apostles or Messengers
the least word should be directed to them, when, as yet, they were extant, in
Christ's and his Messengers times; and (by the bloody Tenent) must be supposed
invested with so high a calling too, so high a work and duty, as higher is
not to be performed in the whole World (and that Ex Officio) to wit, the
Establishing, Governing, Reforming, etc. the Church, the Spouse, and Kingdom
of Christ Jesus.


Peace. 2. The Church and Servants of Christ had great hurt (notwithstanding Mr
Cottons contrary belief) by the Emperors The Arrians persecuted and
persecuting.
persecuting, of whom they judged heretical, partly in that the Arrians were
hardened by their sufferings, and Arrianisme increased by the sufferings of the
professors of it; as also that the Christians were more severely persecuted
(as has often also come to pass (in the Interchanges between the Papist and
the Protestant) when the Arrians came to wear the Sword, and the Orthodox
Christians were under Hatches.


Truth. 3. But that the whole World that wonders after and worshippeth the
Beast, should yet possibly be of the small Number, that follow the Lamb, and
stand opposite to the Beast, on Mount Zion: That the World upon whom the vialls
of plagues and vengeance are to be powered according to the infallible
Prophecies (not to speak of the World from other Scriptures) that The great
Difference between this World and Christ.
this whole World (I say) should be brought into such an Onenes with Christ
Jesus, seems so cross to the fundamental Enmity between Christ's Seed and
the Serpents, to the privileges of the Saints, to the purity of Christ, to
the stream of Scripture, and in particular to the sweet last Will and
Testament of the Lord Jesus, and the nature of his particular Flocks, etc. That
I cannot wonder sufficiently, how any man professing but a small Knowledge of
the Mysteries and Kingdom of Christ Jesus, should be so veiled, so obscured,
so to write of the state of Christ's Church and the World, as Mr Cotton does?


Peace. Christ Jesus (Blessed Truth) gave not thanks to his most holy, most
wise Father in vain, for hiding from Wise and Prudent, and opening to Babes
and Sucklings.


Truth. 4. But further, Such a Conversion of People from A Christianity
strange from Christ.
Idolatry to Christianity, as fits them to be professors of the Son of
God, but yet not fits them for the Fellowship of Christians in Church State, I
find not in the Testament of Christ Jesus. Surely the Conversion of the
Thessalonians was not such, 2 Thessalonians. 1. Who turned not only from Idols; but
to serve the living and true God, which service of God in Christ no Soul
uprightly in love with Christ Jesus, but (in its measure) longs after, as
vehemently and cordially as ever chaste Spouse after her dearest earthly
Husbands presence and Enjoyment, Cant. 1. and 3. and 5.


Peace. Gods Spirit (in John) describes one Difference, etc. between the true
Spirit and Professors, and the f^^se, to wit, that such as acknowledge (that
is truly as I conceive) Christ Jesus to become in the flesh, are borne of God.


Truth. Yea therefore consequently such a Spirit cannot be Antichristian
Christianity.
of Jesus, that makes such a profession of Christ Jesus as the Devils
themselves may make, and (even for want of Regeneration and Personal Grace,)
the professors are not fit for the Fellowship of the true Christian Worship,
and Worshippers.

5. But lastly, if Mr Cotton, or any of his bloody Judgment woare the
Imperial Crown of the Worlds Majesty, what slaughters shall we imagine the
World should hear and feel? Whether would such fiery zeal transport Men?
Yea what an Earthly Dunghill Religion and Worship should the most High God be
served with, fit only for the Dunghill Gods and Goddesses, whom all Asi^ (as
the Towne-clarke speaks) and the World worshippeth.


Peace. If the Report of Mr Cottons interpreting that Scripture of Serving God
with all our Might, etc. be true, to wit, of The bloody Tenent tends to an
universal Conquest of the whole World.
employing our Civil Arms and Forces to the utmost, and that against other
Peoples professing Idolatry and Antichristianisme: His Conscience (as I
conceive) must needs force on and press after, an universal Conquest of all
Consciences, and under that (like those bloody Spaniards, Turks and Popes)
lay under that fair cloak, the Rule and Dominion over all the Nations of the
Earth.


Truth. But may not Mr Cotton better listen to the voice of The bloody Tenent
in its colors.
the Lord Jesus, saying to him and such of his bloody Tenent, You know not of
what Spirit you are of: Were the Emperors too favorable (as Mr Cotton says)
in but Banishing? How keen a Sword would Mr Cotton draw against so many
Millions of Gangreene Souls throughout the Turkish and the Popish World?


Peace. Oh, how far different would Mr Cottons Sword be from the Sword of the
Spirit of God, proceeding from the Mouth of Christ Jesus, yet sharp enough
with two edges, piercing between Soul and Spirit, etc.


Truth. Yea how far different from the Meek Spirit of the Lamb of God, who
came not to destroy Men's lives, but to save them, yea how different from the
former make and noted gentle Temper of Mr Cottons own Spirit, now over-heat and
enflamed by his unmercifull and bloody Tenent?


Exam: of Chap. 62. replying to Chap. 65.
Peace. When Mr Cotton was justly observed to use the Language of Lyon-like
persecution in these words, [More and greater Princes then these you mention
have not tolerated Heretics and Schismatics, notwithstanding their pretense
of Conscience, and their arrogating the Crown of Martyrdom to their
suffrings] He defends such Language by the Scripture Freedom in such Terms
against Sinners, which says he, the Discusser acknowledges.


Truth. In holy Scripture are many Expressions full of Holiness, No Book or
Writing ever so abused as the holy Writing and Scripture of God is.
Gravitie, Love, Meekness, etc. which yet are wrested by us poor Men to
unholy and unchristian Ends and purposes. How many woefully pervert many grave
and heavenly Passages and Expressions of holy Scripture to base and filthy
Jeasting? How many from some sharp Expressions of Christ Jesus and Paul (in
cases) take license to rail and call Men all to naught, in Wrath, Revenge, and
Passion? And how many out of pride and false zeal trampling upon the Heads and
Consciences of all Men, are ready (not in an holy Meek and Christian way but)
in a Pharisaicall, Bishop-like The Language of persecutours.
and Pope-like way, to roar and thunder out against Gods meekest Servants the
odious terms of Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, Seducers, etc. Which
terms though used in holy Scripture, yet never in such a way, as commonly and
constantly the bloody and persecuting express themselves in.


Peace. But what or whom means Mr Cotton in this passage, what Language have
they learned, who in point of worship have left Zion, but not the Gates and
Suburbs of Babylon, for they set up Bull-warkes of Impunitie to secure them.


Truth. Surely Mr Cotton knows that none that plead against the Civil Power
and Weapons in Spiritual Matters, but they also maintain, that, there ought
to be in vigorous use the Spiritual and two edged Sword that comes forth of
Christ's Mouth (not for the Impunitie but) for the Ruin and Destruction of all
Babells ^ra^s and Abominations.


Peace. Mr Cotton spends many lines, and quotes Austin to prove, that Julians
End of tollerating Heresy to grow, was to choke Christianity.


Truth. What ever were Julians End, yet I deny that Tolleration Julian his
Tolleration.
of the weeds of Heresy and blasphemous Religion (Paganish, Turkish, Jewish,
Popish) in the field of the Civil State and World, has power to choke the
vitalls of Christianity in the Garden or Body the Church of Christ Jesus.

And concerning Infection, It is to be observed that when Touching Infection of
false Doctrine, etc.
the holy Scripture speaks by the Similitudes of Leaven, Gangrene, or
Poysonfull weeds, of Wolves, or scabbed sheep, etc. it is commonly with
respect to such Evils got in among the Saints and Churches, the Flocks and
Gardens of Christ, where such Leaven, weeds, etc. tolerated may spread and
infect: But what is this to the Lions, Bears, or Wolves, not to be suffered in
the Wilderness, or Swine, or Dogs, in the common high ways; or weeds in the
Common or Forest, which all may be, and yet the Garden, Body, and Flock of
Christ be pure and safe from such Infection.


Peace. One passage more is very Considerable. In former Discourse about the
Tares Mr Cotton was large in proving the permission of weeds, even in the
Church of Christ, and that until Christ's Coming, and that after they be
discovered to be Hypocrites.


Truth. O what a Distance is between that Doctrine and this Hypocrites
tolerated in the Church, but not in the World.
here? There the Tares must not be touched in the Garden of the Church, here
they must not be suffered abroad in the field of the World, for fear of
choking the good plants in the Garden of Christ. Who can find out how these
Doctrines suit with Godliness, with Reason, or Themselves?


Peace. But now you speak of suiting: It is (says Mr Cotton) (for a close) a
plain Contradiction of the Discussers former Speech to say, that persecuting
of others was a means of choking Christianity, whereas he had said, that
Constantines unknowing zeal did more hurt to Christ's Kingdom, then the raging
fury of the most bloody Neroes.


Truth. Let the words be well weighed, and no such Affirmation will be found:
The words are, [It was not when Christians lodged in cold Prisons, but in Down^
Beds of Ease, and persecuted others.] The Discusser made not persecution to be
a means of choking Christianity, but attributes the Loss of Christians Life
and Love, to those Beds of their abused Sweet prosperity.

2. If he had made persecution a means to choke Christianity, it had been
the persecution of Christians among Themselves, and not the persecution of
bloody Neroes: Which yet if it had been so, it might yet be no Contradiction,
for Neroes persecution might do hurt, although Constantines unknowing zeal
might do much more.


Exam: of Chap. 63. replying to Chap. 66.
Peace. MAster Cotton here being understood to smile on Q: Elizabeth for
persecuting the Papists, and to ^^^wne on K: James for persecuting the (so
named) Puritans, he denies neither, but insists only upon the Number, that as
many and as great Princes are against Tolleration as for it, and in particular
Q: Elizabeth and K: James.


Truth. I say (as before) I should never use an Argument Touching the
Persecution of K: James and Q: Elizabeth.
from the Number of Princes (no more then from the Number of any other men) for
any truth of Christ Jesus: Who as he was not pleased himself to be borne of
the sons of Nobles, so has he not chosen many Nobles and Wise men of this
World to be borne of him: Yet 2. If that be his Argument, he has not
satisfied, in naming these two, for more were named by the Prisoner, and
besides one of those Witnesses, K: James abundantly declared himself, not
only against persecuting of Papists, but against all persecution in general,
what ever otherwise or afterward his practices were against some Persons, as
Mr Cotton too truly alleges.


Truth. In the next Passage the Discusser having objected that both Q:
Elizabeth and K: James did persecute according to their Consciences, and
arguing why should the one (namely) K: James be more blamed for persecuting
according to his Conscience, then Q: Elizabeth for persecuting according to
hers: Mr Cotton distinguishes of Consciences: The Queens says he, was
rightly informed, but the Kings was not. When it was replied, that either K:
James, and such Princes whose Consciences (according to Mr Cottons Conscience)
are ill informed, must act according to their Consciences, or else they want
the Qualification and Fitnes for such places: Mr Cotton answers two Things.

First, that such Qualifications are not Essential, but Integrall.

Secondly, That such Princes must forbear all Civil Censures in matters of
Religion until they be better informed.


Truth. It is most true as Mr Cotton says, if we speak of the right of
Succession, a child may be a Lawful King (as K. James himself was being but
a year old) But if we speak of the Qualifications of the mind, by which a
King is enabled to rule his State (as is supposed Ecclesiastical and Civil,
and to judge under Christ Jesus in all Causes Ecclesiastical as well as
Civil: Surely, he that knows not which is the true Church, true Ministry,
true Ordinances; yea and persecutes the true Church, Ministry, and Worship,
what ever his Qualifications be for the Government of the Touching the
Qualification of Princes.
Civil State, yet can it never be made good that he is furnished with any
Essential Qualification for the Spiritual Administration, any more then He
that undertakes to be a Guide, and yet is blind, and never set foot in the
way, and knows not the true from the false: Or to be a Captain General, yea
or but a Shepherd, etc. 2. Beside, Christ Jesus never called any person to any
Employment of his, to any Work, whom he inables not in a Measure
proportionably, etc.


Peace. In such cases (says Mr Cotton) Princes are called to suspend and
forbear all Execution of Civil Censures in the matters of Religion, till they
be better informed, least they do persecute the Son of God in stead of the Son
of Perdition.


Truth. I answer: First, Then Mr Cotton has cut off K: James from acting,
though so long esteemed and sworn Supreme in all Causes Ecclesiastical.

Secondly, I ask, how many shall forbear, and how long, Touching Magistrates
suspending from acting in matters of Religion.
for evident then it is that most (beyond all comparison) of all the Princes
and Magistrates in the World, must not meddle with this pretended chief part
of their Duty and Office, and that (if they convert not) for the whole Course
and Race of their Life: In particular, that no Pagan Magistrate (of all the ten
thousands in the World, no Persian, Turkish, Popish, nor Protestant (if
Prelaticall or Presbyterian,) ought to exercise any of this High and Glorious
Power, but only such Princes and Magistrates as are of Mr Cottons Conscience;
for otherwise what Prince in the world more learned King in his time then King
James, yet was not he of Mr Cottons Conscience.


Peace. Dear Truth: The fall of this partiality is so apparent, Monstrous
partiality.
and withal so foul, that I think it impossible, but ere long it must needs
be condemned by Men on Earth, as doubtless it is abhord by the most holy and
impartial God, and his holy Angels in Heaven: Upon this occasion I call to
mind that famous Act of the so greatly renowned Constantine, who in his first
wearing of the Diadem, put forth (his Colleauge Licinius concurring also)
Constantines Edict.
a famous and most solemn Charter and Edict, that no man throughout the whole
Empire should be constraind in his Religion.


Truth. Mr Cotton (according to his proviso of suspension) must doubtless
applaud Constantine for this his Forbearance until he were better informed,
whereas afterward his Edicts against Arrius and Arrianisme, testify his
practice to the contrary. But he that shall read seriously in Gods presence
that first Edict of Constantine and Licinius, will there find Constantine to
use such Arguments, as might for ever have caused him to have forbore
persecution, to have still suspended, to have gratified the Subjects of all his
Empire with Liberty and Freedom in the Point of Worship and Religion.

But I will End this Passage with this Querie; If Christ Jesus have left such
Power with the Civil Rulers of the World, Kingdoms, Foul imputations cast on
Christ Jesus.
and Countries, of or for the Establishing, Governing, and Reforming his
Church, what is become of his Care and Love, Wisdom and Faithfulness, since
in all Ages (since he left the Earth) for the general, beyond all exception,
he has left her destitute of such qualified Princes and Governors, and in the
Course of his Providence furnished her with such, whom he knew would be, and
all men find as fit, as Wolves to protect and feed his Sheep and People.


Exam: of Chap. 64. replying to Chap. 67.
Peace. When it was questioned, what good to the Souls or Bodies of their
Subjects did those Princes bring in persecuting! Mr Cotton produces a good
^i^^fold that is brought to Princes and Subjects by the due punishment of
Apostates, Seducers, Idolaters, and Blasphemers.


Truth. Let all that fear God and Mr Cotton himself be persuaded to observe,
whether under this fair cloak of punishing these and these spiritual
sinners, he maintain not strongly (what elsewhere he denies) to wit,
Persecution for cause of Conscience. But we know the Evasion. It is not for
Apostatizing, seducing out of Conscience, but after Conviction, against their
Conscience, etc.


Peace. You have before satisfied me (besides other Passages) Unchristian
Tribunalls.
with this one, that to this End of discerning the poor Heretics sinning
against his Conscience, the Civil State, the Earth, the World must necessarily
Erect its Tribunal, to judge not only Civil Things, but even the Heart and
Conscience also; but now to Mr Cottons five-fold good.

First (says he) it puts away Evil from the People, by cutting off a Gangrene
which would spread to further ungodliness, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. 2 Timothy 2. 1. 6. 7. 13.


Truth. I answer, these Scriptures (though pure and holy in Dent. 13. 5. and 2 Timothy 2. 16. Unchristianly conjoined.
their places, yet) are here coupled together as Linsey Wollsey, contrary to
the Law. Deuteronomy. 13. which concerns the typical National Church, using
National and temporal Weapons: The 2 Timothy 2. concerns the Particular
Congregations or Churches of Christians, using only the Sword of Gods Spirit,
the Word of God, etc.

Beside, Deuteronomy. 13. concerned such a People whom the Lord brought forth of
Egypt with Miracles, into Canaan, etc. Let any such People be now produced,
excepting the Christian (particular) Churches. Why does Mr Cotton then allege
this Scripture so frequently, and in these five Reasons brings two from hence;
This the first; and the Third, to wit, that all the People may hear and fear,
etc. which is alone made good in the Antitype or Christian Church; according to
that 1 Timothy 5. 20. Rebuke them that sin openly, that others may learn to
fear.


2. Peace. Mr Cotton mentions a second good, which is driving away Wolves
from worrying and scattering the Sheep of Christ.


Truth. This was largely answered in discoursing the nature of mystical or
spiritual Wolves, upon that very place which he quotes, Acts 20. From whence
it may evidently appear that from the literal urging of such mystical
Scriptures, all Peoples and Nations are enforced (and that Conscientiously)
like Wolves and Lions to tear and devour each other.


3. Peace. Mr Cotton adds, that Punishments are wholesome Medicines to such as
are curable of such Evils, Zach. 13. 4, 5, 6.


Truth. I answer; All the holy Appointments of God are most powerful (in their
several respective seasons, and manner of Dispensations, to his own most holy
Ends and purposes, etc. The Material National Sword in the National Church
of Israel before Christ: and the Spiritual Sword, in the spiritual and
Christian Church since his coming to abolish those shadows.

As it was therefore in vain to have cut off or Excommunicated Touching
Excommunication in Israel.
spiritually in that National State: So is it in vain to use the material or
carnal Sword in the spiritual. Wherefore (according to this place of Zach.) a
true penitent will bless God for the Wounds of Friends and Lovers (faithful
and sharp dealing) and for Deliverance from the Kiss of deceitful flattery:
But what is this to prove (that which is so much denied) to wit, Corporal
Death or Wounds now to be inflicted upon false Teachers in these times of the
Gospel, and that in all parts and Nations of the World.


4. Peace. The punishment, says Mr Cotton, executed upon false Prophets and
seducing Teachers, do bring down Showers of Gods blessing upon the Civil
State, 1 King. 18. 40, 41.


Truth. If that National State of Israel, and that National or Ans:
Corporeal killing of so many hundredth false Prophets, and that literal
drouth and literal showers of Rain and plenty were figures of no other
Prophets and slaughters, drouth and showers, but literal, material, and
corporeal, (now since the Body and Substance Christ Jesus is come): What
should hinder but that those Priests of Israel, and Sacrifices, and Temple, and
National Church should all be in force, for our Imitation, literally, the one
as well as ^he other?


Peace. I cannot possibly conceive but that (all being of the same Nature,) the
one is Typical as well as the other, and that they must flourish and be
glorious (as Gods Ordinances,) or vanish and disappeare (giving place to
brighter dispensations) at the arising of Christ Jesus the Son of
Righteousness.


Truth. Hence false Apostles, false Teachers, false Prophets, are Spiritual
Blessings and Curses the Antitypes of Corporal before Christ.
Spiritually cut off, Revel. 2. 2 Pet. 2. Gal. 4. And spiritual showers of
Blessings descend upon the Israel of God; for although corporeal Blessings of
Food and Raiment and plenty, are Gods blessings, yet principally under the
Gospel God blesses his Israel, the Antitype with spiritual Blessings, Ephesians. 1.
Houses, Lands, Fathers, Mothers, Children, etc. with persecution, Mark. 10.


Peace. Me thinks (Dear Truth) If Christ Jesus had appointed Great oversight
imputed to Christ Jesus.
such punishments, such executions, literal, in the Christian Church, he would
also have appointed Offices and Officers suitable and proper for such Ends and
purposes, such punishments, such executions.


Truth. It cannot otherwise with Reason and common prudence If civil
punishments for spiritual offenses: they must be inflicted by holy and
Christian Instruments and Officers.
be supposed, but that, if Christ Jesus had appointed (which we find not in
his holy Testament) holy and Christian Magistrates for those great decrees and
sentences, we should also have read of his holy Constables, holy Sergeants,
holy Prisons, holy Stocks, holy Whipping Posts, holy Gibbets, and holy
Tyburnes; together also with holy Hangmen, the spiritual Instruments and
Officers of Christ Jesus, for the Executions of his holy punishments upon
Apostates, Heretics, Blasphemers, Idolaters, Seducers, etc.


5. Peace. Gods Justice (says Mr Cotton) is honored in the Execution of such
Judgments, Revel. 16. 5, 6.


1. Truth. I have (to my understanding) formerly showed Mr Cottons mistake in
his expounding of this third Violl, and have presented an Exposition more
agreeable with the scope of this Prophecy.


Peace. 2. God was honored in all his Judgments which the Tyrants of the
World have executed, (the Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, Roman) yet not by way
of Law and Ordinance, but in the way of his holy providence and just permission.


3. Truth. Yea the Witnesses of Jesus, by the two-edged Sword of God in their
Mouths, execute Gods Judgments, to the vindicating of Gods Glory, and their
Innocence, (Revel. 11.) although they used no carnal Weapon.

4. The holy Name of God is much dishonored and profaned, when the Inventions
of Men are set up, against his holy Appointments, A true Christ, a true Sword;
a false Christ, a false Sword.
and when the Sword of Steel (in spiritual cases) is drawn in stead of the
spiritual Sword, proceeding out of the Mouth of Christ Jesus in his servants
Testimony. All such worship, is but vain or idle worship ( Mark. 7.) and such
is the carnal Sword and Executions of it.


Peace. Whereas it was observed, that Mr Cotton acknowledged that Queen
Elizabeth had well near fired all Europe, by such Executions, Mr Cotton
answers, God bore witness to his Truth in Deliverances: And when it was
replied, that Success does not prove causes true, Mr Cotton answers, yes;
Psalm. 1. 3, 4. Jer. 22. 15, 16, 17.


Truth. I reply, Temporal prosperity, success, etc. were proper in that
Temporal and Civil State, of that National Church, and spiritual Blessing
and prosperity proper in the Gospel now, Ephesians. 1.


Peace. 2. It was answered that God had given victory to the Papists,
especially against the Waldenses (and the Beast makes war against the
Witnesses, Revel. 11. and overcomes them, etc.) Mr Cotton herein first
observes a Contradiction, in the words, to wit, that the Papists ever had the
victory, and yet their success has been various.


Truth. I reply; the words are not that the Papists had ever the Victory, but
that they ever had both Victory and Dominion; which words may be true, although
that the Event were sometimes various.


2. Peace. Again (says Mr Cotton) Queen Elizabeth ever had the Victory
against the Papists.


Truth. I answer; Many gracious Deliverances God vouchsafed Q: Elizabeth her
wars against the Papists.
to Q: Elizabeth, yet sometimes her Armies prospered not against the Papists,
as in that famous Expedition of Essex, Drake and Norris (though in a most
righteous cause,) against the Papists of Spain and Portugal, as also against
the Papists in Ireland and the Low Countries, at sometimes.

2. Grant not only Deliverances, but Victories and Success, Her cause (how
ever intermingled) was civil Defense of her Kingdom, against Invation and
Ambition, Dominion and Conquest, by practices of Tyranny and oppression, both
against the English and the Hollanders (especially) as appeared by the horrible
Exactions, Outrages, Murders and Slaughters committed upon them by D'alva the
King of Spaines General.


Peace. But although the Papists (says Mr Cotton) fought with various
success, yet it is Gods manner to nurture his People with some crosses, to
teach them not to fight in their own strength, etc.


Truth. Yea and it might also teach them not to fight but with Christ's Weapons
in Christ's Cause; who has said, That all that take the Sword, that is, (as I
conceive) in Christ's cause, shall perish by it, Matthew. 26. 52.


3. Peace. Concerning the Walldenses Mr Cotton says, They The Wars of the
Waldenses.
never lost Victory, but when they complied with the Papists, and trusted more
to their false praetences, then to the Lord. And he adds, that it is not true,
that the final success of Victory fell to the Papists, to the utter
extirpation of those Walldenses; for says he, those Witnesses were not
extirpated but dispersed.


Truth. For their Complying with Papists, alas, what can Gods little flock, his
two Witnesses do with carnal weapons, unless assisted by carnal Men, to
whom this carnal course causes them to bow down, dissemble, lie, etc. as
holy David with Achish and his Philistims.

2. For the Success it is evident that the Waldenses and their Adherents, were
so defeated by the Popes Armies, that in respect of any power to resist, the
Armies of the Waldenses were wholly extirpated, although it is true (through
Gods o're-powring hand) the Truths of Christ (which the holy Waldensian
Witnesses testified) were more and more propagated by their Dispersions, Acts
8. and 11.
Christ Jesus gains more by preaching his Truth in a flying persecuted
dispersion, then by fighting on Horsbacke with carnal weapons in carnal
companies, etc.


4. Peace. But, whereas it was observed from Daniell and John their Prophecies,
that Antichrist was foretold to obtain great success against Christ Jesus,
for a time determined: Mr Cotton says, Not against Christ Jesus, but his
Servants, and that either in Suffering for his Truth, or when they ill handled
his Cause.


Truth. Be it so, yet the Prophesies were true, and truly were fullfilled, and
it is Gods Counsel that for the time appointed, Christ Jesus in his Truths and
Servants is despised, Psalm. 89. etc. How can then temporal victory and
prosperity be expected by Christ's followers for Christ's Cause, or the
temporal Sword be an Ordinance for Christ's spiritual Kingdom and Worship?


5. Peace. Now lastly, when the weapons of the Saints Victories Christian
weapons.
were mentioned three; ( Revel. 12.) 1. Christ's Blood. 2. The Word of their
Testimony. 3. Their own Blood: Mr Cotton answers; this is true in private
Christians: But (says he) the Sword of Gideon, the public Magistrate is the
Lords Sword, etc. when drawn out for Gods cause and Worship, according to God,
is Victorious, Revel. 17. with Revel. 19. 14. 19, 20.


Truth. I answer; Gideons Sword (if well examined) will be found a Figure of
that sharp Sword of that great Captain and General Christ Jesus. This Sword
comes forth of his Mouth in the Christ's Sword.
Preachings and Writings of his Servants: other sword we never find he used in
all his Battles against all his Adversaries: yea even against the Devil
himself and his Instruments.


Peace. Yea, those very Victories of the Saints, Revel. 19. are Christ's Wars
and Victories, Revel. 17.
expressly won with that Sword which comes forth of his Mouth: And his own
white Horse, and the Horses of his Followers, and the white Linen with which
they are clothed, cannot with any show of Christian Reason hold forth the
carnal praeparation of white Horses, (literally) Guns, Swords, etc. But of the
Word of Meekness, Innocence and Righteousness (which is interpreted the Fine
Linen, verse. 8.)


Truth. To shut up this Chapter, Gideons Army and Artillery and Victory,
cannot be type of such Material Armies, Artillery, Gideons Army typical.
and Victories, but of a Spiritual Army, fighting with the Light and
Testimony of Gods Truth openly proclaimed, and the cheerful breaking of the
earthen Vessels of their Bodies for Christ's Cause, when in conclusion, the
Antichristian Midianites (by their Divisions and Combustions) run their Swords
in each others Bowels, with mutual slaughters and Destructions; as woeful
experiences has declared.


Exam: of Chap. 65. replying to Chap. 68.
Peace. FRom the Argument of the Testimony of Kings and Princes concerning
persecution for matters of Religion in their Kingdoms and Dominions, the
Prisoner descended to the Argument from ancient Writers: unto some of which
says the Discusser, the Answerer pleases to make Answer: Unto this Mr Cotton
replies; As if any of them were omitted, or as if all of them were not
answered: Compare the Prisoners Letter and mine together, and see if I have
balked any one of them.


Truth. Mr Cotton would here insinuate a false Charge: I have compared the
Prisoners Letter, and the Answer, and although Mr Cotton has said something
to something, which every one of them spoke: Yet he that impartially will view
the Passages shall find, that although in strictness of Gammar Rules, he may
not be said to omit to say something to each of them, yet in respect of Matter
and Argument, he has touched but some, and that but lightly, as the Candle of
Examination will make it appear.


Peace. Hilarious words in the Letter are these: The Christian The Christian
Church does not persecute, but is persecuted.
Church does not persecute, but is persecuted: and lamentable it is to see the
great folly of these Times, and to figh at the foolish opinion of this World,
in that Men think by humane aid to help God, and with worldly pomp and
power to undertake to defend the Christian Church: I ask you Bishops, what
help used the Apostles in the publishing of the Gospel? With the aid of what
power did they Preach Christ, and convert the Heathen from their Idolatry to
God? When they were in prisons, and lay in chains, did they praise or give
thanks to God for any Dignities or Graces and Favors received from the Court?
Or do you think that Paul went about with Regal Mandates or Kingly
Authority, to gather and establish the Church of Christ? Sought he protection
from Nero, Vespatian, etc? The Apostles wrought with their own hands for their
Maintenance, traveled by Land, and wandered from Town to City to preach
Christ: Yea the more they were forbidden, the more they taught and preached
Christ: But now alas Humane help must assist and protect the Faith, and give
countenance to it, and by vain and worldly Honors do men seek to defend the
Church of Christ, as if he by his power were unable to perform it.


Truth. How many goulden heavenly Sentences (like so many precious Jewels) are
treasured up, in the Cabinet of this holy Testimony of Hilarious? And yet, but
some of them, nay only one of them does Mr Cotton choose to answer, to wit,
this, The Christian Church does not persecute, but is persecuted.


Truth. Dear Peace, Each inch and shread of heavenly Gold is precious, forget
not therefore the Addition in the Letter, Hilarie against the Arrians thus: The
Church which formerly by enduring misery and Imprisonment, was known to be
the true Worldly glory and persecution characters of the false Church.
Church, does now terrify others by Imprisonment, Banishment, and Misery, and
boasts that ^hee is highly esteemed of the World, whereas the true Church
cannot but be hated of the same. In which and other Passages of Hilarious Mr
Cotton might see as in a Glass, the foul spots of his own and New Englands
face, in a most lively Testimony against both bloody Tenants and practices.


Peace. To close upon the Point: Mr Cotton says, He cannot make it a mark of
a Christian Church to be persecuted, for ( Acts 9 31.) the Churches had rest,
etc. Nor a mark of a false Church to persecute; for, Asa persecuted the
Prophet (2 Chronicles. 16. 10.) Acts 7. 51. the true Church persecuted the Prophets.


Truth. When the Scripture or common Reason speaks of a common mark or
Character, proper to one they deny not; but in an Act, or unusual cases that
Mark or Character may be The sins of Gods children.
worn by the Contraries. Noah was drunk; Abraham lies; David commits
Adultery: yet lying, drunkenness and whoredom were not their ordinary
Characters, but the Marks of the common Liars, Drunkards and Adulterers of
this World: David stobd Vriah with his Pen, and Asa imprisoned the Prophet; yet
these Acts were not their ordinary Badges, but rather Spots or Blemishes,
Warts, or Scabs, which grew on and were cast off (like Paul's Viper) without the
note of a constant mark or character.

It is the property of Fire to ascend, and Water to descend, yet the Scripture
relates of the descending of Fire, and the ascending of Water, which takes not
away the ordinary Nature of the mark and character of Fires ascending, and
Waters descending the Hills and Mountains.

An arrant Whore is not always in actual Whoredom and Blood, though both are
her Marks and Dispositions: A chaste wife or Virgin abhorres both, and yet by
force or great Temptation, may be vanquished (as Bathsheba) which afterward
the Tears of godly Sorrow and Repentance wash away.


Peace. Yea but, the Question is (says Mr Cotton) whether Magistrates may not
punish arrogant Heretics and Seducers?


Truth. In all ages God has permitted, Goulden Images (like Christ's Witnesses.
Nebuchadnezzars) to be set up, I say State Worships and Religions! And he has
also provided his Witnesses to testify his Truth against such Abominations:
Such Witnesses dissenting, Nonconforming, and refusing to come to the Common
Assemblies of such Worshippers (to come to Church in plain English) to yield
Conformity, to Subscribe, to Swear, etc. are commonly cried down for
Heretics, Schismatics, etc. And if they open their Lips in defense of their
own Conscience, and profession of Gods Truth! Seducers, Seducers, Blasphemers,
Blasphemers.


2. Peace. But 2. says Mr Cotton) it is another begging of the Question, to
take it for granted, that it is a mark of no true Church to procure the Civil
punishment of incorrigible, obstinate Heretics and Seducers.


Truth. I intend by a mark of character, an inbred constant disposition, put
forth in a constant and ordinary practice: And then A true Wife of Christ no
persecutour.
I dare challenge Mr Cotton to produce any true Church of Christ, either in
Scripture or History, that did ordinarily and constantly profess and practice
to stir up the Civil Magistrate against such whom they judged incorrigible
obstinate Heretics and Seducers.


Peace. That which follows is full of Wonder and Astonishment, for Mr Cotton
confessing the Christian Church does not persecute, that is (says he)
persecute in Excommunicating the Touching persecution what it is.
Heretic) it was replied; this is but an Evasion, for who denies Power to
Christ's Church to Excommunicate? or who understands by Excommunication,
persecution for Conscience? Mr Cotton answers; the Prisoner did no^t express
himself, what persecution he meant, and also since false Excommunication is a
great persecution, and so Christ Jesus himself esteems of it, Luke 21. 22.


Truth. I have formerly and must again appeal to the nature of the word,
commonly used and taken, and ask, if persecution properly so taken be not a
corporeal violence, or hunting for Religion and Conscience sake! And then
half an eye will see through this poor and thin excuse and covering,
notwithstanding that false excommunication be a spiritual persecution, and the
abuse of the spiritual Sword be also deeper and fouler then the abuse of the
civil and material.


Peace. To this (upon the Point) Mr Cotton consented, to wit, that Hilarious
complaint, speaks not to Excommunication, but civil censures, and therefore
answers, first by proportion that excommunication of an Heretic is no
persecution, and therefore by proportion neither is the civil punishment of an
Heretic, persecution. By concession of Hilaries words, that the Apostles did
not, and we may not propagate Religion by the Sword.


Truth. The Question with Hilarie was not whether a true Church did persecute
an Heretic Idolater, Blasphemer, etc. but whether a true Church persecuted at
all by civil censures: Now Difference between a civil and spiritual State.
there being two States, the Civil or Corporeal, and the Ecclesiastical or
spiritual: There are conseqnently two sorts of Laws, two sorts of
Transgressions, two sorts of punishments, to wit, Civil and Spiritual, and
there must of necessity be two sorts of false or corrupt punishments, which
are not just punishments, but oppressions, persecutions or huntings, to wit,
the Civil persecution and the spiritual: Now Mr Cotton (confounding Heaven
and Earth together) deceives himself and others by a notion of spiritual
persecution, to wit, by Excommunication, contrary to Hilaries scope, and the
scope of this whole Dispute and Controversy.

I may illustrate it thus: Some Tutours of Kings Children, not being authorized
to correct the Bodies of such young Princes, are said sometimes (not without
some desert) to correct the Bodies of Inferiors (the young Princes
Favorites,) by which the minds of such young Princes smarted sufficiently, if
not exceedingly. The nature of spiritual punishment.
I parallel not the similitude in all respects, but to illustrate the
difference and distinction, between a spiritual punishment of the mind, and
spirit, soul and affections, with which Christ Jesus has furnished his
Churches: and that Civil or corporal punishment, which he never gave them
power to inflict (unless in miraculous dispensation) over the Bodies of any,
directly or indirectly by Themselves or others.


Peace. It is an everlasting Truth; Rightly distinguish, rightly Teach: but let
us view Mr Cottons Second Answer, He grante that the Christian Religion was
not, nor is not to be propagated by the Sword.


Truth. Then let Heaven and Earth judge, if Mr Cotton may not (in this case)
out of his own mouth be judged, since in this whole Discourse he sets the
visible Headship of Christ Jesus (that golden Head, Cant. 5.) over the Church
and all her Officers, The nature of Christ's spiritual Government.
Doctrines and Practices, (in the power of Correcting, Reforming, etc.) on the
shoulders of the Civil State, the Ministers and Officers thereof: provided
that they execute not this Headship or Government, except they be able to
judge, that is, (in English) provided they be of his Conscience and Judgment,
and so consequently will judge and execute, according to the Clergies (though
implicit) decree and sentence.


Peace. It is not much unlike that Mr Cotton affirms in the The Civil Powers
and Officers the Clergies Executioners.
words following: for although he confesses it is not proper for Christian
Churches to inflict Civil punishments by Themselves, yet makes he (as all
Popes and Popish persecutours have done) the Magistrates and Civil powers,
their servants and slaves for execution, etc.


Truth. This Mr Cotton covers over with this Similitude, saying that although
it is not proper for Lambs to tear Wolves, yet if they were reasonable they
would run to their Shepherds to send out their Dogs after them.

Now under this fine Paint and vizard of Lamb like dispositions of Shepherds,
the Bishops, Presbyterians, and Independents, may render the Civil Magistrate
not as Shepherds, but no other upon the point and in plain English, then
their servants and Executioners, to punish such on whom the Clergy first have
past their Sentence. The bloody Papists have commonly used to persecute Christ
Jesus formally and judicially, delivering over Christ Jesus (in his Servants,)
orderly to Pontius Pilate, the Secular Power. The Protestant persecutors use a
finer veil (every ugly vizard will not so deceive) for though they practice
not so above board, in respect of a formal and judicial delivering of Christ
(the Heretic) unto their Shepherd Pontius Pilate the Secular power, yet they
do it, and do it as substantially and fully by preaching and chalking out to
then servants the Magistrates, their task, I say, as fully as ever the bloody
Popes, the Bishops; or their Chancellours did.


Peace. But why (says Mr Cotton) should a Christian Church spare an Idolater
tempting of her now, any more then the eye of an holy Israelite was to spare
the like Tempters in the days of old, Deuteronomy. 13. 3?


Truth. Mr Cotton cannot get over this block, though it be but a shadow, yea
the shadow of a shadow, abolished by Christ Jesus: Spiritual Judgments more
terrible since Christ, then corporal before his coming.
Mr Cotton a little before grants that the power of spiritual chains far
exceeds the power of material, and if so how clear is it, that the spiritual
impartialitie and severitie of a Virgin Israelite now, is incomparably sharper
and more dreadful, by putting spiritually to Death such as Tempt them from the
Lord their God, who has brought them forth of Egypt into spiritual Canaan,
then the impartialitie and severitie of any literal Israelite, against such as
tempted them from the Lord, who in a Type had brought them forth of material
Egypt into material Canaan?

I add (sweet Peace) to end this Chapter, If the Father of Lights graciously
please to open a crevis of Light to that (otherwise) excellent and piercing eye
of Mr Cotton in this Controversy, he will confess concerning this cutting off
in Israel these two things.

First, that the cutting off in material Israel, was by Swords, The cutting
off or Excommunicating from the holy Land of Israel figurative and typical.
Stones, etc. a cutting off from the holy Land, and a casting out of Gods
sight, which cutting off God executed either by legal Judgment and Sentence
among Themselves, or by furious hand of persecutours and oppressors,
slaughtering or captivating that People.

Secondly, That there is no other cutting off in the Gospel, but by the
spiritual Sword of the Word and Ordinances of Christ, or the violent hand of
Oppressors, Antichristians, etc. carrying Gods Israel captive into mystical
Babylon, or Egypt of false Worship, or worldly corruption, which is ten
thousand-fold more terrible and dreadful, then the literal and material
Captivity of Israel.


Exam: of Chap. 66. replying to Chap. 69.
Peace. HEre Mr Cotton complains of wrong, in that the Discusser charge him
to plead for persecution, and yet confesses that he agrees with Hilarie.


Truth. Mr Cotton indeed agrees with Hilarie in general profession, that the
Gospel is not to be propagated by Sword, but in particulars he affirms, the
Blasphemer, the Idolater, the Heretic, the Seducer is to be persecuted. In the
general he says, the Magistrate may not constrain any to believe and
profess the Truth, yet in particulars; thus far says he, a man may be
constrained by the A twofold w^y of constraint.
Magistrates withdrawing Countenance and Favor, Encouragement and Employment
from him, which affirming, what does he else but affirm that he may be
constrained, deposed, punished, that is, persecuted.


Peace. Indeed such kind of punishment, as to displace men, to keep them out
from all offices, or places of Trust and Credit (because of difference of
Conscience) may prove in the particular a greater affliction and punishment,
then a Censure, a Fine, Imprisonment, yea sometimes more bitter to some Spirits
then Death it self.


Truth. Yea and Mr Cottons ground is both unsafe and dark, and needs a candle
of Light to discover the bottom and compass of it: Such, says he, as walk
not according to their Light, are neither true servants to God nor Man, but

First, what means here Mr Cotton by Light? Light in this What it is to walk
according to a man's Light.
sense is commonly taken two ways.

First, For that is Light indeed, to wit, the precious Light of Gods revealed
will.

Secondly, That which so appears to be, to a man's mind and Conscience, but
may be a falsehood, a lie, a mistake, and darkness. Mr Cotton had done well to
have distinguished, for (before) he blamed King James for walking according to
his Light: and although (upon the point) he makes the Civil Magistrates in all
parts of the World, the Heads, Protectours, and Governors of Christ's Church,
yet if the eyes of these Heads see not by his Light, he cuts off these Heads,
forbidding them to act as Heads, and to walk according to their Light, they
must (as often he tells us) suspend, until they have Light, etc.


2. Peace. Beside, it comes often to pass, that the Light which Conviction
twofold: Sufficient in it self: or to the party efficacious.
shines by preaching or practice of others, although it be a mean sufficient
to convince, if God please to bless it, yet until the Consciences of men be
convinced of the Light of it, I Judge it cannot properly be said to be the
Light of their Consciences, nor they to sin against the Light of their
Consciences.


3. Truth. Yea, and there is a moral virtue, a moral fidelity, ability and
honesty, which other men (beside Church members) are, by good nature and
education, by good Laws and good examples nourished and trained up in, that
Civil places of Trust and Credit need not to be Monopolized into the hands of
Church Members (who sometimes are not fitted for them) and all others deprived
and despoiled of their natural and Civil Rights and Liberties.


Peace. But what say you (Dear Truth) to Mr Cottons Apology for New England
(for as for constraint in old he is silent) he says he knows not of any
constraint upon any to come to Church, to pay Church Duties, and says it is
not so in his Town.


Truth. If Mr Cotton be forgetful, sure he can hardly be ignorant of the Laws
and Penalties extant in New England that are (or if repeald have been) against
such as absent Themselves from Church Morning and Evening, and for Non-payment
of Church-Duties, although no Members.

For a Freedom of Not paying in his Town, it is to their commendation
Touching the Maintenance of the new English Ministers.
and Gods praise, who has showed him and others more of his holy Truth: Yet
who can be ignorant of the Sessments upon all in other Towns, of the many
Suits and Sentences in Courts (for Non-payment of Church-Duties) even against
such as are no Church Members? Of the Motions and pleadings of some (not the
meanest of their Ministers) for Tithes? And how ever for my part I believe Mr
Cotton ingeniously willing, that none be forced expressly to pay to his
Maintenance, yet I question whether he would work if he were not well paid: And
I could relate also what is commonly reported abroad, to wit, that the rich
Merchants and people of Boston would never give so freely, if they were forced,
yet now they are forced to give for shame (I take it) in the Public
Congregation.

The Indians of this Country have a Way called Nanowwe, or Giving their
Commodities freely, by which they get better bargains, then if they stood
stiffly on their Terms of Anaqushento, or Trading: And when not satisfied to
the utmost, they grudge, revile, etc. It cannot be, but that to such
Deceitfulness of Heart Mr Cotton is subject as well as others, though Love
bids me, and others, to hope the best.


Peace. The close of this Chapter seems strange and wonderful, Of propagating
Religion by the Sword.
for Mr Cotton acknowledged that Propagation of Religion ought not to be by the
Sword, and yet instantly again maintains he the use of the Sword when persons
(which then must be judged by the Civil State) blaspheme the true God and the
true Religion, and also seduce others to damnable Heresy and Idolatry: But
this (says he) is not the Propagation of Religion, but the preserving of it,
and if it do conduce to Propagation, it is only Removendo prohibens.


Truth. What is this Removendo prohibens, but as the weeding of a Field or
Garden? And every Husbandman will say, that the end of such his work, is the
propagation and increase of his grain and fruit, as well as the making of his
fence, and planting and sowing of his Field or Garden: What therefore is this
Confession, (though with this Distinction) but in truth an acknowledgement of
what in Words and Terms, he yet denies (with Hilarie) to wit, a propagating
of Christian Religion and Truth by the Civil Sword?

2. Besides it is the same hand and power that plucks up the weeds, and plants
the Corn, and consequently, that same hand and Sword that destroys the
Heretic, may make the Christian, etc.


Exam: of Chap. 67. replying to Chap. 70.
Peace. COncerning Tertullians speech, and especially that Branch, to win, that
[By the Law of natural equity, Men are not to be compelled to any Religion,
but permitted to believe or not believe at all] Mr. Cotton answers, that they
do permit the Indians, but it will not therefore be safe to toller* te the
public Worship of Devils or Idols. The Discusser replied, that they do
permit the Indians in their Paganish Worship, and Touching the Indians of
New England
therefore were partial to their Countrymen and others: Mr Cotton answers;
that it is not true, that they do so permit the Indians, what ever they may
do privately: That the Indians submit to the ten Commandments, and that some
of their Ministers have preached to them in English, which has been
interpreted: That one now preaches in their own Language: Further, That they
permit strangers in their Worship. And for their Countrymen, for the most part
that they worship God with them: They which are distant have Liberty of
public prayer and preaching, by such as themselves choose without disturbance.


Truth. Concerning the Indians, it is most true, that the Monahigganeucks,
Mishawomeucks, Pawtuckseucks, and Cawsumseucks (who profess to submit to the
English) continue in their public Paganish Worship of Devils, I say openly
and constantly.


Peace. Yea but (says Mr Cotton) they have submitted to the ten Commandments.


Truth. I answer; the ten Commandments contain a Renunciation of all salse
Gods and Worships, and a Worshipping of the true God, according to his own
Institutions and Appointments, which their practice is as far from, as
Midnight is from Midday.

2. To put men upon observations of Gods Worship, as Prayer, Worshipping of God
and Christ before the foundation of Repentance, is nothing but Antichristian
disorder.
etc. before the Foundations of Repentance from dead works (their worshipping
of Idols, etc.) is as far from the Order of Christ Jesus, and his Christian
principles (whereof Repentance from dead works is the first) as the building
of an House or Palace, without the first Groundsell or Foundation laid.


Peace. Mr Cotton therefore says, they preach unto them.


Truth. I from my soul wish that all the Lords people in New England were
Prophets, yea true Apostolical Ministers or Preachers, truly furnished with
Christ's Abilities, and Christ's Commission, to go forth to convert and baptize
the Nations, even these Wildest of the Nations of Adams Children: But
Conversion of Nations Mr Cotton says (upon Revel. 15.) until the seven
plagues of the seven Angels be fullfilled, will not be great.

This Interpretation I acknowledge to be very probable, so far as concerns any
great Conversion of the Nations before the downfall of Antichrist, and in the
mean season I commend the pious Endeavors of any (professing Ministry or
not) to do good to the Souls of all Men as We have opportunity. But that any
of the Ministers spoken of are furnished with true Apostolical Commission
(Matthew. 28.) I see not for these Reasons.

First, The Minister or Ministers, whom Mr Cotton I conceive Touching preaching
to the Indians in New England.
intends, profess an ordinary Office in the Church of Christ, which is
clearly distinct, yea and another thing from the office of an Apostle, or one
sent forth to preach and baptize, Ephesians. 4. and 1 Cor. 12.

Secondly, Such Churches as are invested with the power of Christ, and so
authorized to send forth, are separate from the World, which many thousands of
Gods people (dead and living) have seen just Reasons to deny those Churches so
to be.

Thirdly, Were the Church true, and the Messenger or Apostle rightly sent forth
with prayer and fasting, according to Act. 13. yet I believe that none of the
Ministers of New England, nor any person in the whole Country is able to open
the Mysteries of Christ Jesus in any propriety of their speech or Language,
without which propriety it cannot be imagined that Christ Jesus sent forth his
first Apostles or Messengers, and without which no people in the World are long
willing to hear of difficult and heavenly matters. That none is so fitted;

First, The Natives themselves affirm, as I could instance in many particulars.

Secondly, The Experience of the Discusser and of many others testify how hard
it is for any man to attain a little propriety of their Language in common
things (so as to escape Derision amongst them) in many years, without
abundance of conversing with them, in Eating, traveling and lodging with them,
etc. which none of their Ministers (other affairs not permitting) ever could
do.


Peace. There being no helps of Art and learning amongst them, I see not how
without constant use or a Miracle, any man is able to attain to any propriety
of speech amongst them, even in common things. And without propriety (as
before) who knows not how hardly all men (especially Barbarians) are brought
to hear matters of Heaven (so strange and contrary Propriety of Language
necessary to the true preaching of Christ Jesus to any people.
to Nature) yea, even matters of the Earth, except profit and other worldly
ends compel them to spell out Men's minds and meaning?


Truth. 3. I may truly add a third, an Instance in the book of their
Conversion, written by Mr Tho: Shepherd, there Mr Eliot (the ablest amongst
them in the Indian Speech) promising an old Indian a suit of Cloths, the man
(says the relation) not well understanding Mr Eliots speech, asked another
Indian what Mr Eliot said.


Peace. Me thinks, the Native not understanding such a common and welcome
promise of cloths upon Gift, would far more hardly understand Mr Eliots
preaching of the garment of Righteousness Christ Jesus, unto which Men
mutually turn the deaf Ear, etc.


Truth. Neither you (sweet Peace) nor I Express thus much to dampe Mr Eliot or
any from doing all the good they can, whiles opportunity lasts in any truly
Christian way, but to show how great that mistake is, that pretends such a true
preaching of Christ Jesus to them in their own Language.


Peace. But to proceed, in the next Passage Mr Cotton affirms their
Impartialitie in permitting others as well as the Indians.


Truth. I answer; it is one thing to connive at a strange Papist in private
devotions on shore, or in their vessels at Anchor, etc. Another thing to
permit Papists, Jews, Turks, etc. the free and constant Exercise of their
Religion and Worship, in their respective Orders and Assemblies, were such
Inhabitants amongst them.


Peace. Doubtless the bloody Tenent cannot permit this Liberty, neither to
the Papists, Jews, Turks, etc. nor to the Indians, nor does their practice
toward their Countrymen hold forth a show of such a freedom or permission.


Truth. I wonder why Mr Cotton writes, that the most part of the English
worship God with them, and the rest absent have Liberty to choose their
Preachers! Since Mr Cotton knows the Petition and Petitions that have been
presented for Liberty of Conscience in New England, and he cannot but also
know the Imprisoning and Fining of some of the Petitioners, etc.


Peace. It may be Mr Cotton will use the common objection, that some part of
their Petition tended to Disturbance in Civil Things.


Truth. Some of their Petitions were purely for Liberty of Conscience to God
in Worship a close Prisoner in New England, and no Petitioner could obtain its
Liberty.
Conscience, which some in Office, both in Church and State favored, as is
reported, if not promoted. If others or some part of them might be judged
offensive against Laws made, yet why then has not the Liberty of their
Conscience (in point of Worship) been granted to them? When they have
complained (amongst other Passages) that they have been forced to stay the
baptizing of other Men's children, while their own might not be admitted, and
therefore earnestly sued for Ministers and Congregations after their own free
choice and Consciences, which have ever been denied to them.


Peace. It is said, that their Ministers being consulted with, utterly denied
to yield to any such Liberty.


Truth. They might justly fear, that if such a window were opened (as once
Bishop Gardener spoke in another case) that the New English Congregations and
Churches would be as thin; as the Presbyterians complained theirs to have been,
when the people once began to taste the Freedom and Liberty of their
Consciences, from the slaves whip, etc.


Peace. In the next Passage, the Discusser having excepted against Mr Cottons
distinguishing between Members of the Church, and such as have given their
names to Christ; Mr Cotton replies; they are not all one, and quotes, Esa. 65.
5, 6.


Truth. Let the place be viewed, and that place will be found Publik^ marriage,
or giving ones self to Christ.
to speak of no such Difference: It speaks of the Lords promise to Eunuchs
and Strangers, laying hold on the Lords Covenant, and joining themselves to
the Lord, which I conceive Mr Cotton will not deny to be in a Church way; in
which condition the Lord gives the Eunuchs a name better then of Sons and
Daughters.


Peace. In the next Passage Mr Cotton upon Tertullians speech, affirms, that a
false Religion will hurt, because the Red Horse follows the White, etc.


Truth. I answer; Gods Judgments (by War, Famine, Pestilence) plaguing false
Religions in his time (though after many hundredth years patience, as has form
^ly been opened) is one thing: and the present hurting or profiting of others,
is another.


Peace. In the next place Mr Cotton takes offense that the Discusser should
insinuate Mr Cotton to have a hand in the Model of Church Government.


Truth. I answer; Mr Cottons words in the End of his Answer to the Prisoner,
(where he speaks of this Treatise or Model, sent to some of the Brethren of
Salem) seemed to hold out the probability of it. How ever Mr Cotton
subscribeth to the rest of the Elders, (as he here says) their words being
rightly understood.


Peace. Further, Mr Cotton here affirms, that the want of a Law for Religion
in any State provokes the Wrath of God, as the want of a King in Israel, Judge.
21. 25. Judges 21. 25 Considered.



Truth. This Scripture proves no more, but that the want of a King, Magistrate,
Governor, or Civil Officer of Justice, provokes the Wrath of God, and
endangereth the people, against which the Discusser never affirmed, but against
their Kingly or Civil Authority in spiritual cases, since Christ Jesus
abolished that National Church.


Peace. But says Mr Cotton, the best Good of a City is Religion, and
therefore there should be a Law for it.


Truth. To this I have spoken largely in discussing of that Model, unto which
I know not of any Reply yet made by Himself, or any of those worthy men whom
he makes the Authors of it.


Peace. But further, whereas the Discusser had said that the Supreme
Authority in Spiritualls.
weeds of the Wilderness will not hurt the Garden, nor poison the Body, if
not suffered to grow in the Garden, nor taken into the Body, Mr Cotton grants
that Christ has ordained Gardiners for his Garden, and Physic and Physicians
for his Body: Yet withal he makes the Civil Officers, to be as Supervisors,
Superintendents, and consequently, Bishops, Governors, and Heads of the Church
or Churches, and over the spiritual Officers of Christ Jesus.


Truth. What is this but to establish Henry the 8. a Spiritual Civil
Magistrate, and Head of the Church, in the room of the Pope? Contrary to which
I have discoursed in the discussing of the Model in the bloody Tenent.


Peace. But what think you of Mr Cottons interpretation of Tertullians mind,
to wit, that Tertullian should mean, that the Christian Religion would not
hurt nor disturb the Roman Civil State?


Truth. I conceive it cannot stand, for although it be true Tertullians Speech
of one Religion, not hurting or profiting another Considered.
that the Christian Religion hurts no Civil State (but infinitely the contrary)
yet Mr Cotton will not deny that the Christian Religion (not of it self, but
through the corruption of the Civil State) may provoke a Civil State many
ways, and therefore Tertullian must mean otherwise, to wit, every Man must
stand or fall in his own Religion, and the Religion of one man will neither
hurt nor save another: Therefore (to end this Passage) Tertullians words may
not unfitly be thus applied: The Religion of the Protestants, if permitted by
the Papists, will neither hurt nor profit the Papists: The Religion of the
Independents will nether hurt nor profit the Presbyterians, if they permitted
it: And the Religion and Worship of other Consciences in old or New England,
will neither hurt nor profit the Independents, where the power of tollerating
or not tollerating lies in the hands and power of the Independents.


Exam: of Chap. 68. replying to Chap. 71.
Peace. HEre Mr Cotton urges two mistakes: First in the quoting of Jerome:
secondly, in naming Tertullian for Jerome.


Truth. Possible it is, they are neither the mistakes of the Prisoner, nor
Discusser, but either the Scribe or Printers may share with them; or if they
were their own mistakes (although the Prisoner wrote in close prison in
Newgate, and the Discusser in multitude of Distractions, yet) they are justly
to be blamed for their least sleepines in the handling of the matters of the
most High.


Peace. But, Jeromes words (says Mr Cotton) imply more then a spiritual
cutting off; for Jerome immediately subjoyneth these words! Arius was but a
spark, but because he was not speedily suppressed, his Flame depopulated all the
World, which cannot be meant (says he) of cutting off by Excommunication,
which proceeded against him once and twice.


Truth. I cannot be easily induced to believe that Jerome intended to complain
of Constantine, who was not sparing at the first to put forth his temporal
Arm and power against Arrius: But this is certain, his words are these, [
Heresy must be cut off with the Sword of the Spirit: and the Scriptures quoted
by him (1 Cor. 5. Gal. 5.) as Mr Cotton yeeldeth] prove only a spiritual
cutting off: So that it seems not rational for Jerome to run from the
Spiritual Sword, about which he is now conversant, to the carnal and
temporal Sword, of which those Scriptures (as Mr Cotton acknowledges)
discourse not.


Peace. But let no man say (says Mr Cotton) that this grant of his [That
Heresy must be cut off by the Sword of the Spirit] does imply an absolute
sufficiency in the Sword of the Spirit, to cut it down according to 2 Cor.
10. ^^ 5. For though spiritual Weapons be absolutely sufficient to the End for
which God has appointed them, as has been opened above, to wit, for the
conviction, and (if he belong to God) for the conversion of the offendour, for
the mortifying of his flesh, and for the saving of his Soul, and for the
cleansing of the Church from the Fellowship of that Guilt: Yet if an Heretic
will still continue obstinate, and persist in seducing, creep into Houses,
lead captive silly Souls, and destroy the Faith of some, it may be of many,
such Mr Cottons and Mr Edwards Gangrenes have little differd
Gangrenes would be cut off by another Sword, which in the hand of the
Magistrate is not borne in vain.


Truth. This answer of Mr Cotton looks too too like that Distinction of the
bloody Bishop against the poor Martyr or Witness of Jesus (which Mr Fox
mentions) The Scripture is Blasphemy against the holy Scripture.
sufficient for Salvation, but not for Instruction: There is need of Tradition,
etc. The Sword of the Spirit (says Mr Cotton) is absolutely sufficient, for
these four, to wit, the Conviction, Conversion, Mortification, and Salvation
of the offendour, the Heretic, yea, and for a fifth, for Expiation, and
cleansing of the Church from the Fellowship of that Guilt, but there is a
sixth, to wit, Infection, and there the Sword of the Spirit is too weak, and
the Sword of the Magistrate must help.


Peace. What sound and modest Reason can be (almost) pretended, why the holy
Ordinances, Appointments and provisions of the Lord Jesus (who is the Wisdom
of the Father, whose is all power in Heaven and in Earth, and whose Heart is
all on Fire with Love to his people) should be so weak in suppressing the
Enemies of his Kingdom, that, all the Counsel, Order, and Power he has left
in his Absence, are not able to resist the Infection of false Doctrine, without
the help of the Powers of the World his professed Enemy, unto whom who so is
a Friend (says John) he cannot but be an Enemy unto God. Oh what should be
the mystery that the two-edged Sword of Gods mighty Spirit, is sufficient for
Conviction, for Conversion, Mortification, Expiation, Salvation, but yet not
powerful enough against Infection?


Truth. There is written evidently, on the Forehead of this Mysteries of false
Christ's.
plea, as on the forehead of the great Whore (Revel. 17.) Mystery. The
Egyptian Onions (as I may so speak) are full of Spiritual Infoldings, or
Mysteries: One or two I shall briefly unfold or peele.

First, the Clergy (sacrilegiously so called) in all Ages since the Apostasy,
have (like some proud and dainty Servants) disdained The true Christ despised
for his poverty.
to serve a poor despised Christ, a Carpenter, one that came at last to the
Gallows, etc. And therefore have they ever framed to Themselves rich and
Lordly, pompous and Princely, temporal and Worldly Christ's, in stead of the
true Lord Jesus Christ, the spiritual King of his Saints and people. And
however it suits well the common End to retain the Name of Christ (as the Lord
Jesus prophesied many false Christ's, should arise, and many should come in his
Name, etc.) yet most sure it will be found, that a temporal Crown and
Dignity, Sword and Authority, Wealth and Prosperity, is the White that most
of those called Scholars, Ministers, Bishops, aim and level at: How many
thousand of them will readily subscribe to the pleas of the French Bishops
against the Lord Peter, disputing before Philip the French King for temporal
Jurisdiction, and Peter's two Swords in the hands of Christ's Ministers?


Peace. Mr Cotton is not far off, for howsoever He and some will say with him,
one Sword is enough for a Presbyter or Elder, A base esteem of the Spiritual
Sword.
enough for Conviction, Conversion, Mortification, Expiation, and Salvation,
yet one Sword is not enough against Infection, and therefore it is needful
(though we are not of the opinion of those French Prelates and others, that
challenged to themselves the Sword of temporal jurisdiction into their own
hands, yet) it is needful that it be at our call in the hands of our
Executioners the Civil Magistrates.


Truth. It is impossible that temporal and worldly Christ's should walk with
the legs of a spiritual supportment, but as (in respect Earthly Christ's need
earthly supports.
of outward Government) they spring from the Earth and the World, it is
impossible I say but their Feeding and Aliment, Defense and Protection should
be of the nature of the Root and Eliment from whence they arise.


Peace. It is objected, was the Church of the Jews temporal that was assisted
and protected with a temporal Sword?


Truth. The Spirit of God tells us ( Heb. 8 and 10.) of a worldly Sanctuary, of
a weak and old vanishing: Covenant, to wit, a National Covenant, and
Ordinances of a Jewish Church.


Peace. It is again said how can the Discusser extol the Sword of the Spirit
only, and acknowledge no Churches.


Truth. Although the Discusser cannot to his Souls satisfaction conclude any of
the various and several sorts of Churches extant to be those pure golden
Candlesticks framed after the first pattern, Rev. 1. Yet does he acknowledge
golden Candlesticks of The state of Christianity during the reign of
Antichrist.
Christ Jesus extant; those golden Olive trees and candlesticks, his Martyrs or
Witnesses, standing before the Lord, and testifying his holy Truth during all
the Reign of the Beast, Rev. 11. Hence, although we have not satisfaction that
Luther or Calvin, or other precious Witnesses of Christ Jesus, erected Churches
or Ministeries, after the first pattern (as they conceived they did) yet does
he affirm them to have been Prophets and witnesses against the Beast, and
furnished sufficiently with spiritual Fire in their mouths, mightily able to
consume or humble their Enemies, as Eliah did with the Captains sent out
against him.


Peace. I will object no more, please you ( Dear Truth) to pass on to the 2nd.
viz. the Ministry of the Spirits pretended insufficiency against Infection: why
should not the spiritual power of the Lord Jesus be powerful enough against
creepers into Houses, against such as lead captive silly souls, against such as
destroy the faith of some, etc. as well as in the first Churches and
Assemblies, professing his holy name and worship?


Truth. Search his Will and Testament, and we find no other but spiritual means
prescribed and bequeathed by the Lord Jesus, to Paul to Peter, or any of the
holy Apostles or Messengers.


Peace. I must needs acknowledge that the poor servants of Christ, for some
hundereth of years after the departure of the Constantines peace a greater
trial and danger to Christians, then 300 years persecution.
Lord enjoyed no other power, no other Sword nor Shield but spiritual, until
it pleased the Lord to try his children with Liberty and ease under Constantine
(a soarer Trial then befell them in 300 years persecution) under which
temporal protection, munificence and bounty of Constantine, together with his
temporal Sword, drawn out against her spiritual enemies, the Church of
Christ soon surfeited of the too much honey of worldly ease, authority, profit,
pleasure, etc.


Truth. Dear Peace, the second mystery is this. In all ages, the world has
been o'respread with the delusions and abominations of false worship, invented
by Satan and his Instruments in Satan's two ways of quenching the Candle of
Christianity.
opposition to the pure worship of the God of Heaven: Against these the Lord
Jesus has not been wanting to stir up his witnesses, servants and soldiers,
fighting for their Lord and Master spiritually, etc.

These witnesses, when Satan has not been able to vanquish and overcome them
by disputing, writing, etc. (but has ever lost that way) he has been forced
to run to the fleshly Armories of temporal weapons and punishments, and to
fetch in the powers of the world; So hoping to dash out the Candle of Truth and
break the candlesticks thereof the witnesses of Christ Jesus: This Satan has
ever practiced one of these two ways, sometimes by (pretended) legal trials
and executions of Justice, sometimes by most horrid and dreadful murders and
massacres


Peace. Thus has Christ Jesus indeed been vanquished, and driven out of this
world by the powers of Caesar's, Kings and other earthly Governors and Rulers.


Truth. It Is a fresh and bleeding History of that famous disputation between
the Cardinal and Prelates of France and Beza The French Massacre must do what
their pretended disputation could not* effect.
with his protestant assistants under Charles the 9th. And not long after of
that most barbarous and horrible murder and massacre of about 30000 Innocents,
to finish and complete that victory which the pretended Disputation and
spiritual arm could never effect.


Peace. Yea in the bloody Marian days, there must be Convocations called at
London, and down must these famous witnesses Pretended disputes in Q. Mary's
days, ending in fiery flames.
of Jesus, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer to dispute at Oxford but faithful Philpot
for his free disputing in the Convocation at London, and Cranmer, Latimer and
Ridley for not yielding away the truth at Oxford, they must all feel the rage
of the fiery furnace, who bow not down to the golden Image.

And (without offense of civil Authority, or disrespect against any man's
person be it spoken) in the late great disputes between the Presbyterians and
Independents at Westminster; what a Tempest raised, what Earthquakes and
Thunders called for, from Earth and Heaven, ihat the second sword of the
magistrate (herein the The late Synodicall disputes.
Presbiterians Servant and Executioner) might effect that which all the power
of the pretended sword of Gods Spirit was never able to reach to.


Pea. To proceed, M Cot. is greatly offended at this word: to wit [the Eye of
the Answerer could never be so obscured, as to run to the Smiths-shop for a
sword of Iron, and steel to help the Sword, of the Spirit; if the Sun of
Ryghteousnes had pleased to show him that a National Church, etc.] And his
anger breaths forth, A bloody and most unchristian speech.
first against all Heretics thus: If there be stones of the streets, the
Magistrate need not run for a Sword from the Smiths shop, nor an Halter from
the Ropiers to punish an Heretic.


Truth. It is true, the warehouse of persecution is so abundantly filled with
all sorts of bloody Instruments, besides Swords and Ropes, that the Primitive
and Latter times have told us how many several sorts of sorrows, pains and
torments the servants of the living God, have felt by several Instruments of
Blood and Death, besides Ropes and Swords, etc. and all to punish (as Master
Cotton says) the Heretic, the Heretic, Blasphemer, Seducer etc.


Peace. What is this Anger but Fury, Ira furor brevis est? And what weapons can
be wanting to Fury, not the stones in the streets (says Master Cotton) Furor
arma ministrat, for the magistrate needs not (says he) stay so long as to run
to a Smithsshop for a sword, or to the Ropiers for a halter, etc.


Peace. O the mysteries of iniquity and cozenage of sin, that a Lamb of
Christ should thus roar out like a Lion, and (at the speech may be construed by
some) so far as in him lies to provoke the civil powers, yea the people in the
streets to furious outrage, and not so much as to attend proceedings in
pretended The rash fury and madness of persecutors even against themselves.
legal Trials and executions, but in the madness of Barbarous murders and
massacres, and that even upon himself and the Independants in their meetings,
etc.


Peace. But 2dly. he finds fault with the Discussers wit, for bringing such
light conceits into grave discourses and disputes about the holy things of God.


Truth. If there be any thing savouring of wit in the Discussors speech, let
all men judge whether there be not a double, yea a treble portion in this of
Master Cottons; I acknowledge, Non est major confusio quam serij and Joci. The
Discussor dares not willingly to profane the holy name of the most high with
lightness, no not with those fine turnings of wit which the word forbids,
Pleasantness of wit sanctified, glorifies the giver.
((...), Ephesians. 5.) which becomes not Christ's scholars, but rather the giving
of thanks: And yet there is an holy wit and pleasantnes in Samsons Riddle, in
Jothams and Jesus his Parables, yea, and in Eliah his sharp and cutting
language, which cut as deep to their deluding consciences, as the Knives and
Lances of their Idolatrous backs and bodies: Yet none of these were (as Mast.
Cotton insinuates against the Discusser) for naming of Smithsshop) playings
with feathers, etc.


Peace. But what think you of his confidence, touching his New England Diana,
to wit, that the Discusser will never be able to make it good: that the Church
in New England is implicitly, a National and State Church?


Truth. His own words seem to prove it, for if it be a Church The pretended
particul^r Churches of N. E. indeed but a National Church.
and not Churches of N. England, as elsewhere he speaks (and as the Scripture
ordinarily speaks, the Churches of Judea, Galatia, etc.) it cannot be no other
but a National, as the English-Church, Scotch-Church, French-Church, etc. But
possibly it being a mistake, I answer, A Nation in the common and large extent,
I dare not call New England, but thus, the several Plantations or Colonies of
one Religion, or way of worship make up one Colonie or Province of Englishmen
in this part or tract of America. I cannot therefore call the Church of
New England (properly) a National Church, but a Provincial Church, a
State-Church; cast into the mould of a National Church, distinct into so many
Parishes, I say not expressly and explicitly, but implicitly and secretly, which
the son of righteousness will at last reveal, as clearly and brightly in the
eyes of all men, as the sun that shines at Noonday.

At present, I affirm (what ever are the pretenses, pleas and coverings to the
contrary) that that Church estate, that religion and worship which is commanded
or permitted to be but one in a country, nation or province (as was the Jews
religion in that typical land of Canan) that Church is not in the nature of the
particular Churches of Christ, but in the nature of a National or state
Church: the nature of a particular Church of Christ, is to be one, 2 or 3 (more
No permission of any Religion or worship but one in N. E. therefore are the
Churches, but a National Church in the mould them, etc. Where the Supreme
Authority in a Church is Civil, the Body cannot but be like the head, and all
make up but one Civil or National mixed Church, like the Jewish National
Church. The purging a Country of Heretics declares that Country is
explicitly or implicitly a National Church.
or less) in Towns or Cities (as in all the instances of the New Testament,
but the nature of the State Church is when the whole State is turned into a
State Church in so many Parishes or Divisions of worshippers: and it is made
odious and intolerable for any part of this City, state, etce. not to attend
the common worship of the City, sanctify the holy times, and contribute to the
holy Officers, and to walk in another way, which is the general state and
practice of New England.

2 That is a national and state Church where the Civil power is constituted
the Head thereof, to see to the conforming or reforming of the Church, the
truth or falsehood of the Churches, Ministries or ministrations, ordinances,
Doctrine, etc.

In the particular Churches of Christ Jesus, we find not a tittle of the
power of the civil magistrate or civil sword in spiritual cases. It is
impossible but a National and Civil head must be head of a National or State
Church, which (upon the point is but a civil or temporal Church (like the
head thereof) and not a heavenly and spiritual: I say, a Civil or temporal
Church, subject to the changes of a changeable Court or Country, and the
interpretings and expoundings of Scripture, to what the Court or Country is
subject to approve ot disprove of.

3 It is a National or State Church, where the opposite or gain-sayer, the
pretended Heretic, Blasphemer, Seducer, etc. is some way or other punished,
put forth of the State or Country it self by death or banishment: whereas
particular Churches put forth no further then from their particular societies,
and the Heretic, etc. may still live in the Country or Countries unmolested
by them.

4 That Church cannot be otherwise then a National or State Church, where the
maintenance of the Worship, Priests and A State Maintenance proves a State
Church.
Officers, is a State maintenance, provided by the care and power of the State,
who (upon the point) pays their Ministers or Servants their wages; whereas the
maintenance of the Worship and Officers of a particular Church, we find by
Christ's Testament to be cared for sufficiently by Christ's power, and means in
his Church.

5 That Church is a National or State Church, whose whole Synods assembled by
Civil Power, prove the Churches of the same Nature with the Head that acts and
calls them.
Assemblies, in Synods, Counsels, Provincial, National, etc. If Mr Cotton
can disprove the truth and substance of these and other particulars alleged,
so far as concerns the general and Body of the Country combined
(whatsoever little variation some particular Towns may make) the Discusser
must acknowledge his Error, but if Mr Cotton cannot do it, as I believe he
cannot (what ever flourish a wit may pretend) the God of mercy pardon what by
Mr Cotton is done in Ignorance, and awaken him and others, who cause his people
to go astray; according to that of the Prophet; Their Shepherds cause this
people to go astray.


Peace. O that all Gods sheep in New England, and such as judge themselves
their Shepherds, may truly judge themselves at the tribunal of their own
Consciences in the presence of the Lord, in the upright Examination of these
particulars: But to leave New England, and to return to the Land of Israel: I
should think (says Mr Cotton) not only mine eye obscured, but the sight of
it utterly put out, if I should conceive (as the Discusser does) that the
National Church State of the Jews did necessarily call for such weapons to
punish Heretics more then the Congregationall State of particular Churches
does call for the same now in the days of the New Testament.


Truth. It is a strange Speech to proceed from so knowing a Man, but let us
ponder his Reasons in the fear of God.


Peace. Was not (says Mr Cotton) the National Church of the Jews completely
furnished with Spiritual Armor to defend it self, and oppose Men and
Devils, as well as particular Churches of the New Testament? Had they not
power to convince false Prophets, as Elijah did the Prophets of Baal? had they
not power to separate Evil Doers from the Fellowship of their Congregations?
And he adds, an unclean Person, although he might not Enter into the Temple,
with the rest of the Israelites to worship the Lord, yet he was permitted to
live in the Commonweal of Israel, Men uncircumcised both in Heart and Flesh.

He adds further, that the National Church of Israel was Touching the
difference between the Church of the Jews and the Christian Churches.
powerfully able by the Sword of the Spirit to defend it self, and to offend
Men and Devils, for which he quoteth, Zach. 4. 6. And he asks, does not the
Discusser himself observe that time was, in the National Church of the Land
of Canaan, when there was neither Carnal Sword nor Spear to be found, 1 Samuel
13? And was not then the National Church powerfully able by the Spirit of God
to defend it self, and to offend Men and Devils as well as particular
Churches now?


Truth. I answer: First, As much as the shadow of a Man falls short of a Man
himself, so did all their Ordinances (which were but shadows of spiritual
things to come) fall short of that bright enjoyment of Christ Jesus, and
spiritual and heavenly things in him, now brought to Light by Christ Jesus in
the Gospel or New Testament.

2. Mr Cotton will never demonstrate that the putting forth, or Excommunicating
of a person from the Church of God amongst them, was other then cutting off
from the Land by Death, and the Civil Sword, the same being spiritually
executed now in the Israel of God, 1 Cor. 5. Gal. 5. 12.

Thirdly, Although the Stranger uncircumcised might live The holy Land of
Canaan a Nonesuch.
amongst them, yet none of the Native Israelites might so live, nor yet might
the Stranger profane the holiness of the Lord by labor on the Sabbath, which
Mr Cotton will never prove ought A Figure of the Chr^stian.
now to be kept by all Countries of the world, and that under such Penalties,
as was in the Land of Canaan, the holy Land: Nor that they had spiritual power
sufficient to punish the wilful breach of any Moral or Ceremonial duty,
without the help of the Carnal Sword, the contrary to which is plain in the
New Testament, 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 10.

Fourthly, For the Scripture, Zach. 4. 6. Not by might nor Power, etc. The
Prophet does not here oppose the Spirit to might or power, so as to deny the
use of Carnal weapons, might or power, which God had vouchsafed to them
against all Enemies within and without, but shows it to be the work of The
weapons of the Jews and Christians compared.
Gods own finger or Spirit in the use of carnal means which they used for the
raising of the Material Temple and Civil defense of Themselves against all
Opposers, Hinderers, etc. Whereas 2 Cor. 10. the Apostle flatly opposes
Spiritual Weapons against Carnal, and Mr Cotton will never prove that the
Corinthians or any of the Saints of Christ, did enjoy other Weapons, in that
first or the Ages next after, but only the Spiritual Weapons and Artillery
which the Apostle mentions.

Lastly, To that of 1 Samuel 13. I answer, That when there was no Spear nor
Sword in Israel, the Israelites were not No Spear nor Sword in Israel.
powerfully able to defend Themselves against their Enemies, except that God
was pleased extraordinarily to stir up means of their preservation, as we
see in the case of Jonathan and his Armor-bearer against the Philistims. In
like manner I believe that where the ordinary power of Gods hand in his holy
Ordinances is withdrawn, it is his extraordinary and immediate power that
preserves and supporteth his people against Men and Devils; as in particular,
during the reign of Antichrist in stirring up and supporting the two Witnesses.


Exam: of Chap. 69. replying to Chap. 72. Touching the Testimony of Brentius.
Peace. IT is untrue, says Mr Cotton, that we restrain Men from Worship
according to Conscience, or constrain them to Worship against Conscience, or
that such is my Tenent or practice.


Truth. Notwithstanding Mr Cottons cloak, to wit, that they will not meddle
with the Heretic before he has sinned against his own Conscience, and so
persecute him only for sinning against his own Conscience, yet I earnestly
beseech every Reader seriously to ponder the whole stream and series of Mr
Cottons* Discourse, Propositions, Affirmations, etc. through the whole book,
and he shall then be able to judge whether it be untrue that his Doctrine tends
not to constrain, nor restrain Conscience.

2. For the matter of fact, how can he with any Humility before the staming
eyes of the most High, cry out, no such practice, when

First, Their Laws cry out a Command under Penalty for all New England loath
to be accounted persecutours.
to come to Church, though not to be Members, which in truth (as has been
opened) is but a color and visard, deceiving himself and others: And a cruel
Law is yet extant against Christ Jesus, muffled up under the hood or veil of a
Law against Anabaptistrie, etc.

Secondly, Their practice cries, their Imprisonments, Finings, Whippings,
Banishments cry in the Ears of the Lord of Hosts, and the louder because of
such unchristian figleave, cloakes, etc.


Peace. Let it be granted (says Mr Cotton) that we did both, yet this did not
make Laws to bind Conscience, but the outward man only! Nor would we (says
he) think it fit to bind the outward man against Conscience.


Truth. I cannot discern the Coherence of these three Affirmations: 1. We
restrain no man from Worship according to Conscience. 2. We make Laws but to
bind the outward man only. And yet again (3) we think not meet to bind
the outward man against Conscience. Mr Cotton lived once under a Popish Law, to
wear a fools Coat or Surplice on his back, and to Laws concerning Gods
Worship.
make a Conjuring Cross with his Fingers, why should he say, that this Law
went beyond his back and his fingers, and came even to his Conscience? If these
petty bonds did bind his Conscience, as well as his back and his fingers; Oh
let not Mr Cotton so far put off the Bowels of Compassion toward Christ
Jesus and his Followers, yea toward all men, as to bind their backs, and their
Necks, their Knees and Hands backward and forward, to or from Worship, and yet
say he binds but the outward man, Dangerous distinctions.
etc.

Yea and oh let not such uprightnes, candor, and Integrity, as Mr Cotton has
been noted for, be blemished with such an Evasion as this, to wit, when it
comes to self, that Conscience his own or his Friends be offered to be bound,
etc. then he shall fly to his third Evasion, saying, We think it not meet to
bind the outward man against Conscience, that is, against our Consciences,
etc. What ever becomes (sinck or swim) of other Men's.


Peace. In the next Passage, God needs not (says Mr Cotton) the help of the
Magistrate more in the Second, then in the first Table.


Truth. God needs not absolutely for the matters of the Second Touching
keeping of both Tables.
Table, though respectively, because he has appointed Ordinances, unto which
he has graciously referd himself. But for the first Table, he has no need
at all, of carnal weapons, no not respectively, because he has appointed
Ordinances to thousandfold more potent, suitable and sufficient.


Peace. Whereas it was urged, that if Magistrates must use their material
Sword in keeping of both Tables, they must be able to judge of both: Mr Cotton
replies, that it is enough, Of Magistrates Judgment in Spirituals, etc.
that they be able to judge in Principles and Foundations, and of the
Arrogancy of a tumultuous Spirit; for such want not Judgment to censure
Apostasy or Heresy, Idolatry, etc.


Truth. It is not like that a Carpenter who has skill sufficient to judge the
Principles and Foundations of a house or Building, should be unable to judge
about the Beams, Posts, etc.

2. With what great darkness, have the best of Gods children themselves been
covered these many hundredth years, touching the very Fundamentalls of Gods
Worship!


Peace. Whereas it was said further, that either they are not Of Qualifications
of Magistrates.
fitly qualified Magistrates and Commonweals, that want this ability to
judge, etc. Or else they must judge according to their Conscience! Mr Cotton
replies; Many Qualifications are required in Husbands, Wives, Children,
Servants, Ministers, Churches, the want whereof may make them sinful, but not
unlawful.


Truth. I answer; some Relations are Passive, as that of children, who may be
true and lawful children, although they know not that they are children. But,
such Relations as are active in their choice and consent, as of Husband, Wife,
Magistrate, etc. these cannot be lawful, unles they be fitted and qualified to
perform the maine and essential duties of Husbands, Wives, Servants,
Magistrates. That Husband, Wife, Servant cannot be lawful, that are engaged to
other Husbands, Wives, Masters: Nor can that Magistrate be lawful, who is a
madman or Idiot, not able to discern between Right and Wrong: and truly
(were Magistrates bound, as to the chief part of their Duty and Office) to
establish the true Religion, etc. he were no more then a madman (as to the
first Table) that were not spiritually endued with ability of discerning the
true Church, Ministry, Worship, etc.


Peace. Now whereas it was further urged that then the Commonweal, the Civil,
Natural state, has more Light concerning Of Magistrates Abilities.
the Church of Christ then the Church it self, etc Master Cotton replies, it
follows not, because that is a weak Church that knows no more light then that
of the Principles; and beside; what light the Commonwealth has it may have
received from the Church.


Truth. I answer, If Kings and Queens, etc. be nurcing Fathers and Mothers (in
a spiritual respect) over the Church, as is usually alleged; can it be
expected but that the Nurse, Father or Physician should know more of the Child's
state then the Child or Patient himself, who oftentimes knows not his
sickness, nor that he is sick, (as often may be the case of a Church of Christ)
It is impossible, but they must have more light then the Child, yea and much
more impossible that they should receive their Light and direction from the
Child, etc.


Peace. We see, says Master Cotton, that Magistrates sometimes have more Light
in matters of Religion then the Church it self, as David and Hezekiah.


Truth. This (1) confirms what I said, that these Kings being appointed by
God, Formers and Reformers of the Church of Judah, they must needs have more
light in the matter of Reformation David and Hezekiah figurative Kings, etc.
then the Church it self to be reformed.

2 I must deny that David and Hezekiah were other then types of Christ Jesus,
both in his own person and in such, who in his absence are by him deputed to
manage the spiritual power and sword of his holy and spiritual Kingdom.


Peace. Yea, but alas, says Master Cotton, there is no color, that because
Magistrates are bound to discern and serve Christ with their power, that
therefore they may punish Christ and Christians.


Truth. True, therefore, Master Cotton elsewhere says, they must suspend to
deal in Church matters until they can judge, etc.

And this, First implies their light and judgment (absolutely necessary) in
all such matters of the Church, about which they are to Judge and act as often
I affirm

2 I ask what kind of spiritual Physicians will Master Cotton have, who shall
be bound to suspend their power, all their lives long, unless they have skill
to judge of Diseases? will not the Magistrates suspending in matters of
Religion.
similitude hold against such spiritual Fathers, Nurces, Physicians, who all
their life long (yea the greatest number beyond compare of all their spiritual
Fathers upon the face of the Earth) must wholly suspend from acting in
spiritual diseases or cases, to wit, in reforming, establishing, etc.

3 Although it excuses not ('it is true) such Magistates, Princes
Commonwealths, for making this Doctrine their ground of persecuting Christ and
Christians, yet doubtless it makes their sin the greater who feed them with
such bloody Doctrines, and so consequently occasion them upon the rocks of such
falls and dangerous and bloody practices.


Exam: of Chap. 70. replying to Chap. 73.
Peace. IN this Chap. ( Dear Truth) lie many stones of offense, at which the
feet of the unwary most easily many stumble; I hope your careful and steady
hand may be a blessed Instrument of their Removal: As First, although Master
Cotton subscribe unto Luther that the Government of the Civil Magistrate does
extend no further, then over the Bodies and Goods of the subject, yet (says
he) he may and ought to improve that power over their Bodies and Goods to the
good of their Souls.


Truth. Sweet Peace my hand (the hand of Christ assisting) shall not be
wanting: but what offense can be taken at the propositions?


Pea. The proposition like an aple of Sodom, is fair and specious until you
crush it by examination: For, by maintaining the Magistrates power over the
Bodies and Goods of the subject, for the good of his Soul, it is clear in this
Chapter and others foregoing and following, that Master Cottons words drive at
no less then a seizing upon, and plundering of the goods, the Imprisoning,
whipping, Banishing and killing the Bodies, of the Woeful Soulsaving.
poor people, and this under the Cloak and color of saving their Souls in the
day of the Lord Jesus.


Truth. The Civil State, and Commonweal may be compared to a piece of
Tapistry, or rich Arras, made up of the several parts and parcels of the
Families thereof. Now by the Law of God, Nature and Nations* a Father has a
power over his Child, the Husband over the Wife, the Master over, etc. and
doubtless they are to improve that power and Authority for the good of the
souls of their Children, Yoak-fellows, etc. But shall we The power of Parents,
Husbands, Magistrates in spirituals.
therefore say that the Father and the Husband has power under Christ over the
conscienies and religion of the Child or Wife, as a Father or Husband had under
Moses Numb. 30. Parents are commanded in the Gospel to bring up their Children
in the instruction and fear of the Lord; the Husband is commanded to 1 Cor. 7.
labor to win and save his Wife (with no other power then the Wife also her
Husband) whether Turk or Jew, Antichristian or Pagan: but such a power and
sword to be improved (as Mr. Cotton here pretends) for soul-good, Master Cotton
will never find in the Testament of Christ Jesus.

The Plain English is (what ever be the Cloak or cover which the States, Kings
and Rulers of this world use in this case) this term [for souls good] is no
more then the old Popish Jesabels The term [ Souls-good] commonly but a
paint, etc.
painting, pro salute animae, pro redemptione animae, or as that noble St. John
observed in a speech at Guild Hall, that the Kings party made use of the name
of Peace, as the Papists used the name of God, In nomine Domini, etc.


Peace. It is most lamentable to see how the Kings of the Earth are grossly
flattered by their Clergy, into as gross a belief that they are most Catholic
Kings as in Spain, most Christian Kings as in France, Defendors of the Faith in
England. Hence those two bloody Persecutors of Luther, Charles the Fifth, and
Henry the Eighth, were celebrated even upon the posts of the doors in
Guild Hall: Carolus, Henricus vivant, defensor uturque,


Henricus Fidei, Carolus Ecclesiae. Peace. And yet to what other end have or
do (ordinarily) the Kings of the Earth use their power and authority over the
Bodies and Goods of their Subjects, but for the filling of their pau^ches like
Wolves or Lions, never pacified unless the peoples bodies, goods and Souls be
sacrificed to their God-belly, and their own Gods of profit, honor, pleasure
etc.


Peace. But in the second place Master Cotton affirms, that by procuring the
good of their souls, they may much advance the good of their bodies and outward
man also.


Truth. This Proposition is as fair as the former, but in the searching and
crushing is as rotten, for however it is most true (as he quoteth 1 Timothy 4.)
that Godliness has the promise of The promises of temporal mercies
considered.
this Life, and of a better, and also that such as seek first the Kingdom of
God, may expect outward mercies to be cast upon them, yet these promises can
never by any rule of Christ, be stretched to prove outward prosperity and
flourishing to the followers of Christ Jesus in this present evil world.


Peace. He that is in a pleasant Bed and Dream, though he talk Idly and
insensibly, yet is loath to be awaked.


Truth. Those sweet promises supply Gods servants with what outward blessings
his holy Wisdom sees they have need of for his service: But when will Master
Cotton indeed witness against a National Church, and cease to mingle Heaven
and Earth, the Church and worldly state together? when will he cease to propose
the rich and peaceable, victorious and flourishing National State of the Jews
as the Type of the Carnal peace and worldly* wealth and honor of the
spiritual Nation and Kingdom of Christ Jesus? when will he more plainly and
simply conform the members to the head Christ Jesus in the Holiness, Glory of
his spiritual poverty, shame and sufferings?


Peace. I have in the experience of many Ages observed the flourishing
prosperity of many Cities, Common wealths and Nations, where no sound of Christ
has come, and that for hundreths, yea, some thousands of years together, as
has formerin this discourse been instanced.


Truth. You have found that when the Red and Black and Pale horse of War,
Famine and Death have thundered upon the Nations, it has not been upon the
decay of a State Religion, but most commonly upon the rejecting and persecuting
of the Preachers and Witnesses against it.


Peace. Yea Master Cotton himself observes that such of Gods servants as grow
fattest in Godliness, grow not outwardly in wealth, but God keeps them low
in outward estate. Worldly prosperity ever dangerous to Gods children.



Truth. I conclude this passage with an observation of constant experience,
ever since the Son of God ascended the Heavens. The nearer Christ's followers
have approached to worldly wealth, ease, liberty, honor, pleasure, etc. the
nearer they have approached to Impatience, Pride, Anger and Violence against
such as are opposite to their Doctrine and Profession of Religion: And (2) The
further and further have they departed from God, from his Truth, from the
Simplicity, Power and Purity of Christ Jesus and true Christianity.


Peace. In the next Passage Mr Cotton (though with another heart, yet) in the
Language and Tongue of the Pharisees, seems to take part with the Prophets
against the persecuting Fathers, and amongst many things he prohibites
Magistrates this one, to wit, that he must not make Laws to bind Conscience.


Truth. What is a Law, but a binding Word, a Commandment? Of Laws binding
Conscience.
What is a Law to bind Conscience, but a Commandment that calls for
Obedience? And must we raise up such Tumults, such Tragedies, and fill the
face of the World with streams of blood, about the Christian M^gistrates
reforming Religion, establishing Religion, killing the Heretic, Blasphemer,
Idolater, Seducer, and yet all this without a Law, that may in the name of
Christ exact obedience?


Peace. I wonder what we shall think of those Laws and Statutes of
Parliament, in old or New England that have bound the peoples Consciences, at
least so far, as to come to the Parish Church, improving (as Mr Cotton says)
the power and Authority over their Bodies, for their Souls good? What shall
we call all those Laws, Commandments, Statutes, Injunctions, Directions, and
Orders, that concern Religion and Conscience?


Truth. The plain truth is, Mr Cottons former reforming zeal, cannot be so
utterly extinguished, as to forget the name and Notion of Christian Liberty,
although in this bloody Discourse, he has well nigh, (if not wholly) sold
away the Thing! The Conscience (says he) must not be bound to a Ceremony (to
a pretended indifferent Ceremony): And yet lo, throughout this Discourse, he
pleades for the binding of it from these and these Doctrines, from these and
these Worships, and binding to this or that Worship, I mean, to come to the
public Town or Country Worship! Just for all the world, as if a Woman should
not be bound to make a Curtsie, or Salutation to such a Man, but yet she
should be bound (will she nill she) to come to his bed at his pleasure. Worship
is a true of false Bed, Cant. 1. 16.


Peace. It is observable in the next place, what Mr Cotton observes,
concerning the Principles of saving Truth, to wit, that no good Christian, much
l^sse good Magistrate can be ignorant of them.


Truth. In the Consideration of the Model, this Goodness or Badnes of the
Magistrate is Examined, and easily it is proved (to my understanding) that this
Assertion confounding the nature of Civil and Moral goodness with Religious,
is as far from Goodness as Darkness is from Light.


Peace. To this Issue tends Mr Cottons Conclusion of this passage [verily the
Lord will build up and establish the House and Kingdom of such Princes, as do
thus build up his.]


Truth. The promise of God to David concerning his House and Kingdom in the
Letter, is most true in the Mystery and Antitype, as to the Spiritual House
and Kingdom of King David, King Jesus, in such Princes or Prophetical Kingly
Spirits, who Spiritually, in the Word of Prophecy (the Sword of Gods Spirit)
contend, for the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ Jesus: God will establish them
in Spiritual Dignity and Authority: But take this Persecution the ordinary
Portion of Christ's Followers.
literally (as Mr Cotton carries it) and as he never will find any such Duty
lying upon Princes in the Gospel, nor any such promise of temporal
prosperity, but holy praedictions and foretellings of the cross and
persecution ordinarily to all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, and the
greater persecution to the most zealous and faithful Servants of Christ Jesus:
So neither can he give any true Instance (truly proper and parallel) to this
purpose.


Peace. Me thinks (...)hough success be no constant rule to walk by, yet Gods
providence in success of Journies, Victories, etc. are with great care and
fear to be attended to and pondered, and the Hand and Eye of God to be
observed in them, of what sort or Nature so ever they be. Two States
wonderfully favored by God, upon mercy showed to oppressed Consciences,
formerly Holland and now the State of England.



Truth. Two instances of greatest success and temporal prosperity we have
presented to us on the public stage of this world, before our own Doors,
crowning the Heads of such States and Statesmen, as have attended to mercy and
freedom toward oppressed Consciences.

The first is that of the State of Holland: The second of our own Native
England, whose renowned Parliament and victorious Army never so prospered, as
since their Declaration and practice of pity and mercy to Consciences
oppressed by Mr Cottons bloody Tenent.


Peace. In the next Passage, it being a Grievance that Mr Cotton should grant
with Luther the Magistrates power to extend Bodies and Goods the Magistrates
object.
no further then the Bodies and Goods of the Subject, and yet withal
maintains, that they must punish Christians for sinning against the Light of
Faith and Conscience: Mr Cotton answers;

First; He supposes the chief good to be that of Christian Faith and Good
Conscience.

Secondly; Suppose (says he) by Goods were meant outward Goods, yet the
Magistrate may punish such in their Bodies and Goods, as seduce, etc. for
(says he) in seeking Gods Kingdom and the Righteousness thereof, Men prosper
in their outward Estates, Matthew. 6. 23. Otherwise they decay.

Lastly, He remembers not the proposition to be his, [The Magistrates power
extends no further, then the Bodies and Goods of the Subject] He answers it
is true in respect of the Object, though not in respect of the End, which
(says he) is (...), Been administrare Rempublicam. And he asks if it be well
with a Commonweal, enjoying bodily health and worldly wealth, without a
Church, without Christ! And he concludes with the Instance of the Roman
Empire, which had it not cast away Idolatry (says he) had been ruined.


Truth. For answer; First, the distinction is famous among all Men of the Bona
or Goods of Animi, Corporis, Fortunae: and again, that of the Mind, Soul,
and Conscience within, and that of the Body and Goods without, that it can be
no less then a Civil as well as a Spiritual Babell to confound them.

Secondly, To his Supposition, suppose (says he) by Goods Oppression in Bodies
Goods and Mind.
were meant outward Goods, yet the Magistrate may punish such in their Bodies
and Goods, as do Seduce, etc. I see not how these Cohere any better then the
grant of some Papists, that the Churches power extends no further then the
matters of Faith and Conscience: But yet (say they) they may punish such in
their Bodies and Goods as seduce, etc. Mr Cottons Suppositions and the Papists
come both out of the same Babylonian Quiver.

But thirdly, let us mind his Reason from Matthew. 6. In seeking Gods Kingdom
men prosper in outward estate, otherwise not: I answer, this Proposition would
better befit the pen of a Jew then a Christian, a follower of Moses, then of
Jesus Christ, who although he will not fail to take care for his in Earthly
Providence, that make it their chief work to seek his Kingdom, yet he
makes (as I may say) Christ's Cross the first Figure in his Alphabet, taking
up his Cross and Gallows (in most ordinary persecution,) which with
self-denial, are the assured Terms his Servants must resolve to look for.

It Is true, he promises and makes good, an hundredth Fathers, Wealth, Honor,
and Prosperity seldom attending Christ's true Followers.
Mothers, Brothers, Sisters, Wives, Children, Houses and Lands: But Mr Cotton
well knows, it is [with persecution]. And how this outward prosperity, agrees
with Imprisonments, Banishments, hanging, burning, for Christ's sake: the
Martyrs or Witness of Jesus in all Ages, and the cry of the Souls under the
Altar, may bring again to his Remembrance, if New Englands peace, profit,
pleasure and Honor, have lulld him into a Forgetfulness of the principles of
the true Lord Jesus Christ.


Peace. But Mr Cotton remembers not the Proposition to be his, to wit, that
the Magistrates power extends no further then the Bodies and Goods of the
Subject.


Truth. Mr Cotton hinted not his least dissent from Luther (as he otherwise
uses to do if he disowne,) etc.

Secondly, He grants it true in the object, to wit, that the object of the
Magistrates power is the Body and Goods of the Subject, though not in the End
which he says is (...), well to administer the Commonweal: Now I ask what
is this Commonweal?


Peace. The Spirit of God distinguishes in the New Testament What is the
Common weal of Israel.
between the Commonweals of the Nations of the World, and the Commonweal of
Israel. The Commonweal of Israel, Mr Cotton will not affirm now to be a
Church Provincial, National, O^cumenicall, but Particular and Congregationall.


Truth. If so, then the final cause of both these Commonweals or States
cannot be the same. But although the End of the Civil Magistrate be excellent,
to wit, well to administer the Commonweal, yet the end of the Spiritual
Commonweal of Israel and the Officers thereof, is as different and
transcendent as the Heaven is from the Earth.


Peace. But how (says Mr Cotton) can it be well with the Commonwealth that
injoyes bodily health, and worldly wealth, if there be no Christ, no Church
there? and how was it with the Roman Empire which the Red-horse of War, and
Black horse of Famine, and Pale horse of Pestilence would have ruined, if she
had not cast away her Idols.


Truth. Concerning this instance of Rome Master Cotton here acknowledges it
abounded in worldly blessings, till the Lord Jesus came riding forth upon the
White Horse of the Gospel. And Master Cotton may remember that from the
Foundation of her The Roman Empire flourishes in worldly glory without Christ
rising and Glory, laid by Romulus until Christ's time, it flourished about 750
years in a long chain of generations succeeding each other in worldly
prosperity, and yet no Church nor Christ to uphold it, so far is Master Cottons
Romish instance from countenancing Mr. Cottons Roman Doctrine.


Peace. But when Christ came (says Master Cotton) and was neglected, then the
Red and Black and Pale horse had almost destroyed her, if she had not cast away
her Idols.


Truth. I answer, Rome the head of the Empire cannot be said to neglect Christ
(until the bloody Tenent of persecution arose amongst them) I say, not to
neglect Christ more, nor so The City of Rome famous for prosessing Christ
Jesus.
much as other States, for there were so many of the Romans, and so glorious
professors of Christ Jesus, that all the world over the Faith and Christian
obedience of the Romans was renowned.

2 The Roman Impire cannot be said to cast away her Idols, but to change (as
the Portugals did in the East Indies) her Idols her more gross and Pagan
Idols, for more refined and beautified Idols, painted over with the name of
Christ, the true God, holiness, etc. and this in the glorious days of
Constantine, or not long after. The Church of Christ Jesus which under
persecution remained Christ's Spouse most chaste under persecution.
a wise and spouse of Christ Jesus, now degenerates and apostates into an
Whore, in the times of her ease, security and prosperity. (Whole Cities,
Nations, and the whole world forced and ravished into a whore or Antichristian
Christian.)

3 As far as the East is from the West, so far is the world and nations and
Empire of it from the holiness of Christ Jesus, holy Spirit* Truth and Saints:
With what appearance then of Christ's holiness, glory, etc. can Master Cotton
advance the world (the Roman Empire) to be (as he here speaks) the Advancer of
the scepter of Christ Jesus?


Peace. If this Roman Empire be that dreadful Beast, (in Daniels prophecy)
more strange and terrible then the rest, yea, and The Roman Monarchy bloody to
the Saints.
more terrible to Christ Jesus and his servants, then was the former Babilonian
Lion, or Persian Bear, or Grecian Leopard, what truth of Jesus is this, that
advances this dreadful bloody Beast to be the Advancer of the Scepter, that
is, the Church and Government, the Truth and Saints of Christ Jesus.


Peace. Glorious things (Dear Truth) are recorded of Constantine and other
glorious Emperors.

Truth. The Beast was (sweet Peace) the Beast still, although Constantine a
friend and enemy to Christ's Spouse.
it pleased God to give some refreshing and reviving to his persecuted
servants, by Constantine and other blessed instruments yet Constantines favor
was a bitter sweeting, his superstiti^us zeal laying the Foundation for after
Usurpations and Abominations.

4 But further, for near 1000 years together, both before and after Christ's
time, Rome grew and flourished (with little alterations The state of the Roman
Empire before and after Christ.
of her glory in comparison) until this very time that Master Cotton calls the
casting away of her Idols: For not before, but after Constantines advancing of
Christians to wealth and honor, etc. I say near about 300 years together
(interchangably) after his time, until Pipinus, and Charles the Great, the
City and state of Rome was almost ruined and destroyed, by the often dreadful
incursions of the Goths and Vandals, Huns, Longobards, and other furious
Nations: So contrary to the truth of Jesus is this fleshly doctrine of worldly
wealth and prosperity, and also this very instance of Rome and her glory here
discussed.


Peace. Master Cotton ends with prayer and blessing to God (as James speaks)
and bitter and cutting cursings and censures to man, the poor Discusser, who
(says Master Cotton) seduceth himself and others and delights to do it, and
against the light of grace and conscience, against reason and experience.


Truth. The Discusser is as humbly confident of Grace and Conscience, Reason
and Experience, yea, the God of all Grace, Christ Jesus, his holy Spirit,
Angels, Truth and Saints to be on his side, as Master Cotton otherwise can be:
but the day shall try, the Fire and Time shall try which is the Gold of Truth
and Faithfulness, and which the Dross and Stubble of Lies and Error.

In the mean time I dare pronounce from the Testimony of Christ Jesus, that in
all Controversies of Religion: That Soul that most possesses it self in
patient suffering, and depends not on the arm of flesh, but upon the arm of
God, Christ Jesus, for his comfort and protection, that Soul is most likely (in
my observation) to see and stand for the Truth of Christ Jesus.


Peace. In the next place Master Cotton denies to compel to the Truth by
penalties, but only by withdrawing such favors as are comely and safe for
such persons.


Truth. I have formerly answered, and do, that a great Load may be made up by
Parcels and particulars, as well as by one mass or bulk; and that the backs
of some men, especially Merchants may be broke, by a withdrawing from them some
Civil privileges and rights (which are their due) as well as by afflicting
them in their Purses, or Flesh upon their backs.

2 Christ Jesus was of another opinion (who distinguishes between Gods due and
Caesar's due: and therefore (with respect to God will not wrong, nor have Caesar
wronged.
God his cause and Religion) it is not lawful to deprive Caesar the Civil
Magisteate, nor any that belong to him of their Civil and Earthly rights. I say
in this respect, although that a man is not Godly, a Christian, sincere, a
Church member, yet to deprive him of any Civil right or Privilege, due to him
as a Man, a Subject, a Citizen, is to take from Caesar, that which is Caesar's,
which God indures not though it be given to himself.


Peace. Experience oft-times tell us, that however the stream of just
Privileges and Rights has (out of Carnal Policy) been stopped by Gods people,
when they* have got the Staff* into their hands (in diverse Lands and
Countries) yet has that stream ever returned, to the greater calamity and
trial of Gods people.


Truth. But (thirdly) it has been noted that even in New England, penalties by
Law have been set to force all to come to Church, which will appear upon a due
search to be nothing else but an outward profession of force and violence, for
that Doctrine which they suppose is the Truth.


Peace. Concerning coming to Church: we tolerate (says Master Cotton)
Indians, Presbyterians, Antinomians, and Anabaptists: and compel none to come
to Church against their conscience, and none are restrained from hearing even
in England.


Truth. Compelling to come to Church is apparent whether Concerning toleration
in New England.
with or against their Conscience, let every man look to it. The toleration of
Indians is against professed principles, and against the stream of all his
present dispute as before I proved.

Touching the Magistrates duty of suppressing Idolatry, Witchcraft, Blasphemy,
etc. such Indians as are (pofessedly subject to English) in N. England,
notoriously continue and abound in the same which if they should not permit, it
as apparent, their subjection is hazarded.

It Is true, this Toleration is a Duty from God, but a sin in them because they
profess it their Duty to suppress Idolatry, Blasphemy; (add, Master Cotton
may say, we not only tolerate the Indians in their abominable and barbarous
worships, but (which may seem most incredible) we tolerate the Indians also in
that which by our civil principles we ought to tolerate no subject in, that is,
in abominable lying, whoring, cursing, thieving, without any active course of
restraint, etc.

It Is true, Those Indians submitting to their Government (as it may be Master
Cotton will say to the ten Commandments) yet living in all kind of Barbarism,
live some miles more remote: how ever they are (they say) their subjects) were
every miles distance an hundredth.


Peace. But is there any such and professed tolleration of Antinomians,
Presbyterians, Anabaptists, as is here insinuated?


Truth. I know of no toleration of Presbyterian, Antinomians, Witness the
bloody whipping of Obadiah Homes for the point of Baptism lately at Boston^
Anabaptists, worshipping God in any meetings, separate from the common
Assemblies. If any such persons be amongst them (like Church-Papists) it is
their sin, that they separate not from such opposite Assemblies and Worships,
and it is the sin of such assemblies to tolerate such persons after due
admonitions, in the name of Christ, rejected.

But further, Master Cotton grants a Communion in hearing in a Church Estate by
Church members, but not in any as are no Church Members, but come in as the
Pagan, Infidel, 1 Cor. 14.


Truth. Communion is twofold* First; open and professed among Church Members:
Secondly, Secret and implicit in all Communion Spiritual, twofold.
such as give their presence to such Worships without witnessing against them.
For otherwise, how can a Church-Papist satisfy the Law, compelling him to come
to Church, or a Protestant satisfy a Popish Law in Popish Countries, but by
this Cloak or Covering, hiding and saving of themselves by bodily presence at
Worship, though their Heart be far from it.


Peace. Whereas it was said, that Conscionable Papists, and all The great
Trial among Papists and Protestants concerning coming to Church.
Protestants have suffered upon this ground, especially of refusing to come to
each others Church or meeting. Mr Cotton replies; They have suffered upon other
points, and such as have refused to come to Church, have not refused because
such hearing implanted them into Church Estate, but out of fear to be leavened.


Truth. It Is true, many have suffered upon other points, but upon due
Examination it will appear that the great and most universal Trial has
been, amongst both Papists and Protestants about coming to Church, and that not
out of fear of being leavened (for what Religion is ordinarily so distrustful
of its own strength?) as of Countenancing what they believe false, by their
presence and appearance.


Exam: of Chap. 71. replying to Chap. 74.
Peace. COncerning the Papists testimony against persecution; Mr Cotton
replies: First, why may not their Testimony be wicked, as well as their Book,
confessed so to be? Secondly, He grants, that Conversion of Souls ought not to
be but by Spiritual means.


Truth. It is true, the Author of the Letter calls their book wicked, and
themselves the Authors of persecution, yet their Testimony is in part
acknowledged by Mr Cotton to be true, and will further appear so to be upon
Examination: But whether Mr Cotton allow of no other Arms, then Spiritual to
be used about Spiritual conversion, it has and will be further examined.


Peace. Whereas the Papists allege ( Matthew. 10.) that Christ Jesus sent his
Ministers as sheep among Wolves, not as Wolves among sheep, to kill,
imprison, etc. Mr Cotton grants this true, yet adds that this hinders not
Excommunication, Tit. 3. nor miraculous Vengeance against Spiritual Wolves
(Acts 13.) where there is a gift: nor their Prayers against such, 2 Timothy 4. 4.
nor their stirring up of the Civil power against them, as Elijah did Ahab and
the people against the Prophets of Baal, 1 Kings 18. 40.


Truth. Concerning the two first we agree, for the third, the Touching prayers
for Vengeance upon Gods Enemies.
Prayers of Gods people against Gods Enemies, we find twofold: First,
General against all; secondly, Particular against some; and that twofold;
First, for Gods Vengeance in Gods time, leaving it to his holy Wisdom; as Paul
prayed against Alexander. Secondly, For present Vengeance; as the Disciples
desired in the case of Christ, Luke 9. And against such Prayers the Discusser
did and does contend.

For the fourth, in Stirring up of the Civil State against false Stirring up
of the Civil State to persecure.
Prophets, I must answer as before, Let Mr Cotton produce any such Civil State
in the World, as that Extraordinary and miraculous State of Israel was, and I
yield it: otherwise, if the passage be extraordinary and typing, why does Mr
Cotton add fuel to Nebuchadnezzars fiery furnace, which has been so
dreadfully hot already, and has devoured so many millions of Gods people?


Peace. Further out of Matthew. 10. Whereas the Papists book says, Christ's
Ministers should be delivered, but should not deliver up, those whom they are
sent unto to convert, unto Counsels or Prisons, or to make their Religion
Felony or Treason; Mr Cotton answers; What is this to Apostates, who seek to
subvert the Faith they have professed? What is this to them that seek to subvert
States, and kill Kings; which Doctrine, in downeright terms, he at last
charge upon the Author of the Letter, and the Discusser.


Truth. But how falls an Antichristian or Apostate more directly under the
stroke of the Civil Sword, then a Jew or Turk or Pagan? By what rule of God
or Christ has a Magistrate of this World, Authority, so to punish the one
above the other? And where has Mr Cotton found one Title, either in the Letter
or in the Discusser, which forbids the Magistrate to punish Felony or Treason,
whether it be in practice, or in Doctrine, leading to it? Does not every Leaf
and Line breath the contrary to what Mr Cotton here insinuates? The Truth is,
as Potiphars wife accusing The bloody Tenent of persecution is alone the King
killing and Stare-killing Doctrine.
Joseph was not clear her self, so let this charge be well examined, and this
will be the Result of it; The Papists and the Discusser agree together in
asserting one Truth in this Chapter, to wit, that Gods Messengers ought not to
deliver any to Prisons or Counsels. But in the Doctrine of killing heretical
Kings or Magistrates, who sees not but such Papists as should that Doctrine,
and Mr Cotton meet in the end? For if the Magistrate prove an Apostate,
Blasphemer, Idolater, Heretic, Seducer (according to Mr Cottons Doctrine, as
well as the Papists) such Kings and Magistrates ought (as well as thousands of
his Subjects in like case) be put to Death.


Peace. Again, where the Papists book argued from Matthew. 10 that Christ bids
his Ministers to salute an house with peace, he sends no Pursevant to ransack
and spoil it: Mr Cotton answers: True, but if Seducers be there, or Rebels or
Conspiratours be there, God has armed the Magistrate, Romans 13.


Truth. Mr Cotton (too too like the bloody persecutours of Christ Jesus in all
Ages) still couples the Seducer and the Rebels together, as the Jews coupled
Christ and Barrabbas, though Barrabbas finds more favor then the Son of God,
for Christ as a seducer, a D^ceiver, etc. is commonly executed, and Barrabas
released.

It Is true the Magistrates Commission is from God, even in the time of the
Gospel, but Christ Jesus never gave Commission to Magistrates to send
Pursevants to ransack an house, to search for Seducers and Idolaters, who
transgress only against the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ Jesus, but not
against Civilitie and the Civil State.


Peace. This Distinction of Evils* I remember it pleased God to open some of
the Roman Emperors eyes to see, upon the occasion of his poor servants
Apologies presented unto them.


Truth. You seasonably remember this (Dear Peace) for although Amoninus Pius
his Edict for the Christians.
we find not Antoninus Pius or Aurelius Antoninus to have been Believers in
Christ Jesus, yet they gave forth their Edicts, tha^ no Christian should be
punished merely for that he was a Christian, except some other crime against
the Civil State were proved against him: And the later of these gave in
Express charge, that such as were their Accusers should be burnt alive.


Peace. If such an Edict or any far more moderate should come forth in our
Time, against the great troublers of all Civil Transgression against the
Spiritual or Civil peace.
States, to wit, Informers, Accusers and Maintainers of the bloody Doctrine of
persecution: Doubtless thousands and ten thousands of Men, yea not a few of the
most zealous Hunters or persecutors would easily submit to the Truth of the
Distinction between the crime of a Religion contrary to a State Religion, and a
crime against the Civil State thereof.

But to the Papists again, they (lastly) alleged, John 10. that the true
Shepherd comes not to kill the sheep, etc. Upon this Master Cotton queries.
But what if the Wolf, the Thief come, shall the Shepherd use Spiritual
Censures, when they are not capeable of such strokes, or shall he not seek
help from the Magistrate, who is to see Gods people live a quiet and peaceable
Life in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2.?


Truth. I answer, and cry out, how long, how long Lord, Persecutours of Christ's
Sheep pretend to save them and kill none but Wolves.
before thou avenge the blood of thy holy ones, against them that dwell on the
Earth, both bloody Papists and bloody Protestants? Out of their own Mouths
shall Papists and Protestants be condemned, for slaughtering Christ Jesus (the
Shepherd) in his poor Sheep and Servants, and especially the bloody Papist,
for alleging that Scripture, for the Popes bloody Butcherie, [Arise Peter,
kill and Eat:] yet all pretending to save the sheep, and only to resist
Wolves, Thieves, etc.

But more punctually Master Cotton well knows, that in the Antichristian
Ministers great Thieves.
Mystery of Antichristianisme, many thousand Antichristian Wolves pretend
strongly to be the harmeles sheep of Christ Jesus, yea his tender and careful
Shepherds, yet are but Antichristian Thieves and Robbers, who cannot dig and
to beg are ashamed, and therefore find it best to steal and rob^, whole
Parishes and Provinces, whole Nations, etc. for Livings, for Benefices, for
Bishoprics, Cardinalships, Popedomes, etc.


Peace. What kind of Sheep and Shepherds (Christ Jesus Hireling Ministers.
will find out shortly) are all those Hirelings, Papists or Protestant, who no
longer penny, no longer paternoster, no longer pay, no longer pray, no^ preach,
no^ fast, nor convert, etc.


Truth. These Babylonian Rivers shall at last be stopped: God and Man shall agree
to stop them: The truth of that holy Mystery of that great Exchange shall be
opened, Revel. 10. And Peoples eyes shall be opened to see, how these mystical
Merchants of the Earth (pretending to be the great Sellers of Truth) have been
the greatest Deceivers, and Cheators, the greatest Thieves and Robbers in the
World.


Peace. But Mr Cotton will say, Gods people would live at peace in Godliness
and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1. as Paul professes, Acts 25. 8.


Truth. I remember when old Chaucer puts this Querie to Friars in Chancers time
and the Clergy in our time considered.
the four chief sorts of Friars in his Time [which of the four sorts is the
best] he finds every sort applauding it self, and concluding the other three
sorts of Friars to be Liars: whence in Conclusion he finds them all guilty of
Lying (in a round) before God, for all professed themselves to be the only godly
men.

I may now ask, who among all the sorts of Churches and Ministers applaud not
themselves (like the Friars in Chaucers days) to be Christ's only Churches,
Christ's Ministers, etc. And who among the several sorts of such as are Gods
people indeed, believe not their own Godliness (or worshipping of God) to be
only right and Christian?


Peace. What now if each sort should enjoy Magistrates of their own profession
and Way?


Truth. The bloody Tenent will unavoydably set them altogether by the Ears,
to try out by the longest Sword, and strongest Arm, which Godliness must live
in peace and quietness: But as for that Scripture, 1 Timothy 2. I have (as I
believe) fully debated it, in the Examination of the Model, and made it
evident how far from all Godliness and Honesty that holy Scripture is
perverted.


Peace. Mr Cotton in the next passage being charged with partial dealing, and
a double weight and measure, one for himself and another for others; Mr Cotton
in effect answers, that it is a true and just Complaint against persecution
and persecutours, but not against them, for they are Righteous and not
Apostates, Seducers, Heretics, Idolaters, Blasphemers, etc.


Peace. What does Master Cotton answer, but what all religions, sects* and
several sorts of worshippers in the world* all religious Priests and
Churchmen plead, We are Righteous?


Peace. Yea, the very Turks and Mahumetans challenge to The Turks themselves
will be Muslemanni, or right believers. The horrible partialite of persecutors.
themselves true Faith in God, yea, whether Jews, Antichristians or Christians,
they all call themselves Muselmanni that is the right believers.


Truth. It is not so great wonder then if the popish and protestant sects, and
ministers of worship cry out (as men use to do in suits of Law and pretenses
to the Crown) We are righteous, my title is good, and the best. We are holy,
we are Orthodox and godly: You must spare us, believe us, honor us, feed us,
protect and defend us in peace and quietness. Others are Heretics, Apostates,
Seducers, Idolators, Blasphemers, starve them, imprison them, banish them, yea
hang them, burn them with fire and sword pursue them.


Peace. When it was urged (by way of prevention) that persons truly professing
Christ Jesus be his sheep, and they cannot persecute;

First, Because it is against the nature of Sheep to hunt, no not the Wolves
that have hunted themselves, etc. Master Cotton answers, First if the
similitude be so stretched, then if a Magistrate be a sheep, he ought not to
punish, robbers, adulterers, murderers, etc.

2 Paul was a sheep, and yet he struck Elimas with blindness, Acts 13.

3 (Says he) when the Wolf runs upon the sheep, it is not against the nature
of the true sheep to run to the true sheepherd, and is it against the nature of
the true Sheepherd to send forth his Dogs, to worrie such a Wolf, without
incurring the reproach of a persecutour.


Truth. To the first, the finger of true Distinction will easily untie these
seeming knots. Mystical sheep.


Sheep therefore are twofold, natural and mystical.

Again, mystical are twofold, First, Civil, and so all Magistrates have
rightly been called Sheepherds and the people sheep.

2 Spiritual, and so Christ Jesus gave pastors, that is Sheepheards and
Teachers, and all Believers and followers of Jesus are sheep*

On the contrary there are natural and mystical wolves: of mystical some
oppose the spiritual, and some the Civil State, and some both, who must be
resisted by the proper sheepheads, and proper weapons in each kind, and to
confound these is to deceive and to be deceived.


Peace. Upon the ground of this Distinction we may easily perceive, that a
Shepherd in Civil state, of what Religion soever he be, as a Shepherd of the
people he ought to defend them by force of Civil arms, from all oppressions of
body, goods, chastily, name, etc. This does the Magistrate as a Shepherd of
the Civil state and people, considered in a Civil respect and capacity, and
this ought all the Magistrates in the world to do, whether they be sheep or no
themselves in another respect, that is in a spiritual and Christian.


Truth. Yea, and if a Magistrate be a sheep or a true Christian, who sees not
that he punishes not the robber, adulterer, murderer as a spiritual
shepherd with spiritual weapons, but as a Civil Shepherd with a C^vill
stasse, sword, etc?

It Is true, Paul was a sheep, that is, a spiritual sheep; he also Paul his
striking Elimas blind considered.
was a spiritual Shepherd, and Elimas was a wolf opposing spiritually, and
Paul in his opposition struck him blind. Striking is twofold, spiritual and
corporal: And all the sheep of Christ as spiritual, are also Lions and armed
men, and so do strike spiritually.


Peace. It will be said that Paul struck both spiritually and corporally.


Truth. Corporal strokes may be considered either ordinary or mediate, by force
of arms, fire and sword, etc. or extraordinary and immediate, such as it
pleased God to use himself, and his holy Prophets and Apostles by his power:
Now it is true, in this second way, (even in spiritual cases) Gods sheep which
have been inducd with power above nature, that is of miracles, have plagued
Egypt, have burnt up Captains and their Fifties, yea plucked up Nations and
Kingdoms as Jeremie: Peter killed Ananias and his wife, Paul struck Elimas
blind, and the two witnesses consume their Enemies with fire out of their
mouths. Of the power of miracles.


If either of these should do this ordinarily, that is, by ordinary means (for
instance, if Peter had killed Ananias with a Sword, or Paul beat out Elimas his
eyes with a Fist or stone) they ought to have been punished by the Civil state,
as oppressors of the people, and transgressors against Civil peace, etc. But
performing these executions, by a spiritual, divine and miraculous power,
above humane reach: all that heard were to acknowledge, and fear and tremble
at the holy Spirits might: of this gift of miracles, I say as the Lord Jesus
spoke touching the gift of Continency, he that can receive it, let him receive
it.


Peace. By what has been said, I see Master Cottons last answer will be more
easily satisfied: when the Wolf runs ravenously (says he) upon the sheep,
is it against the nature of the true sheep to run to their Shepherds? and it
is not against the nature of the true Sheepherd to send forth his Dogs to
worrie such a Wolf, etc?


Truth. Master Cotton (doubtless) here intends mystical sheep, and
Shepherds, and Wolves and Dogs, and presses the similitude from the
natural sheep in Civil respect, he cannot here mean (for that is not the
Question) whether Wolvish-men oppressing the Civil state are to be resisted
and suppressed by civil weapons, etc.

Concerning Spiritual sheep then: the first question is: If the Spiritual
sheep and wolves considered.
wolf runs ravenously upon the Sheep, is it against the nature of the true
Sheep to run to their Shepherd? I answer, a spiritual Wolf (a false Teacher,
etc.) may be said to run ravenously upon a spiritual sheep, by spiritual
assault of Argument, Dispute, Reproach, etc. The same man as a civil wolf (for
so we must speak to speak properly) may also run upon a sheep of Christ by
Civil Arms, that is in a Civil respect, upon Body and Go^^^, etc,

If now the Wolf ravin the first way, the sh^ep of Christ may and ought to
run, to the Lord Jesus (the great Mr. Shepherd) and to such under and in
inferior Shepherds as he has appointed (if he can attain to them.)

If the second way, the sheep (beside running to Christ Jesus by prayer, and to
his Ordinances and Officers for advice and comfort) may run to the Civil
Magistrate (appealing to Caesar, etc.) against such uncivil violence and
oppression.


Peace. Mine heart joyfully acknowledges the Light mine eye sees, in that
true and necessary distinction: Now to the Second Question, is it against the
nature of the true Shepherd (says Mr. Cotton) to send forth his Dogs to
worrie such a wolf, etc.


Truth. Mr Cotton here discoursing of Christ's sheep, and Christ's Shepherds,
Reason would persuade, that the Shepherds or Pastors here intended should be
the Shepherds or Pastors appointed by Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4.


Peace. If so he should intend, it well suits with the spirit of some proud and
scornful (pretended) Shepherds of Christ Jesus in the World, who have used to
call their Clerks, Sumners, Proctors, and Pursevants, their hunting Dogs, etc.


Truth. But such Dogs, (as yet) the Independent Pastors or Shepherds, keep
not.


Peace. Yea but the Pope (to speak in Mr Cottons phrase, The Pope and, all
proud Popish Priests and Clergy use the Civil Powers but as Dogs.
yet with all humble respect to Civil Authority, the blessed Ordinance of God
and Man) I say the Pope keeps such Dogs good store, yea Dogs of all sorts, not
only of those lesser kinds, but whom he uses as his Dogs, the Emperors,
Kings, and Magistrates of the World, whom he teaches and forces to crouch, to
lie down, to creep, and kiss his foot, and from thence at his beck to fly
upon such greedy Wolves, as the Waldenses, Wicklevists, Hussites, Hugonites,
Lutherans, Calvinists, Protestants, Puritans, Sectaries, etc. to imprison, to
whip, to banish, to hang, to head, to burn, to blow up such vile Heretics,
Apostates, Seducers, Blasphemers, etc.

But I forget, it will be said, the Protestants Grounds and practices differ
from the Popes as far as Light from Darkness, and how ever the Pope uses the
secular power and Magistrates thereof, but as Dogs and Hangmen, yet the
Reformed Churches teach and practice better.


Truth. It Is true (sweet Peace) the Protestants profess greater The Protestant
Clergy their dealing with Magistrates.
honor and subjection to the Civil Magistrate: But let plain English be
spoken and it will be found that the Protestant clergy (as they will be
called) ride the backs and necks of Civil Magistrates, as fully and as heavily
(though not so pompously) as ever the great Whore sat the backs of Popish
Princes.


Peace. The Protestant Clergy has yielded up the temporal sword into the
hand of the temporal State, Kings, Governors, etc. They proclaim the
Magistrates, Head of the Church, Defenders of their Faith, the Supreme Judges
in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil.


Truth. It Is true, they make the Magistrate Head of the Church, but yet of what
Church they please to make and fashion.

They make him Defendour of the Faith, but of what Faith, what Doctrine, what
Discipline, what Members they please to admit and account of: And this under
the penalty of being accounted either heretical (and so Magistrates worthy
themselves to be put to Death) or ignorant, and so not fit to act (as Mr Cotton
says) but must suspend their power, until they submit to the Cleargies
pretended Light, and so be learnd to see and read with the Cleargies Spectacles.


Peace. To this purpose (indeed) agrees the next passage, wherein Mr Cotton
affirms, that although all the Magistrates A suspending or hanging up of
Magistrates
in the World, ought to punish Blasphemers, Idolaters, Seducers, yet this must
they not do while their Consciences are blind and ignorant of the Truth, and
yet they cease not to be Magistrates (says he) although they cannot perform
all the Duties of Magistrates.


Truth. Concerning this stated Duty of all Magistrates, and yet suspending of
all ignorant Magistrates from acting, according to this their Duty I have
spoken to before and often, I now add, according to Mr Cottons similitude, if
the Errors of others be as motes in comparison of the beams of this ignorance
and blindness in Magistrates, which he calls Beams, it will be found that
he renders thousands of the Magistrates of the World as incapable to be true
Magistrates, as an heap of Timber to be an House, which wants the beams and
principalls.


Peace. The sum of the Difference in the last passage is not great, nor any
in words, for says Mr Cottons Conclusion, If the Difference be only in the
way and manner of the Administration of Christ, and the Difference be held
forth in a peaceable and Christian way, God forbid a Staff should be shaken
against such, or a Sword unsheathed.


Truth. Alas, where has lien the great Difference between the Prelates and
Presbyterians, the Presbyterians and Independants, but about the way and
Administration of Christ's Kingdom (for as for matter of Doctrine according to
the 39 Articles The great spiritual differences of these late Times.
of the Church of England, they have little differd)? Yea wherein for matter of
Doctrine, of Faith, Repentance and Holiness) have the Churches which make
whole separation, or such as go further to a new Baptism, wherein have they
differd from the former? and yet we know what Laws have been and are extant in
Old and New England against them, and what practices have been felt, and may
justly be expected both from the Mother and the Daughter, if a jealous God and
heavenly Father (for our unthankfullnesse) should once be pleased to finish
this late and wonderful calm and moderation: Which yet may Of rest from
persecution.
justly be feared to prove, (as Seamen use to observe) but a Winters calm, and
they ray, a Winters calm (for then storms are breeding) is as bad as a
Summers storm.


Exam: of Chap. 72. replying to Chap. 75. Concerning the Testimony of Austin.
Peace. MAster Cotton finds two faults in the first entrance. First, that
Antichrist should be said to be too hard for Christ at voting: 2. That Austins
Testimony should be put off as a Rhetorical Evasion.


Truth. To the first, it will shortly appear as the Light at Noone day, what
packing of Votes, and listing, and mustring up of Numbers have been in all
Ages, in all Counsels, in all Synods, in all Parliaments, and in all (falsely
so called) Christian Countries, against the Lord, his Christ and Servants.


Peace. But Mr Cotton marvailes that when the case concerns tolleration of
Heretics and Antichristians, that Antichrist should procure more Votes against
Antichristians, and that Christ should procure any Vote, though fewer, for them.


Truth. To expound this ridle; It was never affirmed, that Christ has any
Votes for the tollerating of Heretics or Antichristians in the Religious State
or Church of Christ, but in the Civil State or Commonweal, that is, in the
common field of the world together.

Secondly, Not only Antichrist may oppose some Antichristians, Gods children
may possibly fight each against the other. (...)
but the Israel of God may oppose Israel: Ephraim may be against Manasseh, and
Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against Judah in several respects. Have not
the Presbyterians been against the Independents, and the Independents against
the Presbyterians, and both against such a^ separate from the uncleanness of
them both?

No wonder then when one Antichristian Faction prevails to crush another, (and
therein wraps up Christ Jesus himself as Antichristians against
Antichristians, but principally against Christ.
an Antichristian,) that Christ Jesus should find some Friends and Votes
against the Oppressing Faction, though the number of the oppressors do far
exceed, and cast the cause (most commonly) against Christ Jesus, as a Male
factor, a Drunkard, a Glutton, a Deceiver, a madman possessed with a Devil, a
Seducer, a Blasphemer, etc.


Peace. But to the second, let us Examine the Reasons against Austins Argument
with Mr Cottons defense of them.

The first answer was, that soule-killing was of a large extent Touching
spiritual murder.
in Scripture, which may reach to many sins that are not capital; Mr Cotton
replies; the Answer reaches not the point; for as every killing of the Body is
not a capital crime, so neither is every killing of the soul, but such as is
more voluntary and presumptuous, and joined with some gross and murtherous
intent.


Truth. Austin and Mr Cotton spoke in general, without distinction of
soule-murther and killing: the Title and sound of soulemurther and
soule-killing, should not be cast abroad like Thunder and Lightning, with a
late excuse that we intend not every soule-murther and killing.


Peace. Your second Argument was from the Dissimilitude of bodily and
spiritual Death: Body-killing is but once and for ever, but a soul killed may
recover, etc. Mr Cotton replies, that the very attempt of soule-killing is
capital, Deuteronomy. 13. 10.


Truth. First, then the Dissimilitude or Difference remains good, between the
murdering of the body, and the killing of the soul or inner man; contrary to
his Answer foregoing.

Secondly, Concerning this attempting I have spoken elsewhere, Touching
Seducers.
and proved that spiritually it may be made good, against a Christian
Israelite, falling away from Christ, and seducing others; but literally,
against such attempting against any man's present Religion or Worship, (in any
Civil State all the World over) it cannot be taken, because the whole world,
the Nations and peoples of it cannot parallel this State of Israel, whence
this plea is taken.


Peace. I presume (Dear Truth) you would not excuse and extenuate the
punishment of a Soule-Traitour and seducer, now under the Gospel.


Truth. No; I aggravate the least attempt of soule-murther, The hainousnes of
spiritual stumbling blocks.
and the least prejudice or hindrance to Eternal Life, infinitely above what is
temporal and corporal murder, when either Husband or Wife, Brother or
Sister, King or Queen, Synod or Parliament shall lay a stumbling block in the
heavenly way, or grieve or offend the least of the littles ones of Christ
Jesus, and such dreadful punishment shall all even the highest and greatest
find, who now seem to forget the Millstone.


Peace. The third argument was from the different punishment Punishing of
Seducers.
which Christ Jesus has appointed for Soul-killing, to wit, by the two edged
sword, which comes out of Christ's mouth, which is able to cut down Heresy,
and to slay the soul of Heretics everlastingly.

Master Cotton replies, this answer has been removed above: Church censures
are sufficient to heal the Heretic, if he belong to God, and to remove the
guilt of his wickedness from the Church, but not to prevent spreading, etc.
nor to cle^se the Commonwealth from such rebellion as has been taught by him
against the Lord.


Truth. Above has also been shown the sovereign excellency Commonweal
twofold, and Rebellion twofold.
and power of Christ's spiritual means against spiritual infection: Above
has also been shown the twofold Commonwealth; First, the Civil and natural;
Secondly, the spiritual, religious and Christian.

Rebellion also against the Lord has been proved, twofold, First, spiritual,
against himself in point of his more immediate worship and service, for which
he has provided not only the vengeance of eternal fire approaching
(according to the degrees and heinousness of such rebellion) but also present
spiritual punishment, far exceeding all corporal punishment and torment in
the world.

2 Rebellion against God is temporal and more mediate, as it is a resistance,
opposition or violation of any Civil state or order appointed by God or Men.
Now to confound these together, (and to hover in general terms of Rebellion
against the Lord) is to blow out the Candle or Light, and to make a noise in
the dark, with a sound and cry of a guilty Land; a guilty State,
soul-murtherers, soul-killers, heretics, blasphemers, seducers, rebels against
the Lord, kill them, kill them, etc.

Suppose these soul-murthering Heretics, Seducers, etc. be as full of vexation
and mischief as the Musketoes or Wolves in New Mystical Wolves and Muskeetoes.
England or other Countries; It were to be wished, (but never can be hoped in
this world) that every Civil state, City and Town in the world, were free from
such mystical and soul-vermin: The poor Planter and Farmer is glad, if his
house and chamber, if his yard and field, his family and cattle, may be
tolerably clear from such annoyances, however the Woods and Wilderness abound
with them: They that are of such fiery pragmaticall restles spirits, that they
content not themselves to keep the Farm and House of the Church of Christ free
from such Infection and annoyance, but rage that such vermin are suffered in
the worlds Wood, etc. It is pity but they had their full employment and task,
to catch and kill even all the swarms and Herds of all the Muskeetoes and
Wolves, which either the Wilderness of America, or the whole World can afford
them.


4. Peace. Accordingly the Fourth Argument was from Christ's tolerating of
soule-killers to live in the field of the World, though not in the Garden of
the Church: Mr Cotton replies, this has been largely and fully refeld above.


Truth. It is true, the Discusser alleged, and Mr Cotton refuted the
Exposition of this Parable, but whether of them according to the mind of
Christ Jesus, let every reader uprightly judge with fear and trembling at the
word of the Lord.


Peace. The Fifth Argument was from the Impossibility of killing and soul by
a Heretic: Mr Cotton answers, this is against Paul himself, 1 Cor. 8. 11.


Truth. As I spoke unto the Argument of the Impossibility of the perishing of
any of Gods Elect, so here, the using of such an Of Soule-killing.
Argument is far from undervaluing or neglecting of any of the means or
Ordinances, natural or spiritual, which God has graciously appointed, but to
condemn the over-wise and over-busie Heads and Hands of Men, adding their
Inventions to Gods Appointments, as if weak and insufficient: whereas Gods
number of living and dead are certain, and though the means which he has
appointed for life should fail, and notwithstanding all other means in the
World used by men as helps and hindrances, yet his holy End shall not be
disappointed, but fulfilled.

Beside the Difference between soule-killing and body-killing, is but (as Mr
Cotton here uses the word) so much as in us lies, that is, by attempt or
endeavor, which may be many ways frustrated, and disappointed by the holy
hand of God, and the soul yet saved and live in the day of the Lord Jesus.


Peace. Whereas you said, that the imprisoning of Men in a Touching State
Religions.
National or State Religion is guilty of their Destruction, together with the
monstrous sword of Civil Wars, which cuts off Men from all means of
Repentance.

Mr Cotton answers; If the Religion be good, it is no Imprisonment: If it be
naught, then there should be no Imprisonment.

To the second (says he) this Fear is causeles, for if Men belong to God, he
will give Repentance, and how ever (says he) God^ revealed Will is fullfilled
in their just Executions.


Truth. I could here ask Mr Cotton where (amongst all the Religions and
Worships of the sons of men) he ever met in the whole World, with above one
Nation, which Nationally professed a true Religion; and where ever, since Christ
Jesus, ending of the Gods children Gods City, Nation and Kingdom.
shadows, any State, Religion, or National Worship can be found true;
notwithstanding Mr Cotton knows I grant Gods people, in Kingdoms, Nations,
Cities, Towns, etc. to be Gods Kingdom, Nation, City, etc.


Peace. And since Mr Cotton speaks thus of Imprisonment, me-thinkes that every
peaceable man and woman may bring in here against him, at the Tribunal of
Christ Jesus, an Action of A State Religion a prison.
false Imprisonment (indeed false every way) not only of the sensible and
outward man, but of the most noble and inner part, the mind, the spirit, and
Conscience; for who knows not that Jerusalem it self may be a prison to
false-hearted Shimei? Who has not found a palace a prison, when forced to
keep within it? yea confine a man to his own house and home, though dear and
familiar, and most intimate to him, his own house during that force and
restraint, is a prison to him.


Truth. Yea it is most woefully found evident, that the best Religion (like the
fairest Whores, and the most golden and costly Images) yea the most holy and
pure and only true Religion A forced Religion.
and Worship, appointed by God himself, is a Torment to that Soul and
Conscience, that is forced against its own free love, and choice, to embrace
and observe it: And therefore whether the Religion be good o^ ^aught (as Mr
Cotton here distinguishes) there ought to be no forcing, but the soul and
mind and conscience of man, that is indeed the man, ought to be left free, as
in his Earthly marriage-choice, so here ten thousand times rather in his
heavenly and spiritual.


Peace. But what say you to his unmercifull conclusion, in the bloodshed and
destruction of so many thousands and millions, formerly Of the late Wars.
and lately slain and murdered by this bloody Tenent of persecution? Yea the
late and lamentable streams of English blood, and the blood of our neighbors,
friends, Brethren, Parents, powered forth by these late Episcopal or Bishops
Wars? Mr Cottons conclusion is, The revealed will of God (says he) is
fullfilled in their just Execution, whether they belong to God or no.


Truth. I wish Mr Cotton more mercy from God, and a more merciful mind toward
the afflicted, and I say as the Lord Jesus The bloody Tenent guilty of the
Rivers of Blood, etc.
said in the case of offense: Great offenses, National offenses will come for
Religions sake, for National Religion sake, but woe unto those that bear the
guilt of so many thousand slaughters, murders, ravishings, plunderings, etc.
The Pope, the Bishops, the Presbyterians, the Independants, so far as they
have been Authors or Actors in these horrible Calamities, out of the
persuasion of the bloody Tenent of persecution for Religion and Conscience;
the voice of so many Rivers of blood cry to Heaven for vengeance against them.


Peace. But may not (blessed Truth) the sword of Civil power Wars for
Religion.
which is from God (Romans 13.) be drawn and drunk with blood for Christ his
sake. What say you (among the many Examples of Religions Wars) to the most
famous Battles of Constantine against the bloody persecutour Maxentius? Was
not Constantine Christ's Champion, as once that valiant Scanderbeg called himself
against the bloody Turks?


Truth. Sweet Peace, the sword of Civil power was Gods sword Constantines
wars for the Christians.
committed by Gods most wise Providence into the hands of that famous
Constantine: Doubtless his war was righteous and pious, so far as he broke
the Jaws of the oppressing persecuting Lions that devoured Christ's tender
Lambs and sheep: And famous was his Christian Edict (wherein Licinius joined
with him) when he put forth that imperial Christian Decree, that Constantines
Edict against forcing in Religion.
no mane Conscience should be forced, and for his Religion (whether to the
Roman Gods, or the Christian) no man should be persecuted or hunted: When
Constantine broke the bounds of this his own and Gods Edict, and draws the
sword of Civil power in the suppressing of other Consciences for the
establishing of the Christian, then began the great Mystery of the Churches
sleep, the Gardens of Christ's Churches turned into the Wilderness of
National Religion, and the World (under Constantines Dominion) to the most
unchristian Christendom.


Peace. I am unquestionably satisfied, that there was never Never any true
National Religion in the World but one.
any National Religion good in this world but one, and since the Desolation of
that Nation, there was never, there shall be never any National Religion good
again: and this will be most evident to such as hold the Truth of the
continuance of Christ's visible Church in the way of particular Congregations.

6. But now to the Sixth Argument, which Mr Cotton thus repeats from the
possibility of a false Teacher, and a spiritual Wolves recoverie from the
estate of a soule-killer to become a soule-Saviour, as it was in the case of
Paul: And thus he answers; If men Touching Paul's blasphemy before his
Conversion.
be such Blasphemers, and such Wolves, as Paul was before his Conversion,
neither the Law of God nor man would put such a Man to death, who sinned of
Ignorance, and walked (as himself professed) in all good Conscience, even in
his former evil times, Acts 23. But as for such as apostate from the known
truth of Religion, and seek to subvert the foundation of it, and to draw away
others from it, to plead for their Tolleration in hope of their Conversion, is
as much as to proclaim a general pardon to all malefactors (save only such
as sin against the Holy Spirit) for he that is a wilful murderer and
adulterer now, may come to be converted, and die a martyr hereafter.


Truth. I see not why Mr Cotton should pass a more charitable censure on Paul's
Conscience, then on other Men's professing Conscience also and the fear of God:
nor an harder censure upon other Men (to wit, that they are convinced, and
sin against their own Conscience) more then upon Paul himself: Heard he not
that famous powerful Sermon of Stephen? Saw he not his glorious and most
heavenly Death? and having so much to do with the Saints, could he otherwise
choose, but hear and see many heavenly passages tending to his souls
conviction?


Peace. Yea why should Mr Cotton pinch upon Apostates from the truth of
Religion and Seducers? he cannot choose but know Of Apostates.
how many thousands and millions of men and women in the world, are Heretical,
Blasphemers, Seducers, that never yet made profession of that which he
accounts True Religion?


True. Yea and (to plead thy case Dear Peace) why should Fallacious mixture
and confusion.
Mr Cotton couple Murderers and Adulterers with Apostates and Seducers? Does
not even the natural Conscience and Reason of all men put a Difference? Do
not even the most bloody Popes and Cardinals, Gardiners and Bonners, put a
difference between the crimes of Murder, Treason, Adultery (for which
although the offendour repent, etc. yet he suffers punishment) and the crimes
of Heresy, Blasphemy, etc. which upon Recantation and Confession, are
frequently remitted?


Peace. I remember it was high Treason in H. 8. his days to deny the Kings
spiritual Supremacy, as well as to kill his person, and yet upon Confession
and Recantation we find, that the very Conscience of those bloody men could
distinguish between these Treasons.


Truth. It Is true this bloody Tenent of persecution was lamentably Spiritual
Treason recanted, forgiven: but not so (by way ofcourse) the Civil.
drunk with blood in the days of that Henry, as well as afterward in the
days of his bloody daughter Marie, and yet in Henry his days we find John
Haywood recanting his (so called) Treason against the Kings Supreamacie in
spiritual things, and is cleared. When famous and faithful Cromwell, for
words pretended to be spoken by him against the Kings person, must pay his
noble Head. But to End this Chapter, most true it is, that An Instance from ^^:
Haywood and the Lord Cromwell in King Henry the 8. his days.
multitudes of people in all parts of bloody Christendom, and not a few in
England in Henry the 7. and Henry the 8. his days; have escaped with a
Recantation and Abjuration, for spiritual Treasons, when principles of Reason
and Civil Government have taught men, for their common safety, to think of
other punishments for Murderers, Adulterers, Traitors.


Exam: of Chap. 73. replying to Chap. 76. Discussing the Testimony of Optatus.
Peace. MAster Cotton having alleged Optatus, justifying Macarius his putting
Heretics to Death, from the Example of Moses, Phinehas, and Elijah; it was
answered, that these shafts were drawn not out of Christ's, but Moses Quiver:
Mr Cotton replies; did ever any Apostle or Evangelist make the Judicial Laws
of Moses concerning Life and Death ceremonial and typical?


Truth. What ever the Apostles of Christ did in this matter, Of Moses
Judicialls.
yet sure it is Evident, that Mr Cotton himself makes some of Moses Laws,
which he calls Judicial, to be but ceremonial and typical.


Peace. Me thinks Mr Cotton should never grant that, who lays so much weight
upon Moses practices, and the moral and perpetual ground of them.


Truth. Well take for an Instance this very case of putting to Death, Idolaters
and false Prophets, he grants this in this very Chapter to be typical in the
State of the Jews; for Israel (says he) being the Church of God, and in
Convenant with God, their Example will only extend to the like Execution of
all the false Prophets in the Church of God.


Peace. Such a Candle lighted up in the Conscience and Judgment and Confession
of Mr Cotton, may (if the Father of Lights so please,) light up many Candles
more, to Mr Cottons own and the eyes of others.


Truth. Yea if the Father of Lights so please, Mr Cotton will look back and
see, that if the Example of Israel extend no further then to the Church of God,
then those Laws of Moses concerning Religion, cannot but be typical and
ceremonial; for, what is moral and perpetual, none can deny to concern all
Men in all Nations, where no Church or House of God was ever erected.


2. Peace. If Mr Cotton say it extends but to the Church of God, what Church of
God can Mr Cotton mean, but a particular Congregation (for he professes
against National, Provincial, etc.) And yet how can he mean a particular
Church, since he grants the Church of Christ armed with no other weapons then
spiritual, like unto the Head and King thereof Christ Jesus?


3. Truth. If Mr Cotton will grant the Church of Christ to have The first three
hundred years after Christ.
been extant upon Earth during the first three hundred years of her fiery
trials, he must grant that then the Church of Christ was furnished by Christ
Jesus with no other weapons but spiritual, for all the Civil powers of the
World seemed to be against them. All which time by Mr Cottons Doctrine, the
Church of Christ his The Primitive Church the purest, and yet without a Civil
Sword.
heavenly Garden must needs be over-growne with Heretics, Idolaters, false
Prophets, for want of a Civil Sword, etc. Or if they were not (as sure it is,
the Spouse and Garden of Christ was never fairer since): As Mr Cotton grants
the Example typical, and extending only to the Church of God, so must he then
also grant these false Prophets and Idolaters to be put to Death by the
Churches power, which is only spiritual, and Isreal's material Sword will
then appear to be a type of the two-edged sword of Christ Jesus in the Gospel.


Peace. It is true (says Master Cotton,) what the Discusser Christ no Author
of Civil violence for Religion.
says, that Christ Jesus gave no Ordinance, Precept or President in the Gospel
for killing men for Religion, and no more (says he) for the breach of Civil
Justice: Civil Magistrates therefore must either walk without Rule, or fetch
their Rules of Righteousness from Moses and the Prophets, who have expounded
him in the Old Testament.


Truth. If Mr Cotton please more awfully to observe and weigh the mind of
Christ Jesus his New Testament in this point, he will not only hear himself
subscribing to Caesar's Right in Civil matters, but also by his servant Peter
establishing all other forms of Civil Government, which the peoples or
Nations of the World shall invent or create for their civil being,
Commonweal or welfare. Yea he may remember that Christ Jesus by his Servant
Paul commands the Magistrate, to punish Murder, Theft, Adultery, etc. for
he expressly names these Civil Transgressions together with the civil Sword
the Avenger of them, Romans 13.


Peace. I cannot well conceive what Mr Cotton means by saying, that Moses and
the Prophets expounded Christ Jesus in the Old Testament.


Truth. Nor I: They did speak or prophecy of Christ, they did type or figure
him to come, with his sufferings and Glory, but (as John says) Grace and Truth
came by Jesus Christ, that is, the fullfilling, opening, and expounding came by
Jesus Christ.


Peace. Hence indeed I remember that Christ Jesus (Luc. 24.) expounded to his
Disciples, out of Moses and the Prophets, the things written of him. But more
particularly touching Moses: Macarius did well (says Mr Cotton) in putting
Heretics to Death, from the Example of Moses putting Idolaters to Death, Exodus
32. and the Idolater to Death, Levit. 24.


Truth. These Instances (by Mr Cottons Confession) extend The Levites killing
3000. Exodus 32. typical.
no further then the Church of God, and then I desire my abovesaid Answer may
be uprightly weighed. And I add the former Instance of putting Death the three
thousand Israelites about the Goulden C^lfe by the hand of the Levites, may
most lively seem to typifie, the zealous Execution of spiritual Justice in
(the Israel of God) the Church of Christ, by the true Ministers of Christ
Jesus, the true Antitype of that zealous Tribe of Levi.


Peace. Concerning Phineas, whereas it was said that the Phineas his Act.
flaying of the Israelitish Prince and Daughter of Midian, was not for
spiritual but for corporal fulthinesse, Master Cotton answers and urges
the Israelites eating of their Sacrifices, and joining to Baal-peor: Also that
single Fornication was no capital crime.


Truth. It is most true, the people committed both spiritual and corporal
Filthiness (as very often they go together) but the Justice of God reckoned
with these two sinners, for and in the midst of their corporal Filthiness,
which although it were not capital in Israel, yet the committing of it with
so high an hand of presumption (and small sins committed presumptuously in
Israel were Death) was enough to make it worthy of so sharp and sudden a
Destruction.


Peace. Concerning Phineas his act Mr Cotton acknowledges that it is no
president for Ministers of the Gospel so to act, but withal says it is
praesidentiall for Magistrates.


Truth. Phineas his Act (whether of ordinary or extraordinary Justice) how can
it be praesidentiall to the Civil Magistrate in a particular Church, where the
weapons are only spiritual? And Mr Cotton grants these Examples extend no
further then the Church: Such as maintain a National Church (which Mr Cotton
does not) have some color to urge this Example The spiritual and Civil State
vastly different in their frame, Laws, Officers, etc.
for a president: for in a civil State, civil Officers, civil Laws, civil
Weapons, civil punishments and rewards are proper, as are also (and only)
Spiritual Officers, spiritual Laws, spiritual punishments and Rewards in a
spiritual State.


Peace. Concerning Eliah, Mr Cotton excepteth against the number eight hundred
and fifty, as too many by half.


Truth. It is true, the number of Baals Prophets were four Elijah and the
Baalites.
hundred and fifty ( false Prophets enough to one poor true) but yet Eliah
numbers Jezabells four hundred trencher Chaplins with them; for, says he, Now
therefore send and gather unto me all Israel unto Mount Carmel, and the
Prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the Prophets of the Grove four
hundred, which eat at Jezabells Table.


Peace. But how ever (says Mr Cotton) here was no type nor Figure for Actions
of moral Justice, (though sometimes extraordinary) yet they are never
figurative, but with such as turn all the Scripture into an Allegory.


Truth. To make the shadows of the old Testament and the Substance The types
and figures of the old Testament
or Body of the New, all one, is but to confound and mingle Heaven and Earth
together, for the state of the Law was ceremonial and figurative, having a
worldly Tabernacle with vanishing and beggarly Rudiments: And I believe it
might not only be said, that Abraham's lying with his handmaid Hagar, was an
Allegory, but that the whole Church of Israel, Root and Branch, from first
to last included figurative and Allegorical Kernells, were the Husks and
Shells disclosed with more humbly diligent and spiritual teeth and fingers.


Peace. I cannot but assent unto you, that to render the old Testament
Allegorical in an humble sobriety, your Instance with many more give
sufficient warrant.


Truth. Yet I add (in answer to Mr Cottons charge of turning all Scripture
into an Allegory) that to deny the History of either Old or New Testament, or
to render the New Testament (which expounds and fullfills the ancient figures)
Allegoricalls are both absurd and impious.


Peace. But how (says Mr Cotton) can an Act of moral righteousness be
figurative?


Truth. There is a Fallacy in this term [ moral Righteousnesse]
Righteousness two fold.
for Mr Cotton himself has ^^knowledged a Righteousness twofold, A
Spiritual Righteousness of the Church, and a civil of the Commonweal: Mr
Cotton also acknowledges Israel The state o^ Israel typical.
to be a Typical people, their land a typical Land, their Ministry and
Worship typical! How can Mr Cotton then deny, but that the weapons of this
people, their punishments and rewards, etc. (so far as concerned this their
mixed figurative and typical state) were figurative and ceremonial also? And
so not parts of moral civil Righteousness, or common to all other Nations
and peoples in the World.


Peace. I cannot readily assent to Mr Cotton, that moral Actions of Civil
Righteousness could not be figurative with this ceremonial, typical and
figurative people: for their war it self (which if lawful, is an Act of
civil moral Righteousness) Paul seems to make figurative of the spiritual
Wars of the Christian Israel and Church of God.


Truth. Yea and it is easy to observe that not only their Not only moral but
natural Actions of the Israelites typical.
spiritual Worship, etc. not only Acts of moral and civil Righteousness in
peace and war, etc. but even their very natural Actions and Excrements (in
wars against their Enemies) were figurative and typical, full of heavenly
and spiritual Instruction, which the unbelieving Jews then saw not, but the
believing saw, as they saw Christ Jesus in the Sacrifices, and all their
observations leading to the blessed Son of God, the Messiah, the Anointed, or
Christ to come, and his Eternal Kingdom.


Peace. Mr Cotton in the next place takes offense that the Fact of Elijah
should be called miraculous, and asks if it be a miracle for Elijah with the
aid of so many thousand Israelites to put to Death four hundred and fifty
men?


Truth. Mr Cotton mistakes the word, for the word is not Whether Eliahs
procuring the slaughter of the Baalites was Typical or Moral.
fact but passage, which compriseth not only the slaughter of these their
Priests, but the whole matter and business, as the putting of the Worship of the
true God, to the Trial of Fire from Heaven, the descending of Fire from
Heaven, the devouring of the Sacrifice, and licking up of so much water, and
upon this so great a number of their Priests (the Fathers, Shepherds, and Gods
of the people) so thunder-smitten as from Heaven, with so sudden and dreadful
a slaughter, what can these be but an extraordinary Inspiration in the Prophet,
a supernatural descent and operation of Fire, yea and an extraordinary and
wonderful change in the heart of the People? And I doubt not but Mr Cotton
does sometimes give an heavenly and spiritual signification, to all these
figurative and miraculous Mysteries.


Peace. But I wonder at the next words; Though Christ (says he) gave no such
Commission to Ministers of the Gospel to put false Prophets to Death, as Elijah
did, yet the Act of Duty was an ordinary duty of moral Righteousness,
belonging to such as bear the Sword. Anon again he writes; This Example will
not extend to the Idolaters of the World.

First, Because many thousand thousand of them are exempt from the civil
Magistracy of Christians. Secondly, They were never in Covenant with God, to
whom only the Law of Moses concerning the punishment of Idolaters extended.
Thirdly, Though the Israelites were Idolaters, yet Elijah spared them, because
of their simplicity and Ignorance.
Truth. I answer, first, if Christ Jesus gave no such Commission No Commission
from Christ for corporal punishment in religious matters.
(as is confessed) then woe to all those Popish and Protestant Priests, who
have (by theft, or flattery, or other evil means) got Commissions from the
Civil powers of the World, whereby (to maintain their own honors, and
profits of Bishoprics and Benefices, etc.) they smite with the fist and sword,
of wickedness: or under a pretense of holy Orders in themselves, put over the
drudgery of Execution to their enslaved Seculars!

Secondly, If these need no Commission, because to put to Death the false
Prophets and Idolaters, is an Act of moral Righteousness, how agrees that
Position and these three together.

First, only Christian Magistrates (said Mr Cotton) must act in these cases.

Secondly, They must act against such only as are Churchmembers.

Thirdly, They must not act against such Church Members as commit Idolatry out
of simplicity or Ignorance.


Peace. Dear Truth, if it pass your capacity to reconcile these in point of
Truth, it must needs pass mine to see how such Doctrines can stand with any
civil peace or order in the world.


Truth. To affirm such Actions to be ordinary duties of moral Strange and
monstrous* duties of Moral Righteousness.
Righteousness, belonging to such as bear the Sword, and yet not to be
practiced but by such Magistrates as are most rarely found in the World, and on
such a people in such an Order as is most rare in the Nations of the World, is
to me all one, as to call all Fathers and Masters in the World to such ordinary
Duties as belong to every Father and Master of a Family: Or to call Masters
and Commanders of Ships to such ordinary duties as belong to all Masters of
Ships in the World: Or Captains and Commanders in War to such ordinary
Duties as belong to all Captains and Commanders in the World, and then at last
to tell them: It is true, the Duties are ordinary and common, to all Fathers,
Masters, Commanders, Captains, but these Duties are to be performed only by
such Fathers, Masters, Captains and Commanders, and in such Families, Ships,
and Armies as are not ordinary to be found in the World.


Peace. I see not but the Similitude does fully reach, for indeed although such
a people so and so in Covenant with God, according to Mr Cotton, were true
visible Churches according to Christ's Institution, and so consequently their
Magistrates truly Christian, yet compare such Magistrates with the rest of the
Magistrates of the World, who as lawfully bear the Sword as Gods children are
wonders and monsters accounted.
Themselves, and compare such a people so and so in Church Covenant, with the
rest of the people and Nations of the World, and we shall not find them
ordinary and common, but rather as six fingers, wonders and monsters to all
other parts of the World, yea even to the very Popish and Protestant parts of
the World also.

But to end this Chapter; The other fact of Elijah in slaying the Captains
with their fifties, Mr Cotton acknowledges not to be alleged by any other
Author in this Controversy, but only by the Discusser, to make himself work
in such Cobweb-Evasions.


Truth. Mr Cotton forgets, for Elijah his Act (from Luc. 9.) Elijah his
slaying the Captains and their fifties.
has been mentioned by others, and answered too by Master Cotton in this
present Book and Controversy. And for the Cob-webs, let the poor Witnesses
of Christ be esteemed as Spiders, and their Testimony and Witness but as
Cob-webs, yet let them not be discouraged, but lay hold (like Solomon's Spider)
with the hand of spiritual Diligence, and let all such their heavenly
Wonderful Spiders and Cobwebs. Prove* 30*
Cob-webs be in Kings Palaces. And let them know their Cobwebs be of such a
strength, that how ever the cruel Beezome of persceution may sweep them
down, out of this World, yet in pomt of Truth and true Christian power and
worth, neither Pope nor Prelate, neither Presbyterian, nor Independent
persecutour, nor Baalzebub himself (the God of Flies) shall ever be able to
sweep them down, or break through them.


Exam: of Chap. 74. and 75. replying to Chap. 77. and 78.
Peace. IN Chap. 74. One passage cannot be past by, to wit, [God has laid this
charge upon Magistrates in the Old Touching Seducers, and their punishments.
Testament to punish Seducers, and the Lord Jesus never took off this Charge
in the New Testament: Who is this Discusser, that he should account Paul
himself, or an Angel from Heaven accursed, that should leave this Charge upon
Magistrates, which God laid on, and Christ never took off?]


Truth. This is but a Repetition of what has formerly been examined: unto
which therefore I briefly say, It will never be found true, that God has laid
this charge upon all Magistrates in the World, as he did upon the Magistrates
in Israel, to punish Seducers.

Secondly, God laying this charge upon the Governors and Magistrates in
Israel, the Church of God (in the type) lays it still upon Christ Jesus and his
Governors spiritual under him in his spiritual Israel, which Kingdom he
administreth, with Laws, Punishments and Weapons Spiritual. All this Mr
Cotton in this Controversy has acknowledged.

Thirdly, When he says, Christ Jesus never took off this Charge.

First, I answer, let that Parable which he mentions be the Trial of it in
the fear of God.

Secondly, God having now in these last times declared his Christ Jesus
abolished former figures, though he name not each of them in particular.
will by his Son: Where has his blessed Son spoken to us, to build no more
Temples, to erect no more Altars, to offer no more Sacrifices? And yet these
and the whole frame of that typical State we justly abrogate, both from the
words of Christ and his first Messengers, which are plain and easy enough to
such whose eyes it pleases God to open, although (in express Terms) Christ
Jesus has not given an express Catalogue of all such particulars to be
abolished.


Peace. In the next passage Mr Cotton deeply charge the poor Discusser with
partiality and falsehood; upon which Grounds he turns off all the
Consequences, which the Discusser observed to follow upon Mr Cottons
Conclusions.


Truth. It is true, the Author of the Letter expresses Liberty of Conscience
to such as fear God indeed: Mr Cotton subscribes, but presently razeth out his
Subscription in these words following, which he has again now reprinted, to
wit, But the Question is whether an Heretic after once or twice Admonition
(and so after Conviction) and any other scandalous and heinous offendour, may
be tolerated, either in the Church without Excommunication, or in the
Commonweal without such punishment, as may preserve others from dangerous and
damnable Infection.


Peace. Who sees not but this bloody Tenent (I mean these The Mystery of the
Bloody Tenent.
words now recited) does not only restrain Liberty of Conscience to such as
fear God indeed, and speaks fire and faggot to all the world beside: But also
(under the name of Heretic and Seducer) throws into the Furnace (most
commonly and ordinarily) all such as fear God (Christ Jesus and his Messengers
and Ministers not excepted) who have always been and are accounted, the
chiefest Heretics, Blasphemers, Deceivers and Seducers in this World?


Truth. I add the Consequences therefore remain good, that The bloody
consequences of the bloody Tenent.
either All the Inhabitants of the World must come into the estate of men
fearing God: Or else dissemble Religion, and fearing God, in hypocrisy: Or
else, be driven out of the World. Then also the Civil State must judge of the
Spiritual, and of Magistrates fearing or not fearing God: The People must
judge (I say) who fear God indeed, and are by them to be permitted, and who
are the Heretics, and to be punished, which who may not see to be the driving
of the world out of it self, and the bloody routing up of all Societies of
Men?


Peace. This charge of partiality and falsehood, you have (Dear Truth) to my
understanding shielded the poor Discusser from, Can you now help his
Forehead, and his Heart, which Mr Gotton in the next passage charge with
another notorious and impudent falsehood, in relating out of a printed book an
Answer of the New English Ministers to Questions sent unto them from their
Brethren in old, which answer Mr Cotton says he cannot The sad Effects of the
bloody Tenent on Mr Cottons own Spirit.
find.


Truth. So much Gall and Vinegar has Mr Cotton powered forth in this whole
passage from the first to the last of it, that no sober minded man fearing God,
and knowing Mr Cottons former temper of Spirit, but will confess two things:

First, that this bloody Tenent of persecution has infected and A lamentable
Character of the change of Mr Cottons Spirit.
inflamed his very natural Temper and former sweet peaceable disposition.

Secondly, his Eye (being thus bloudshot) is so weakened in its former (and
otherwise excellent sight) that it now questions no Difference between the
Mountains and the Molehills, for at the worst, in common probability of
Reason, there can be but a mistake in the Discusser concerning this passage.


Peace. If the Discusser have no spark of the fear of God, yet if but common
crvilitie and honesty, or least respect of common credit among men, it were
impossible for him to forge so grossly in matters lately printed, public and
obvious to every eye.


Truth. The truth is, whether there be different Editions or different Copies
printed, let Mr Cotton and whom it concerns take care of it, for the Discusser
is confidently resolved that if this passage (for the substance of it) be not
printed and to be read in print of all men, in their names, he will then
willingly bear and lie under the charge of a false forehead and heart, which
Mr Cotton in such heat and anger imputes unto him.


Exam: of Chap. 76. replying to Chap. 79.
Peace. IN this short Chapter the Discusser is charged with Ignorance and
uncharitablenes, for thinking amiss of the Penmen of the Answer to the
Questions, to wit, that he should conceive that the passage to New England
should change the Judgment or Consciences of Men.


Truth. The Discusser professes (and I know in truth) to bewail his Ignorance
and uncharitablenes, yet upon a second review of the words, it will be found
there was not an Imputation of such a conceit, to those worthy Authors, or any
man, but an Item unto all men, occasioned by the Confidence expressed, that
they doubted not, but those godly brethren of old England should agree with
them here in New, if they were in New England together. This Item or Caveat
will appear to be given, not by way of positive Charge, nor in the least
derogating from the holy and blessed use of free and humble Conference, but to
take off the Edge of such Confidence of agreeing in New England, when the
Differences of Gods people have been and Differences of Gods own children in
Old and New England.
are yet so great in Old and New, and so many Conferences and Disputations of
Truth and Peace have not yet raised that blessed Agreement of which the Answer
to the Questions would make no doubt.


Peace. Me-thinkes there should be little hope of their coming to New England
when the New-English Ministers had got the Advantage of the higher ground, and
Carnal Sword for their Religion to Friend, and had expressed their Judgment of
their conceiving it not safe, that, (if they should not agree,) their several
ways of Worshipping God, should be permitted in one Commonweal.


Truth. Yea and I believe still the Consequence was truly gathered by the
Discusser (how ever Mr Cotton has so charged his Forehead and Heart for it) to
wit, That the New English Ministers could not (as their Conscience stood)
advise the Magistrates of New England to permit that which their Consciences
and Judgments taught them was not safe, etc.


Peace. These passages occasion me to remember a serious Profession of Christ
Jesus in New England, not so like to be true as that (which was persecuted) in
Old.
Question which many fearing God have made, to wit, Whether the promise of Gods
Spirit, blessing Conferences, be so comfortably to be Expected in New England,
because of those many public sins which most of Gods people in New England
lie under, and one especially, to wit, the framing a Gospel or Christ to
themselves without a cross, not professing nor practicing that in Old (except
of late in times of Liberty) which they professedly come over to enjoy with
Peace and Liberty from any cross of Christ in New.


Truth. I know those thoughts have deeply possessed, not a few, considering
also the sin of the Pattents, wherein Christian Kings (so called) are invested
with Right by virtue of their The great ^in of New-Englands former Pattents.
Christianity, to take and give away the Lands and Countries of other men; As
also considering, the unchristian Oaths swallowed down, at their coming forth
from old England, especially in superstitious Land his time and domineering.

And I know these thoughts so deeply afflicted the Soul and Conscience of the
Discusser in the time of his Walking in the Way of New Englands Worship, that
at last he came to a persuasion, that such sins could not be Expiated,
without returning again into England: or a public acknowledgement and
Confession The Authors trials about the Pattents of New England.
of the Evil of so and so departing: To this purpose before his Troubles and
Banishment, he drew up a Letter (not without the Approbation of some of the
Chief of New England, then tender also upon this point before God) directed
unto the King himself, humbly acknowledging the Evil of that part of the
Pattent which respects the Donation of Land, etc.

This Letter and other Endeavors (tending to wash off public sins, to give
warning to others, and above all, to pacify and to give Glory unto God) it may
be that Council from Flesh and Blood suppressed, and Worldly policy at last
prevailed: for this very cause (amongst others afterward re-examined) to banish
the Discusser from such their Coasts and Territories.


Peace. But from Violence to the Discusser, or any other, Mr Cotton (in the
next passage) protests his Innocence, and insinuates the Discusser to be no
other then (a Devil) an Accuser of the Brethren, for imputing to them any such
Evil, etc.


Truth. He that reads how hard the Heart of holy David Gods children may be
guilty of bloody persecution for the hiding of their spiritual uncleannessee.
grew, in the sin of Whoredom and Murder, until the Lord awakened him,
will less wonder, that Spiritual Whoredom and murtherous violence, may
possess the Heart of Gods David's and holiest Servants now, and that without
blush, or shame, or least appearance of Relenting: Does not all this whole
Traverse of Mr Cotton maintain a persecution even unto Death, of such whom the
Civil State shall judge Heretics, Blasphemers, Idolaters, Seducers, etc.

Does not this very Chapter expressly justify persecution upon the Subverters
of the Christian Faith, obstinate after Conviction? upon Blasphemers,
Idolaters, Seducers? And is Mr Cotton not Gods mercy in stopping New-Englands
persecution, by the mercy of old England, the mother to dissenting Consciences.
informed, what success his Doctrine has had, that (if a merciful God had
not prevented) not Courting, nor Fining, nor Imprisoning, nor Whipping nor
Banishing had been punishment sufficient, to men and women, for cause of
Conscience in New England, but even Death it self, (according to the
Principles of persecution) had been inflicted.


Peace. Mr Cotton will urge that Gods people will not be such Heretics, etc.


Truth. I might urge Mr Cottons own grant of such sins in Gods own people,
for which they may be justly Excommunicated; but I will rather produce an
Instance in our Nation of England. None fearing God will easily deny the
Eminent Godliness Holy Cranmer and Cromwell joining with persecutours of Christ
Jesus out of great weakness in H. 8. his days.
of Cranmer and Cromwell in King Henry the eight his days; At that very time
when King Henry himself disputed in so famous an Assembly against the blessed
witness of Christ Jesus, John Lambert! Find we not also holy Cranmer
disputing before the King and that Stately Assembly, against this poor Servant
of God, for that horrible and monstrous Idol of Transubstantiation?


Peace. Find we not then also holy and zealous Cromwell (at the Kings command)
reading that bloody Sentence of Death against that blessed Lamb of Christ
Jesus, who was thus worried to Death, not only by the bloody Wolves the
Bishops, but even by those holy Lambs of Christ, Cranmer and Cromwell also!


Truth. This was that blessed Lambert, a true Follower of the The most famous
passages of Cromwell and Lambert in H. the 8. his days.
Lamb of God Christ Jesus, who cried out in the midst of the Flames, None but
Christ, None but Christ: and well might he so cry: Not Cranmer, not Cromwell,
who after so much Light in Disputations, yet persisted in their Heresy and
Idolatry, and partaking with violence against this holy man, that he might well
cry out, None but Christ, None but Christ.


Exam: of Chap. 77. replying to Chap. 80.
Peace. AS it is (Dear Truth) oftentimes in Journies, the worst way and
saddest weather attends the Journies End: So here Mr Cotton (near our close)
charge upon the Discusser a threefold wresting of his words, and accordingly
so much false-dealing.


Truth. It is sad on the Discussers part, if this be done by him, either by a
wilful or a negligent hand.


Peace. Yea and it is sad on Mr Cottons part, if the Charge be not real and
substantial.


Truth. Mr Cotton acknowledges his words to be these The Godly will not
persist in Heresy or turbulent Schism, when they are convinced in Conscience
of the sinfullnesse of their way] The first charge therefore against the
Discusser is that he confounds Admonition with Conviction, for (says Mr
Cotton) Admonition ought not to be dispensed, until the offendour be convinced
in his own Conscience of the sinfullnesse of his Way.


Truth. For answer hereunto the Discusser to my knowledge humbly appealeth to
the Searcher of all Hearts, that he has not willingly nor wittingly falsified
Mr Cottons words in a term or syllable. And indeed whether he has wronged
him at all, or be not rather unjustly trampled under the feet of weak and
passionate charges, the Discusser appealeth to Mr Cottons own Conscience,
awaked (if God so please) out of this bloody Dream.


Peace. Yea but (says Mr Cotton) Admonition is one thing, Of Admonition and
Conviction.
and Conviction in their own Conscience is another; for though says he,
Admonition ought not to be dispensed till after Conviction, yet it may fall out
that the Church (through mistake) proceeds to Admonition before the offendour
be convinced in his own Conscience of the sinfulness of his Way.


Truth. Passing gently by the want of Equity in Mr Cotton to the Discusser, in
condemning him of falsehood, for taking Admonition for Conviction, when he makes
it but a mistake in the Church to practice the one for, or before the other:

I answer, I know not that suitable Distinction between Admonition and
Conviction, as Mr Cotton carries it, saying, that how ever the Church may
through mistake practice Admonition before Conviction, yet Admonition ought not
to proceed, until after Conviction in a man's own Conscience, for find we
not the words of Reprooving, Rebuking, Admonishing, Exhorting a brother,
indifferently used both in the Old and New Testament? And does not that very
word (...) ( Matthew. 18. Reprove him) imply Conviction as well as Reproof or
Admonition, for does it not signify Convincingly reprove him?


Peace. I have heard indeed, that Conviction is twofold: Conviction twofold.
First, External and legal before men in Civil or Spiritual Judicature.

Secondly, Effectual and inward in the Court of a man's own Conscience before
God, which internal, always follows not the External.


Truth. No, such External Conviction may be legal before men, but not in the
fight of God, and a man's own Conscience, as we see in the case of Naboth, who
was legally convict of Blasphemy, when acquitted by God and his own
Conscience: As also in those Consciences (of which Paul speaks) seared with
hot irons, which Consciences (notwithstanding the abundance of Light from
heaven convincing, yet) are not brought from believing Lies.


Peace. Yea, but it seems by Mr Cottons words, that the Church, Of Conviction
of Heretics.
that is, (according to his way) the Major part of the Church must judge that
the Heretic is convinced in his own Conscience of the sinfullnesse of his way
before she proceeds to Admonition.


Truth. For my part I cannot reconcile these three Propositions, comprised by
Mr Cotton in these few lines.

First, the Godly will not persist in Heresy, or turbulent Schism, when they
are convinced in Conscience of the sinfullnesse thereof.

Secondly, The Church is to judge of the Conviction of such a Godly man's
Conscience.

Thirdly, Although such a Godly man be convinced of the sinfulness of his way,
yea although he will not persist in Heresy or turbulent Schism, when he is
thus convinced in Conscience of the sinfulness thereof, yet then is the Church
to proceed to Admonition. For thus he says, Admonition ought not to be
dispensed till after Conviction.


Peace. If Mr Cotton spoke of the first Conviction, to wit, the External, I
could subscribe, but now speaking of that internal Conviction sufficient,
external by the word, and efficient internal by Gods Spirit.
in a man's own Conscience, I see it pleases God, most holy and only wise to
permit the best and wisest of his Servants, to entrap, entangle, and bewilder
themselves, that they may learn to confess him only and infinitely wise, and
be more humble in themselves, as fools and liars, and less bitter in their
Judgments and Censures on the poor Underlings and Outcasts.


Truth. O that Mr Cotton, who grants the Godly may fall into such foul sins
of Heresy and Schism, may also be godly jealous over himself and others
fearing God in old or New England, that also possibly they may fall, into the
very sin of persecuting the Son of God himself, especially since it is the
Lot of Christ Jesus (beyond all compare) both in Himself Christ Jesus
(accounted) the greatest Heretic, Blasphemer, Seducer, and Deceiver that ever
was in this world.
and his Followers, to be accounted the greatest Heretic, Blasphemer, Seducer
and Deceiver.


Peace. To the second and third Charge Mr Cotton complains of false dealing, in
that the Discusser should render his words, as if he charged such to be
obstinate persons, that yielded not to once or twice Admonition, and that for
every Error, when he speaks only of persisting in Heresy, or turbulent
Schism.


Truth. For answer, let Mr Cottons Conclusions in the beginning of this Book
be remembered. Wherein he maintains that a Man of an Erroueous and blind
Conscience in Fundamental and weighty points, and persisting in the Error of
his way, is not persecuted for cause of Conscience, but for sinning against his
Conscience. Whence it follows that the Civil Courts of the World must judge:
whether the matter be fundamental and weighty: whether the party have been
rightly once and twice admonished: and whether he persist in the Error of his
Way: that is, whether he be obstinate after such Admonition, and must then be
persecuted, though (as the Conclusion woefully concludes) not for cause of
Conscience, but for sinning against his Conscience.


Peace. Yea but the Discusser (says Mr Cotton) deals falsely, in carrying my
words, as if I had said, that Godly persons in whatsoever Error they hold, if
they yield not to once or twice Admonition, they must needs be obstinate:
whereas (he says) he speaks not of every Error, but of persisting in Heresy
and turbulent Schism.


Truth. The Discusser did not so say, or so carry it as Mr Cotton insinuates,
but this he says, that even in the place of Righteousness and Judgment (as
Solomon says) Iniquity, and such Iniquity (in all civil Courts of the
World, and in all Ages Small matters accounted Heresies.
of the World) usually has been found, that as in multiplying glasses a Flea
is made an Elephant, etc. So the poor witnesses of Christ have been proclaimed
and persecuted for Heretics, Blasphemers, Seducers, etc. not only for not
houlding the Popes Transubstantiation, Auricular Confession, Purgatory, and
those waightier points of the Beasts worship: but reading a piece of a Leaf of
Scripture or any good book is Heresy. Eating a piece of Flesh in Lent, yea
the slight breaches of the smallest Traditions of the Elders and State
Worships, accounted Heresy, Blasphemy, etc.


Peace. Hence was it I think, that the Naturalist could tell us in the Fable of
the Fox and the Lion, that the Fox ran not away in vain upon the Proclamation
of the departure of all horned Beasts, as knowing that if the bloody
persecutours of the World shall say, the plainest Ears are horns (that is, the
smallest Errors, yea the plainest Truths are Heresies) it is in vain for any
Innocent to plead they are but Ears, etc.


Truth. Yea hence it was that in that famous, or rather most The barbarous
usage of John Hus in the Council at Constance.
infamous Council of Constance, the blessed Servant and witness of Christ
Jesus, John Hus, was as it were stobd to Death (before his burning) with
terms of Heresy, Heretic, Heresiarck, yea though he held as the Pope and
the Council held, even in those points for which they condemned him, because
(beside their hatred of his Holiness, witnessing against their Filthiness)
themselves would say from his writings, that he did hold so and so against
their Popish Tenants, which he himself professed he never did.


Peace. In the next place (Dear Truth) are two Passages related by the
Discusser from New England. To which Mr Cotton gives no credit.

2. He says, If such words were spoken, they might be spoken upon such waights
as might hold weight, etc.


Truth. For the Stories and the Discussers mistakes (willing mistakes, as Mr
Cotton seems to insinuate) I know the Discusser humbly desires like a true
Traveller to his heavenly Country, to hear of, and see and acknowledge, and
forsake every false path and step (by the help of Christ) that the poorest
child, though but a naked Pagan shall hint him of: But why should the Stories
seem incredible that suite so woefully fit with the Common Tenants?


Peace. It may be Mr Cotton will not believe it, nor approve it: But there are
not two, but ten witnesses, to testify such Stories, were it seasonable to
relate and enlarge such particulars.


Truth. Let Mr Cotton then please to understand (to pass by particular names
of the former Stories, which are ready to be declared to any charitable and
loving Inquiry) that his bloody Tenent is a bitter Root of many bitter
branches, not only bitter to spiritual tastes, but even to the taste of
Civilitie and Humanity it The bloody Tenent destroying civilitie and humane
Society out of the World.
self. But since the names of persons are so desired, I shall relate (not out
of any personal disrespect to Mr Street and the people of Cohannet, alias
Taunton, my loving friends) what many testify, that the said (reputed)
Minister Mr Street, publicly and earnestly persuaded his Church Members to
give Land to none but such, as might be fit for Church Members: yea not to
receive such English into the Town, or if in the Town, yet not to Land, that
if they lived in the Town or place, yet they might be known to be but as
Gibeonites, hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the service of them that
were of the Church.


Peace. I know what troublesome Effects followed in the same place, and what
Breaches of Civil and humane Society? What Departures of diverse, and Bars
to the coming of others, to the spoil and hindrance of a most likely and
growing Plantation.

But to proceed (Dear Truth) you cannot more faithfully and carefully labor
to discharge the Discusser of falsehoods, then Mr Cotton endeavors to lay them
on: For to the former three, behold in the next passage four more.

For, first the Discusser is charged to report Mr Cotton as expressing
Confidence in this cause, which Mr Cotton says he expressed not. Secondly, He
reports Mr Cotton to say, that he (to wit, Mr Cotton) had removed the grounds
of this Error, whereas Mr Cotton (says he) said not so, but that he had
spoken so much for that End. Thirdly, He foisteth in the name of great Error,
which though it be so, yet Mr Cotton did not so style it.

Fourthly, That Mr Cotton should conclude, that to be a great Error, that
persons are not to be persecuted for cause of Conscience, when he states the
Question so, that none ought to be persecuted at all for cause of Conscience,
but for sinning against their Conscience.
Truth. Sweet Peace, he that has a mind to beat a Dog, will soon find a
cudgel, etc. If Mr Cotton had not esteemed the Discusser as a Dog, and had not
had as great a mind as a Dog to use him, he would never have so caught at
every line and word, to find out (such) the Discussers Lies and Falsehoods.

For, first, it is apparent that the Discusser here undertook not to repeat
Mr Cottons words, but upon such and such words of Mr Cottons (compared with all
former Agitations) to collect according to his understanding such a Conclusion.


Peace. But whether he has rightly and without breach of All Men are confident
in their own opinions.
Truth or Love so and so collected, let it be (briefly) in the fear of God
examined.


Truth. First then, has not Mr Cotton through all this discourse, expressed a
Confidence (some have called it imperious and insulting) against the poor
Heretics, Blasphemers, Seducers? And do not these words [for avoiding the
grounds of your Errour] import so much?

Secondly, Does not Mr Cottons words imply that in his opinion such a Tenent is
an Error, and that by speaking so much against it, he has removed it, what
ever his opponent thinks to the contrary?

Thirdly, Why may not the Discusser, or any man say, that Mr Cotton counts that
a great Error, which Mr Cotton endeavors so to represent to all men?


Peace. But the fourth (says Mr Cotton) is an evident falsehood in the
Discusser to say, that Mr Cotton should conclude this to be the great Error,
that persons are not to be persecuted for cause of Conscience.


Truth. The Father of Lights has of late been graciously pleased to open the
eyes of not a few of his servants to see that Mr Cottons Distinction [of not
persecuting a man for his Conscience, but for sinning against his Conscience]
is but a Figleafe to hide the nakedness of that bloody Tenent, for, the Civil
Court must then judge when a man sins against his Conscience, or else he must
take it from the Clergy upon trust, that the poor reputed Heretic does so
sin.


Peace. Mr Cotton adds that it is an Aggravation of sin to hold or practice
Evil out of Conscience. The persecutour of Turks, Pagans, Jews, or
Antichristiane, is in a greater error then any of them.



Truth. True, but I also ask, Does not that persecutour that hunts or
persecuteth a Turk, a Jew, a Pagan, an Antichristian (under pretense that this
Pagan, this Turk, this Jew, this Antichristian sins against his own
Conscience,) does not this persecutour, I say, hold a greater Error then any
of the four, because he hardens such Consciences in their Errors by such his
persecution, and that also to the overthrowing of the civil and humane
Society of the Nations of the World, in point of civil peace?


Peace. Well you may (dear Truth) enjoy your own holy and peaceable Thoughts,
but Mr Cotton ends this Chapter with hope that the reputed bloody Tenent,
appears now whiled in the blood of the Lamb, and tends to save Christ's sheep
from devouring, to defend Christ's truth, and to maintain and preserve peace in
Church and Commonweal.


Truth. Sweet Peace, that which has in all Ages powered out The bloody Fruits
of the bloody Tenent.
the precious blood of the Son of God, in the blood of his poor sheep,
shall never be found whited (as Mr Cotton insinuates) in the blood of this most
heavenly Shepherd: That which has maintained the works of Darkness 1600
years under the bloody Roman Emperors, and more bloody Roman Popes, has
never tended to destroy, but build and fortify such hellish works. That which
all Experience (since Christ's time) has shown to be the great Firebrand or
Incendiarie of the Nations, has powered out so many Rivers of blood about
Religion, and that amongst the (so called) Christian Nations. That Tenent, I
say, will never be found a preserver, but a bloody destroyer both of
Spiritual and civil peace.


Exam: of Chap. 78. replying to Chap. 81.
Peace. WE are now (Dear Truth) through the mercy of the Father of mercies,
arrived, at the last Chapter of this Sorrowful Agitation: Mr Cotton finds
nothing Touching confidence in opinions.
in this worth the while to speak to: yet thinks he it good to find time to
blame the Discusser for self. Applauses, vainglorious Triumph, and confident
persuasion, which before he had noted Mr Cotton for.


Truth. That which was noted in Mr Cotton was not merely a persuasion or
confidence, but indeed an imperious and insulting confidence, over the poor
and oppressed, and an adding of V^megar to the Gall of the Son of God,
persecuted in his poor Saints and Members.


Peace. But may there not seem to be too in the Discusser, too great a
confidence of the converting and turning of the bloody Storm of Wars about
Conscience, into merciful calmes of peace, and of the return of Christ's dove,
with Olive branches of civil peace?


Truth. Then let thousands and ten thousands, French, Polonians, Hungarians,
Transilvanians, Bohemians, Netherlanders, Freedom of Conscience has ever been
a Peacemaker in all Nations where it has appeared.
and others, and now at last (through Gods gracious smiling upon this holy
Truth of his) I say, many thousand English men set to their seal and witness,
to wit, that Freedom to the Consciences of men, (from all other but spiritual
opposition) has stuck many Millions of Brows and Houses with Olive branches,
that were before beblubbered and overwhelmed with tears and blood.


Peace. I cannot but confidently see and say, that doubtless, had not the
prudent and zealous care of Englands Parliament and Army subscribed to this
blessed means of peace, restored to Lands and Countries embroyled in bloody
civil Wars about Religion, And especially at this hour in England.
doubtless, the stream of War which has run so long with blood between the
Prelates and the Puritans (so called) had run as fresh and furious in all
devouring flames between the Presbyterians and the Independents.


Truth. Oh blessed be the God of peace, who has more pity upon the
unpeaceable Sons of Men, then they have on Themselves.


Peace. Mr Cotton in the next place adds, that one passage he may not let
pass, because the name of Christ is interessed in it, and dishonored by it,
to wit, [ Christ delights not in the blood of men, but shed his own blood for
his bloudiest enemies:] Mr Cotton answers; It is true that Christ delights
not in the How Christ delights in blood.
blood of men, while they gainsay and bloudily persecute him and his, out of
Ignorance: but he delights in the blood of such, who after the acknowledgement
of his Truth, do tread the blood of his Covenant under-foote, and wittingly
and willingly reject him from reigning over them: The contrary whereof he says
Proclaims the Gospel to the seed of the Serpent: Sows pillowes under all
ellbowes, makes the Heart of the Righteous sad, strengthens the hand of the
wicked, and proclaims peace to Jezabell, and her whoredoms and witchcrafts,
and concludes with prayer against such a bewitching of the Whores Cup, where,
by open profession she is rejected, but let in by the back-doore of Tolleration.


Truth. I perceive (Sweet Peace) that in the winding up of this Discourse Mr
Cotton winds up, resolves and reduces his former pleaded for persecuting of
Heretics, Blasphemers, Idolaters, Of persecuting Apostates.
Seducers, into the persecuting only of Apostates, who after the acknowledging
of the Truth, do tread the blood of Christ's Covenant underfoote, etc. To which
I answer: If so then the discerning and judging between such as gainsay Christ,
and blaspheame him out of Ignorance, (such as Mr Cotton makes the Jews, who
put him to Death) and such as willingly and wittingly reject him: I say, the
judging of this must then rest at the Bar of the Civil Courts and
Judicatures of the World, which necessarily implies a supposition of power of
Judging in all the Nations of the World, and so consequently in Natural men
contrary to the Scriptures, which conclude all Mankind (while in their
natural estate,) incapable of the things of Gods Spirit.


Peace. Yea and also (to my understanding) it implies, a submitting and
subjecting of the Crown and Scepter and affairs of Christ Jesus, to the
Civil and humane Crowns and Scepters and Tribunalls of the Nations of this
World, and that in spiritual and heavenly things, the proper affairs of his
own Spiritual Kingdom, in the which, the wisest of this world are ignorant,
and extremely opposite.


Truth. For this, you know Mr Cotton has a broken Refuge, to wit, [the Nations
of the World, and Natural men must not judge until they be better informed]
In which, what a wonderful and menstrous suspension does he put upon the
affairs of Christ A monstrous suspension or hanging up of Magistrates.
Jesus all the world over, and leaves the matters of Christ Jesus in worse
case, and more poorly provided for by Christ Jesus, then the matters and
affairs of any King or Kingdom in the World, beyond compare and Imagination.


Peace. Yet, methinks those Scriptures quoted by Mr Cotton Luc. 17. Those mine
Enemies, etc. and Revel. 16. Bloody vengeance upon Antichristian Emissaries,
are very considerable.


Truth. Doubtless all Scripture seriously alleged by the most Allegations of
Scriptures ought seriously to be mad and answered.
ignorant and unworthy (how much more from so learned and conscientious) ought
seriously and awfully to be pondered in the holy presence of God: The Warrants
and Authorities of civil powers (though but pretended) are not without due
respect to be examined, although rejected (in the end) as insufficient, etc.
But consider in the Examination of those Scriptures: Is it credible that all
that resist Christ Jesus, his Kingdom and Government, are Apostate and
Antichristian Emissaries, against whom Millions of Turks, Jews, and
Antichristians are far from the due charge of Apostasy.
he powers out that Violl? Have they first acknowledged the Covenant of Jesus,
and then trod the precious blood of that High Covenant under feet?


Peace. The East is not so far from the West, as those Scriptures from such a
Conclusion.


Truth. Yea how many hundredth thousands of Jews and Turks and Antichristians
perish temporally and eternally, and that for refusing Christ Jesus to be King,
and for shedding his blood in his servants, who can never be brought under this
guilt of Apostacy, after they have once acknowledged the truth of Christ's
Government and Kingdom.


Peace. Methinks to understand the Scriptures in Mr Cottons sense, were a
wonderful penning up and straightning the holy Scripture.


Truth. Sweet Peace, as soon may we immure the glorious Sun in a dark
dungeon, as confine those bright Scriptures in the dark Cells of Apostacy: but
I further observe, that Christ Jesus not only praid and dyed for his Enemies,
who bloudily persecuted him and his out of Ignorance, but gave this reason
against bodily Death to be inflicted on any for his cause and sake, Luc. 9. The
Son of Man is not come to destroy Men's lives: and I might return the Question
to Mr Cotton, not unfitly, Are not these the words o^ Him that delights not
in the blood of his bloudiest enemies and Gainsayers?


Peace. It will be said, What slaughters, what drinking of Blood is that which
Christ Jesus in these Scriptures intends?


Truth. I answer, although the Sword of Christ's Kingdom, that sharp Sword
with two edges is a Spiritual Sword, and is carried in his Mouth, yet all
power in Heaven and Earth being given into his hands by his Father, he rules
and over-ruleth in a way of power and providence, all the powers of the World.
The mystery of the red Horse of War.


There is therefore a great Sword given to him that rides upon the white
Horse, (Revel. 6.) by which, for the resisting of him that rides upon the
white Horse, (in the gainsaying and persecuting of Christ in his Members)
Christ Jesus takes peace from the Earth, and suffers the Turks to plague the
Antichristian World, (Papists and carnal Protestants) to plague each other,
and to fill Cups of Blood each to other, while they contend and fight, first
against God, and then one against another, for their several false Prophets
and Religions.


Peace. Methinks then Mr Cotton might have spared to charge the Discusser with
proclaiming of peace to Jezabell, etc.


Truth. There is a Spiritual peace in the matters of Christ's A spiritual and
Civil peace.
Kingdom and Worship, and in the particular Consciences and Souls of his
Servants. There is a Civil peace in the quiet enjoyment of each man's
propriety, in the Combination of Towns, Cities, Kingdoms, etc. But neither
of these three will Mr Cotton prove the Discusser proclaims to such
Antichristians or enemies of Christ Jesus, who persecute and oppress Jew or
Gentile upon any civil or spiritual pretense.

It Is true, the Consciences and Worships of all men peaceable in their way, he
affirms ought not to be molested, and though not approved yet permitted, and
(although no spiritual, yet) a civil peace proclaimed to their outward man
while peaceable in civil commerce.

To persecutours, he not only proclaims Gods Judgments spiritual and
eternal, but temporal also, and affirms that all persecutours of all sorts
(and especially the bloody Whore of Rome (who has so long been drunk with the
blood of the Saints,) ought by the Civil Sword to be restrained and punished
(as the Destroyers of Mankind and all civil and peaceable being in the
World,) according to the hight of their cruel and murtherous Oppressions.


Peace. But Tolleration of her (says Mr Cotton brings) her in at the back
door, and so we may come to drink deeply of the Cup of the Lords wrath, and be
filled with the Cup of her plagues.


Truth. There are two opinions which have bewitched the Two woeful opinions
bewitching the Nations.
Nations professing the name of Christ.

First, That a National Church or State, is of Christ's appointing.

Secondly, That such a National Church or State must be maintained pure by the
power of the Sword. While Mr Cotton prays against the bewitching of the Whores
cup, O that the Father of Lights might graciously please to show him the depth
of her witchcrafts, and his own most woeful Delusions in both these.

In vain does Mr Cotton fear partaking of her sins and plagues by a
tollerating (merely) of her Worship in a civil State, while he forgets the
three great causes of her downfall and desolation, The 3 great Causes of the
downfall of the Church of Rome.
and partakes of any of them ( Revel. 18.) to wit, Her worldly pomp and
pleasure: Her spiritual Whoredoms and invented Worships, and her cruelty and
bloodshed, more especially against the Consciences of the Saints or holy ones
of Jesus.


Exam: of Chap. 79. Touching the Model of Church and Civil power, Examined in
the first part of the bloody Tenent, but not defended by Mr Cotton, or any,
that the Discusser knows of.
Peace. I Had hoped ( Dear Truth) that we had gained a Touching a New English
Model of Church and civil power.
peaceable and quiet harbor, after all our tempestuous Tossings in the
boisterous Seas of this bloody Tenent, yet now behold a sharp and cutting
wind of Mr Cottons continual Censures; For I was not (says Mr Cotton) of
those that composed the Model: and secondly, the Ministers say it was not sent
by them to Salem, and therefore the Discusser is left of God to a double
falsehood.


Truth. Sweet Peace, till sweet Death, in and (often) for Christ, close up
the Eyes of his servants, they must not expect to rest fully from their
Labors, and expect their works to follow them.

Once again therefore let us hear the Discussers plea for himself against
this blustering charge of double falsehood. Master Cottons own words in the End
of his Answer to the Prisoners* Letter, are these; I forbear adding Reasons to
justify the Truth, because you may find that done to your hand in a Treatise
sent to some of the Brethren, late of Salem, who doubted as Writing to ^^^ Mr
Hall.
you do.


Truth. To my knowledge it was reported (according to this hint of Mr Cottons)
that from the Ministers of the Churches (pretended) such a Model composed by
them was sent to Salem: Hereupon it was that the Discusser wrote on purpose to
his worthy friend Mr Sharp (Elder of the Church of Salem, (so called) for the
sight of it, who accordingly sent it to him.


Peace. If this Model, of such consequence, were so composed and so sent to
Salem, if Mr Cotton directs others thither to repair to make use of it, if he
thus approve and promote it, I see not why it might not probably be collected,
that Mr Cotton (not the last in such great and public matters) was amongst, if
not chief amongst the composers of it, and that he and they were not ignorant
of the conveyance of it to Salem.


Truth. But grant Mr Cotton should have been imagined to Deep Censures for
none or innocent mistakes.
have been left out in this so great and public a service, and that all the
former probabilities fail: yet doubtless Mr Cotton will be cast at the bar of
Christian Love and Moderation, for so bitter a charge upon the poor Discusser
for so easy and harmles Mistakes.


Peace. Such fierce flashes might well issue from the bloody French Cardinals
against the poor Hugenots, from the English bloody Bishops against the poor
Lollards, from the bloody Popes against the Heretics and Lutherans: but a
gentler Breath and style might well beseem a Protestant to a Protestant,
engaged in common principles and Testimonies and sufferings of Jesus against
those bloody Tyrants.

But to the Model, Mr Cotton seems highly offended, that the Discusser should
say, that the Model awaketh Moses from his unknown Grave, and denies Jesus
yet to have seen the Earth. For, Moses his Laws were of force (says he) to
the Israelites in the Land of Canaan, when Moses was dead: and again, Christ
came not to destroy the Law of Moses, not the Moral Law, nor the Judicialls,
such as are of common Equity: Or else (says he) the Conscience of the Civil
Magistrate could never do any act of civil Justice out of Faith, because he
should have no word of God to be the Ground of his Act, if the Laws of
Judgment were abrogated, and none extant in the New.


Truth. I answer; that speech of the Discusser was neither unreasonable, nor
untrue, as Mr Cotton alleges: for grant Touching Moses his Judicialls.
Christ came not to destroy the Moral Law of the ten Commands (for the
Substance of it, for all material circumstances therein Mr Cotton will not
urge nor practice). Nor secondly, the Judicialls of Moral Equity, that is,
such as in deed concern Life and Manners, according to the Nature and
Constitution of the several Nations and Peoples of the World.


Peace. Pardon me ( Dear Truth) before you proceed, a word of Explication:
your Addition [according to the Nature and Constitution of the Peoples and
Nations of the World] will not he allowed of.


Truth. Without this I cannot allow of Moses his Judicialls to bind all
Nations of the World, then before, or since Christ Jesus: my reason is: That
people of Israel (to which those Israel in a kind a miraculous people.
Judicial Laws and punishments were prescribed) was as I may say, a
miraculous people or Nation, miraculously brought from one Nation, (the Land of
Egypt) into another (the Land of Canaan) both types, a people furnished with
miraculous food and clothing during their forty years Travel through the
Wilderness: The seven Nations of Canaan wondrously and miraculously destroyed
before them; Their Laws and Institutions miraculously delivered to them, etc.

Beside (not to wade deeper into this Controversy, as in the Examination of
the Model I have done) their Land was typically holy, and that people the
Church of God, the only Church of God in the World. And therefore being a
people of such miraculous considerations, Means and Obligations, the breach
even of Moral Laws concerning Life and Manners and civil Estate, might be
more transcendently heinous and odious in them, then in the other several
Nations and peoples of the World, many thousands and millions whereof never so
much as heard of the Name of the God of Israel.


Peace. If men see cause to ordain a Court of Chancerie, and erect a
Mercy-seate to moderate the rigor of Laws, which cannot be justly executed,
without the moderate and equal consideration of persons and other
circumstances! Methinks, the Father of Mercies (though he be Justice it self,
yet) cannot be justly imagined to carry all Judicial or Civil Laws or
Sentences, by one universal strictnes through all the Nations of the Earth.


Truth. The Lord Jesus tells us of a more tolerable Sentence, (even for the
Sodomites in the day of Judgment, then for the Jews, who were the people and
Church of God: and Paul his servant lays heavier load ( Romans 2.) upon such
Adulterers, Thieves, as profess to be Teachers unto others, etc. of the
contrary Graces and Virtues.


Peace. Dear Truth, the Scriptures are full, and many Arguments might be
drawn out this way, but please you to pitch upon an Instance, whereby we may
the sooner finish this Digression.


Truth. Take that great case of the punishment of Adultery, Touching
punishment of Adultery.
and I confidently affirm, that the Conscience of the Magistrate, may out of
Faith, execute other punishments beside (stoning to) Death, which was the
punishment of that sin in Israel. For although (as Mr Cotton says) That was
the Law of Judgment in the Old Testament, and there is no other particularly
expressed in the New, yet the Conscience of the Magistrate may know,

First, That the carriage of the Lord Jesus about this case, when the Question
was precisely put to him, was extraordinary and strange: For (although unto
other Questions, even of the Pharisees, Herodians, Sadduces, the High Priest,
and Pilate, he gave more or less, first or last, punctual Resolutions, yet)
here, he condemns the sin, yet he neither confirms, nor disanulls this
punishment, but leaves the Question (in all probability) and leaves the
several Nations of the World, to their own several Laws and Agreements (as
is most probable) according to their several Natures, Dispositions and
Constitutions, and their common peace and welfare.

Secondly, The Lord Jesus (1 Pet. 2.) approves of the several All Civil
Government Gods Ordinance.
humane Ordinances (or Creations) which the several peoples and Nations of the
World shall agree upon for their common peace and subsistence. Hence are the
several sorts of Governments in the Nations of the World, which are not framed
after Isreal's Pattern. And hence consequently, the Laws, Rewards and
Punishments of several Nations vastly differ from those of Israel, which
doubtless were unlawful for Gods people to submit unto, except Christ Jesus had
(at least in general) approved such humane Ordinances and Creations of Men for
their common peace and welfare.


Peace. Methinks Mr Cotton, and such as literally stick to the punishment of
Adultery, Witchcraft, etc. by Death, must either deny the several Governments
of the World to be lawful (according to that of Peter) and that the Nature and
Constitutions of peoples and Nations, are not to be respected, but all
promiscuously forced to one common Law, or else they must see cause to moderate
this their Tenent, which else proves as bloody a Tenent in civil affairs, as
persecution in affairs religious.


Truth. Yea, of what woeful consequence must this prove to True Republikes and
Commonweals without Kings.
the state of Holland and Low Countries, to the State of Venice, to the Cantons
of Switzerland, to our own dear State of England, and others who have no
King, as Israells last established Government had, especially no King
immediately designed, as Israells (in the Root) was? Yea what becomes of all
Christianity, and of Christ's Church and Kingdom in the World for ever, if it
want the Government of a King: for says Bishop A wonderfull^ saying of Bishop
Hall.
Hall (in his Contemplation on Michaes Idolatry) in plain and express words:
No King, therefore no Church.


Peace. To end this passage, upon the former grounds, methinks the Conscience
of a New English Magistrate (being called to be a Magistrate in Old England) may
in Faith execute any other punishment (according to Law established) beside
Death, upon Adulterers. And the New English Colonies may be exhorted to
rectify their ways, and to moderate such their Laws, which cannot possibly
put on the face of moral Equity from Moses, etc.


Truth. Your Satisfaction (Dear Peace) now praesupposed The State of Israel.
I proceed and grant (with that Limitation forementioned) that Christ Jesus
neither abrogated Moses Moralls, nor Judicialls, yet who will deny that Moses
established, (beside the two former) a third, to wit, Laws merely figurative,
typical and ceremonial, proper and peculiar to that Land and people of
Israel? Those Laws necessarily wrapped up that Nation and people in a mixed
constitution, of Spiritual and Temporal, Religious and Civil, so that their
Governors of Civil State were Governors of the Church, and the very Land and
People were by such Governors to be compelled to observe a ceremonial purity
and Holiness. But Christ Jesus erected another Commonweal, the Commonweal of
Israel, the Christian Commonweal or Church, to wit, not whole Nations, but in
every Nation (where he pleases) his Christian Congregation, etc.


Peace. Dear Truth, I cannot count him a peaceable child of mine, that rests
not herewith satisfied: Mr Cottons next Exception is against your excepting
against a Magistrates Membership in a Church Estate, joined with an Head-ship
over it, to establish, reform, etc. (as being impossible that a Magistrate
should sit Head and Supreme on the spiritual Bench, Of Magistrates being
nursing Fathers, etc.
and yet stand as a delinquent at the spiritual Bar of Christ Jesus) Mr
Cotton answers, that in several respects, a Magistrate may be a nursing Father
and Judge in causes Ecclesiastiall, and yet be subject to Christ's censure in
the offensive Government of himself against the Rules of the Gospel. And where
it might be said, that the Church is subject to the Magistrate in civil
causes, and the Magistrate is subject to the Church in spiritual cases, Mr
Cotton Of Magistrates Power in Spiritualls.
answers, this eases not the Difficulty, for suppose, says he, the
Magistrate fall into Murder, Adultery, etc. which are civil Abuses, shall
the Church tolerate him herein? And he concludes, Let the like Power be
granted to the civil Magistrate to deal faithfully with the Church in the
notorious Transgression of the first Table, as is granted to the Church to
deal with the Magistrate in the notorious Transgression of the second Table,
and the Controversy is ended.


Truth. This Answer and instance of Mr Cotton carries a seeming Beauty with
it, but bring it to the Trial of the Testament of Christ Jesus, and it will
appear to be, but a vanishing Color. For, there is a vast Difference: The
sins of each Churchmember, Of the sins of Magistrates.
whether against the first or second Table, are proper to the Cognizance and
Judgment of the Church, as the sin of the Incestuous person was punished by
Christ's Ordinances (in the Church at Corinth) as well as the Abuse of the Lords
Supper. But it is not so with the civil Magistrate, whose Office is
essentially civil, one and the same, all the world over, among all Nations and
people: For, having no spiritual power (as the Authors of the Model
afterward acknowledge) he cannot possibly act as a Civil Magistrate in
spiritual matters, though as a Churchmember, he may in Church Estate, as also
may the rest of the Members of that spiritual Body.


Peace. Methinks it it clear as the Light, that if that incestuous person in
the Church of Corinth had been a Magistrate of the City of Corinth, the
Church might justly have proceeded against him, because all sin is directly
opposite to the A case touching the Magistrates punishing the Sin of Church
members.
holy Kingdom of Christ. But in that abuse of the Lords Supper (which was
merely unchristian) neither that Magistrate, nor all the Magistrates of
Corinth, or the World to help him, could justly punish the Church, because
that Supper (in the Institution, and Spiritual use of it) was not only of the
Nature of the Suppers, of the meats and drinks of the City of Corinth, but
also of a divine and spiritual Institution, of a heavenly and mystical Nature
and Observation. But to Conclude this piece and the whole, Mr Cotton corrects
himself for putting in his Sickle into the Harvest of his Brethren, unto whom
he refers the defense of their Model, and for himself ends with desires that
Christ Jesus would blast that peace which he says the Examiner proclaims to
all the ways of false Religion, to Heresy in Doctrine, etc.


Truth. If Christ Jesus shall please (for the further manifestation of his holy
Truth and Glory) to permit those able and worthy men, to proceed to fortify
and defend their Model: I hope he will also please to assist the Discusser, or
some other of his poor servants, to batter down (with the Spiritual
Artillery of his Word and Testament) such weak and loose and unchristian
Fortifications.


Peace. But with what a deep and unrighteous charge does Mr Cotton end against
the poor Discusser, as a Proclaimer of peace to all the ways of false
Religion, to Heresy in Doctrine, etc.


Truth. Grant Mr Cotton (in many excellent Truths of Jesus) a sweet sounding
Silver Trumpet: Grant the Discusser as base a Rams-horne harsh and
contemptible: Grant that (for the peace of the Civil State, the being of the
Nations, and the World, the safety of the good Wheat the Righteous, and the
calling home of the Elect to God, Jews and Gentiles!) the Discusser proclaims
a civil being, and civil peace to Erroneous Consciences, not sinning against
humane and civil Principles: Yet what Peace has this Rams-horne proclaimed
(as Mr Cotton insinuates) when throughout this whole Book, from first to last,
the Proclamation sounds ou^ open war against all false Worshippers.


Peace. I am a joyful witness of war proclaimed from the God of Truth, from
the Sun of Righteousness, from the Spirit of The direful state of false
Worshippers.
Holiness, from the flames of Fire, those mighty Angels, from all the Saints
and Witnesses of Jesus, from all his holy Truths and Ordinances. War to their
Consciences, Preachings, Writings, Disputations, a war present, a war
perpetual, and (without Repentance) a war eternal and everlasting.


Truth. Dear Peace, our goulden sand is out, we now must part with an holy
Kiss of heavenly Peace and Love: Mr Cotton speaks and writes his Conscience:
Yet the Father of Lights may please to show him that what he highly esteems as
a Tenent washed white in the Lambs blood, is yet more black and abominable, in
the most pure and jealous eye of God.


Peace. The Blackmores Darkness differs not in the dark from the fairest white.


Truth. Christ Jesus the Sun of Righteousness has broke forth, The
Portraiture of the Bloody Tenent.
and daily, will, to a brighter and brighter Discovery of this deformed
Ethiopian: And for my self I must proclaim, before the most holy God, Angels
and Men, that (what ever other white and heavenly Tenants Mr Cotton houlds) yet
this is a foul, a black, and a bloody Tenent.

A Tenent of high Blasphemy against the God of Peace, the God of Order, who
has of one Blood, made all Mankind, to dwell upon the face of the Earth, now,
all confounded and destroyed in their Civil Beings and Subsistences, by
mutual flames o^ war from their several respective Religions and
Consciences.

A Tenent warring against the Prince of Peace, Christ Jesus, denying his
Appearance and Coming in the Flesh, to put an end to, and abolish the shadows
of that ceremonial and typical Land of Canaan.

A Tenent fighting against the sweet end of his coming, which was not to
destroy men's Lives, for their Religions, out Euc. 9.
to save them, by the meek and peaceable Invitations and persuasions Prove. 9.
of his peaceable Wisdoms Maide^^.

A Tenent fowly charging his Wisdom, Faithfullnes and The Portraiture of the
bloody Tenent.
Love, in so poorly providing such Magistrates and Civil Powers all the World
over, as might effect so great a charge pretended to be committed to them.

A Tenent lamentably guilty of his most precious blood, shed in the blood of so
many hundredth thousand of his poor servants by the civil powers of the World,
pretending to suppress Blasphemies, Heresies, Idolatries, Superstition, etc.

A Tenent fighting with the Spirit of Love, Holiness, and Meeknes, by kindling
fiery Spirits of false zeal and Fury, when yet such Spirits know not of what
Spirit they are.

A Tenent fighting with those mighty Angels who stand up for the peace of the
Saints, against Persia, Grecia, etc. and so consequently, all other Nations,
who fighting for their several Religions, and against the Truth, leave no
Room for such as fear and love the Lord on the Earth.

A Tenent, against which the blessed Souls under the Altar The Portraiture of
the bloody Tenent.
cry loud for vengeance, this Tenent having cut their Throats, torn out their
Hearts, and powered forth their Blood in all Ages, as the only Heretics and
Blasphemers in the World.

A Tenent which no Uncleanness, no Adultery, Incest, Sodomie, or Beastialitie
can equal, this ravishing and forcing ( explicitly or implicitly) the very
Souls and Consciences of all the Nations and Inhabitants of the World.

A Tenent that puts out the very eye of all true Faith, which cannot but be as
free and voluntary as any Virgin in the World, in refusing or embracing any
spiritual offer or object.

A Tenent loathsome and ugly (in the eyes of the God of Heaven, and serious
sons of men) I say, loathsome with the palpable filihs of gross
dissimulation and bypocrisie: Thousands of Peoples and whole Nations, compelled
by this Tenent to put on the foul vizard of Religious bypocrisie, for fear of
Laws, losses and punishments, and for the keeping and hoping for of favor,
liberty, worldly commodity, etc.

A Tenent woefully guilty of hardening all false and deluded The Portraiture of
the bloody Tenent.
Consciences (of whatsoever Sect, Faction, Heresy, or Idolatry, though never
so horrid and blasphemous) by cruelties and violences practiced against them:
all false Teachers and their Followers (ordinarily) contracting a Brawnie and
steely hardness from their sufferings for their Consciences.

A Tenent that shuts and bars out the gracious prophesies and promises and
discoveries of the most glorious Sun of Righteousues, Christ Jesus, that burns
up the holy Scriptures, and forbids them (upon the point) to be read in
English, or that any trial or search, or (truly) free disquisition be made by
them: when the most able, diligent and conscionable Readers must pluck forth
their own eyes, and be forced to read by the (which soever praedominant)
Cleargies Spectacles.

A Tenent that seals up the spiritual graves of all men, Jews and Gentiles,
(and consequently stands guilty of the damnation of all men) since no
Preachers, nor Trumpets of Christ himself may call them out, but such as the
several and respective Nations of the World themselves allow of.

A Tenent that fights against the common principles of all Civilitie, The
Portraiture of the bloody Tenent.
and the very civil being and combinations of men in Nations, Cities, etc. by
commixing ( explicitly or implicitly) a spiritual and civil State together,
and so confounding and overthrowing the purity and strength of both.

A Tenent that kindles the devouring flames of combustions and wars in most
Nations of the World, and (if God were not infinitely gracious) had almost ruind
the English, French, the Scotch and Irish, and many other Nations, Germane,
Polonian, Hungarian, Bohemian, etc.

A Tenent that bows down the backs and necks of all civil States and
Magistrates, Kings and Emperors, under the proud feet of that man and monster
of sin and pride the Pope, and all Popish and proud Cleargie-men, rendering
such Laics and Seculars (as they call them) but slavish Executioners (upon the
point) of their most imperious Synodicall Decrees and Sentences.

A Tenent that renders the highest civil Magistrates and Ministers The
Portraiture of the bloody Tenent.
of Justice (the Fathers and Gods of their Countries) either odious or
lamentably grievous unto the very best Subjects by either elapping or keeping
on, the iron yoakes of cruellest oppression. No yoke or bondage comparably so
grievous, as that upon the Souls neck of men's Religion and Consciences.

A Tenent, all besprinckled with the bloody murders, stob^, poysonings,
pistollings, powder-plots, etc. against many famous Kings, Princes, and States,
either actually performed or attempted, in France, England, Scotland,
Low Countries, and other Nations.

A Tenent all red and bloody with those most barbarous and Tiger like
Massacres, of so many thousand and ten thousands formerly in France, and other
parts, and so lately and so horribly in Ireland: of which, what ever causes be
assigned, this chiefly will be found the true, and while this continues (to
wit, violence against Conscience) this bloody Issue, sooner or later, must
break forth again (except God wonderfully stop it) in Ireland and other
places too.

A Tenent that stunts the growth and flourishing of the most The Portraiture of
the bloody Tenent.
likely and hopefullest Commonweals and Countries, while Consciences, the
best, and the best deserving Subjects are forct to fly (by enforced or
voluntary Banishment) from their native Countries; The lamentable proof
whereof England has felt in the flight of so many worthy English, into the Low
Countries and New England, and from New England into old again and other
foreign parts.

A Tenent whose gross partiality denies the Principles of common Justice,
while Men weigh out to the Consciences of all others, that which they judge not
fit not right to be waighed out to their own: Since the persecutours Rule is,
to take and persecute all Consciences, only, himself must not be touched.

A Tenent that is but Machevilisme, and makes a Religion, but a cloak o^
stalking horse to policy and private Ends of Jeroboams Crown, and the Priests
Benefice, etc.

A Tenent that corrupts and spoils the very Civil Honesty and Natural
Conscience of a Nation. Since Conscience to God violated, proves (without
Repentance) ever after, a very Jade, a Drug, loose and unconscionable in all
converse with men.

Lastly, a Tenent in England most unseasonable, as pouring Oil upon those
Flames which the high Wisdom of the Parliament, (by easing the yoakes on Men's
Consciences) had begun to quench.

In the sad Consideration of all which (Dear Peace) let Peace her Repose and
Tabernacle.
Heaven and Earth judge of the washing and color of this Tenent. For thee (
sweet heavenly Guest) go lodge thee in the breasts of the peaceable and
humble Witnesses of Jesus, that love the Truth in peace! Hide thee from the
Worlds Tumults and Combustions, in the breasts of thy truly noble children,
who profess and endeavor to break the irony and insupportable yoakes upon
the Souls and Consciences of any of the sons of Men.


Peace. Methinks (Dear Truth) if any of the least of these deep charges be
found against this Tenent, you do not wrong it when you style it bloody: But
since, in the woeful proof of all Ages past, since Nimrod (the Hunter or
persecutour before the Lord) these and more are lamentably evident and
undeniable: it gives me wonder that so many and so excellent eyes of Gods
servants should not epsy so foul a monster, especially considering the
universal opposition this Tenent makes against Gods Glory, and the Good of all
mankind.


Truth. There have been many foul opinions, with which the old Serpent has
infected and bewitched the sons of men (touching God, Christ the Spirit, the
Church, against Holiness, against Peace, against civil Obedience, against
chastity) in so The Bloody Tenent of persecution compared.
much, that even Sodomie it self has been a Tenent maintained in print by
some of the very pillars of the Church of Rome: But this Tenent is so
universally opposite to God and man, so pernicious and destructive to both (as
has been declared) that like the Powder Plot, it threatens to blow up all
Religion, all civilitie, all humanity, yea the very Being of the World, and
the Nations thereof at once.


Peace. He that is the Father of Lies, and a murderer from the beginning, he
knows this well, and that this ugly Blackmore needs a mask or vizard.


Truth. Yea the bloudines and inhumanitie of it is such, that not only Mr
Cottons more tender and holy Breast, but even the most bloody Bonners and
Gardiners have been forced to arm The maskes and vizards of the bloody Tenent.
themselves with the fair shows and glorious pretenses, of the Glory of God,
and zeal for that Glory, the Love of his Truth, the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
love and pity to men's souls, the peace of the Church, uniformitie, Order, the
peace of the Commonweal, the Wisdom of the State, the Kings, Queens, and
Parliaments proceedings, the odiousness of Sects, Heresies, Blasphemies,
Novelties, Seducers, and their Infections: the obstinacy of Heretick^, after
all Means, Disputations, Examinations, Synods, yea and after Conviction in the
poor Heretics own Conscience: Add to these the flattring sound of those
glosing Titles, the Godly Magistrate, the Christian Magistrate, the Nurcing
Fathers and Mothers of the Church, Christian Kings and Queens. But all other
Kings and Magistrates (even all the Nations of the World over, as Mr Cotton
pleads) must suspend and hold their hands, and not meddle in matters of
Religion, until they be informed, etc.


Peace. The dreadful righteous hand of God, the Eternal and avenging God, is
pulling off these maskes and vizards, that thousands, and the World may see
this bloody Tenants Beauty.


Truth. But see (my heavenly Sister, and true stranger in this Truth and Peace,
their meetings seldom and short in this world.
Sea-like restles, raging World) see here what Fires and Swords are come to
part us! Well; Our meetings in the Heavens shall not thus be interrupted, our
Kisses thus distracted, and our eyes and cheeks thus we^, unwiped: For me,
though censured, threatened, persecuted, I must profess, while Heaven and Earth
lasts, that no one Tenent that either London, England, or the World does
harbor, is so heretical, blasphemous, seditious, and dangerous to the
corporal, to the spiritual, to the present, to the Eternal Good of all M^n,
as is the bloody Tenent (how ever washed and whited) I say, as is the bloody
Tenent of persecution for cause of Conscience.


The Copy of a Letter of R. Williams of Providence in New England, to Major
Endicot, Governor of the Massachusetts, upon occasion of the late persecution
against Mr Clarke and Obadiah Holmes, and others at Boston the chief Town of
the Massachusetts in New England.
SIR,
HAving done with our transitory Earthly Matters touching the p^^ce of the
English and Indians, about which the said Governor did write to R. W.
Affairs (as touching the English and the Indians) which in Comparison of
heavenly and Eternal you will say are but as dung and dross, etc. Let me now
be humbly bold to remember that Humanity and piety, which I and others have
formerly observed in you, and in that hopeful Remembrance to crave your gentle
audience with patience and mildnes, with ingenuitie, equanimitie and candor,
to him that ever truly and deeply loved you and yours, and as in the awful
presence of his holy Eye, whose dreadful hand has formed us to the praise of
his mercy or Justice to all Eternity.

Sir, I have often feared and said within my Soul, Have I so Great love
formerly between the said Governor Endicot, and R. W. before his Banishment.
deeply loved and respected? Was I also so well beloved? Or was all
counterfeit, and but gilded over with earthly Respects, Worldly ends, etc. Why
am I silent? my Letters are not Banished! may be welcome, may be seen and
heard, and if neither, yet will back again (together with my prayers and
cries) into my Bosom.

Thus while I have sometimes mused and resolved! Objections, Obstructi^ns, and
a thousand hindrances (I fear from Satan as Paul said) have pressed in, held my
hand, etc.

Sir, It has pleased the Father of Spirits at this present to smite my heart
in the very breaking up of your Letter: This The Seal wherewith the Governors
Leter to R. W. was sealed.
Deaths Head tells that loving Hand that sealed it, and mine that opens your
Letter, that our Eyes, our Hands, our Tongues, our Brains are flying hence to
the hole or pit of Rottennes: Why should not therefore such our Letters, such
our Speeches, such our Actings be* as may become our last minutes, our
Deathbeds? etc.

If so, how meek and humble, how plain and serious, how faithful and
zealous, and yet how tender and loving should the Spirits and Speeches be of
dying and departing Men?

Sir, While something of this Nature I muse over your Deaths head, I meet (in
the Entrance of your Letter) with this passage [ Were I as free in my spirit as
formerly I have been to write unto you, you should have received another manner
of Salutation then now with a good Conscience I can Express; However God
knows who are his, and what he is pleased to hide from sinful man in this
life, shall in that great Day be manifested to All.]

Sir, At the reading of this Line, (I cannot but hope I have your leave to tell
you) The speech of that wise Woman of Tekoah unto David came fresh unto my
Thoughts: Speaks not the King this Thing as one that is Guilty? For will my
honored and beloved friend not know me for fear of being disowned by his
Conscience? Shall the Goodness and Integrity of his Conscience to God cause him
to forget me? Does he quiet his mind with this; [ God knows who are his? God
hides from sinful man, God will reveal before All?] Oh how comes it
Persecutours conclude no Conscience in the whole World but their own.
then that I have heard so often, and heard so lately, and heard so much, that
he that speaks so tenderly for his own, has yet so little respect, mercy or
pity to the like conscientious persuasions of other Men? Are all the Thousands
of millions of millions of Consciences, at home and abroad, fuel only for a
prison, for a whip, for a stake, for a Gallows? Are no Consciences to breath
the Air, but such as suit and sample his? May not the most High be pleased to
hide from his as well as from the eyes of his fellow- Servants, fellow-
mankind, fellow- English? And if God hide from his, from any, who can
discover? Who can shut when he will open? and who can open, when he that has
the key of David will shut? All this and more (honored Sir) your words will
warrant me to say, without any just offense or straining.

Object. But what makes this to Heretics, Blasphemers, Seducers, to them that
sin against their Conscience (as Mr Cotton says) after Conviction? What makes
this to stobbers of Kings and Princes, to blowers up of Parliaments out of
Conscience?

First, I answer, He was a Tyrant that put an Innocent Man into a Beares-skin,
and so caused him as a wild Beast to be baited to Death.

Secondly, I say, this is the common cry of Hunters or persecutours All
persecutours render the most innocent most odious.
[ Heretics, Heretics, Blasphemers, etc.] and why, but for crossing the
persecutours Consciences, (it may be but their superstitions, etc.) whether
Turkish, Popish, Protestant, etc.

This is the Outcry of the Pope and Prelates, and of the Scotch Presbyterians,
who would fire all the world, to be avenged on the Sectarian Heretics, the
blasphemous Heretics, the seducing Heretics, etc. had it not pleased the
God of Heaven who bounds the insolent Rage of the furious Ocean, to raise up a
second Cromwell (like a mighty and merciful Wall or Cromwell the second, a
Refuge of the oppressed.
Bullwark) to stay the Fury of the Oppressor, whether English, Scottish,
Popish, Presbyterian, Independent, etc.

Lastly, I have said much and lately, and given particular Answers to all such
pleas, in my Second Reply or Answer to This Rejoinder was sent to England long
since, and hoped to have been published.
Mr Cottons washing of the Bloody Tenent in the Lambs blood, which it may be
is not yet come to your sight and Hand.

It Is true, I have to say elsewhere about the Causes of my Banishment: As to
the calling of Natural Men to the exercise of those holy Ordinances of
Prayers, Oaths, etc. As to the frequenting of Parish Churches, under the
pretense of hearing some Ministers: As to the matter of the Patent, and King
James his Christianity and Title to these parts, and bestowing it on his
Subjects by virtue of his being a Christian King, etc.

At present, let it not be offensive in your eyes, that I single out another, a
fourth point, a cause of my Banishment also, wherein I greatly fear one or two
sad evils, which have befallen your Soul and Conscience.

The point is that of the Civil Magistrates dealing in matters of Conscience
and Religion, as also of persecuting and hunting any for any matter merely
Spiritual and Religious.

The two Evils intimated are these; First, I fear you cannot after so much
Light, and so much profession to the contrary (not only to my self, and so
often in private, but) before so many Witnesses; I say, I fear you cannot say
and act so much, against so many several Consciences, former and later, but
with great Checks, great Threatenings, great Blows and Throws of inward
Conscience.

Secondly, If you shall thank God, that it is not so with Abuse of light most
dangerous.
you, but that you do what Conscience bids you in Gods presence, upon Gods
warrant, I must then be humbly faithful to tell you, that I fear your
underprizing of holy Light, has put out the Candle, and the Eye of Conscience
in these particulars, and that Delusions, strong Delusions, and that from God
(by Satan's subtletie) has seasd upon your very Souls belief, because you
prized not loved not the endangered persecuted Son of God in his despised
Truths and Servants.

Sir, With Man (as the Lord Jesus said of the Rich man) I know it is impossible
for the (otherwise piercing) eye of your understanding to see into these
things, for it is discolored, as in some Diseases and Glasses; It is
impossible for your Will to be willing to see, for that is in a thousand chains
resolved (as once you spoke heroically and heavenly in a better way) to spend
your dearest Heart blood in your way, etc. Yet with God all things are
possible, and they that laughed the Lord Jesus to scorn when he said, the
Damsel is not dead but sleeps, were afterward confounded, when they saw her
raised by his heavenly voice.

His holy pleasure I know not, nor do I know which way the Glory of his great
Name will more appear, either in finally suffering so great a fall and ruin
of so strong a pillar, that Flesh may not Glory, but that his strength and
Glory only may be seen in Weakness. Or else in your holy Rising and Reviving
from the Bed of so much spiritual filthiness, and from so bloody a mind, and
lip, and hand, against all withstanders or Disturbers in it. That so the short
Remainder of your Candle may hold out to the World, the Riches of his Mercy,
at whose words the holiest of his Servants ought to tremble, and to work out
their Salvation with fear and trembling: I say (I desire to say it;
tremblingly and mournfully) I know not which way he will please to raise his
Glory) only I know my Duty, my Constience, my Love, all which enforce me to
knock, to call to cry at the Gate of Heaven, and at Yours, and to present you
with this loving, though loud and faithful noise and sound of a few Grounds of
deeper Examination of both our Souls and Consciences uprightly and impartially
at the holy and dreadful Tribunal of Him that is appointed the Judge of all
the Living and the Dead.

Be pleased then (honored Sir) to remember that that thing which we call
Conscience is of such a Nature (especially in Englishmen) as once a Pope of
Rome at the suffering of an Englishman in Rome, himself observed) that
although it be groundles, false, and deluded, yet is it not by any Arguments or
Torments easily removed.

I speak not of the stream of the multitude of all Nations, The power of
Conscience though Erroneous.
which have their ebbings and flowings in Religion, (as the longest Sword, and
strongest Arm of Flesh carries it) But I speak of Conscience, a persuasion
fixed in the mind and heart of a man, which inforceth him to judge (as Paul
said of himself a persecutour) and to do so and so, with respect to God, his
worship, etc.

This Conscience is found in all mankind, more or less, in Jews, Turks,
Papists, Protestants, Pagans, etc. And to this purpose let me freely without
offense remember you (as I did Mr Clarke newly come up from his sufferings
amongst you) I say, remember you of the same Story I did him, it was that of
William Hartly in Queen Elizabeth her days, who receiving the Sentence of
hanging, drawing, etc. spoke confidently (as afterward he suffered) what tell
you me of hanging, etc. If I had ten thousand millions of lives, I would spend
them all for the Faith of Rome, etc.

Sir, I am far from glancing the least Countenance on the Consciences of
Papists, yea or on some Scotch and English Protestants too, who turn up all
Roots, and lay all level and in blood, for exaltation of their own way and
Conscience. All that I observe is, that Boldness and Confidence, Zeal and
Resolution, as it is commendable in a kind when it seriously respects a
Dietie, so also, the greatest Confidence has sometimes need of the greatest
Search and Examination.

I confess, that for Confidence no Romish Priest has ever exceeded True and
false Witnesses both Confident.
the holy Martyrs or Witnesses of Jesus: Witness (amongst so many) that holy
English Woman, who cried out, that if every hair of her head were a life or
man, they should burn for the Name of the Lord Jesus: But Sir, your Principles
and Conscience bind you, not to respect Romish or English, Saints or Sinners:
William Heartly, and that Woman, with all their lives, you are bound by your
Conscience to punish (and it may be) to hang or burn, if they transgress
against your Conscience, and that because (according to Mr Cottons monstrous
Distinction (as some of his chief Brethren to my knowledge have called it) not
because they sin in matters of Conscience, (which he denies the Magistrate to
deal in) but because they sin against their Conscience.

Secondly, It is so notoriously known, that the Consciences of the most holy
men, zealous for God and his Christ to Death and Admiration, yea even in our
own Country, and in Queen Mary's days especially, have been so grossly
mislead by mistaken Consciences in matters concerning the worship of God, the
coming out of the Antichristian Babell, and the Rebuilding of the spiritual
Jerusalem, that I need but hint who were they The Common Prayers and the
Composers of it.
that pend the Common prayer (in its Time, as glorious an Idol, and as much
adored by Godly persons, as any Invention now extant) I say, who they were that
lived and dyed (five in the flames) zealous for their Bishoprics, yea and some
too too zealous for their Popish Ceremonies, against the doubting Consciences
of their Brethren: At which and more, we that now have risen in our Fath^rs
stead, wonder and admire how such piercing eyes could be deceived, such
Watchmen blinded and deluded. But

Thirdly, We shall not so much wonder when we lift up our trembling eyes to
Heaven, and remember our selves (poor What Is sweet with man, st^nks (often) in
Gods nostrills.
dust) that our Thoughts are not as the Thoughts of our Maker, that, that which
in the eyes of man (as the Lord Jesus tells us, Luc. 16.) is of high and sweet
esteem, it stincks and is abomination with God: Hence such Worships, such
Churches, such glorious professions and practices may be, as may ravish
themselves and the behoulders, when with the piercing eyes of the most High,
they may look counterfeit and ugly, and be found but (spiritually) Whores, and
Abominations.

Fourthly, Wise men use to inquire, what Motives, what Occasions, what Snares,
what Temptations were there, which moved, which drew, which allured, etc. This
is the Apology which the five Apologists (Mr Goodwin, Mr Nigh, etc.) made to
the Parliament, to wit, That they were not tempted with the moulding of New
Commonwealths, after which they might be moved to frame their Religion, etc.

Surely Sir, the Baits, the Temptations, the Snares laid to catch Satan's
policy in proposing Motives and Baits to wise and excellent Saints.
you, were not few, nor common, nor laid to every foot. Saul pretended zeal
to the Name of God, and love to Israel in persecuting the poor Gibeonites to
death, but Honor me before the people, was the maine Engine that turned the
Wheels of all his Actions and Devotions. What set Jeroboams brains to consult
and plot the Invention of a new Religion, Worship, Priests, etc. but Honor,
and the fear of the loss of his gained honor? What moved Jehu to be false
and halting with God after so much glorious zeal in Reformation? Yea I had
almost said, what moved David to stob Vriah (the fire of God) with his pen,
but the fear of dishonor in the Discovery of his sin, though doubtless there
was some mixtures of the fear of his Gods displeasure and dishonor also?

Sir, it is no small offer, the choice and applause and Rule over so many
Towns, so many holy, so many wise, in such a holy way as you believe you are
in: To say nothing of strong drinks and wines, the fat and sweet of this and
other Lands: These and others are snares which without abundant strength from
God will catch and hold the strongest feet: Sir, I have known you strong, in
repelling strong Temptations, but I cannot but fear and lament, that some of
these and others have been too strong and potent with you.

Fifthly, We not only use to say proverbially, but the Spirit of God expressly
tells us, that there is a minde-bewitching, a Spiritual Witchcraft.
betwitching of the very Consciences and spirits of men. That as in Witchcraft,
a stronger and supernatural power lays hold upon the powers of Nature, with
a suppressing or elevating of those powers beneath or above themselves: So is
it with the very Spirits and Consciences of the most Intelligent and
Conscientious, when the Father of Spirits is pleased in his righteous
displeasure and jealousy, so to suffer it to be with ours.

Sir, I from my Soul honor and love the persons of such, whom I, you, and
themselves may see have been Isntrumental in your bewitchin^* Why should it be
thought inconsistent with the holy wisdom of God to permit wise and holy and
learned persons to wander themselves and mislead others; when the holy
Scripture and Experience tells us of the dangerous Counsels and ways of as
wife and learned and holy as now breath in either Old or New English air?

Sir, I had thought to have named one or two, who may justly be suspected
(though otherwise worthily beloved) but I have chose rather to present an hint,
for that's enough to so intelligent a Breast, if but willing to make an
Impartial Review and Examination of Passages between the most High and your in
most Soul in secret.

Therefore sixthly, for a sixth ground of suspecting your Soul and Spirit and
Conscience in this particular of persecution, which I now instance in, may you
please, Sir, without offense to remember, that as it is in such as have
exceeded in Wine, their Mystical Drunkenness and the drunken Language of it.
speech will bewray them: So it is in Spiritual Cups and Intoxications.

The Maker and Searcher of our hearts knows with what Bitterness I write, as
with Bitterness of Soul I have heard such Language as this to proceed from your
self and others, who The language of persecutours.
formerly have fled from (with crying out against) persecutours! [you will say,
this is your Conscience: You will say, you are persecuted, and you are
persecuted for your Conscience: No, you are Conventiclers, Heretics,
Blasphemers, Seducers: You deserve to be hanged, rather then one shall be
wanting to hang him I will hang him my self: I am resolved not to leave an
Heretic in the Country; I had rather so many Whores and Whoremongers and
Thieves came amongst us:] Oh Sir, you cannot forget what Language and Dialect
this is, whether not the same unsavourie, and ungodly, blasphemous and bloody,
which the Gardiners and Bonners both former and later used to all that bowed
not to the State goulden Image of what Conscience soever they were. And indetd,
Sir, if the most High be pleased to awaken you to render unto his holy Majesty
his due praises, in your truly brokenhearted Confessions and Supplications,
you will then proclaim to all the World, that what profession soever you made
of the Lamb, yet these Expressions could not proceed but from the Dragons
mouth.

Oh remember, and the most holy Lord bring it to your Remembrance, that you
have now a great price in your hand, to A price and a Heart blessed Companions.
bring great Glory to his holy Name, great Rejoicing to so gracious a Redeemer
(in whom you profess is all your Healing and Salvation) great Rejoicing to the
holy Spirit of all true Consolation, whom yet so long you have grieved and
sadded, great Rejoicing to those blessed Spirits (attending upon the Lamb, and
all his, and terrible to his persecutours) great Rejoicing and Instruction to
all that love, the true Lord Jesus (notwithstanding their wanderings among so
many false Christ's) mourning and lamenting after him in all parts of the World
where his Name is sounded: Your Tallents are great, your Fall has been so:
Your Eminency is great, the Glory of the most High in Mercy or Justice toward
you will be great also.

Oh remember it is a dangerous Combat for the Potsheards of The horrible and
dangerous path which all persecutours or Hunters walk in.
the Earth to fight with their dreadful Potter: It is a dismal Battle for
poor naked feet to kick against the Pricks; It is a dreadful voice from the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Endicot, Endicot, why huntest thou me? why
imprisonest thou me? why finest, why so bloudily whippest, why would thou
(did not I hold thy bloody hands) hang and burn me? Yea Sir, I beseech you
remember that it is a dangerous thing to put this to the may be, to the venture
or hazard, to the possibility: Is it possible (may you well say) that since I
hunt, I hunt not the life of my Savior, and the blood of the Lamb of God: I
have fought against many several sorts of Consciences, is it beyond all
possibility and hazard, that I have not fought against God, that I have not
persecuted Jesus in some of them?

Sir, I must be humbly bold to say, that it is impossible for any Man or Men to
maintain their Christ by the Sword, and to worship a true Christ! to fight
against all Consciences opposite to theirs, and not to fight against God in
some of them, and to hunt after the precious life of the true Lord Jesus
Christ. Oh remember whether your Principles and Consciences must in The least
(...) spark of persecution tends to blood, and will proceed, except God
mightlly stop it.
time and opportunity force you. It Is but worldly policy and Compliance with
Men and Times ( Gods mercy overruling) that houlds your hands from murdering
of thousands and ten thousands were your Power and Command as great as once the
bloody Roman Emperors was.

The truth is (and your self and others have said it) by your Principles such
whom you count Heretics, Blasphemers, Seducers, ought to be put to Death; You
cannot be faithful to your Principles and Consciences, if you satisfy them
with but imprisoning, fining, whipping and banishing the Heretics, and by
saying that banishing is a kind of Death, as some chief with you (in my case
formerly) have said it.

Sir, It Is like you knew or have heard of the man that said he would never
Conform publicly, although he did subscribe in private for his Liberty sake
of Preaching: That, although he did conform in some things, yet in all he
never would: That, although he did himself yield, yet he would not molest and
enforce others: That although he yielded, that others did molest them, yet
himself would never persecute, and yet did all.

But oh poor dust and Ashes, like stones once roling down the Alps, like the
Indian Canoes or English Boats loose and adrist, where stop we until infinite
mercy stop us, especially when a false fire of zeal and Conscience drives us,
(though against the most holy and eternal himself?)

Oh remember the black Catalogues it has pleased the most Gods most dreadful
Judgments against persecutours.
jealous and righteous God to make of his fiery Judgments and most dreadful
stoakes on Eminent and remarkable persecutours even in this life. It has been
his way and course in all Countries, in Germany, France and England,
(especially) what ever their pretenses have been against Heretics, Rebels,
Schismatics, Blasphemers, Seducers, etc. How has he left them to be their
own Accusers, Judges, Executioners, some by hanging, some by stobbing, some by
drowning and poisoning themselves, some by running mad, and some by drinking in
the very same Cup which they had filld to others?

Some may say, Such persecutours hunted God and Christ, but I, but we, etc. I
answer, the Lord Jesus Christ foretold how wonderfully the wisest of the World,
should be mistaken in the things of Christ, and a true visible Christ Jesus!
When did we see thee naked, hungry, thirsty, sick, inprison, and. How easy,
how common, how dreadful these mistakes?

Oh remember once again (as I began) and I humbly desire to remember with you,
that every gray hair now on both our Death is a Boanerges.
heads, is a Boanerges, a son of Thunder, and a warning piece to prepare us,
for the waighing of our last Anchors, and to be gone from hence, as if we had
never been.

'Twas mercy infinite, that stopped provoked Justice from blowing Gray hayres are
Gods Alarums.
out our Candles in our youths, but now the feeding Substance of the Candle's
gone, and it is impossible (without repentance,) to recall our Actions! nay,
with repentance, to recall our minutes past us.

Sir, I know I have much presumed upon your many weighty affairs and thoughts,
I end with an humble cry to the Father of mercies, that you may take David's
Counsel, and silently commune with your own heart upon your Bed, reflect upon
your own spirit, and believe Him that said it to his overzealous Disciples,
You know not what spirit you are of: That, no sleep may seize upon your eyes,
nor slumber upon your eyelids, until your serious thoughts have seriously,
calmely, and unchangeably (through help from Christ Jesus) fixed.

First, On a Moderation toward the Spirits and Consciences of all mankind,
merely differing from or opposing yours with only Religious and Spiritual
opposition.

Secondly, A deep and cordial Resolution (in these wonderful searching,
disputing, and dissenting times) to search, to listen, to pray, to fast, and
more fearfully, more tremblingly to enquire what the holy pleasure, and the
holy mysteries of the most Holy are; In whom I humbly desire to be

Your poor Fellow Servants, unfainedly, respective and faithful, R. Williams.

An APPENDIX: To the Clergy of the four great Parties (professing the Name
of Christ Jesus) in England, Scotland, and Ireland, viz. The Popish,
Prelaticall, Presbyterian, and Independent.
WORTHY SIRS;
I Have pleaded the Cause of your several and respective Consciences (against
the bloody Doctrine of Persecution) in my former Labors, and in this my
present Rejoinder to Mr Cotton:

And yet I must pray leave without offense to say, I have impartially opposed
and charged your Consciences also, so far as Guilty of that bloody Doctrine
of persecuting each other for your Consciences.

You four have torn the seameles Coat of the Son of God The seameles Coat of
Christ Jesus torn into four pieces, and the three Nations torn into
Thousands.
into four pieces, and (to say nothing of former Times and Tearings) you four
have torn the three Nations into thousands of pieces and Distractions.

The two former of you, the Popish and ( Protestant) Prelaticall, are Brethren:
So are the latter, the Presbyterian and Independent: But, oh, how Rara est,
etc? What Concord, what Love, what pity has ever yet appeared amongst you,
when the providence of the most High and only wise has granted you your
Pattents of mutual and successive Dominion and precedencie?

Just like two men, whom I have known break out to Blows and Wrestling, so
have the Protestant Bishops fought and The Battles of the Clergy.
wrastled with the Popish, and the Popish with the Protestant! The
Presbyterian* with the Independent, and the Independent with the Presbyterian!
And our Chronicles and Experiences have told this Nation, and the World, how he
whose Turn it is to be brought under, has ever felt an heavy wrathful hand
of an unbrotherly and unchristian persecutour:

Mean while, what outcries for a Sword, a Sword at any price, All Court the
Magistrate for his Sword, and his Money.
on any Terms, wherewith to take final Revenges, on such their Blasphemous
and Heretical Adversaries and Corrivalls?

Hence is it, that the Magistrate has been so courted, his person adored and
Deified, and his Religion magnified and Exalted.

Amongst the People, some have thought and said, How has the shining of the
Magistrates Money and Sword, out-shin'd the Nobility of his person, or the
Christianity of his Conscience? For when the person changes and Religion too,
how grossly notorious have been the Cleargies Changes also? For Instance, how
For which, any person and Religion has served the Turn.
have they Pernified, tack't and turned about (as the wind has blown) from
Popery to Protestanisme, from Protestanisme to Popery, and from Popery to
Protestanisme again, and this within the Compass of about a dozen years; as
the Purse and Sword-Bearers were changed, what ever the persons of those
Princes (male or female, Men or Children, or their Consciences, Popish or
Protestant) were.

Yea, how justly in the late Kings book (if his) are the Clergy The late K.
charging his Clergy, etc.
of England charged with horrible breach of Vows and Oaths of canonical
obedience to their Fathers the Bishops, against whom (in the Turn of the Times
and the Sword-Bearers) they turned to the Scotch Presbyters, their fathers
dreadful Enemies and persecutours?

Now as to the persecuting each of other, I confess the Wolf (the
persecutour,) devoures the Goat, the Swine, yea the very The Wolf in plea
with the Lamb, will be always Judge.
Fox, and other Creatures, as well as the inoffensive Sheep and Lamb? Yet (as
the Lord Jesus made use of that excellent Fable or Similitude of a Wolf
getting on a Sheepes-skin, so) may I not unseasonably make use of that of the
Wolf and the poor Lamb coming down to drink, upon the same Brook and
Stream together: The Wolf cruel and strong drinks above and aloft: The Lamb
innocent and weak, drinks upon the Stream below: The Wolf questions and
quarrels the Lamb for corrupting and defiling the Waters: The Lamb (not
daring to plead how easily the Wolf drinking higher might transfer Defilement
downward, but) pleads Improbabilitie and Impossibility, that the waters
descending could convey defilement upwards: This is the Controversy, This the
plea: But who shall judge? Be the Lamb never so innocent, his plea never so
just, his Adversary the Wolf will be his Judge, and being so cruel and so
strong soon tears the Lamb in pieces.

Thus the cruel Beast armed with the power of the Kings (Revel. 17.) sits
Judge in his own Quarrels against the Lamb, about the drinking at the Waters.
And thus (says Mr Cotton) the Judgment ought to pass upon the Heretic, not
for matter of Conscience, but for sinning against his Conscience.

Object. M^* thinks I hear, the great charge against the Independent party to
be the great pleaders for Liberty of Conscience, etc.

Answ. Oh the horrible Deceit of the hearts of the sons of Men! And, what
Excellent Physic can we prescribe to others, till our Soul (as Job said) come
to be in their souls cases? What need have we to be more vile (with Job)
before God, to walk in holy sense of self* Insufficiency, to cry for the
blessed Leadings of the holy Spirit of God, to guide and lead our Heads and
Hearts uprightly?

For (to draw the Curtain, and let in the Light alittle) do The wonderful
Mystery of Liberty of Conscience.
not all persecutours themselves zealously plead for Freedom, for Liberty,
for Mercy to Men's Consciences, when themselves are in the Grates, and Pits,
and under Hatches?

Does not Ges^er tell us of a Gentleman in Germany, who fitting his Pitfall
for Wild Beasts, found in the morning a Woman, a Wolf, and a Fox in three
several Corners, as full of Which all persecutours themselves (in their
turns) plead for.
Fear, and as quiet, and as desirous of Liberty one as well as another?

Thus bloody Gardener and Bonner (prisoners, during King Edwards days) yea
and that bloody Queen Mary her self, all plead the Freedom of their
Consciences. What most humble Supplications, and indeed unanswerable Arguments
for Liberty K. Charles and his Chaplains forced to subscribe to Liberty of
Conscience.
of Conscience have the Papists (when in Restraint) presented, (and especially)
in King James his time? Yea what excellent Subscriptions to this
Soule-Freedome, are interwoven in many passages of the late Kings Book (if
his)? Yea and one of his Chaplains (so called) Doctor Jer. Taylour, what an
Everlasting Monumentall Testimony did he publish to this Truth, in that his
excellent Discourse, of the Liberty of Prophesying? Yea the (formerly)
Nonconforming Presbyterian and Independent, Scotch and English, Old and New,
what most humble and pious Addresses have they made before the whole World, to
Princes and Parliaments, for just mercy (in true Petitions of Right) to their
Consciences? But, let this present Discourse, and Mr Cottons About Twenty years
persecution in New England.
Fig-leave Evasions and Distinctions: Let the practices (of the Massachusetts)
in New England, in twenty years persecution: and this last of Mr Clarke,
Obadiah Holmes, and others be Examined: Yea let the Independent Ministers late
Proposalls be waighed, with the double weight of Gods Sanctuary, and it will
appear what Mercy the poor Souls of all Men, and Jesus Christ in any of
them, may expect from the very Independents Clergy themselves.

Object. But does not their Proposalls provide a Liberty to such as fear God,
viz. that they may freely preach without an Ordination! and that such as are
not free to the public Assemblies may have Liberty to meet in private.

Answ. It may so please the Father of Lights to show them that their Lines and
Modells, and New-Englands Copy also (after The persecution of the New and Old
English Independent Clergy.
which they write and pensill,) are but more and more refined Images, whereby
to worship the Invisible God: and that still (as before) the Wolf (the
persecutour) must judge of the Lambs drinking!

For instance; New Englands Laws (lately published in Mr Clarks Narrative)
tell us how free it shall be for people to gather themselves into
Church Estate? how free to choose their own Ministers? how free to enjoy all
the Ordinances of Christ Jesus, etc? But yet, provided, so- and so (upon the
point) that the Civil State must judge of the Spiritual, to wit, Whether
persons be* fit for Church Estate, Whether the Gathering be right, Whether the
peoples choice be right, Doctrines right, and what is this in truth, but to
swear that blasphemous Oath of Supremacy again, to the Kings and Queens and
Magistrates of this and other Nations in stead of the Pope, etc?

Into these Prisons, and Cages, do those (otherwise worthy and excellent Men,
the) Independents, put all the Children of God, and all the Children of Men in
the whole World, and then bid them fly and walk at Liberty (to wit, within
the Conjured Circle) so far as they please.

To particularize briefly: When they have in their six several Circuits
ejected (according to their Proposalls) it may be A brief touch upon the 15
Proposalls of the (so called) Independent Ministers.
hundreths, it may be thousands (if impartial) of Episcopal and Presbyterian
Ministers, and that without and against their Peoples consent, to the present
Distressing of thousands, and inraging (through such Soul-oppressions) the
whole Nation! Then, say they, it shall be free for all that be able, etc. to be
Preachers, though not ordained, etc. But, provided, that two Ministers hands
(at least, The Independents implicitly and silently challenge the power of
Ordination.
which upon the point, is instead of an Ordination) be to their Approbation,
etc. Upon this lock any shall be free to preach Christ Jesus, upon this point
of the Compass (as I may in humble reverence, and with sorrow speak it) the
Spirit of God shall be free to breath and operate in the Souls of Men! By this
Plummet and Line, Rule and Square, and (seeming) Goulden Reed and Meetewand,
the Sanctuary must be built and measured, etc.

But further, if any shall be of tender Consciences, and that the common size
will not serve their foot, if they shall think the Independents Foundations
too weak, or it may be too strong for their weak Belief, if they cannot bow
down to their Goulden Image, though of the finest and latest Edition and
Fashion: Why God forbid they should be forced to Church The Danger of pawning
spiritual Liberties to Civil powers.
as others, they shall enjoy their Liberty, and meeteapart in private: But,
provided, they acquaint the Civil Magistrate, that is, as it may fall out (who
knows how soon?) and too too often has fallen out, the poor Sheep and Dear of
Christ must take License of and betray themselves unto the paws and jaws of
their Lyon-like persecutours.

Hear Oh Heavens, give Ear O Earth! What is this but like The Dutch Attempts,
and the Independents, on their Friends, compared.
the Treacherous Dutchmen, who Capitulate of Leagues of Peace and Amity, with
their Neighbor English, and in the midst of State Complements (some say, out
of malicious wrath, others say it was out of drunken Intoxications at the best)
thunder out Broad-sides of Fire and Smoke of persecution?

Object. Some possibly may say, Your just suffering from the Independents in New
England makes you speak Revenges against them in Old.

Answ. What I have suffered in my Estate, Body, Name, Spirit, I hope through
help from Christ, and for his sake I have desired to bear with a Spirit of
patience and of respect and love, even to my persecutours. As to particulars, I
have, and must (if God so will) further debate them with my truly honored and
beloved Adversary Mr Cotton.

But as to you, worthy Sirs, (men of Learning, and men of personal Holiness
many of you) I truly desire to be far from envying your Honors, pleasures,
and Revenues, from whence the two former Popish and Prelaticall are ejected,
unto which the two later Presbyterian and Independent are advanced: Nor would I
The Authors desire as to the Ministry of the Land now possessed.
move a Tongue or pen that any of you now possessed, should be removed or
disturbed, until your Consciences by the holy Spirit of God, or the
Consciences of the people, to whom you serve or minister, shall be otherwise
(then as you are yet) persuaded.

Much rather would I make another humble plea (and that I believe with all the
Reason and Justice in the World) that such And as to that Ejected.
who are ejected, undone, impoverished, might some way from the State or you
receive relief and succor: Considering, that the very Nations Constitution
has occasioned parents to train up, and persons to give themselves to studies
(though in truth, but in a way of Trade and Bargaining, before God) yet, it is
according to the Custom of the Nation, who ought therefore to share also, in
the fault of such Priests and Ministers who in all changes are ejected.

I end with humble begging to the Father of Spirits, to persuade The Author
begs three things of God for the Clergy of England.
and possess yours with a true sense of three particulars.

First, of the yoakes of Soule-oppression, which lie upon the necks of most of
the Inhabitants of the 3 Nations, and of the whole world: as if Chams Curse
from Noah were upon them, Servants of Servants are they, and that in the
matters of the Souls Affection unto God, which call for the purest Liberty: I
confess the World lies in wickedness, and loves darkness more then Soul
Bondage the greatest.
light: but why should you help on those yoaks, and force them to receive a
Doctrine, to pray, to give thanks, etc. without an Heart? yea and (in the many
changes and cases incident) against their Heart and Souls Consent?

Secondly, of the bloudines of that most bloody Doctrine of persecution for
cause of Conscience, with all the Winding Stairs and back doors of it, etc.
Some professors true and false, Sheep and Goats, are daily found to differ in
their Apprehensions, persuasions, professions, and that to Bonds and Death.

What now, shall these be wrackt, their Souls, their Bodies, their purses,
etc? Yea if they refuse, deny, oppose the Doctrine of Christ Jesus, whether
Jews or Gentiles, why should you call for Fire from Heaven, which suits not
with Christ Jesus his Spirit The Bloudinesse of the Bloody Tenent.
or Ends? Why should you compel them to come in, with any other Sword, but
that of the Spirit of God, who alone persuaded Japhet to come into the Tents of
Shem, and can in his holy season prevail with Shem to come into the Tents of
Japhet?

Thirdly, Of that Biass of self-love which hales and swayes our minds to hold
so fast this bloody Tenent: You know it is the Spirit of Love from Christ
Jesus, that turns our feet from the Tradition of Fathers, etc. That sets the
Heart and Tongue and Pen and Hands too (as Paul's) day and night to work, rather
Little of the Spirit of Love from Christ Jesus yet extant, and our self-love
biasseth us to Inventions, Traditions, and Doctrines of persecutions.
then the progress and purity and simplicity of the Crown of Christ Jesus
should be debased or hindered.

This Spirit will cause you leave (with joy) Benefices, and Bishoprics, Worlds
and Lives for his sake: the Heights and Depths, Lengths and Breadths, of whose
Love you know does infinitely pass your most knowing Comprehensions and
Imaginations. There is but little of this Spirit extant, I fear will not be,
until we see Christ Jesus slain in the slaughter of the Witnesses: Then
Joseph will go boldly unto Pilate for the slaughtered body of most precious
Savior: and Nicodemus, will go by day, to buy and bestow his sweetest spices,
on his infinitely sweeter Souls beloved. The full breathings of that heavenly
Spirit, unfeinedly and heartily wishes you,

Your most unworthy Countriman, R. Williams.

FINIS.
The Principal CONTENTS.
TRuth and peace rarely meet page 1 Many excellent men plead for persecution p.
2 New Englands persecution guilty of the persecution in Old p. 3 The first
occasion of publishing the bloody tenent p 4 Master Cotton complains of being
persecuted, and yet writes so much for persecution p. 5 The word persecution (
in plain English) what it is ibi. Master Cotton would change the word
persecuting into punishing. p. 6 State worships the ordinary occasion of
persecution p. 7 Ordination of Ministers and Coronation of Kings unfitly
compared p. 11 Master Cotton pleading for Common Prayer p. 11, 12 Three causes
for which Master Cotton pleads for persecution p. 13 Christ's church may be
gathered and dissolved with no disturbance of civil peace p. 14 Persecution
breaks all civil peace p. 15 Civil peace may be kept long and flourish even
where Christ is not heard of, yea disowned, etc. p. 16 Christianity lost most
under reforming Emperors ibid. The societies or Churches of Saints are merely
voluntary in combining or dissolving p. 17 Christ's Spouse is chosen out of this
world p. 18 No civil state can judge the spiritual p. 19 The difference of
spiritual and civil peace p. 20 When Gods people flourish most in godliness,
then most persecuted; and, when most persecuted, then flourish most in
godliness p. 21 A monstrous mingling of spiritual and civil disturbance p. 22
Six instances of zeal in Scripture (charged with, yet) free from breach of
civil peace p. 23 The Indians ( subjected to the English) permitted, while
English fearing God in New England persecuted p. 25 Jonah's casting over board,
pleaded by Master Cotton as a ground for persecution, examined p. 26 The
killing of the false prophet, Zech. 13. 6. p. 27 Conviction of conscience p. 28
The violation of civil peace, though out of conscience, to be punished. p. 29
Gamaliells council considered p. 30 Christ Jesus never persecuted as Christ,
but as a deceiver, blasphemer, seducer, etc. p. 31 Gods people fast asleep, and
yet awake ibid: A deep mystery in persecution p. 32 Wolves complaining of being
persecuted by the sheep p. 33 The blood of the souls under the Altar is a
sealed Mystery p. 34 A challenge to the Devil himself, touching the persecution
of heretics p. 34 All Antichristian hunters make Titus the third their Den or
Fortress p. 35 The horrible abusing and profaning of that word Heretic p. 36
A child of God may possible be an Heretic p. 37 The straights in which the
bloody tenent (and this Rejoinder also) were composed p. 38 Th^se Preachers who
will not Preach without money, must beg or steal ibid. Christ Jesus his
distinction of Diggers, Beggars, stealers p. 39 Persecution usually taken for a
corporal, not a spiritual punishment ibid. Very severe, but not Christian, and
more then Judaical punishment of Thieves in England p. 41 The civil and
spiritual life confounded p. 42 Gods right and Caesar's p. 43 The great peace
breakers ibid. English Diana's p. 44. Gross partiality to private interests
ibid. England in all ages guilty of much persecution p. 45 Two seasonable
Petitions of any persecuted ibid. The Parable of the Tares grossly abused p. 46
Hypocrisy both open and secret p. 47 Spiritual whoredom against God in his
worship, may be in the midst of pure civil relations. p. 48 The parable of the
wise and foolish Virgins p. 50. A true church or society of Christ cannot
consist of visible Hypocrites p. 51 The Field of the World ibid: The Mystery of
christians and antichriastians p. 52 The first rise of Antichristians argued p.
54 Touching the judgment of the great whore p. 55 Christ's church by
institution properly consisting of good ground p. 57. The nature of the Jewish
church ibid. The nature of Christ's true Apostles or Messengers p. 58
Antichristians, monsters in Religion p. 59 Two sorts of sinners p. 60 Two sorts
of Hypocrites ibid. Two sorts of opposites to Christ Jesus p. 61 The Rivers and
Fountains of Blood, Rev. 16. p. 63 Of hypocrites in the profession of
Christianity p. 64 Corrupt consciences distinguished p. 66 Toleration of
idolaters considered ibid. Civil weapons in spirituals blur and slight the
spiritual p. 67 The toleration of Jezabel in Thyatria p. 68 The difference
between spiritual and civil slander p. 69 The dreadful nature of Christ's
spiritual punishments ibi. The punishments in the national Church of Israel
were material and corporeal p. 70 Touching Prayer against present destruction
of the Tares p. 71 Pastors and teachers are not Apostles or messengers ib.
Elijah stirring up Ahab to slay the Baalites p. 72 Touching the state of Israel
in the Apostasy of Jeroboam, and more of the Baalites p. 72 Touching Apostles
or Messengers p. 74 Touching fundamentals p. 75 Persecuting of Christ Jesus by
a Law p. 76 The greatest blasphemy against Christ Jesus that ever was, yet not
punished but spiritually ibid. Paul's appeal to Caesar more examined p. 78 Few
Magistrates in the world that bear the very name of of Christ Jesus. p. 79
Fewer truly Christians ibid. Mystical and most cruel Surgery ibid. To serve
God with all our might, literally taken, horribly abused p. 80 The title of
defender of the Faith in England p. 81 A bold, but true Word touching defend or
of the faith p. 83 The title of supreme head of the church examined p. 84 The
plague of the Turks upon the antichristian world p. 84 Whether Saul was a type
of Christ, and the Kings of Israel, etc. p. 85 The Priests and Clergy in all
nations the greatest peacebreakers p. 88 Touching the seducer and seducing p.
89 Bishop Longlands subtle and bloody oaths of inquisition against seducing
(christians) ibid. Causes of destruction to a nation p. 90 All nations, Cities,
and Towns of the world, parts of the world etc. p. 91 Changes of state
Religions ibid. The state of Israel unparalleled p. 92 The punishments of
Christ sorer then the punishments of Moses ibi. That of Jude, twice dead,
examined p. 93 Of spiritual infection p. 94 The sword of typical Israel a type
of Christ's spiritual sword p. 95 Magistrates cannot receive from the people a
spiritual power p. 69 The proper charge of the civil Magistrate p. 97 The
plague of the Turk upon the Antichristian world p. 98 A twofoldcare and charge
of souls ibid. Christ the true King of Israel ibid. Christ's threefold sending
of Preachers p. 99 No true office of Ministry, since the Apostasy, but that of
Prophecy ibid. Great neglects charged on Christ Jesus. p. 100 Pretended order,
monstrous disorder p. 101 The Parliaments high justice against oppressors p.
102 The title head of the church p. 103 The civil Magistrate no spiritual
officer now, as in Israel p. 104 All commonweals that ever have been, are, or
shall be in the world (excepting that of typical Israel) merely civil p. 105
The decrees of Pagan kings for Israel and the God of it, considered ibid. The
Ministers lay heavy load upon the Magistrates back ibid. The great desolation
of the visible order of Christ's Saints and servants p. 107 The Wolves at
Ephesus considered, Act. 20 p. 108 The duty of the civil Magistrate in
spirituals ibid. The changing of Persecutors is one thing, the abolishing of
persecution another ibid. The persecuting clergy no cordial friends to
Magistracy ibid: Master Cotton and Bellarmine all one for the deposing
heretical princes p 109 The Lord Cobham his troubles in Henry the fifths days
p 110 Civil society pluck up by the roots ibid. A turn-coat in Religion more
faithless then a resolved Jew, Turk or Papist 111 Doctor Pearnes turning and
returning, and turning again in Religion p. 111 Consciences yielding to be
forced lose all conscience ibid. Two strange Paradoxes about force in
spirituals p. 112 How the kings of Israel and Judah were Types ^f Jesus Christ
to come p. 113 Cyrus called Christ, a figure of Christ p. 114 The fire from
Heaven, Revel. 13. p. 115 All truth, not only heavenly, but moral, civil, etc.
precious p. 116 Many excellent Prophets in eminency and power, and yet may not
use a civil but a spiritual sword in spirituals p. 117 More confidence commonly
put in the civil sword then the spiritual p. 118 Englands changes in Religion
compared with those of Judah ibid. Whether England may not possibly receive the
Pope again 119 The Religions of the world, politic inventions to maintain a
civil state p. 120 The absolute necessity of some order of Government all the
world over ibid. The Emperor Antoninus Pius his distinction and Edict against
persecution p. 120, 123 The degeneracy of Christianity now professed p. 121 The
horrible d^ss^mbling of some persecutors ibid. Too short a time set for
repentance in New England p. 122 False Teachers commonly hardened by persecution
ibid. The great sufferings of Master Gotton and his friends in England p. 123
The difference between spiritual and corporal murder p. 124 Civil Justice
ought impartially to permit one conscience as well as another p. 124 The
difference of the persecution of the Roman Emperors and Roman Popes p. 125 The
difference between the persecuted for conscience, and punished for civil crimes
p. 127 Every true Moses will make a difference between Israelites and Egyptians
p. 128 Whether a Commonweal may prosper in the permission of diverse Religions
p. 129 Cups of blood given into the hand of persecuting nations p. 129
Scripture perverted from the spiritual to the civil state p. 131 The Magistrate
usually but the Clergies Cane and Trumpet ibid. Romans 16. 17. grossly abused by a
Governor in New England ibid. The bloody Tenent plucks up the Nations and all
civil being p. 132 Romes glory and downfall p. 133 The civil state and officers
thereof cannot be spiritual Judges ibid. The case of Gallio p. 134 The
sufficiency of Christ's spiritual weapons p. 135 A vain fear of false Teachers
p 136 Christ Jesus nor Paul addressed themselves to the civil state ibid. Turk
and Pope and the generality of all Protestants against free conference p. 137
David and Goliath Types ibid. Difference between spiritual and civil Ministers
p. 138 Isreal's corporcal killing, types of spiritual ibid. The duty of the
civil state in spirituals p. 139 The kingdoms of the world becoming Christ's
ibid. Touching forcing men to Church p. 140 A Spanish inquisition all the world
over p. 141 Master Cotton kindling a twofold fire ibid. Mathias the second
Emperor, granting liberty of conscience p. 142 Christian weapons considered
ibid. A fallacious distinction of using the civil sword, not in, but about
spiritual matters p. 143 Wonderful strange Carpenters p. 144 Master Cotton
slights stocks and whips, etc. and provokes to banish and kill heretics etc.
ibid. All civil violence in spirituals, is for an interest p. 145 The civil
sword esteemed more powerful then the spiritual p. 146 That great fort of Romans
13. considered p. 147 The civil Magistrate not charged with the keeping of two
tables ibid. Calvin and Beza's judgment on Romans 13. p. 148 Unrighteousness
civil and spiritual ibid. Spiritual wars without civil disturbance p. 149 Of
the Roman Emperors power in spirituals p. 150 Foul imputation against Christ
Jesus, and yet his wise provision for his Kingdom p. 151 The Clergies evil
dealing with the civil magistrate p. 152 The nature of the Church, and of
Christ's true order, but lately discovered since the Apostasy ibid. Spiritual
Courts and Judges p. 153 Touching Paul's appeal to Caesar p. 154, 155. Spiritual
rights and civil p. 156 The true and only Christendom p. 157 Christ Jesus
robbed of his crown p. 158 Of custom tribute, etc. p. 159 Of praying for
Magistrates p. 160 Civil Ministers and spiritual ibid. The God of heaven has
many sorts of Ministers p. 161 Ordinarily the truth is persecuted ibid.
Touching the term evil, Romans 13. p. 162 The civil Magistrate robbed of his
civil power ibid. Of toleration, which Master Cotton in cases makes large
enough p. 163 The land of Israel a type p. 164 Touching false and seducing
teachers p. 165 The great difference of sin against the civil or spiritual
estate p. 166 The gross partiality of the bloody doctrine of persecution ibid.
Gods children much labor to shift off the cross of Christ p. 167 Christ Jesus
between two thieves p. 168 The horrible hyp^c^isie of all persecutors ibid.
Christ's charge to Pergamus and Thyatira against toleration, examined p. 169 The
word persecution how ordinarily taken ibid. Famous speeches of some kings
against persecution p. 170 No civil state or country can be truly called
Christian, although true Christians be in it p. 171 Nursing fathers dealt with
all as children p. 172 Persecutors, if it were in their power would and are
bound to persecute all consciences and Religions in the world p. 173 All
persecutors hold the Popes traitorous doctrine of deposing Heretics, etc. p.
174 The Popish and Protestant Clargy, set the Popish and Protestant world on
fire for their maintenance ibid. The Dutch device to win their Clergy to
toleration of other Religions p. 175 All that profess to be Christ's Ministers,
must resolve to dig or beg, or steal ibid. All Antichristians are fundamentally
opposite to Christ Jesus p. 176 Of letting the Tares alone p. 177 A speech of
King James considered p. 178 Touching compelling to come to Church to hear p.
179 A second speech of King James proving it possible that a Papist may yield
civil obedience ibid. The Parliament at Paris, although Popish, yet condemned
books against civil obedience p. 180 All England was Catholic, and yet the
Pope renounced ibid. A twofold holding the Pope as head ibid. The two English
sisters Laws concerning conscience p. 181 Cautions for preventing disturbance
by Papists ibid. Other Nations well provide against distractions and tumults
from opposite consciences p. 182 Nearer competitors to the truth among our
selves, then the Papist ibid. The admired prudence of the Parliament in
preserving civil peace p. 183. Increase of Papists unlikely (as things stand)
in England ibid Master Jo. Robinson from Holland as touching permission of
Papists, his testimony p. 184 A third speech of King James considered ibid.
Persecution (ordinarily) the mark of a false Church ibid. Stephen King of
Poland his speech ibid. The spiritual power of Christ entrusted, not with civil
but spiritual Ministers p. 185 An excellent argument used in Parliament against
the persecuting Bishops ibid. Two ways of disturbing and destroying Religion
p. 186 The Bishops as Tyrants justly suppressed, and the Parliament therein
prospered from heaven ibid. Daniels council to Belshazzar, preserves
Parliaments and nations ibid. Israel a miraculous nation p. 187 Two sorts of
nations in the world ibid. Touching the true Christ, and the false p. 188 The
King of Bohemia his speech p. 189 Spiritual Rapts and violence upon conscience
p. 189 Amnon his ravishing of Tamat a Type p. 190 The Judge of conviction of
conscience ibid. Wars for Religion p. 191 The bloody tenent guilty of all the
blood of Papists and Protestants formerly and lately spilt p. 192 Touching
national Churches ibid. Practical denying of Christ Jesus the greatest p. 193
Two high transgressions objected against Master Cotton p. 194 Touching Julian
his toleration p. 199 Touching the infection of false doctrine ibid. King James
and Queen Elizabeth their persecutions compared p. 200 Fit qualification of
Princes p. 201 Master Cotton suspends most part of the Magistrates in the world
from acting in matters of Religion ib. Constantines Edict as to Religion p. 202
Foul imputations cast on Christ Jesus ibid. Unchristian Tribunals and
proceedings p. 203 Touching excommunication in Israel p. 204 Spiritual
blessings and cursings the Antitypes of Corporal in Israel p. 205 Holy and
spiritual Constables, prisons, stocks, posts, gibbets, Tyburnes, etc. ibid. A
true Christ, a true sword; a false Christ, a false sword p. 206 Queen Elizabeth
her wars against the Papists ibid. The Wars of the Waldenses p. 207 Christian
weapons, wars and victories p. 208 Gideons army typical ibid. The Christian
Church does not persecute, but is persecuted p. 209 Poverty and persecution,
the most common companions of Gods Church. p. 210 The sins of Gods children
ibid. Christ's witnesses in all Ages. p. 211 A true wife of Christ no persecuter
ibid. The difference between excommunication and persecution ibid. Difference
between a spiritual and civil state p. 212 The civil powers made the Clergies
executioners p. 213 Spiritual judgments more terrible since Christ, then
corporal before his coming p. 214 A twofold way of constraint p. 215 What it is
to walk according to man's light ibid. Conviction twofold p. 216 The maintenance
of the New English Ministers ibid. Of propagating Religion by the sword p. 217
Touching the Indians of New England p. 218, 219 Propriety of Language necessary
to all Preachers p. 220* Conscience a close prisoner in New England, etc. p.
221 Public Marriage of a soul to Christ ibid. Spream Authority in spirituals
p. 222 Mysteries of false Christ's p. 225 The true Christ despised for his
poverty ibid. A base esteem of the spiritual sword ibid. Earthly Christ's need
earthly supports p. 226 The state of Christianity during the reign of
Antichrist ibid. Satan's two ways of quenching the candle of Christianity p.
227 A note of the French Massacre ibid. The pretended disputes in Queen Mary's
days p. 228 The late Synodical disputes ibid. A bloody and most unchristian
speech ibid. The rash madness of persecutors against themselves p. 229
Pleasantness of wit sanctified, etc. ibid. The Churches of New England proved
an implicit national Church ibid. A civil state maintenance proves a state
Church p. 231 Synods assembled by civil power, cannot be but civil also p. 231
The holy Land and Country of Canaan a Nonesuch p. 232 The weapons of the Jews
and Christians compared p. 233 New English loath to be accounted persecutors p.
234 Laws concerning Gods worship p. 234, 240 Touching the Magistrates keeping
of both Tables p. 235 Of Magistrates suspending in matters of Religion p. 237
Woeful soul-saving ibid. The term [souls Good] commonly but a paint p. 238
Worldly prosperity ever dangerous to Gods children p. 239 Holland and England
wonderfully prospered upon mercy shown to consciences p. 241 Bodies and goods (
not conscience) subject to civil powers p. 242 What is the Commonweal of Isreal
p. 243 The Roman Emperor flourished long, though without Christ p. 244 Christ's
spouse most chaste under persecution ibid. Constantine a friend and an enemy to
Christ's spouse p. 245 Concerning toleration in New England p. 247 Papists and
Protestants both force to Church p. 248 Prayers for vengeance upon persecutors
p. 249 The bloody Tenent of persecution is a King-killing and Sure killing p.
250 P^rsecutors pretend to save but kill p. 251 Hireling Ministers. ibid.
Friars in Chaucers time, and the Clergy in our time considered The Turks will
be Muselmanni, that is, true believers p. 253 Mystical sheep and wolves p. 253,
254 Paul's striking Elimas blind considered p. 254 The Clergy using the
Magistrate as dogs p. 256 The great spiritual differences of these times p. 257
Gods children may possibly fight each against other p. 258 Spiritual murderers
and seducers p. 259, 261 Commonweal and Common-woe twofold p. 259 Mystical
wolves and Muskeeto's p. 261 A state and forced Religion a prison p. 262 Of
Constantines wars for the Christians p. 263 Never any true Religion in the
world, but one p. 264 Touching Paul's blasphemy before his conversion ibid. An
instance from John Haywood and the Lord Cromwell in K. Henry the eighth his days
p. 265 Of Moses Judicials p. 266 The first Christians the purest and yet the
civil sword was against them p. 267 The Levites killing 3000, Exodus 32,
typical. p. 268 Phineas^ his act considered ibid. Elijah and the Baalites, and
other figurative passages of the Old Testament p. 269, 270 Strange and
monstrous duties of Moral righteousness p. 271 Gods children are monsters
accounted, etc. p. 272 Elijah his slaying the Captains and their Fifties ibid.
Wonderful Spiders and Cobwebs ibid. Touching Seducers and their punishments p.
273 The sad effects of the Bloody Tenent on M. Cotton's own spirit p. 274, 275
The differences of Gods people in Old and New England p. 276 The great sin of
New Englands former Patents p. 276, 277 Old England curbing New Englands
persecutions ibid. Holy Cranmer, and Cromwell, joining with bloody persecutors
in Hen. 8. his days p. 278 The famous passages of Cromwell and Lambert in Hen.
8. his days p. 278 Conviction twofold p. 279, 280 Christ Jesus accounted the
greatest Heretic, Blasphemer, and Seducer in the world p. 381 Small matters
accounted Heresies ibid. The barbarous usage of John Hus in the Council at
Constance p. 282 The Bloody Tenent destroys civility out of the world p. 282,
285 All men confident in their own way p. 284 He that persecutes Jews, Turks
Pagans, or Antichristians, is in a greater error then any of them ibid.
Freedom of conscience a great peacemaker p. 286, 287 Of persecuting Apostates
p. 287* 288 Two woeful opinions bewitching the Nations p. 289 Three great causes
of the downfall of the Church of Rome p. 290 Touching the New English model of
Church and Civil power p. 290 M. Cotton' s too deep censuring p. 291 Israel a
miraculous people p. 292 Touching the punishment of adultery among the Jews p.
293 All civil Government Gods Ordinance ibid. True Commonweals many without
Kings p. 294 A wonderful saying of Bishop Hall ibid. Magistrates nursing
fathers and their sins p. 295, 296 The Pourtraicture of the Bloody Tenent p.
297, etc. Compared with other Opinions and Practices p, 301. The Maskes and
Vizards of the Bloody Tenent p. 302. Truth and Peace their meeting seldom, and
short in this World ibid. The Letter of R. W. to Major Endico^ Governor of the
Massachuset ( in N. E.) upon occasion of the late Persecution at Boston p. 303
Persecutors approve no persecution in the World but their own p. 304 All
Persecutors render the innocent most odious p. 305 Cromwell the 2d a Refuge for
the oppessed p. 306 This Rejoinder formerly sent out of N. Eng. but not till
now published ibid. Abuse of Light most dangerous ibid. The power of Conscience
though erroneous p. 307 The Common Prayer and the Composers of it p. 308
Perfumes with man, stinks with God ibid. Of Spiritual Baits and Snares p. 309
Spiritual Witchcraft ibid. Spiritual Drunkenness and the persecuting Language
of it p. 310 The horrible Path which Persecutors walk in p. 311 The least
beginning of Persecution tends to Blood. Gods dreadful judgment against
Persecutors p. 312 Gray hairs are Gods Alarums p. 313 An appendix to the
Clergy of (old and New) England Scotland and Ireland p. 314 The Clergy
Court the Magistrate for his Sword and his money 315 The late Kings charge
against his Clergy ibid. The Woolf pleading with the Lamb will be judge ibid.
All prosecutors ( in their turns) plead for liberty of conscience p. 316 King
Charles and his Chaplaias subscribe to liberty of Conscience ibid. About
twenty years persecution in New England p. 317 The persecution of the New and
old English independent Clergy p. 317 A brief touch upon the fifteen
proposals of the (so called) Independent Ministers p. 318 They silently
challenge the power of ordination in all England, etc. ibid. They sell the
Spiritual Liberty of Christ ibid
FINIS.

