An Humble REQUEST* TO THE Ministers of both Universities, AND TO ALL Lawyers
in every Inns-a-Court. TO Consider of the Scriptures and points of Law herein
mentioned, and to give a rational and christian Answer, whereby the difference
may be composed in peace, between the poor men of England, who have begun to
dig, plow, and build upon the common Land, claiming it their own, by right of
Creation. AND The Lords of Mannours that trouble them, who have no other
claiming to Commons, then the Kings will, or from the Power of the CONQUEST,
AND If neither Minister nor Lawyer, will undertake a reconciliation in this
case, for the beauty of our Commonwealth. Then we appeal, to the Stones,
Timber, and dust of the Earth you tread upon, to hold forth the light of this
business, questioning not, but that Power that dwells every where, will cause
light to spring out of darkness, and Freedom out of Bondage.

By GERARD WINSTANLEY.

1 Cor. 6. 5. I speak to your shame; Is it so, that there is not a wise man
among you, no not one, that shall be able to judge between his Brethren?
LONDON, Printed by J. C. And are to be sold at the two Bibles, at the West end
of Paul's Churchyard, 1650.

TO THE READER,
THe occasion of the publication of this Request to the Ministers and Lawyers
was this: Upon a discourse between Parson Plat, Lord of the manor of Cobham,
and Gerard winstanley, about the matter of digging upon the Commons in his
Lordship.

Mr. Plat did promise and engage himself with loving expressions, and words
savouring of much moderation, tenderness and reason, that if Gerard Winstanley
could prove by Scriptures, the lawfulness of the work, that is, that the earth
was made to be a common Treasury, and ought to remain so to whole Mankind,
without respect of persons: That he would never hereafter molest the Diggers,
but quietly suffer them to build and plant the Commons in his Lordship: And
that he would bring in his Estate, and become one in that community.

This which here follows is a Copy of those Scriptures I delivered to him,
which he had not then time to read over; but upon discourse at the same time,
upon the same Scriptures, he did not gainsay, but by his words of Gentleness
declared a condescension, to the light of that universal freedom, held forth
thereby to Mankind.

For the present I offer this to the consideration of all rational and
Christian-spirited men, to judge in the case; And according as Mr. Plat gives
answer, I shall be as ready to declare and publish.

For the present farewell. per me, GERARD WINSTANLEY.

To the Ministers of both Universities, and the Lawyers of every Inns-a-Court.
Gentlemen, Brethren, and Englishmen,
YOu all hear of the difference between Lords of M^nnours, and the poor People
of England. The poor people say, the common Land is their due, by right of
Creation, and by the Laws of a Commonwealth. And being encouraged herefrom,
do build houses, and plant them corn for their Livelihood, upon the Commons and
wast Land, that they may live like men, in their right of Creation; and that
they may enjoy the benefit of a free Commonwealth, as they are Englishmen.

The Lords of Mannours say, it is not their Creation-right; thereupon beat
them, pull down their houses, and much abuse them, pushing the poor with their
horns of power, like unrational Beasts.

And though the difference rise higher and higher between them, both in point
of Conscience, and point of Law yet hitherto, there does not any appear to
reconcile the difference,

But Gentlemen, let it not be said hereafter among posterity but that there
were some wise men among you, that were not blinded by passion, covetousness,
and self-interest; but that you would adventure to speak for righteousness, and
that took the cause of the poor into your hands.

This difference between Lords of Mannours and the poor, about the common Land,
is the greatest controversy that has rise up this 600. years past.

If reason and righteousness which is the foundation of Scriptures, and just
Laws do give it us: let us have our freedom quietly; if neither reason nor
righteousness give us this freedom, we will lie still, and never trouble you
more.

Therefore I leave these following Scriptures and Considerations to you, and
rest,

A fellow-Commoner of England, and true friend to Freedom, GERARD WINSTANLEY*
April 9th. 1650.
The whole Earth: By the Law of Creation, is the Common treasury of free
Livelihood, to whole Mankind. And those Lords of Manors, and others, that deny
any part of mankind, this creation-freedome in the earth, are sinners in the
highest degree, and are upholders of the fall and curse of Mankind.
To prove this by Scripture.
IT is plain, that the Scriptures consists of Three Parts. First, they declare
the righteous Law of Creation, wherein God gives to all Mankind, equal
freedom, without respect of persons.

Secondly, they declare the fall of Mankind from this righteous Law; and the
various unrighteous actings of Mankind, under his fallen estate, or power of
darkness, by whom he is taken prisoner.

Thirdly, they declare the restoration of Mankind to his
creation-rigteousnesse: By whom he is restored: And the actings and
conversation of Mankind upon his resurrection from under that dark, or fallen
estate.

I Will begin with the First, and take notice how the Scriptures gives an
universal freedom in the Earth to whole Mankind.

In Genesis, Genesis 1. 26.
God said, Let us make Man: By Man, in the singular number implies, Mankind.
And let them have dominion: By Them, in the plural number, implies, whole
Mankind in all his branches.

Again: he created Man; that is: Mankind. Male and female, created he Them.
Ver. 27. and Ver. 29
And bid them, in the plural number; increase, and multiply, and replenish the
earth: and after Mankind, in his variety of branches, did increase and fill
the earth. Then the creating Power, or God, gives 2 Commands more.

First, To subdue the Earth. And this implies, plowing, diging, and all kind of
manuring. So then observe. That bare and simple working in the Earth, according
to the freedom of the Creation, though it be in the sweat of man's brows, is
not the curse.

But for one part of Mankind, to be a Task-master, and to live Idle; and by the
Beast-like power of the sword, does force another part of Mankind to work as a
servant and slave. This is the power of the curse, which makes mankind eat his
bread in sorrow by the sweat of his brows.

The Second Command from God, was this, to Mankind. That he should have
dominion over the Fish, Foul, Beasts, Herbs, Plants. And this implies; that
whole Mankind, spread abroad in variety of bodies, and yet but the unity of one
Creation, Mankind is the Lord of the Earth: As David says; The earth is the
Lords: Psalm. 24. 1.
that is, Mankinds.

But there is not the least tittle spoken, that one part of Mankind should
subdue, and rule in oppression over another, for this came in after the fall,
and is the Beastly Power that has been suffered to reign, Dan. 7. 25.
for a time, times, and dividing of time.

When Mankind lives in the unity of the one Spirit of Righteousness; he lives
in the light, and the light lives in him; which is Christ in him, the light of
the Father, or the restoring Power.

But when Mankind lives in division, contention, and covetousness, one part of
Mankind hedging themselves into the earth by force and sword, (as experience
shows, the strongest sword, rules over the weakest) and thereby shutting out
another part of Mankind, Jam. 4. 1.
making them slaves.

Now Mankind lives under the power of the Fall, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
In darkness, and darkness lives in him. And this darkness is the Devil, or
son of bondage, which causes all division and sorrow.

This same Creation-Right, or common freedom in the earth among Brethren, was
confirmed by Covenant from God, to Noah, and his Seed, Genesis 9. 9.
without limitation or respect of persons.

So that, we see when that Almighty power did work a restoration in the earth,
he gave the earth still to be in common; shutting out none, from enjoying the
benefit of his Creation: But when Mankind began to quarrel about the earth;
and some would have all, and shut out others, forcing them to be servants; This
was Man's fall, Jer. 45. 5.
it is the ruling of the curse, and is the cause of all divisions, wars, and
pluckings up.

This same Creation-Right, Genesis 17. 8.
or Universal Freedom in the earth, was confirmed by Covenant to Abraham, and
his Seed, not limiting, or restraining any part. Now in this Covenant to
Abraham, God points out the work of restoration by Christ, the restoring Power,
who shall be the joy and blessing of all Nations.

So that in the work of restoration, God brings Mankind to this universal
freedom in the Earth, without respect of persons, according to the righteous
Law of the first creation of all things.

In the next place, the Scriptures declare the Fall of Mankind from this
righteous Law of Creation.

And the fall of Man, Psalm. 49. 12
is declared in these words: Mankind being in honor, abides not; that is: he
being made the Lords of the Earth, and had dominion over the Fish, Foul, and
Beasts, and was free in himself; yet he abode not in that honor.

For one part of Mankind, seeking to enslave another part, setting up one to be
a King, Rev. 19. 19. 20.
or Lord, casting another at his footstool, the stronger part hedging
himself into the Earth, by Armies and Self-will Laws, and thereby hedged out
others, did hereby become like the Beasts that perishes.

And how is that? Rev. 12. 14.
even as the beasts, that pushes one another with their horns, Dan. 7. 25.
so does Mankind; so that Mankind, in their Actings each to other, is become a
Beast: And this Beastly Power was to reign for a time, times, and dividing of
times.

Therefore, whosoever upholds this Beastly Power, and yet says they are the
Sons of Christ, or restoring power, they lie, they deceive themselves, and the
truth is not in them.

The Scriptures likewise declares the actings of Mankind under the fall, Genesis
4. 3.
or in darkness. Cain rose up in discontent, and killed his brother Abel. The
quarrel rise about the Earth; for Abels industry made the earth more fruitful
then Cain; thereupon Cain would take away Abels labor from him by force.

These two Brothers did type out, or fore-run all the acting between man and
man, from that time to this; being a plain declaration of that darkness, into
which Mankind is fallen.

Moses Law of equity, was but the moderation, or the curbing in of the Fall of
Mankind: Deuteronomy. 5. and Cha. 18. 18
for his Law was not the restorer: but, says he, there is one comes after me,
mightier then I, and him ye shall hear, which is Christ, the restoring Spirit.

All the wars and divisions in Isreal's time, Genesis 23. 4.
and since: and all buying and selling of Land, Gal. 4. 29.
and the fruits of the earth, which is the art of cheating one another, Jam. 4.
1.
is but the actings of Mankind in darkness, Isa. 33. 1.
under the power of the fall; for, both Kings, Rulers, and all people, have had
their checks from God, for their unrighteous walking, or cruelty against Abels
plain-hearted Spirit. And all the great combustions that has been, and yet is,
in the world, is but politic, covetous, murdering Cain; holding Abel, or the
honest plain dealing heart under him; or the son of bondage, persecuting the
son of freedom.

Now in the Third Particular. The Scriptures declares the restoration of
Mankind, to his Creation-righteousnesse; or that the Son of Righteousness
shall rise up, and expel the darkness.

And there are 3 degrees of this First the Scriptures declares promises of
restoration; Genesis 3. 15.
as in these words: The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head. Gal.
3. 8.
Abraham's Seed shall be the joy and blessing of all Nations. 2 These. 2. 8.
The bright appearing of Christ, Heb. 8. 10.
the restoring Power, shall destroy Antichrist, or that darkness in man, 1 John 2. 27.
called the Mystery of iniquity, that rules in, and enslaved Mankind. Joh. 6.
45.
And in the latter days, they shall be all taught of God, Mat. 7. 12.
and the Spirit of truth, shall lead them into all truth. And such like.

Now these, and such like promises, declares the restoring of Mankind to his
original righteousness, and that they shall be brought to be of one heart,
and of one mind; and that they shall be freely willing to let each other enjoy
their Creation-rights, without restraining, or molesting one another; but every
one doing as they would be done by.

Secondly, Isa. 2. 4. and
the Scriptures declares Prophecies, foretelling the restoration, in such words
as these. Chap. 11.
The Swords shall be beaten into Plow-shares, Ezekiel. 36. 34. 35.
and Spears into pruning hooks, and Nations shall learn war no more; but the
Lion and the Lamb shall feed together: the wast places shall be builded, and
the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all
that passed by.

This shows, that the Commons, Heaths, and waste land, that has lain barren,
Joel 2. 21.
by reason of the unrighteousness of Kings, and Lords of Manors, Psalm. 107.
34.
that would not suffer the enslaved poor to till, Zachar. 8.
and manure it, shall in the day of Christ's Power, be manunured, and be made
fruitful, that there may be no beggary nor misery among Mankind, but that
every body may freely enjoy their creation rights.

Thirdly, Romans 8. 20.
the Scriptures declares the resurrection of the spirit of freedom within
Mankind. As in these words; The whole creation groaneth and travelleth in
pain, Romans 7. 24.
waiting for a restoration. And Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of sin: That is, who will deliver me from my covetousness,
pride, envy, uncleanness, self-love, and this great power of darkness in me,
that hinders me, that I cannot do to others, as I would have them do to me:
And that enslaves me within, so that I cannot quietly suffer others to enjoy
their creation rights in the earth.

The Apostles were hated, slandered, persecuted, and bore all patiently, rather
then strive again, that they might hold forth the righteous law of creation:
This shows the resurrection of the spirit of Love in them.

Jesus Christ was slandred, beaten, reviled, and at last put to death, for no
cause; yet he reviled not again, but suffered all patiently, that he might
honor his Father. The spirit of Righteousness; this shows the resurrection of
the spirit from under darkness, and a growing up of freedom and light.

This spirit of Love, Patience, Humility, and Righteousness, is called the
light of the world, and the salt of the earth, which brings mankind into a
moderate, meek, Loving, and seasonable condition: Math 7. 12.
It is the restoring spirit, teaching all men to do as they would be done by.
Rev. 11. 15.
He that has this spirit, will never strive to be a Lord of Manor, Dan. 7. 27.
or a divider of Land; for he will quietly suffer every one to enjoy the
freedom of his creation. Ephesians. 2. 15.
This spirit destroys all enmity: This is the Gospel: This is Christ,
appearing to be the joy of all Nations, which the Ministers of Christ must
preach if they be faithful to Christ.

This is the spirit of poverty, that has been a servant in the world a long
time, but now is appearing and rising up to draw all men after him.

This poor man is he, that saves Mankind from utter ruin, and yet he is
despised by Ignorance. This poor man spread abroad in sons and daughters,
Psalm. 37. 9, 10.
shall inherit the Earth: This is he that will give Mankind a full freedom in
the earth, and take off all bondages, therefore he is called the blessing of
the earth. But the power of covetousness, which is the divider of land, is
called the curse of the Earth, and murderer.

Jesus Christ bid the young man sell all that he had, and give to the poor:
Luke 3. 5, 6.
This speech extends to all men, as well as to that selfe-conceited young man.

When Christ appears in glory, in the day of his power, he will make crooked
ways straight, and ruff ways smooth, throw down the Mountains, and fill up
the Valleys.

This declares the universal restoration of Mankind to the law of
righteousness, from whence he fell; for when once the Law of Love and truth is
written in the heart of Mankind, they will never quarrel one with another
about the earth, who shall have it, and who not, for it is the birthright and
Inheritance of all.

For says Christ, Matthew. 20. 25.
though the Gentles seek Dominion and Lordship one over another, yet says
Christ, it shall not be so among you who are my followers.

Now these of the Parliament, Army, Clergy, Lawyers, and people of England
that professes to follow Christ: and yet exercises Lord-ship over their
brethren, not suffering their brethren quietly to live by them on the Earth;
they do deceive themselves, and are hypocrites.

Therefore woe, Jam. 5. 1.
woe, woe, to you Rich men (and Lords of Manors) howl and weep. Isa. 16. 4.
The oppressor shall fall: and he that takes the sword, Matthew. 26. 52.
and rules by it over brethren, shall perish by it. He that hedges himself
into the earth, and hedges out his brother, not suffering his brother to enjoy
the benefit of his creation; Exodus 20. 13. 15.
That man is a Thief, and a Murderer, and an Enemy to Christ.

And here I conclude, that these forementioned Scriptures being but a gleaning
of the Bible, gives a full warrant to all poor men, to build them houses, and
plant corn upon the Commons and unnurtured land, for their comfortable
livelihood, as they are part of Mankind, being the right of their creation.

And whosoever denies or hinders them of this freedom, does deny God, Christ,
and Scriptures, and overthrows true and pure undefiled religion.

True Religion, and undefiled, is to let every one quietly have earth to
manure, that they may live in freedom by their labors; for it is earth that
every one seeks after, that they may live in peace, let them say what they
will.

The practice of the Gentry is to have the Earth to themselves: It is that the
Army fights for: It is that the Clergy preaches for; for if you deny him
Tithes, or a Maintenance, you shall not hear of him.

Nay, is it not the bottom of all National laws, to dispose of the Earth: and
does not this appear to be true, by the practice of Lords of Manors and the
Gentry, that cannot be at rest for vexing and fretting, because poor men
begins to see their creation-freedome, and begins to build upon, and plant the
Commons.

And men that in other cases are mild and seemingly loving, are like Lions and
Devils, ready to kill and destroy these poor diggers; and not only the Gentry,
but the Clergy generally are mad against this work: Well, the power of
darkness, and the fall, rules in these men; for if the restoring spirit,
Christ, were in them, they would do as they would be done by.

And seeing the Scriptures confirms this creation Right to whole mankind, then
in the next place it follows,

That all the Title and Power, which Lords of Manors have to the Common land,
whereby they beat the people off from this their freedom, Is no other but the
will of Kings, who were Conquerours, and ruled successively by swordly power,
inslaving the creation Mankind in England.

First then consider, That King CHASLES and his Laws was the Successor of the
person and power of William the Conqueror; for he did not rule by the law of
creation, suffering every one to enjoy their creation-right on the earth: But
by the laws of a Conquest, which intitles some to the earth, and shuts out
others.

Secondly, That K. Charles, and that Kingly Lordly conquering government, is
cast out of England, by the victory of the Army over him, and by words and
Acts of Parliament. If they do not again lose this their honor and peace
too, by their self-love and covetousness, suffering the enemy to cheat them
by policy, and thereby being in Kingly power again, who could not overcome them
in the Field.

And seeing Kingly and Lordly power is declared against both by Army and
Parliament, the people wants nothing now but possession of the Commonwealths
freedom; for our freedom must not lie within the clasps of a Book, in words
that may be read; nor in the bare title of a Victory: but it must be freedom
really enjoyed, or else it will do us no good.

The first Parliament law, which encourages the poor Commoners of England, to
plant the Commons and wast land, is this; wherein they declare England to be a
free Commonwealth: This Law breaks in pieces the Kingly yoke, and the laws
of the Conqueror, and gives a common freedom to every Englishman, to have a
comfortable livelihood in this their own Land, or else it cannot be a
commonwealth.

Secondly, The Parliament did make this law, presently after the Kings head was
cut off; That they would establish all the old ancient fundamental laws,
wherein the Lives, Liberties, persons and estates of the people of England
without exception, were concerned.

By this they give a common freedom to every Englishman to have and enjoy the
land for their comfortable livelihood by their labors, without restraint of
any.

For the Ancient fundamental Law is Salus populi, the safety, peace, and
preservation of the whole body of the people, excepting none.

And this fundamental law, called Salus populi, was that which gave life and
strength to the Parliament and Army to take up Arms against the King; for they
had not the least letter of any written law for their warrant at that time, all
the laws being for the King, and none against him.

Now if there be any Ancient Laws of the Conqueror unrepealed, whereby the
people are hindered of a quiet enjoyment of a Commonwealths freedom, they are
all blotted out and abolished by this Act of Parliament, which has declared

Therefore the poor people, being part of our Commonwealth, and being
impoverished by the Kingly Lordly and Power, which is now cast out, are freed
from the oppressions of all those Laws, whereby their lives, liberties,
persons and creation-rights, were ens^aved: And Salus populi, is the
fundamental Law, that gives that life and strength and courage to build upon
and plant the common Land, for their comfortable livelihood. This is the
Commonwealths Law, and the Commonwealths Freedom.

3. Thirdly, The Parliament have made an act to free the People, from yielding
obedience to the King, and to all that hold claiming under the King. This Law
likewise throws down the power of the Conquest, and makes Englishmen free in
their Land, that they may live comfortably in their English Commonwealth, and
quietly enjoy their Land now, which they could not, while the conquering Kingly
and Lordly Power ruled.

4. Fourthly, The Parliament has made an Engagement, to maintain this present
Commonwealths Government, against King and house of Lords. This likewise is but
a confirmation of the first, to make England a free Commonwealth. And that all
Englishmen may enjoy the comfortable livelihood in the Land, as Brethren,
without restraint; for if I have not freedom to live in peace, and enjoy food
and raiment by my Labors freely, it is no Commonwealth at all.

Now in the purchasing of this declared freedom, the common people of England,
have spent their Estates, as well as the Gentry, partly by their free hearts in
lending money to the Parliament, partly by Taxes, partly by free quarter, and
partly by plunder in times of War. By all which our proprieties are wasted,
and the fruit of our labors laid down and accepted of, both by Parliament and
Army, to be a price to purchase Salus populi, the peoples creation-freedom, out
of the oppressing power of Kingly power.

Therefore in reason and justice, I conceive, that if the poor people do build
houses, and plant corn upon the Commons of England, for a livelihood, they are
protected and warranted both by Scriptures, and the Laws of the present
Commonwealth: And we expect the Officers of the Law, will be as faithful to us,
to put us in possession, as our Law Books are to declare our common freedom,

And whereas some Justices do say, that for poor men to dig and plant upon the
Commons, they do bring themselves within the statute, to be punished for
vagrants, idle or wandering rogues: to this I answer.

1. That the Justice cannot call these men vagrants, or wandering rogues; for by
the letter of the Law, it is no vagrancie to dig and work; but when men are
idle, wanderers, begging up and down, these the Law looks upon as punishable.

But the Diggers they set themselves to work, according to the Law of creation,
as they are Englishmen, upon the Commons of England, claiming the privileges
of the Commonwealth, according to the Laws of a Commonwealth, that they may
not beg, nor be forced to steal through want, and so be hanged by the Kingly
and Lordly Law.

2. Secondly, Their digging upon the Commons for a livelihood, is no Riot,
though some Justices would make it; for they do not fight against any. And
their meeting together, is no unlawful or riotous meeting, unless the
gathering together of many people in one field, to dig, plow, or reap, be a
Riot, or an unlawful meeting.

These Laws against Riots, or unlawful meetings, as they call it, was the Law
of the fearful Kingly Conqueror, lest the common people by their often meeting
should understand their creation-freedom, and so should join together, to
conquer and cast out him that had conquered them.

Yet the Gentry and Lords of Manors, who are part of the Kingly and Lordly
Power, they have met diverse times in Troops, and have beaten and abused the
Diggers, and pulled down their houses. Yet we do not hear that the Clergy,
Lawyers, or Justices, who would be counted the dispensers of righteous justice,
do speak against them for Rioters, but against the poor laboring men still,
checking the Laborers for idleness, and protecting the Gentry that never work
at all: therefore if idle persons, who wander up and down idly, be punishable
by the Statutes; Then judge whether it be not the idle Gentry, rather then the
laborious poor man.

These things I leave to the consideration of all rational men to judge of,
they being the foundation, whereupon our work of community in the earth,
according to the Law of creation, being reason and justice is builded. And I
desire any rational man, Minister or Lawyer, to answer these, either to confirm
us, or else to raise up this foundation of Scriptures and Law, not by take him
Jailer, which is the language of the Beast; but by reason which is the voice of
the man.

Though this work of digging upon the Commons, have many enemies, yet I am
assured of the righteousness of the work, and it shall take root in one place
or other, before many years pass over Englands head, I can set no time, but I
wait for the consolation of Israel to arise up, and break forth in others, as I
have a taste of him in my self.

The voice of the Dragon is, kill him, pull down his house, beat him, arrest
him, take him Jailer, imprison him, he is a rogue.

But the voice of the Lamb is, love your enemies, let him live, the earth is
his creation-right as well as mine: therefore let us do as we would be done
unto.

Ministers and Lawyers, will you all stand looking on, and see the Lords of
Manors exercise Kingly Power over the poor men that claim their
creation-right in the earth, and be silent?

You would be called dispensers of Justice: here is a point of justice for you
to decide: this is the point upon which you shall either stand or fall, be
saved or damned; for you are put upon the trial.

The week before Easter, Parson Plat, Minister of Horsley, being the Lord of
the Manor of Cobham, where the Diggers were at work. And Thomas Sutton, the
impropriator of Cobham, came in person, and brought diverse men, whom they hired
to pull down a poor man's house, that was built upon the Commons, and kikt and
struck the poor man's wife, so that she miscarried of her Child, and by the
blows and abuses they gave her, she kept her bed a week.

And at this time I went to Mr. Plat, and spoke with him, about our freedom in
the Commons, he answered me, if I could make it good by Scriptures, he would
never trouble us more, but let us build and plant: Nay he said, he would cast
in all his estate, and become one with the diggers.

The next week after I carried him this writing before printed, being Monday in
Easter week, and upon our discourse, he seemed to consent to many things, and
was very moderate, and promised me to read it over, and to give me an Answer:
moreover he promised me, that if the diggers would not cut the wood upon the
Common, he would not pull down their houses: And the diggers resolved for peace
sake, to let the wood alone till people did understand their freedom a little
more.

And upon Friday in Easter week, he came and brought his answer, which was
this. He came accompanied with about 50. men, and had hired 4. or 5. of them,
to fire down the diggers houses: some that stood by said, do not fire them, the
wood will do some good; his answer was, no, no, fire them to the ground, that
these Heathens, who know not God, may not build them again; for if you let the
wood alone, they will build again.

Thereupon at the Command of this Parson Plat, they set fire to six houses, and
burned them down, and burned likewise some of their housholdstuffe, and wearing
Clothes, throwing their beds, stools, and housholdstuffe, up and down the
Common, not pitying the cries of many little Children, and their frighted
Mothers, which are Parishioners borne in the Parish. And yet some of these
hired men, lives not in the Parish, and some are strangers newly come into the
Parish: and so were bewitched by the covetous make bate Priests, to do this
heathenish turkish act.

The poor diggers being thus suddenly cast out of their houses by fire, both
they, their wives and Children were forced to lie upon the open Common all
night: yet the rage of Parson Plat and his Company rested not here, but in the
night time, some of them came again upon the Commons, while the diggers were
quiet, and some of them in bed, and said, we have Authority from our Master,
that is Mr. Plat, to kill you, and burn the rest of your goods, if you will not
be gone: thereupon Sir Anthony Vincents Servant, called Davy, struck at one,
and cut some of their Chaires and other Goods to pieces, frighting the women
and Children again. And some of the Diggers asked them, why they would do thus
cruelly by them, they answered, because you do not know God, nor will not come
to Church.

Surely if the God of these men, by their going to Church, teach both their
preacher and they, to do such cruel deeds; we will neither come to Church, nor
serve their God. Mr. Plat in his Sermons can say, live in peace with all men,
and love your Enemies: therefore if the Diggers were enemies, he ought to love
them in action; but it is a true badge of an hypocrite, to say, and not to do.

Let every Man's actions be tried, and see who serves God, They or the Diggers.
Mr. Plat and the Gentlemen, (so would be called) that were with him, were full
of rage, and gnashed their tongues with vexation; but the Diggers are patient,
cheerful, quiet in spirit, loving to those that have burned their houses.

Therefore the poor Diggers have got the Crown, and wear it, and the Priests
and Gentry have lost their Crown: The poor have striven with them 12. months,
with love and patience: The Gentlemen have answered them all the time with
fury; they would have the Earth and all freedom, but they will not suffer the
poor to have either earth or freedom, but what they hire of them.

But though the Devil be let loose to swell against us, in these Gentry that
rule over us, by Kingly Power, or Law of Norman Conquest, notwithstanding, they
have taken the Engagement, to cast out Kingly Power: yet his time to be chained
up draws nigh: and then we are assured this righteous work of earthly
community, shall have a most glorious resurrection out of his ashes.

Nay farther, if this satisfies not Mr. Plat, but he and Tho: Sutton, of
Cobham, have hired three men, to attend both night and day, to beat the
Diggers, and to pull down their tents or houses, if they make any more; and if
they make Caves in the earth, they threaten to murder them there, so that they
will not suffer the poor Diggers to live, neither above nor below ground: if
they beg, they whip them by their Law for vagrants, if they steal they hang
them; and if they set themselves to plant the Common for a livelihood, that
they may neither beg nor steal, and whereby England is enriched, yet they will
not suffer them to do this neither: And so hereby these Gentlemen, take away
both creation-right, and Commonwealths right from the poor Diggers; for they
command the poor enslaved Tenants and Neighbors likewise not to suffer any of
the Diggers to have any lodging in their houses, nor to sell them any meat for
their money.

And thus the fury of Parson Plat, exceedes the fury of any other Lord of
Manor. The chief setters on to burn these houses, and to abuse the Diggers,
was Parson Plat, Sir Anthony Vincent his Tenants and Servants, were most of
them there; likewise Thomas Sutton and William Star, these are they that say
the Commons belong to the poor, and yet these rich men are agrieved to see the
poor make use of the Commons: the actors in this Turkish design, were furious
beyond the fury of the Beasts; but many of those that came were threatened by
Vincent his chief men, to be turned out of their Livings, if they came not, so
that this is not an act of the tenants by free consent, but the Gentlemen hired
others to do it.

These men do so powerfully act the Image of the Beast, that they will neither
buy nor sell with any freely, nor let any have land houses, or work under them
but such as have the mark of the Beast; that is, such as are filled with fear
of them, and are obedient to their beastly Power. And some of them say, they do
God good service, if they can destroy or kill the Diggers. Thus the Scriptures
are fulfilled. Rev. 13. 17.

And now they cry out the Diggers are routed, and they rang bells for joy; but
stay Gentlemen, your selves are routed, and you have lost your Crown, and the
poor Diggers have won the Crown of glory.

For first you have not routed them by Law, for you durst not suffer the
Diggers plead their own cause, so that it never came to any trial; and you have
no Law to warrant your Lordly power in beating of the Diggers, but the will of
Kingly swordly power, which is self-will, and Club-law.

Secondly, You have not routed the Diggers by dispute; for your impatient,
covetous, and proud swelling heart, would not suffer you to plead rationally
with them.

Neither thirdly, have you routed them by Scriptures; but the Diggers have
routed you by your own Law; by reason, by Scriptures, and patient suffering all
your abuses and now your name shall rot, and your own power shall destroy you.

When the Scribes and Pharisees of old, (these Lords of Manors Ancestors) had
put Jesus Christ to death, they rejoiced, and sent gifts one to another, and
made merry, and in such like words, said they had routed him. And so now these
English Pharisees, because they have acted the power of the Beast, and to the
eye of the Beast, seem to stand uppermost for a time, they say they have
routed the Diggers.

But they are mistaken, for the Diggers keep the field of patience, quietness,
joy and sweet rest in their hearts, and are filled with love to their enemies;
but the Gentlemen are so impatient, they cannot rest for fretting, jearing,
railing, and gnashing their tongues with vexation.

They will not suffer the Diggers to look to the Corn which is planted upon the
Commons, being about eleven Acres: neither will they look to it themselves, but
let the Cattle spoil it, that they may say, see, their labor comes to nothing.
Are not these men the curse of England, that will not suffer others to live by
the^, and will rather spoil corn in these dear times, then let the poor enjoy
their own righteous labors upon the Commons?

This work of digging, being freedom, or the appearance of Christ in the earth,
has tried the Priests and professors to the uttermost, and has ripped up the
bottom of their Religion, and proves it mere witchcraft, and cosonage; for
self love and covetousness is their God, or ruling power. They have chosen the
sword, and they refuse love; when the Lamb turns into the Lion, they will
remember what they have done, and mourn.

And thus I have faithfully declared all the businesses, and though the power
of their coverousnesse, self-loving flesh, has for the present trod our weak
flesh down; yet the strength of our inward man, has overcome them; and is the
Lord God Almighty, above that power that rules in them.

We have declared our Testimony, and now let freedom and bondage strive who
shall rule in Mankind: the weapons of the Sons of bondage being carnal, as
fire, club, and sword; the weapons of the Sons of freedom being spiritual, a^
love, patience, and righteousness.

FINIS.

