A most true RELATION OF The last weeks passages in YORK, and HVLL, In two
Letters from thence. Discovering the strange Behaviors and rude affronts of
the Cavaliers and other malignant persons in those parts.

With diverse other matters of extraordinary note, and very remarkable.

Together with the Names of those Gentlemen which are entertained for the
PRINCE his Guard since he was made Captain of the Troops, viz.

Mr. Franck of Kneton.

Mr. George Grant

Brothers.
Mr. Henry Blackston Mr. Peter Blackston
Mr. Tho Hall of Hornby.

Mr. Francis Tunstell of Wicliff.

Mr. Bierlaies Son.

Mr. Cane of Stocton.

Mr. Tongue.

London Printed for John Wright, June 23d. 1642.

Sir,
I Excuse my not writing since our great meeting at York, for indeed we are
clear out of all hopes, and therefore but that you both desire, and well
deserve the pain, s^ would not have writ at this time, for the great meeting
at York, it was only a show, and nothing was done on any side, the King came
to the Moore with a mighty company of very brave men, when they came they did
provoke a shoute first, and then those that were next them did join with them,
and so marched up where the Trained Bands stood, and they beat their Drums, and
as they went the books were delivered, no Petitions could be delivered. This
week I was at York my self again, and there I saw many brave men, and it
was reported forty four Lords, who had all made protestation against the Order
of the Militia, not to obey the Parliament in it, and to that purpose their is
Commissions of Array to dispose the Militia to other men, as they report, it is
also reported at York, how they had 300 thousand pounds at Sea, and Ordnance
also to be landed at Scarborrow, as one of the Captains at York told me,
truly I think there was 100 thousand men at the great shout, a tenth part
whereof I am confident, would not have been against: he Parliament, though now
I think men begin to waver much, for there is many strange aspertions cast on
the Parliament by the Papists, as that Master Pym has married two or three
daughters with the money of the state, the Speaker they say is to have a great
deal for his part, the Committie at York for them a great deal, and Sir John
Hotham a good quantity, my Lord of Holland is very much spoken against at
York, as who should say, he has gotten more then his part, with these rumors
they make people unwilling to pay subsidies; many other strange inventions we
have a foot, for which it is strange the Parliament does not put out a
Declaration to clear themselves. The preaching of my Lords Butler, with
another Lords Coachman for a wager, the taking away the Common Prayer Book,
all these are frequent among the Papists, whose Priests never did labor with
that earnestness they now do but it is but some money matter as I am informed.
Yesterday Captain Leg, and Sir William Carnaby rid post into the North, and
this day my Lord of Newcastle is gone that way, I believe to garrison
Newcastle, for so we have heard this fortnight. It is doubtful whether we
shall have peace or war, the Troops of our Country Gentlemen for the
Princes Guard are ordered, and have received their Colors, and have Captains
over them; the young Gentlemen receive no pay; in this note you have their
names I know of. The King has put out a very sharp Answer to the last
Remonstrance, and about this day he will as is said, put forth one other in
which the malignant party in the Parliament House will be set out in their right
colors. I pray you send us nothing that is Printed at York for we have enough
of them. I did speak with your mother about the business, and your friend in
store will not fail, how the other will do I know not, but all your friends
are very well. Our Clergy are all against the Parliament; if the Bil against
pluralities had bin for 3 Benefices a piece, it had been more like to have had
their favor; we had a Parson that sent about to his Parrishioners, to forbid
them to sign any Petition, and now there is a Petition come from York, and
read in some Churches, and desired by the Kings servants to besigned to the
Parliament, as also their has been letters of thanks to the Country for their
pains in coming to York. All manner of things are cheap, nay even meat at
York is very cheap, though all that great company be there. One thing I
forgot, and that was before we went to shovt, Doctor Bean. came to persuade all
his friends about us to be for the King, and did protest solemnly, that if all
would go that way, the business would come to a happy end, and with him that
stout Captain Robinson came well provided to tear any Proclamation, or any
thing else that came from the Parliament. The Recusants pay their Rents at
York very fast. There was some passage on Monday at York with the Soldiers,
and thus it was, Alderman Vaux by his warrant had caused a Soldier to be
arrested, they did petition his Majesty, and order was sent to release the
party, but upon refusal Sergeant Major Duncome came with some soldiers, and
took the prisoner, whereupon the Soldiers went to the Aldermans house, the
Committee being then in it, and one of their servants came out with a Pistol,
and demanded their occasion therein, they took his Pistol from him, and broke
all the windows, pulled up the blew stoupes that were at his door, and if
Commissarie wilmot had not been in the house by chance, it is thought they had
done more ill, they trayled the stoups to their house of Guard, and cried
Roundheads. And when I was at York Captain Wharton bid one of his Soldiers to
let me see two of Alderman Vaux Roundheads, and he did, which was his stoups,
this was on Tuesday, I was there. It is also reported there is a general
pardon in drawing up, and only twelve persons to be excepted out of it, you
may show this letter if you please to your good friend and mine, all his are
very well, here was one of his house, just while I was writing this, his two
good Scholars were here on Monday: And thus with my daily prayers for your
happy returns, I rest

Yours in all

From Hull June 18. 1642.
Sir,
I Received yours on Friday last, and hope presently to receive another. On
Saturday last we had 2 Messengers from the King; the first said he was to
deliver his Message to the Committee, but while they were Assembling went his
ways, without delivering his errand. Another 4 hours after with a Letter to
the Mayor from his Majesty, who it seems had bin informed we were all in
combustion, commanding him to see that in these tumults, his Arms should not
be imbeasled away: the Relation of that b^bble here, which was the original of
this rumor, I suppose you had last week, as likewise of Mr. Cob, and Mr.
Consta^les Duel, about the senior Captaine-ship: the same morning came a letter
from the Sheriff, signifying of diverse complaints upon Oath, of outrages
committed by the garrison upon the Country, so for his satisfaction, there is
a full examination of Mr. Aldreds going out with 6 Carabines for his guard, but
without the least violence offered to any sent to York: I hear there has
this week bin great stirring in York, about an anti-Parliamentary petition,
many refusing, and in the Country about the same business, to which Selby
Town has generally subscribed, and some others, but it will be backed with a
good Protestation: the Militia is now fully settled in Lincolnshire, none
refusing, notwithstanding three threatening Letters to the contrary, sent to the
Committee: in Lincoln, the voluntieres are equal to the trained Bands, a
pursivant sent to apprehend the Mayor of Lincoln, was sent for by the
Commissioners to appear before them. In South division two head Constables
sent not out warrants, yet came the Country in to a man, and with the like
cheerfulness was it received in all parts. Thursday was the last Session, Sir
Edward Asbue, and Sir Christopher Wray will according to the Order be here on
Monday, there has bin all this week, and is still, a speech of the Kings
going to Lincoln: Captain Leg is gone to Newcastle, a regiment of foot and
200 Horse is to follow him, my Lord of Newcastle has sent for all his Horse to
York, and it is said they must follow him, none of the Lords are yet gone from
York, but my Lord Strange, who is gone into Lancashire, and not yet returned.
Some at York talk of a Petition from Cornwall with 10000 hands, as it was
presented to the King by my Lord Moon, proffering their lives and fortunes in
the anti-parliaments service, but I believe nothing of it, they deal so much
in that trade of false rumors, that little coming that way is to be credided:
yesterday there was an affront offered to the Committee at York. Alderman Vaux
his house and chamber windows broke with stones, by the soldiers, the
Committee being there, complaint was made, but no redress obtained, there is
much speech reported by some, and contradicted by others, coming thence lately
of two troops of Horse come to York, we know not well what to believe, but
certain there is great and daily resort of all sorts of people thither.

Your assured Friend to serve you, S. M.

FINIS.

