A VINDICATION OF THOSE, Whose endeavors is only to make the Earth a common
treasury, called DIGGERS.
OR, Some Reasons given by them against the immoderate use of creatures, or the
excessive community of women, called Ranting; or rather Renting.
FIrst, those that are called Diggers; do look upon the Ranting Practice, to
be a Kingdom without the man; which moth and rust do, may, and will corrupt;
and which thieves may break through and steal away; It is Kingdom that lies
in objects; As in the outward enjoyment of meat, drink, pleasures, and women;
so that the man within can have no quiet rest, unless he enjoy those outward
objects in excess; all which are vanishable. Therefore it is the Devils
Kingdom of darkness, and not the Kingdom of heaven nor true peace within.

Secondly, this outward life, in the abundant eating and drinking, and actual
community with variety of women is the only life of the five senses which is
the life of the Beast, or living flesh; And fights against reason, who is the
seed or tree of life, or the righteous man that is within. For when the
sensitive power, which is the son of bondage rules, then Reason which is the
son of freedom, is trod under foot, and in the absence thereof the whole
body, whole Families, nay, whole Nations are distempered; But when Reason rules
in the house or heart, not suffering the senses to run into excess in any
action: then the whole body enjoyes quiet rest and peace. Therefore that
immoderate ranting practice of the Senses, is not the true life of peace.

Thirdly, the Ranting practice is the proper Kingdom of Covetousness, or King
Lust of the flesh, which is the Kingdom of darkness, full of
unreasonablenesse, madness and confusion; it is the land of darkness,
bringing forth nothing but misery to the Inhabitants thereof, for,

Fourthly, it is destructive to the body, house, or Temple, wherein Reason, or
the spiritual power dwells; it brings diseases, infirmenesse, weaknesses and
rottenness upon the body, and so ruins the house about the man's ears, that
he cannot live in quiet peace; for diseases of body causes sorrow of mind. And
as moderation in any action brings peace, so excess brings diseases and death.
Therefore the unrationall ranting practice, is not the life of rightnesse, nor
peace.

Fifthly it brings vexation to the mind or man within* for when you want your
delight in the excessive copolation with Women, and in the super abundant
eating and drinking, which is the wastfull spending of the Treasures of the
Earth. As the Ranting practice is, Then Angar, rage and variety of vexations
possesses the mind, and inflames their hearts to quarrelling, killing, burning
houses or Corn, or to such like distructivenesse.

Sixthly, The Ranting practice is a peace breaker; it breaks the peace in
Families, and rents in pieces mankind, for where true Love has united a man
and woman to be Husband and Wife, and they live in peace, when this Ranting
power or king lust of the flesh comes in, he seperates those very friends,
causing both sides to run into the Sea of confusion, madness and destruction,
to leave each other, to leave their Children, and to live in discontent each
with other.

It pretends love to all men and women. But yet he is a beast that respects
persons; for the richest and fairest must be his associate.

Seaventhly, This excess of Feminine society, hinders the pure and natural
Generation of man, and spills the seed in vain, and instead of a healthful
groth of mankind it produces weakness and much infirmnesse, through immoderate
heat; so that either the Mother has much more pain in child bearing, or else
the child is filled with such infirmnesse, that it proves a burden to the Mother
or nurse, or through deseases he brings with him into the world he proves
either not long lived, or a fool, or else a sickly, weakly thing that is a
burden to himself: So that this moderat Ranting, is not a health full builder
up of the creation man, but a violent waster and destroyer of the health and
strength of man. This false generating fire, is the foundation of much
lamentation for children begotten through this forced immoderat heat of lust,
proves, furious, and full of rage, it is a breeder of much distemper, Wars,
and quarrels; It is one cause if not the chief of the rising up of the hairie
man, which is a destroyer of himself and others. And the mother and child
begotten in this manner, is like to have the worst of it, for the m^n will be
gone and leave them; and regard them no more then other women, like a Bull
that begets a Calfe, that never takes care neither for Cow nor Calfe, after he
has had his pleasure. Therefore you women beware, for this ranting practice is
not the restoring, but the destroying power of the creation.

Eighthly, The Ranting practice, is the support of Idleness, for they that are,
the Sons and Daughters of that unrationall power, neither can nor will work,
but live idle, like wandering bussi bodies, expressing and cheating others, that
are simple and of a civil flexible nature, so that by seeking their own
freedom they imbondage others which is the selfish, but not the universal
Love, for true Love seeks the preservation of others as of one self, or else
for want of food and raiment, through an inward proud sullenness, either
sterves their own bodies, or else through an inward rage endeavors the ruin
of others.

Ninthly, This Ranting power, or god, is full of sutletie to deceive others of
what they can, and is a nurse of hardness of heart against others, when he
has deceived them, for this is his nature, to gets what he can from others,
labors to eat up other and make them poor, and then to laugh and rejoice in
others poverty.

Tenthly, The Ranting power, would make this Covenant with all men, to put out
their eyes, or suffer him quietly to put them out, and to s^e by his eyes, and
to walk by his legs, and then he calls them high lighted creatures, otherwise
he tells them they live below them, and is in the dark, and rather then proud
civility would be counted ignorant, it will yield, and first stands looking and
saying, I can say nothing against this ranting practice, and then afterward
yields, and then is ensnared and taken by the suitle devcaring Ranting Beast.
But now he that obeyes reasons, Law of righteousness within, shall escape that
snare.

Eleventhly, This Ranting power, is the resurtection of the unclean doggish
beastly nature, ^t is the resurrection of the filth, unrighteouse power in all
his branches, and it is high now, but will rise higher, for it must rise to the
hight to show himself a complete man of darkness, that he may come to
judgment, and so be cast out of heaven, That is out of mankind.

For as he is upon his resurrection, so the man of pure life, reason, and
righteousness, is upon his resurrection too. Who is rising to purge and to
restore the ereation, and to set it down in peace. And these two men, one of
Light, and the other of darkness, now strives with great vehemency; the
sons of darkness may live in their vanishable peace and tread the sons of
light under feet but the sons of peace shall rise up, and take peace from the
Earth.

There is only two things, I must speak as an Advice in Love

First, let every one that intends to live in peace, set themselves with
dilligent labor to Till, Dig, and Plow, the Common and barren Land, to get
their bread with righteous moderat working, among a moderat minded people, this
prevents the evil of Idleness, and the danger of the Ranting power.

Secondly, Let none go about, to suppress that ranting power by their
punishing hand, for it is the work of the Righteous and rational spirit within
not thy hand without that must suppress it; But if thou will needs be
punishing: Then see thou be without sin thy self, and then cast the first
Stone, at the Ranter; Let not sinners punish others for sin, but let the power
of thy Reason and righteous action, shame and so beat down their unrationall
actings.

Would thou live in peace; Then look to thy own ways, mind thy own Kingdom
within, trouble not at the unrational government of other men's kingdoms
without; Let every one alone, to stand and fall to their own Master for thou
being a sinner, and strives to suppress sinners by force, thou will thereby
but increase their rage, and thy own trouble: but do thou keep close to the
Law of righteous reason, and thou shall presently see a return of the Ranters:
for that spirit within must shame them, and turn them, and pull them out of
darkness.

This I was moved to write, as a Vindication of the Diggers, who are slandered
with the Ranting action: And my end is only to Advance the Kingdom of peace,
in and among mankind, which is and will be torn in pieces by the Ranting
power, if reason do not kill this this fine headed, or sencitive Beast.

All you that are merely civil, and that are of a loving and flexible
disposition wanting the strength of reason: and the life of universal love,
leading you forth to seek the peace and preservation of every single body, as
of one's self; You are the People that are like to be tompted, and set upon an
torn into pieces by this devouring Beast; the Ranting power.

Febr. this 20. 1649. Gerrard Winstanley.

Therefore know all ye Lasivious, feedars, or Sarvers of your own bellies,
that ye are breeders of all foul filthy beastly and Abominable Children, which
come into the world to preach to that Nation, where they appear, what the
first sign sign of filthy Sin or lasivious feeding heats, begot for
lasivious feeding, causes lacivious acting which if they knew the resurrection
or eternal Judgment, they durst not act.

I am told there are some people goes up and down in the Country among such as
are friends to the Diggers gathering Monyes in their names. And they have a
note wherein my name and diverse others are subscribed. This is to certify that
I never subscribed my name to any such note. Neither have we that are called
Diggers received any money by any such Collections, therefore to prevent this
Cheat: we desire if any are willing to cast a gift in, to further our work of
Digging upon the Commons, that they would send it to our own hands by some
trusty friend of their own.

March this 4th. 1649. Your friend Gerrard Winstanley.

FINIS.

