Physical Rarities, Containing The most choice RECEIPTS OF PHYSIC, AND
CHYRURGERIE, FOR The Cure of all Diseases incident to Man's Body. Being a rich
Jewel, kept in the Cabinet of a famous Doctor in this Nation; stored with
admirable Secrets, and approved Medicines.

Published By RALPH WILLIAMS, Practitioner in Physic and Chyrurgerie.

LONDON, Printed for J. M. and are to be sold by George Calvert, at the half
Moon in Watling-street near S. Austins Gate. 1651.

To the READER.
COurteous and kind Reader, I must consesse that diverse learned men have taken
much pains in translating sundry books, containing most wholesome and
profitable precepts of Physic and Chyrurgery, wherein they have published, and
at large declared all such things as seemed necessary and expedient in Physic,
to be known in our Native and mother Tongue, to the intent, that every one that
would but take the pains to peruse them, and make trial of them, might benefit
themselves, and do much good to their acquaintance and friends.

To the same intent and purpose, I have collected this small (though
beneficial Treatise) I have thought fit to write something in the behalf and
praise thereof, finding many rare experimented medicines, which (put in
practice) may prove beneficial to studious and careful Practisioners, and I
doubt not but they may gain much credit and applause, both by their practice,
and by their cure (if they please to put them in practice) which will be little
expense unto them, though great credit and benefit.

There are many curious Medicaments therein contained, and diverse of them
approved by famous Physicians of good esteem: And therefore desire all who
affect their healths, to make use of such medicines as they shall find suitable
to the preservation thereof: as also, for such as are necessary for the
recovery of such as are sick and weak, being confident by Gods assistance, that
much happiness will redound to such as make trial of them.

And to the end, that this little volume might not be dispiseable, but
estimable and beneficial to the Commonwealth of England; I have thought fit to
write thus much in the praise thereof, wishing good success in its progress,
and to all that shall peruse and practice on it; and to all Students,
Practitioners, and well wishers to Physical practice, and that their studies,
labors, and practices may always be successful and prosperous, to the
honor and glory of God, the good of the Commonwealth, the benefit of their
Patients, and to their perpetual fame and renown; and therefore do wish that
every one of them would use all care to spend some part of their study, how to
benefit the Commonwealth, knowing the saying of Cicero (non solum nobis nati
sumus) but to be helpful to our friends and strangers, which is most
commendable. This I conceive should invite all well-wishers to the general
good, to imitate the example of diverse learned Physicians, who have not only
cured diverse out of charity, but also left most famous pieces of Physic and
Chyrurgery printed in English, for the good of all that will take the pains to
read them, and practice on their labors. And certain I am, that many by their
care and industry following their prescriptions, have gained much benefit, and
great esteem thereby, and though ignorant in Physic, or the practice thereof,
became Practitioners, and famous by others labors and endeavors, and
successful also in what they undertook. I hope the same happiness will
befall such as will take the pains and care in reading this Treatise, and
likewise make trial of the medicaments herein contained, which is and shall be
desire and prayer of

R. W.

A Table.
A
Sovereign plaster for any ach 154. For an Ague 167, 168. For the quartan ague
140, 160. Adder stung 172. For an Adder crept into a man's body 172. For him
that has eat or drunk poison 172. For aching bones in the Legs or Joints 199.
For the ach in the Feet 120. For aching bones in the feet 120. For aches in the
arms 122. For aching in the wrest 122. For S. Anthonies fire 208.
B
For the Breasts when they be broken 49. For a sore breast 50. A healing salve
for a sore breast 50. For a swelling in a woman's breast 50. For abundance of milk
in a woman's breast 54. For all manner of stopping in any breast 51. For all
diseases of the breast, and to clear the voice 51. To clear the breast 52. For a
sore breast 52. For to make the breasts shrink, and for to heal them 52. For a
woman that lacks milk in her breast 152. To dissolve a hard belly 75. For any
hard belly that is sore 75. For diseases of the belly 76. A drink to destroy all
evils of the belly 76. For blanes, and to skin sores 156. Medicines for a
bruise 157. For the biting of a mad dog 169. The biting of all kind of venomous
beasts 169, 173. The bursten to cure 183. Weakness of the back 83. For the
pain in the back 83 Medicines for burning and scalding 139. For one burned with
a Match 139. For burning with Gunpowder 139. For burning with Wildfire 139.
For the bleeding of the Nose, to stop any other place 141 Another 205. Another
ibid. For the pain in the reins of the back 84. For the bloody Flux 86.
Another for the same 87. To avoid bruised blood 87. A gentle purge for the
blood without fear 87. For all evils in the bladder 78. For wind in the belly
78. For spitting blood 25. For boil to ripen 188. For one, if bursten six
years, man or child 183.
C
MEdicines for a Canker 138. For a Canker, or Fistula warts 138. To cure a
Cataract 194. For one that is costiff in childbirth 192. Another 204. For cut
finger, or hand, 204. For the Consumption 188. A Cordial for the burning Fever
186. For to keep a child from Convulsion fits 184. For chap'd lips 40.
Medicines for the Colic 78. For the Wind-collick 76. For the Colic a
precious medicine 78. A Sovereign medicine for the Colic and Stone 79.
Another ibid. For the Colic of the Stomach ibid. For the Cramp 152. Another
for the same 153. For the Convulsion 178. Another. 184, 199. For a child
still-born 184. For a dry Cough, 47. For the Cough 48. Another for the same 49.
Another 206. For the Chin Cough 48. For Corns in the Toes 121. Another for
chaps 122.
D
DRawing plaster for the Dropsy 135. Another for the Dropsy 136. Another for
the Dropsy that swells 137.
E
FOr the Eyes 6. An excellent medicine for sore eyes, and Megrim in the head
11. For a rheum in the eyes 6. For the white that does grow over the black of
the eye 7. For bloud-shot eyes 7. For a blast in the eye 7. To clear the sight
7. For bleer eyes, 8. Water for dimnesse of the sight 8. Another for the same
8. A powder that takes away the redness of the eyes 8. A regiment for fore
eyes. 8. To clear the sight or redness of the eyes 16. Another for the same
ibid. For a pin and a web 19. Another for the same 16. An excellent Water for
sore eyes 9. For a hurt in a man's eye by a stroke 19. Another for the same 10.
For watery or bleer eyes 10. To save a man's sight a long time 11. To draw rheum
back from the eyes 11. For a pearl and web in the eyes 11. For the small pocks
in the eye 11. For blind eyes 5. For sore eyes 14. For a wound in the eye 15.
For sore and dim eyes 15. A water for sore eyes 17 Another for the same ibid.
For a perle and flem growing over the eye 18. For an Earwig, or worm in the Ear
18. To make one hear that is deaf 18. Another for the same 19. A water to help
hearing 19. For the pain in the ears, and difficult hearing 19 Another for the
same 20. To draw an Earwig out of the Ear 20.
F
FOr the Tertian Fever 303. For a saucy stained face 38. For a copper face 38.
A diet for a copper face 39. For a red face 39. For worms in the face 39.
Another 41. To make the face fair 40. For a white scurfe in the face 40. For
fevers in children, or women in childbed, an excellent medicine, called salt
of Coral. 190. To put away freckles in the face 41. Another for the same 43.
For blanes in the face 42. For foul blasts in the face 42. For a red face full
of pimples 43. To take away small pocks from the face, that they shall not be
seen. 44. To make the face fair 44. For a felon 146. To break a felon hastily
161. To destroy a felon 147. For the falling sickness that does not foam 164.
Another for the same 165. For the flux in the belly 84. Far the bloody stix 84.
For all manner of flixes whatever 85. To stop the bleeding of the fundament.
86. For the falling out of the fundanent 107. Another 108. For a fig in the
fundament 108. For a red swelling in the foot 119.
G
TO take away the pain in the Gout 129. Another for the same 130. A Glister
113. An approved medicine for the Gout 126. For the Gout in the hand 127. For
the Gout, and all manner of aches 127. Another 128. For the Gout in the feet
128. For the cold Gout 129. Another for the same 129. For the festring Gout
that makes holes 130. An especial medicine for the Gout 133. Another approved
for the Gout 133. Another 134, 135. For the Gums gnawn and fretted with humors
36. A water for a canker in the gums 36. Another for the same. ibid. To make a
gum hard to hold the teeth 37. For rotting of the gums 37. For the guts that be
fretted 81. For wind in the guts 81. For the pain in the guts 82.
H
A Remedy for the universal pain in the head 1. Another for the same 1. For
the pain in the head 1. For all manner of head aches 2. To purge the head 3. A
water for the rheum in the head, and how to put away the Palsy 2. For the
megrim in the head 3. For to stop and dry rheum up 3. For a scald head 3. For
the rheum in the head 4. For the weakness in the brain 4. For hair falling
from the head 4. An excellent medicine for the head 5. Another for the same 5.
Lightness of the head: 5. To purge the head of ill humors 6 For trembling of
the heart 72 Another 72 For the swounding of the heart 73 A comfortable
medicine to restore the spirits of the heart in Consumption 74 For a swelling
or rising about the heart, 74 For the fatness about the heart 74 To put away
venom from the heart ibid For gnawing about the heart 74 Things good for the
heart 74 Against swounding 75 For hands that be chapped 123 Another 123
I
JAundies 64 Black Jaundies 64 Another for the same 64 Yellow Jaundies 65
Imposthhumes in a man's body 147 To break an Imposthume 148 To put out an
Imposthume without peril 148 For the Itch in a man 161
K
MEdicines for the swelling in the knee 115 For the knee Gout 116
L
AN ointment for the Liver to make a good digestion 60 A restorative for the
Liver and Lungs 61 For the liver grown 62 For the heat of the liver 62 For one
liver-burnt 62 For the stopping of the liver 63 To preserve a man from stopping
of the Liver 63 For the liver 63 An excellent medicine for the Cough of the
lungs 70 Another for the same 71 To make a Water that is restorative, that if a
man's Lungs be wasted therewith, it will restore them again 71 To comfort the
Lungs 71 To open the Lungs 71 To help a woman of Lask in child bed by stoppage
85 To cause a Lask 86 To keep one Laxative 86 For Legs that be swollen 116
Another 119 Legs that be swollen, a plaster 117 For Legs that be sore 117 For
Legs that be sore, a Pultis 117 A medicine for a Leg that is swollen, and is
not red 117 Another 117 To heal a sore Leg coming of an old cause 117
M
For spitting blood 25 For a stinking Mouth 25 For a stinking breath 26 To
recover a man's speech 26 For the mouth that is flaid with heat 26 For the Canker
in the mouth 26 Another 27 Another 28 Against the inward eating sore in the
mouth 27 The falling of the Evola 28 For the Canker in the mouth 28 For the
measles 148 To take away the scarrs of the small pocks, or measles. 148 For the
measles or Shingles 149 Against the biting of a mad dog 169 Another ibid
Another ibid For the Morphew 141 Another 142 For the black Morphew 142 For the
mother fits excellent 196
N
FOr the Nose For the fleshy humor in the Nose 21 For the bleeding of the Nose
21 Stop the bleeding at the Nose 23 For stinking in the Nose 21 A singular
medicine to stop blood 22 To kill a Canker in the Nose 22 For pushes and
pimples in the Nose 24 A plaster for the swelling of the Navell 82 For a
child's Navell that is sore with crying 83 To cause an Nail to come 122 For
Nipples that be sore 203
P
FOr the Plurisie 68 Another ibid Another ibid. (...) ibid A regiment for the
Plurifie 69 For the Palsy that sometimes takes a man's speech away 145 Another
ibid An excellent drink for the Palsy 146 Medicines for the small pox 149 For
the pock holes 150 To drive out the pox 151 For the French pox 152 Against
poison 173 Against the plague 175 Plague water 177 For the Piles or Emerods 169
For the Emerods or Piles 110 Piles 111 Another ibid For Emerods that have paps
111 Piles or Emerods 112 For a prick with a thorn 123 Another for the same 124
To draw out a prick or thorn 123 Another for the same 124 For the pain in the
Stomach by cold 181
R
For a Ringworm 170 Rehume in the head 179 Another for the same 179 For the
Ring-worm 208
S
MEdicines for Sciatica 103 Another approved 193 Another 193 Sciatica in the
hips 105. Stone and Strangury 99. For all manner of Gouts, and the Sciatica,
and Consumption of the members Strangullion 76. A water for the Strangullion
76. Swage and cool a swollen sore Leg 121. For a swelling in any place 121. For a
scald, or burn, and chiefly for the Emerods 190. For a swelling in a man's body
137, For to get out the fire by a scalding 148. To stop blood in a vein 148. To
stop blood suddenly in a wound 148. To stop blood if the Master-Vein be cut.
141. Salt of Coral, to make it, and excellent virtues thereof, as to cure the
fevers in Children, and women in Childbed 197. For the Wind in the Side 66
Stich in the side 66 Stich in the left side 66 Another for the same ibid. To
know when one has a stitch, whether it be of Wind or Plurisie ibid Stich at
the heart ibid Assuage a swelling 157 For a scab in man or woman 161 For the
itch in the hands that come of Worms 161 To destroy all manner of scabs, dry or
moist 162 For the dry scab 162 To make one sleep 166 Pain in the Stomach by
cold 181 Medicines for the stone, etc. 88, 89, 90. For the Spleen 54 For the
wasting of the Spleen, and for the Dropsy 54 Medicines for the Stomach 56, 57,
58, 59, 60, 61.
T
TO make Teeth white 29 To keep teeth from worms 29 A regiment for the teeth
30, 31. Another 32. To take away the toothache in half an hour 32 A noteable
medicine for the toothache 32 To make teeth white 32 For the toothache 32 To
remove teeth 33 Water for the teeth 33 For a Canker and tooth ach 33 To make
childrens teeth come 34 To fasten teeth 35 For worms in teeth 35 For tooth ach
35 For a sore throat that is inflamed 45, 46 For hoarsenesse in the throat 45,
46 Canker in the throat 46 For Quinsie in the throat 46 Canker in the throat 46
For stopping of pipes 47 To kill a Tetter or ring-worm 192 Medicines for the
thighs that be stiff 113 For the aching bones of the thigh 113 To knit the
sinews and veins in the thigh 114 To make an ointment to assuage the swelling,
and to keep sinews from shrinking 114 For thighs that be swollen 114 For
sinews shrunk in the thighs 114
V
FOr an Vncom 13 An excellent vomit 199
W
MEdicines for the Worms 80 The Worms in young children 80 Medicines for all
sorts of wounds and sores 153 A good water for every sore 153 To heal a wound
158 A water to heal all manner of wounds in a short space 159 To heal a wound
in ten days 160 To make that flesh shall not grow in a wound 160 Diet for him
that is wounded 160 For warts to take away 165 Medicines to take away Wens 171
Against wind in the Stomach 174 Against the worms in children 18, 206 Felon
and Whitlow 183 Another 205. For the whites to cleanse and stay them 191. 214
For a wound that is full of blood 141 Water to comfort the Vitalls most
excellent 143
Y
REmedy for a man's Yard 99 Against the erection of the yard 100 To heal a man's
yard that is sore 100 For the swelling in any yard 100 For the pain in a man's
yard thorough gravel 101 A water for a sore yard 101 For being burnt with a
harlot 102 For a man's stones that hang down long 102 For him that cannot make
water 102, 103, 104
Medicines for the Head.
A remedy for the universal pain of the Head.
FIrst, beware of all things which do hurt the Head, as Garlic, Onions,
Chiboles, Wine, stooping down with thy Head, extreme labor, and such like;
and beware of surfeiting and drunkenness, and purge thy Head with Gargacies,
and sternutations, and purge thy Head and thy stomach twice per week, with
pills of Coch, or such like, and be whole.

A remedy for the Head, whatsoever the pain be.
TAke an handful of Betanie, an handful of Cammomell, and a handful of
Vervain leaves picked, stamp them and sees them in black Wort, or in Ale for
went of Wort, and in the latter end of the seething, put to it a little Cummin
brayed, the powder of a Hartshorn, and the yolks of two Eggs, and Saffton a
little, and stir them well together; and lay a plaster hot over all the
forehead and Temples. This is an excellent remedy: also for the Megrim, it
shall pierce the better, if you shall add to the medicine, a little Vinegar.

For pain in the Head.
TAke Rue, Heyhoad, Camomell flowers, Betany, Vervain, Mints, Hillwort, red
Fennel, Wormwood and Sothernwood, of each a handful, and wash them, and shred
them small, and sees them in water, and mingle the herbs with wheat bran, and
make a plaster and lay it on thy mold as hot as thou can suffer it, and bind
it on with a Kerchief, and thou shall be whole in short space.

For all manner of Headaches.
TAke the grease of a Heart, and mingle it with Oat meal, and Sorrel, and
temper them well, then lay it plaisterwise to thy temples. This is proved.

To purge the Head.
TAke the juice of Primrose, and milk of a Cow, and with a quill blow it into
thy nostrills, and this will purge the head.

A water for the Rheum in the Head, and how to put away the Palsy.
TAke a red Onyon, and break it small, and sees it in a little Verjuice, and
put thereto a little Honey clarified, and when they be well sod together, put
thereto a great spoonful of Mustard, and let it sees long together; then lay
the sick upright, and he shall find ease: Do this three days twice per day,
and be whole.

For the Megrim in the Head.
TAke sour Bread, and Chickweed, and bray them together, and boil it in
Vinegar, and so bind it to the grieved place, or take and sees Barley well in
water, and as it seeths, put in Betanie, and other good herbs for the Head, and
when they be well sodden, bind them to thy head.

To stop and dry up Rheum.
TAke Cummin-seed, a Nutmeg and a little Baysalt, every one beaten to powder
alone, and spread the same upon hurds of Flax, in a cloth, and hold the same
over the perfume of Frankincense, and lay it hot to your Head.

For a scalded Head.
TAke the liver of a Thornback and sees it by it self, and six Elacampana
roots, and sees them by themselves in water three hours, and put thereto
three handfulls of Houseleek stamped, and strained through a cloth, and make an
ointment thereof, and anoint the Head therewith, and if the hair be gone, take
a handful of Wool, and bray it hot to powder, then take two spoonfulls of
Honey, and anoint thy Head therewith; where it is pilled, and thy hair will
soon come again, as thick as in any other place of thy Head.

For the Rheum in the Head.
TAke and sees Pimpernell in Wine, and drink it in the Evening hot, and in the
morning cold; this will help thee: Or take and stew Onions in Water, in a close
pot, and bath thy Head, thy mouth, and thy nose therewith, and it will help
thee.

For the weakness of the Brain.
TAke a handful of Rosemary, Sage, Marjoram, Hysop, Betany, the leaves, and
roots, and the seeds and roots of Pyony; wash all these said herbs, and put
them into a pottle of fair Water, and let them sees together until the one
half be wasted; then take out the herbs, and put to the said water almost half
a pint of Honey clarified, and let it boil well together with a dram of
Stecados, knit in a linen cloth; and let it boil till the sweetness of the
Honey be boiled out: then take out the Stecados, and put thereto a quarter of
an ounce of Cinnamon, three Nutmegs well bruised, and put them to the same
liquor, and sees them together a good while; then strain it through a linen
cloth, and so use to drink it morning and evening, and it shall comfort thy
Brain.

For hair that fails on thy Head.
TAke and bray Lineseed, and mingle it with oyl-Olive, and when it is well
beaten together, anoint thy Head therewith three or four times, and this will
heal thee, or take oil of Tartar and warm it, and then rub your Head with it,
or any place that is scald, eight or nine days, and the hair will come again.

An excellent medicine.
TAke a farthing worth of Pellitory of Spain, and a quarter of Stavesacre seed,
and beat both together, and then drink a draught of Malmsey, and put a
spoonful of this powder into your mouth, rolling it up and down, till your
mouth be hot, and full of phlegm, and then spit it all out; then take a stool
and set before you, and lay a cushion under your knees, and set a basin under
your mouth, and gape as wide as you can, and then the phlegm will void from you
out of all the members of your Head, and if it come too fast, hold over your
Head to the basin, and let it go; use this once in a year, and you shall be the
better for it, a long time.

A remedy for the Head.
TAke the juice of Ivy leaves, mixed with Oil, and Vinegar, and rub therewith
your temples, and your nosthrills.

For lightness in the Head.
TAke small tents of linen cloth, and dip them in Cinnamon water, and put them
into thy nosthrills, and thou shall be helped presently.

To purge the Head of evil humors.
TAke the root of Pellitory of Spain, and chew a piece thereof on either side
of thy mouth, between thy Gumms, and close thy mouth fast, till the water
comes down; then let the water go forth, but hold the root still a quarter of
an hour.

For pain in the Head.
TAke the juice of Ivy, that grows upon trees, and oil of Roses, and mingle
them together with Wine, and anoint your Head therewith, and this will make it
leave aching. Probatum.

For the Eyes.
FIrst, if it do come of Rheum or corrupt blood, purge Rheum, and blood; if
it do come otherwise, be let blood in a vein called Mediana, and use local
waters as waters, to mundifie the place, and then use Salves sanative.

For a white that does grow over the black of the Eye.
FIst purge the Rheum with Anacardine, and Sternutations, or Gargarices, and
then make a plaster made with the white of two Eggs, and beat it well together,
and then put to it a little Honey, and after that put to it Flax, or Tow, and
to bedward lay it over the Eyes, and let it lie all night, and in the morning
wash thine Eyes with cold water, and a fine cloth; do this three nights one
after another, and be whole.

For a bloodshotten Eye.
TAke the white of two new laid Eggs and beat them to a watrish spome; then
put Tow unto it, and three nights together lay it to thine Eye, and bind it
fast, and renew it every night, and wear a green cloth before thine Eye.

For a blast in the Eye.
MEddle not with it with medicines, but wear before thine Eye, a piece of black
Sarsenet, and eat neither Garlic, nor Onions, nor drink no Wines, nor strong
Ale, and it will away.

A water to clear the sight.
TAke Fennel, Vervain, Roses, Salendine, and Rue, of each two ounces, and
distill them, and wash thine Eyes therewith, for it is good for all manner of
sore Eyes.

For blear Eyes.
TAke the juice of Wormwood, and mingle it with water made of the white of an
Egg, and put it into thine Eyes, and it shall put the blood and aching away.

A water to clarify the dimnesse of the sight.
TAke the juice of Fennel, and Salendine, Rue, and Eyebright, of each two
ounces, Honey an ounce and a half, Aloes, Time, and Sarcocell, of each half an
ounce, the caul of a Capon, Chicken or Cock, two drams; Nutmegs, Cloves, and
Saffron, of each a dram, Sugar Candy six drams, put all into a limbeck of
glass, and distill it, and of this water put into your Eyes, and if you could
get the liver of a Hee-Goat, and mix with the said things in the distillation,
that water will be of much greater virtue, and almost without comparison.

Another for the same.
TAke the green Walnuts husks and all from the trees, with a few Walnut leaves,
and distill thereof a water, to drop into your eyes.

A singer powder that dries and takes away the redness of the Eyes.
TAke Tutty prepared an ounce, Antimonie half an ounce, Pearls two drams, red
Coral a dram and a half, pound all these together very fine, and keep them in
a box of Tyn, and use when thou have need.

A Regiment for them that have sore Eyes.
TAke heed that you always keep your body loose, and abstain from fire, smoke,
wind, dust, and over hot and cold air, and from weeping, and long reading of
small letters, from over long watching, over much drinking of Wine, and eating
late, for all these are noisome to the Eyes; also all vaporous things, as
Onions, Leeks, Garlic, Mustard, Pease, and Beans are very dangerous; forbear
day sleep, and behold green things, clear, and precious.

To clear the sight, or for redness of the Eyes.
TAke Salt and Ginger, and make it in fine powder, and temper it with white
Wine, and let it so stand a day and a night, then take off the thinnest ryne,
and wet your Eyes with a feather to bedward.

For a Pin and Web in the Eye.
IF there be a Pin and Web in the Eye, or other blemish in the ball of the Eye,
take water of Pimpernell, Vervain, or Salendine.

To make a good water for sore Eyes.
TAke Fennel, Rue, Eufrace, Vervain, torn Mintill, Betany, red Roses, Endive,
Sowthistles, called Chicken meat, Pimpernell, red Salendine, Filago, the leaves
of Piony, the leaves of white Vine, March, Egremony, Sinkfoil, called Woodbine,
of each a like quantity, bray them well together, and the first day lay them in
white Wine, the second day lay them in the Urine of a man-child, the third day,
lay them in the Milk of a woman, that feeds a man-child, the fourth day, in
clean Honey, and then distill them with a clean fire softly, and keep that water
well, for it is excellent.

For a hurt in a man's Eye that comes with a stroke.
TAke Betany two handfulls, and beat it small in a mortar, and put thereto the
white of an Egg, and break it with the other in a mortar, and take of the same
liquor, and put it into thine Eye, and lay some upon the Eye, and bindit fast,
and do so nine days, and be whole.

Another for the same.
TAke Egremony and bray it, and temper it with white Wine, and an Egg, and
make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the outside of thine Eye, and if were
almost out, it would heal it without doubt.

For the Eyes that run full of water, and be bleared.
TAke of the juice of Rue four spoonfulls, and two of Honey, and mingle them
together, and when you go to bed, put thereof into your Eyes and keep it in
together, and use this, and it will help thee. Or take two or three roots of
red Fennel, and the leaves also, and a branch of Salendine, and a good race of
white Ginger, pared and beaten flat, and if one be not great enough take two
races, put all these into half a pint of running water and cover it, and use to
put of this water into your Eyes, when you go to bed, and an hour before you
rise in the morning; when you take thereof strain it.

To save a man's sight a long time good
TAke a crop of Rue, and another of Camomile, and eat them fasting, with a fig
or two three days in a week, and this will save thy sight.

To draw Rheum back that falls into the Eye.
TAke an Egg, and roast it hard, and slit it into two parts, and lay it hot to
the nape of the neck, and thou shall find ease presently.

A medicine for sore Eyes, and for the Megrim in the head.
TAke the white of a new laid Egg clean taken from the yolk, and a spoonful
of white Ginger, and a spoonful of strong white Vinegar made of Malmsey, or
white Wine, and a spoonful of clean Rose water; but first the white of the
Egg must be well beaten, and then to the oil of the Egg put your other things
above written, and beat them all together, then take Flax, as much as will make
two plasters, for either Temple one, with a cloth, and dip it into the
medicine, and bind upon every Temple one with a cloth, and take heed the
medicine do not touch your Eyes, and do this three or four nights together, and
every morning the Eyes will cleave together with the Gum; but this medicine
has brought to sight them that were eight weeks stark blind.

For a Pearl and Wb in the Eye.
TAke fine white Ginger and grate it upon a whetstone, and then beat fine a
little white Coperas, and put to it, and when the Patient goes to bed, put
some of it with a quill into his Eyes, and when it has been there a little
while, take ground Ivy beaten, and strained, with woman's Milk, and put three or
four drops into your Eyes evening, and morning, after the white Coperas has
been in your Eyes half an hour. Probatum est.

A Medicine to clear the sight
TAke clean Rose water a quantity in a sawcer, and take clean Myrrh as much as
a nut, and break it to powder small, and bind it in a clean linen cloth, and
let it lie in the Rosewater twelve hours, and then the water will wax somewhat
red of the Myrrh, then take of this water, and put it into your Eye, and this
will clear the sight very well. Probatum est.

To make a precious water for sore Eyes, that be fair to look on, and yet
cannot see with them.
TAke Smallage, and red Fennel, Rue, Betany, Vervain, Pimpernell, Eyebright,
Sage, and Salendine, of every one of these a quartern, and wash them clean, and
stamp them in a very fair vessel, and take the powder of fifteen Pepper corns,
and a pint of good white Wine, and three spoonfulls of good live Honey, and
fifteen spoonfulls of the water of a man child that is very young, then put all
these together, and let it boil over the fire a little, and then strain it
through a clean cloth, and keep it in a vessel or glass well stopped, and
when you will occupy it, put some of it into your Eyes with a feather, and if
it dry away in the glass, then put a little white Wine to it, and this is good
for all sore Eyes; if thy Eyes be never so sore, in fifteen days it will heal
thee. Probatum est.

For a Pearl and Web in the Eye.
TAke fine white Ginger, beaten fine into powder, and searse it, and sees it a
great while in good white Wine, and put it into a fair vessel of Latten well
stirred, and let it stand in the vessel till it look green, then put it into a
glass, and when you have need of it, use it with a little white Coperas at the
dressing; Or for the Web in the Eye, take the gall of an Hare, and clarified
Honey by even portions, and mingle them together, and lay it on the Web, and
within three nights the Web shall break and save the sight. Probatum est.

A Medicine for any that have the small Pox fallen into their Eyes.
TAke Pimpernell and stamp it, and strain it, and take the juice thereof and
drop it into your Eyes, where the small Pox is, with a feather, morning and
evening, and this is a special good Medicine for a Pin, a Web, or a Pearl in
the Eye.

For a Pin and a Web.
TAke the Ivy leaves, that grow upon an Ash tree, wipe them clean with a cloth,
and stamp them and strain them, with Woman's milk, if it be a man that has a
Pearl in the Eye, strain it with the milk of a woman that nurseth a Girl; if a
woman have a Pearl, then with the milk of a Boy, and the sorer the Eye is, the
more of the juice you must take, and less of the milk, and drop this Medicine
into thine Eye with a feather, morning and Evening, and twice in the afternoon.
This is proved.

For sore Eyes.
TAke the juice of Houseleek, Woman's milk, Rose water, or Woodbine water, and
the white of a new laid Egg well beaten, the froth taken away, and beat all
these together, and dip in Flax, and say it to your Eyes when you go to bed.
Probatum est.

For Eyes that are swollen.
TAke two spoonfulls of Woman's milk, one spoonful of Rose water, the pap of a
roasted Apple, and the yolk of a new laid Egg, and boil all these together in a
sawcer upon a chafing dish of coals until it be thick, and spread it upon a
little cloth of the bigness of the Eyes, and lay it to lukewarm, one day and a
night, or until you see them something assuaged, and then wash them with
Woman's milk. Probatum est:

I have known a woman heal many blind people with this medecin following.
TAke Daysie roots, Betany flowers, Pimpernell, and red Fennel, stamp them, and
strain them, with stale Ase, and drink of this evening and morning, and lay
outwardly to thy Eyes, Rose Water, Woman's milk, and the white of an Egg with
Tow, being well beaten together: the drink will be better, if you pound, and
put the juice of Cheslocks, a worm so called, that is between the bark and the
body of trees commonly, and then the juice of the said worm, put into the sore
Eyes, heals them.

A medicine wherewith one was helped that had a prong thrust into the white of
his Eye.
TAke the right ground Ivy, Salendine, the green of a Goose Tird, and Woman's
milk, and put them together in a Glass, then when they be settled, power out
the clearest, and put it into thine Eyes, and this will make thee whole.

A precions medecin for sore and dim Eyes.
TAke a handful of Time, a handful of Vervain, a handful of Rose leaves, a
handful of brown Fennel, and when you have washed those herbs clean, put them
into a Stillitory, and then put thereto a pint of white Wine, and eight
ponniworth of pure white Coperas, and distill the same, and put it into a
glass, and use to wash your Eyes therewith. Probatum est.

Another for sore Eyes.
TAke red Rue, Smallage, Vervain, Maidenhair, Ivy, Sengreen, Walwort, and red
Fennel, of each a handful, wash them clean, and lay them in good white Wine a
day and a night, and after put them all into a stillitory, and still them; for
the first water will be like gold, the second like silver, and the third like
Balm, and keep it in a glass and use it.

A special medecin for Eyes, first to clarify the sight, and curable to all
Passions to Eyes, as has been proved many times, and if the Eyes be therewith
washed, or else one drop of clear water put therein, it clears the sight, and
is much profitable to strained Eyes, it will destroy a Pearl, overcomes the
Megrim, and heals any Eye that is smitten with a stroke.
TAke red Fennel, Rue, Eufrace, Vervain, Betany, red Roses, Grape leaves,
Appium, Egrimony, ground Ivy, that grows upon an oak, and of all these take
even portions, and it must be put four days and four nights in this manner
following: the first day and night in white Wine, the second day and night in
Water of a Manchild, a Virgin, the third day and night in Woman's milk, the
fourth day and night in clean Honey: and this done, take all the herbs, and put
them into a stillitory, and the water that comes thereof ye shall put into a
vial, and use this as aforesaid, and in this water put the fourth part of an
ounce of Camphere beaten in a mortar, this is an excellent medicine.

To make a precious water for sore eyes, and for all manner of sores, as
follows.
TAke red Roses, Smallage, Rue, Vervain, Maidenhaire, Eufrasia, Eyebright,
Endive, Sengreen, Walwort, red Fennel, and Salendine, of every one of these
half a quartern; wash them, and lay them in good white Wine twenty four hours,
and then distill them, and the first water will be like gold, the second like
silver, and the third like balm; keep it well in a vial or glass, for it is
worth any Balm for any manner of evil, or sore Eye, and this has been proved
many times.

To make a water for sore Eyes, which is excellent.
TAke the filing of Brass, of Iron, Lead, of Steel, and of Gold, and put it
one day in the water of a clean Virgin to steep, the second day put it in white
Wine, being hot, the third day in the juice of Fennel, the fourth day in the
milk of an Ewe, the fifth in red Wine, the sixth day in three whites of Eggs,
and then put it into a Stilletory, and distill it with a soft fire, and keep
the water in a vessel, this water is right excellent and precious for a man's
sight, and destroys the Leprosy.

A medicine for the Pearl and Phlegm grown over the Eye.
TAke the Gall of an Hare, and boil it with as much Honey as the Gall. Probatum
est.

Medicines for the Ears.
For an Ear-wig, or Worm in the Ear.
TAke the Juice of Wormwood, Rue, and Sothernwood, of each a like much, and
mingle them together, and put it into the Ear, and that will slay the Worm that
is in any man's head within five nights at the furthest, and lay some of the
substance of the herbs plaister-wise.

To make one hear that is deaf.
TAke green Elm, and lay it amidst the Fire and take the water that comes out
at the ends thereof a spoonful, and take a spoonful of the juice of Sengreen,
and a spoonful of Eels grease, that is a kind of a black Eel, of the gobbin
next the navell, and boil them together a little over the fire, and then put
the liquor into a glass, and put thereof into thine ears when thou art in
bed, and within a day thou shall be whole: but look that the liquor be
milk-warm: or take the juice of Betany, and let it rest a good while, and then
take black Soap, and the juice together, and put it into thine Ears.

Another for the same.
TAke Camomill, Melil ot, Marjoram, Calamint, Hysop, Wormwood, Pennyroyall,
Stethados, Mints, of each a handful, boil them in running water one hour, and
dip a cloth therein, and hold it hot to the Ear that the heat may enter into
thy head, and after stop thy Ears with cotton or black wool, that no cold may
enter, and this will help the hearing.

A water to help the hearing.
TAke and distill Sorrel, or Wormwood in a common stilletory, and take four
drops of either of the same waters, whether you will, and put into the ear
lukewarm.

For pain in the Ears, or for default of hearing.
TAke the oil of sweet Almonds, and drop it into thine ear, and it helps the
pain speedily; also milk sodden, and put into a stone pot with a narrow mouth,
and the sore ear holden over the pot, that the vapor of the milk may ascend
into the care; this takes away the pain, and breaks the imposthume of the
head, this is proved trrue.

Another for the same.
TAke the oil of a silver Eel, with black wool of a Ram, betwixt the hinder
legs, and the flank, it helps presently the pain, and will cause the Ear to
run. Also the oil of a Weasle or Mole helps the hearing very well, but you
must make it in this sort, when the Weasle or Mole is stripped of his skin,
then put the said Weasle or Mole into an earthen Jug, and stop the Jug very
close, and put the pot into seething water, and let it stand there three
hours, and then take it out, and put the clear substance into a Glass.

To draw an Ear-wig out of the Ear.
TAke a piece of an old Apple, and put it into the Ear of the Patient, and lie
down all night upon the same side, and in the Morning pluck away the Apple
quickly, and the Worm will come forth. [This helped a Woman in Oxfordshire] Also
another Woman had one of the said Worms in her Ear, and she took Aqua vitae,
and dropped it into her Ear, and stopped her Ear with Bumbast, and laid her
down on the same side, and was helped presently; but if once will not serve, do
it two or three times.

Medicines for the Nose.
For a fleshy humor growing in the Nose, or for a bottle Nose.
TAke of the Powder of Dragagant with a little Honey, and make a Tent thereof,
and introduce it into your Nose, or Nostrills, or take the Juice of Black Ivy,
with a little Cotton, and make a Tent, and put it in your Nostrills.

For bleeding at Nose.
TO restrict the Blood which does flow out of a man's Nose, let him smell to a
Hogs Tird, and lay his Stones, and Cods in Vinegar. If it be a Woman, let her
lay her breasts in Vinegar, or else exhaust an Ounce or more of Blood out of a
Vein called Cephalica.

For stinking of the Nose.
TAke Cloves, Ginger, and Calamints, of each alike, and sees them in white
Wine, and therewith wash thy Nose, and after put in Powder of Pierimonie to
provoke sneesing: Also if the cause of thy stinking come from thy Stomach,
first help thy Stomach, as shall be said in the Remedies for the Stomach.

A singular Medicine to stop blood.
TAke Swines Dung, as hot as you may have it from the Swine, and when you have
cleansed the congealed Blood out of the Nose, wring it through a Cloth, and let
that juice pierce into the side, from whence the Blood comes, and by the Grace
of God it shall stanch anon. Moreover it is good to bind the Feet and Arms, as
hard as can be suffered with a Cord or Lace, the stronger the better. Or take
strong Vinegar, and put it into the side of the Nostrill that bleedeth; and if
they bleed both, put it into both, and it shall stop straight: Or take and bear
about thee the herb Appium, otherwise called March Smallage, that grows by
the Waters side, and whilst thou bear the same about thee, thou shall not
bleed, if thou had many Wounds.

To kill a Canker in the Nose.
TAke and boil Strong Ale until it rope, and be like a Salve, then lay it on a
plaster of Leather, and lay it on the Nose, and it will heal it: and for
stinking Flesh that grows on the Nose, take and distill Serpentine, called
Adderstongue, and then put of the same Water with Cotton into the Nostrills
where the stinking Flesh is: And against the Imposthumation of the Nose, take
and distill Flower de Luce, and lay wet Clothes thereon: also Water of
Sowthistles, called Carduus Benedictus, does heal the Noli me tangere in the
Nose, wet Clothes being laid thereon, and some of the Powder of the same will
heal the Nose.

For Pushes and Pimples in the Nose.
TAke the Yolk of an Egg, and bray it with Ceruse, and so anoint your Nose
therewith, and be whole within four or five days at the most: or take the
Juice of Plantane, and the roots of Burres, and Salt, and Verjuice, and stamp
them all together, and strain out the Juice, and therewith wash thy Nose, and
it will be whole.

To stop Bleeding at the Nose.
TAke Amber, and burn it in a Chasingdish of Coals, and let the Smoke of it go
up into thy Nose, and it will stop Bleeding. A Tailor Bleeding twenty four
hours without ceasing, and no Medicine could stay him, at last he took a Skain
of black Thread, and put the one end thereof in at the Nostrills, and the other
was set on Fire, and when he had received the Smoke into his Nostrills, the
great Flux ceased immediately, and he bled no more in a long time after.

Another for the same.
TAke the Root of the great Roman Nettle, and let the Patient chew it in his
mouth, and so refresh it with another Root, for this in great need has been
found very saving for staying of the Flux of Blood. And when I could stop the
Blood with no manner of Medicine, then I opened a Vein in the Ear, and so let
out a good quantity of blood: this is the last Refuge for Bleeding at the Nose.

Medicines for the Mouth.
WHosoever would have help for the Mouth or for the Tongue, or for the Ears, or
for the Eyes, or for the Nose, or for the Teeth, or for any dolor, or pain
which may be in any of those parts or places; let them use otherwhiles
Sternutations, and Pills of Cochy, and once or twice a Month, let them use
Gargarizes to exhaust and draw out the Rheum out of the Head, the which Rheum
is cause of many infirmities in man's body, as does more largely appear as
follows.

For spitting of Blood.
TAke the Juice of Betany, and temper it with Goats Milk, and let the sick
drink thereof three days, and he shall be whole: Or take Smallage, Mints, Rue,
and Betany, and boil all these together in good Milk, and sup it warm.

For stinking of the Mouth.
TAke the Juice of black Mints, and of Rue a like much, and put it into thy
Nostrills and this will help thee. This is proved.

For a stinking Breath.
TAke an Ounce of Sage, and make thereof Powder, one Ounce of Rosemary Flowers,
half an Ounce of Cloves, two Drams of Cinnamon, two Nutmegs, and two Grains of
Musk, and make them all into Powder, then take as much purified Honey as will
cover all them, put it in a Box, and set it in the Sun five days, and it will
be perfect. then take every Morning fasting half an Ounce, and so at Night to
comfort the Meat that it putrify not, or corrupt the Stomach; and be whole.

To recover a Man's Speech.
TAke the Juice of Sage and Primrose, and put into the Patients Mouth, and he
shall speak straight, or within a while after.

For a Mouth that is staid with heat.
TAke Ribwort, and sees it in Red Wine, and hold it in your Mouth hot, and do
this often, and be whole.

For the Canker in the Mouth.
TAke nine Leaves of Sage, and stamp them with a little Salt and Verjuice, and
make thereof a Plaster, and lay it thereto, and it will be whole, but you must
dress it twice a day.

Against the inward eating sore of the Mouth.
TAke and distill Perwinckle, and with the Water thereof wash thy Mouth, also
Water of Lavender and Fumitory does kill all sores in the Mouth: and for Blains
in the Mouth, take and distill Burnet in a common Still, and with the Water
thereof wash the Blains in thy Mouth.

For a Canker in the Mouth.
TAke rusty Bacon, wheaten Bran, and the Roots of a Vine, and sees all these
together in Brine, wherein Flesh has been laid to Salt, and let the hot Vapor
thereof ascend to the sore place through an instrument like a Funnel, made of
Wood, and this done, wash this sore place with this Water following. Take the
inner Bark of the Roots of black Thorn, and sees it in a Pint of white Wine
Vinegar, and a Pint of Water; of the Bark twelve Ounces, of Roch Alum two
Ounces, sees these together in a stone Cruse, in a Kettle of water closely
stopped, till half be wasted, then strain them, and put of this Liquor into the
Sore. This helped a child of twelve years old, that the Canker had eaten
through the Roof of his Mouth, into his Nose: But if the Canker be not very
corrosive, take Woodbine, Sage, Lavender, Rosemary and Salendine, and sees
these in running water, and white Wine, till half be wasted, and then strain
them, and put to this strained Liquor, a little Alum, and Myrrh, Honey, and
Sarcacoll, when these be a little sodden, then strain them again, and rub thy
Mouth therewith often in a day.

For the falling of the Evola.
TAke a little Pepper, and Salt, and put it up therewith: or else take and
sees a little Pepper in Ale, ad dip a Linen Cloth therein, and put it up
therewith also take a handful of Fetherfew, and rub it between your hands,
then lay it to the Crown of the Head, and it will draw up the Evola.

For a Canker in the Mouth.
TAke Rosemary, Sage, and running Water, and sees them well together, and put
to them Roch Alum, and wash thy Mouth therewith: or take Woodbine leaves, and
stamp them, and put thereto a little running Water, and strain out the Juice
thereof, then put to the same a little white Coperas, and wash thy Mouth
therewith, and it will be whole.

For a Canker in the Mouth.
TAke a sawcer full of Wodbine-water, and put thereto as much Alum as a Hasell
Nut, and then take of Mell-Roset as much again as the Alum is, and put to it a
spoonful of good Vinegar, and boil all these together upon a Chafingdish, and
wash the Canker therewith.

Medicines for Teeth.
To make Teeth white.
TAke Vinegar of Quinces, and dip a little piece of Cloth in it, and rub thy
Teeth, and Gums therewith: the said Vinegar fasteneth the Teeth and Gums,
comfort the Roots of the Teeth, and makes sweet Breath.

To keep the Teeth sweet, clean, and from danger of Worms, or a Regiment Ach
TAke a Pint of White Wine, two Ounces of Alum, and a quarter of an Ounce of
Honey, boil them together, and wash your Mouth therewith every Morning.

A Regiment for the Toothache.
YOu must wash your Mouth before and after Meat with warm Water to cleanse the
Mouth and purge the Humors from the Gums, which descend out of the Head, it is
good every Morning to wash the Mouth, and to rub the Teeth with a Sage Leaf, or
with Powder made of Cloves, and Nutmegs. You must forbear Lettice, and raw
fruits, all tart things, and the chewing of hard things: also all Meats of
evil digestion, and vomiting, and straining of your self.

For the Toothache.
TAke the Root of Henbane, and sees it in Vinegar, and hold in thy Mouth the
Decoction thereof, and the pain of the Teeth will away straight: or take
Hysope, and make a decoction with Vinegar, and wash your Mouth, and Teeth
therewith being hot, and the pain will away.

Another for the same.
TAke Wheat Bran, and good stale Ale, and make it thick like Mustard, and let
it soke therein a quarter of an hour, then strain it, and put thereto the
Powder of Pepper a good quantity, and some of the Juice of Rue, and make it
somewhat thick, and put it into a little bag of linen cloth, and lay it
between thy Cheek and thy Teeth, and lie down on that side, and let the Water
run out of thy Mouth, and use it three or four times, and thou shall never have
the Toothach more: or take Hounds tongue, and stamp it, and fry it with
Butter, and make a Plaster thereof, and bind it to thy Cheek on that side that
the pain is, and thou shall be whole. Proved.

An approved Medicine for the Toothache.
TAke Berries of Ivy, and the scraping of a Hearts Horn, and boil it in white
Wine, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to thy Cheek, and hold the Liquor
thereof in thy Mouth, and thou shall be whole. Or take Pepper, Salt, and the
Roots of Primrose, and dry them all together, and make Powder thereof, and rub
thy Teeth therewith.

To take away the Toothache in half an hour.
TAke Henbane Seed, Smallage Seed, and Poppy Seed, of each the weight of a
Penny, and make Pellets thereof as big as a Vache, with a quantity of Aqua
vitae, and lay it unto thy Teeth that ache, and the pain shall cease straight.

A notable Medicine for the Toothache.
TAke Pellitory of Spain, both of the Leaf, and of the Root, wash it and stamp
it, and there of make three Balls, every Ball as big as a Plumb, and lay the
first Ball between the Teeth and the Gummes, the space of a miles riding, and
even as the water ingendreth in thy Mouth spit it out whole, and put in another
Ball, as thou did at the first, and likewise the third, and so let the
Water run out of thy Mouth still, and be whole straight.

To make Teeth white.
TAke Flower of Rye, Salt, and Honey, and mingle them well together, and
therewithal rub thy Teeth every day twice or thrice, and then wash them clean
with Water, and they will be clean. Or take green Branches of Broom and burn
them, and make thereof a Powder, and burn Alum, and mix them together, and then
temper them with fair Water, and rub thy Teeth therewith, and it will do away
the blackness of them.

For the Toothache.
TAke the green part of the Eldar Rine, not the uttermost, nor the innermost,
but the green in the middle between both, and Sage, Rue, and Ginger, and a good
deal of Salt, then grind them all together in a mortar, and sees it in white
Wine, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay to the Cheek, and be whole.

Another for the same.
TAke a Pint of the strongest Vinegar thou can get, and a handful of Sage,
the Root of a red Nettle the quantity of a Fingers length, and as much of the
Rine of an Oak, and cut them in little pieces, and so let the Vinegar and all
the rest sees together from a Pint, then let the Patient chew it on the sore
Tooth, and so dress Evening, and Morning, half of it at each time, and this
shall help him for ever. Probatum est.

For to remove a Tooth.
TAke the Root of a Mulberry Tree, and lay it in Vinegar, three days and three
Nights, and then dry it in the Sun, and make Powder thereof, and rub thy Teeth
therewith, and it will fall out.

A Water for the Teeth.
TAke and distill the Water of Mother wort and hold it in thy Mouth a good
while, and it will kill the Pain of the Teeth, and the stinking thereof. Also
Water of Vervain, or Hysope Water will do the like.

For the Toothache.
TAke Henbane-seed, and the Powder of Amber, of each a like much, and lay them
on a glowing tile, and make a Pipe that thy Breath may go through to the sore
Tooth, and this will kill the Worms, and put away the Toothache.

For a Canker, and Tooth ach.
TAke Smalladge, and Sorrel Leaves, Alum, and Glass, and make thereof a
Powder, and lay it to the Sore, wheresoever it be, and for the Tooth that is
hollow and aketh, take the Flowers and Leavos of Pellitory, and stamp it with
Salt, and fill the hollow Tooth therewith, and be whole.

For the Toothache.
Take Ivy Berries, and sees them well in Vinegar, and when they be well
sodden, sip some of the liquor as hot as you may suffer it, and hold it in your
Mouth till it be cold, and then cast it out, and take new, and do so three or
fout times, and it will ease you.

For the Toothache.
TAke and roast an Egg hard, and put therein a Spoonful of Salt, and two
Spoonfulls of Vinegar, or good Aleger, and temper them well together, till they
be a Pap, then strain it, and with a little fine Cloth put some thereof into
your Mouth, and when you have spit out the corruption, refresh the same with
more, and it will take away the Pain shortly.

To make Childrens Teeth come.
TAke the Brains of a Hare, and sees them, and anoint the Gummes therewith;
and take the Brains of a Hen likewise, and rub the Gummes therewith, and this
shall make the Teeth grow without akng.

To fasten the Teeth.
TAke and sees the Roots of Vervain in old Wine, and wash thy Teeth therewith,
and this will make them fast.

For Worms in the Teeth.
TAke Henbane seed, and lay it upon a flat Stone, and set it upon a Chafingdish
of Coals, and let the smoke go into your Mouth, and this will will kill the
Worm shortly.

For the Toothache.
TAke the inner Rine of an Eldar Tree, and bruise it a little, and put thereto
a little Pepper, and make it in Balls, and lay it to your Teeth, and be whole.

THe cause of these impediments may come, either by an humor descending out of
the Head to the Teeth, or Gummes, or by corroding or eati^g of Worms, or
corruption of Blood, lying and being upon, and betwixt the Teeth: or it may
come by drinking of hot Wines, eating of hot Spices, or hot Apples, Pears,
Cherries, and such like; and it may come of a hot Liver or Stomach: and ever
beware of pulling out of thy Teeth, for pull out one, and pull out more, but if
it be hollow pull it out, for it will rot still, more and more, do what thou
can.

Medicines for the Gummes.
For the Gummes that be gnawn and fretted with Humors.
TAke Cloves, and sees them in Rose water, then dry them, and make Powder
thereof, with Rose water, or Roses, for that is best, then dry it again in the
Sun, do this three or four times, and then temper the Powder again with Rose
water, or with the Juice of Roses, and anoint thy Gummes therewith.

A Water for a Canker in the Gumms.
TAke half a Pint of white Wine, and a quarter of a Pint of Water, and put
thereto an Ounce of burnt Alum, and take a quantity of five leaved Grass,
otherwise called Cinque-Foyl, and put all these into a clean earthen Pot, and
set it over the Fire, and let it sees to the half, and scum it clean, then
strain the Liquor into some Vessel, and keep it in a Glass till thou have
need to occupy it.

Another for the same.
TAke Herb Grass, and wash it clean, and dry it with a Linen Cloth, and stamp
it in a Mortar, and put thereto strong red Vinegar, then strain it through a
clean Linen Cloth three times folded, of an Ell broad, wet it in the same
Medicine, and lay it to the Sore within the Mouth, and if it be a very great
Canker, take Alum, and beat it very small in a Mortar, and put it to the said
Medicine, to the value of a handful of Herb Grass, and this will heal thee.

To make a Gum hard to hold the Teeth.
TAke clean Rose water, and daily wash thy Gummes and Teeth therewith, and it
will fasten thy Gummes to thy Teeth.

For rotting of thy Gummes.
TAke the Water of great Sage, and wash thy Mouth, and Gummes therewith, and it
will help the rotting of thy Teeth, and the shaking of them, if thou use it
often in a day, and hold it in thy Mouth.

Medicines for the Face.
For asawcy stained Face like a Leper.
YOU must give him a Purgation, as is said in the pain of the Head, coming of
Choler, then dip Cloths in Alum water, which must be made as follows: take a
pound of Alum Glass, the juice of Purslain, of Plantine, and Verjuice, of
Grapes, or Crabs, of each a Pint, with the whites twenty one Eggs well beaten
together, then mingle them altogether, and distill it in a Stillitory: this
Water is for the Pimples, Scurfes, Chafings, Wheals, and Heats, dip your Cloth
therein often, and lay to the redness.

THe cause of these Impediments does come of a venomous matter ascending out of
the Stomach, meeting with Rheum that would descend from the Head, and meeting
both together, do cause the Vapors to break out in the Face.

For a Copper Face
TAke Litarge of Silver, and Brimstone, of each a like much, and sees them in
Vinegar, and then wet a Linen Cloth therein, and lay it to the Sore, putting a
little Rose water to it.

A Diet for a Copper Face.
ABstain from all Salt things, Spices, Fried Meats, and Roasted Meats; from
drinking of Wine, for it is very ill: also Onyons, Mustard, and Garlic be very
bad, instead of which you must take Purslain, Sorrel, Lettice, and Hops,
Borage, otherwise Succory, or Endive in your pottage. Also it is necessary to
be laxative, and sleeping to lay your head high.

For a red Face.
TAke Sowthistles, Borage, Purslain, Sorrel, Barley, Parsley Roots, and
Licoras, and boil all together in running Water, and drink it first and last.

For Worms in the Face.
TAke of Rosine three parts, and the fourth of unwrought Wax, one spoonful of
Honey, half a spoonful of May Butter; try them all together on the fire, then
strain it through a fair Cloth into a dish of fair Water, and when it is so
cold that you may stir it with your hand, work it well against the Fire, as you
do an Electuary, and in working thereof, put in as much white Coperas as a Nut,
as you do occupy it made into Powder, then strike it on a Cloth, as you do
other plasters, and lay it to the Face, and within three days you shall know
whether there be Worms, they will rise white like Wheals, under the plaster:
then cast more Coperas on your said plaster, and so dress him, and he shall
be whole.

To make the Face fair.
TAke the Flowers of Rosemary, and boil them in white Wine, then wash thy Face
therewith, and use to drink of the same: Or take Burnet water, and Wash thy
Face therewith, and let it dry by it self: also Water of Bean Flowers does
better.

A Medicine for a white Scurf in the Face.
TAke of Vinegar a Pint, and dissolve in it one Ounce of Champhire, and let it
stand there in fourteen days, being very well stopped, and then wash the
diseased place. This holp a Gentlewoman which had a long time a Scurf rising in
her Face, as though she had been a Leper.

For Chapped Lips.
TAke and anoint them with Vnguentum album consecratum, and if there be any
corrupt blood or matter, you must wash the place with Water of Plantain wherein
has been sod a little Alum, before you put in the same ointment: also it is
good to wash the place with Plantain Water, and Barley Water together.

To put away Freckles in the Face.
Take and anoint thy Face with the Blood of a Hare, or of a Bull, and this
shall destroy the Freckles within five nights dressing, if you use it.

A singular Medicine for Worms in the Face.
TAke the Leaves and Roots of Leeks, and the Juice of them all together, and
take thereof a Pint and a half, and put it into a glass, with an Ounce of
Powder of Pellitory, and a scruple of Verdigreace, and stir them all together,
and every, day bath the Worm and Whelks With Cotton moistened in the said
Juice, and stir it often in the said glass: also it is good for Worms in any
other Members, and breeding in the sickness, called in France the Kings Evil.

To put away Freckles in the Face.
TAke and lay a raw Egg (that is new laid) in white Wine Vinegar all night,
and on the morrow stamp the Egg small, and then put thereto as much Powder of
Mustard Seed as the Egg was, and mingle it with the Egg, and when thou go
to bed anoint thy Face therewith, and on the morrow mingle Barley Meal, and hot
Water together, then cast away the Water, and wash thy Face therewith, nine
days: or take Salendine, stamp it, and temper it with white Wine, and lay it
to the Face: or take a good quantity of Pellitory of Spain, and white Wine,
and let it stand a while, and then wash thy Face therewith, and it will heal
thee.

For Blains in the Face.
TAke Salt, and the Roots of Plantain, and Verjuice, and stamp them well
together, and wash the Face therewith, and this will heal thee.

For a foul Blast in the Face.
TAke red Honey-Suckle for the Man, and white for the Woman, and take the
juice thereof, and anoint therewith thy Face, and it will heal thee.

For a saucy Phlegm Face.
TAke the Roots of Enula Campana, and sees it in a pot of Vinegar, until the
Vinegar be well sod away, then stamp it in a Mortar, and put thereto
Quicksilver, and Brimstone, and Swines Grease, and make therewith a plaster
ointment and anoint thy Face therewith: and if you make, a plaster, lay
thereto the some stuff. This is proved. Or took Oil of Tartar, and anoint thy
Face therewith, or any Canker or Ringworm or Tetter Leprosy, for this will
make it whole.

For a red Face full of Pimples.
TAke and distill Water of Salendine, and dissolve Camphire in it, as is before
written. with Vinegar, and with this wash thy Face; this did make a maid whole
in twenty days, that had a mavelous great heat in her Face. Also there was a
Farmers Wife in Berk-shire, which had her Face full of white Scales, and was
cured with this that follows: she took Honey Suckle Leaves, and distilled
them, and washed her Face often with the Water, and it never came again. Also
there was a Woman which had such a grief in her Face, that if she had been by
the Fire but a little while, and then gone abroad into the Air, her Face would
have risen full of red spotts, as though she had been drunk, which was helped
with this which follows: She took Frankincense, and Saffron, and then made
them to Powder, and then cast this Powder upon a Chafingdish of Coals, and
received the Smoke with open Mouth, and using it often, was helped.

To take away Freckles in the Face.
TAke Pellitory, and sees it with Wine, and make a plaster thereof, and lay
it to the Freckles, and this will take it away: or take the Gall of a Cock, and
mingle it with the Flower of Cocle, of each a like quantity, and make a
plaster thereof, and lay it to the Freckles: or take when you kill a Bull, and
save the Blood thereof, anoint the place therewith that has the Freckles, and
it will take them away.

To take away the small Pox, that they shall not be seen.
TAke the Juice of Fennel, and heat it lukewarm, and anoint the place
therewith three or four days diverse times, for this is an approved Medicine
for the small Pox.

To make the Face fair.
TAke white Lillies, green Cocle, and green honey Suckles, of every one a like
much, and then distill them in a Stilletory, and take the Water thereof, and
wash therewith thy Face, and within fifteen days thou shall be fair.

Medicines for the Throat.
THE Causes of these Impediments do come of Rheum descending from the Head, or
by Opilation, or such like; therefore first purge Phlegm, and Rheum.

For a sore Throat that is inflamed.
TAke two spoonfulls and a half of Honey, two good spoonfulls of Treacle, of
Alum as much as a Pullets Egg, of sweet Butter two good spoonfulls, five
Sprigges of Rosemary, a quarter of a spoonful of Pepper, and for an old body
the more Pepper.

For dry Hoarsenesse in the Throat.
TAke the Root of Parslie and the Root of Fennel, a like much, and three penny
weight of Enula Campana, and one pound of Figs, and a quarter of a pound of
Licoras; sees all these together in a Gallon of running Water to three quarts,
and put therein a little Hysop, and strain it, then boil it, and take the white
of ten or twelve Eggs and put therein, and let it boil together till it turn
clear, then take Sug^r, Roset, and put thereto as much as a Hens Egg, then
take it from the Fire, and cleanse it through a fair Cloth, and drink thereof
Morn and Evening.

For a Canker in the Throat.
TAke a Pint of good stale Ale, and a good handful of Sage, and a good stone
of Alum as much as an Egg, and boil them together well, and then with a Cloth
wash thy Throat, and garle it in thy Throat, and be whole: Or take Sage,
Woodbine, Rue, Hysop, or Penyryall, of each a quarter of a handful, and boil
them in good Wine Vinegar, or strong Ale, with a little Roch Alum and a
spoonful of Honey, and then strain these through a Cloth, and with Liquor
scour the Canker with a fair Cloth on a sticks end, and wet a cloth double, and
lay it plaisterwise to your Throat and be whole.

For Hoarsenesse in the Throat
TAke Penyryall and sees it in running water, and then take of it at night a
dish full, somewhat hot, with a little Sugar melted in it, and within two or
three times dressing you shall be clean again.

For Hoarsenesse of a long continuance.
TAke Raisins, Figs, Sugar, Cinnamon, Cloves, of every one a little, and sees
them in good Wine, of the which you shall give the Patient Ounces at a time,
Morning and Evening, except she have a Fever: or for a Child that has the
Cough. Take Oil of Roses, and chafe well his Stomach when he goes to bed, and
then lay a warm Cloth to his Stomach, and he shall be whole.

To heal a Quinsie in the Throat.
TAke one pound of the Water of Scabias, and one ounce of Aqua vitae, and
mingle them together, and wet Cloths therein, and so lay it it to the sore, and
this will kill it in three or four days.

For the dry Cough.
TAke half a pound of Licoras, and scrape it clean, and bruise it well, and put
it into an earrhen Pot, and put thereto three quarts of fine Wort, and one
Ounce of Sugar, of Ginger beaten two drams, and a Pint of Clarified Honey, and
sees all these hogether, till half be wasted, and then strain it through a
Cloth into a clean Vessel, and let the sick drink thereof first, and last, at
Evening hot, and Morning cold.

For stopping of the Pipes.
TAke two drams of Methridatum, and a spoonful of Claret Wine stirred
together, and so drink it fasting, and by and by drink a Pint of Claret Wine
after it, and then fast two hours after, without Meat or Drink, and take this
twice a week for two or three weeks together, and use in all your Meats and
Broths, white Pepper grossly beaten:

For the Cough a good Medicine.
TAke a half penny worth of Licoras, a spoonful of Aniseed, a sawcer full of
the Juice of Fennel, and one ounce of Sugar Candy, sees all these in white
Wine, or Sack, from a quart to a pint, then strain it, and give the Patient
thereof to drink.

For the Cough, and Pursinesse.
TAke of the Powder of the Lungs of a Fox, and Sugar Candy, and temper it in
Rose water, and drink thereof: Or take white Sugar Candy, and Rose water, and
drink it, for it is very good for the Cough, if it come of the Inflammation of
the Lungs.

For the Chyne Cough.
TAke the Root of Horse Hoof, and the Root of Cumfrie, of each a like much, and
wash them in fair Water, then stamp them, and sees them in fair water, till
half be consumed; then take two parts of that Liquor, and a third part of
Honey, and boil them, and scum them clean, and when it is well sodden, put it
into some Boxes, and let the sick use three spoonfulls at a time every day
fasting and to bed ward.

A very good Medicine for the Cough
TAke a brown Loaf, before you put it in the Oven, and make a hole in the top
of it, and put therein a good handful of Rosemary, and cover it again with the
same Paste, and being baked, take it out of the Oven, and mingle it with half
an Ounce of the Powder of Enula Campana Roots, of Licoras three parts, of Sugar
Candy as much as of the Rosemary, of round Pepper, and long Pepper, of each
half on Ounce, take of this Evening, and Morning, and in your Pottage, and will
help the Cough with great success, for it has been well tried.

Medicines for the Breast.
For sore Breasts when they be broken.
TAke Wheat Flower, and two Yolks of Eggs, and the Juice of Plantain, and
mingle them all together till they be thick like a sauce, and if there be holes
in the Breasts, make Tents that will suffice the holes, and dip them in the
same, and put them in the holes, and lay a plasster thereupon.

For sore Breasts
TAke a handful of Figgs, and stamp them until the Kernells be broken, then
take a little fresh grease, and temper it with the Figgs, and make a plaster
thereof, and lay it as hot as the Patient can suffer it unto the Breast, and it
will take away the anguish, and if it be apt to break, then it will break, or
else not.

An healing Salve for sore Breasts that be broken.
TAake Sorrel, the Boys call it Wood sour, and lap it in Wort Leaves, and
roast them in the Embers half a quarter of an hour, then stamp them, and put
thereto Honey and Vinegar, and put them in a Box, but first lay to the sore
Breasts a plaster of Garlic and Meal, boiled together in Vinegar two or three
times, and lay it thereto.

For swelling of Women's Breasts.
TAke Line-seed bruised, and the white of an Egg, or the Juice of Smallage,
and mingle them well together, and lay them plaisterwise to the swelling of the
Breast, and if she lose her milk, give het to drink the Juice of Vervain, and
she shall have Milk enough, and this will also heal your Breast.

For abundance of Milk in a Woman's Breasts.
TAke Popilion, and Lineseed Oil, and sees them together, and dip clothes
therein, and so lay them to the Breast, takes away the abundance of Milk, and
the hardness of the Breast presently, also Chickweed sodden in Plantain Water,
and laid Plaisterwise to the Breast, dries up the Milk, and takes away the
hardness thereof: green Wheat being stamped and strained with Oil, brings to
Women Milk abundantly without measure.

For all manner stopping of the Breasts.
TAke the Gum of a Cherrie tree, and dissolve it with old Wine, and let the
sick sup thereof, and it will void all hoarseness and straightness of the
Breast and Lungs: Also take Figgs, and slit them on the outside, and stop them
full of Mustard, and sees them in white Wine, and eat of the Figs, for this
is very good.

For all Diseases of the Breast, and to clear the Voice.
TAke a good quantity of VVoodstonne, and grind them not too small, and then
put them into an earthen Pot, and put thereto new Ale, as it is cleansed, and
mingle them so, that the Ale be a good deal above the Slonne, and bury it in
the Earth, and cover it well with the same earth, and so let it stand nine
days, then give to him that needs a little cupfull hot at night, and cold in
the morning.

To clear the Breasts.
TAke Sentory, Pilliall, Rue, Hysope, and red Morrell in stale Ale, and strain
it, then put into the clear liquor Cinnamon and Cloves, and sees them well, and
drink thereof nine days, at evening hot, and at morning cold, and be whole.
Also take Angelica Water, and drink it at evening and morning an ounce at a
time, and it will greatly help thee.

For sore Breasts.
TAke the yolk of an Egg, and fair fresh grease, and sovre fresh dough, and
mingle them well together, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the sore,
and when it is broken do away the dough, and lay it to your Eggs and grease,
and it will be whole quickly. Or make a plaster of Smallage, Linseeds, and
whites of Eggs, and lay it to the sore Breasts, and this will heal them; or
take Claret Wine and Barley Flower, and boil them together thick, and make a
plaster thereof and lay it to the Breast: this has been proved.

To make the Breasts shrink, and to heal them.
TAke Hemlock, stamp it and temper it with Verjuice, and lay it on the sore
Breasts, and use this and thy Paps will be less, and to make them whole,
anoint them with it, and it will make them hard.

For a woman that lacks Milk in her Breasts.
TAke of Crystal ten penniweight, and make fine powder thereof, and drink it
with Bastard or Muskadell five or six times, or else take of Fennel, of
Mallows, of Anniseeds, of March, of each two handfulls, and sees it in Bastard
or Muscadell, and strain it, and drink it often. If the Breast be long, and big,
and great, make a plaster with Hemlocks sodden in white Wine and lay it to the
Breasts. If there be any Inflammations in the Breasts, take the Whites of two
Eggs and two handfulls of houseleek, compound both together and lay it to the
Breast. If thy Milk be crudded in the Breasts, take Dragagant, and Gumm Arabic,
and compound them with whites of raw Eggs, and the oil of Violets, and make a
plaster thereof: Or take pitch and liquefie it in the oil of Roses, and put
thereto a little Goats dung, and dregs of Wine, and make a plaster thereof.

Medicines for the Spleen.
An expert Medicine for all diseases of the Spleen.
TAke the leaves and cods of Seny, the bark of an Ash tree scraped and cut,
Maidenhair, Hartstongue and Licorish, and sees them all together in clear
Wine, and then strain it, and drink thereof twice or thrice a day till it be
amended. Or sees the Rine of an Ash in white Wine, and drink thereof, and it
will help thee. Or take your own Water in the morning and wash your side, and a
little the Stomach downward, and it will help you.

Another for the Spleen.
TAke the roots of Nettles, and stamp them well together with Vinegar, and lay
it unto the Spleen when it swells. Also the lungs of a Fox dried and made in
powder, and eat in a Fig in the morning, is very good.

For the wasting of the Spleen, and for the Dropsy, for the Water passage, and
for the stopping of the Liver, and for the Flower, and Emeroides.
TAke Gromell, Saxifrage, Parsley, and Sage, and boil it all together in strong
Are that is stale, and use to drink hereof in the morning, at noon, and at
night, and use these herbs in your pottage and this will help you, or the
powder of them in your pottage.

The Spleen is a spungeous substance, lying under the short ribs in the left
side, and it does make a man to be merry and to laugh; and if a man he
Spleentick, let him use merry company, and let him be let blood in a vein
called Salvatella on the left side, some do use to let blood in a vein called
Basilica on the left side. But I say, that every thing that hurts the Liver,
hurts the Spleen, and every thing which is good for the Liver, is good for
the Spleen. And whosoever will make the hardness of the Spleen whole, first
take the marrow of a Calf, and the marrow of a Heart, and the fatness of a Hog,
of a Capan, of a Duck, and the oil of sweet Almonds, of each a like much, mix
these together and anoint the Spleen, and dry the Lungs of a Fox, and make
Powder thereof, and eat it with figs.

Medicines for the Stomach.
THe cause of these impediments may come by anger or fear, or by great studying
upon many matters, or by extreme heat or surfeiting, or such like.

For belching.
USe for this disease Dietrion, Poperion, drunken in Wine.

For pain in the Stomach.
TAke a spoonful of hot ashes, and dew them with good Wine, and cover them
with a linen cloth that it go round about the spoon, and lay it to the
Stomach, or take a slice of bread meekly thick, tossed it, and wet it in hot oil
of Camonile, as hot as it comes from the oven, or in oil of Spike, and wrap it
in a linen cloth and lay it to the pain.

Another for the same.
TAke a dram of Galingal in powder, and give it to drink with a little hot
Wine, and above all things for pain of ventosity, a singular remedy is to drink
a little Caster with good Wine.

For a stinking breath that comes out of the Stomach.
TAke three ounces of Comin in powder, and sees in Wine from a gallon to a
pottle, and give the sick to drink thereof as hot as he may suffer it, first
and last, and without doubt-he shall be whole within fifteen days.

To Vomit or cleanse the Stomach.
TAke three roots of Daffadills, and wash them clean, and cut them small, and
sees them in a cup of Ale or Beer till it be half consumed, and put thereto
half a penniworth of Saffron, and boil them together, then strain and drink it
after you have broken your fast.

For Worms in the Stomach.
TAke three or four Cloves of Garlic every day fasting with Salt, and abstain
from meat and drink after it half an hour, and you shall be whole.

For him that cannot keep his Meat in his Stomach without Vomiting.
TAke Quinces and make them clean, within and without, and sees them in strong
Vinegar, then stamp them in a Mortar, and put into them a little Mustard seed
beaten into powder, and so incorporate them together, and lay it hot upon a
linen cloth, putting to it some powder of Cloves, and lay this upon his breast,
and within three or four times doing he shall be whole.

For Phlegm in the Stomach.
TAke Beer and sees it, and scum it clean, and put thereto a good quantity of
Sugar, then take a race of Ginger and grate it into thy Beer, and so drink it
warm.

For Wind in the Stomach.
TAke a pottle of white Wine, two penniworth of Sugar Candy, and two spoonfulls
of Aniseeds, and two or three roots of Parsley, and as many of Fennel, and
sees them all together until they be half wasted, and then drink it warm as
often as you will. Or take and drink Powder of Comin in red Wine to bedward
three nights together, and thou shall be whole.

To stay Vomiting.
TAke and make a tossed, and remper it with Vinegar and Mints, and so hold it to
your Nose, this stays Vomiting.

For an ill breath coming out of the Stomach.
TAke the uppermost leaves of Rosemary, and eat two or three in the morning
fasting.

For the Stomach that has the Pipes stopped, and so the Dropsy breeds.
TAke two parts of Cinnamon, and the third part of Galingall, and the same
quantity of Ginger, and put that Powder into a spoonful of Hysope Water, and
drink it fasting, and be whole.

Things evil for the Stomach.
ALl sweet things, for they make the Stomach well, old cheese, honey, marrow of
bones not well sodden, to ear e're thou art hungry, to eat many sorts of meat
at one sitting, to drink e're thou be athirst, to eat bread not well baked,
heaviness, anger, dread, thought, raw flesh, overgreat travel, all fried
meats, much bathing after meat, too much casting, to eat when thou art overhot,
and all milk is naught, ^ave Goats milk.

For burning in the Stomach.
TAke Sorrel, Cinque-foil, Borage, and Violet Leaves, and stamp them together,
and strain them into Ale, and make a posset thereof, and drink it next your
heart when you feel your self grieved, and when the heat is gone, make posset
Ale of Mercury, and that will restore you to heat again, and bring you to good
temper.

To make one Vomit.
TAke an Oken Leaf, and lay it upon your tongue, the rough side downward, and
hold close your mouth, and this will make you Vomit. Probatum est.

A precious Medicine for all Winds in the body, the Strangullion and the Stone.
TAke the Root of a white Lilly that never bare flower, and bruise it, and
sees it in a pint of white Wine, and put into it two spoonfulls of Anniseeds
and Sugar, and let it sees, till it be more then half sodden away, and give it
to the sick that is in pain, and it shall ^oon ease him of the great pains.

A precious Powder for Digestion.
TAke Ginger, Cinnamon, and Galingale, of each one ounce, of Anniseeds, Caraway
seeds, and Fennel seeds half an ounce, long Pepper Grains, Maces, Nutmegs, of
each two ounces, of Setwell one ounce, make all these in fine Powder, and put
to them two pound and a half of fine Sugar, and use this Powder before meat and
after at your pleasure, it is good to comfort the Stomach, and against Wind.

For the Stomach that cannot Digest, ^or have Appetite to Meat.
TAke and drink often Sorrel Water, or Angelica Water, or Betany Water, or
ground Ivy Water, for all these are good for the same.

Medicines for the Liver.
An Ointment for the Liver that mak^th good Digestion, and keeps the body
from Putrefying.
TAke Oil of Roses, and Oil of Wormwood, of each two ounces, and set them over
the fire, and when they begin to boil, put thereto an ounce and a half of fine
Mastick, and when the Mastick is dissolved, strain it while it is warm in the
morning, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to your side, and be whole.

A Restorative for the Liver and the Lungs, if they be rotten it will restore
it again, and do away the Gleme from the Heart, and comfort the same.
TAke Fennel Roots and Parsley roots, and pill away the Bark, and pull out the
pith, and cast it away, then mince them small, and put into a brazen pot three
quarts of water, and set it on the fire, and put the roots therein, then take
Figs and cut them small and pound them, and put a quantity of Honey to it, and
let it boil a while, then take it down and clarify it through a cloth into a
vessel of glass, and stop it fast that no air go out, and let the sick drink
of it hot in the morning, and cold at night a good draught.

For one that has his Liver cloven to his ribs.
TAke a shelfull of the juice of Betany, and a quarter of a pint of white Wine,
and a spoonful of honey, and Pepper corns, temper these together, and drink
thereof, and it will help you.

For the heat of the Liver.
TAke Liver-Wort, and five-leaved Grass, Succory, Endive, Buglosse, and
Borage, and sees all these in Whey, and drink of this as often as you will,
and this will help you.

For one that is Liver brent.
TAke Sowthistle, Dadelion, and Rib-Wort, and sees them in water with
Licorish, until the one half be wasted, and drink of this at all times, saving
at meat.

For the stopping of the Liver.
TAke Ivy Berries, and Egrimony, Hearts Tongue, Liver-Wort, and the bark of an
Ash, of all these a little quantity, and put them to double as much Polypodion,
as of any one of the rest, and make thereof pottage, broth, or syrup. If the
Liver be opilated, the face will swell, and pain will be in the right side.

To preserve a man from stopping of the Liver.
TAke a Fig and gross Pepp^r, with the crops of Time, if it be eaten two hours
before dinner, and two hours before supper, it preserves a man from op^lations
of the Liver. Also the Liver of a Hare dried and made into powder is good for
all diseases of the Liver.

For the Liver.
TAke a good handrull of Liver-Wort that grows upon the stones, and another
of Fumitory, and as much of Hearts Tongue, and sees them in Whey clarified, and
drink it every day twice. If the Liver be hot, because of too much blood, the
Patient has red urid hasty Pulse, his Veins great and full, he feels his
spittle, mouth and tongue sweeter then it was wont to be; wherefore it is good
to be let blood of the Liver Vein, on the right arm, and to use Lettice or
Sorrel, Purslain and Hops in portage, and sometime to drink of the water.

Medicines for the Jaundise.
TAke Cows milk and white Wine, of each a pint, and distill them, and keep the
water that comes thereof, and give the sick to drink thereof two ounces in the
morning, two hours before meat, and likewise after supper, when he goes to bed,

For the black Jaundise.
TAke Enula Cumpana roots, and sees them in milk, then take the milk and
strain it through a piece of cotton, and give the sick to drink thereof. This
did help a gentlewoman that was sixteen years troubled with the Jaundise, and
could not be helped.

For children take Turmerick and Ivory, of each two Drams, of Saffron two
scruples, sees these in milk, and give it to the children that have the black
or yellow Jaundise.

Another for the Jaundise.
TAke Hempseed and bruise it, and then boil it in good strong Ale or Beer, and
scum it very clean, and let the sick drink of this drink, and eat the sodden
seed.

For the black Iaundise.
Sees the inner bark of a Walnut tree in Ale or Beer, and in the same drink
quench steel, being made red hot at least forty times, and drink of this five
or six ounces at a time hot evening and morning; this is proved excellent good.
Also Goats dung or Fallow Deers dung strained into milk and given to the sick,
has helped the black Jaundise.

For the yellow Jaundise.
TAke Elecampane roots, and the inner bark of a Barberie, of each six ounces,
of Salendine roots eight ounces, of English Saffron the weight of a groat,
sees all these in a pint of white Wine, strain it, and drink thereof four
spoonfulls morning and evening warm.

Medicines for the Side.
For Wind in the Side.
TAke the leaves of Holly, and dry them and make powder thereof (but do not
burn them) and give the Patient thereof to drink in Beer or Ale, and it will
ease immediately. Proved by my Lady Coplin.

For a Stich in the Side.
TAke the urine of him that is sick, Wormwood, and Cummin, and sees them well
together, and by the fire therewith anoint thy side, and after with the oil of
Bay. Also Endive Water, water of Divells-bit, water of Mallows, and water of
Carduus benedictus, are all good for the Stitch.

For a Stich in the left Side.
TAke a quantity of Cummin, and steep it in a pottle of Malmsey, then take and
fry them together in a Pan, and put it into a linen bag, and lay it hot to
your side, and it will help you.

Another for the same.
TAke and stamp Wormwood, Mints, and Camomill, Mallows, red Roses, Sage,
Cummin, and white Bread Crumbs, and boil all these in red Wine, or in stale Ale,
and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the side. This is proved.

To know when one has a Stitch, whether it be of the Wind or the Plurisie.
TAke Wormwood, and lay it on a tile-stone before the fire, and when it is
near hot, sprinkle it with good Malmsey, and put it in a linen cloth, and lay
it to when you feel the Stitch, if it be but a Wind, it will take it away in
two hours, but if it be the Plurisie it will augment the pain, and then seek
other remedy.

For a Stitch at the Heart.
TAke and distill Endive Water, and when the fire is out of it drink thereof
one ounce at a time; for this will help all Stitches of the Heart if you will
use it.

Medicines for the Pleurisy.
TAke Broom Flowers, Scabias, and Carduus Benedictus, of every one a like
portion, mingle them together, and let the Patient every morning and evening
take a good draught, and anoint the ribs with oil of Broom Flowers, for this
is good.

Another singular remedy for the same.
TAke three ounces of the water of Lady-thistle called Carduus Benedictus, one
spoonful of white Wine, and fix inner whites of Eggs well braid, mingle them
together and lay them plaister-wise upon the ribs as hot as you may suffer it.

Another for the same.
TAke two good handfulls of Horse-dung, two races of Ginger in powder, then
wrap the dung and the Ginger together in a linen cloth, then put them in a pot
to boil with a quart of white Wine until the third part be consumed, and
drink thereof evening and morning, and after you have drunk the said Wine,
cover you well and sweat.

A Regiment for the Pleurisy.
THe Patient ought not to drink wine, nor eat flesh, but must be content to
drink Tysants, Barley water, and weak drink, and to eat Barley hulked, and milk
of Almonds clarified, roasted Apples and great Raisins, as long as the Fever
does last. And to help him to spit, it is good to use often white pills of
Diadragaganton, Sugar Candy, and other things mentioned in the Remedies of the
Cough.

For the Pleuresie.
THe common practice is to let the Patient blood, and to administer to him
Tysants, and to give the syrup of Violets in the which is dissolved Cassia
newly drawn, half an ounce of Manna elect 1.3. give this to the Patient after
he is let blood, this has helped many. Also this is very good for the
Pleurisy. Take a hollow Apple, and put therein a good quantity of Olybanum,
and put the Apple in the hot embers, and so let it stand till it be roasted, and
then give it to the Patient: this has helped many without letting blood. A
Pleurisy comes of cold humors, and if it be not far past, give the Patient
Malmsey wherein has been sodden Camomil to drink; this has helped many without
letting blood.

Medicines for the Lungs.
An excellent Medicine for the Cough of the Lungs.
TAke the Lungs of a Fox and wash them clean in fair water, and lay them in
Vinegar two days, and then hang them up to dry, the shortest way is to dry
them in an Oven, and then take a few crops of Hysope, Elecampana roots, and a
few crops of Hoarhound, and a good quantity of Anniseeds, and a good quantity
of Licoras, and one ounce of Sugar Candy, and bray all together, and searse it,
and then you may choose whether you will eat the Powder in apples, in pottage,
or in meat.

To make a Water that is restorative for a man, that if his Lungs be wasted,
will restore them again, and gather Nature again.
TAke Fennel roots, and Parsley roots, and wash them clean, and pill of the
utter bark of the roots, and the hard roots that is within them, and cast it
away, and make them small; then take a brazen pot, and put therein three quarts
of water, and put the roots therein, and sees it over the fire: then take Figs
and mince them small, and Licoras small, and put them together, and make them
boil well, then take Sorrel and stamp it, and put it thereto, and let it boil
well, and then take it down and strain it through a cloth into some Vessel of
earth, and stop it well and fast that the breath go not out, and let the sick
drink thereof hot evening, and morning cold.

For the Cough of the Lungs.
TAke a handful of Figs, and sees them in Ale or Beer until they be somewhat
tender, then slit them asunder, and put them in a linen bag, and so lay them
on your Stomach warm, and when they be cold, warm them again in the same liquor.

To comfort the Lungs.
TAke and distill our Lady Thistle, and drink the water thereof twice a day,
and it will comfort the Lungs. Also the Water of Chervell does the like.

To open the Lungs.
TAke Hysope Water and drink thereof twice a day evening and morning, at each
time one ounce and a half, or two ounces, and it will help you.

For the Impostumation of the Lungs.
TAke and drink Water of Camomill, twice a day, at each time an ounce, and it
will help thee: Fennel water will do the like. Approved.

For heat or drought in the Lungs.
DRink water of great Plantain twice a day, and it will kill the heat of the
Lungs. Water of blue Violets does the like.

Medicines for the Heart.
For trembling of the Heart without a Fever.
TAke the maw of an old Cock, dry it, and make powder thereof; and drink the
same powder in red Wine or sweet Wine, for it is very good; put a little
Saffron thereto.

For the Heart that beats or trembles in man's body, and comes of thought.
BRay Coral in a mortar of brass as small as you can, then searse it, and
mingle it with Sugar very fine beaten, use to take of this powder first in the
morning and last at night, and it will help you.

A good Medicine for the Heart, and Swowning.
TAke the powder of Cloves, with the juice of Borage, a spoonful at a time,
and it will help you. Also the powder of Ginger and powder of Cummin put in
meats is good for the same.

A comfortable Medicine to restore the spirits of the Heart, and to mend the
disposition of the Etick or Consumption, as follows.
TAke a quarter of an ounce of Gold foil, and half an ounce of Manus Christi,
beat them in a mortar together until none of the Gold be seen, and keep it
till you have need to use it, which must be in manner following. Take a quart
of pure Rose water, and boil it with a quantity of Penidos, keep it in a fair
glass, and when you will use it, take in the morning the weight of the
foresaid powder and put in your mouth, and drink it down with five or six
spoonfulls of the foresaid water.

For swelling or rising about the Heart.
Sees Oil Olive by it self, then take as much Honey, and sees it by it self,
then sees them together a little while, and when it is cool put it in a box,
and this is very good for the Heart.

For fatness about the Heart.
TAke the juice of Fennel and Honey, and sees them all together, until they
be hard, and then eat thereof evening and morning, and thou shall be whole.

To put away venom from the heart.
TAke Bolearmoniack and Sanguis Draconis, of each three ounces, and of the best
Cinnamon four ounces, and mingle them altogether in powder, and so receive it,
and it will put away Venom from the Heart.

For Gnawing about the Heart.
TAke Sage leaves, and as much yarrow, and grind them together, and temper them
with Ale, and then strain and drink thereof.

Things good for the Heart.
SAffron, Borage, Hearts horn, Mustard, Cloves, Galingale, Nutmegs, red Roses,
Violets, Maces, Sugar, good Wine moderately taken, Mirth and good air, that
day you eat of Piony, or drink thereof, you shall not swound.

Against Swounding.
BOrage eaten with flesh, or in pottage, is good for them that fall in their
Swounding, or be faint at the Heart, or have Cardiack Passion at the Heart.

Against Swounding.
TAke water that Roses has been sodden in, and the powder of the same, with a
raw Egg. Or take Rose Water, that Sweet Water has been sodden in; this is
very good.

Medicines for the Belly.
To dissolve a hard Belly.
TAke and stamp Mallows and Mercury together, and make a plaster thereof, and
lay it to thy Navell, and it shall dissolve the matter in the womb in short
time. Or take the juice of Rue and drink it, with stale Ale, or Wine, or fair
Water, and use to drink of this, and it will help thee in short time.

For any hard Belly that is sore.
MIngle Pennyroyall and Ginger together, and bind them plaisterwise to thy
Belly, and be whole.

For Diseases of the Belly whatsoever they be.
TAke Wormwood, Rue, Motherwort, Lavender Cotton, and the gall of an Ox, Cow,
or Calf, stamp the herbs, and put the Gall thereto, and lay it to the bottom of
thy Belly, and be whole.

A Drink to destroy all evils in the Belly or Body within fifteen days.
TAke Scabias, Mugwort, Smallage, Devills-bit, Herb-Ivy, Wormwood, Fumitory,
Fetherfew, and Spiknard, stamp all these, and sees them in white Wine, and
clarify it with whites of Eggs; drink of this nine days and be whole.

Medicines for the Colic.
For the Wind-Collick.
TAke Winter-Savory, stamp it and strain it with strong Ale; drink this warm,
and immediately the pain will cease, as if it were sweep'd away. There have
been diverse helped with this which have had such pain with the Wind-Collick,
that they have swowned several times in a day. Also a cupping-glasse set upon
the top of the Navell is a present remedy. Also Camomill, Rosemary, Sage and
Salt roasted under the embers and laid to the Navell is a present Remedy. Emmets
eggs dried in an oven, made in powder and drank, helps the Wind-Collick
immediately. For the Colic of the Stomach see after.

For the Strangullion.
CUt off the top of an Onyon and take out the core, then put into the place a
pretty quantity of this powder following. Take Betany and Centory of each a
like quantity, and make powder thereof, putting in a little Butter, then put on
the top again, and put it in hot embers and roast it, then lay it to your Navell
as hot as you may-suffer it, and be whole.

To make a precious Water for the Strangullion.
TAke a peck of Hawes when they be ripe, and half a peck of Hips, and beat them
in a mortar to powder, then take two gallons of Lees of Malmsey or Sack, a
penniworth of long Pepper, and a half-penniworth of grains, put all these
together and distill them in a Stilletory or Limbeck, take the water thereof
and drink it lukewarm first and last.

For the Colic, a precious Medicine, proved.
TAke Saxifrage, Maidenhaire, unset Time, and Parsley seed, and sees all these
together in Malmsey, strain it and drink it warm. Or take Time, Mints,
Woodroof, Vilipendula and Setwall, make pottage herewith, and you shall find
great ease.

For all evils within the Bladder.
TAke Fennel seeds, Parsley seeds, and Smalladge seeds; bruise them and temper
them with fair running Water, and drink this first and last at your pleasure.

For one that has much wind in his Belly.
TAke Juniper berries ere they wax black, and dry them in the air, and keep
them all the year, and use the powder thereof in your drink and pottage. Or
take the roots of Elecampane, the roots of Pellitory of the garden, and Fennel
roots, of each a like quantity, and as much of Sothernwood, wash them, and bray
them a little, and sees them all together in a gallon of Wort, and drink
thereof.

For the Colic.
TAke Flower and Ale, and drink it unsod, with a little Sugar, and this will
make you go to the stool and ease your Colic and Strangullion.

Or take Hempseed and dry it, and make powder thereof and let the Patient
drink it with Ale or Wine. Or take Dill seed, Anniseed and Cummin, of each a
like quantity, beaten into fine powder, eat it in your pottage and it will help
you.

A sovereign Medicine for the Colic and Stone.
TAke Parsley seed, Fennel seed, Anniseed, Cummin seed, Plantain seed, of each
of them a quarter of an ounce, an ounce of Nutmeg, four ounces of fine Sugar,
beat all these seeds into powder and searse them, and let the Sugar be beaten
with Ale, then take of the powder as much as an Hafell nut, and let the Patient
use to drink thereof morning and evening four times a week warm with Wine or
Beer (but Wine is best) and when the pain comes drink it with Malmsey.

Another.
Fry Pellitory and Butter together, and bind them to thy Navell, and this will
suddenly cease the pain. Or take a Lapwing and burn her in the fire feathers
and all, then take the ashes of her, and give it the Patient to drink with Wine
somewhat warm, and this will ease the Colic.

For the Colic of the stomach.
TAke of Broom feeds a spoonful and a half, so many Barberries with the hulls
off, and half a spoonful of Anniseeds, and a quarter of a spoonful of
Licoras, and as much white Sugar Candy, of all these beaten together into
powder take a quantity first in a morning, and last in an evening.

Medicines for the Worms.
TAke and eat Garlic, and it will kill all Worms in man's Belly. Or take of the
juice of Lavender-Cotton, and put to it the powder of Wormseed, and drink it
three times every morning fasting, but drink not in an hour or two after, and
this will destroy the Worms.

For Worms in young children.
TAke Setwell (you must buy it at the Apothecaries) and make it into fine
powder, and give the child to drink as much as a small Walnut in a cup of
Malmsey, and it will destroy all Worms. Or, Take Garlic, Wormwood, Mints,
Fetherfew, Tansey, and stamp them all together with the gall of an Ox, then
fry them together and put them in a linen cloth, and lay them to the Navell as
hot as may be suffered, or sees them in Vinegar and lay them to likewise. Or
take the gall of a Bull, and dip some Wool therein, and lay it upon the Navel
of the child, and it will make the worms come forth. Or take Honey, and spread
it on a tossed of bread, and cast good Worm-seed thereon, and give it the child
fasting.

Worms in the Belly.
TAke the pills of Oranges, and dry them, and make them in powder, and drink it
in Malmsey or stale Alc, there is nothing better.

A Medicine for the Guts.
For the Guts that fret.
TAke twelve leaves of Rue, nine Pepper corns, and as much Dill-seed as thou
may take up with thy two fingers; stamp them and temper them together with
fair water, and it will help thee.

For wind in the Guts.
TAke Honey pitch, and Butter, and sees them together, and anoint thy belly
therewith against the fire.

For pain of the Guts.
TAke Tansey Rue, and Sothern-wood; and eat it with salt fasting, and be whole.

For the cough in the Gnts.
TAke the water of Flower-de-luce, and drink it lukewarm twiceor thrice a day
an ounce at a time. Also water of Camomil does the same drunk as aforesaid: The
water of Vine leaves is good against stitches, and also against Impostumes in
the Guts.

A Medicine for the Navel.
A plaster for swelling of the Navel
TAke Cowes dung and dry it to powder, Barley flower, and Bean flower, of each a
portion; the juice of Knotgrass a good quantity, and of Cummin a little; make a
Plaster of Ale, and lay it to thy Navel, and it will heal thee. Or take Cowes
dung and sees it in the Milk of the same Cow, and lay it on the grief; this is
also mavelous good for a sudden Ach, and swelling in the Bagg.

For a Child's Navel sore with crying.
TAke a little Bean-flower, and the ashes of fine linen clouts burned; and
temper it with red Wine and Honey, and so lay it to the sore.

Medicines for the Back.
For the weakness of the Back.
TAke flower of Barley, and Beans, and oil of Roses, the yolk of an Egg; and
make a plaster thereof, and lay it to thy back in the day time, and it will do
you much good. Or take slower of fine Rice, and Wheat flower, and temper it
with Claret wine and Sugar, and put thereto a little of the powder of Clare,
and Nut-megs; and make a Cake thereof, and bake it well, and eat thereof; this
is good.

For pain of the Back.
TAke fresh Cow dung and fry it in Vinegar, and make a Plaster thereof, and
lay it to thy Back; and within four or five times dressing thou shall be whole.

For pain in the reins of the Back.
TAke and sees the leaves of red Willow, and as hot as the sick may suffer it;
lay it to the reins of thy Back, and within four or five times dressing thou
shall be whole.

Medicines for the Flux of the Belly.
To restrain the Flux, whatsoever the cause be.
TAke the pisle of an Hare, and dry it, and make powder thereof, and drink it:
Also ^e water of Oken-buds or the very Acorns dried and made in Powder, and
drunk with red. Wine, is very good: Also the maw of a young Leveret is very
good, drunk with the juice of Plantano.

A good Medicine for the bloody Flux.
TAke a pennyworth of Honey, and a pennyworth of Wheat flower, and three,
spoonfuls of Chalk, and the yolks of five Pgs, and half a pennyworth of Saffron
and make a Cake thereof, and eat thereof four days, and be whole. Or take the
root of the red Nettle, and stamp it, and delay it with water or Ale, then
strain it and drink, thereof, and be whole for over.

For all manner of Fluxes that be curable.
TAke the seed of Plantane, and the blossoms of red Roses in Powder, of each
alike much, and give the sick half a spoonful at once with warm Whey, first and
last three days together, and it will heal him. Or take and drink the water
that stone has been scalded in first and last and be whole.

To stop a Lask in Children.
TAke the seeds of Plantane, and make powder thereof, and give it to the Child
to drink in red Wine, or in Ale, and it will stop the Flux: Proved true. Or
take Almonds and blaunch them, and fry them in a Pan, and cat them diverse times
in a day. Also the durg of a stoned Horse that goes to house, fried in
Malmsey, and laid to the Navel, will stop a Lask.

To stop the bleeding of the Fundament.
TAke Aloes and Mirrhe, of each a like much, and make them into Powder, and
with a little Pile of Almonds anoint the sore, and then cast the Powder
thereon, and put upon the Fundament with a hot Scarlet cloth, and this will
help thee.

To make a man have a Lask,
TAke Salt and Soap, and lay it to thy belly, plaister-wise; and it will make
the have a Lask straight. Or take the gall of an Ox, and anoint thy belly and
stomach therewith, and it will make thee Laxative.

To keep a man Laxative.
TAke Mallows and Mercury a good quantity, and stamp them together, and fry
them with May-butter, or fresh butter; and then strain it and keep it in a Box,
and anoint your belly therewith evening and morning, and it will keep you
soluble.

For the Bloody Flux.
TAke the jaw-bones of a Pike, and make powder of them, and eat of this powder
dry, or take it with red Wine first and last, and it will stop the Flux; for it
has helped, when nothing else could help.

Another for the same.
TAke red Beans and boil them in red Wine, till it wax thick, but first
dissolve a little Allom in the Wine; then let the Patient eat of this evening
and morning, and drink nothing but red Wine after it; this did help a man that
had the Flux a great while on him. Or take an old Apple, and pull out the Core,
then put into the Apple a ball of Virgin-wax; then roast it in the Embers and
eat it; this will stop the Fux: Probatum.

To avoid bruised Blood.
TAke Nepp and drink the juice thereof with Wine or Ale, eight or nine times,
and that will cause it to avoid downwards, although he had it twenty times.

A gentle Purgation to be taken at all times without fear.
TAke two ounces of Syrrp of De radibus, Manna one ounce, mingle these with
five ounces of the water of Bugloss, and he shall have a Lask without peril. Or
take a little clarified Butter, and put it in Ale lukewarm, and give the
Patient to drink thereof; and it will make him go to stool.

Medicines for the Stone.
A Medicine for the Stone, tried by Master Hide of Narbury.
TAke four handfuls of Prosper, six handful of Parsley, and Parsleyroots, two
handful of Grommel, or for want of that, some Grommelfeed, the quantity of an
Egg-shel full; two handful of Philipendula, three handful of Betony, four
handful Mousear, one handful Centuary with Mast, begotten between the two
Lady-days; two handful of Cherry-stones, three handful of Brierheps, threescore
innerskins of Pigeons gissarers; let them be washed and hanged upon a thread
till they be dry, so as they may be knocked to powder, as also the Heps, and
Cherry stones must be dried in an Oven or before the fire, the other herbs in
the Summer, the Heps. Cherry-stores, and Gissarens must be knocked to powder
every one severally by themselves, the other herbs must be rubbed to powder,
then blend them altogether, and sift them through a sine sive; and take every
morning and evening a quantity of half a Nutmeg of the same powder, and put it
in a spoon, and blend a little Beer or Ale, and sup it, and drink after it; and
use this till you find ease.

An excellent Medicine for them that have the Stone
THere grows in the Gall of some Oxen a certain yellow stone sometimes in
bigness of a Walnut, somewhat long and brittle; if you take that Stone and make
it to powder, and eat of it in your pottage the weight of a scruple or more at
a time, according to your strength, it is a singular thing for them that cannot
make water, and for stopping of the Conduits.

For the Stone and Strangullion.
TAke a handful of Chickweed and as much fresh Butter as a Walnut, and half so
much black soap, and stamp them altogether in a mortar, and then fry them, and
lay them plaisterwise to thy Navel, and this will make thee void the Stone
without any pain. And for the Strangullion, take the bone that is in the pistle
of a Weasel, and dry it and make powder thereof and use to drink it with Ale or
Beer, and be whole.

For the Stone, that never fails.
TAke Barley Malt, and pick it very clean, and then grind it and make thereof
good Wort, and put into the said Wort a good quantity of Cherry stone kernels,
and Gum that grows on Cherry trees, and boil the Wort and the Gum together,
until half the Wort be consumed, then strain it, and put it a fair Vessel, and
use to drink thereof morning and evening, and be whole on warrant.

Another for the same.
TAke the Urine of a Boar, and give it the patient to drink, and it shall drive
out the Stone wheresoever it be. This medicine did a Lady use for the best
medicine that ever she knew.

Another for the same.
TAke the blood of a Fox, and anosnt the side that is sore, and the Stone will
break to powder, and go away if you use it. Or take the blood of a Fox with
white Wine, and it will break the stone hastily.

To break the Stone in the Bladder.
TAke a great Flint stone, and lay it in the fire until it be as hot as fire,
and then put it into stale Ale, and drink thereof at evening and at morning,
and it will break.

A sovereign Medicine for the Stone.
TAke the blood of a Fox, and anoint thy Yard therewith, and this will break
the Stone in the Bladder; and to try the goodness thereof, put some small stone
into the Fox blood, and it will break it. Or take a great root of Radish, and
pare him, and cut him into fifty round pieces, and put them into a dish, and
put thereto honey enough, and let it stand all night; and on the morrow eat
nine pieces, and the next day eight, and then seven, and so abating one every
day till all be eaten; and this will break the Stone.

A proved Medicine for the Stone.
TAke true black Jet, and beat it to powder, and searse it, then take Bees
(stings and all) and dry them in an Oven, and make powder thereof, and drink it
and the Jet together; and if you put the feed of Burrows made into powder to
it, it will be the better: And for lack of Bees, and Bur-seed, you may use to
drink the Jet alone. This medicine is well proved, and if you use it, it will
help you.

A Medicine for the Stone, oftentimes proved.
TAke green Samphire as it grows, and make powder thereof, and let him that
is troubled with the Stone drink every week of it, whether he feel pain or no,
and in short time it will rid him clean of the Stone; this powder is best to be
drunk with white Wine.

For the Stone.
TAke the Acorns that grow on an Oak, and dry them, and make powder thereof,
and drink it in the morning fasting with Rhenish wine and sugar; and this will
break the Stone.

A most approved Medicine for the Colic and Stone, by the most learned
Physician Doctor Gynello.
TAke a quantity of wood Betony, and dry it to powder, and a quantity of the
roots of Elicampana, and dry them into powder, and boil them with a little
sugar plate in a quart of red wine unto a pint, and drink it hot in the morning
fasting, before the sun be up, and in the evening after the sun is down; use
this three times, and it will help thee God willing.

A special Medicine for the Stone of Doctor Leuckner, his Experiment as
follows.
TAke the green weed that comes from the Sea amongst the Oysters, and wash it
very clean, and dry it as dry as you can, and make it into fine powder, and
drink it fasting with Malmsey, and it will break the greatest Stone that is.

For the Stone.
THe best thing that is to dissolve the Stone ln man or woman's body, is the oil
of Crystal, being dulcified and given to the Patient, a Dram at once in white
Wine or Renish Wine a good draught; for if you lay a stone in the Urine which
the Patient voided, afterward it will dissolve him in twelve hours; and the
same oil will also heal any green wound or sore with great expedition. There
was a man the which was sore grieved with the Stone, who was helped with this
drink following. Take the blossoms of Haws, and distyl them; then take the
water thereof and sees it, and put therein Grommel-seed, Saxifrage-seed, and
Parsly-seed, of each an ounce, of Goats blood, Hares blood, and Fox blood, of
each of them seven Drams; sees all these in a quart of the water, in a close
pot of Pewter or earth, in a Kettle of water the space of six hours; then
strain it and drink thereof every day. This is an excellent hing.

To deliver the Stone, a Medicine that never fails.
TAke the roots of red Nettles, and wash them clean in many waters, and then
bray them small, and lay them in red Wine twelve hours; then give the sick
thereof to drink six spoonfuls of the liquor and let him rest on a bed 3 hours;
and then give him twelve spoonfuls, and 3 hours after give him twenty
spoonfuls, and anon he shall make water and deliver the Stone, Or take white
Thorn buds in May and distyl them, and take a pint of the same water, and half
a pint of Malmsey, and boil it a little at the fire, (but if you put in a
little Honey withal it will be the better) and then drink it to bed-ward:
Proved by Master GAGE.

To break the Stone.
TAke a quantity of a Jet-stone, and two races of Ginger, and the shells of
Eggs, hatched under a Hen when the Chickens be out; (but first take away the
filme of the shells) and put them altogether in a Mortar, with the piece of a
stone that comes out of an Ox gall, or with Parsley-seed if you cannot get the
stone; and make Powder of all these together, and drink of it with warm. Ale in
a spoon as often as you shall think good; and it will break the Stone, and ease
you of the Colic, and cause you to make water easily.

An excellent Medicine for the Stone.
TAke Selgreen, Planten, Fetherfew, and Tansey; and pound them all apart, and
keep every Liquor by it self in a Glass; then take of each of them a like
quantity, and boil it with Beanflower and Honey to make it Plaister-wise; and
then take a double swadling-band of linen cloth, and spread the Plaster
thereupon, and so lay it to the pain, and round about the back, and use it so a
fortnight or three weeks; for this is a special good Medicine and well approved.

Another for the same.
TAke a Goat, and keep him three days fasting, then put him in a Tub full of
holes; and the fourth day give him nothing but Grommel, Parsley, Alexander,
Salendine, Saxifrage, Hawberries, and Watereresses; and make him to lick
prepared Salt, and give it him with Wine to drink; and so keep him with that
food a whole week in the foresaid Tub; and all the water he makes you must
through the holes of the Tub receive it into some vessel; then take this water,
and put thereto Holly Berries, Ivy Berries, and Hawthorn Berries, of each half
a handful; of Juniper Berries, of flowers of Starewort, of Crasfoot, of each
half a handful; of the seeds of Parsley, Saxifrage, Elysander, Radish,
Philipendula, Nettles, the Berries of Kneeholm, Asparagus, Fennel-seed, and
Anni-seed, of each half an ounce; of the roots of Kneeholm, of Asparagus, and
Watercresses, of each of them four ounces; of Grommel-seed and Smallage-seed
eight ounces. Bruise all these feeds small, and chop the herbs, and put them
into the foresaid Goats water the space of twelve days into some warm place,
stirring them every day two or three times; then put them together into a
Still, and hang in the mouth of the Still a little Musk Cynamon and Cloves,
because of the loathsomness of the Goats water; and so distyl the water, and
give the Patient that has the Stone three ounces at a time: this is the most
Soverain water can be found, for it melts and voideth the Stone without pain:
This holp a Scholar at Eaton-Colledge, whom all the Physicians gave over as
one incurable.

Of the Stone.
THe Stone is engendered by reason of a great heat that is about the Reins,
straightness of the Conduit, and abundance of gross and slimy humors; or
Brentcholer, which by the said excess of heat, is (as one would say) baked or
dried as Clay in the Furnace, and so at last becomes a hard stone. Therefore
it is chiefly to be noted, that without the mending of the foresaid causes, all
that you do minister to break the Stone, is either hurtful to the Patient, or
else small effect; therefore it is good to keep a sober diet. And note that
always whatsoever they be are naught in this case: All kind of Pulses, as
Pease; Beans, and such like; all gross flesh and water-fowls, and fowls of
great bodies, and all Fruits (except ripe Prunes) are might; and all Shellfish
except Grevise and Shrimps; also all Pepper and hot spices, and all meats salt
or sower; but especially boware of hard Cheese, for that is oftentimes the
only cause of the Stone; and you must not lie on your back, and you must keep
your Reins cold, and let your back be untrussed in summer.

An approved Medicine for the Stone and Strangury.
TAke most of Licoras, then Anniseeds, Colianedr, Grommel, Fennel Parsley and
Alicander-seeds; then dry all these seeds and pound them severally by
themselves; and note that Licoras, Anni-seeds, and Grommel-seeds be
Restoratives; and when they are all in Powder, mix thereto powder of Sire, to
the quantity of one half of one parcel of the scowrers; also mix thereto white
Sugar Candy, to the quantity of your Licoras, with a Nutmeg or two; use this
powder fasting in clear Ale, in your Broths, and all suspected meats.

Remedies for a Man's Yard.
IF this Impediment be of any interial cause, use to drink Milk or else drink
often a good portion of the water of Hawes, and inject into the Yard the water of
Comphry, if the Impediment be betwivt the head and skin of the Yard, wash the
head of the Yard diverse times with white Wine, and after that use the powder of
a rotten Post, or any siceative Medicines is good; or else Populion or
Vnguentum ei Epsiacon is good.

For the Erection of the Yard above Nature.
TAke first and anoint the Yard and Godds with oil of Juniper, and the oil of
Campheret is good, and so is Agnus Castus braid and made in a Plaster, and
laid upon the Stones.

This Impediment does come of the inflammation of the Reins of the back; or of
inflammations of the Veins of the Yard and Stones, or of too much use of
Venerious acts.

To heal a man's Yard that is sore.
TAke Turpentine, and the yolk of an Egg, of each a like much; well beaten
together with Saffron, and anoint the sore Yard therewith. Or take and sees
the powder of Lynseed in sweet Milk till it be thick, and lay it to the Yard
Plaister-wise, and anoint it with the juice of Morrel and Plantane, and be
whole.

For the swellings in a man's Yard.
TAke Leeks, with the tails, and wash them clean, and stamp them, and fry them
in Barrows-grease, and make a Plaster, and lay it all about the yard, and be
whole. Or take Betony, and sees it in Wine, and stamp it, and make a Plaster,
and lay it to the Cods, and it will assuage the swelling of them; this is well
proved.

For pain in a man's Yard through Gravel or Champise as follows.
TAke Pellitory, and Boares-grease, and fry them together well, and make two
Plasters thereof, and lay one between the Navel and the Yard, and the other on
the Reins of the back, and anon thou shall deliver water and gravel, which
before thou might not do but by drops; this will help thee without doubt.

To make a water for a sore Yard.
TAke and put Allom in fair water, and sees it till it wax tough; then put it
in a pewter Box this will cleanse a sore, and make it fair.

For burnign with a Harlot.
IF a man be burnt with a Harlot, and do meddle with another woman within one
day, she shall be burned: If one be burned, let him wash his secrets two or
three times with white Wine, or Sack and water; but if the matter have
continued long, go to some expert Chyrurgion to have help, or else thy Guts
will burn and fall out of thy belly.

For a man's Stones that hang down long.
TAke the fatness of a Conney, and anoint thy Cods and Stones therewith, and
then wrap thy Sons in a Conny-skin; do this nine times, and labor not in nine
days, and be whole.

For him that cannot make water.
TAke Rue, Grommel, and Parsley; and stamp them, and mingle them with white
Wine, and give the sick thereof to drink warm. Or take the juice of Cinquefoil,
and drink it with Posset-ale, and it will make you make water anon.

For one that cannot make water.
TAke the stones and Kercels of Peches and Medlers, as much of the one as of
the other; and make them into Powder, very fine, and searse them; this done,
take fine Sugar, the weight of all this; and mingle all this together, and let
the Patient drink thereof with good white Wine, and he shall be whole
incontinent.

To make one make water.
TAke six or seven Berries of Ivy, and stamp them, and strain them with Ale,
and give the sick to drink thereof, and he shall make water straight.

To make one make water.
TAke a pint of good Ale, and put therein of Honey, even as it comes out of
the Hive with Bees, wax and all; and strain it with the Ale, then give it the
Patient to drink, and within one quarter of an hour he shall make water; with
this was one helped that lay three days, and never made water.

To make one make water.
TAke a pint of white Wine, and a good spooonful of Sivil Soap, finely
scraped, and the yolks of two Eggs well put from the whites; beat all these
together, with the Wine, and then strain it, and warm it lukewarm, and drink
hereof as often as you shall feel pain, and this will help you; for it is well
proved.

A Medicine for the Scyatica.
THis Infirmity comes of hard lying on the Huckle-bones, or lying upon the
ground, or upon a form, or such like: it may come by a stripe, or by a fall,
and it will run from the Huckle-bone to the knee, and from the knee to the
anckle, and from the anckle to the little toe, and then it is past cure; and
otherwhiles this Gowt will have a reflection to the Reins of the back, and to
the Flank; and it may come of a gross Flegmetique humor.

The chiefest remedy is, to anoint the place with oil of Turpentine, and Aqua
vitae compounded together, and use to anoint the place often against the fire,
and a searcloth of pitch is good.

For the Scyatica.
TAke oil of Olive, May butter gall of a Bull, and red Onyons, and boil these
together and lay it to the hips where the pain is; this is a good Medicine: Or
take a red cloth, and Anoint it with Clarified Honey and thereupon strew the
powder of Cummyn, and as hot as you may, Bind it to the sore, and be whole.

For the Scyatica in the Hip.
Take a Pottle of wine Lees, and wine dregs and sower bread and Cow Dung, and
boil these well together, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the pain
as hot as you may suffer it, and this will heal you.

For the Scyatica Passion.
TAke a Gallon of Urine, and sees it well, and scum it well, until it be
clear, and then take it down, and let it stand until it be cold and then put
the clear thereof into a fair Pot, and put away the dregs, and then take the
same clear Urine, and put it over the fire, and put therein a quart of black
dew Snails, and boil them together until the Snails be wasted, then strain it
through a hair sive, and keep the same liquor in an earthen pot, and aniont the
hipp and the leg therewith before a hot fire, and let the liquor be warm.

For all manner of Gouts, and consumed members, and for the Scyatica passion.
TAke a pound of Riote of red docks that men make brogys of, and wash them
clean and dry them in the sun, until the water be away, then cut them small,
and bray them in a mortar, and boil them in a quart of strong vinegar, until
half be wasted; and then with the same anoint the aching place, and it will
amend: then keep it in a vial of glass, or else it will dry away. This Medicine
is very excellent for the diseases abovewritten, for it has been very well
proved.

Medicines for the fundament
A Remedy for falling out of the Fundament.
FIrst beware of taking cold in that place, and beware of costiveness, and keep
your arse and buttocks warm, and sit not upon the cold earth nor upon stones,
nor upon no hard thing, but take something under the buttocks, not only for
falling out of the Longation, or arsgut, for all other infirmities that may be
engendered in the Longation.

For the fig in the fundament.
THis Impediment is a Impostumation or lump of flesh growing in the Longation,
and it does come of melancholy humors, the which does descend to the Longation,
or fundament, and for remedy, purge the matter with confection of hamock, or
with the pills of Lapides Lazule, or with Vera Rufini, then take of the powder
of a dogs head burned, and mix it with the juice of pimpernel, and make tents,
and put into the fundament.

For him that his fundament goes out.
TAke bay leaves, and boil them in a pot of water and as hot as you can suffer
it, you must sit over it, to the intent the fume of the water may go up into
the body, and with your finger put it up by little and little, and when it is
hot, heat an Oaken board, and sit on it as hot as you can suffer it, and it will
help you,

For the falling out of the fundament.
TAke a red Nettle and bray it well, and put it in an earthen pot, and put
thereto a good portion of white wine, and sees it until it be half wasted, and
of the liquor give the patient to drink first and last warm, and lay the herbs
to the fundament as hot as he may suffer it, and use this and be whole.

Medicines for the Piles and Emeroids.
THe Emerods or the Piles the which be the vains in the extreme parts of the
Longation, to whom does happen diverse times 2 sundry passions, the first is
like paps and tetts, and they will bleed, and they be the very Emerods, the
other be like wartes, and they will itch, water, and smart, and they be called
the Piles; and in the same place, does breed other infirmities, as is
aforesaid. The cause of this Impediment does some of malicious humors in the
Maw and Entrails, or it may come of a choleric humor.

For the Piles or Hemeroids.
TAke a pint or a quart of Linseed Oil, and put into it as many Cray-fish alive
as it will hold, then boil them a quarter of an hour, then strain the oil from
them, and let them be very well beaten in their shells in a Mortar, and then
put them into the oil again, and let them boil as formerly, then strain them
hard from the oil, and cast them away; then fill the oil with as many of the
young tops or tender buds of Elder, or the young fresh leaves, and let them
boil in them till they begin to be crips like fried Parsley, then strain that
very hard from the Elder, and reserve that for an excellent medicine to anoint
the Piles; or moistning a little Cotton, keep it close trussed up, and it will
quickly help them. It is also a soverain medicine for any Burning or Scalding.

For the Emrods,
TAke an onyon, and cut of the top thereof, and take out the heart of the onyon,
and fill up the place with the juice of unset leeks, and then rist it in the
fire, and with the juice thereof anoint the sore, and lay all hot thereto. Or
take bran of wheat, and fry it in sheeps tallow and put it in a bagg or pocket,
and lay it to the sore, or let the sick sit thereon, and this will help you.

For the Piles.
TAke Scabias, and boil it in water until the water be consumed almost, and let
him that is sore, hold his fundament over the fume of the said water as hot as
he can suffer it, and be whole.

For the Piles.
TAke aqua vitae cold, and wash the piles therewith, and take cotton linen and
burn it, and lay the powder thereof to the piles upon a linen cotton cloth as
often as you be greived. Or take wormwood and grind it in a mortar small, and
then fry it in Oil Olive, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the sore
as hot as you can suffer it, and this will cease the bleedag and aching.

For the Emeraoids that have pappes,
TAke and bind about the Pap a red silk thread, and cut away the pap above the
head, and leave the thread fast, and lay a plaster of Wormwood upon the same,
and this will heal it, Probatum est.

For the Piles.
TAke a quart of White Wine, and the tops of Elder buds, and Honey, and boil
them well together, then strain them, and wash the place therewith, and this
will heal you in short space.

For the Hemeroids.
TAke the juice of red Nettle leaves, and a little Deer suet, and heat them
together in a Sawcer till it be somewhat green, and anoint the place with it.

For the Hemeroids, an approved Medicine.
TAke a gray Cat, and cut her Throat, and save her blood, then flea her, and
roast her, and save the grease, then fry the grease and the blood together, and
lay it to the fore thrice as hot as the Patient may suffer it, and it will help
him.

An excellent Medicine for the Hemeroids or Piles.
TAke and stamp Dandelion and Daysies together, and strain out the juice
thereof into good Ale, and drink thereof, and it will help thee.

A Glister,
TAke of Endive, of Succory, of Violet Leafs, of each a handful, of Cummin
seeds, and Anniseeds being bruised small, of each a little, boil them in
sufficient water as will boil them tender, then strain the herbs from the
liquor, and take three parts of the water, and one part of milk, putting into
it a little salt, a spoonful of Honey, and as much Oil Olive, if you will make
it stronger, you may put in an ounce of Cassia Fistula extract.

Medicines for the Thighs that be stiff.
The Brooklime, Horehound herb, John Sheeps Tallow, Swines Grease, and a Horse
turd that is new made, beat it all together, and lay it to the sore.

For aching of the Bones of the Thighs.
TAke a pint of white Wine, and the Gaul of an Ox, and boil them well, and
scum them clean, then take crumbs of white Bread and put thereto, and make it in
a plaster, and lay to the sore two or three times, and be whole.

To knit the synews and veins of the Thighs, or elsewhere, when they be broke.
TAke great worms of the earth, and put them in sallet oil, and with a little
Spodonesos that Pedlers have to sell, work them together, and lay them to the
wound, and let it lie nine days, and remove it not, and it will knit both
Sinews and Veins together. This is proved.

To make an ointment to assuage the swelling, and to keep Synews from shrinking.
TAke clean Barrows Grease, and a good quantity of Sage, and boil them together
upon a chasingdish of coals, and when the Sage is dry, strain it through a
cloth, and anoint the place therewith.

For Thighs that be swollen.
TAke Hens dung, or Pigeons dung, and Sheeps tallow, and Chickweed, and
Smalladge, and beat all together and fry it with lees of Malmsey, and so lay it
as hot as you can suffer it to the swelling.

For Synews that be shrunk in the Thighs, or elsewhere.
TAke young Swallows out of the nest, to the number of twelve, then take
Rosemary, Lavender-Cotton, and Strawbery leaves, strings and all, of each a
handful, and bray the Swallows in a Mortar, guts feathers and all, with the
herbs, till they be small, and then fry it again in a Frying Pan, with May
butter, and then strain it, and when you will occupy it, chafe it against the
fire.

Medecines for an ach or swelling in the Knee.
TAke Rue and Lovage, and stamp them together, and put thereto honey, and lay
it to the sore. Or take Lovage, Smalladge, and Sheeps tallow, and lees of white
Wine, and boil all together, and lay it to the sore on a cloth. Or take Milk
and Oatmeal, and dry Rose leaves, and sees them together, and lay them to the
sore hot, and be whole.

For an Ach that does come of an old bruise.
TAke a pottle of Running Water, and a pint of Bay Salt, and boil them till
half be wasted, then thick it up with Bran, and lay it to the sore. Or take and
sees the juice of Nightshade in Butter and Oil, and scum off the froth, and
keep the same for a precious Jewel to use when you have need. Or take and
sees Oatmeal in white Wine, and lay it plaisterwise to the sore Knee, and it
will help thee shortly.

For the Gout in the Knee.
TAke the milk of a Cow of one color, and wheaten flower, and sees it until
it be thick like a plaster, and put thereto the juice of Smallage, and lay it
to the Gout, and be whole.

Medicines for Legs.
Medicines for the Legs that be swollen.
TAke Wormwood Sothernwood, and Rue, of each a like much, and stamp them
together; and sry them with fair Honey, till it llegin to wax dry; and as hot
as you may suffer it lay it to the Legs or Hands, and this will assuage the
swelling.

A Psaister for swollen Legs, or when you have no feeling in them.
TAke a pound of Pitch, and half a pound of Wax, and half a pound of Dears
sewet, or Sheep sewer, and boil all these together, then strain tnem through a
linen cloth, and so make a plaster of white Leather, of the bigness of the
fore place, and let it lie to the sore three or four days, and then if it be
not whole make another plaster, and lay it again, and so dress it till it be
whole, for this will bring the feeling again, and mollify the humor, and
assuage the swelling.

For a sore Leg.
TAke unwrought Wax, and a little sheeps Tallow, and sees them together with a
little white Coperas, and strike it on a cloth, and so lay it to the sore. Or
take Elder Leaves, those that grow one side the leaf longer then the other on
the stalk, then the other does, these be very good for a sore Leg, both to
heal, and these be leafs best for mankind.

A Pultis for a sore Leg which is swollen red, and does prick and ache.
TAke Housleek, Maslows, Lilly roots, and Smallage, dry red Rose Leafs, of each
a good handful, Oatmeal two handfulls, Lineseed, Vinecreet seed, of each a
handful, good Ale dregs, and Vinegar, of each a pint or more, white Wine a
pottle, more or less, sees the foresaid stuff very softly, and make thereof
a Pultis, and lay it to the Leg.

A Medicine for a Leg that is swollen, and is not red, but will pit after ones
finger.
TAke Chickweed and Pelltory, of each an handful, and instead of Vinegar take
dregs of Wine, and put thereto Sheeps tallow, pound chopped, and Cows milk at
your pleasure, and sees them as before written, until it be soft, and bind it
to the swollen Leg.

Another for the same.
TAke a quart of red Wine, and crumbs of Rye bread, and sees them together till
it be like a plaster, as hot as you can suffer it lay it to the sore Leg, upon
a fair cloth, and when that is done, take another; and so till you have taken
four, and this will help you.

To heal a sore Leg coming of an old cause.
TAke flowers of Camomill, or Camomill, and a good handful of Mallows, of
Wormwood, of Grunsell and Sage, of every one half a handful, and beat all
small in a Mortar, and sees it in Milk, and put thereto in the seething
Vincreeck seed in powder, half a handful of Anniseeds, and Fennel seeds one
ounce, a little May-butter, four or five yolks of Eggs, and sees all together,
and the same Eggs in the latter end of the seething, and so let it sees till
you come to a thickness: You may in the latter end of the seething put in a
pint of red Wine to comfort the Synews: take the Camomill and Mallows of each a
handful beaten in a Mortar, with Oatmeal and Milk sodden together, and let it
boil to a thickness.

For a Vein or Synew sprung in the Leg, or elsewhere.
TAke Dill, Vervain, Mallows, and the crops of red Nettles, and sees all these
in running Water, and after chop them small, and lay them hot to the Leg, as he
can suffer it.

The best Medecin for aching of bones in the Legs, or Joints, or elsewhere.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Dill, and beat it to powder, and put thereto a
quart of good white Wine, and let it sees till half be wasted away, then put
thereto a pint of Oil Olive, and let them sees together, and then strain it,
and keep it to anoint the sore place withal, and this will cease the pain
anon: this is called Oleum Vnamico; keep it well in a glass, for this is
proved.

For a swollen Leg.
TAke Oatmeal and sees it in Milk, as you would make pottage therewith, and
put thereto a handful of Mallows chopped small, and the juice of Sengreen, and
sheeps sewet, and let it boil together till it be thick, and make a plaster
thereof, and lay it to the sore Leg, and be whole.

For a red swelling in the Foot.
TAke and sees Bean meal and Barley meal with water, right thick and well,
and make a plaster, and lay it to the swelling. Or take Turpentine and
Vinegar, Honey, white Wine and Bran, and sees all these together well until
they be thick, and then lay it to the swelling: Or take else Parsley, Sage, and
Rue, and stamp with Lard of fat Bacon, and gray snails, and lay it to the sore,
and it will gather to a head. Or take Rose leafs, and Lineseed, Milk, and
Oatmeal, and fry all these together, and lay it to the sore.

For an ach in the Feet, or if his limbs were taken from him.
TAke wool Oil, or rather other Oil, and put thereto a good quantity of Aqua
vitae, and beat it to gether, and chase it against the fire, and all to rub the
sore and dead place, and in short time it will be whole.

For great aching of Bones in the Feet, or elsewhere, the best Medicine.
TAke Baldare one ounce, and put it in your pottage, and eat thereof, for this
is very good for aching of Bones, and also to restore a man that is in a
Consumption in short time, if you will use it.

To cool a hot sore Leg, and to abate the swelling.
TAke red Coal Leaves, Sage and Smallage, well stamped and meddled together with
sour dough, and Honey, and lay it to the sore. Or take horse Dung newly made,
and wring out the juice thereof, and anoint the sore therewith a good while,
and then take Violet Leases and Housleek, and stamp them, and strain them, and
put to that juice sweet Cream, and anoint the sore therewith, and it will
destroy the great heat.

For a swelling in any place.
TAke Hogs Dung, Pigeons Dung, and Sheeps Tallow, Chickweed and Smallage, and
put all these together in Lees of Malmsey, or in Malmsey, or for lack of this
in his own water, and when it is well boiled lay it hot to the sore swelling,
and this will abate the swelling, and ease the pain.

For a Corn on the Toe.
TAke a black Snail, and roast him in a white cloth, and when he is roasted lay
him to the corn hot, and it will heal thee in short time. Or take a sharp
knife, and cut the Corn clean away, and pick out the little white pith that
is within him, and when you have so done, lay a little Turpentine unto it, and
be whole.

Another for the same.
FIrst pare the Agnails or Corns with a sharp knife to the quick flesh, that it
bleed, then wipe away the blood, and drop into the place red Wax, and let it
lie till it be consumed, this will heal your Corn within twice or thrice serving
so.

To make a Nail.
TAke Cinquefoil and bray it with any grease, and lay it unto the Nail, and
this will bring the Nail again.

For aches in the Arms.
TAke Searcloaths that be atractive, or take the Oil of Turpentine, and mix it
with Aqua vitae, and anoint the place therewith.

For aching of the Wrests.
TAke and stamp Mugworth with Swines grease, and put verjuice thereto, and lay
it to the grief, and this will help the akings. Or take Planten leaves, and
stamp them with a little salt, and this is good if it be swollen. Or take the
Bran, and the Powder of Line, of each a like much, and and sees them in Wine,
and put a little Oil thereto, and make it thick, and lay it to the sore, and
this will heal thee.

For chapped hands.
TAke Mastick, Frankincense, new Wax, and Oil of Roses, and make thereof an
ointment, and anoint thy chapped hands, and this will make thee whole.

Another for the same.
TAke Rose Water, and Oil of Almonds, and a little Wax, and melt them together,
and make an ointment thereof, and anoint thy chapt hands, and within four
times anointing, they shall be whole.

For the prick of a Thorn.
TAke Sothernwood and stamp it, and mingle it with fair Barrows grease, and lay
it to the Thorn, or pricking of any venomous Beast. Or take Brooklime,
Smalladge, Sheeps Tallow, Bay Salt, and your own urine well sod together, and
lay it to the sore place where the Thorn is.

To draw out a Prick or Thorn.
TAke Dittany and grind it, and make a plaster, and lay it to the sore, and
also eat or drink Dittany, and it will do the same: Or take black Soap and lay
it to the sore, and it will draw out either prick or thorn, being well
tempered with Birdlime, and so will Violets boiled in water and laid to the
sore. Or take stone crop and stamp it, and lay it to the point of a thorn, and
this will draw it out without fail.

To draw out a Thorn and heal the place, being red swollen, my Lady Audelies
medicine.
TAke Smallage perfectly beaten in a Mortar and put it to black Soap and Boars
Grease and beat all together very well, and make an ointment thereof, and spread
ir on a linen cloth, and lay it vvarm to the sore place where the Thorn is,
and bind it.

For a prick of a Thorn or Nail.
TAke Chickvveed, and sees it in fair running Water, til it be tender, and
then strain it from the water, and bray it in a Mortar, and put it in a bottle
of milk, and put thereto Deers Sevvet, or sheeps Tallovv, and Oatmeal, and
sees it all together till it come to a Pultis, then vvash the sore place with
the water that the Chickvveed was sodden in, and then lay this Pult is on a
linen cloth, and lay it to the sore. Or take the dung of a Gander new laid,
and lay it upon the place where the Thorn is upon a linen cloth, and this
will dravv him out.

For a prick of a a Thorn.
TAke of the seed of Flax half a handful, and a quarter so much of Oatmeal, of
Cummin an ounce, beat all these into fine powder in a brazen Mortar, and sees
them in Vinegar or lees of red Wine, or Claret Wine, or white Wine, and put
thereto half so much milk, and let it sees until it be thick like Past, and
then lay it hot to the sore, and if it be rotten, it will draw it out, and if
not, it will dissolve it.

Another for the same.
TAke the black worm called a Shromp, which is commonly in horse dung, and
make a slit in his belly, but kill him not, and lay it round upon the place
where the Thorn is, or went in, it will be painful for a time, but it will
bring out the Thorn without fail.

Medicines for the Gout.
An approved Medicine for the Gout.
TAke Wormwood, Smallage, Camomill, holy-Oak leaves, Horehound, of each a
handful, then take a pint of Neatsfoot Oil, and half a pint of the Oil of
Shomakers patches, and boil the Oils together a little while, and scum it, and
the herbs being well chopped, then put them into the Oils, and let them all
boil together a quarter of an hour, and strain it through a cloth, and keep it
for your use: to this must be added Deers sewet, and two spoonfulls of Aqua
vitae.

There be four kinds of Gouts, named in Latin, Chiragra, Podagra, Scyatica and
Artetica: the one is in the hands, fingers, and arms, the which is called
Chiragra: The other is named Podagra, and that is the feet, toes and legs: The
third does keep the huckle bone, and does run to the knee, and in process of
time descends to the ancle, and to the toe, and is called Scyatica: The
fourth kind of the Gout, is named the Gout Artetick, the which does run over
all the joints and parts of a man's body, and the Medicines of every one follow.

For the Gout in the hand called Chyragra.
THe cause of this impediment does come of rheum, and evil dirt, and there be
two kinds of Gout in the hands, the one is confirmed and cannot be made whole,
for if it do come by kind, and the joints be broken, the sickness is
incurable, the other which is not confirmed, may be made whole, as follows.

TAke of Colworts three handfulls, and sees them, with a little Lie, with
three spoonfulls of Vinegar, and a little salt, stamp all these together with
the said little, and make a plaster thereof. Or take and eat Treacle, and make
a plaster thereof, and lay it to the place, and mark if the matter do come of
a hot cause, you may minister hot Medicines, and if of a cold cause, no hot
medecines but cold, and let the Patient beware of eating those things that be
over hot or cold.

For the Gout, and all manner of Aches.
TAke of Clot roots two pound, and sees them in piss till they be tender, and
then bray them and strain them through a cloth, and then take six Oxen galls,
or Neats, and look that you have a pottle of urine or more well strained, and
then put thereto a quart of Oil Olive, and sees this together till it do come
to the quantity of the Oil, for this will work wonders in the Gout.

To comfort the joints and Synews.
TAke five or six handfulls of Walworts, and sees them well in Wine, then
strain them with a little wax, oil of Spike, and Aqua vitae, make an ointment
wherewith you must anoint the place morning and evening every day.

Medicines for the Gout appropriate in all causes.
TAste cow dung, and sees it in sweet Milk, and lay a plaster thereof to the
Gout: Also the yolks of Eggs, woman's Milk, Lynseed, and Saffron all together in
a plaster asswageth the diseases of the Gout, and if you be disposed to break
the skin, and to let the humor issue out (as by such means many a one is eased)
you shall make a little plaster of black Soap, and Aquavitae, which will
blister it without pain: Also very hare old cheese cut and sodden in the broth
of a gammon of Bacon, and afterward stamped with a little of the broth, and
made in manner of a plaster, is a singular remedy for the diseases of the
Gout, and was first practiced by Galen the Prince of all Physicians.

For the Gout in the Feet.
TAke and stamp nettles, and lay them to the Podagra Feet or Legs, and this
will join flesh to the bone that is risen; but you must mingle it with salt,
for that dries up evil humors in short time.

For the Gout cold.
TAke as much black soap as a Walnut, and as much herb grace made in juice to
the quantity of the Soap, and as much of the juice of Salendine, and mingle
them all together, then take sheeps Leather, and on the fleshy side lay on the
plaster, and so lay it to the Gout three days, and it will help thee.

For the Gout.
TAke a pint and a half of good Ale, and half a pound of black Soap, and a
handful of bay Salt beaten small, then mingle them all together till half be
consumed, then put four spoonfulls of Aqua vitae, and let it boil a little
more, then take a cloth and dip it in it, and lay it to the grief as hot as he
can suffer it, and be whole. Or take a pint of good Ale, and clarify it on the
fire, and put therein a handful of Bay Salt, and stir it well a good while,
put thereto two spoonfuls of black Soap, and before you lay on the medicine,
take a linen cloth, and rub it well a good while, and then lay on the medicine.

To take away pain of the Gout.
TAke the fattest Brach you can get, and scald him like a Pig, and take out the
guts and garbadge at one of the sides, then take nettles and stamp them with
two ounces of Brimstone, four yolks of Eggs, four ounces of Turpentine,
incorporate all together, and put it in the whelps belly surely sowed up, that
no composition come out, then roast him with a soft fire, and keep the dripping
that does come from him, and anoint the sore place therewith, for this is
excellent; and will cease all manner of Convulsions of the Sinews or joints,
and pain of the Cramp that may be felt in any man: This medicine has been
tried not only to heal the Gout, but to drive it away for ever.

Another for the same.
TAke half a pint of strong Vinegar, and three Yolks of Eggs, and put them to
the Vinegar with a quantity of black Soap, and so let it stand three days and
three nights, and then mingle them together like a plaster, and lay it to the
sore. Or take and stamp Walwort small, and sees it with the lees of red Wine
as thick as pap, and lay it to the sore wheresoever it be, if it be hot lay it
on hot, if it be cold lay it on cold, and then annoint it two days after with
Nerve Oil upon the Sinews:

For the festring Gout that makes holes.
TAke the juice of rib grass, and as much of the white of an Egg, and Rye
meal, and mingle them together, and stamp them, and make a thick plaster
thereof, and lay it to the sore, and let it lie still until it fall away. Or
take Rye flower, and mingle it with the juice of Walwort roots, and make
thereof two cakes, and bake them, and then take one and do away the crust, and
bind it to the sore as hot as you may suffer it, and when that cake is cold
then take the other, and lay it to the pain, and this will heal it.

For the Gout.
TAke Castle soap, and scrape it into the barm of Ale, but the Ale must not be
sour, and stir the soap and the barm together, and then lay it upon the ach,
and with a little cloth roll it on, and when it swells take red Fennel and
sees it, and put to it butter, and lay it to the swelling; it must be butter
unsalted, and use this, for it is very good.

An approved medicine for the Gout.
TAke a quantity of unwrought Wax, and four times so much Boars Grease, and as
much black Soap as the Boars Grease, then take the Boars Grease first, and
sees it in a skillet, and then clarify it, and melt the Wax by it self, and
put it to the grease, and then put them together with the soap, then take it
firom the fire and stir it a great while till it be like a salve, then make a
plaster of sheeps Leather, and when your pain does come lay on this plaster
somewhat broader then the grief is, and let it lie on twenty four hours before
it be removed, and you shall find great ease in it. This salve will be good a
whole year, if it be kept close.

A special medicine for the Gout.
YOu shall buy at the Apothecaries Cantarides, which is a great fly, take of
this a quantity, and twice so much sour bread, the crumbs thereof stamped in a
Mortar with a little Vinegar, so that you may make thereof a plaster, then
stroke it upon a cloth, and cut it the breadth of a penny, and lay it to the
place where the pain is for the space of six or seven hours, then lift up the
plaster with a knife, and let it lie half an hour, then again pull it off, and
a blister will rise there, then let out the water with a needle, in the lowest
place of the blister, and softly thrust it with your finger, and if the water
be cold, it will be somewhat yellow, if the pain be new, it will be white like
the gelly of a Pig, then take the leaf of an Oak tree, and cut away the
hardness thereof, and prick it full of holes, and lay it on until it be
whole, as soon as the blister is broken the pain is gone, but you must make the
blister beneath the joint.

For the Gout.
TAke six new laid Eggs, and roast them hard, and cut them asunder, take out the
yolks, and where the yolks were, while the Eggs be very hot, put in myrrh of
Alexandria, it is to be bought at the Apothecaries, and lay one side of the
Eggs upon another as you cut them, and lay them in a row between two dishes,
and thereof will come a water and be in the dish, then take it out, and put it
in a glass, and then dress new, till you have some quantity of the Water, for
six Eggs will not make above a spoonful at once. This is a proved medicine to
drive away the pain of the Gout when it comes.

For the Gout.
TAke the milk of a Cow of one color, and small Planten Leaves, and flower of
clean Wheatmeal, and boil them together, and make a plaster, and lay it to the
sore, and this will help thee in short space.

A special medicine for the Gout.
TAke a young Whelp in the month of May, and strip him out of his skin, and
dress him clean, then take a quantity of Water-frogs, and put them in his
belly when his guts be out, and sow up his belly, then roast him, and take the
dripping in an Iron Vessel, and when it is cold put it in a glass, and
therewithal annoint the disease, and you shall be whole, by Gods grace.

For the Gout a proved medicine.
TAke Civil soap, and two penniworth of Camphire, a sawcer full of woman's
Milk, of a man child, then put the Soap and Camphire into the milk til it be
thick, then put it into a clean box or vessel, and let it stand twenty four
hours, and then annoint the Patient therewith cold, and ever lay the medicine
above the sore to draw it downwards. This was proved upon Sir John Wilton and
many others.

For the Gout.
TAke Cows horn coming of a red or brinded Cow, a good quantity, and make it
warm in a frying pan, and put thereunto half a spoonful of the powder of a
rotten post, or pole of Older wood, and stir them together, and bind them on
the place aggrieved hot or bloud-warm, and lap it with a woollen cloth next to
the medicine, and a linen cloth over all to keep in the medicine: wash off
this medicine when you take it off with Farrow Cow milk warmed.

Another for the Gout.
TAke four ounces of the Oil of Lineseed, four ounces of Oil of Worms, and the
like quantity of the best Treacle, and mix them well together, and annoint the
place aggrieved, and also spread it on a linen cloth, and bind it on all night.

For the Gout.
VAlerian, Coltsfoot, Oylof Shomakers patches, Deers sewet, and as much of
Neatsfoot Oil as the other two, melt the Oils and Deers sewer, and then put in
the two herbs, being chopped small, and boil them all together with a gentle
fire half an hour, and then strain them through a course cloth, and keep this
ointment in a box. Annoint the place aggrieved with this ointment and lay it on
a plaster of the Oil of Shomakers patches only spread upon thin brown paper
warmed.

Medicines for the Dropsy.
TAke a portion of water Cresses, and Sage, the greatest part of Mugwort,
Hysope, red Fennel; of every one of these a like portion, wash all these clean,
and let the water run from them, then take the same herbs and put them in Past
of a great pie, and the same Pie to be baked in an oven, and when it is baked
take it out, and all hot put it into a pot of ale clear drawn after the portion
of your herbs: Also you must cover your pot, to the intent the strength of the
herbs come not out, but remain in your pot still, and work in the Ale, to make
it so much the stronger, then draw off the said Ale daily, and let the sick
drink thereof at all times, when you will day or night, when he desires to
drink, and within nine days he shall be whole.

An excellent medicine for the Dropsy, made for Queen Elizabeth, by Doctor
Adrian and Doctor Lasye.
TAke Polypodium, Spicknard, Squant, Ginger, Marjoram, Galingall, Setwell, of
every one, one penny weight, Seeny, the leaves and cods, so much as all the
rest, grossly broken into powder, and so put them into a bag, and hang it with a
packthread in an earthen pot of two gallons of Ale, and every four days cover
the Ale with new Barm, and drink no other drink the space of a whole week, and
this shall purge all ill humors in the body: this drink will not let the blood
putrify, neither phlegm to have domination, nor choler to burn, nor melancholy
to have exaltation, it does multiply blood, and helps all evil, it purges
the rheum, and mightily helps it, it defends the Stomach, and nourishes
it, profits and preserves youth; and engenders good color, comfort the
fight, and nourishes the mind.

For the Dropsy that swells.
TAke and eat water Cresses, and Raysons, and this shall make the malady come
down to the Legs and Toes, then when it is in the Legs or Feet, take the green
bark of Older in Winter, and the Crops in Summer, and Oatmeal, and lay it to
thy Legs being sodden in fair water, and this will heal thee.

For a swelling in a man's body.
TAke Betany and Sentory, of each a like much, and make Powder of them, and put
of the powder in your drink, and in your pottage, and it will bring the
swelling out of your body into Legs and Feet, then take Salendine and bruise
him in a Mortar, and lay him to the soles of your feet, and it will take away
all the swellings of the Body through the soles of your Feet, by water running;
and it is called a Dropsy.

Medicnes for a Canker.
TAke Walwort and Waybred, Self-green Housleek, and Smallage, of each a like
much, stamp them together in a leaden Mortar, and strain them through a cloth,
and mingle the juice with wheat flower, and honey, and the white of an Egg, and
stir all these, and lay it to the sore.

For a Canker, Fistula, Wart, new sores, old sores, or wounds.
TAke a gal^n and an half of running Water, and a peck of ashes made of green
ashen wood, and sift them clean, and make thereof a gallon of Lie, and put
thereto a gallon of Tanwoose, and a pound of Madder, and sees all these to a
gallon, and let your Pan be so great, that it be little more then half full,
and when it rises in the seething, stir it with a ladle, that it run not over,
then let it stand three or four hours till it be clear, and then let all that
is clear strain through a good clean cloth, and then wet a ragged cloth, and
with a long Lint lay it to the sore, and this will heal the diseases aforesaid.

Medicines for burning or scalding.
TAke unslaked Lime, as much as you think good, and slake it in common Oil,
and then take it out as dry as you can, and incorporate it with Oil of Roses,
and it will be as it were an ointment, which you shall annoint the place with,
and in eight or ten days it will be whole, and not leave any mark or scart
upon the skin, and when the party is first burned or scalded, because the other
is not ready, take a little of the Lard of a Barrow.

For one that is burned with a Match.
TAke the same Match and burn it to powder, and strew the same powder upon the
place, and this will heal it in short space.

For burning with Gunpowder.
TAke Sheeps sewet, and Sheeps dung, and fry them both together, and so annoint
the place that is burned therewith, twice every day, and do not wash the sore
with any thing, for the meditine vvil fall away of it self as it does heal,
and do not change the medicine in any wise.

For burning with Wildfire.
TAke the dregs of Wine and Vinegar, and an Egg, both the white and yolk by
even portions, and mingle them well together, and lay it to the sore, until it
be whole.

To get out the fire of burning or scalding.
TAke the whites of new laid Eggs, after the quantity of the sore, and put them
in a peuter dish, and with a stone of Roch Alum, labor it about till it come
all to a froth, then take a fine linen cloth and wet it in Oil Olive; or for
lack of it in fresh grease or butter, and lay it next the sore, and then lay
the froth upon the same a good thickness, and so bind it with a cloth, four
times dress it, evening and morning, and the fire will be out.

Medicines to stop Blood.
To stop Blood in a Vein.
TAke a handful of Leaves of the little Burrs that stick upon a man's Coat, and
are called Strachantes, and bray these Leaves, and lay them to the wound, and
it will stop the blood.

To stop blood in a wound suddenly.
TAke Paper, Flax, or Linen cloth, which is next thy hand, and burn it, and
put it into the wound, the ashes thereof hot, and the blood shall stop
straight: Or if you will stamp nettle roots, and lay them to the wound, it
shall be no more.

To stop blood, if the Master-Veine be cut, or the wound very large.
TAke red nettles or red Colwort Leafs, stamp them with Hogs dung well tempered
together, and lay it on the wound, and this will stench the bleeding quickly.
Or take dried Vervain made in Powder, and put the Powder into the wound, and it
will help.

For a wound that is full of Blood.
TAke red Nettles and stamp them with Vinegar, and lay them upon the wound, and
it will cleanse the wound, and do away the blood.

To stop bleeding at the Nose, or in any other place upon the sudden.
IF it be a man that bleedeth take a Leather point and tie about his stones
very hard, and this will stop the bleeding straight. Or if his Arm or Leg be
cut, bind the other Arm or Leg very hard, and the blood will run to the other
side that is most pained.

Medicines for the Morphew.
TAke Mustard made of white Vinegar, and let the Patient annoint himself
withal where the Morphew is nine nights, and this will help him. Or take and
bray Sorrel, and strain it clear, then put to it as much sugar and honey as
you do juice, and boil them well together over the fire, and then let them
sees till the sugar have the taste, then put to it one ounce of Vinegar, and so
dress it, and keep the medicine to eat.

Another for the same.
TAke an ounce of very good soap, and a penyworth of Aqua vitae, and put them
both into a Mortar, and grind them well together, then take a handful of
Eglantine, and stamp it, and strain it, and put some of the juice to the so^e
and Aqua vita, and then take a course Canvas cloth, and rub where the Morphew
is, and after annoint the place with this medicine, and be whole.

For the black Morphew.
THere be two kind of Morphews, the white and the black, the white is named
Alborus; and for remedy for the black Morphew take this rule, that if the place
be pricked and will not bleed, then it is not cureable, but if it will bleed,
take of Rapes and Rocket, of each an ounce and an half, and stamp it with
Vinegar, and after that wash the place. Or take of the earth of Africa, and mix
it with Vinegar, and wash the place often therewith, and it will heal thee.

A most excellent Water to comfort the Vitalls, and preserve other parts of the
body, made by Doctor Stephens.
TAke a gallon of good Gascoygne Wine, Ginger, Galingale, Cinnamon, Nutmegs,
Grains, Cloves, Anniseeds, Fennel seed, a Dram, Sage, Mints, red Roses, Time,
Pellitory, Rosemary, wild Time, Camomile, Lavender, of each one handful, then
bruise the spices and the herbs small, and put all into the Wine, and let it
stand twelve hours, stirring it diverse times, then still it in a Lymbeck
according to the art, and the first water is of more strength then the second,
and both be the better by the standing in the Sun.

The virtues hereof,
Be to comfort the spirits vital, helps to the inward diseases of cold, the
Palsy, the contraction of Sinews, the conception of Women, kills the Worm^
within the body, cures the Cough, Toothach, cold Dropfie, comfort the
Stomach, helps the stone in the Bladder, and in the reins of the Back,
slackneth a stinking breath. Whosoever uses this water ever anon, and not too
aften, it preserves him in good likeing, and makes him seem young very long:
with this Doctor Stephens preserved his own life, until such extreme Age, that
he could neither go nor ride, and kept him five years, when other Physicians
judged it impossible for him to live one year.

To make Cinnamon Water.
TAke Rhenish Wine a quart, and Spanish wine a pint, Rosewater a pint and a
half, Cinnamon bruised a pound and a half let these stand infused the space of
four and twenty hours, then distill it, and being close stopped and luted, then
with a soft fire distill the same softly in a Limbeck of Glass, and receive
the first Water by it self.

Also, if ye be so disposed to make the same Water weaker, take three pints of
Rosewater, and a pint and a half of Rhenish Wine, and so distill the same, and
you shall have to the quality of the stuff the quantity of the Water, which is
three pints; but the first Water is the best, and so reserve it to your use,
both morning and evening.

To make Cinnamon Water another way.
TAke three quarts of Muskadine, and a pound of Cinnamon, and half a pint of
good Rosewater, and so let them lie infused the space of four and twenty hours,
and distill it as aforesaid, and you shall receive to the quantity, as to the
quality, but the first pint is the best, and the chiefest of all the other, as
is manifest by practice.

Medicines for the Palsy that take away the Speech.
TAke Sage leaves and Primrose leaves, and if it be in winter, take leaves, and
roots and all, of each a like quantity, beat them together, and strain them
with Ale, and give it the sick to drink, a spoonful or two at a time, and it
will bring the speech again.

For the Palsy.
TAke and stamp a handful of Sage, as small as may be, and put thereto two
penyworth of Treacle, and a penyworth of Aqua-vitae; temper them well together,
and lay a plaifter thereof to the Wrist of the hand, and in the Nape of the
Neck; and thus thou may heal him that is lame of the Palsy in short time.

For the Palsy that makes a man bed-ridden.
TAke both the crops and blossoms of broom, and sees them in good red wine
till it be thick as Ointment, and then anoint all thy body with it, and use
this, and it will make thee whole.

An excellent Drink for the Palsy. Proved diverse times.
TAke the flesh of a Fox new killed, and lay it all night in new Milk, and the
buds of Rosemary leaves and flowers, and that a great quantity, and half a
handful of Hearts tongue, and take away the string that goes along the back of
the leaves, and a good quantity of Bugle, and a few small raisins; still all
these together with a gentle fire, and when it is forty days old, drink it
fasting; it destroys the Palsy, and makes good blood.

Medicines for a Fellon.
TAke Groundsel and stamp it small, then temper it with oil of Roses, and make
it like a salve, and lay it to the sore, and this will heal thee.

To break a Fellon hastily.
TAke the yolk of an Egg, and Bay salt, and powder of Coperas, and lay it to
the sore, and it will break it.

To destroy a Fellon.
TAke Scabias a good handful or two, then take Sheeps suet and brown bread and
chop all these together small then fry them in a pan, and lay it hot to the
Fellon, and it shall destroy it.

Medicines for the Impostume within a man's Body.
TAke young Walnuts, and stamp them Rindes and all, and lay a plaster thereof
upon the Navel; and this will destroy an Impestume; as Isaac says. Or take two
handfuls of Clot roots made clean, and sees them well in half a gallon of good
Ale or more, until the fourth part be wasted away, and let it run through a
cloth, but wring it not; and let the sick drink thereof three days, and then
other three days; and if thou will, thou may put thereto Licoras. This is
proved.

To break an Impostume.
TAke the kernels of Wall-nuts, and stamp them with Rue, and lay a plaster
thereof morning and evening upon the Navel, and without all doubt it will help
thee of all other swellings.

To put out an Impostume without peril.
TAke and drink the juice of Mary-golds with red horehound, and thou shall be
whole.

Medicines for the Measels or Shingles.
TAke the juice of Archangel, and dip a linen cloth in it, and lay it to the
sore, morning and evening, until it be whole, Probatum est.

To take away the Scarres of the small Pox or the Measels.
TAke the blood of a Bull or of a Heart, and this is much commended of Authors,
to be good to anoint hot the scarres, and also the liquor that issues out of
the sheeps claws hot in the fire, or the dripping of a Signet or Swan, upon
the place oftentimes hot.

For the Shingles or Measeles.
TAke a Cat, and with a stick beat her ear a good while, and when you have well
beaten her ear, cut off that ear first, and with a sawcer save the blood, and
then cut of the other ear as you shall need, and with that blood anoint the
place where the Shingles be, and use this three times, and be whole.

Medecines for the small Pox.
FIrst let all Physicians beware, not only in this infirmity, but in many
others; not to minister Medicines External which should be repercussive; which
is to say, to drive in the infirmity into the body: And beware in this matter
of ointments and baths, and of cold and open ayers, or of picking or touching
any of the pushes, or skabs; keep the Parient warm, and let him be of a good
diet to comfort blood, although some that be expert Physicians in this matter,
would that a man should exhaust blood out of a vain named Mediana.

For Pock-holes.
TAke for a man the grease of a Capon, and for a woman the grease of a Hen, and
anoint the place where the Pock-holes be, and it shall cleanse them, and make
them appear as it were no Pock there.

To drive out the Pox.
TAke Malmsey, Ginger, and Treacle, and mingle them well together; and when
thou go to bed, drink a good draught, and it will drive out the Pox.

For the French POX.
OF this there be many kinds, some be moist; some be watrish, some be dry, and
some be scurvy; some be like Scabs, some like Ring-worms; some be fistuled,
some be festered; some be Cankers, some be like Wens; some like Biles, some
like Knobs or Kernels; and some be Ulcerous having a little dry Scab in the
midst of the ulcerous Scab; some have ach in the joints, and no sign of the
Pox, and yet it may be the Pox.

The cause of this infirmity does come many ways, it may come by lying in the
sheets or bed wherein a Pockie person has lain the night before, it may come
by lying with a Pockie person, it may come by sitting on a Jakes, where Pockie
persons did lately sit, it may come by drinking with a Pockie person; but
specially it is taken, when one Pockie person does sin in Lechery with another;
all the kinds of Pox be infectious and therefore beware of them.

A Remedy.
TAke the grease of a Boar, the skin clean taken away; the weight of a pound of
the powder of Brimstone, three ounces of the powder of Oyster-shels, two ounces
of Verdigrease, the weight of twelve pence, of the inner bark of the branches
of a Vine; two ounces of Quicksilver, mortifyed with fasting-spittle; then
stamp all these together in a Mortar and anoint thy body specially as near as
you can to the sores, and then lay the person in a bed, and lay clothes enough
over him, and let him sweat twenty or four and twenty hours, do this three
times in nine days, and after that take an easy purgation, and take of the
water of planten, half a pint of Mercury sublimated, the weight of eight pence,
of Roch allom half an ounce, make powder of it, and mix it altogether, and with
the feather anoint the place. Or take of Turpentine well washed, one ounce of
Lytarge and burnt Allom,, of each an ounce, and mix these together, then take
seven ounces of the fat of a Goat or Kid, and anoint the place. Or take of
fresh Butter an ounce and an half, of Barrowes grease half a pound of old
Treacle an ounce, of Mitbridatum half an ounce, of Quicksilver mortifyed, the
weight of six groats, of Lytarge and salt of each half an ounce, mix this
together, and make an ointment thereof, and anoint the sores therewith, and
this will heal thee if thou will use it as is aforesaid.

For the Cramp.
TAke the stifle bone of a Hare, and as long as you have the same about you
next to your skin, you shall not have the Cramp.

Another for the Cramp
TAke two spoonfuls of May-butter, and two spoonfuls of Ruejuyce, and temper
them together till they be a salve, and anoint the place therewith.

Medicines for all kind of sores and wounds, and first to draw a sore.
TAke and beat Oatmeal in a Mortar, small, and then put it into milk, and sees
it well together, with a handful of Rose-flowers unstild, if you may have them;
or else of them that are stilled, and not burned, and sees them till they be
like Pap together, and then lay them warm to the sore as the Patient may suffer
it, evening and morning, and this will dry it.

A good water for every sore.
TAke a quart of ashes made of an Ash, and a pottle of vinegar, and a pound of
Madder, half a pound of Allom-glass, and sees all these together until they be
half wasted, then take it from the fire and let it stand and spurge, then take
the water that is clear above, and put it into a Vial, and put that water into
a sore, and this will heal it without any more cost.

A Plaster for that swelling which is called an Vncome.
TAke Rue and Smalledge, of each an handful, a good gobet of fat Bacon, such as
is very much smoaked. or resty as they call it, and dress the said Bacon in
squares as big as your finger, and beat all these together, till it be
dissolved, and meet to spread upon leather or cloth, and lay it to the sore,
and it will both draw it and heal it when it is broken.

A sovereign plaster for any Ach.
TAke a quart of Malmsey, and a spoonful of Sallet-oyl, a good handful of
Onyons pilled, broken and bruised, and an-ounce of pepper, finely beaten, then
sees all these together, till they be thick, and spread it upon a cloth, and
lay it to the place where the pain is, and this will take away the Ach.

A Medicine or Ointment called Flos Unguentorum.
TAke Rosin, and per Rosin, of each half a pound, Virgin wax, and Frankincense,
of each a quarter of a pound, Mastick an ounce, Hearts tallow a quarter of a
pound and Camphire two drams; melt that which is to be molten, and powder that
which is to be made in powder, and searce them fine, and boil them over the
fire, and then strain them through a Canvas cloth into a pottle of white wine,
then boil the wine with all the other ingredients together till the wine be
confumed, then let it cool till it be but bloud-warm then put thereto a quarter
of a pound of Turpentine, evermore stiring it till it be through cold, but ever
beware your stuff be no hotter then blood when you put in your Turpentine and
Camphire, for if it be it marreth all your stuff; then when it is cold, make it
up in rolls and keep it for your use, for the best medicine and precious salve
that ever was or can be made.

To make Salus Populi, which is good for Blanes, and to skin all sores in three
days, and is good for him that fears the Hemeroids.
TAke of Salendine two handfuls, Allom one handful, and grind them together
like sauce, then take Weathers tallow, or Hearts tallow a pound, of oil of Roses
half a pound, and melt them together and boil the herbs therein until it sink
down to the bottom, and it wax somewhat black, then strain it, and keep it to
your use. This Ointment is hard, and therefore when you will use of it, put it
in a spoon, and melt it over the fire; and understand, it must not be put in
old sores but there as it scaldeth the skin off and when there rises any
pimples, white, black, blew, or red, this Salus Populi dries well, and heals
well, and destroys the wild stre.

A special Medicine for a Bruise.
TAke a great handful of Rue, the white and Yolks of five Eggs, half a pint of
Honey, and a handful of wheat flower temper all these together, and make it
thick, and so lay it to the place that is bruised upon a fair cloth heated hot
against the fire, and let it ly twenty four hours, and then lay on a fresh.

To assuage any Swelling wherever it be.
TAke two handfuls of Penyrial, and set it in the strongest Ale you can get til
it be tender, then take it and press it from the herbs, and lay it unto the
swelling as hot as he can suffer it, and so use it two or three days, and it
will be good.

A mavelous Salve to heal and draw.
TAke Betony, Plantane, and Smallage, the juice of them one pound, then take
four ounces of Wax that comes of the honey, two ounces of incense white and
clean, two ounces of pitch, two ounces of Rosin, melt these by themselves upon
a soft fire; that done, put the juice of the herbs to it, and boil it together
until the juice be wasted, and always stir it; then take it from the fire and
strain it through a clean cloth, then take two ounces of Turpentine, and temper
it with the rest, and when it is cold, keep it as gold.

To heal a wound.
TAke the flowers of herb John, and put them in a glass, and put thereto as
much oil Olive as will cover the herbs, and then stop the glass close, and put
it in the Sun for the space of twenty days or more, then it will be a fine
colored ointment, and very good for green wounds, and when you will use it,
warm it a little at the fire, and then wet your Lint therein, and lay it to the
wound, and it will be whole.

A water to heal all manner of wounds in short space, which is a thing that
every man ought to have in his house, seeing it is of so great virtue.
TAke a pound of new yellow wax, or as much as you will, and melt it in a clean
pan, and then pour it out into some other vessel, wherein must be Malmsey,
Muscadel, or good Claret Wine; and then take the wax out, and pour it again
upon the wine I and do so seven times, then take the said wax and melt it on
the fire, and put into it a handful of Brick beaten into fine powder, and stir
it well together, and then put it into a crook't-neckt glass, such as Stillers
call the Bag-pipe-glass; you must clay it well about the midst of the glasses
neck, and let it distill first with a little fire, and then more and last with a
good great fire, and then when all the things be cold, put it out of your
recipient, and pour it into a Viol well stoped with wax and searcloth, so that
in no case the air go out, no sun nor fire come to it, for it is so fine of
himself, that it will vanish away straight; and when you will occupy it, you
must wet and moist the wound with a fine linen cloth, and so bind it to the
wound.

To heal a wound in ten days.
TAke Camphire and stamp it with Boarsgrease, put it into the wound, and this
will heal it in ten days without fail.

To make that flesh shall not grow too much in a wound.
TAke the Lights or Lungs of a Sheep hot, and lay it upon the wound, and the
flesh shall rise equal with the skin.

A Diet for him that is wounded.
TAke heed you eat no Cheese, Butter, Eggs, nor Fish of the Sea, nor Fruit, but
fine and light meats, as Capons, Chickens Rabbets, Pheasants, and Partridge,
Lamb, Lark, and such like.

Medicines for the Itch in man or woman.
THis I do advise every man for this matter, to ordain and prepare a sharp pair
of nails to scratch, claw, rent, and tear the skin and the flesh, that the
corrupt blood may run out; and then use purgations, stoves, and sweats; and
beware you reverberate not the cause inward with any ointment, nor claw not thy
skin with filthy fingers, but wash thy hands to bed-ward.

For a Scab on man or woman.
TAke Mallows and Wormwood, and boil them well together, and with the said
water and herbs (warm as thou may suffer it) all to wash thy Body, and this
will heal thee in short time.

For the Itch in the hands that come of worms.
TAke the seed of Henbane, and cast it on a Chafing Dish of coals, but first
wash thy hands, and then hold them over the fire as hot as you may suffer it a
good while; and then put thy hands into a Basin of cold water, and thou shall
see the worms creep out into the water; do this three or four times and be
whole.

To destroy all manner of Scabs dry or moist.
TAke the juice of Scabias and Vinegar, and one part of Garlic, and sees
altogether till it do turn to an ointment, and anoint the Scabs therewith, and
be whole.

For the dry Scab.
THis infirmity comes to man after his complexion, by superabundant humors,
or by lying with an infectious person having the said infirmity, or by aridity
or dryness of choler, or melancholy, the which does engender a dry Scab, which
is the worst among all the kind of Seabs.

The Remedy.
TAke Mercury mortifyed, with Fasting-spittle three cunces, incorporate it with
the oil of Bays, and anoint thy body therewith: Or take Mercury mortifyed
three ounces, of the powder of Brimstone two ounces, of the powder of
Elicampana two ounces; Confect it together with Barrows-grease, and anoint thy
body often.

Medicines for the Falling Sickness that does not foam in the mouth, but by
Urine and Egestion, or both at once defiles himself.
THe cause of this infirmity, many Authors in diverse matters be of sundry
opinions; but for this matter I do say, that forasmuch as it is one of the
kinds of the Falling Sickness, it does take his Original of a Rheumetick
humor, opilating the cells of the Brain; the Brain so opilated and stopped, the
Patient lies pitifully, unto the time that Nature has removed the Cause.

A Remedy.
FOr this matter, a great circumspection must be had, first in the diet of the
Patient for the Patient (not only in this kind of Fallingsickness, but in all
other kinds) must abstain from white meats, Beef, Hares-flesh, and Venison;
also they must beware of climbing up to high places, they must eat no Saliets,
Onyons, nor Garlic, Raisons, Gibboles, or Scalions, or such like things: The
Patient must beware of eating of Water-fowles, and fatness of fish; as Eels,
Conger, and Salmon and such like; and then use the seeds and roots of Piony, as
well in meats as drinks; and so wear the seeds about thy neck, and purge thy
head, and do as it is specifyed in the Chapter named Epilepsia next following.

THere be three kinds of Falling Sickness which men be infected with; to wit,
Epilepsia, who in their falling foam at the mouth; and this is the common kind
of the Fallingsickness: They which have the Analepsia, shall (when they fall)
defile themselves, and not foam at the mouth: They which have Tatalepsia,
whether they be taken open-ey'd, or half closed, for the time they shall see
nothing.

For the Falling Sickness.
TAke Rue, and Wormwood, of each of them a handful, and make it powder, and
blow some of it into his nose that does fall, and he shall presently rise.

Medicines for Warts.
THis Infirmity does come of gross evil humors; to remedy which, Take a pair of
Cissers, and cut off the heads of the Warts, and then rub them with Garlic and
Bay salt, and stamp both together; do this six or seven times, and lay over
them a plaster of lead.

To take away Warts.
TAke the juice of red cole-stocks, and lay it on the Warts, and this will heal
them. Or take a white Snail without a house, and anoint thy Warts withal, and
they will go away. Or take Egrimony, and Verjuyce, and put them together, and
lay it to the Warts three nights, being stamped, and it shall drive them away
and heal them.

Medicines to make one sleep.
TAke of the Oil of Violets an ounce, of Opium half an ounce, incorporate these
together with woman's milk, and with a fine linen cloth lay it upon thy
Temples. Or take leaves of Henbane, stamp it, and lay it to thy Temples. Or
else use to eat Lettice seeds, white Poppy seeds, of Mandragon seeds, and of
Sander, of each three drams; but above all things, mirth is best to bedward.

To make one sleep.
TAke ground Ivy, and Sengreen, of each a like quantity, and stamp them, and
temper them with woman's milk, and lay it to thy Temples, and this will make
thee sleep well.

Medicines for an Ague; for a Fever Tertian.
TAke the buds or leaves of Willows, red Sage, and Fetherfew, of each an
handful; sees them in a quart of Milk, till the herbs be well sodden; then
crush the herbs, and wring them in a cloth, and lay them to your pulse as warm
as you can suffer it, and this will help the Ague.

Another for the same.
THe Medicines which do help a Fever causon, will help a fever tertian; first
purge choler, and three or four hours before the fit does come I do thus; I
cause a man to ly in his doublet, and a woman in her wastcoat, then do I cause
them to put on a pair of gloves, and with two garters I do bind the wrists of
their arms, and do lay their arms and hands into the bed, and do cast on
clothes, and do bring them into a sweat before the fit does come three or four
hours, and out of a goose quill one put into another, they do take their drink,
because they shall take no air into the bed; then do I give them first an
Altery, and suffer them to drink as much possit Ale as they will, and when the
burning does begin, I do withdraw the clothes; and this I do three courses and
have made many hundreds whole so, and on their good days I do not suffer them
to go into the Air.

For the quartane Ague.
TAke a spoonful of mustard, and as much Treacle as a bean, and let the sick
drink thereof with vinegar, and he shall be whole. Or take his own urine, and
scum it clean, then take the juice of Camomil, the juice of sage, or the
powder of them both, and the powder of Galingale, and Licoras, and let them
boil together a little while, and drink thereof often fasting.

For the ague Mr Willoughbies Medicine.
TAke a handful of the herbs called Shephards purle, and half a handful of
Houseleeke, and as much sinkfoyl, and the like of Groundsel, and beat them with
two spoonfuls of bay salt; then divide it into four parts, and lay two parts to
the wrists of the hands, one half hour before the fit does come, and when you
feel it come, take knot grass, and stamp it, and strain it with a pint of
stale Ale, and let the sick drink it lukewarm; he must ly down as soon as the
herbs be bound to his arm.

For the biting of a mad Dog.
TAke mints, and a clove of garlic, and salt, and stamp them together, and
make a plaster thereof, and lay to the bitten place, and this will heal it.

Another for the same,
TAke Egremony, Plantane, and the white of an egg, and beat them well together,
and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the sore place, and this will heal
it.

For the biting of all kind of venomous beasts, and other things.
TAke the juice of Vervaine, and drink it, and with this many have been helped.
Also the black that is of the Crabs feet well beaten into powder do very well
help the same being drunk.

For the biting of a mad Dog.
TAke a quantity of Vervaine, as much of Rue, and as much of Plantane, with
Treacle, and stamp it, and strain it with good wine, or stale Ale, and give it
unto the Patient. Also take any of those herbs, and stamp them with Bay Salt,
and bind it fast to the wound, and it will draw out the venom. Dr Wood, and Dr
Nichols are of this opinion.

To kill a Tetter or Ringworm.
TAke Fetherfew, and stamp it, and strain it with Vinegar, and rub the Tetter
therewith, and this will kill it in short time.

For a Ring-worm.
TAke Juniper berries (...) ounces, and stamp them, and sees them in a
sufficient quantity of water, until half be consumed, then strain it, and put
to the said water swines grease clean tried, three ounces, of Turpentine half
an ounce; sees all these over the fire again a little time, then take it off,
and when it is cold, put the said water away, and to the rest, put of Brimstone
finely powdered one ounce, and so make an ointment; this is very good.

Medicines to take away Wens.
TAke Snails, to the number of forty, and sees them in a pint of running
water, as you do Perywinckles, and let them rest in the water until they be
cold, and then scum off the fat with wool, or with a linen cloth, and lay it
to the Wen, and in short time it will be whole and gone. Or take a stone or two
of fine Jet and make the same in powder, and put it in Ale or Pottage, and give
him to drink that has a Wen, and this will assuage it in short time.

For stinging of an Adder.
TAke Garlic, pill it, and fry it in oil Olive, or in May butter, or in any
other thing without salt, (but May butter is best) and lay it unto the place
that was stung, and change it twice a day and this will kill the Venom, and
make the place whole.

For an Adder that is crept into a Man's Body.
TAke green Rue, and temper it with man's urine, be it man or beast that has
the worm crept into him, and give it him to drink.

For him that has Eaten or Drunken Poison.
TAke the bark of a Walnut Tree, and put away the innermost Rind, and stamp it
in a Mortar as small as you can, and lay it in Ale, and in the morning strain
it, and give the Patient to drink thereof fasting, and this will make him cast
out all the Venom in short time.

To avoid poisoning with wicked meats, and to keep thee from Drunkenness.
TAke the seed of Lettice, and drink it fasting, with clear running water; or
take Betony and dry it, and make Powder thereof, and use this every morning
fasting in a little stale Ale, and this will keep thee from Drunkenness, and
save thee from poisoning.

For biting or stinging of any venomous Beast.
TAke one handful of Plantane, and one handful of Rosemary, and stamp them
together, then mingle it with a little sower Leaven, and fry it with a little
Butter, sweet; and when it is a little through warm, then lay it plaister-wise
unto the sore place; but first you must bath the place well with warm Vinegar,
Probatum.

For Man or Woman that is poisoned.
TAke Rue and Wormwood, and stamp it, and drink the juice thereof, and eat
Hasel-nuts, for they be very good for the same: Or take Goats-milk, and mince
and sees them together with Treacle, and drink it hot three days, and be
whole.

For the wind in the Stomach.
TAke Cummin-seed, Fennel-seeds, and Anniseeds, and make them in Powder; sees
them in white Wine, and drink thereof first and last five days, and you shall
find great ease therein.

Medicines for the Plague or Pestilence.
Against the Plague.
TAke three ounces of the liquor of the inner rind of an Ash-tree, and still it
with three ounces of white Wine, and give the Patient to drink of it every
three hours, and within four and twenty hours he shall be whole by the Grace of
God.

A Medicine that was sent by the Queens Majesty to my Lord Major of London for
the Plague.
TAke a handful of Sage virtue, a handful of Herb grace, a handful of
Elder-leaves, and a handful of red Bramble-leaves, and stamp them together, and
strain them in a cloth with a quart of white Wine, and a quantity of white
Vinegar, and take a quantity of Ginger and mingle them together, and drink
thereof evening and morning a spoonful nine days together, after the first
spoonful they shall be made safe for four and twenty days, and after the ninth
spoonful for a whole year, by the grace of God: And if it happen one to be sick
of the Plague before he has drunk of this Medicine; Then take the water of
Scabias, a spoonful of Betony water, a quantity of Treacle; put it altogether,
and it will put out the venom: And if it fortune the Botch to appear, then
take Bramble-leaves, Elder-leaves, and Mustard Seed, and stamp them together,
and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the sore, and it will draw out the
venom, and heal the Patient.

Another for the same.
AMong the excellent and approved Medicines for the Pestilence, there is none
more worthy or available: When the sore appears, then take a Cock-pullet, and
pluck off the feathers of the tail or hinder part, till the rump be bare, then
hold the bare of the said Pullet to the sore, and the chicken will gape and
labor for life, and in the end he will die; then take another Pullet and do the
like, and so another as the Pullets do die; for when the poison is drawn out,
the last chicken that is offered thereto will live; the sore presently is
assuaged, and the party recovereth; it is necessary to use the Medicine to
drive away venom from the heart: This is proved very true.

To make Plague water.
TAke a pound of Rosemary, a pound of Salerdine, a pound of Sage, and a pound
of Balm, a pound of Mugwort, one pound of Rue, one pound of Wormwood, one pound
of Dragon one pound of Scabias, one pound of Pimpernel that grows among the
corn, one pound of Angelica, and one pound of Betony; put all these herbs
together in a great pot with a narrow mouth, and let them soak in white Wine
three days and three nights closely stopped, and then take the herbs out and
still them, and keep the water in a fair glass, and if any be sick of the
Plague give him the value of ten spoonfuls blood-warm, so soon as he does feel
himself sick; and then let him walk if he be able, if not, lead him by the
arms; and keep him from eating and drinking one hour after; and then let him
go to bed, and if he vomit it is the better for him; and if it be possible that
he take it before he sleep, he shall escape by Gods grace; and the elder the
water is, the better it is: This water is good for the quartane Ague, or any
disease lying in the stomach, taking it before the fit does come; and this
water must be stylled in the month of May

Contra vim mortis non est Medicamen in hortis. To make Doctor Josephus Water.
TAke a pint of Water, and a spoonfnl of French Barley, half a handful of red
Rose leaves, two or three drops of the Oil of Brimstone, and a quarter of a
pound of the finest refined Sugar; the water and Barley to sees together, and
then the scum to be taken off, and so the other to be let cool, so with the
Rose leaves to stand all night, and then to be well brewed all together; but
first the leaves and Barley strained from the Water.

For the Convulsion.
TAke one ounce of an Elke-hoof, and half an ounce of English Liqueris, two
piana small roots, two or three Fenel roots, as many Parsley roots, three or
four roots of unset Hyssop, a little quantity Herbegrass which is Rue, a quart
of small beer, but boil it till it come to a pint, then strain it, and sweeten
it with Syrop of Hyssop, and give it the Party before and after the Fit.

For the moist Rhume in the Head.
TAke conserve of Roses two ounces, Metridate two drams, Bolearminak one dram,
of Olibinum one dram and an half, Mastick half a dram, beat these together with
Syrop of Violets into the form electuary; whereof take twice going to bed, and
in the morning the quantity of a Nutmeg.

Another for the same.
ROsemary flowers, Elder flowers, Bittony flowers, Sage flowers, of each two
good handfuls, Scurvy grass three handfuls, Chinaroots three ounces, an ounce
of sweet Fennelseeds, two ounces of Coriander-seeds, half a pound Fumitur,
three handfuls Epithimum, Agramony, Hartstongue, of each two handfuls;
Harts-horn-shaving one ounce, of Stringoroots four ounces, Citron-seeds Musked,
half an ounce; let these be boiled in a gallon and an half of Whey, and let
them first be infused two days in a gallon of white Wine, then put the
ingredience with the Wine to the Whey, and let them be boiled gently the space
of two hours, and so next day drink thereof half a pint in the morning, and so
in the afternoon as long as it lasts.

An approved Medicine for sore Eyes.
TAke six ounces of Lapis Callimnaris, and heat that in a wooden fire, and blow
it red hot, and then quench it in a pint of pure white Wine in a Bowl, or any
other clean vessel nine times; and then strain it out by it self through a fine
linen cloth; and then take a handful of Houslick unwashed, and stamp it in a
clean Mortar, and strain it through a fine cloth; then put the quenched Wine
and that both together, and strain them again through a fine cloth; and then
take a feather and drop it in your eyes three or four drops at a time every
morning and evening, and by the grace of God you will find help in a very short
time. Probatum est.

A Medicine for Children that have the worms, approved by Mistress Isabel Dee
in Moscoe.
TAke Wormseed and boil it in Beer, and then sweeten it with clarifyed Honey,
and let them drink of it every morning fasting.

For a pain in the stomach by a Cold.
TAke two or three Turnips and wrap them in brown Paper, weted; and put them in
Ember-ashes for two hours as ready for to eat, and then scruze the juice out of
them betwixt two Trenchers, and then mix it with Loaf-sugar, with Cynamon, and
Nutmeg powdered and made like a Syrop; and then drink four ounces of it at
night when you go to bed: Probatum est.

Mistress F^yerirs medicine for sore Eyes.
TAke a pine of white Wine, two drams of Camphire cut as small as may be, half
an ounce Omphacium, that is, pure oil of green Grapes, or for want of that,
your purest Sallet-oyl; put the Camphire and the Oil into a Basin, let them
stand covered two hours, then put in your white Wine to them, then take the
stones called Lapides Culumanaris, and heat three of them fire hot; then put
them so hot into the Wine, covering your Basin very close, while they are a
cooling in the water heat three more fire hot, take the other out, and put in
the hot ones, and so heat them by course five or six times, till the Wine is
very hot, and the Camphire well dessolved; then take the clcarest of it, and
the top, (when it is cold) and reserve it in glasses: For your use put two or
three drops into the sore ey three times a day.

For a Fellon or a Whitlow.
FIrst take a quarter of a pint of Milk, and as much Leaven as an egg, and let
it boil till it comes to be as thick as a Poultess, then take a pennyworth
of oil of Roses and mix with it, (and which is above half a spoonful,) and so
apply it to the grieved place as hot as you can; twice a day lay it too as you
do a Poultess: This is proved.

For one that is Bursten, or a Child that has been Bursten six years.
TAke oil of Nip or Nep, and anoint the Party therewith, and morning and
evening take of the herbs; and bind one boiled in Butter; or dip Wool in the
aforesaid Oil; this use six weeks until you be whole: This proved.

For to keep a Child from having Convulsion fits
TAke oil of sweet Almonds new drawn, beaten up with white Sugar Candy, and
give the Child so soon as it is born, as much as a good big Pea or Nut: This
proved.

For a Child still born, that was not long dead in the womb; or if there be any
life in it, though not in appearance.
TAke of the blood of the String, and sueeze out a drop (as you cut the Navel
string) into a spoon, and give it the Child in a little fair water, and if life
be in it, it recoyers in an hour or less: Proved.

For to bring them down on a Woman in Childbed, though never so weak.
TAke half a Dosin of Piana seeds, and beat them a little till the black hull
come off, and then beat this small, and give her in a spoonful of
Cardus-posset-drink, sweeten it with a little sugar, then give her a good
draught of the Posset to drink, as hot as she can; and let her lie close, and
it will cause her to sweat, and it will be a means to bring them, and to drive
an Ague away, if she take it but three times every two hours: Proved.

To make a Cordial to give one in a burning Fever or Ague, in the time of their
burning, when it is at the height.
TAke some gross Mace oil, a quarter of a pint, and sweeten it with an ounce or
two pennyworth of the Syrop of Clove-gilliflowers, and give it him to drink:
And you may make another on this wise. Take the juice of an Orange, and as much
red Rosewater, and sweeten it with white Sugar Candy; it will refresh the
Spirits, and cool and alay their drought. Probotum est.

To make a Glister for one that is troubled with a sharp humor that causes
blood to proceed instead of Ordour.
TAke a pint and an half of Milk, and boil it into a pint, with a handful of
red Rose leaves, and sweeten it with powdered Sugar, and give it him, and let
him keep it as long as he can: Probatum.

For an Itch that is vehement.
TAke of your Soap and Brimstone a like quantity, and as much English honey,
and boil these together till it be like an ointment, and then anoint your
wrists with it warm by the fire, and lap clouts about them warm, and anoint
under your Arm-holes, and under your Hams, and in the bent of your Arms; and do
not shift you in a month, nor pull off your clouts from off your wrists all the
while, and you shall be whole without any purge though your hands were all
scabby: Probatum.

For a Consumption.
TAke as much flour of Brimstone as you can take upon a Sixpence, and pour
three drops of Blood-warm Milk into a Spoon, and mix it by degrees; and till it
be like Batter; and your Spoon being full, put to it good store of Sugar, then
drink the rest of the pint of Milk blood-warm also, sweetened with Sugar well;
this you may use as long as you please, and at any time in the year; for them
that find a wheasing and shortness of breath, it is very good; you must fast an
hour after it: Proved.

A Medicine to ripen any Boil or sore, or a Push.
TAke a Spoonful of Molish-honey clarified. Wheat Flour a Spoonful, a yolk of
an Egg mix these altogether, and apply it warm (as blood) morning and evening
as thick as your finger, till it break apply it: It is very good to ripen a
Plague Sore.

For the Spleen.
LEt the Party purge twice in a week, with a Dram or the weight of Six pence of
Pulvis Sanctus, and the next week cause the Leeches to be applied to the Emerod
veins in the Fundament, afterward use this Drink following for the space of
seven or eight days.

TAke the inward bark of an Ash-tree, two ounces of Polopodi-root, or Fern that
grows on the sides of watery ditches, one ounce Tamartock, two good hardfuls,
Licorish half an ounce, Anniseed an ounce: Let these be boiled in three quarts
of small Beer till it come to two quarts; whereof let the Party drink every
morning, and at night going to bed-ward a quarter of a pint very warm.

And for Diet,
LEt them generally forbear Fish Bak'd-ments, smoak'd-meats, and new Beer; use
to eat good store of Broom-buds, Capers for Sallets; and after this course, you
shall cause the Leeches to be applied to the Emerod veins in the Fundament.

An excellent Medicine for a Scald or Burn, and chiefly for the Emerods.
TAke a pint or a quart of Lincedoyl, and put into it as many Crafish alive as
it will hold, then boil them a quarter of an hour, then strain the oil from
them, and let them be very well beaten in their shells in a Mortar, then put
them into the oil again and let them boil as formerly, then strain them from
the oil as you can, then fill your oil as full of tops of Elder, or young buds
of Elder, or the young fresh leaves; and let it boil in them till they be
crisp'd like fried Parsley; then strain it very hard from the Elder, and reserve
it for an excellent Medicine

For the Whites, to cleanse and stay them.
TAke of Purits Rossin, or Gum, of Lignum vita, otherwise called of gum
Guaicom; rub it gently in a Mortar, so as it may be in a fine powder, and
thereof mingle as much as the weight of six pence in a draught of Milk and
Sugar, and take it cold; so use it twice in a week for two weeks together, and
it will give you two stools or three, cleanse and knit the weakness of the back.

For a Whitlow.
TAke a Snail out of his Shell, and chop it very small, and bind it to it, and
dress it twice in a day, and it will quickly heal it.

For a cut of a finger or hand.
TAke some green Hysop and stamp it well in a Mortar, with some Sugar, and so
bind it on the hand.

For a Tetter or Ring-worm.
TAke ordinary white Coperas four ounces powdered fine, and put to it a pint
of sharp white Wine vinegar, and shake them well together, till the Coperas be
well dissolved; so weting linen cloths in it, and apply it to the place
grieved.

For one that is costive in Childbed, there is no safer thing nor better.
TAke two ounces oil of sweet Almonds, or if the Party cannot take it, you may
make a Supository of Castle-soap cut with a wyre.

For the Scyatica, an approved Medicine.
TAke red seeded Nettles, and whip the grieved party so far as his pain goes,
till it be all over bubbled, and so let him ly to sleep, and the next day he
shall be whole by the help of God, though he were so bad he could not stir off
the bed in five or six weeks out of your bed; you must lash them gently, not
too hard; and if it should come again, use it again; and if it come again, use
it again, and be whole always after.

For an extraordinary flux of Rheum in the Eyes that has been.
TAke stone pitch and spread it upon leather, as broad as the palm of your
hand, and as round, and prick it full of holes with a point of a knife, and lay
it to the nape of your neck, just upon the bone that sticks out most, and as
long as it will ly on, let it; but in two or three days it helps some: You
may let it ly on as long as you please a quarter of a year, and if it falls
off before your eyes be well, you may wipe off the moisture of it, and apply
others, as you shall see occasion. Probatum.

To Cure a Catarack.
A Catarack is curable by making an Issue in the Nape of the Neck.

This is the manner how you shall discern a Catarack it will seem to be like
many motes or little Flies between them and the light, and in the beginning,
begins to take away the true sight of the Eye, and then it grows into a
Film, which is counted uncurable when it covers the whole sight or bale of the
Ey, though at first it is curable, although there is nothing to be seen on the
outside of the Ey, as a purl, or such like; so that it is not to be helped
being within the Ey (though many books write of it) without the handy Operation
of some skilful Chyrurgion, putting some filver Needle into one corner of the
Ey, and twisting the film about the Needle, coucheth it under the sight of the
Eye, where it will afterward waste; but it requires an Artist that is well
skilled, in the couching a Catarack.

For a Consumption.
TAke the heart and lungs of a Calf new killed, a Capon, let these be bruised
in a stone mortar, and boiled with an hundred Snails, till the broth be as
thick as pottage, then put to it Hearts tongue, Maiden hair, Hysope, Scabias,
Sage, of each an handful, with China roots, sliced and beaten two ounces, of
the juice of Coltsfoot roots ten ounces, the blood of a Pig newly killed, and
Conserve of red Roses one pound; these being well mixed, let them be distilled
in Balneo with a very gentle fire, and reserve it.

Another.
TAke a young Cock, pull him alive, and then slit him in the middle, then wipe
him with a clean cloth, then take sops of white bread, soaked in a quart of
Burrage water, put the sops in a common Still, and lay the Cock with his bones
broken upon the sopping, putting thereto raisins of the Sun stoned and
unwashed, with a quantity of Dates, this being distilled, take thereof
constantly a pretty quantity.

A Julip of D. Trench, for the Mother fits, Proved.
IN the time of year distill black Cherry water, Pyon flower water, Couslip
water, Rue or Herbgrace water, then take of the waters of Couslip, and black
Cherry, of each an ounce, Aqua Histericae half an ounce, Cinnamon water one
dram, Sirup of Clove Gillyflowers three drams; Take of these two spoonfuls at a
time, as often as you please. Histerica is Castor.

To make the Salt of Coral.
TAke of the broken pieces of the reddest Coral you can get at the Druggist,
half a pound, or as much as you please, then put upon it of good wine Vinegar
distilled a gallon, and presently you shall see it work up and down upon the
Coral, then set it in a great glass on the top of a warm Stove, and let it
stand three or four days, then if you taste of the Vinegar, although it were
sharp before, it will have no strength, but taste sweetish, which is a sign it
has taken into the Vinegar as much as it can; then you may pour that off from
the Coral, and put on more Vinegar, and do as before, till all your Coral be
dissolved; then put all your Vinegar together, and put it into a large flat pan
well glased, and lay into the Vinegar in the pan two or three white lists half
a yard long, and let one half of them ly in the Vinegar in the pan, and the
other half hang out, and you shall see those lists (which must first be very
clean washed before you lay them into the Vinegar) by drops draw out all the
Vinegar in the pan, which you must receive with setting an other large pan or
pot under the ends of the Lists that hang out of the pan that they ly in. And
when you have so filtred your foresaid Vinegar very clear from the dross of the
Coral which you shall see remain at the bottom of the first pan you put your
Vinegar into, then you must set your clear Vinegar into the Oven, being a
little hotter then when Household bread is drawn; but it must be put into a
large clean Tin Basin, or Silver, for it will pierce through any earthen
vessel; and so it must be breathed away gently, till all the Vinegar be gone,
and leave the Salt of Coral in the bottom, being very gently dried. Then must
you have in a readiness a pottle or two of plain distilled water, and upon your
formerly dried salt of Coral, if there be a quarter of a pound, put a quart of
distilled water, and set it in warmth till it be melted, like Sugar in it; then
lay in your clean washed lifts of cloth into it, being put into a flat Pan as
formerly, and let it run through those lists by drops, to purify the salt, and
when all the water is come from the dross, which will remain in the Pan the
lists were put into, then put your clear water into the Oven, and let it breath
away gently, till it leave the salt of Coral dry, and then disolve it in
distilled water again, and proceed with it as before, and then it will be pure
and prepared for your use; whose virtues are many, and some approved by
practice as follows.

The virtues of the salt of Coral.
IT is to be given to children of any age in Fevers, the weight of twenty
grains, and gently covered to move sweat. Also to women in childbed that are
in any Fever, the weight of thirty grairs. Also in apparision of any small Pox,
or the Measels, it is never taken without good success. It strengthens the
Liver, and helps it to make good blood, being taken twice in a week in a
little Posset-ale, and continued so for the space of a month. Also it helps
children of Convulsions.

For Convulsion Fits.
TAke white Coperas, dissolve it in a little warm distilled water, and then
with clean lists laid into it, fylter it from his dross, and gently vapor away
the water till it be ^ry; then dissolve it again, fylter it, and lay it again
in a Oven as before, and it is prepared: Hereof you may give unto a sucking
child three grains in a spoonful of Posset Drink once or twice, and it seldom
or never fails, but cures.

An excellent Vomit.
TAke the leaves of Assara-bacca, being gathered in the beginning of June, and
run a thread through the leaves, and let them hang thereon till they be dry, in
the shade, so that you may powder them to fine Powder in a Mortar; and then
searse them, and keep the Powder in a Glass close stopped: Hereof you may give
to a man or woman ten grains, and temper it well with conserve of Barberries,
or any other conserve; and after it does work, let them drink still between
times, a good draaught of Posset Drink.

For the Toothache.
TAke the green Bark of the Elder-tree, after you have scraped off the upper
gray Bark, being gathered in the Spring; let it be gently dried in the shade,
so as it may be powdered, whereof take a quarter of an ounce; Bay Salt well
dried, Pellitory of Spain, and Euphorbium, of each the weight of sixpence; let
all of them be beaten together into very fine Powder, and there of ty up so
much in a little thin Lawn, Tiffine, or Sarcenet, as will make the quantity of
an ordinary Button; which you must let the Party hold between his teeth, laying
it on the pained Tooth, and so hanging down the head, let the Rhume run out of
the mouth till the pain cease. With this only Medicine, M. Clark in Sheer-lane
got forty pound in a year, having many coming to him in the mornings, and
paying ten groats each of them, and so departing helped. Or take the Powder of
Spanish-flies and lay them on a piece of sower Leven, well moystened with sharp
Vinegar, and press them well into the Leven, (being the bigness of a Shilling,
and so lay them under each ear, and when they are fast bound, let them lie
still the space of six or eight hours, in which time it must raise a Blister,
which when you take it off, you must dip and let it run as long as you can,
laying on it a Colewort-leaf, until it be whole; and this will also help.

For the Mother.
TAke Sneesing-powder, the weight of sixpence, Castorium, the weight of
twopence; mingle them together, then moysten the Powder well with oil of Amber,
and taking a little on the end of ones little finger, stroke it into the nose
when the Party has her Fit, and it will cause her sneese, and cease the Fit.

Also for the preventing the Fit.
THe Party should use twice in a week at her going to bed, to take two good
Pills of Assa-fetida: Or else, Take of the Briony root, dry, the weight of
sixpence, and boil it in a pint of white Wine; and then strain it, and put
some sugar to it, and make three draughts of it, taking it three times in a
week, each other morning, and you shall find it a singular Remedy.

For the Spleen.
LEt the Party purge twice in a week with a Dram or the weight of sixpence of
Pulvis Sanctus, and the next week let them cause the Leeches to be applied to
the Hemeroid-veins in the Fundament, and afterward use this drink following for
the space of seven or eight days.

Take the Inner Bark of the Ash-tree, two ounces; the Polipody-root, or
Fearn-root, that grows on the sides of watery ditches, one ounce; Tamerickt,
woe good handfuls; Liqueorish, half an ounce; Anniseeed, one ounce: Let these be
boiled in three quarts of small Beer, till it come to a pottle, whereof let
then Party drink morning and at night going to bed a quarter of a pint very
warm.

And for Diet, let them generally forbear Fish, Baked-meats, Smoak-dryed-meats,
and new Beer; use to eat good store of Capers, and Broom-buds for Sallets.

And after this course, you should cause the Leeches to be applied to the Veins
in the Fundament, called the Hemeroid veins.

For a Tertian Fever.
TAke young Plantane, with the root, young Vervane with the root, Cinkefoyl
with the root; of each of them three roots; with the herb of red Fennel, red
Sage, Rosemary, of each three slips: Let these be boiled in a pint and a half
of Posset-ale, or whey, till that come to a pint, and in the latter end of the
boiling, put into that a dram of the salt of wormewod, and then let that be
strained.

Whereof the patient must make three good drafts three hours before the fit be
exspected, each hour a draft as hot as he can drink it, and at the second day
of taking that, the cure is done. This cures the fever that comes every other
day.

To dry up milk in the breasts
USe nothing but the plaster of Diachilon, spread upon thin leather, and let
it ly on three or four days, and it fails not.

For sore Nipples.
TAke of the rosin of the Fur tree, and when that is finely powdered, strew
that upon the sore nipples and then cover them with little cups fitted hollow
for to cover the nipples like a thimble, with a little brim unto it, and it
will skin it. This powder also being finely beaten, and with a quill blown
into the eye will take away the pin and web, or any excrescens on the surface
of the eye.

For one that is Costive in Childbed.
THere is nothing safer nor better, then to give the party two ounces of the
oil of sweet almondes. Or if the party cannot take that, you may give her a
suppositer of Cassel soap, which is always to be had; for the manner of the
cutting the soap, you may do that by the holding a Cytern wire fast at both
ends, and then sawing it through it without breaking out of the sides, as it
will do if you cut with a knife.

For to Cleanse and stay the whites.
TAke of the purest rosin, or gum of Lignum vitae, otherwise called the gum of
Guaicum: rub it gently in a Mortar, so as it may be in a fine powder, and
thereof mingle as much as the weight of six pence in a draught of milk and
sugar, taking that cold, and so use that twice in a week for two weeks
together, and that will give two or three stools, cleanse and knit the weakness
of the back perfectly.

For a Whitelow on the finger.
TAke a snaile out of his shell, and chop it very small, and bind that to it,
and dress it twice in a day, and that will quickly help it.

For a cut hand or finger,
TAke some green hysop, and stamp that well in a mortar with some sugar, and so
bind that to the wound.

To stay the bleeding of the nose.
TAke nettles, stamp them and juice them, which you may take cold a good
spooneful or two, holding that in your mouth as long as you can, and then take
some more fresh, and also stamp them, and lay them al over your forehead, being
a little moistened or sprinkled with vinegar.

Also thus
YOu should in the month of March take two or three cloths as big as
handkerchiefs, and wet them very well in the spawn of froggs, and hang them up
to dry in a stove, and then dip them very well again, and dry them, and do so
three or four times, and when at last they be well dried reserve them. And when
you have occasion to use them, you may tear off a piece, and spriknle it with a
little vinegar, and lay it on cold upon the forehaed, and if that do not stay
it, the party must presently be let blood before he grow too weak.

For a Cough.
TAke Turnips, and put them into an Earthen glased pot, and cover it with a
cover of the same, or a peuter dish and paste that close together, then set
them into the bakers oven with the household bread, and then they will be well
stewed. And then press out the juice, and make it into a syrup with sugar, and
take of it often in a day, a spoonful at once, letting it melt down your throat
by degrees, and that will recover you from your cough.

For the worms in Children.
TAke gum Dragaint a dram, put to it a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, let it
stand twenty four hours, stirring of it often, and with this muscilage moisten
some fine powdered sugar, working them together into a paste, of which paste,
take the quantity of twenty grains, and mix with it nine or ten grains of the
powder of Mercurius dulcis and make that into a little cake, and let it dry in
a Stove, and give it to children of five, six, or seven, and to elder you may
give twelve grains.

The Composition of the Emplastrum Diachilon, to dry up milk in the breasts.
TAke Linseed oil two pintes and a half, Litharge of Lead in fine powder, two
pound, mix the oil and the Litarge together, and let them boil til they be knit
and com to a reasonable stifnes, then put in twelve ounces of the muscilage
made with Marshmallow roots, Fennigreek seed, and Linseed, then boil it til all the muscilages moisture be boiled away, then put in half a pound of wax, rosin
one pound, melt them with the rest; which being done, put into the same in the
cooling cerufe one pound, stir them up together, and then make them up into
roules and reserve them.

When you put in your muscilage, put it in a spoonful at once, til you have put
it al in, lest it make the medicine run over.

For any red inflammation, or that which is called saint Anthonies fire, which
usually does come in the Legs, and sometime in other Places.
TAke one ounce of the Lapis Medicamentosus, and boil it in a quart of fair
water, til half a pint be wasted, and then let it stand together all night,
next morning you should dip a linen cloth in it warm, and lay it on the place
til it be dry, and then lay on another, and you shall keep wet clothes to it
til it be well, which usualy is two or three days.

For a Tetter or Ringworm.
TAke ordinary white copperas four ounces, powder it fine, and put to it a
pint of the sharpest wine vinegar, and shake them well together til the
copperas be dissolved: and so wetting linen cloths in it apply it, to the
place.

FINIS.

