ENGLAND'S CHANGELING OR, The Time Servers Laid open in their Colors, BEING A
clear Discovery of the New Cheat of the Thing called the Good Old Cause.

By one that hopes to see better TIMES.

Printed in the year, 1659.

To all true Englishmen.
Dear Countrymen,
TO let you know that one as truly now
Forgets himself, as he remembers you,
I here present you with I know not what,
To do you service. --
What though some rotten Vpstart swell, what then?
So you take it friendly, what care I for them,
But would you know this Sir that is here intended,
His titles what, and whence he is descended;
Then know they call this Gent. sprung from a Fig,
One for the good Old Cause, Times Whinligig:
Titles sufficient to make him a flaunting,
And now time-Gallant (though true worth be wanting)
He comes to kiss your hands, and hope that you
Will give him Quarter for a night or two,
And afterward if so you think it fit,
To burn him, do, or tear him every bit,
Wishing poor Englands Tyrants all so used,
That have so many honest men abused;
And that is all, and that is scarce enough,
For them or this dressed up in such a stuff.
Yours, and only yours, H. W.

To Englands Tormentors.
HAve at you Sirs, it is but a word or two,
And that is enough, if not too much for you;
You that pretend Religion, and why?
To make Religion cloak your villainy;
You that pretend the public good, but how?
Just as the Pigs that whine to suck the Sow;
You men-devouring beasts, you ne'r-be-good,
Will nothing please you but our all hearts-blood?
No wonder that sweet England seems a hell,
When you sit Judges in our Israel:
What e're you think, we think you mad or worse,
Do You hope to fatter still byth' peoples curse?
Foxes indeed fare best when wished a rope,
But you will unkennel'd be e're long we hope;
And then (what then) 'twill be such sport, that O,
Acteons Dogs never used their Master so.
ENGLANDS CHANGLING OR, The Time Servers, etc.
WHat Age is this? What times are now?
Vice states it so in each man's brow,
with thousands waiting on her,
Clothed all in silks and Purple brave,
As if no honest man, but knave,
should ere again have honor.
Whilst virtue (who is so heavenly sweet)
That blessed are Kings if kiss her feet,
goes slighted up and down;
She that laments poor Englands woes,
See, see, how naked there she goes,
Kikt at by every Clown.
An honest man! a thing most rare,
Or Gentleman that is D^bonaire,
to live has much ado;
Then what one said, I now avow,
It Is hard not to write Satyrs now,
I think you think so too.
A Gentleman good Sir, alack,
What Is that? a last years Almanac,
I thought so by his look,
A foolish, useless, worthless thing,
A cast-by now just as the King,
whom Upstarts cannot brook.
No, no, we have a people now,
Blew-apron-blades, men that know how,
all Nations fill with wonder,
Who'r skilled in State-affaires so well,
Each man's another Machivell,
to keep the Gentry under.
Religion's made a Tennis-Ball,
For every fool to play withal,
both which we have so many,
That we disputed have so long,
'Bout which is right, and which is wrong,
till we have hardly any.
I now have lived to see the day,
Wherein a Fig-man bears such sway,
that Knights dare scarce sit by him;
Yea, I have lived to see the hour,
In which a Clothier has such power,
that Lords are glad to buy him.
Thus do the froth of all the earth,
A spawn sprung from a dungill birth,
now Prince it in our Land,
A people come the Lord knows how,
Both Fame and nameless till just now,
must every one command.
Kind hearted souls they are indeed,
O that we had more of the breed,
which take such mickle pain;
Spending their spirits day and hight,
That they the Nation may requite,
by turning all again.
Ah me! what times, sad times are these,
Wherein such tadpole slaves with ease,
mount up and live respected?
When they that have done service more
Then ten of them, yea ten score,
go slighted and neglected.
Witness those many Gallant men,
That fought it out so stoutly, when
The State was brought most lo,
Which now for their Arrcares do lie,
But not one groat can they come by,
though some a begging go.
Yet such as have no service done,
Nor ever did on hazard run,
these wars I dare be sworn,
But lay for Offices in wait,
Aiming to get a great Estate,
get thousands in a morn.
The honest souls which live by love,
Now see all this but dare not move,
the cause, because not Master;
For they to prove the City lover,
So long the staff delivered over,
that now they cannot bast her.
Then what is man to trust upon,
Who is so fond, so fickly gone,
so crazed in's apprehension;
He Is never well until he be,
Above his fellows, thought straight he
downfall beyond demension.
And down good God pluck all such down,
That seem for Christ, but seek their own,
where ere they come or go;
But peace, no more, the rest is meant,
O that this long-long Parliament,
would rid us of our woe.
But Parliaments have done amiss,
Themselves ere now, pray may not this?
then who will cast anchor there;
Alas can men do what they should,
Nay, would they do it if they could,
a second War I fear.
A second War, how can that be?
Has not the Parliament and we,
brought all we wished to pass?
So long as Monk and we agree
And all our Enemies forced to flee,
who fears a War's an ass.
But why should we be so secure?
Since God is just h^e'l never endure,
things managed as you see;
P^ide and oppression cry aloud,
Then cry to Heaven, to Heaven for blood,
and they shrewd sticklers be.
What was it that beat the first alarms,
In English hearts to take up arms,
I menn in the well affected?
Was It not our Church to pu^ifie,
From all the dregs of Popery,
which had her so infected.
And this was well, and bravely done,
Had we gone on as we begun,
't had been a gallant Cure,
But for to thrust out one Church so,
And suffer thousand worse to grow,
this purge is not so pure.
And what was next the moving cause,
That made us rush even in the jaws,
of death, with such delight?
Was It not left arbitrary Power,
Should State and liberty devour,
to stave off if we might.
Sure this was it, and this was all,
These were the main, the principal,
that made the honest fight;
And now that this accomplished is,
Beyond what we could think or wish,
you sweetly them requite.
If we sometimes had from our Prince
A lash or two, what have we since?
indeed a world of favor;
Just as from Rehoboam, when
One finger should be heavier then
the weight of all his Father.
How often promised (but still fooled)
Were we, the Egyptian taskers should
be punished for oppression?
But whilst the Sheep has any wool,
Our Shepherds will be never full,
tears make but poor impression.
Then since that man's grown such a beast,
That Homo homini lupus est,
blessed they who are unborn:
How ere let us sigh to God bove,
One sigh may chance to get his love,
though men our tears do scorn.
FINIS.

