A Voice from the Heavenly Word of God; AS A Representation to every Member of
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, In the Behalf of Mr. JOHN LILBVRNE
close Prisoner in Newgate. WITH The sighs and lamentations of many of the free
born People of England for Justice and Equity, whose names are hereunto
subscribed, on the behalf of themselves and others.
THe Lord Jehovah alone is the Power of all powers, King of kings, and Lord of
lords: By me Kings rule or Ragin, and Princes decree Justice; by me Princes
Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the earth, Prove 8. 15, 16. thus with
the mind of God, all the people that fear God do acknowledge all powers to be
of God, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 2 Chronicles. 19. 4, 5. These Scriptures
discovering the reason why Powers are set up of God over people: First, Rulers
are not a terror to good works, but to the evil, Romans 13. 3. For the punishment
of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, 1 Pet. 2. 14. And as
Jehoshaphats charge was to the Judges which he set over the fenced Cities of
Judah: thus he said unto them, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man,
but for the Lord, who is with you, or should be with you in judgment;
wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed, and do it, for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts, 2 Chronicles. 19. 4, 5, 6, 7. And as Moses charged the Judges, to hear the
causes of their brethren, and to judge righteously between every man and his
brother, and the stranger that is with them: Ye shall not respect persons in
judgment, but ye shall hear the small as well as the great; ye shall not be
afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is Gods, Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. For the
Word of the Lord says, Cursed is he that perverteth the judgment of the
stranger, fatherless and widow, and all the people shall say Amen, Deuteronomy. 27.
19. mark the words of the Queen of Sheba to Solomon, Happy are the men, happy
are these thy servants, which stand continually before thee, and that hear thy
wisdom, therefore the Lord made him King, to do Judgment, and Justice, 1 Kings
10. 8, 9. For when the righteous are in Authority the people rejoice; but when
the wicked bears rule, the people mourn: The righteous considers the cause
of the poor, but the wicked regards not to know it, Prove. 29. 2. 7. for he
that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God: So shall he be as
the light of the morning, when the sun rises, even as the morning without
clouds, as the tender grass springs out of the earth by clear shining after
rain, 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4. for the paths of the just is as the shining light,
that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4. 18. It is joy to the
just to do judgment, but destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity.
Prove. 21. 15. For the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he
pondereth all his goings, Prove. 5 21. For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro
through the whole earth, to show himself strong in the be half of them whose
hearts are perfect toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Zach. 4. 10. Jer. 16, 17. Now
he that is just shall surely live.

Thus are the charges of the everlasting God to all Princes or Parliaments, or
Magistrates and Judges, that will obey the command of the God of Israel; and in
so doing, you or they glorify his name, and gain to your selves everlasting
comfort.

But now seeing the cause wherefore the Lord has ordained a power to be over
people, and the rule for them to walk by, as is abovenamed, and you the present
power that we are under, as you do declare your selves to be the Parliament of
the Commonwealth of England, whom we own in all, as all powers are of God,
praying for the preservation of you, according to the Command of God by his
Apostle, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty, 1. Tim. 2. 1, 2. and willing to assist you to the utmost of our power
in all well-doing, to the glory of God, and Comfort of his people: And we the
free born people of the Commonwealth of England, do understand you do declare
your selves free and willing to do good for the free born people of this
Nation, in setting the oppressed free; and you professing your selves to have
much of the knowledge of God amongst you by your Declaration, and teachers of
others, therefore hear all ye people, and hearken O earth, and all that therein
is, and let the Lord God be witness against you, the Lord from his holy Temple,
if you justify the deeds of that wicked Parliament, who are destroyed and gone
out like the snuff of a candle. Woe unto them that devise iniquity, and work
evil upon their beds, when the morning is light, then they practice it, because
it is in the power of their hands, who make a man an offender for a word, as
did the late Parliament against Mr. Lilburn, who made an Act to banish him for
words, which was the ground only and alone that that must illegal and unjust
Act had its foundation from, because men's wills would have it so, and so there
wills must become a Law, by this insnaring Act, not only to fine Lieut: Col:
John Lilburn (as that Act calls him) in seven thousand pounds for words, but he
must go into perpetual banishment, and if he return he must suffer as a Fellon:
Will being the womb in which this most bitter inhumane, illegal Act had its
conception in the bowels of iniquity, to make their will a destroying Law,
contrary to the Law of God, and the Law of Nature, which is to do unto all men,
as they would have all men to do unto them: Now judge you, whether the late
Parliament has done to Mr. Lilburne, as they would be done by? or if anyof you
of this present Parliament should have any such Act and Fine made and past
against you, or any of your near relations judge ye.

But blessed be the Lord which judges righteously, and has not spoken his
word in vain: For the terrible ones are brought to naught, and the scorner is
consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off, that make a man an
offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate, and
turn aside the just for a thing of naught, Isai. 29. 20, 21 If a word against a
man be but a trespass, as Christ says, Matthew. 18. 35. a man should forgive a
man his trespass until seventy times seven; and seeing it lies in your power
to forgive a trespass, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother
his trespasses, how shall Christ forgive you, Now how much rather that wicked
Act, wherein there was no trespass worthy of such an Act to be made, as in it
self it does plainly appear.

Further, we humbly entreat you to consider the days that are past, in which
wicked men did reign, being the late Parliament, whom the Lord by means has
rooted out; Did not the Heads thereof judge for reward? Mic. 3. 11. But we hope
better things of you, and if you will seriously consider with your selves, to
preserve the life of Mr. Lilburn, in making v^id that most illegal Act
pretendedly made against him, and let Christ be your example, who came, not to
destroy men's lives, but to save them; and see how he reproved his Disciples for
desiring fire to come down from heaven to destroy men's lives; but Christ
reproves them, telling them, they knew not what spirits they were of: therefore
consider what spirits ye are of, if ye have the spirit of Christ, from that
spirit we are sure proceeds these fruits, love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; against such there is no
law, Gal. 5 22. For every tree shall be known by his Fruit, Mat. 7. Men cannot
gather grapes of thorns, nor figgs of thistles; neither does a fountain send
forth at the same place sweet water and bitter, Jam. 3. 11. Neither can any say
they have Abraham to their father, if they do the works of the Devil, who was
a murderer from the beginniug, John 8. 39. 44. therefore be sober and
vigilant, and consider the words of Christ, that valued the life of man more
then all the things on earth, Matthew. 6. 25. For we know the Lord is of
long-suffering and tender mercy, and would not that any should perish. Now lay
this to heart we entreat you, for yo ur own good, that the guilt of Mr.
Lilburnes blood be not upon you, seeing the word says, He that bids any God
speed in any evil, is partaker of their evil deeds, 2 John 10. 11.

So we desire you that you go not into that way of those wicked men which made
that most wicked Act against Mr. Lilburn; for they that justify the wicked,
and condemn the just, even they are abomination to the Lord: If we be not
merciful to another, how shall we expect mercys at the hand of God, seeing we
all, nay, the best of men, are so great offenders daily to his glorious
Majesty, the Lord of Hosts; and shall a man have his life taken away for a
word, which wicked men took as an offense; and will you justify men in their
wickedness, and neglect the righteousness of God in doing of Justice? and when
your pleasure is you will save a man's life though condemned to die according to
the Law. Consider we pray you, and be not worse then the unjust Judge, who
feared not God nor regarded man, yet he heard the cry of a poor widow that
cried unto him, Luke 18. and how many thousand has cried daily unto you for
justice in the behalf of Mr. Lilburn, yet none can be heard? Consider we humbly
pray you how it grieveth the souls of those that fear the Lord, to see how hard
you deal with Mr. Lilburn in keeping him close-prisoner, debarring him the
company of his friends; more hard usage then was received from the heathens of
Paul, though he was accused to be a raiser of new Sects, yet when he was a
prisoner in the Castle, kept by the chief Captain, yet had he his liberty for
his friends to come to him, as appears by Acts 23. 16. for when Paul's sisters
son heard of some lying in wait to destroy Paul, he went and entered into the
Castle, no man forbidding him, to acquaint Paul with it: and when Felix
commanded a Centurion to keep Paul prisoner, these are his words, to let Paul
have his liberty, and that he should hinder none of his friends to minister
unto him, Acts 24. 23. as also did the heathens suffer Paul to live two years
in his own hired house at Rome, forbidding none to come to him, Acts 28. 30.
and if Paul who was a Jew had this liberty of heathens, would it not grieve any
soul to see the Freeborn people of this Nation (who profess themselves
Christians) so cruel one to the other? Therefore we entreat you to let Mr.
Lilburn have his liberty, that his friends may come to him.

And lastly, we desire you to consider these our requests (tending as we hope)
for the good of all, and especially those that fear the Lord; and let us not be
accounted your enemies by declaring unto you the truth, or in desiring the
innocent blood of Mr. Lilburn might not be suffered to be spilt, to satisfy
the lust of his bloudthirsty enemies. Consider the innocent Vriah which was
slain by David's command to satisfy his lust, which caused him much repentance
for it, Psalm 51. for which sin the Lord would not suffer him to build him an
house; and for that sin, the sword did not depart from his house all his days.
Seeing it lies in your power to save the blood of Mr. Lilburn that it be not
spilt, by making void that most illegal Act, and that all Trials the reupon
against him be null and void; but if Mr. John Lilburn according to the Law of
God (which should be the foundation of al Laws, to try all men by, but
especially those that profess themselves Christians) were he worthy of
punishment or death, if we did know it, we should not desire it, contrary to
the Law of God. Therefore hear what the wise man says, Whosoever stops his ears
at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but not be heard, Prove. 28.
9. He that turns his ear from hearing the Law, his prayer shall be an
abomination to the Lord. Give instruction to a wise man, and he will yet be
wiser teach a just man, and he will increase in learning. So hoping you will
hear our just requests, that we may be happy messengers for Mr. Lilburns
deliverance from his cruel and causeless bondage; so you will not only have
the praise of men, but of God: and in so doing you will oblige your friends,
who as in du^y bound, shall ever pray.

Ralph Willis Philip Thomas Isaac Gray George Lawson Robert Hannam Richard
Woodward Nicholas Waterson Tho. Wall.


Printed at London, August 10. 1653.


