A Discovery of Charity Mistaken; OR, Some Reasons against Committees forcing
the Parliaments godly, faithful and plundered Ministers (who labor in the Word
and Doctrine) to pay fifth parts to Sequestered Ministers Wives and Children.
With some Answers to some Arguments Alleged for it. AS ALSO Some Complaints of
poor plundered Ministers, against the hard dealings of some Committees about
fifth parts, and Juries, with a motion for their settlements for their Lives.

1 Timothy 5.17, 18. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the word and Doctrine, for the Scripture
says, thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the corn, and the
Labourer is worthy of his reward. Omne beneficium postulat Officium. LONDON,
Printed at the desire of a Friend, and are to be sold at the Three Bibles in
Paul's Churchyard, and in Westminster Hall. 1654.

A Discovery of Charity mistaken.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, wherein you desire to know my reasons, why fifth parts
should not be allowed to the Wives and Children of sequestered Ministers, by
those Ministers that are put into Sequestrations, (which with some intermixed
grievances) I hereby humbly offer to your serious consideration, and candid
interpretation. But to prevent mistakes I premise,

1 That I plead not against the States allowing fifth parts to the Wives and
Children of sequestered Delinquents temporal Estates, except they be Offices
into which others are put: Neither

2 Do I intend any evil, but good, to those that have sat, and do now sit at
the stern of our Commonwealth; (I am one of those that have acted with, and
suffered much, in name, body and estate for them) but that you may see, lament,
and reform the hard measure that some of their best friends have received, at
the hands of some of their Committees, and worse may, if some good course be
not speedily taken to reform and restrain them; and therefore I hope, that
neither you nor any others well-affected, will take in ill part what I shall say
in vindication of this Position.

That it is not warrantable for Committees to force poor plundered Ministers,
put into Sequestrations, to pay fifth parts of the profits of them, to the
respective Wives and Children of Ministers, that are sequestered from them.

And my Arguments to prove it are these.

1 Because they have no right unto them, for if they have any right to them, it
is either in right of the sequestered Ministers, or of themselves, but neither
of these ways, therefore no way.

1 Not in right of sequestered Ministers, because they have no right unto them,
they had (it may be) a civil right unto them, but that they have lost by their
convicted scandalousnesse and delinquency, and are dead in Law, now (you know)
when a Minister is dead, neither he, nor his Wife, nor Children have any right
to any profits due after his death, and therefore not to a fifth part.

Obj. But you will say, they are not dead in law, because not legally put out,
by a Judge at Common Law, or deprived by their Ordinary.

Sol. I Answer, 1 They are deservedly put out by the Authority of the highest
Judicature in England, for most have been sequestered by the late Committee for
releife of plundered Ministers, who were all Parliament Men; and though some
have been sequestered by Country Committees, (who commonly Favored Delinqent
and scandalous Ministers, much more then the Committee for Plundered Ministers
did) you know these Committees were authorized to do what they did, who
proceeded as favorably as they could, according to those Rules given them from
above, and secundum allegata and probata, the scandalousnesse and delinquency
alleged and proved against them; if not (as I have heard) they had their
appeal even to the house it self, if made within half a year after
sequestration,

2 You know that Juries are for the most part malignant and corrupt, favorers
of malignant, and scandalous Ministers, and foreswore taking upon them to bring
in their Verdict not according to the evidence, but to judge of the Law it
self; So that if some good course be not speedily taken, Acts of Parliament,
and men's proprieties will be little or nothing worth. I am confident there are
no greater oppressions in England, then malignant and corrupted Juries are to
honest men; and yet (though the Lives and Estates of Godly and Well-affected men
are to be tried by them) there is no provision made against them.

3 And besides the fifth part is commonly allowed to the wives and children of
those Ministers, who would undoubtedly have been sequestered, not only by an
honest well-affected, and uncorrupted Jury at Common Law, but by a Vote of the
major part of the whole House it self.

4 And truly, many (if not most) of those that now stand sequestered, were
never legally, (if we take legally, according to Gods holy Word) put in, for
God never sent them; For he never sends any but such as he quallifies with
gifts of Illumination and Sanctification convenient and necessary for them,
both which many (if not most) of them wanted, when they were first sent by men.

5 And truly, many of those Patrons that presented them, as well as those
Bishops that instituted them, were as sequestrable for delinquency and scandal
as themselves, and therefore sure they were not fit and competent Judges of
them and their behavior. But to leave this to the Parliament, who know upon
what good grounds they have sequestered them.

2 I say they have no right in themselves to fifth parts. For 1. Though it be
said by some that the Parliament has given them to them, and therefore, that
they have as much right to fifth parts, as the Ministers put into
sequestrations have to the four parts: The Parliament seeing how forward some
were to cut such large thongs out of honest men's, their good friends, sides (if
I may so speak) as to allow third parts to the sequestered Ministers under the
color of their Wives and Children, did, as in the case of Usury, make a Law to
restrain them to fifth parts; and thereby did indeed tolerate, but not command
their Inferiors, nor necessitate themselves to allow fifth parts from poor
plundered Ministers, which Law of theirs, is (God knows) much abused by their
Committees, to their great dishonor, and the grief and undoing of many godly
Ministers and their Families, and the maintaining and rejoicing of their
irreconcilable Enemies. Secondly, I deny the Argument. For it does not follow,
that because the State does tolerate and restrain Usury to 6 l. per cent.
that therefore it is lawful and just; So neither does it follow, because the
State does tolerate a maintenance to the wives and children of sequestered
Ministers out of those Sequestrations where godly and plundered Ministers are
placed, and restrain their Agents to fifth parts, that therefore it is lawful
to force them to pay them to them.

Ob. You will say it is lawful by man's Law, though (it may be) it is not lawful
by Gods Law.

Sol. Sir, Grant the latter and you must yield the former, for man's Law must be
rightly grounded upon Gods, else it will not be a righteous but ungodly Law.
But more of this hereafter. For Answer I say, with submission to all in
Authority, that they have no right unto fifth parts by Man's Law, for

1 The Parliament did not command, but only tolerate fifth parts, as it does
not follow, that because our state does tolerate men to take 6 l. per cent.
that therefore they must take so much, for men may lend for less; or freely
for nothing if they will. But Committees force poor plundered Ministers to pay
them to the Wives and Children of sequestered Ministers, though people pay them
not their Tithes and Dues.

2 Their Committees are Patrons pro tempore of all sequestered Livings, to which
they present their Ministers when they send them to the Assembly, or other
godly Orthodox Divines, and institute and induct them, when they give them
Orders for their respective places; now by that good old unrepealed Law against
Symonie; it is unlawful for any Patron, when he presents any Minister to a
presentative Living, to reserve a fifth part, yea, any part of the profits of
the same, either for himself or any others (be they never so poor) as all
skilled in our Laws, know right well; and therefore I conclude, that it is not
lawful for Committees to force poor plundered Ministers, to pay to the wives
and children of those that have been sequestered, a full fifth part of the
profits of their Livings, as they do, under the penalties of Sequestration, or
imprisonment.

Ob. But you will say, that every inferior Patron is, but Committees are not,
tied to that Law.

Sol. Sir, I profess I am very loath to write any thing that may be by any
construed against the late Parliaments just proceedings but I hope I may do
this without offense, as well as others write against Usury which is tolerated
by them. Therefore in answer I say, That it is contrary to the late Parliaments
Declarations; For, you know, the late Parliament Declared and Promised to
repair the losses of those that were plundered for their adhering to them,
which this forcing of them to pay fifth parts does not do, but (I will not
say) plunder them more. And also to maintain the good and wholesome Laws of
our Land, of which kind that known Law against Symonie is one, and as yet is
not formally repealed, but even by the Parliament and Judges justly punished;
now to force Ministers to pay fifth parts to the Wives and Children of them
that are sequestered, has the materiality, if not the whole formality of
Symonie; And besides, you know that Committees are not supreme but subordinate
Patrons, and therefore are bound to observe the Laws of our Land as well as any
others.

Second Argument, To force poor plundered Ministers to pay fifth parts to the
Wives and Children of sequestered Ministers, is contrary to their proceedings,
with others in like cases. For

1 Many men have been sequestered from Offices of great profit, which they or
their friends have bought with great sums of money, and which they did and might
hold by the Laws of the Land as well as Ministers, and yet Committees though
they have continued those Offices, and put others, though not plundered, into
them; yet have not enjoined, much less forced them to pay fifth parts to their
Wives and children, though they were poor and had nothing else to live upon but
their labor, which was never yet denied to the Wives and Children of
sequestered Ministers.

2 Yea, many Heads and Officers of Colleges and Halls in the Universities,
have been sequestered from their several Headships and Offices, and yet have not
forced those that have been put into them to pay their Wives and Children fifth
parts, though some of them have neither Wife nor Children, neither have they
been plundered as some Ministers (that are forced to pay fifth parts) have
been, neither are they defrauded of, and troubled about their dues, as many
poor plundered Country Ministers commonly are. I write not this out of any envy
of them, God knows my heart, I wish them better then they have, for some of
them have too little, but to let you see the inequality of some Committees
proceedings. Yet why both these sorts of men should be exempted from fifth
parts, and other godly and plundered Ministers who have Wives and Children of
their own should be charged with them, I see no reason at all, but only will.

3 It is inconvenient to force them thereunto in many respects;

1 To Committees, for there by they are many times put to a great deal of labor
and charge, to watch and wait to make orders, and hear causes about fifth
parts, which might well be spared, and better spent.

2 To the Parliament and Army. For 1. Thereby godly Ministers having been
plundered for aiding of them, are disabled now to help them as formerly they
have, and might, and would. 2. Malignants are not thereby made their friends,
but the more able to hurt them, and their friends, and doubtless will when
time serves.

3 To their Ministers, and that many ways, for it takes them off from their
studies, compels them to be absent from their Families, and flocks, and puts
them to great trouble, labor, and charges to attend the hearing of their
Causes. For many times they are put off until their friends be absent, and a
Committee made against them; yea, when they have showed good cause, and that
approved of, and have been thereupon discharged from fifth parts, yet many
times they have been charged again, and hereby they are not only disabled from
repairing their old dilapidated houses, and releiving the poor; but are
necessitated to be more strict with their Parishioners about their Tithes and
Taxes then otherwise they would be. Yea, further, it animates malignants
against them, for they look upon fifth parts as an earnest that their old
sequestered Ministers have right to all, and shall one day enjoy all again; and
this makes them many times, and ways, to vex and oppress the Parliaments poor
plundered Ministers, by over-valuing, and over-taxing their Livings, that a
fifth part is made a third part, and then there remains but two parts to the
Parliaments poor plundered Ministers, to maintain themselves, their own Wives
and Children, pay Taxes, relieve the poor, repair their houses, and keep
hospitality; and it may be are forced to go to law with their Parishioners for
all, and in the mean time borrow money to pay taxes and fifth parts, and in the
end compound for half the value of their Tithes, after they have spent twice
as much as their Tithes were worth. Is this the way to relieve poor plundered
Ministers? Yea, further, it being left to sequestered Ministers Wives and
Children to choose their fifth parts of which Living they please (for many of
them had two Livings, some three) it so falls out, that they commonly pitch upon
the places where poor plundered Ministers are placed, and let the other alone,
or make some underhand bargain with them, and so it comes to pass, that many
times godly Ministers, who have been deprived of the lives of their friends, of
their estates in the wars, and have Wives and many small Children of their own,
and friends, who have lost their limbs in the Parliaments Service to maintain,
are compelled to pay full fifth parts unto the Wife or child of the sequestered,
that has it may be good considerable temporal estate to live upon, and this
without defalcation of taxes and charges, which were or are in many places
above a fourth part of the whole; but this is occasioned by Committees giving
them leave to choose where they list, and always, and all of one, and so
Newters, yea, Malignants till of late, and young men, who have either none; or
but little charge, and never lost any thing by the wars, escape
fifth-part-free, and the burden, as has been showed, is laid upon the aged
well-affected, poor plundered Ministers, who have great charge of children and
friends depending upon them.

Third Argument, To force poor plundered Ministers, put into Sequestrations, to
pay fifth parts unto the wives and children of sequestered Ministers, is a
practice not well grounded upon the Holy word of God, which ought to be the
rule and foundation of Christian men's actions. Therefore it is not warrantable.
-- I know it is pretended to be an act of great mercy, and the Ministers that
are against fifth parts (though they be truly godly and poor, and merciful to
those that are poor indeed) are hardly censuRed, and looked upon, as covetous,
selfe-lovers, and without natural affection; but it is for the most part by
such that are so indeed, and also false accusers, and despisers of those that
are truly good (2 Timothy 3.) But Sir, some wise and worthy men say, it was but
an act of humane policy devised at first by some in favor of Malignants, and
connived at by others (as in time of the wars) favoring honest godly
Ministers, but continued to their undoing. Now to evidence it to be a practice
not well grounded upon the Word of God, I suppose it will not be amiss to lay
down those portions of holy Scripture producible for the lawfulness of
Committees forcing fifth parts from godly, poor plundered Ministers, to the
wives and children of those Ministers that are sequestered by the Parliaments
Authority, and then clear them.

Ob. First is or may be alleged, 1 King. 2.26. And unto Abiather the Priest,
said the King, get thee to Anathoth unto thine own fields, for thou art worthy
of death. Hereupon it is said that it is evident that though Solomon sequestered
Abiather the Priest from being Priest unto the Lord, yet he did not take away
all his maintenance from him, but commanded him to go to Anathoth to his own
fields there, therefore say they, fifth parts are grounded upon the Word of
God, for here is example for a maintenance out of a sequestered Ministers own
fields.

Sol. For Answer unto this, be pleased to consider these things.

1 That Solomon was an absolute King as most men hold, extraordinarily made by
the Lord, as Adonijah said, 1 King. 2.15. and therefore Solomon's practice is no
good president for our Committees, who are but conditional, else we are in a
worse condition then we were in formerly, but let it go for good, then know

2 That Solomon (the Supreme Magistrate) sequestered Abiather the High Priest,
as a grand Delinquent for adhering to Adonijah, who would needs be King before
King David was dead, or willing to resign his Kingdom into his hand, for
which Solomon judged him worthy of death, and yet pardoned him as to life, and
temporal estate, and confined him to his fields at Anathoth, which belonged
not to him as he was High Priest, if Solomon's practice be a good president for
fifth parts, why not for our Committees to sequester.

3 That Solomon pardoned Abiather as to life and temporal estate, for that
time, for his former good Service done to his father David, and sufferings, for
and with him, but thrust him out of the Priests Office and confined him to his
own fields at Anathoth; So many Ministers though they have more deserved death
then Abiather did, yet have been pardoned by the Parliament, as to life and
liberty, though they have done both them and their Fathers, and friends, all
the mischeife they could. But now that Committees practice in allowing fifth
parts to sequestered Ministers Wives and Children, and forcing godly poor
plundered Ministers to pay them, is not well grounded upon Solomon's, nor
consonant thereunto, is manifest. For

1 Solomon sequestered Abiather from being Priest before the Lord, and put
Zadock in his room, but he did not allot Abiather or his wife or children a
fifth part of the High Priests maintenance, and much less compel Zadock, who
performed the Office to pay it him or any other; But now Committees do
commonly cut out fifth parts as large as third parts of the profits of
sequestered Livings, to sequestered Ministers wives and children, and constrain
godly, faithful, plundered Zadockes to pay them (besides performing the Office,
to which by the Law of God and man they have ever been annexed and paying of
all taxes and charges imposed, which Zadock knew not of.) under the penalties
of sequestration or imprisonment, to sequestered Abiathers shall I say? that
name is not convient, for they never bear the Arc before, nor suffer any thing
with, or for the Parliament, but rather acted with Saul and Absalom, and either
like Doeg murdered, or at lest, like Shimei cursed, and railed, and cast stones
against them, and their friends, now whether most Committee Men have truly
written after Solomon's copy, let all seeing and uncorrupted men judge,

2 Solomon did confine Abiather to his own fields or possessions at Anathoth,
for near thereunto was the City of Nob before Saul destroyed it, where
Abiathers land lay, as the learned * S. W. R.
Knight observes. He did not give him leave to make away his temporal estate,
and then choose his maintenance where and when he would out of Zadocks (as some
Committees have done) no, but he confined him to his own fields belonging to
his Person, not to his Office, and that was a special act of grace to
Abiather, because he had carried the Ark of the Lord before his father David,
and had been afflicted in all wherein his father David had been afflicted. And
truly, if we look back to the 1 Samuel 21.22. chapters, we shall find that
Abiather deserved some favor, more then other. For he had done, and suffered
much, he had born the Ark before David, and he had lost his Father, and
friends, and moveable goods for David's sake, and shared with him in all his
troubles, and his fault was such as a wiser man might have slipped into; For
Adonijah was the Kings eldest Son, a proper man, and David's Darling, and the
King had not declared any thing against Adonijahs succeeding him. And Joab (a
wise and valiant man) the Kings General was also in the action; and these
things, no doubt, if Abiather did not plead, Solomon (being a wise man) knew
right well and also that this was the first time, that ever he was found
faulty, and therefore he gracioufly pardoned him as to life and temporals, and
only sequestered him from the Office and Profits of the High Priest, both which
he deservedly, freely, and fully gave to Zadock, who had faithfully adhered to
his father David and himself. Indeed Sir, those Abiathars that acted with, and
suffered for the Parliament in the beginnings of our late troubles and changes,
but failed (it may be, inconsiderately some of them) in the matter of Adonijah,
might very well plead this practice of Solomon, as a good prefident for our
wise Sages and Committees to follow: But why cursing Shimei's, and seditious
Korah's, who have done what they could (and they are most of them the same they
were) to subdue and destroy the Parliament and their adherents, should be
permitted to plead this for themselves, their wives or children, especially
against godly Zadocks who have faithfully adhered to, and constantly served the
Parliament even in their greatest extremities, and suffered so much for them. I
profess I see no reason at all.

Object. 2. The next place that is brought for fifth parts, is Mat. 5.5.
Blessed are the merciful for they shall find mercy: therefore seeing poor
plundered Ministers will not of their own accord give the wives and children
of sequestered Ministers fifth parts, it is lawful for Committees to force them.

Sol. To this I might answer thus; that they must show,

1 That to give fifth parts is a duty.

2 That they are able to do it, or else I believe they will not be blessed in
their deed.

3 By way of question ad homines, pray what fifth parts do these merciful men
allow to those Bishops, etc. whose only crime was, that they were Bishops,
whose Lands and Possessions they have bought (for a small matter yea, as some
say) for a fifth part of the worth of them, and do they not appear so merciful
to Malignants of purpose that they may speak well of them, or that they may
obtain mercy from them if the times should alter, which they fear, and so is
not all their specious show of Charity to others, any other thing then plain
self-love? I do not know their hearts (but God does) and therefore I do but
ask the question.

4 But I answer, ad rem, to the thing objected, and insinuated.

1 That those for whom they so stiffly plead, and violently act, are not
commonly such subjects of misery, and therefore not such objects of mercy, as
they would make the world believe they are: For I know it is often pretended
that there is a Wife and ten or twelve small Children like to perish if they be
not releived by a fifth part of a poor plundered Ministers maintenance, but
upon due examination there is found neither Wife nor Children but only one
single Son or Daughter, and either of them eighteen or twenty years of age,
and well bred up, and provided for, and able to get their Livings, and
maintained in their Silks and Sattens. Now let conscience speak whether it be
the mercy here intended by our Savior to compel a poor plundered Minister (who
has really a Wife, and it may be eight or ten or twelve small children unable
to help themselves) to pay a full fifth out of the profits of his Living, for
which he labors night and day to such a single person or persons who are well
able to get their livelihoods by their labor, if they had not friends to help
them.

2 I say that the mercy to which blessedness is promised is spiritual, and
has for its original the Holy Spirit of God, Gal. 6.10. Dr. Harrice in loc.
for its subject a spiritual regenerated man, and for its chief object,
spiritual men (I mean spiritual, in opposition to carnal) and for its ends,
spiritual motives: Now whether this be such a spiritual mercy, let spiritual
men judge.

3 True spiritual mercy is guided by the true rule of justice, so that he that
does not regulate his actions by it, is not to be reputed a spiritually
merciful man, Psalm. 112.4.5: a good man is righteous as well as merciful: Now
whether this forcing of poor plundered Ministers to pay fifth parts to
sequestered Ministers wives and children be an action guided by the rules of
true justice, let all just men judge. The Word of God, which ought to be the
rule of Justice, says plainly, That he that preaches the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9 14. And the laborer is worthy of his hyer, Luke 10 7.
And if any will not work they must not eat, 2 These. 3.10. And let the Elder
that rules well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor
in the Word and Doctrine; For the Scripture says, thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, and the laborer is worthy of his
reward, 1 Timothy 5 17, 18. But now does not this forcing of poor plundered
Ministers to pay fifth parts, make them unable to live of the Gospel? and a
Gospel maintenance ought to be more liberal and large then that before or
under the Law; Because the ministration of the Gospel is more excellent then
that before or under the Law, Heb. 8.6. but fifth parts make it much less,
yea, then it was in times of Popery; they deprive the labourer of his hire and
reward, and of that double, yea, single honor which is due unto him; they
muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, that gives their bread
to them, that labor not for it. And if that remarkable Position of many learned
and unbyassed men (Ministers and others) be true, as they boldly affirm, and
strongly prove) that Tithes were always paid to Christ, as they gather from,
Heb. 7.5, to 10. compared with Genesis 14.18.19 20, And Christ being a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedech, ver. 17. Then it will follow that they
rob Christ, for robbing of his Ministers is robbing of Christ, Mal. 3.8. will a
man rob his Gods, yet ye have robbed me but ye say wherein have we robbed
thee? in Tithes and Offerings. Now I hope, Act 9 4, 5.
they will not say that those able and godly, and painful Ministers which they
have put into sequestrations, and labor in the Word and Doctrine are not
Christ's Ministers; and much less affirm that those scandalous and delinquent
Ministers, whom they have justly and orderly cast out, are Christ's Ministers,
and yet many Committees take from the one to give to the other; Is this just,
to force Christ's Ministers to discharge the Office, and compel them to pay the
fifth part of their maintenance, which Christ has ordained for them, to the
others, who neither rule well, nor labor in the Word and Doctrine? I trow, if a
faithful Captain, Steward or Ambassador, should be forced to pay a full fifth
part of his pay or Salary to the Captains, Stewards, Ambassadors wife, or
children that has been justly cashiered, or displaced for insufficiency,
scandal or delinquency, he would not like it very well, but complain and cry
out injustice, njiustice, especially if he should be compelled to do the Office
of a Captain, Steward or Ambassador, seeing omne beneficium postulat officium.
Every Benefice requires the Office thereunto belonging and omne officium
beneficium postulat beneficium, Every Office requires the Benefice or Wages
thereunto belonging? And what, is it Justice to compel the poor plundered
Minister to perform all the Duties belonging to his Office, and yet force him
to pay a fifth part of the Profits, Benefits or Wages thereunto belonging
(whether he can get them or not) to him or his, who perform not the Office,
but is judged unable, or unfit to do it?

4 That is not true spiritual mercy, which necessitates them to neglect their
duty: But forcing of poor plundered Ministers to pay fifth parts to the wives
and children of sequestered Ministers, necessitates them to neglect their duty,
even those things which God himself has commanded them to do, Therefore I
conclude it is no spiritual mercy. The major is so clear, that I suppose, none
will deny it. And the minor I prove thus.

1 It necessitates them to neglect their own Families, their own Wives and
Children, for whom the Law of God and Nature requires them to provide for, He
that provides not for his own family is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. for
it is impossible for them to pay fifth parts and provide for their own
Families, and do other duties too.

2 It compels them to neglect those that are poor indeed, and ought to be
releived, 1 Timothy 5.16. In which Chapter the Apostle distinguishes of two sorts
of Widows. 1. Widows that be wanton. 2. Widows that be godly and grave. And
Widows that are godly (widows indeed as the Apostle calls them) are of two
sorts. 1. Some are poor and without friends. And 2. Others have rich friends
able to relieve them. Now those that are wanton must not be releived by the
Church, nor those that have rich friends, lest it hinder the Church from
releiving of those widows that are poor indeed: Vide Perkins.
as strong and sturdy Beggars must not be releived (except in the case of
extremity) lest we do thereby rob those that are aged, impotent, and unable to
work, in the releiving of such; Ministers ought to go before others, not only
in Word and Doctrine, but also in Deed and Practice, Matthew. 5.16. But the Wives
and Children of sequestered Ministers, are seldom or never such widows indeed,
and fatherless indeed, as the Apostle would have releived by the Church (much
less only by poor plundered Ministers) though they are looked upon as such,
by some men that are better able to relieve them then poor plundered Ministers,
and yet when they are such indeed, they take no such care, and pains to
relieve, but leave them to the wide world to shift for themselves (as godly
Ministers Wives and Children have done and do) and why not now, as well as
when their Husbands and Fathers are dead.

3 It hinders them from distributing to the necessities of the Saints and
keeping of hospitality, both which they ought to do, Romans 12.13. for fifth
parts devour the meat, drink, clothes, and lodging, which would else be given
to Christ's hungry, thirsty, naked, and harborlesse members, which mercy Christ
accepts as done to himself Matthew. 25.35.40. Indeed they may be given to
hospitality, and other such duties; but this forcing of them to pay fifth
parts, makes them unable to perform them: for the neglect, or rather not doing
of such good works they are deeply charged by some men, with covetousness and
unmercifulness, and their names being thereby defamed, their persons are soon
despised, and their doctrine contemned, and God much dishonored. Is not the
cause of the cause, the cause of the thing caused by that cause? And thus I
hope I have sufficiently proved, that forcing of poor plundered Ministers (who
labor in the word and doctrine) to pay fifth parts to sequestered Ministers
Wives and Children, does necessitate them to neglect, at lest, leave those
things undone, which the Law of God commands them to do: Therefore I conclude,
that the forcing now, or lately in fashion, of poor plunder Ministers to pay
fifth parts to sequestered Ministers Wives and Children, is not true spiritual
mercy, especially that intended by our Savior in Matthew. 5.5. but rather
unmercifulness to those poor Ministers that have been plundered for their
piety to God, and good affection to the Parliament, to their poor Wives and
Children, to many hundreds of poor indeed; yea, members of Jesus Christ, who
might and would be releived by godly Ministers put into Sequestration (though
they were kept out of, or under in the Ministry by those unworthy men in the
Bishops time) were they not constrained to pay fifth parts to maintain
Delinquents and scandalous Ministers their Wives and Children in pride,
idleness, and malignancy --. For if they pay them not, they will either
sequester them, or imprison them, or seize upon their Estates, sometimes all
three (there is no such course taken to recover poor plundered Ministers real
and just debts, which their people owe them for Tithes) or else they must leave
laboring in the Word and Doctrine amongst the people that have duly chosen
them, and leave them to Dogs, Foxes, and Wolves to be devoured, which in
conscience they cannot do. Christ the great Shepherd, and Judge of all the
world, sees all these things, and will one day visit for them all; But God
give the Causers, Actors, and Abettors of them speedy and unfeighned repentance
for these and all other abusings of his faithful Messengers and Witnesses.

Ob. But you will say still, that Sequestrations have been freely given by the
Parliament to many Ministers, who had but little before Sequestrations were set
on foot, and therefore met hinks they should not be averse from paying of that
which they allow, and their Committees ordered to be paid.

Sol. Sir, I do not any way desire to undervalue the Parliaments free bounty
to any Godly Ministers, much less to them that have adhered to them in times
of their extremity, and suffered for their sakes, but honor them, and praise
God that he did at first put it into their hearts to sequester scandalous and
delinquent Ministers, and put godly and well-affected Ministers in their rooms:
For by it much glory has redounded to God, and good to his Church, themselves,
and the Commonwealth; I wish them well, and pray for them; but yet I cannot
blame those poor plundered Ministers that struggle as for life to be freed from
that intolerable, and unlivelihooding burden of fifth parts, arbitrarily, and
contrary to the Parliaments intention, imposed on them by Committees, who
compel them to make their full tale of Bricks, and yet make them borrow, yea,
go to law for straw. I have heard so many sad complaints by those that are
truly Godly and dare not lie, that I dare not condemn them, but as you see me
thus pleading for them.

But Sir, Your Object on I suppose is fully answered already, if all that has
been said be well weighed, in the even Scales of unbyassed judgment. For
though Patrons give Livings freely (as they ought to do) yet if they impose or
expect more from their Ministers then is reasonable and just, they must excuse
them, if they cannot comply with them. It is true indeed that many young men,
who had nothing before the Wars, stood still for a time, till they saw which
way the scales would or did turn, have been freely preferred to considerable
Places, and either they are not married, or but lately, and so have no charge,
or but little, and have their Wives portions unspent. Your argument might be
somewhat to move them to a willing compliance in what is just, and not
prejudicial to their elder brethren; but many, yea, most of them dealt so
warily as to refuse such Sequestrations as they thought were or would be
cumbred with payment of fifth parts; but poor plundered Ministers could not
deal so circumspectly; for being plundered and having wives and children to
maintain, and other plundered friends to relieve, they could not pick and choose
where and when they listed, but were constrained through necessity to lay hold
on that which was first offered, and therefore there cannot be in reason so
much expected from them, as may be from some others, who lost neither friends
nor means, but have abundance, and no charge.

But Sir, If your Argument were good, it would make that good Law against
Symonie unjust, and lay open a wide gap for the admission of the lame, and the
blind, and the unworthiest of the people to enter into the great work of the
Ministry, as it was in the days of Jeroboham in Israel, and of the Pope here
in England. To prevent which inconveniences, that necessary Law against
Symonie was wisely made by our Ancestors, who though they had less knowledge
of God, yet had they more zeal for him and his Servants, then many of us, their
degenerating posterity have.

Sir, You knowing the scantling of time I have had to answer your Question,
will (I hope) excuse my plainness, and pardon my confusednesse, and whatsoever
failings else may, upon serious perusal, be found in this my indigested
Answer. What I have done has been to satisfy your desire, and clear those
Godly Ministers that lay under many hard thoughts, and bitter and heavy
aspersions, and move some compassion toward them, hoping that you and other
godly men, will make what good use you can of all your interest both in Heaven
and Earth, in and out of the House, that those poor Ministers who have great
charge of children, and have been plundered for their piety toward God, and
faithful serving the Parliament, may be absolutely discharged from that heavy
burden of fifth parts and settled by Act of Parliament for their lives, where
they have been placed by Authority of Parliament; especially seeing some of
them, upon promise of many Parliament men, that they should be settled for
their lives, have left those Places they formerly had, and have promised to
stay with those godly people that duly made choice of them, and have laid out
much in repairing their old ruined Parsonage and Viccaridge houses where they
are, and also seeing if they are not both they, and their wives and children,
and godly people will suffer many inconveniences, and as bad put into the
Ministry again, as have been cast out: By this means also, if others yet left
in, shall be duly cast out, young men retired into the Universities may be
invited out, and cheerfully go on in the service of God and the Commonwealth,
in their Places and Callings. In considence of which, I subscribe my self,

SIR, Your humble Servant. R. WILLIAMSON.

I Suppose that no honest man will move that those that stand sequestered for
scandal, may be admitted into the work of the Ministry again, they being as
salt that has lost its savor, are good for naught, but to be cast out, as our
Savior speaks in Matthew. 5.13. But as for those that stand sequestered only for
Delinquency, and are not scandalous, but are able and Orthodox Preachers (they
giving good security, that they will neither preach nor act any thing against
the present Government, and be faithful thereunto) I suppose (now the power of
private Patrons is taken away) it will not be contrary to the rules of
Christian piety or policy, to give them liberty to labor in the Word and
Doctrine, provided, it be not in any place where any godly well-affected
Minister is placed, nor near the place from whence they were sequestered
(England and Ireland are wide enough, and there will not be many) thereby both
they and theirs will be better provided for then by fifth parts. But as for
those that are insufficient, scandalous, or obstinately Malignant, neither they
nor their wives nor children have any right by the law of God to fifth parts,
nor deserve to have any such releife by the Law of Man, but what is raised by
way of tax as for other poor (if they be poor and unable to work) or by free
gift from their friends, but not by compulsion from the Parliaments poor
plundered Ministers, who labor in the Word and Doctrine, and therefore should
have the whole reward assigned for their maintenance and encouragement, to
maintain themselves and provide for their own Families, and perform such other
good works as God has commanded them to do.

FINIS.

