portrait of Thomas Willsford, age 46 Vera effigies THOMAE WILLSFORD: Aetatis
suae 46.
Omnia videntur formata ratione Numerorum: Boethius. Man's shadow often does first
appear,
And so does his Effigies here:
Look in his Books, and there you will find,
Him in the Mirror of his Mind
M: Boteler. To: Vaughan sculp:


NATURES SECRETS. OR, The Admirable and wonderful HISTORY Of the generation of
Meteors.

Particularly describing, The temperatures and qualities of the Four Elements,
the Heights, Magnitudes, and Influences of the fixed and wandering Stars: the
efficient and final causes of Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges, Epidemicall
Diseases, and Prodigies of precedent times; Registered by the Students of Nature.

Their Conjecturall presages of the Weather, from the Planets mutual Aspects,
and Sublunary bodies: with the proportions and observations on the
Weather-glass, with Philosophical paraphrases rendered explicitly, useful at
Sea and Land. By the industry and observations of THOMAS WILLSFORD, Gent.

Venite and videte opera Domini, quae posuit prodigia super terram, Psalm. 45.
v. 8. LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. 1658.

A DEDICATION TO The Right Honorable, the Lady Stafford, Sister to the Lord
Henry Stafford deceased, Lineally descended from the eminent and ancient Earls
thereof, and sole Heir surviving the most illustrious Dukes of Buckingham.
Madam,
THe splendour of your renowned Family, and the influence of Celestial Graces
illuminating the moral virtues you inherit, attracts me and my Meteors, as the
Sun does Exhalations and Atoms; although many have been observed more
illustrious to vulgar eyes, and more stupendous to common capacities gazed
upon by the gaping Multitude with terror and admiration; yet some of them now
totally eclipst, others proved but Ignes fatui, the greatest and highest like
enflamed Comets, elevated on the wings of Ambition, consume themselves with
their own glory, discovered by their Horoscopes through the Perspectives of
Reason; Demonstrated by the Parallaxes of their Spheres, and by Experience
found that the most exalted are but Falling Stars, whose coruscations show
their gross extractions, something sublimed from the faeces of the Earth;
whereas I look upon your Honor like a benevolent Planet Culminant, which may
be eclipst for some time, and also set, yet will rise again, recover its former
luster, and dissipate those Meteors that mask the face of little Stars: and
thus (Serene Lady) a smile from you (by virtue of your Rays) will calm the
most rigid brow, clear the frowns and cloudy aspects of malignant readers,
convert the aspersions of palli'd Envy into Pearls, and scatter the misty
Exhalations risen from splenitick bodies, to obtenebrate the weaker inspection
of others: but if it be judged presumption to require so honorable a
Protection in defense of so mean a Piece, vouchsafe me leave to prostrate this
at your Honors Feet, whereby your shadow may prove as propitious, and
tutelary, as the Laurel whose shade is held a Sanctuary against storms of
Thunder and Lightning.

I have compendiously rendered here (most auspicious Lady) the prognostication
of Meteors, with sundry observations plain and conspicuous as in a Mirror, in
favor of your Sex, to whom (I hope) 'twill be acceptable, reflecting on the
providence of Nature, and in imitation of her dictates, providing best for
those who are in most danger to be damnified by the assaults and sudden
incursions of angry storms; and this her motherly affection not only visible in
Sensitive Creatures, but in all Vegetables, vailing their bonners to salute the
Sun, while their blossoms receive his vivificating beams; and if too hot for
their natures, their leaves fan the Air, or their Husks make Vmbrelloes against
the inflammation of his Rays, and at other times contract them like traverse
curtains, whereby to shelter their infant Buds and tender Blooms from being
stormed, or injured by the excess or fury of the weather: but the nobler
Creatures endowed with the use of Reason (as your Honor with an ample portion
fortified with knowledge) those are referred to search, and argue the cause, or
by precursing signs derived from the effects, prefage the events, as the
collections of Experience. Upon these animadversions in order to Natures
Instincts, I composed this treatise, your tender and beautiful Sex
transcending her pleasant and odoriferous Flowers; and since the better sort
are often now exposed to rude and boisterous storms, by the abortive production
of a more blustering uncivil Age, the precepts of Gratitude obliged me to
dedicate these Observations to your Honor (as the Noblest in my eye) that the
World may witness my sincere and grateful intentions for sheltring me; In
testimony whereof it is signed by

Your affectionate kinsman and most devoted servant, Thomas Willsford.

A GENERAL PREFACE TO The Ingenious and Judicious speculators of Nature,
illustrating here the Antiquity of this Meteorological subject, in
prognosticating their effects.
Benevolent Reader,
I Shall present you here with a small compendium of a mighty subject, offered
up to the glory of God, and intended for your benefit, in the description of
the Heavens, the Heights, Magnitudes, Periods and Aspects of the fixed and
wandering Stars; the natural qualities and greatness of the four Elements; the
generation of Meteors, and Prognostications of the Weathers variable
transmutations; with the alterations of Sensitive and Vegetable Creatures, in
their dispositions and inclinations; a subject, into which the Wise and Learned
(of precedent Ages) have made serious and diligent inquisitions, omitting
Catalogues of Philosophers, from Aristotle and his Disciples (on the
speculative part) continued by succession to these times; and for the practical
observations of many I will record a few.

Thales (one of the Athenian Wisemen) a grand contemplator of Nature, and so
judicious a proficient in this Art, that he said, he could be rich when he
would, by prognosticating Weathers temper in succeeding years, from thence
presaging plenty, or scarcity of Fruits; after him, diverse made observations of
the Stars aspects, and those grave Experience ratified as in relation to
particular Countries or regions; after a long tract of time, this knowledge was
made more universal by being contracted into general Rules, and those again
much illustrated by the industry of Ptolomaeus the Alexandrian, whose fame
survives his Funeral: Since his time very many have writ of this Subject, in a
continual succession, unto this present Age, yet never rendered till now in our
vulgar tongue.

And that I may please all Sexes and Ages, the Ignorant and Learned, diversity
of predictions are here inserted, from the Heavens to the Elements, from the
lofty Pine to the humble Shrub, and little Vegetables, from Birds and Beasts
and Fishes in the deep, down to the Minerals in the Earths pregnant womb,
besides ocular Demonstrations to preserve you from the injury or assaults of
the Weather: Yet some (perhaps) will bluster, and make a noise (like Thunder
without Lightning) because dedicated to a Woman; should I name her Virtues they
would be calmed, or charmed by their own Reasons to silence, but 'twill
displease her Modesty; so I will only intimate, her Favors reflecting upon my
mind (as the Sun upon a Cloud which he raised) represented this Impression,
having imprinted in my memory her Nobleness indelible, not convenient to be
published at this present time.

As for the subject of this Treatise, it appertains to the Astronomer in part,
it is true; yet who understands the Characters and Aspects of the Signs and
Planets by this, will know them in any Ephemeris, or Annual Calendar, whereby
you may judge of the future Weather: For our present purpose Mr. William
Lillies is the best extant; As for apparitions in the Airy Regions, you have
here the Observations upon them; and for the nature of Vegetables they are more
essentially observed, and better known in general, then the influence of the
Stars, or the nature of Meteors are discovered to learned Men, especially all
tender and redolent Flowers, that embroyder the Earth, or perfume the Air;
whose natural instincts, each Florist observes as Kalenders of the Weathers
mutability: besides these, here is Birds and Beasts, that are domestic
Creatures, or familiarly seen; which if they satisfy not the beholders, I have
presented them with a Glass, not to see their features in, but to view the
state of the Air, whether Dropsical or Feverish, Hot or Cold, and by a member
sequestered from the Element, confined within a transparent Glass, where behold
its contraction or rarefaction! and from thence you may visibly presage the
approaching weather; the fourth and last Part is historical; so there is
something in every ones Sphere, or Element.

The Tables of the Stars natural qualities in their tempers seem oppugnant to
themselves; as cold and dry, with hot and moist, likewise in page 82, line 28,
and 29; and such like seeming contradictions in general, but not in particular
respects: these are the observations of others, faithfully recollected and
transferred to your judgments as Moderators, whereby I will not deceive you, if
you be deceived. The Cosmical rising and setting of some Stars are mentioned
here, when as to many Places, and whole Countries, those Asterismes can neither
rise nor set: In all such cases it is to be understood (if visible) when near
the Horizon of that place, or direct North, the Sun ascending or descending
that Hemisphere at the same time. As for terms, Latin words and quotations not
explained, they are known unto the Lady, for whom this is chiefly intended; and
if they do eclipse or offuscate the subject (as in relation to others) the next
Impression shall delucide them: And as for those who only know how to find
fault, I can with more facility remit, then such as they can censure; So all
such malignant spirits I leave to themselves, and reconvert my discourse from
them, to the Ingenious (as the Heliotrope from its shade to court the Sun) and
if they are satisfied, I am pleased by subscribing

Your friend and coadjutor, THOMAS WILLSFORD.

To his honored Uncle Mr. Thomas Willsford upon his Book of Meteors.
Heaven is by earth epitomized!
The greater world, by th'lesse Comprisd
The sacred Harmony o'th spheres
Made audible to mortal ears!
Nature's Anatomy displayed!
The universal frame survayd!
The Elements complexions shown!
And every Star's Dominion!
The Weathers watr in glasses cast,
Speaks how her fits, may change, or last!
Whence bearded Comets have their births!
And strong Convulsions shake the Earth!
Whence all portentous symptoms rise!
Bad Omens, and sad prodigies!
These are thy tracks! pervious to none,
But to thy better thoughts alone!
Whose mystique Causes do explore;
Seeing implum'd effects in store!
Who Can the Cabala of Fate,
And energy of Planets state!
While stupid we on Terrene Regions move:
But Looking up see Stars and Thee above!
Edward Boteler.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLDS EPITOMY, AND THE Generation of Meteors.
ACcording to my Talent received from the sole Creator of the Universe, whose
Fiat alone made this great and stupendous Machine of the World, for whose
excellency Man cannot find an attribute, but Supereminent in all beginnings,
Eternal, Immense, Omnipotent, etc. which we cannot comprehend: Who in the
beginning created Heaven and Earth, Genesis 1. cap. 1. And by his omnipotent Word
alone, made on the first Day Light, which He divided from darkness; whose
Divine assistance I now implore, to illuminate my understanding, and to
dissipate the clouds of Error involving humane Learning, deviated in diversity
of Tracts, in which obtenebrated ways, we grope for what we seek in the
bewildred cogitations of others, whereof some do think they see so well as
Argus, when they are as blind as Moles, Phantasmes undermining their wilful
benighted judgments.

Others there be whose sordid minds are buried deep in Earth, or so propense on
vanities, that they reflect not upon Natures daily works, much less on the
Sacred Deity, from whence she was ordained herself; should but any stupid man
(that has a glimmering light in the use of Reason) behold the Heavens, he must
needs read there an immense Creator, if his Reason enters into judgment for to
examine the cause, or contemplate on the effects, observe the illuminated Orbs,
how by an orderly course and succession they rise and set; distinguishing Days
from Nights, and Seasons of the Year; contracting their Lights, or distributing
their Rays impartially to the Pesant as the Prince; they cannot but confess
the Providence, Goodness and Bounty of an Infinite and universal Opificer:
Which moved Ovid, though a Heathen, wavering like a weathercock, turned with
Air of poetical fictions, yet from them converts himself to point at the
original Author, Metam. lib. 1. describing of the Chaos.

-- Quia corpore in uno
Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia sice is,
Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus;
Hanc Deus and melior litem Natura diremit.
And a little after,

Ille Opifex rerum mundi melior is origo.
Declining here the Poets and Philosophers authority let any rational man but
contemplate of the least vegetable or sensitive creature, a time there was it
had no being, it increases to maturity and perfection, at a period declines
again, returning unto Earth, from whence extracted, according to the course and
conception of Nature; which evidently demonstrates that She and the World had
an original, as by their Fruits and offspring, (the subjects of mortality) and
consequently must have an end: Eccles-cap. 3. consider then the omnipotency of
an Eternal Creator, by whose sacred Word alone 'twas made, by whose Providence
it continues, and by whose Power it shall perish, all things declaring the
Almighty Deity, and so apparently, that there are not any but must see it,
except wilfully blinded in their understandings; and thus writes the Apostle
of the Gentiles, S. Paul, inspired by the holy Ghost, ad Roma. cap. 1. ver. 20.
Invisibilia enim Dei, a creatione Mundi, per ea quae facta sunt intellecta
conspiciuntur; sempiterna quoque ejus virtus and Divinitas, ita ut sint
inexcusabiles.

Now to return from whence I came, and look back to the Creation; on the second
Day, God made the Firmament as the bounds unto this great work; for the
Empyreal-Heaven or his blessed Seat, is an Orb unlimited, whose Center is
everywhere, and the Circumference nowhere; and since that Genesis does mention
the Heavens as the nobler part of this admired Architecture, I desire here to
begin, where I hope for to conclude, having finished my Pilgrimage through this
transitory Desert; and in what I shall err, may it be ascribed to my weakness
and not my will; and that we may always remember our imbecillities, and reflect
on the Glory and Majesty of the sole eternal God, Behold the Regal Psalmist 75.
ver. 1. Confitebimur tibi Deus, confitebimur: and invocabimus nomen tuum,
narrabimus Mirabilia tua.

The subject of my intended discourse is Meteors, originally derived from the
Creation of the 4 Elements, their conceptions extracted from thence by Nature,
with a continual succession from Corruptions to Generations, and from hence
Reason assisted with Experience, discusses their Qualities, and from their
material cause prognosticates their effects; the Stars are generally conceived
the efficient cause in elevating and digesting the matter which Nature imploys
to what it is aptest for: thus the wandering Planets and fixed Constellations,
over-looks their transmutations, and by their mutual aspects do generate the
Meteors from whence Man does prognosticate the Weather, either at the present,
or by calculation of their places, for any time in future; yet the nature of
these Stars being known but by the effects, depending much upon Experience, on
Demonstration little; this presciential knowledge is often subjected unto
errors, besides the course is more uncertain, by reason so few do concur, and
not an Age free from extravagant opinions of Philosophers and Astronomers,
started up in opposition to what has been maintained and generally received
before: the World's environed in obscurity for the pride of Knowledge, which
transgression made humane Sciences conjectural under the tuition of Experience;
yet since we are allowed to argue and dispute upon it, conclusions may be
deduced and made apt for humane use, and Nature beheld through the
Meteoroscopes of Reason, although with mists before our eyes (the Scouts to our
understandings) yet some are sharper-sighted than others, and many think they
discover more than they do, and multitudes magnify and multiply things
greater then they are, or more than is true; so I will record here a few,
supposed both Wise and Learned men and so proceed.

Empedocles the Philosopher of Sicilia, a man famous for wit, and endowed with
a profound talent of humane learning, employing all the faculties of his mind
to discover the secrets of Nature, and the substance of the Celestial orbs (in
which the Elements are involved) he maintained to consist of Water; of this
opinion he had many disciples, which flourished until buried with the Author's,
and in this later Age his paradoxes are revived again, unto which Galilaeus
does much incline: others conceive them to be formed out of a refined Element
of Air, and the Stars of Fire: many urges that the arched vaults of Heaven are
composed out of Natures Quintessence, as it were a sublimed substance refined
from the 4 Elements, yet differing essentially in their Qualities, as by being
neither Hot nor Cold, Dry nor Moist, Ponderous nor Light; to be brief, a body
which they fancy, but understand it not: Aristotle conceives the Stars to be
a thicker part of their Spheres in which they are infixt, not differing in
matter nor Species any more, than knots in a piece of timber, and these
condensed Orbs apt to receive light, being void of luster in themselves (like
the common people of the Skies) but as they are illuminated by the influence of
the Sun, nor have they heat but by reflection, nor color, but by participation
of diverse phaenomenons, or appearances of sundry colors; but all this cannot
be admitted, since sage Experience (in peculiar motions) by demonstration
overthrows their Arguments, and Reason denies their conclusions.

In the Firmament are placed all the fixed Stars, accounted in number but 1143,
and of those there are 14 rarely visible, besides multitudes (without
peradventure) that never were or shall be seen to Mortals, since by
Perspectives some have been discovered in this later age to attend particular
Planets, never observed before, and by several mediums undoubtedly have
influences on sublunary bodies; yet by what means it is in dispute: but least my
cogitations should wander with those Stars, it shall ascend to the fixed,
distinguished by their Magnitudes, whose differences are 6. as by these
paradigmas following.

1 The number of Stars of the first Magnitude are accounted 15. viz. as the
Scorpions and Lions heart, etc.

2 Those of the second Magnitude are reckoned 45. viz. the north Horn of
Taurus and the Foot of Gemini, etc.

3 Of the third Magnitude, there are numbered 208 Stars, as the Breast and Knees
of Cassiopeia.

4 The fourth Magnitude does list 474. as the Northern and Southern Ass, etc.

5 The fifth Magnitude or difference, does number 217, as the least in the
Pleiades and the Ram.

6 Of the sixth and last Magnitude, 49 Stars, as those in the mouth and on the
back of Capricornus, etc.

There are accounted besides all these 14 little cloudy, or obscured Stars that
seldom do appear, viz. Praesepe in the breast of Cancer, the sum of these is
1022. to which if you add 121 Stars of several magnitudes discovered by the
Portugalls, in their voyages to the East Indies, the total will be 1143 in
several Constellations, according to Astronomers observations; but I believe
not true, since the Sacred Records puts to man this quaery, Who can number the
Stars? but these are more than we know, or shall use in our observations here,
although there were none created unnecessary, nor can there be less without an
error.

The fixed Stars are so called for never changing their positions or latitudes,
and their longitudes not one minuit in a year, as all the Planets daily do: to
distinguish the fixed, and avoid confusion, they are contracted into several
Constellations or Asterismes, the easier to be remembered, the sooner to be
found, and the better for observation: these Celestial Configurations are now
numbered 58. representing the forms and names of Men, Beasts, Birds, Fishes,
etc. deriving their Pedegrees from Astronomers Poetical fictions, or their
natural effects; as when the Sun enters the Sign of Aquarius, these northern
Countries to expect much rain or snow: Canis major or Sirius at his Heliacal
occultation or setting inflames the Air, and makes Dogs apt to run mad, as
Pliny testifies, lib. 1. cap. 40. the Egyptians called their river Nilus Siris,
from the Dog- star, observing their inundations to happen constantly every
year, when this Star ascended their Horizon with the Sun, and those floods
overrunning their valleys, until his Haliacal rising or apparition, summoned
those extravagant, but fertile waves to retreat into their confined channels.

Hypotheses of Astronomers, concerning the heights and magnitudes of the fixed
Stars and also the Planets in their mean motions, with the distance of the four
Elements from the Earth's center.
THe Firmament or 8. Sphere (in which the fixed Stars are placed) is affirmed
by Astronomers to be in distance from the Worlds center, the Earths diameter
9327 times; from the Terrestial Globes superficies 18653 semi-diameters; the
distance from us in miles 65285 500; the least Star in this Sphere is conceived
greater than the Globe composed of Earth and Water, and that all the Stars of
the first magnitude are 100. times as great in relation to their Cubes.

Under the starry Firmament there are imagined 7. peculiar Spheres involved
within one another, on these the ancient Astronomers did fancy little circles
(called Epicycles) whose centres were in the superficies of those Orbs, in
whose circumferences they placed the center of each Planet according to its
proper Sphere, thereby to solve the irregular motion of each wandering Star, in
their various courses, and excentrick motions; that point which is most remote
from the center of the Earth is called Apogaeon, the lowest Perigaeon, the
difference between them is termed the mean motion, the Planet being then on the
superficies of his own Sphere.

Saturn the highest of all the Planets, in his mean motion is in distance from
the superficies of the Earrh 10358 1/10 Semidiameters in proportion to it as 31
to 11. being greater than the Terrestrial Globe 22 3/10 according to cubical
numeration, and is in distance above us in our Hemisphere 36153318 Miles; this
later age (by Telescopes) has discovered 2 Stars that attend him, interposing
themselves sometimes betwixt him and us.

Jupiter in his mean motion is in distance from the Earth 3917 4/10
semi-diametrs, and is in proportion to it as 12 to 5. and greater than the
Terrestrial Globe, according to the Cubes made of their diameters 13 8/10 and
in distance from us 13711090; he has 4 Stars discovered, that make a progress
with him through the 12 Signs, but keep no equal distance, and do often
interpose themselves and us.

Mars in his mean motion, is above the Earth 1713 2/10 semi-diameters, and is
in distance from the superficies of the terrestrial Globe 5996200 Miles, and
according to Tycho Brahe, the Cube made of his Diameter, is less then that of
the Earth 13 times and a little more.

Sol in his Apogaeon is from the superficies of the Earth 1169 semi-diameters,
in his Perigaeon 1089, and consequently in his mean motion 1129, and according
to his Cube 139 times greater then the cube made of the terrestrial Globes
diameter, and is in distance from the Earths superficies 3951500 Miles.

Venus is in proportion unto the terrestrial Globe, as 6 to 11. and she is
lesser then the globe of Earth 6^ 1/1 times, and in her mean motion is in
distance from thence, so much as the Sun is or very near.

Mertury is held less then the terrestrial Globe 19 times very near, and in his
mean motion, has the same distance allowed him almost as the Sun has in his
mean motion.

Luna in her mean motion, is in distance from the Earth's superficies 58 9/10
semi-diameters, in Miles 206050, and the cube made of the terrestrial Globes
diameter, will contain that made of the Moon's 42 8/10 the proportion being as
2 is unto 7 and so much greater is the Globe of Earth then that of the Moon.

Under the Moon's Sphere is the Element of Fire conceived for to be in
thickness 154050 Miles, whose concave or nearest distance from the superficies
of the Earth and Water is conjectured 52000 Miles, and from the center 55500
Miles.

The upper Region of the Air (being next unto the Element of Fire) is supposed
to contain in thickness 51994 Miles, and the concave of it in distance from the
superficies of the Earth 6 Miles, the Middle Region 4 Miles, and the lowest two
Miles, which is the distance from the Earth to the highest watery clouds, and
this is the Region of Air in which we mortals draw our vital breath in.

The two lowest Elements do make one Globe consisting of Earth and Water, whose
Diameter is 7000 Miles, and the whole circumference 22000 Miles, and according
to this proportion 61 1/9 miles upon this Globe will answer unto one degree in
the Heavens; but expect no exactness in the dimensions.

Here I could have shown you a great assembly of various opinions, but not
assisted with any convincing Reasons, or grounded upon undeniable
demonstrations; as in the magnitudes and distances of the Stars, most supposing
them for to be in a further distance from the Earth, and of greater magnitudes,
in which proportions I have followed Tycho Brahe, but not altogether in their
heights. Some deny these several Spheres, and the motions called Accessus, and
Recessus; others will have them moved by Angelical powers; and this opinion is
assisted by the great Doctor and light of the Catholic Church St. Augustine,
lib. 83. p. 74. saying, Every visible thing in this World, is under the charge
of an Angelical power; And so writes St. Jerome cap. 28. On Ezech. That there
is an Element of Fire some reject, others do affir it; but deny that either the
Fire or the Air have any morion with the Heavens from East to West. Aristoile
affirms the Air to be naturally of a hot quality, the Stoiks and Cardanus do
think it cold; Turnebius neither, but apt for either heat or cold: The common
received opinion is, that the upper Region of the Air is naturally hot and dry;
the second cold and moist; the lowest Region temperate, according unto the
place and Season of the year; but generally the whole Element of Air is thought
to be hot and moist.

Now as for the two lower Elements, Earth and Water, as united together they do
make one Globe, and this assertion generally ratified, and unanimously
consented unto, by the ablest men in all Ages; yet something in approbation of
this shall be said hereafter: But as for the greatness of this Globe it is
doubted of by many, although not with such dissonant, and diversity of
opinions, as for the magnitude and height of the Spheres, and the other two
Elements: for some do seem to prove by Eclypses of the Sun, and Moon, and
voyages at Sea, what part or how many leagues or miles upon this Globe will
answer unto one degree of the Heavens; the common opinion is 20 leagues or 60
miles, and by this account the terrestrial Globe is in compass 21600 miles.
Ptolemaeus accounts 500 Stadiums for 1 degree, that is 22500 miles, if the
Stadium in Egypt did not exceed that in Italy; others will have it 66 miles
allowed for one degree, and in compass then 23760 miles: but I have in this
allowed for the whole circumference of the Earth 22000 miles: Thus numerous are
the opinions of learned Philosophers, Geometritians, Astronomers, Geographers,
Cosmographers and Navigators, and their ways so ambiguous, seldom agreeing in
any thing, often crossing one another; that if there be a truth in them, it is
hard for to discover which it is, and being found difficult to follow,; but
whether this admired and stupendous machine of the World, be greater or lesser
it is not for me to argue, And thus I will conclude, Psalm. 135. ver. 6. Omnia
quaecunque voluit Dominus fecit in Coelo and in Terra, in mari, and in omnibus
abyssis.

The 7 Planets, or wandering Stars, with their Characters, color, motion,
period and courses.
FIrst under the Firmament or Starry Heaven, is placed the planet Saturn who is
the highest of them; his color is pale, his course is finished through the 12
Signs, in 29 years, 5 months, 2 weeks, 1 day and 8 hours.

The next Orb to this is Jupiter a fair and bright planet he passes through
the 12 Signs of the Zodiac in a 11 years, 11 months, 5 days and 17 hours, or
very near.

Mars appears in his proper Sphere, of a red or fiery color, marching
through the 12 Signs in 1 year 11 months, 1 week, 6 days and 22 hours or
thereabouts.

The Sun is next being placed in the middle of the planets, the better to
distribute his light unto the rest, they being illuminated by him, their bright
and glorious Prince, and is called Sol quasi solus: for this Planet is as
Monarch of the Skies, all the Stars receiving their luster from Him: his
progress through the Zodiac is finished in a year, consisting of 365 days, 5
hours, 49 minuits, and 16 seconds almost; for the odd hours and minuits, is
allowed a day every fourth year.

Venus is a very bright and clear shining Planet, she finisheth her course in a
year: sometimes rising before the she is called the morning Star, and at other
times will follow the, and then is called the (...) Stars she seldom goes 4,
degrees from the and can never exceed two whole Signs or 60 degrees.

Mercuny posting to and fro in the sixth Sphere; but cannot exceed 30 degrees,
or one whole Sign in distance at any time from the and so is seldom visible,
being obscured by the Sun beams, and when seen, he is not bright, and finisheth
his course in something less then the space of a year.

The Moon is the lowest of all the Planets, and consequently swiftest in her
motion; She passes through the 12 Signs of the Zodiac in 27 days, 7 hours, 43
minuits, and 5 seconds, but from one new Moon unto another it is 29 days and
odd hours, by reason of the proper motion from the West Eastward, in those 27
days.

The mutual Aspects, or positions of the 7 Planets.
THe Planets are called wandering Stars, both for their various courses, and not
keeping any certain distance one from another, each of them moving in a proper
and peculiar Sphere; the Sun only keeping under the Ecliptic line; but all the
other 6 (according to their motions) changing continually their latitudes;
being sometimes Southward of the Ecliptic as was said before, which mutability
of their courses, you may plainly behold by the Moon, who passes by all other
Planets in less then 30 days; and so do all the other 5 Planets (according to
their proper motions) mutually aspect one another, and are conceived by
Astronomers to have the more force (in their influences upon all sublunary
things) according to their positions; and the powerful effects of their
natures, are supposed to be hindered or furthered by the interposition of
another, which in things of this nature ought to be judiciously and
circumspectly considered, weighing with reason the position of the Planets,
their natures, the Seasons of the year, with the temperature of the Signs they
are in, and the intervening Aspects of the other Stars; of which Aspects there
be many observed by Astronomers; but those which may concern this Treatise are
these following.

Conjunction of any two Planets, is when they have one Longitude, both of them
being under one Sign and degree of the Zodiac.

Sextile aspect, is when any two Planets are in distance one from another (in
respect of their Longitudes) part of the 12 Signs, that is two whole Signs or
60 degrees.

Quartile aspect, is when the difference of two Planets Longitudes shall be
part of the Zodiac; that is 3 Signs, being a quadrant or 90 degrees.

Trine, is the aspect of any two Planets, that differ in Longitude one from
another part of the Zodiac, that is 4 whole Signs or 120 degrees.

Opposition, is the aspect of two Planets directly opposite, differing in
Longitude 6 of the 12 Signs that is 180 degrees, and for brevity are
charactered thus, according to their Aspects.

A Table of the 7 Planets aspects.
The Characters Conjunction Degrees of the Zodiac. 00 Sextile 60 Quartile 90
Trine 120 Opposition 180

The natures and qualities of the four Elements.
AN Element, is a beginning; out of which all bodies are composed, mixed with
some part, of all the four which are these, viz. (1) Fire (2) Air (3) Water and
(4) Earth; these four do fill up the whole Orb, from the center of the Heavens
to the Moons Sphere, whereby a vacuum or an emptiness is avoided, which Nature
does abhor, and so has curiously made them, as to be the bounds of the connex
superficies of one another, and consequently to the concaves of their Spheres,
and are described in order thus.

Fire.
Under the Moon's Sphere is placed the Element of Fire, void of all weight and
most remote from the center of gravity, this Element is of nature extremely hot
and dry.

Air.
Next unto the Fire is placed the Element of Air: which is also light, and is
by nature hot and moist.

Earth and Water.
The other two (that is the Water and the Earth) as joined and commixt together
do make one Globe; for the Water is heavy, and by nature cold and moist; the
Earth extremely cold and dry but heavier then the Water; yet both these
Elements pressing to the center of the Spheres.

To prove the Earth's roundnesse.
NAture, in all her admirable works, does aim at that which is most convenient,
and attains unto the greatest perfection, which is a spherical figure, being
most capacious, and uniform of all others, one part counterposing the other:
thus Nature has made the center of the Heavens, the seat of Gravity, to which
all heavy things must naturally tend unto; and so consequently if it were of
any form but round, the fluxible waters would be divorced from the Earth,
dissenting it, to run unto the center. But some will object, that it is not
round, by reason of some high exalted hills, spacious plains, and deep
depressed valleys, and do conceive these a sufficient demonstration; but this
Argument will be of no force, if you consider the greatness of the terrestrial
Globe; For Mount Pelion, was observed by Dicaearchus, whose perpendicular
height was sound to be but 12 Stadiums, that is, but an Italian mile and a
half, and this the highest hill that was then known; and so writes Pliny, lib.
1. cap. 65. but in the same Chapter he falls into a great absurdity, conceiving
the Alps to be 50 miles high: Eratosthenes (a famous Geometrician) found the
perpendicular of mount Atlas not to exceed 10 Stadiums, a small proportion, in
respect of the Globes rotundity.

And that the superficies of the Water is also round it does evidently appear
by every little bubble, or drop of water falling from any place, or lying upon
some dust, it will immediately contract into a spherical or round form whereby
to preserve it self from drought; this naturally and voluntarily doing so,
argues the roundness and form of the whole Element, whose parts they are; the
eclipst demonstrates the Earth's rotundity; and let this suffice, as not
requisite in this Treatise, conducing to our purpose.

The concord and disagreement of the four Elements.
THis Globe composed of Earth and Water, is suspended in the center of the
Heavens equidistant on every side, counterpoised with its own weight,
circumvolved with the Element of Air, and that within the Fire; these 4
Elements have naturally a peculiar quality in themselves; participating with
some, and contrary to others, as the Fire in hot, the Air most, the Water cold,
and the Earth dry: in this, the Fire and Water be naturally opposite, as heat
and cold; the Air and Earth be in opposition, as wet and drought; these 4
Elements do also participate of one another qualities; as thus, the Fire is of
nature hot and dry: the Air hot and moist: the Water cold and moist: the Earth
cold and dry: So the Air agrees with the Fire, in respect of heat, and with the
Water in respect of moisture. The other medium is, the Water in combination
with the Air in moisture, and in coldness with the Earth: the two extremes, as
Earth with Water in respect of coldness, and agreeing with the Fire in dryness.

By the commixtion of these 4 Elements, all bodies are engendered, and by their
mutual affininities do subsist: and if any one predominates, or be defective,
it turns the other 3 into discord; and if not in time united, it subverts the
frame, and destroys for want of concord, what it should preserve in peace; for
if the Fire prevails, it burns and turns to Fevers; and if defective, the heat
of the Air being equally opposed with the cold of the Water, moisture in them
both predominates, equalled with the drought of the Earth; So that the cold
then only rules with which nothing can live.

The nature and temperature of the 4 Seasons.
THe 4 Seasons of the year are compared to the four Ages in every Man; and his
complexion or constitution unto the four Elements: and first the Spring is
compared to Infancy, being Airy, hot and moist. 2. Summer to youth; as being
Fiery, hot and dry, grown to full perfection of strength and vigor of body,
every part and member ripe. 3. Autumn is likened to elder Age, the body and
strength in Man declining, being Watery, cold and moist, his beauty withering.
4. Winter, resembling old and decrepit Age, being cold and dry.

But some do suppose the 4 Seasons of the year to be in opposition one unto
another; for what one Season does produce, the contrary will destroy. And so
they conceive, as the Spring is hot and moist, that Autumn is cold and dry:
and as the Summer is naturally hot and dry; so Winter is opposite unto it,
being cold and moist; But these Seasons vary as the Climates do.

The Complexions in Man are these.
1 Choler: like Fire, hot and dry. 2 Sanguine: Air, hot and moist. 3 Phlegm:
Water, cold and moist. 4 Melancholy: Earth, cold and dry.
THus one does qualify and allay the violence of the other; but yet you must
conceive they are not equally commixt in every Man, Beast, or vegetable
Creature, but all differing, and every member or part participating much more
of one then of another, as the vital Spirit of Fare, the Flesh of the Air, the
Humidity of the Water, and the Bones in more affinity with the Earth: yet these
compositions not alike infused, as you may see in the diversity of Spirits and
conditions of Men: by the agility of some Beasts, and the slownesse of some
others; the mildness of one creature, and the fury of another; as the servile
Ass, dull and slow, Horses valiant and nimble, Lions indomitable, always
raging as with a perpetual fever, inflamed with choler; And so it is in all
other Creatures, differing in their temperatures, both in their several kinds
and species; and the like we see in Vegetables and Minerals in their
compositions, yet participating in all four of the Elements, but in some of
them more then in others.

As in Plants, the roots are most Earthly, their leaves in affinity with the
Water, their Blossoms do participate of the Air, and their seeds of the Fire;
for without heat, nothing can be produced; all Stones do generally partake most
of the Earth: yet there be exceptions, as Flint-stones and Thunderbolts, are of
a fiery quality: Crystal and Pearls of a Watery: and in others the Air and Water
most predominates, as the Pumice-stone, made of the froth of the Sea, and
flotes upon it, being exceedingly light; which argues it participates but
little of Earth, and less of Fire: from whence the old Adagie is derived, To
strike fire out of a Pumice-stone, is to expect an impossibility in Nature. But
this discourse here is not in season, and so let us return.

The 4 Seasons.
EVery one of the four Seasons is conceived to be qualified with the Signs as
they are commixt with their several temperatures, called the triplicity, three
Signs being in every Season, as we have said already; but for your more ease, I
will place it here again, but not intending to induce or persuade any for to
believe that, which I do not confidently credit my self, as that their natural
temp^ratures are known: yet I doubt nor, but that the Stars, by their aspects
and influences, are causes of distemperatures, and alters the Air and all
sublunary bodies; Yet by what means, it is not certainly demonstrated unto
Reason, being but extracted from bare effects where doubtful Experience is only
Mistress. For if it were a truth, that the nature and temperature of them were
discovered to man, we could not egregiously err so often as we do; besides the
aspects being general, the effects would be so too, the Climate considered; but
this is quite otherwise, when the weather will alter in a little space, or few
miles, and there may be at one time (in four near adjacent places) Rain, Snow,
Hail, and fair weather: yet to satisfy some (Experience having thus delivered
it) I will neither approve, nor quite reject it: but leave it indifferent to
every ones judgment, as they please to peruse, or omit it; And here I will
subject to your view, the Signs, Temperatures, Complexions, and Natures of the
four Seasons observed by many,

The sympathy of the twelve Signs with the four Elements.
Fiery Hot and dry Choleric Earthly Cold and dry Melancholy Aierial Hot and
moist Sanguine. Watery Cold and moist Phlegmatic Fiery Hot and dry Choleric
Earthly Cold and dry Melancholy Aeriall Hot and moist Sanguine Watery Cold and
moist Phlegmatic Fiery Hot and dry Choleric Earthly Cold and dry Melancholy
Aeriall Hot and moist Sanguine Watery Cold and moist Phlegmatic. The nature and
qualities of the seven Planets in union with the four Elements.
Earthly Cold and dry Melancholy Airy Hot and moist Sanguine and Fiery Hot and
dry Choleric and Watery Cold and moist Phlegmatic

As for the temperature of the Planet he is of himself inclinable to the
condition of the Sign he is in, or the nature of any other Planet that is
in,,,, or with him; yet in conjunction he is generally observed (as is) to
cause tempests and a turbulent air; but more or less according to the
disposition of the others, and the Signs he moves under, suitable to their
temperatures, and not moderating the evil aspects of the bad, as men do in this
World, according to the old saying or Adagie; Who lives with good, are good we
see;
And with the bad, perverted be.


Definitions of some few terms that are used by Astronomers.
A Parallel Sphere is also called vertical, having the World's Poles in the
Zenith and Nadir, the Equator in the Horizon; the Meridians and Azimoths are
all one; and likewise the Parallel circles and Almicanters; in a verticle
Sphere there is half a year day, and half a year night; one half of the Heavens
never rises, and so consequently the other half must never set.

A right Sphere has the World's Poles in the Horizon, the Aequinoctial circle
passes by the Zenith and Nadir, and by that means it divides the Horizon at
right angles; in this Sphere every degree and part of the Equator, that
ascends or descends the Horizon with the Sun, or any fixed Star, will come
to the Meridian with the or the same for these causes it is called a right
Sphere; and here the days will be always equal to the nights, either of them
being 12. hours in any time of the year; and all the Stars likewise will be 12.
hours above the Horizon, and as long depressed in every natural day.

An Oblique Sphere has one Pole elevated above the Horizon, and the other as
much depressed; in any oblique Sphere, the Equator will pass by the Horizon
obliquely, making an acute, and consequently an obtuse angle with it; and that
degree or part of the Equator, which shall ascend the Horizon with the Sun or
any Star, will not come unto the Meridian of the place with the or the same for
these reasons this Sphere is thus nominated. In all oblique Spheres some part
of the Heavens will never rise, some will never set; and some Stars will both
rise and set, as by the Sphere is evident in any latitude.

The Altitude, or Poles elevation, is an arch of the Meridian circle,
intercepted between the Horizon, and the end of the World's Axis; and the
complements are the degrees and parts that it wants of 90, that is, an arch of
the Meridian contained between the Pole elevated, and the places Zenith, which
in all oblique Spheres is ever equal to an arch of the Meridian, intercepted
betwixt the Horizon and the Equator.

The Declination of the Sun, or any Star, or part of the Heavens, is an arch of
the Meridian, passing through the center of the or, and intercepted between the
Equator and the center of the, or point of the Heavens, given either North or
South.

The Oblique Ascension is the degree or part of the Equator that ascends the
Horizon with the Sun or any Star in an oblique Sphere, and those degrees
reckoned from and continued to the end of, that is to 360. degrees.

The right Ascension of the Sun or any Star, or part of the Ecliptic, are the
degrees of the Aequinoctial circle, that ascends the Horizon with them, in a
right Sphere, or the degrees of the Equator, that do come unto the Meridian of
any place with the,, or any other part of the Heavens, and those reckoned from
Aries to 360. degrees, in the Aequinectial circle, as were the former oblique
Ascensions; and this is general in all oblique Spheres whatsoever, and the true
degree in the Equator, that ascended the Horizon, the, or in a right Sphere.

The Magnitude of a Star is to be understood only of the fixed, which for
distinction, and the readier finding them in the Sphere, they are divided into
six sorts, the first being the greatest, and so in order; but as for those of
the sixth Magnitude, or cloudy ones, they are but little observed in the
predictions of the weather; yet are here inserted with a Table of the Sun's
right Ascension in hours and minutes; for every 15. degrees of the Equator, is
equal to an hour, and so each degree is equal to four minutes in time, as was
said before.

I have here inscribed a Table for the Sun's right Ascension every fifth day of
the year, and two other of the Stars which are observed in prognostication of
the weather, with the right Ascensions, Declinations, and Magnitudes of them,
whereby they may be readily found on the Globe, or without it, when they will
be visible, and when obscured with the Sun, and what time of day or night they
will come upon the Meridian; from whence the hour of the night, and many other
useful propositions, and necessary conclusions will be deduced, by well
observing these in pronostication of the weather.

A Table of the Suns right Ascension in hours and minutes, for every fifth day
in any month in the year.
Days. Janu. Febru. March Aril. May June ho.mi. ho.mi. ho.mi. ho.m. ho.m.
ho.m. 5 19 50 21 57 23 42 1 34 3 28 5 34 10 20 11 22 16 00 00 1 53 3 48 5 55 15
20 32 22 35 00 18 2 11 4 8 6 16 20 20 53 22 54 00 36 2 30 4 28 6 37 25 21 13 23
12 00 54 2 49 4 49 6 57 30 21 33 1 12 3 9 5 10 7 18 Days July August Septem
October Nove. December. ho.m. ho.mi. ho.mi. ho.mi. ho.mi. ho.mi. 5 7 38 9 39 11 32
13 21 15 23 17 32 10 7 58 9 58 11 50 13 40 15 43 17 54 15 8 18 10 16 12 8 13 59
16 5 18 16 20 8 38 10 34 12 26 14 18 16 26 18 39 25 8 57 10 33 12 44 14 38 16
48 19 00 30 9 16 11 11 13 3 14 58 17 10 19 23 The right Ascentions,
DEclinations, Natures, and Magnitudes of some one noted Star in each
Constellation of the Firmament from the North Pole to the Ecliptic.
The first Table of in North Latitude. Right Ascentions ho.mi. The Decliations
de. mi. The Stars. mixed natures. Magnitude The Stars names. The Polar Sear 00
30 87 N 19 and 3 Andromedas girdle 00 49 33 N 42 2 The Northern Fish 01 00 17 N
21 5 Cassiopeias knees 01 12 58 N 17 and 3 Delta the north Triangle 01 32 27 N
51 4 The Ramms head 01 46 21 N 42 and 3 Algol, Medusas head 02 44 39 N 29 3
Perseus right side 02 58 48 N 28 2 Pleiades or 7 Stars 03 24 22 N 57 and 3 The
Goat and Kids 04 50 45 N 33 and 1 Erichthonius his heel 05 00 30 N 00 and 2
Castor, or the head of 07 11 32 N 38 2 The head of Pollux 07 23 28 N 52 2 The
Manger in breast 08 15 20 N 56 and don The northern Ass 08 22 22 N 44 and 4
The Lions head 09 11 24 N 38 and 3 Regulus the heart 09 49 13 N 45 and 1
Calisto the great Bear 10 40 63 N 43 2 Berenices hair 12 00 31 N 31 and 3
Vindemiatrix in 12 44 13 N 9 and 3 Arcturus in Boots 13 58 20 N 30 and 1 The
bright in 14 57 7 N 57 and 2 The northern Crown 15 18 28 N 7 2 The Snakes neck
15 26 7 N 45 and 2 Hercules, his forehead 16 58 14 N 56 and 3 Serpentarius, his
head 17 18 12 N 56 and 3 The Dragons head 17 49 52 N 00 and 3 The Vulture and
Harp 18 25 38 N 29 and 1 Antinious his right knee 19 17 7 S 44 and 3 The Eagles
heart 19 33 7 N 58 and 2 Capricornus, his head 19 58 14 S 34 and 3 The Swans
breast 20 19 39 N 9 and 3 The Dolphins head 20 22 13 N 15 and 3 The Waterman,
21 12 7 S 4 and 3 Cepheus lest knee 22 55 75 N 0 3 Pegasus right wing 23 50 11
N 10 and 2 The right Ascentions, Declinations, Natures and Magnitudes of some
noted Stars in every Constellation of the Firmament from the Ecliptic to the
South pole.
The second Table of * in North Latitude. Right Ascentions ho.mi. The
Declinations de. mi. The Stars. mixed natures. Magnitude The Stares names. The
Phaenix neck 00 10 45 S 50 and 3 The Whales belly 01 30 12 S 7 and 3 Alcarnar
in Eridanus 1 35 40 S 43 and 1 The water Snake 2 00 64 S 30 3 The Hyades or 5 3
50 14 N 30 and 3 Aldebaran the eye 4 15 15 N 42 1 The Hares belly 5 13 21 S 30
3 Orions girdle 5 18 1 S 28 2 The Dove 5 40 37 S 00 2 Argonavis 6 10 52 S 30
and 1 Dorado 6 15 66 S 10 4 Syrius the great Dog 6 29 16 S 12 and 1 Procyon the
little Dog 7 20 6 N 9 and 2 The Southern Ass 8 24 19 N 26 and 4 The flying
Fish 8 30 68 S 30 and 5 The Hydras heart 9 9 7 S 4 and 1 The Chamelion 10 30 77
S 10 5 The Goblet 10 40 16 S 9 4 The Centaures flank 11 50 49 S 30 2 The
Christians Arms 12 00 61 S 10 3 The Crows wing 12 15 12 S 23 3 The Indian fly
12 20 67 S 30 5 Arista ear of corn 13 6 9 S 10 -- 1 The Indian Be 14 10 82 S
15 5 The Wolfes flank 14 30 46 S 30 3 Antares, the heart 16 7 25 S 30 1 The
South Triangle 16 15 69 S 15 2 The Altar 16 30 56 S 30 and 3 The Southern Crown
18 30 43 S 20 3 The foot of Sagittarius 18 40 40 S 30 2 The Peacooks eye 19 50
60 S 00 1 The Indian with darts 20 30 59 S 00 5 The Cranes wing 21 45 50 S 50
Fomahaud in Pisces 22 36 34 S 10 and 2 Toucan an Indian bird 23 50 68 S 30 1

The use of these Tables.
THe first of these, contains the Sun's right Ascension, in hours and minutes
the fifth day in every month, excepting February, which is defective, having
but 20 days, undess it be Bisseatile or leap year; and some months have 31
days, which excess or defect is not to be regarded, nor such exactness
required, as to a minute, and yet you may allow, in proportion some minutes,
for any day between these, if so it be desired; the head of this table contains
the 12 Solar monethe of the year, each in a peculiar column: the first has the
days for the fifth day in every month, against which in each column, stands
the hours and minutes for the Sun's right Ascension those days.

The next Table has 5 columns, the first contains the names of those Stars
which are used in prognosticating the weather; the second column shows the
right Ascension of those fixed Stars, that is, the hours and minutes, or
degrees of the Equinoctial circle (reckoned from) that comes unto the Meridian
with those Stars: the third column does contain the declinations of those
Stars, in degrees and minutes, and those distinguished with an S, or an N, to
signify whether their Declinations be Northward or Southward from the
Equinoctial circle; the fourth, their natures, according to the Planets; the
fifth and last column shows the bigness, or magnitudes of those Stars: as
whether they be of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6. magnitude; as their titles in the head
of the Table do appear, the use of them is as follows.

To find the Sun's right Ascension.
ADmit it were required to know the Sun's right Ascension on the 5. day of
March; against 5 in the Title of days, and in the column under March, I do find
23 hours, 42 minutes for the day required, that is, 42 minutes after 11 at
Noon, was the 6 day upon the Meridian; for from that time 355 degrees, 30
minutes of the Equator had past the Meridian, and Astronomers do account from
one midday unto another; and if the right Ascension were required upon the 5
day of July, it will be found in the Table 7 hours and 38 minutes, and in the
same manner may the others be known.

To find the right Ascensions, Declinations and Magnitudes of these Stars.
LOok for the Star desired in the first Column of either Table; on the head of
the Table you will find whether the Star sought for, has North or South
Latitude: in the second column stands the right ascension, in hours and
minutes: the third will show the Declination in degrees and minutes; and
whether it be Northward or Southward from the Equator; the fourth the
temperature according to the Planets: and the last will show the magnitude of
that Star.

Example, the Ram's head is desired, having north Latitude, whose right
Ascension is 1 hour, 46 minutes; the Declination 21 degrees, 42 minutes
Northward from the Equinoctial; The nature participates of both these Planets,
and, and is a Star of the third magnitude, and so of the rest; thus are the
fixed Constellations of a mixed and doubtful nature, according to Durer, whom I
follow much in this.

To know at any time of the year, in what hour either of day or night, any of
these Stars will be South.
Substract the Sun's right Ascension, from the Stars right ascension, the
remainder will show the hour and minute of the Stars coming to the Meridian,
and whether it be day or night, by being reckoned from noon. But if it be
required to know when a Star will be South, whose right ascension is less then
that of the Sun's, in all such cases, add 24 h. unto the Stars right ascension,
and from that sum, substract the right ascension, and then the remainder will
be the hour and minute, that day from 12 at noon, that the Star will come unto
the Meridian; this done, for to know whether it will happen in the day time, or
visible at night, or whether it will be near about the time of Sun rising or
setting, or how long before or after, I will now show, and explain it (God
willing) with two Examples following.

Upon the 10. day of June, it is required at what hour the Star called the
little Dog will be upon the Meridian: the Sun's right ascension for that day, I
do find to be 5 H. 55 minutes; and the little Dog (a Star of the 2 magnitude)
to have for his right ascension 7 h. 20. m from whence substract the right
Ascension (for the day given) and the remainder will be 1 H. 25. so the little
Dog will be upon the Miridian the 10 day of June, 35 minutes before 2 in the
afternoon.

The 25 day of December celebrated for the Nativity of our Blessed Savior, it
is required to know when the middle Star in Orions girdle will come unto the
Meridian, this is a Star of South Latioude, and of the second magnitude, whose
Declination, you may see is 1 g. 28. min. and the right ascension of this is 5
H. 18 minu. and the right ascension the 25 day of December, is 19 hours, o
minutes, which being greater then the given Star; add 24 hours to it, the sum
will be 29 H. 18 minu. from whence substract the Suns right ascension 19 H. o
minutes, and the remainder will be 10 H. 18 minu. at night.

By Trigonometry you may find the true time of rising or setting in any
Latitude, and for any day in the year; which hour known, and subtracted from
the hour of the Stars being South, gives the time after Sun setting; as in the
Latitude of 52. g. o.m. where the Artick pole is elevated above the Horizon;
the upon the 25. day of December will descend the Horizon, at 3. h. 50 m. which
subtracted from 10. h. 18. m. the remainder will be 6. h. 28. the true time
after Sun setting, before Orions Girdle comes unto the Meridian.

Boots (who is also called Arcturus) will be full South on the same day, at
18. h. 58. m. from whence substract 12 hours, (for you must reckon from
noonday) and there will remain 6. h. 58. m. in the morning, and before rising
1. h. 12. m. if it were required when these or any other fixed Star will be
upon the Axis of the Equator, substract 6. h. from their right ascentions, and
the remainder is the thing required; as Orions Girdle was upon the Worlds Axis,
at 4. h. 18. m. after midday, and Arcturus 58. minutes after midnight, by the
right ascentions of the Stars and the, you may find their apparitions, and
occultations to any time of the year, with the hour of the night, etc. The
Pleiades, and these two last constellations are mentioned in the sacred
Scriptures: As Job 38.31, and ^2. and cap. 9.9.

The several Aseentions and Descentions of the fixed Stars and Planets.
THis is to be understood in respect of the hemisphere, and the Horizon of your
place, and that in several senses too; as a Star is said (sometimes) to be
ascending, not being come unto the Meridian of any place required; and when any
Star is upon the Meridian, it is said to be culminant; and here you are to
note, that the influence of any Star is then of most force to that place; and
observe also in the aspects of any Planet in or; whether both these Planets
thus aspected are visible in that hemisphere at the same time? or which of
them? and in what sign? and whether ascending toward the Meridian? or having
past it, descending toward the Western Horizon? but the ascension and
descention of the Stars, is usually understood for the rising and setting of
any Star, according to the violent motion of the Primum Mobile; and in respect
of the Horizontal circle, to that hemisphere which they must pass, both
ascending and descending.

But know, that in all oblique Spheres (where either pole is elevated above the
Horizon) that those Stars can never set to that hemisphere, whose declinations
toward the pole elevated are greater then the complement of the poles
elevation; and those Stars whose declinations are as many degrees toward the
pole depressed, can never rise: But if the declination; of any Star (toward
either pole) be less then the Aequators height above that Horizon, then all
those Stars (in every natural day) will both rise and set; of which ascentions
and descentions of the Stars, there are three several kinds observed, both by
the Poets and Prognosticators of the weather, in the alteration of the Air: And
are these,

1. Cosmicall. 2. Acronycall. And 3. Heliacall.

Those Stars are properly said to rise Cosmical, which do ascend the Horizon
with the; as the Dog*star does in Summer, from whence they are called the
Dog-dayes, beginning about the 20. day of July, and ending in the latter end of
August: But in the largest sense any Star is said to rise Cosmical, that
ascends the Horizon in the day time. The Cosmical setting of any Star, is when
they do descend the Horizon at the same time when the rises, or at any time of
day, but not taken in the strictest sense.

The Acronycal ascension is the rising of any Star when the sets; as when the
does enter into the sign, and descending the Horison, the sign will rise at the
same time, which is properly called Acronycal, although it be often taken for a
Star that ascends the Horizon at any time of night; the Acronycal descension is
said of any Star that sets with the, as the little Dog Star the 5. day of June;
but this is also said of any Star that sets in the night time.

The Heliacal rising of any Star, is to be understood of those that have been
obscured with the Sunbeams; and the Sun moving according to the succession of
the signs, the Star begins again to appear at his rising, a little before the
Sun, as you may see in the Latitude of 52. g 0. And on the seventh of August,
the Lions heart quite obscured, and a few days after will be seen to rise
before the Sun; and the Heliacal setting, is any Star that is seen presently
after the Sun setting, and a few days after will be quite obscured with the
glory of his beams; as the 28. of August, you may behold Spica Virginis in the
West, and in a few days after offuscated with the resplendent radius of the
Sun, his proper motion being Eastward. This I do desire may satisfy (most
courteous Reader) as an abstract of the world; and if further satisfaction be
desired, vouchsafe to look over my books of Astronomy; and for the better
recording (in your memory) the apparition and occultation of the Stars, accept
of these verses, though from a rude Minerva.

Ascension Cosmicall (as Poets say)
Are Stars that rise with Sol, or in the day.
Those asterismes Acronycall they call,
That in the night do either rise or fall.
And those Heliacall (Astraea says)
Whom Phoebus does offuscate with his rays.
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE Second Part of Meteors.
AS for the word Meteors, it signifies an apparition in the Air (as taken in
the common or usual sense) or high and lifted up: but in general there are two
sorts, one risen from Vapors and Exhalations, termed by the Philosophers
imperfect mixed bodies, by reason they are easily reduced into their first
nature, or proper Element, as Hail or Snow, quickly resolving into Water, and
all those which are accounted perfectly mixed, are thunder bolts, etc. and the
reason they do give, is because that such as these will not so soon be
converted into their first Elements, from whence they were extracted or
derived, the material cause of all, are hot and moist vapors, or hot and dry
exhalations, from Water and Earth, the efficient cause (under God) is from the
fixed and wandering Stars, by virtue of whose beams a light rarifi'd substance
is extracted from gross and heavy bodies, as vapors from water, and
exhalations from Earth: their qualities, are heat and moisture, which causes
diversity of effects, especially in those less perfectly mixed, which are the
subjects now intended.

Vapors do consist of the four Elements, but the substance water, as the steam
of a boiling Pot, which hangs like a dew upon the lid, or cover over it: And
Exhalations are commonly like smoke, of nature hot and dry, as you may behold
in a Summers day to offuscate the Air, or make it seem dusky with the ascending
of thin sumes, and after this comes usually thunder, which shows from whence
these exhalations were extracted; for out of Fire and Air only no Meteor can
consist, as wanting matter, the Fire of it self (as being an Element) is so
subtle, that it cannot be purified; whereas all exhalations and vapors, must
be refined, and consequently extracted from some grosser body; for the Air (if
much rarefied) would turn to Fire; as you may see in violent and circular
motions, of wheels or such like things, that are set on fire by rarification of
the Air, where the matter is dry and combustible: and when the Air becomes
gross it turns to Water, as you may see by your breath, in the winter time, or
the Air enclosed in vaults, or other hollow places, will quickly be condensed,
by opposition of the outward Air, or coldness of the place, especially against
rainy weather; but lot us now ascend to unmask some other doubtful quaeries.

The places where Meteors are generated, is generally held for to be in all, or
any Region of the Air, which are three, viz. the upper from the Element of Fire
to the clouds, the middle Region containing the clouds, the lowest from the
clouds unto the Earth; but Tycho Brahe, with some others, do conceive the
Element of Air, for to be delated up into the Firmament or fixed Stars; but
that above the Element of Fire, to be of a Celestial nature, differing from the
inferior Air; and their reasons are derived from the height of Comets,
observed not only above the Element of Fire, but with the Planets and some
higher then the Sphere of Saturn, even with the fixed Stars, as the new Star in
Cassiopaeia which was seen, and the height taken by Ticho himself (in the year
of the World's Redeemer, 1572) without parallax.

The proof of the altitude of Comets, is deduced from their Parallaxes, that is
the difference between the true and apparent height of any blazing Star (being
observed from the superficies of the terrestrial Globe) and not from the center
of the Heavens; and this difference is discovered several ways. First, as by
observing some noted and fixed Stars, ascending the Horizon with it, or
presently before or after; and if they do keep the same distance, or near unto
it, that Comet must needs be very high; or by several observations made in
other Countries; for if near the Firmament, those fixed Stars will appear with
it in all Hemispheres alike: But if the distance between them varies, and in a
small distance of place or time, it argues those blazing Stars are very low.
And thus the Parallaxis of any thing visible under the Firmament, will be found
greater or lesser, according to the height of it; As the Star in Cassiopaeia
appearing in the year of Grace, 1972. differing but little or nothing in the
Parallax, or the observations made by diverse Astronomers in several Countries,
in the year of the Virgin's being a 1585, there was a Comes appeared in the
Sphere betwixt Saturn and Jupiter, and an other in the year of the Incarnation
of the Son of God, 1618. between Jupiter and Mars.

Aristotle, with Regiomontanus, and many others of his followers, do affirm all
Comets to be sublunary: and this their Scholars do allege, that if the
Astronomical hypotheses be true, the Star in Cossiopaeia, was greater then the
fixed Stars of the first magnitude, and consequently (by their own
demonstrations) bigger then the whole Globe of Earth and Water above 100.
times; and a greater body cannot be extracted from a less; from whence then
(say they) could the matter be drawn or exhaled to feed so great a light for
the space of a year and four months? but to this Galilaeus answers, that the
highest Sky under the Firmament has matter in it for the generation of these
blazing Stars. Licetus to defend the height of Comets, does argue that the Sky
has hard condensed knots in it, made and enlightened by the rays both of the
fixed and wandering Stars. Gemma Phrysius did diligently observe in 3. or 4.
Comets, that their tails did stream or extend out directly contrary to the Sun,
as if it were by him enlightened. But others do rather conceive from hence, that
these are Meteors, whose matter is drawn together, and set on fire by some Star
or Planet which it follows, and turns unto it by some attractive power, and
their bodies not round, but dilated according to the matter.

Some do think that these Stars were not new, but from the creation, although
unvisible to the world before; as that observed by Hipparchus, or that in the
breast of the Swan, in the year 1600. or that which appeared in the year 1604.
in Sagittarius; and these observed without parallaxes, in the year of
Christianity, 1625. toward the latter end of August, a bright Star did appear
at noonday, to the admiration of the people in the City of Antworpe; which Star
many Astronomers did behold, and affirmed that it was the Planet Venus. From
the Nativity of our Lord and Savior, Anno 1630. May the 29. being the
birthday of Prince Charles, there was a bright Star appeared at midday; the
decrees of just Heaven, I dare not presume for to enter into. So here I will
end this discourse of blazing Stars, the cause and their effects not being
certainly known unto mortal man: And thus writes St. Damascene, lib. 2. cap. 7.
Fidei Ortho. Cometae Dei imperio certis temporibus conflantur, rursusque
dilabuntur.

The middle Region of Air contains watery Meteors, as Hail, Snow, and Rain; but
some conceives that those clouds which causes rain, to be the bounds unto the
middle and lowest Region of the Air; the midlemost is thought not to exceed
four miles in depth; and that the lowest is but so high as the Sun can reflect
from the superficies of the terrestrial Globe; so one of these regions must
decrease by the increasing of the other; and yet the lowest region when
highest, not to exceed two miles; and when least, or the lowest clouds, not
above an Italian mile; for there be hills whose heads are perpetually covered
with Snow, and yet their perpendiculars are found by the observations of able
Geometricians, not to exceed a mile and a half, that is, 12. Stadiums, or 1500.
Geometrical Pases, as was said before.

But some do urge that Tenariffe is higher then Pliny fains the Aspes to be;
others do affirm that it is visible at Sea 4. degrees, or 240. miles; from
whence Snellius would seem to demonstrate the perpendicular height for to be
miles 9, and others 4. miles. There is a mountain in Pera called Periacqca by
the Indians, which hill Josephus Acostae (in his History of the Indies) does
advance so high in the description of it, as he makes the Aspes in Italy for to
seem but like mole-hills unto it; and that the Air was so subtle on the tops
of them, that it was unapt to breath in, and that he had almost vomited up his
life. And some erroneously do conceive the heads or tops of these mountains for
to be exalted above the middle region of Air.

Cradanus in his 17. Book, De Subtilitatibus, affirms the highest clouds not
to exceed two miles, and the lowest not above half a mile from the superficies
of the terrestrial Globe, being by common experience found to be under the tops
of ordinary mountains: Some would seem to prove it by thunder and lightning in
this manner; observe when a cloud breaks over your head, the space of time
between the flash of lightning, and the clap of thunder, for to be equal unto
the firing of a Cannon, and the report it gives at a miles distance; neither is
it heard much further then great Ordnances are, as it has been often observed
in great tempests both of thunder and lightning, that in 30. or 40. miles
distance, nothing has been heard or seen, but a fair day, and tranquil Sky.

Some men do think the matter which causes this thunder and lightning to have
an affinity with Gunpowder, one being compounded by Nature, and the other
imitated by Art, which opinions are various both in Philosophers and Chemists;
for Paracelsus and most of his disciples do affirm, that it is caused by
Sulphur and Saltpeter, commixed with a great contrariety of Mercury unto
either, and these three they allege to be the chief causes of Meteors. Others
do say that they are sulphurious exhalations confused in the clouds, and by
opposition of the vapors and coldness of the place, it gets into a body,
where taking fire by antiparistasis, it violently forces a passage through the
condensed clouds, with a roaring noise, to the astonishment of mortals: Others
do think that tempests are caused by the wicked condemned spirits, and for this
cause bells are hallowed and rung; probable it is that it may be often times so
permitted by the Creator; as Psalm. 77. ver. 49. and in the 7. of the
Revelation; yet all is in the power of God, as Jer. 10.13. and Psalm. 134.7. Qui
producit ventos de thesauris suis.

Nothing in this world is certain or permanent; opinions of men have their
births, periods, coursees, and revolutions, as you may read in all ages, where
the opinions of Philosophers have been buried, and again revived from their
funerals, armed with new demonstrations, and fortified with arguments, yet
besieged and overthrown at last by the offspring of others; which shows these
are but disputations, nothing being certain but the greatness of the Creator:
yet useful conclusions are derived from hence, and necessary observations may
be selected from humane conceptions, although the essential part cannot be
comprehended by us: And here I will end this Introduction. Ecclesiastes cap. 3.
ver. 11. Cuncta fecit bona in tempore suo, and mundum tradidit disputationi
eorum, ut non inveniat homo opus, quod operatus est Deus, ab initio usque ad
finem.

The second Part. A brief discourse of Meteors: imperfect mixed bodies, and
their causes.
FIrst you ought to observe, that the Fire, Air, Water, and Earth (which here
we have for our use) cannot be called pure Elements, but rather Elementarie
bodies; for Fire and Water, Air and Earth, are oppugnant and irreconcilable
one to another, as they are contrary in their own natures, and can neither
generate, nor corrupt simply of themselves, but as mixed they do; for if these
were pure Elements which here we have the Fire would be immoderate for our use;
the Air to subtle, and not fit for living Creatures to breath in; the Water
would be without taste and not good to drink; the Earth would be sterile, and
could neither bring forth, nor cherish; and we being all mixed bodies
(compounded of the four Elements) could not be nourished or sustained with
Simples.

Of the several divisions and dispositions of the Air.
THe Element of Air, is divided into three several regions; or distinguished in
three several parts variously qualified, in which are generated many imperfect
and mixed bodies, and these divisions are thus nominated, the Upper, Middle and
Lower Region of the Air; the first and uppermost, is close adjoining to the
Element of Fire, and has a circular motion with it, from East to West, carried
about by the Primum Mobile,; this Region of Air, is perpetually hot and dry, by
the reason of its violent motion, and proximity to the Fire. In this Region
there are no clouds, because of the heat, and remoteness of the Earth, from
whence they are extracted, their matters being gross and moist; but to this
place are lifted up, exhalations, being by nature hot and dry, which do easily
ascend to that height, by reason of their heat and levity: these imperfect
bodies, by the heat of the Sun and influence of the Stars, are conceived to be
exhaled from the Earth, or out of lakes, rivers, seas, and other watery places;
and this Meteor as it does ascend, it leaves the grosser part, in the lowest
and the middle region; and as it rarifies, it elevates it self, unto the upper
region, like a subtle and thin fume.

These exhalations having penetrated the middle region, and attained unto the
height of the Elements, and circumvolved with a slimy matter, oily, and apt to
be inflamed; thus having assumed a body, is violently carried about with the
Air, until with the motion and vicinity of the Fire it is inflamed, and then
nourished with more exhalations (continually drawn unto it) that it burns and
converts it self into diverse forms, according to the disposition of the matter,
as resembling Dragons, Lances, Torches, Comets or Blazing Stars, etc.

And some again that seems to fall and slide through the Air, the lightest part
being consumed, extracted, or drawn away by some other means, or the levity of
it, unable to support the grosser part, lets it descend, which gliding through
the Air, and enlightened, appears like a falling Star: some conceives, that
these ascend not so high, being of a gross body (yet hot) and striving to
ascend is repulsed by the coldness of the middle Region, or the moistness of
the clouds, and so by the reason of its own weight, and opposition of the
Element, it is thrown down again; the substance of them is like a gelly,
transparent, and apt to be illuminated.

Comets, and all fiery Meteors are usually moved with the Region they are in,
and from East to West, according to the raptile motion of the Spheres: but
Seneca affirms, that he did see one which moved parallel to the Horizon, from
the North, by the West into the South, and so by the East into the North again;
and the contrary likewise may be so, the exhalations moving as the Air and
according to the matter which does nourish it, as you may see fire in a
stubble: and others have been seen to remove suddenly from one place to
another, casting forth sparkles like fire; these by some are called Goats: and
some have seemed as fixed, both in respect of their Latitudes and Longitudes.

They may be also generated in any part of the Heavens, and at all times of the
year: but in cold Countries, rarely but in Autumn; for then the heat is
sufficient to raise up the matter, and the temperature of the Air, is apt to
suffer the exhalation to draw to it a slimy substance: which cannot be in the
Spring time, the heat being not sufficient to elevate them, and in the Summer
season the exhalations are not so gross, by reason of the Sun's heat,
dissipating those vapors, and rarifying the Air, and if it could be got
together, the middle Region is so cold that it cannot ascend to the uppers; and
the Winter quarter is cold and moist, oppugnant to all such exhalations; and so
consequently quite unapt for those generations, or any other of that kind as
Philosophers affirm, though experience proves the contrary many times.

The middle Region of Air and what is there generated.
THis Region, or middle part of the Air is generally conceived to be vehemently
cold and moist by Antiperistasis, and the effects do also prove the same: and
this we see in all things that are oppugnant, enclosed and comprehended by
their contraries, being of greater force, does cause the contrary enclosed (not
being able to break forth) and withal repulsed by its opposite, to contract
and fortify it self: as by experience you may see in all living and sensitive
Creatures, that their inward parts are much hotter in Winter then in Summer,
and their stomachs apter and abler to digest; and the cause is, for that the
heat is then repulsive to the inward parts, by the opposition and coldness of
the outward air; and besides, you may see that the fire and all combustible
things will burn more violently in Winter then in Summer; and the colder the
weather is, the more it scorches; the reason is the same in these; for the fire
grows more violent, by how much the more it is opposed with the contrary
quality of the subdued cold.

The case is the same in the middle Region of the Air; for the upper part is
made hot by the violent motion of it, and the neernesse unto the Element of
fire; and the lower Region is made hot by reflection of the Sunbeams; and so
the cold included between them is the more violent, by how much the lower
Region is inflamed with the Suns reflection, and so by that means is colder in
the heat of Summer then in Winter: But these divisions or portions of the Air,
have no determined bounds, nor has the Water in respect of quantity; for by
the motion of the celestial bodies, cold and moisture getting together, the
Element of Water will increase, and the Air of necessity must then diminish;
and with the conjunction of heat and moisture, the Sphere of the Water will be
diminished, and the Air as much increased; so by this means the Air does more
abound in Summer then in Winter, and the Water more in Winter then in Summer;
and thus the middle Region is greater at one time then at another.

By the heat of the Sunbeams, and influence of the Stars, Meteors are elevated
to the middle Region of the Air; those which by nature are temperately hot and
moist, are extracted from wet and waterish places; yet have so much heat as is
sufficient to elevate them unto the height of the middle Region, where by
reason of the coldness of that place, they are condensed, and do generate
there several kinds of mixed imperfect bodies; the clouds thus incorporated, are
with the cold turned into Snow, congealed many times before it does engender
Water: And to prove this assertion, you may observe that Snow (if compacted or
beaten together) is not so soon dissolved into water, as Ice will be by the Sun
or any other means; which argues, had it been water first, it would have been
the sooner reduced: These vapors or thick exhalations, drawn up into the
middle Region, are often digested and turned into water, from thence distilling
down like mists, or in very small drops; for the greatest rain is thought not
to fall far through the Air, and out of the inferior part of the lower Region.

For it is generally conceived, the rain that falls from the middle Region,
descends in little orbs, whereby to preserve it self, and resist the violence
of the Air through which it passes, and becomes small by reason of the
distance and time in falling; for the Hall does demonstrate both the bigness
and rotundity of the drops, which from humide exhalations drawn up unto the
middle Region, and there converted into water, and immediately as the drops do
distill down, they are contracted into Ice by the Airs coldness in that part,
which is called Hail; derived from the high Dutch Hagell, opparadventure from
the Hebrew Egell, which signifies congealed drops.

In the Winter season it is seldom observed to Hail, by reason the cold in the
middle Region is more remiss then in warm weather; and in Sommer-time it is
also rare, upon any very hot day, because the heat of the lower Region will not
permit it for to pass without dissolving of it before it comes unto the Earth;
but frequently in the Spring and Autumn, the heat being then sufficient to
elevate the matter, and yet not so violent as to dissolve it in the fall; yet
sometimes it happens that great Hailstones are precipitated at Mid-Sommer, or
in very hot seasons, and are then the greater, (if the matter be sufficient) by
how much the more it is opposed by the lower Region made hot by reflection of
the Sun; for in all times of the year you may find (if observed) more and
greater storms of Hail to fall in the day time then in the night.

And some do conceive that there is a fiery nature included in them, besides
the heat of that subtle vapor which made it to ascend that middle Region, for
by contraries, it is undoubtedly congealed; as you may see in Salt (which is
hot and dry) to be made of water, whose natural temperature is directly
opposite, being cold and moist in open weather, or by the fireside, or in
Sommertime; take a little Salt, and mix some Snow with it, stir them together
till they do incorporate, and they will contract themselves into Ice, which is
done by Antiperistasis, or repulsion on every part; as the middle Region of the
Air is cold, and these frigide Meteors are ingenerated there. Many other things
might be here inserted, which for brevity sake are omitted.

The lower Region of the Air, and the effects it produces.
THis Region of Air receives all the former qualities by course, according to
the seasons of the year; and by the former means (out of waterish places) there
are exhaled from the Earth, moist and crude vapors, the grosser part of them
being earthly, and containing but little heat, they are unable to ascend unto
the middle Region; yet with the help of that heat included in those vapors,
and the attractive virtue of the celestial Orbs, they are raised above the
Earth, and there often times congealed before they can be dissolved into water;
and these are called Frosts; whereof there be many kinds, according to the
matter exhaled, and the temperature of the season, as some times of the year
the ground (in the mornings) will be hoary, like the head of Time, and the
grass crisped with the Frost; at other times rine-frosts, or congealed mists,
hanging like pendants on the trees; there be also black or windfrosts, which
are not so wholesome, for they are gross and earthly vapors exhaled out of
more undigested humors, and not so easily discovered by the sight as by the
sense of feeling.

There be some vapors exhaled which are called mists, the name derived as from
the mixture of Air and Water; of these there be several sorts, as some vapors
thin and sterile, and have not moisture sufficient to beget water, nor the heat
in them is not prevalent to elevate the gross humor, and cause them to ascend,
but they hang upon the earth, until the Sun rises, which if he chases away,
and dissipates by the virtue of his beams, it argues a fair day. There be
besides all these gross mists or fogs, which are more earthly then the former,
composed of crude and undigested vapors, drawn from corrupted places, as out of
fennes and marish grounds; these are very unwholesome, and very unpleasant to
the sense of smelling; but are usually the worse according to the places from
whence they were extracted, or after much calm and moist weather.

The nature of Dews in general are these.
DEws are defined for to be liquid vapors, extracted from the water, or earth;
these have an affinity unto frost, as Rain unto Snow, and are alike in the
material cause; the efficient cause is attributed unto the Stars, and the
coldness of the Air: These Dews are conceived to be very earthly and
ponderous, for they do not ascend high, but are converted into a watery
substance, so soon almost as extracted, being observed much more upon low and
wet grounds, then upon high and dry hills; and thicker upon the humble shrub,
then upon trees, or any exalted plant, as the lofty Cedar.

The usual time of these Dews is in the evening, the heat of the Sun declining,
being unable to support the Meteors which he raised, and he deserting the
Hemisphere, those that were more elevated must likewise fall; and the hotter
the day was, the greater are the exhalations, and the nights are usually then
cooler to convert them into water.

All Dews are commonly observed the greater, the Moon increasing, or at the
full most of all; the season of the year is to be considered, and the weather,
for the hotter the day is, the cooler will be the night, by reason of the
shadow which the terrestrial Globe then makes: As for an instance, you may see
by the shade of trees, or any other interposed body, which are cooler in
Sommer-time then in Winter, as in respect of the Air in general; for in
shadowed places, in the heat of Summer, the Air, as in opposition to the Heat,
does contract it self into a grosser body; from whence some conjecture (as by
the parts) that the whole Element of Air is by nature cold.

The Virgins thread.
There is a Dew that flies in the Air like small untwisted Silk or Yarn, and
falling upon the ground or plants, it does convert it self into a form like
Spiders Webs; the matter they consist of, is held for to be an earthly and
slimy matter, or exhalation something dry; these are observed for to be both in
the Spring, Summer, and Autumn; but in these Northern Countries they are most
frequent, the Sun near Libra, the days being temperately warm, the earth not
exceeding dry, nor yet overcharged with moisture.

Mell-dews.
Honey-dews some conjecture for to be earthly exhalations, mixed with waterish
vapors, and many suppose them for to be exhalations from plants, and all sorts
of flowers and vegetables; and this does evidently appear in Sugarcanes, and
diverse kinds of Indian Reeds, that have in the morning a Dew hanging upon them,
in taste resembling honey; which argues by their sweetness that they are
extracted from thence.

These Honey-Dews do afford plenty unto the warehouses of the industrious Bees
with quick returns: their purveyers are going for to seek provant, nor their
laborers much trouble to get their loading.

These Honey-Dews, as they are good for Bees, so they are as destructive to
diverse kind of beasts, as Sheep, Goats, etc. and in general to all fruits and
blooming flowers, especially to Hops and Grapes; they are also obnoxious to
Corn, and often blasts it in the blooming: For diverting these sad effects,
Numa, one of the Roman Kings superstitiously instituted a Feast called
Rubigalia and Floralia, in the year from the building of Rome, 516. Pliny, lib.
18. cap. 29. which Feast was observed upon the 28. day of April, 3. Kalend.
Moy; He was advised so to do by the Oracles of Sybilla. This Heathenish. Feast
the Catholic Church did alter into Ascension Week, calling it Rogation from
asking a blessing upon the fruits of the Earth.

The nature of Rain water:
RAin Water is much more insipide at one time then at another, and has very
often a brackish and unpleasant taste, yet comfortable to vigetables, and by
reason of the warmth, it does nourish them much better, and more natural for
them then spring water, or out of wells, being cold and too earthly; whereas
the other participates of the Air, which is hot and moist; but by reason of
this commixture of the Elements, it is apt to form diverse bodies, especially in
calm times; the Air wanting motion may corrupt, and so consequently generates
many things, according to the undigested matter exhaled from the earth, as
Frogs, falling upon the tops of houses and Churches, immediately after a storm,
and there they will perish in a short time, for want of sustenance; which
argues they were not there produced. Corn I have seen, that was after a shower
found upon the leads of Churches, and on the ground in diverse places; it had
the form of Wheat, but small and without taste, the color of it pure white,
both within and without.

The lowest Meteor in the Air, is the burning candle, or as some call it, Ignis
Fatuus: This is a hot and moist vapor, which striving to ascend, is repulsed
by the cold, and fiered by Antiperistasis, mov^s close by the earth, carried
along with the vapors that feed it, keeping in low or moist places; the light
is of an exceeding pale color, very unwholesome to meet withal, by reason of
the evil vapors it attracts unto it, which nourishes the pallide flame, and
will often ascend (as those exhalations do) and as suddenly fall again, from
whence the name is derived.

Thunder and Lightning, and the causes from whence they proceed.
THese are conceived to be vapors hot and moist, commixed with exhalations
that be hot and dry; involved thus within one another, they do ascend (by
virtue of their heat) unto the middle region of the Air, where the exhalation
by Antiperistasis grows inflamed, and strives to get forth of the cloud in
which is involved, and the upper part of the cloud (where the heat would pass)
by opposition grows the strongest, and the exhalation grown over-hot by being
constrained, with violence breaks forth of the weakest place, against the
weather that is in the lowest part; and by reason of the cold above it, the
heat and subtilenesse of the exhalation, with its own violence in breaking
forth, it glances down upon the earth without doing any harm, if unresisted; as
consuming a Sword without hurting the Scabbard; and many other things of this
kind, unnecessary, and too long for to relate.

The clap of Thunder is first, but the Lightning soonest appears, by reason our
sense of seeing is much quicker then our hearing: As you may perceive at a
distance a Man driving a Stake, or felling of Timber, you may behold him ready
to strike again, before you hear the former blow; and in shooting, or
discharging of a Gun, you may see the fire before the report. With the
conjunction of these compound vapors and exhalations, stones are generated in
the Air, as other Minerals are in the Earth, but more fiery by nature, and
these are called thunderbolts, in their forms perfect cones, like the flame
of fire which did generate them out of the terrene exhalation; it strikes not
above five feet into the earth, as some do affirm.

The remedies against Thunder and Lightning; all hard things will preserve whas
is soft and liquid; as Iron laid upon Vessels, will keep the Liquor from
sowring, by the former alleged reasons; besides this, it is naturally resisted
by a cover made of Seals skins, and preserving that on which it is p^aced upon
any creature; and the like does the Laurel tree, which caused many of the
Roman Emperors in time of Thunder and Lightning, to wear a garment made of
Laurel boughs: The pale lightning is most unwholesome, but the red aptest to
burn; the best and most assured remedy against these tempests, is the
protection of Heaven: A fulgure and tempestate, libera nos Domine.

But note, there may be Thunder without Lightning, and Lightning without
Thunder; for when these hot and dry exhalations are inflamed, and the cloud
weak (in which they are involved) the incensed exhalation breaks forth without
violence, in not being restrained; but the coldness of the middle Region
strikes the falshes downwards upon us, but not always upon the earth; but
glittering and reflecting on the watery clouds, makes it seem close by; as you
may see by the Sun beams, or any other sudden light falling upon the water,
will reverberate the luster, and dazzle your eyes, especially if the water be
moved with any wind; these coruscations are usual in hot Countries, or in the
heat of Summer.

Thunder without Lightning does happen when these hot and dry exhalations break
violently through the clouds (in which they are circumvolved) but not inflamed,
yet making a roaring noise in the burst of the cloud which restrained it; as
you may see, little bladders filled with wind, will give a crack or report at
the sudden and violent breaking of them; sometimes Thunder will happen (and
yet no Lightning appear) by reciprocal winds, the clouds violently breaking
themselves in meeting with one another; and this may often happen with
insurrections of several mutinous exhalations, disturbing the Air with several
commotions; these usually proceed after much calm weather, but are very
wholesome to purge the Air, lest with too much quietness it should corrupt.

Apparitions in the Air made by reflections of the Sun, Moon, fixed Stars, or
Planets, upon condensed Clouds.
Of Circles about the Sun, Moon, or Stars.
SUndry apparitions in the Air are made by the Stars reflecting upon waterish
exhalations; for when they happen uniform in all the parts equally rarefied and
supposited under the Sun, Moon, or Stars, that their beams cannot penetrate the
cloud in any part, by which means the rays are refracted, and the cloud being
uniform and round, the extremes or outward part is enlightened in manner of a
misty circle, which equally will appear about the Sun, Moon, or Stars; but
these are rarely under any of the fixed Stars, but common under any of the
Planets; yet not so usual under the Sun; for by reason of his fervor and heat,
the exhalation cannot so easily get directly under it; and being got together,
it cannot long subsist, but the matter will be dispersed by vigor of his beams;
which the Moon cannot effect for want of heat, and so the oftener she has those
circles about her, they continue longer; the same reason it is with the other
Stars; yet the circles made about them, are conceived to be weak and sterile
exhalations, neither so apt to beget wind or rain as the former are; for in
thick and waterish exhalations, the rays of the Stars are unable to illuminate
them, but will be observed by those and such like spissous, and dark clouds.

Impressions in the Clouds representing the Sun or Moon.
THe cause of these apparitions does proceed from thick clouds, regular and
uniform, as were the former, from whence are caused circles about the Sun or
Moon; yet these exhalations are more condensed then be the others, and not
situated under the Sun or Moon, as be the last; but placed obliquely on either
side, which clouds are apt to be converted into rain, and by refraction of the
Sun beams it does express the form or image of it; as you may see in a mirror
of glass or polished steel; these clouds must be condensed, for the beams of
the Sun to reflection, and not under the Sun, for then his refracted rays will
not be visible unto us; and if it be not regular and uniform in all the parts,
the cloud cannot portrait and express the whole and perfect image of it; and
in this manner there may be represented in clouds the figure of the Moon; but
those are much more rare to be seen, because her rays are weaker; and there may
be many Suns or Moons appear at once, upon these former alleged reasons.

Of the Rainbow, and the causes thereof.
RAin-Bows are generated in waterish clouds, ready to be dissolved into rain;
these are observed to be always directly opposite to the Sun or Moon; as if the
be in the South, the Rainbow will be in the North; and when the is in the
East, the Rainbow will appear in the West: and the contrary so in any part of
the Hemisphere; and the lower or nearer the Horizon that the Sun is, the
Rainbow will appear the greater, but never can exceed a semicircle, but less,
according to the height of the Sun above in any Sphere, which is the reason at
noon day we rarely see any, especially the being in the Summer Solstice, or
nigh the Tropic of, excepting all places far Northward, or toward the pole
Antartick, where for some weeks there is continual day; but the in Winter, near
may cause a Rainbow at noon day in these our climates; for they are formed by
the light rays of the Sun falling upon vapors and waterish exhalations
opposite unto him, and but little elevated above the earth; and by reason of
the great distance or remoteness of the Sun, the illuminated beams describe
his form, after an obscure and imperfect manner, portraiting only an arch of a
circle adorned usually with three colors, viz. Red, Green, and Purple, or
inclining unto a Bluish color; the distinction of these proceeds from the
Radius of the Sun reflecting upon these vapors; for those colors are lightest
in it which are nearest to the Sun; and those which are remotest, do tend more
to obscurity.

As for a demonstration, you may behold in the commixture of such like colors,
and the form of the Rainbow you may experimentally try, by casting water in a
circular manner against the Sun when he shines: But some do think the red
color to be only made by his rays, the second by reflection, and the third by
the second, all contained within some condensed hollow cloud, commixed with
Aerie and waterish exhalations; for if more Rain-bows do appear then one at any
time, it is conceived that they are made by reflection of one another; but the
colors in the second will be weaker then those in the first; and the third
Rainbow more pallid then the second. If there happens to be three, which is
very seldom seen, then the colors in the first will be counterchanged in the
second, and the third again like the first: These arches in the clouds or
Rain-bows, do continue longer then do the circles about the Sun, because the
distance in these is so great, that his beams cannot so soon dissipate the
exhalation which caused them. Rain-bows in the night time are exceeding rare,
because they are made by the Moon, whose beams are usually too weak to cause
such a reflection upon any cloud, at so great a distance; and are so rarely
seen, that I will cease to describe them any further.

The causes and diversities of Winds.
WInds by the virtue of the Sun, are generated of hot and dry exhalations,
evaporated from the Earth, and striving to ascend, are repulsed by the obvious
coldness of the Air; and forced collaterally about, and upon the superficies
of this terrestrial Globe, moving as they are compelled by the cold, and do
receive names, as from whence they blow, and are divided into 32. distinct
winds, according to the divisions or points of the Mariners Compass. The four
chief are these, East and West opposite, and so the North and South point,
which four do divide the Horizon into four equal parts; and are compared by
some to the nature and temperature of the four seasons.

But as for these exhalations, they are naturally dry, resolved into Air by
virtue of the Sun, as the moist vapors are into rain; sometimes these
exhalations are mixed with moist vapors, which the Sun convers at one time
both into rain and wind; the more these windy exhalations are restrained, by so
much they will rage; and the more violent they are, by how much they are
repulsed, and stricken down with the coldness of the Air, which makes them
often times rebound upon the Earth, which commonly are called whirl-winds, from
revolving and throwing up all light things that are in the way where they move;
these are also caused by the meeting of two contraries. Winds are the greatest
in open weather; in Frosts exhalations are enclosed within the pores of the
Earth, and so likewise by excessive heat.

The generation of Waters.
THere is undoubtedly a continual flux and reflux of waters, both upon the
superficies of the Earth, and in the channels within it, as you may see by the
veins in the bodies of men (a Microcosmus in it self) for the Earth being by
nature extreme dry, without water would be sterile, and quite unapt to produce
any vegetables, or Minerals within her now pregnant womb; and so the waters to
supply this defect, do continually move, as from their Springs, to little
Brooks, and those united making Rivers, running along in fruitful Valleys,
cooling the superficies of the Earth, and supplying what the fervor of the Sun
exhales; this office being performed, and living creatures in it nourished by
the streams, the rest falls into the Ocean, and from thence returns into the
veins of the Earth again; one water still following of another; and this is
confirmed by the undeniable authority of the sacred Scriptures, Eccles. cap. 1.

Yet many exhalations and vapors are by the Sun extracted from the waters, and
those converted (by the virtue of his rays) into several Meteors, as moist and
windy exhalations, which the Air gratefully does repay again unto the waters,
as in a continual course of amity, and inseparable league between them; the Air
which is included within the pores of the Earth, is by nature subtle, and gets
into all the corners and hollow places, whereby to avoid a vacuum, which Nature
does abhor; the Air here with cold, (that in the Earth does abound) is easily
condensed, and turned into drops of water, which falls from their heads into
little channels, and so discends into the valleys; for these sometimes are
observed at the bottoms or sides of hills to bubble forth; and the bigger
mountains do afford the greater Springs, and the more plenty of water,
especially such as are pregnant with Minerals.

The higher and greater that the mountains be, the vaster are their caverns and
hollow places in them to receive the Air; and as it turns into water, it is
supplied with more; And besides, hills being more exposed to the Sun beams,
must of necessity be fuller of pores then the lower grounds, and plain places;
and yet it does not follow that all high places must have Springs, because the
soil may differ, and the Earth not pory, there will want receptacles for the
Air, whereby the water should be generated. For a demonstration of this, you
may see in the Winter time, or against wet weather, the stones do become moist,
with a Dew hanging upon them, and in close and cold rooms drops of water will
hang upon the walls; observe then but the alterations and fluxibility of the
Air, the condensed coldness of the Earth, and this will easily be credited,
which makes Springs generally lowest in Autumn, as from hence, and being
exhausted with the Summers heat.

The wonderful virtues and effects of Waters.
FOuntains there be which naturally have marvelous qualities, of which I will
briefly relate some of their strange operations; As a Fountain in Baeotia,
which being drunk of does stupifie the senses, and causes forgetfulness. And
one in Cilicia which quickens the wits, as M. Varro writes. Ovid. Metam. lib.
15. writes the River Lyncestus will inebriate; and the water of the Stygian
Lake in Arcadia, will cat through any metal, and is held deadly poison: In
Dedons the Fountain of Jupiter will extinguish a torch that is lighted, and
being immediately put in again, it will illuminate it: So writes S. Augustine
of a Well in Egypt; in some waters nothing will easily sinck, as Mare mortuum
in Judaea.

Here be waters in England that will turn wood into stone; but one of the most
remarkable stories is recorded by Albertus Magnus, near Lubeck in Saxony, where
birds in a nest being touched with a stick taken out of the Sea, metamorphosed
the young ones into stone. There is a River in Hungary, that will give Iron a
tincture of Copper. Theophrastus writes of waters that will change the color
of birds or beasts, if they do drink of it, as from black to white. The waters
of Peutasium (as Solinus writes) is good and wholesome for men to drink of, but
deadly poison to venomous serpents. In Libiu there is a Spring, that at the Sun
rising and setting is temperately warm, at noonday exceeding cold, and at
midnight excessive hot, Some Springs do rise and fall every six hours, as the
Seas do ebb and flow: As for the taste, color, and temperature of waters,
they are according to the veins and minerals through which they pass; whereof
some are hot and drying; as the Bathes, having a taste of Brimstone, coming
through some sulphurious minerals, famous they are for curing of aches in the
bones, and all cold diseases: Those that turn wood into stone, or other
materials into metal, do participate much of their natures, and the mines from
whence they run; some being hot, others cold; some salt, others fresh; some
wholesome to drink, others hurtful and unpleasant, with diverse other strange
operations, retaining more or less of the nature and qualities from whence
they are derived.

Yet, as we said before, all waters are not conceived for to run through the
hollow veins of the Earth, but some are generated there, in the caverns of
hills, and all hollow subterranian places, by the condensed Air; and this is
not oppugnant to the sacred Scriptures, Eccle. cap. 1. ver. 7. for that is the
general course of all rivers, and the other but particular, which is
demonstrable in man, the little world; for by learned Physicians it is
observed, that such bodies as are inclined to a Dropsy, or any phlegmatic
disease, their Urine will be more in quantity and weight then all that they do
eat and drink; and this observed not only for a few days, but many months
together; and the reason which they give, is, that not only their meat and
drink converts to water, by reason of the coldness of those phlegmatic
stomachs, but the very Air in those bodies does turn to water, and those parts
supplied with more Air, as it converts to the other element; and such cold
causes and waterish effects may be in the Earth: and likewise in discoloring
of water, as by making it black, pale, green, high-colored, or the like; but
howsoever these are but peculiar, and from accidental causes; for the general
course of waters is from the Springs unto the Sea, and so to those heads again.
Thus wonderful are the works of the Omnipotent God, every thing magnifying His
Greatness, Daniel 3. Benedicite fontes Domino.

Conjectures of the Seas saltness, with the Ebbs and Floods.
THe Seas are conceived to be made salt and brackish by the fervor of the
Sun's rays, with the permixion of burnt exhalations, and chafed with the
violent and perpetual motion of the flux and reflux of the waters; for by
experience we find that liquid things, if hot and burnt, their tafte will be
bitter, and with commotion will prove brackish; but it is very likely that the
Seas were brackish from the creation, and by this means continued so; but some
does object that if the rainwater were exhaled from the Seas, and that the
Springs did flow from thence, the waters would retain a saltness in their
taste; but as for that it appears evidently that the Rain is refined by virtue
of the Sun, and the Spring-waters by their Meanders, in passing through the
Earth; and this you may try by distilling of Salt Water, or putting it into
Earth, so as it may drain forth, and in time it will lose its saltness, being
but accidental.

As for the ebbing and flowing of the Seas, the cause is assigned unto the
Moon, her influence having power over all waterish bodies; and besides, the
Tides are observed to alter as she does in her course (if not hindered or
furthered by accidental causes, as winds, land floods, or the like;) She coming
later every day unto the Meridian, by 48. minutes or very near; and those Seas
which flows when she is above the Horizon of that place, will cause greater
Tides then when she is depressed in the opposite Hemisphere; and when she has
latitude and declination toward the pole elevated, the force of her influence
is the greater, and the waters will flow the higher, and rage the more
violently in all indraughts, especially at the new Moon or full, which are
usually called Spring-Tides; but the full Moon, and three Tides after are much
the greater, her power then predominating most over all waterish and
phlegmatic bodies, and requires time to bring in greater supplies of water
into the Land.

Of Earthquakes, and their causes from whence they do proceed.
THe causes of these are exhalations hot and dry, generated by the virtue of
the Sun and Stars, enclosed within the concaves and hollow places of the Earth;
yet they cannot break forth by reason of the vapors, grosnesse, and the close
compactednesse of the Earth which involves them, and there increasing till it
cannot be contained, and not finding a passage out, it strives to force one and
so violently shakes the Earth, that it causes a trembling, which often has
swelled up mountains, and overturned others, and ruinated many Cities, making
men's houses their sepulchers, and whole Towns involved in a grave, overwhelmed
with their ruins; the continuance of Earthquakes is uncertain, from a minute
to a day, and a longer time, according to the greatness of the vapor
enclosed, and the firmness and solidity of the Earth which contained it. Here
I have showed you the weak and supposed reasons of men, in the wonderful and
stupendous frame of Heaven and Earth; all which are subjected, and do obey the
commands of the Immense Creator, Eternal God, and Author of Nature, to whom be
all Honor, Praise and Glory, world without end. Amen.

AN INTRODUCTION TO The Third Part. Predictions of the Weather.
TO Prognosticate, or foretell the alteration of the Weather, there has been
(in all Ages) diligent observers of Nature, who have prescribed rules and
prenotations of the Airs mutability, grounded on judicial signs, collected from
the Stars and the four Elements, the principles of all sublunary bodies: Of
these Predictions there be several kinds, both general and particular,
established by humane reason; some derived merely from old experience, yet many
of them true; diverse observations are ascribed to some particular Place,
Country, Province, or less proportion of this our habitable world, being
oftentimes confined within the precincts of a parish, as by fogs or mists
ascending from some mere or morish grounds; or descending from the tops of
hills, high exalted places, and low depressed dales; some men do observe
domestic and particular beasts, as the story of the Herds-man, etc.

But as for all such presages (as are not general, or warranted by some seeming
reason) I will qui^e reject, and leave them at home for to observe the smoke of
their own chimneys; for it is my real intention (at least my desire) to direct
my serene instructions to the benefit of the tender, vigilant, or distressed
travelers, whereby they may avoid the danger or inconvenience of foul and
tempestious weather, by presaging the Airs alteration, and the inundation of
the lower Regions, menacing the Earth with their overcharged exhalations and
vapors, in tumults ready to descend; to avoid these ensuing storms is the
scope of my intentions in this Treatise, and the better to enable you to do it,
I have prostrated to your view The Worlds Eprtomy, and the several risings,
settings, apparitions, and occultations of the Stars, with the natures of those
celestrial Orbs, the four Elements, and all Meteors in general the secondary
causes (under God) of heat cold, wet and dry weather; from whose excess
proceeds want, dis^^^d, all corporal distempers, and from their ^^^cord plenty,
crowned (by the blessing of H^^ven) with health and happiness.

That the Stars have their influences upon sublunary bodies, it is not denied
by any learned men, and affirmed undoublably by many of the most famous
Philosophers, Astronomers, and Divines, as witness Aristotle, Ptolomaeus, and
St. Augustine, lib. 13. Cap. 4. de Trin. and multitudes more which I have
omitted, fearing to incumber this volume with testimonies and approbations of
that which seems demonstrated unto reason, and confirmed by experience; and
according to Hippocrates (with the consent of many others) Thunder, Lightning,
Hail, Snow, Rain, Storms, and all alterations of the weather may be predicted
by the rising and setting of the fixed Stars, with the aspects of Planets,
their natures and qualities considered with the climate, region, and season of
the year.

The Stars being supposed of several natures, and each constellation mixed,
their influencies may cause diversity of effects, as heat, cold, moisture, or
drought, which are the four qualities of the Element; and as for the Planets,
they do alter according to their aspects, which many learned Physicians do
diligently observe in administering Physic, and in the time of their Patients
falling sick, calling the 7. day critical, the 14. etc. Their reasons are, the
Moon having dominion over all humors and waterish bodies, and in her motion
swift, does pass in 7. days, and a little more, from one sign into another of
a contrary nature and quality, as from hot and moist, into cold and dry, and
the like of others; from whence the Doctors do judge of the malignity of the
disease, with the hopes of life, or danger of death; and of this you may read
in Gallen (lib. 3. de diebus Criticis) rather then in me.

And in prognostication of the Weather, these judicial days would be observed
in the beginning of drought, Rain, Snow, Frost or the like, and there would be
considered the latitude and aspects of the Planets, the nature of the signs
they are in, passing under the fixed Stars, especially where they are mixed with
the nature of those Planets: Consider the season of the year, as Hale, or Rain
in the Spring, or Autumn, Thunder and Lightning in Summer, Frost and Snow in
Winter: Ponder also the rising and setting of the fixed Stars, with the
Planets, the Eclipses, Comets and all fiery Meteors, and such as these
accompanied by nature, are justifiable; for God has given man knowledge and
understanding in the course of natural things and signs in the Heavens, whereby
to avoid inconveniences, not with a certain, but a conjectural science, by the
Asterisms or celestial configurations and the four Elements, from whence may be
presaged distempers of the Air, causing contagious diseases, sterility and the
like; as Aristotle writes of Thaletes, who foretold the scarcity of Oil that
would be in the (...) year; and so writes Pliny, lib. 18. cap. 35. of
Democritus.

But whether the Stars are of these mixed natures, or their temperatures be
known, it remains as yet in dispute, and not for me to argue, but only follow
the tracts of other men, and their observations of the weather, delived from
experience, but not presume to search into the decrees of Heaven, or predict
the actions of men, with the event of future things, which many pretend to do;
for although that God has made figns in the Heavens, and has enabled us to
know the times and seasons of the year, with all things necessary for us to
understand, yet not to be inquisitive in those sacred Ordinances, which the
omnipotent Creator has decreed and concealed from us, as unnecessary to be
known; and prohibited by the commands of the Doctors and Councels of the holy
Catholic and Apostolic Church, to which sacred Authority I do humbly submit
my self. And here I will conclude this Introduction, remembering the saying of
our blessed Savior unto His Apostles, Acts cap. 1. ver. 7. Non est vestrum
nesse tempera vel momenta, quae Pater posuit in sua potestate.

The Third Part. Of the Weathers Prediction.
The affinity of the 12. Zodiacall Signs, with the 7. Planets in their natural
qualities, with their operations on sublunary bodies, according to the
collections, and observations of the Wise and Learned.

THe signs of the Zodiac in the eighth Sphere are removed almost 28 degrees
from their places, according to the motion of the primuns Mobile; so that the
first Star in the horn of Aries, is in the 28. degree of, and is continued to
the 18 degree of Taurus, the first mover, and in like manner are the rest of
the 12 signs.

The first parts of Aries beginning on the 28 of, and ending in the 4. degree
of, do cause winds and rain; those Stars being of the nature of and, commixed
and assisted with, the middle part of Aries, from the 4. degree unto the 10. of
temperate, inclining to heat and drought, by reason of the Stars in his hinder
foot, in his loins and ham, being of the nature with; from the 10. degree of
Aries to his hinder parts (being in the 17. degree of almost) is very hot; his
horns and his neck of the nature of and, but cool by the southern Stars in the
Whale being very cold of the nature of.

The former parts of Taurus, from the 17. degree to the 27. of, the Stars are
something windy, turbulent, and cloudy, by reason of the Pleiades contained
within those degrees, and are of the nature of and, the middle parts of from
the 27. degree to the first of are temperately hot, and something moist, by
reason of some Stars in Perseus, of the nature of and, from the beginning of to
the Hyades and the horns of Taurus, of the nature of, and by the approach of
Orion, causes Thunder and Lightning, the North part made temperate by Perseus,
the South variable and uncertain, by reason of some Stars participating of,
commixed with others of the nature of,, and.

The former part of Gemini from the 26. of unto the 6. degree of are something
moist and hurtful; the middle parts, from the 6. degree of unto the 14. the
Stars do incline to the nature of, as in the arms and knees of, yet temperate,
and observed drier then formerly they have been; the hinder parts of, from the
14. degree unto the 24. of, are of a mixed and uncertain nature inclining to
drought, by reason of some Stars of the nature of and, the heads of, of, the
North part moves winds, the South part causes heat and drought.

The former parts of Cancer, from the 24. of to the first degree of, are Stars
of mixed and doubtful natures, of,, and, as those nigh the feet of, Praesepe,
etc. causing earthquakes, or tempests; the middle parts of, from the 1. degree
of unto the 7, in which are the little Asses of nature, and more hot and dry
then formerly, from the 7. degree of to the 13. the Stars in are of nature and,
very dry, but not so windy a formerly; both the Northern and Southern Stars of
are generally hot and suffocating.

The former parts of Leo, from the 13. degree to the 24. of where Regulus is,
the Stars are of various natures, part of them commixed with and, others with
and, and part replenished with and, pestilent and stifling; the middle parts
of, from the 24. degree to the 4. of, temperate, and inclining to moisture but
a little; the Stars of the nature of and, and others with and, the hinder parts
of to the 17. degree of, temperately hot and moist; the Star in the tail, of
the nature of and, the North part of this asterism is fiery and unstable, by
reason of Vrsa major, the South part moist because of the Hydra, whose nature
is and.

The first part of Virgo, from the 17. degree unto the end, the Stars being of
the nature of and, are something hot and offensive, but less then formerly;
from the beginning of to the 18. degree is temperate, containing in her left
wing and thigh, Stars of the nature of and, the end of this constellation is
from the 18. degree of, unto the 8. degree of, in which is contained Spica,, of
the nature of and; and some other Stars in the train of her gown, of the nature
of and, yet something waterish, and more then formerly participating of the;
the Northern Stars are windy, inclining to and, the Southern Stars to and.

The former parts of Libra, from the 8. of unto the 15. degree, contains
Stars of the nature of participating with the Southern Balance, and the
Serpent of Aesculapius, which Stars are temperately cold, and drier then
formerly; the middle of, from the 15. to the 19. degree of is also temperate;
the extremes of, from the 19. to the 26. degree of waterish; the Northern part
of windy, of the nature of and; the Southern part dry and feavourish.

The former parts of Scorpio from the 26. degree to the 6. of, do participate
of Stars commixed with the nature of and; and in the 4. degree, as the Star
Antares, producing Snow, and more then formerly the middle of, from the 6.
degree of to the 16. degree, the Stars are temperate, by the vicinity of
Serpentarius, of the nature of and, but moister then they have been in former
ages: the tail or extremes of, from the 16. of to the ^6 degree are turbulent,
their natures being of and; the Northern parts are hot, the Southern moist.

The former parts of Sagittarius, from the 26. unto the 6. degree of the Stars
are moist, and colder then in former ages; the middle part of, from the 6.
degree of unto the 16, the Stars are of the nature of and, yet temperate,
inclining to cold; the hinder part of, from the 16. of to the 28. fiery; the
Northern part of this constellation is windy, the South part moist and
inconstant.

The first part of Capricornus, from the 28. degree to the 7. of, the Stars do
participate of and which are hot and hurtful; the middle of, from the 7. degree
of unto the 15, more temperate; lastly, from the 15. degree to the 21. of is
observed rainy weather, for the Northern and Southern part of this asterism is
generally held moist, and also hurtful.

The beginning of Aquarius, is from the 21. degree unto the end of the same
very moist; the middle of it, unto the 8. degree of temperate, of the nature of
and; the end of this sign in the 15. degree of windy; the Northern part of this
constellation is hot, the Southern part snow or cold weather.

The former parts of Pisces, from the 15. degree unto the 30. more cold then in
former ages; the middle parts from the beginning of, unto the 15. degree,
moister then formerly; and lastly, from the 15. degree of unto the 28. causing
a thick and dark air, the Northern part windy, and the Southern is held
waterish, which concludes the 12. Signs and the properties of them in
particular.

Aphorisms, or selected places out of Cardanus.
CArdan. 7: Aph. 73. does propound these, and do cause winds, and the half of,
the other part of being more aireal, participating of does produce sudden and
fruitful showers; Author of winds, and produces great heat and storms of Hail,
remiss heat and gives showers, and, inequality of Air, Snow and Rain, cold
weather does produce, and waters, especially in the beginning.

Stadius, and the later observers collects these properties of the 12. Signs,
of the first mover and 8. Sphere, conformable to this Age.
OF the Primum mobile less subject to Thunder, but apter to hail then in the
times of Ptolomy.

Hot, and moderately moist.

Temperate, inclining to heat, and also to drought.

Cloudy, and not the parent of fair weather, in times past.

Hot, with a scorching drought and suffocating.

Thunder, with moisture, but more temperate then in former ages.

Various and mutable, inclining something unto drought.

Flery, but more remiss then in the time of Ptolomy.

Windy, but moister then formerly.

Temperately cold, and a little moist.

Cold and watery.

More cold then in former ages.

The natures, properties, and operations of the 7. Planets upon sublunary
bodies, in causing Meteors.
SAturn by nature is more cold then dry, especially being Eastward of the, and
in earthly signs, producing then both clouds and coldness of the Air; in time
of heat it lessens it; and in frosty weather it much increases the cold; when
he passes from one sign into another, for many days together he causes red
clouds, and fiery apparitions in the Air, inundations, earthquakes, snow,
frosts, and much cold, according to the season of the year, and situation of
the Country. Card.

Jupiter is of nature hot and moist, and is accounted the parent of fair
weather, being temperate both in heat and moisture, mittigating the cold of
Winter, and the heat of Summer, causing gentle winds, and a temperate Air, with
much serenity; being Eastward of the he increases heat, and Westward
moisture. Card.

Mars is hot and dry in excess, and in fiery Signs in Summer he causes much
heat, and in Wintertime remiss, mittigating the coldness of the weather; he
is accounted as Lord paramount of tempests, violent and sudden storms of Rain,
Hail, Thunder, Lightning, excessive heat in fiery Signs, and much Rain in
passing by the Pleiades, as is observed by Stadius.

Sol is by nature hot and dry, but more or less, according to the Sign he is
in, or aspected with the other six Planets; or assisted by the fixed Stars; in
his annual revolution, his greatest force is in making Hail, moderate in Rain,
little Frosts and Snow; the general motive of vapors and exhalations, the
destributer of light unto the rest of the Stars, Monarch of the skies inabling
them with his rays, and the earth with fruitfulness.

Venus is temperately cold and moist, yet Argol says moderately warm,
predominating over humors, she warmeth little, and moistneth much, especially
when she is the morning Star; in Winter she makes the Air temperate, but
moist; and in Summer she lessens the drought, and causes great Dews and gentle
showers, but chiefly when she is in the beginning of. Card.

Mercury is by nature mutable and doubtful, according to the Sign or nature of
the Star he is withal, or the Aspect of any other Planet participating of their
natures, with whom he is associated; he is held the father of winds, in earthly
and watery Signs; and causes Thunder and Lightning often in fiery or airy
Signs.

Luna, the lowest Planet, is of nature cold and moist, and but little warm; she
naturally moves the waters, having much force over all phlegmatic bodies and
cold humors, and increases them, according to her place in the Zodiac, the
Aspect with the, and the other Planets, her association with the fixed Stars,
and her latitude from the Ecliptic. Astrologers do allow the Moon these
temperatures, from the to the first of, cold and moist; from the first unto
moist, and something warm; from to the last dry, and a little warm; from the
last to the cold and something dry; but in general she is held to increase the
humors in all bodies, from the new unto the full; and decreasing, for to dry
them up or lessen them, yet more or less according to her place and season of
the year: and the full is conceived cold in Summer, and temperate in the Winter
season; the new warm in Summer, and produces the coldest nights in Winter; and
in general the conjunctions of the Luminaries brings the fairest weather, and
their oppositions the greatest store of Rain. Card. And thus far for the
particular observations of the Planets properties and natures.

Proper and peculiar observations of the weather, in every one of the four
Seasons, or Quarters of the Year.
Spring.
IN the conjunction or opposition of the Luminaries immediately, or the last
before the Vernal Equinox, if were in with either the or, expect much Thunder
and Lightning for to follow; if in March or April be retrograde, expect much
wet weather to follow.

Summer.
If the 5. Planets be direct, this season will be beautiful and pleasant; but
if these 5. be retrograde, then will the Summer be vehemently hot; for the
Planets do heat the Air, when retrograde in their courses, and when direct they
cool; and this is general, except when is in to the Sun. Planets in their swift
motion, do increase the heat; but when Stationary, if they be hot, they do
inflame the Air; if cold, they cool it; if moist, they do beget Rain; and those
by nature dry, do cause at that time much drought; and Planets combust in this
Summer quarter, do cause much Thunder and Lightning, Leupold. Tract. 6. cap. 2.

Autumn.
Fiery Planets in this season, and in our Northern Countries, do cause both
cold and moisture; if in this quarter the 5. Planets be retrograde, there will
be much drought in every Country and climate, and when the enters into the 18.
degree of, if be in a watery Sign, expect excessive rains, with inundations,
Leupold. 3.

Winter.
Fiery Planets in the beginning of this quarter do produce clouds and Southern
winds; if that in his season be direct, and the morning Star; in the beginning
of Winter she will produce some rain, and in the latter end much wet, unless
it be hindered by some other Planet of near affinity to the Sun; and the
contrary when is retrograde, and Lucifer, expect then very much rain in the
beginning of this quarter, and in the end of Winter but little or none at all.

This general conclusion Haly does propound thus, Cap. 4. part 1. If be
retrograde in this quarter, it does presage a moist and rainy Winter: one
Planet retrograde when in with argues drought, especially at the end of this
season, going out of into; if there be two Planets retrograde, it
prognosticates temperate but moist weather; but if three, an abundant deal of
wet; and if four Planets be in their motions retrograde, it will presage a
deluge. And here ends the observations upon the four Seasons or quarters of the
year; the Sun entering any of the four Cardinal points, as,,, and. Leupold.

The names of the most tempestuous and remarkable Asterismes and Stars observed
in former Ages, as at this present.
THe most tempestuous Constellations are these; Orion. Arcturus, and the
Northern Crown; the most windy are the Goat, and Kids, in Erichtonius; the most
watery are the Hyades, and the 7. Stars called the Pleiades; the causers of
violent heat, are Regulus, or the Lions heart, and both the Dog-stars, as
Sirius and Procyon: These are the chief and principal Asterismes observed in
presaging the Airs mutability; yet there be many more Constellations of note in
this kind, although not so general in their effects, being of much more
doubtful and promiscuous qualities; but being part of the Astrologers
Calender, they shall be inserted, and according to their Cosmical ascentions
for this latitude of 52. degrees, beginning at the feast of Christ-mass, and so
in order with the Suns revolution in his proper course through the 12. Signs,
as in this manner following.

The head of Capricornus, Andromeda, Canda,, Pisces,, the Rams head, the Bulls
eye, the heads of Gemini; Aselli, the Asses; Praesepe, or the Cribbe both in
the Lions head; the Hydras heart, Vindemiator, and Spica Virginis, or the ear
of Corn, both in, the Vulture with the Harp; the Serpent with Aeschylapius.
Lucida Lancis, or the bright Star in the Eagle; the Scorpion heart, or Antares,
the Dolphin, etc. There are many other Stars observed (but not so remarkable)
which you shall see in the following Predictions of the Weather. There are
diverse other Constellations toward the antartick pole, not vifible in our
Hemisphere, as the Stern of Argonavis, with multitudes more, whose natures and
effects are not known, and howsoever not for our observations, in
prognoflicating the weather, and so they are purposely omitted.

The Cosmical and Acronycal rising and setting of the Stars, observed in
presaging the Airs Vicissitude, as in former Ages by Pliny, and at this present
time.
FIrst, you are to note that the nature of the fixed Stars, and their
influences are increased or diminished by the association of the Planets or
wandering Stars, either by oppugnant or united qualities; as approaching any
Stars of her own nature, causes cloudy and fickle weather, rain or much
moisture; uniting his rays with Stars of his unconstant and subtle nature,
causes winds, and a great mutability of the weather; joined or commixing his
rays with Stars of his fiery nature, increases them much more, and inflames
the Air, being prone unto all combustions, as with Sirius, and the rage of the
Dog Star is mittigated by the approach of and; the Planet. also lesseneth the
heat, and causes dark weather, and cold showers when his rays are united with
fixed Stars of his own cold and melancholy disposition, and thus judge of the
rest: The influences of the fixed Stars to be more or less effectual,
according to the Planets united with them, or ascending the Horizon of any
place together; the time of year and sign considered, and the nature of Meteors
pondered in your judgment, with what has been already specified, and so to
proceed.

1. The Star Arcturus, when he sets Acronycally, denotes cold winds, and with
the rays of tempests, and conjoined with, hail, snow, winds or cold rain,
according to the season.

2. Aselli and Praesepe, if conjoined with the rays of or, it presages rain or
moist and misty weather.

3 The Cosmical rising, and Acrouycal setting of the Hyades d notes rain, and
if instigated by the approach of, expect winds both by Land and Sea.

4 Virgiliae, or the Pleiades setting Cosmically, produces rain and storms, if
joined with, and the Sky at the same time be cloudy, it argues a wet Winter,
especially if be with it; and if the Heavens be clear, it foreshews a sharp and
cold Winter.

5. Sirius with his Cosmycall rising makes the Seas rough, and stupifie the
Fishes; in this I have partly followed Pliny.

Observations of the weather, by Ptolomy, collected from the ascentions of the
fixed Stars with the Sun.
6. ORions Girdle setting Cosmically, causes a turbulent Air, and if
Sourtherly winds, then rain will immediately follow after.

7. The Dolphine setting Acronycally, causes both Winds and Snow.

8. The Rams head rising Cosmically Presigeth hail or cold rain.

9. The Hyades rising Cosmically prenoteth wet and showry weather; and setting
Cosmically, frost, snow or cold rain.

10. The Eagle setting Cosmically, produces violent hot weather.

11. Arcturus rising Cosmically does predict some showers to follow quickly
after, within a few days; from hence the Swallows take their leaves, and
repairs to their Winter Quarters.

The observations of Maginus, selected from the Ascentions of the Sun and fixed
Stars.
12. THe Asses and Praesepe rising Cosmically often presageth a sudden
alteration of the Air, with thunder, lightning and rain.

13. The Eagle, the tail of, or the head of Medusa rising Cosmically produces
Snow.

14. Libra rising Cosmically, causes rain, with some wind.

15. The Eye of or Orion rising Cosmically does cause rain, disturbeth the Air,
and sometimes produces thunder and lightning; the Acronical setting of these
Stars causes the same effects, with sudden showers.

16. Andromeda, the Whale, the head and tail of, the belly of, and Fomahand in,
rising Cosmically, do all presage moist weather, and a turbulent Air.

17. The Sun entering the cloudy Stars of, Orion, or, causes lowering weather;
and likewise the Hydras heart, and head of.

18. The Cosmical ascension of the shoulder of Pegasus; and the tail of
produces snow, cold, or cloudy weather.

19. The Acronical setting of the Vulture with the Harp, predict a moist, cold,
and cloudy time.

20. Virgiliae, or the Pleiades rising Cosmically foresheweth wet and cloudy
weather, and sudden storms to ensue.

21. The Star Regulus rising Cosmically is a sign of showers, with thunder and
lightning.

22. Sirius rising Cosmically prenoteth hot weather, with thunder and
lightning; the Cosmical setting foresheweth warm weather, but inclining to wet.

23. The Sun rising with any Star of Jupiters nature, and not commixed with or,
argues warm, clear and temperate weather; with those of nature, cold and cloudy
weather, and sometimes snow; with those of moist, and inclining to rainy
weather; ascending the Horizon with those of, it argues tempests, with thunder
and lightning; with Stars of his own nature, or of winds; with those of the
great floods and tumultuous billows at Sea; and if the Sun does rise with fixed
Stars of mixed natures, as and, it argues in Summer time a hot and suffocating
day; these last signs are general, according to Maginus.

Observations of the weather by the influence of the fixed and wandering Stars,
united and collected by Na. Durret.
24. SAturn rising with the head of Medusa, prognosticateth for some days cold
and moist weather, according to the season or time of year.

25., with the Stars of the Whale, the tail of, the horn of, and the belly of,
causes a cold, cloudy and troubled Air, sometimes with rain or snow.

26., with the Pleiades, a dark and troubled Air, inclining to rain or snow.

27., with the Stars of Orion produces showers, and sometimes cold storms.

28., with the Virgins ear of Corn, causes sudden alterations of the Air,
with often showers.

29., with Arcturus produces winds and cold showers.

30., with the Dolphin, the Crown or the tail of, produces moist and cloudy
weather, and often snow and cold showers.

31., with the Hyades, the Asses, and the Manger, causes clouds and rain, with
thunder and lightning sometimes.

32., with Regulus causes cloudy and unconstant weather, in Sommer-time
thunder, in Winter temperate.

33., with the great Dog causes rainy and windy weather, with tempests of
thunder and lightning.

34. ascending the Horizon with Regulus in Winter, causes fair weather, and
lessens the cold; but in Summer it produces heat, and prone to thunder.

35. rising with the tail of makes the Air in hot weather temperate, in winter
snow, and so with the heart of causing the same effects.

36. with Arcturus ascending, does produce thunder, lightning, rain, and
furious tempests.

37. rising with the Eagle causes snow in Winter, and cold weather; and in
Summer rain.

38. What has been said of the these Planets will effect; but with much more
mildness, and with more violence and fury; and thus with the Pleiades causes
rain; and with the Eagle in Winter, snow, or cold rain; and so likewise
ascending the Horizon with these fired Stars, causes very great alteration of
the Air; as rising with Orion, the Hyades; Regulus; the great and little Dog;
the Herp Spica,, etc. All these in their ascentions with do produce hail, snow,
rain, and causes the Air to be troubled, and makes many alterations, and
often times produces thunder and lightning, and violent tempests; the with the
fixed Stars does often cause mutations of the Air; but those are soon over, her
motion being so very swift: And here note that in all signs of stormy weather,
the predictions given are most prevalent, and do last the longer if they happen
at the time of any Eclipse, or the of the two luminaries.

Prognostications of the winds, collected from the observations of Pliny and
Maginus.
THe word Wind is derived from the instability of it, and signifies to turn; as
for their natures and temperatures in general, they are hot and dry exhalations
got together in multitudes, yet do retain part of the qualities from whence
they are extracted, as from earth cold and dry, from water cold and moist
vapors; some of these are called Anniversary winds, as blowing at some certain
time or season of the year; others are called Provincial winds; so termed as
from particular Provincies, no wind being general in all places, by Sea and
Land; and some caused by great and high mountains in these Countries; others
derived from Lakes, Rivers, Seas, etc. and denominated often from thence; as
the Levant, or Subsolanus, called also the East Wind; how they have been
anciently divided and nominated; See Pliny, lib. 2. cap. 47. of his natural
History.

There may be as many winds as there be supposed divisions in the Horizon,
which the Seamen (to avoid confusion) do divide into 32. points, represented
by the Compass, distinguishing those points and parts of the Horizontal circle,
by several and peculiar names; and so also the winds answering to those points,
whereof in this I will use but eight, being sufficient for prognostication, and
the chiefest that are observed: And first, the four principal or cardinal
points are these, North, South, East, West, dividing the Horizon into four
quadrants or 90. degrees asunder; and those equally divided by four points
more; all the eight being 45. degrees from one another, and are these North
east, and North-west, South-east, and South-west: As for the temperatures of
these particular winds, they are so uncertain in every Country, that I will
write nothing of them more, but refer you to the second part of this Book; for
in these Countries the North Wind is cold and dry; the South-winds warm and
moist, making our bodies generally dull, and causes moist weather, and pains
in the head; whereas in the Southern parts of America, and the East Indies, the
effects of these winds are quite contrary, participating of that nature from
whence those exhalations were extracted: But the signs presaged by the Stars,
and derived from the observations of learned men, are these following.

1. Orions girdle rising Acronycally presageth South-west winds, and ofttimes
great tempests both by Sea and Land.

2. Aselli and Praesepe, as Pliny says, lib. 18. cap. 35. that if in a fair
and clear night the Manger be not visible, expect some storms or winterly
weather.

3. If the Northern Ass be observed with any mist, the Southern winds will
rage; and if the Southern Ass be hidden from your sight, then look for storms
and tempests from the North or East.

4. The Dolphin setting Acronycally, produces cold winds.

5. Vindemiatrix rising Acronically causes cold Northerly winds.

6. The Cosmical Rising of the Pleiades is a sign of Westerly winds; the
Acronycal setting brings Southerly winds.

7. Sirius setting Acronycally, causes South west winds, and sometimes
tempests.

8. The Caniculare days bring the Easterly winds; and the Cosmical setting
Southerly, weather and tempests; the Heliacal rising or apparition of Sirius
did begin the Grecian year.

9. The Cosmical setting of the Eagle produces Eastern winds.

10. Regulus setting Acronycally does cause Westerly winds, lasting oftentimes
for 9. days, but seldom very violent.

11. Vindemiatrix rising Cosmically, produces North-west winds, and white
frosts; if the first day of September be fair, it betokens a dry Autumn.

12. The Cosmical rising of the Northern Crown produces cold winds.

13. Virgiliae setting Cosmically, brings Northern-winds; if at this time the
Sky be dark or cloudy, it foreshews a wet Winter; and very cold if dry and
clear.

14. Arcturus setting Acronycally produces Southerly winds; and much rain to
follow, if it rains at his Heliacal setting or occultation.

Saturn,,,, and, or any one of these rising or setting with the Triangle, with,
with the belly of the Southern Fish, with the right shoulder of Auriga, with
the foremost head of, with Praesepe and the two Asses, with Orions Girdle or;
the Crown Arcturus, with Hereules, or with the Balance, all these produces
winds, and many times violent tempests, especially the aforesaid Planets being
stationary or retrograde.

16. Mercurius does produce winds, if he rises or sets with the thigh of
Pegasus, with Auriga, with the Triangle; with the Rams head sharp and cold
winds; with the Pleiades wind and rain; with, with Orion tempests, and often
thunder and lightning; and so likewise with Praesepe, either Dog or Regulus;
the Hydras heart, Arcturus and Spica,, winds and cloudy weather; and likewise
rising or setting with the Vulture, the Balance, the Eagle, or the Dolphin,
ascending or descending the Horizon with causes often winds and cloudy
weather, with the cloudy Stars of lowering weather; but with Acarner clear days,
and warm winds; and usually so with most Stars of the nature of; and so much
for this.

General Aphorisms in Prognosticating storms and tempests, selected out of
Cardanus, Maginus and Durret.
THe twelve Signs of the Zodiac do contain the nature of the four Elements;
and these twelve Signs (by transmutation of their places) are divided into
four Trigones, each of them containing the temperature and qualities of one
Element, as was declared already in the Worlds Epitomy; and being they are
conceived to have their several effects in producing of particular winds, I
will once again insert them, v.z. and produces Northwest winds, and produces
Northeast winds, and causes Southwest winds, and raises Southeast winds: and
thus are the twelve Signs appropriated to the four points of the horizon,
equally between the four cardinal winds; yet you must consider the nature of
the fixed and wandering Stars ascending with them, in every particular Horizon.

The presaging of the winds depends upon many causes, and are as various as
they be inconstant; and besides all this, you must know the winds are
appropriated unto each proper Planet, as the East to, the North to, the West
to, the South to, and also to the East, and to the West: as for, he is
indifferent to the other six according to the conjunction of his rays with
them. For if he applies himself to, he produces great winds, cloudy or rainy
weather; if to, warm gales with some rain; to or hot and corrupt winds; and
with or moist winds. If changes his latitude, it argues winds; if stationary or
retrograde, or going from one sign and entering the other, betokens great
winds: also does alter the weather for many days together, in his removing from
any one sign into another, especially being retrograde, and having latitude
toward the pole elevated, and the Apogaeon or Perigaeon of the Planets is to
be considered.

There is never any great mutation of the Air without the or aspect either of,
or, by reason their motions are so slow; great of Planets that are of contrary
naures, do cause contrary winds, much rain, hail or snow, according to the
season of the year; hail is multiplied by the of hot Planets in fiery Signs;
the wandering Stars in their swift motions do beget drought, and likewise if
they be direct and Oriental; but if slow, retrograde or occidental, they do
produce rain, excepting; and stationary they do generally cause winds; and
instability of the Air, and likewise many or Aspects of the Planets concurring
at one time, do pronounce great mutability of the weather, and do usually very
much distemper the Element; in this Cardanus is oppugnant to Leupold.

Here we are arrived, having past many ambiguous Meanders, and obscure
Laborinths of humane Hypothesis, concerning the nature and effects of the fixed
and wandering Stars, through which I cannot guide you in a direct line with a
thread, but am forced to follow the observations of others, and the rules by
them prescribed, and delivered to Astronomers by succession, from one ensuing
Age unto another; yet with several opinions, according to the diversity of men,
and the Countries they lived in, as Egypt, Italy, Germany, and the like: These
several temperatures of Climates, have caused errors in our later observations
whereas their rules were true perhaps in those Regions where they did inhabit.
I have therefore delivered some things twice, to show how several men's opinions
do concur; others again I have given you almost oppugnant, yet may be in some
things reconciled; which to do, I refer to your candid Judgment, to choose,
correct, or reject, as you please.

I have shown you rules and prognostications of the weather, both for days,
years, and the several seasons thereof, as by the fixed Stars and Planets, with
the effects of their influences commixt, (according to humane conjectures.) And
now I will place before your eyes, predictions of the weather by mutual Aspects
of the Planets, only with themselves; which way is generally held and approved
for to be the best and most assured tract to follow, as in things that depends
upon so many and uncertain causes; yet it is convenient to ponder in your
judgment the former rules prescribed, and those well weighed and considered, I
will leave it to your application, and so proceed to the observations of
Maginus, with some diligent collections of my own annexed thereunto.

But first there ought to be considered whether either Planet were retrograde
at the time of conjuction, or in any other Aspect; of which these are the
chiefest, and held of greatest power in altering the Airs temperature, viz.
has the most force, and the effects of longest continuance; the next is, and
then the the and, much weaker, and seldom observed in prognostication of the
weather, except in and, or when the others are stationary, or else,,, any one
of these parting with to join with or; portends a turbulent air, and stormy
weather near at hand; also in, or ill aspected, will effect the same or worse.

Prognostications of the weather by the mutual Conjunctions and Aspects of the
Planets, according to Maginus, Argoll, etc.
Saturn conjoined or aspected with Jupiter.
SAturn and in,,,, or, are according to the nature of the Signs; as in fiery
Signs they generally cause drought; in moist Signs rain, hail, with winds, and
great mutations of the Air, both before and after, if other causes do not
interpose.

Particularly causing in the Spring a troubled or moist Air; in Summer, hail
and thunder; in Autumn winds, or rain; in Winter frost, or snow; a turbulent
Air, and durable storms.

Saturn conjoined or aspected with Mars.
SAturn and, in,, or, do produce these effects for some days, both before and
after, especially if be in his slow motion, and properly hail in his, or, rain,
with lightning and tempests; in moist Signs, cloudy and dark weather corrupts
the Air, and is generally hurtful, but more or less as aspected with the fixed
Stars.

Particularly in the Spring rain or thunder; in Summer time hail or thunder; in
Autumn wind or rain; and in Winter remiss cold, yet sometimes snow.

Saturn conjoined or aspected with the Sun.
SAturn and, in,, or, do cause generally rain, hail, and cold weather, both
before and after, especially in watery Signs, or in, and, and is called Apertio
portarum, or opening the Cataracts of Heaven.

Particularly their effects in the Spring are cold showers; in Summer producing
much thunder and storms of hail; in Autumn rain and cold; in Winter snow, or
moist, dark, and cloudy weather, and oftentimes frost.

Saturn conjoined or aspected with Venus.
SAturn and, in,, or, begets cold showers, especially in watery Signs, with
sometimes hail, but not much, yet unconstant weather generally.

Particularly producing in the Spring cold rains; in the Summer season sudden
showers; in Autumn cold storms; and in Winter it portends snow, sleet, or rain.

Saturn conjoined or aspected with Mercury.
SAturn and, in,, or, do generally produce cold winds; in moist Signs rainy and
cloudy weather; in dry Signs drought; in aerie Signs great winds; in earthly
Signs cold and drought, hurtful to all vegetables.

Particularly in the Spring season these aspects do cause winds, with some
rain; in Summer less wet, but some wind; in Autumn it begets clouds; and in
Winter snow, and often violent storms.

Saturn conjoined or aspected with the Moon.
SAturn and, in,, or, in moist Signs, do cause cold and cloudy weather; in
aerie Signs, and in, or in, it increases the cold, and often causes hail,
especially at the full, and at the new Moon drought; in dry times she causes
frosts, or dark and obscure clouds; yet sometimes pleasant, quiet, and gentle
showers, but with some cold; and withal she does much at these times increase
the Tides.

Particularly in the Spring these conjunctions or aspects, do cause a troubled
and moist Air; and likewise in the Summer with remiss heat, and sometimes
hail; in Autumn cloudy weather, with some frosts; in Winter cloudy, and
venemently cold weather, especially if either of them be aspected with.

Jupiter in conjunction or aspected with Mars.
JVpiter and, in,, or, do properly foreshew thunder, lightning, flashes of
fire, and rain; in moist Signs, thunder, corruscations, and rain; in fiery
Signs scorching heat, and if rising with any of the tempestuous Stars, it may
cause hail in Winter, and if otherwise, storms and snow.

Particularly in the Spring and Autumn whirlewinds; in Summer thunder,
tempests, and combust heat; in Winter remiss, cold, and a temperate Air.

Jupiter in conjunction or aspected with the Sun.
JVpiter and, in,, or, do generally produce wholesome winds or gales, fair,
clear, warm and temperate weather, especially in aerie Signs; in watery or
moist Signs it begets fertile showers; in fiery Signs it increases heat,
and assures us constant fair weather, but in earthly Signs less.

Particularly in the Spring and in Autumn winds; in the Summer season, thunder
and lightning; and in Winter remiss cold, and a temperate Air.

Jupiter in conjunction, or aspected with Venus.
JVpiter and, in,, or, do beget a wonderful pleasing, tranquile, calm, and
temperate Air, with grateful fair weather; in watery Signs gentle and wholesome
showers; and in other Signs generally pleasing gales, and clear weather; much
fertility, plenty of fruits; wholesome weather in any quarter of the year
according to the season.

Jupiter in conjunction or aspected with Mercury.
JVpiter and, in,, or, do generally generate winds, and often great tempests
without rain; in fiery Signs, drought and warm winds; in airy Signs fair
weather, and pleasant gales; winds are usually his effects in every quarter or
season of the year.

Jupiter in conjunction or aspected with the Moon.
JVpiter and, in,, or, does generally groduce serene weather, propitious and
favorable winds; in and, white clouds spreads over the Skies, but in all
quarters of the year it affords usually fair and temperate weather, and very
calm.

Mars in conjunction or aspected with the Sun.
MArs and, in,, or, do usually cause thunder, lightning, rain, hail, with
vehemence and hurt, especially in Summer; in fiery Signs, it begets heat and
drought; in airy Signs a dark Sky, and spissious clouds, and many diseases it
produces, especially in the Spring.

Particularly in the Spring and Summer they cause whirlewinds and drought,
especially if the Signs did participate of both their natures, the effects will
be diseases, and cause cloudy weather; in Summer time vehement heat, with
thunder, and lightning and in the winter it lessens the cold.

Mars in conjunction or aspected with Venus.
MArs and, in,, or, in watery Signs causes much rain, opening the floud-gates
of Heaven; in other Signs less rain generally.

Particularly in the Spring and Autumn they generate rain; in Summer often
showers; and makes the winter season not very cold, but alters the present
state of the weather.

Mars in conjunction or aspected with Mercury.
MArs and, in,, or, in fiery Signs do declare heat, and excessive drought; in
watery Signs rain, and often showers: in airy Signs warm winds, and those
usually violent.

Particularly do generate hail and cloudy winds; in Autumn, in the Spring, and
Winter, snow; in the Summer tempests of thunder, lightning, and hail, and often
violent storms.

Mars in conjunction or aspected with the Moon.
MArs and, in,, or, in watery Signs prognosticates rain; in fiery Signs
drought; and scatters over the heavens with red and yellowish clouds, causing
often times rain; and as in Signs that are aireal, it makes the weather warm.

Particularly they cause in the Spring and Autumn showers; in Summer thunder,
lightning, and hail; in Winter remiss heat, and oftentimes extends the
celestial bow, a premonitor of following rain, but usually not much.

The Sun and Venus in conjunction.
SOl and, in, do generally prognosticate moist weather, especially in watery
Signs, and particularly in the Spring and Autumn rain; in Summer thunder and
showers; and in the Winter quarter moist and foggy weather.

The Sun and Mercury in conjunction.
SOl and, in, do commonly beget winds in airy Signs; with moisture, in watery
Signs rain; in fiery Signs drought, warm winds, with corruption; these two
Planets do always accompany the Sun, neither of them exceeding 60. degrees in
their greatest distances, and this not 30.

The Sun and Moon in conjunction or aspected.
SOl and, in,, or, in moist Signs produce rain, reddish clouds, and great drops
of water; and in fiery Signs fair weather, and alters the Air according to
the season of the year, and the present temperature of the time; at the new and
full she causes the greatest flux of the Sea, and all waterish humors, and
much the more if aspected with the Hyades or Pleiades at the same time, with
other circumstances to be considered, as the other Planets, and what has been
said before.

Venus and Mercury in conjunction.
VEnus and, in, do commonly beget in moist Signs showers, and generally at all
times of the year moist winds, and if this conjunction shall happen when the
two luminaries are in,, or, or within an hour it will cause an inundation, or
very much rain, if not hindered with other intervening causes.

Venus in conjunction or aspected with the Moon.
VEnus and, in,, or, presage generally mild and gentle showers, or moist
weather, with some cold, according to the season; and much increases the
flowing of the Seas, causing violent Tides, especially with Hyades or Stars of
their own natures.

Particularly in the Spring moist and cloudy time; in Summer remiss heat; in
Autumn they produce dark clouds; and in the Winter season a cold and troubled
Air, if not snow, sleet, or rain.

Mercury in conjunction or aspected with the Moon.
Mercury and, in,, or, do signify winds, clouds, rain, with various and
unconstant weather, and generally in all seasons of the year, if it happens in
watery Signs, rain, or moist weather is presaged; in airy Signs wind; in fiery
Signs drought; in earthly Signs cold; they cause also, many times, pale
uncontinued clouds, resembling the color of smoke; but the effects of these
are not durarable, or of long continuance, without the assistance of the higher
Planets.

The fixed and wandering Stars are observed diligently by some in administering
Physic, Phlebotomy, etc. which I will omit in prescribing any Rules, (being
out of my element) but leave it to the learned Practitioners. Others do
vigilantly regard the Planets in Agriculture, and above all the Moon,
predominating most over vegetables; but this is also out of my rode, excepting
my Predictions of the Weather, and seasons of the year; as for other things
Experience is the best instructor; yet those that will, may satisfy themselves
with Virgils Georgicks, with Pliny, lib. 17. and 18. and diverse others of that
kind; but being this you have, and those not always at hand; peruse these few
collections, if you please, they being held general.

Observations in Agriculture.
TO plant or sow, the Moon in these Signs, is held the best, viz. in,,,,,, and,
and if the be aspected with it is the better, as causing the more moisture.

Plant or graft trees the increasing in, and.

Sow all seeds after the new; but round seeds near the opposition is generally
held the best, but all moist seeds in wet grounds the decreasing.

Gather fruits the decreasing before the last quarter.

The Eclipses of the two Luminaries are generally observed prejudicial to this
kind of husbandry, and the bloming of Corn.

Any Planet that is retrograde, and in with the is accounted hurtful to
planting, graffing, or sowing.

The wind in the North or in the East, is held destructive or hurtful to
planting, graffing, or felling of timber.

Cut hair, and shear sheep the increasing.

Presages of the weather by Experience, collected from the inflammation of
Comets, fiery impressions, influences: and apparitions of the Stars reflecting
on sublunary Meteors.
HItherto I have discovered (according to my ability) the effects of the fixed
and wandering Stars, selected from their aspects, by the registers of
Experience, conceived by them the efficient cause (under God) of Wind, Rain,
Hail, Snow, etc. But all men not being Astronomers, and my intentions general,
to whom I endeavor the dedication of my discourse; therefore I will
demonstrate the weathers transactions, by signs derived more directly from the
immediate dictates of Nature, beginning with Comets, being generally supposed
to be sublunary, and so descend unto those more inferior, according to my
prescribed order, intending to treat of falling Stars, Rainbows, and all fiery
apparitions in the Air, and then our terrestrial fires; for although they are
compounded of the 4. Elements, yet I will rank them amongst these, because the
flames of all combustible matters, do naturally of their own accords ascend
toward the Element of fire, the seat of lenity; whereas all heavy and
ponderous things do tend downwards, pressing toward the seat of gravity and
center of the Earth.

The effects of Comets.
1. ALl fiery impressions and Comets do presage violent tempests of long
continuance, and also they do denote much heat and inflammation of the Air,
Pliny, lib. 2. cap. 25.

2. Frequent and many Comets do foreshew sterility of the Earth, famine,
plague, burning fevers, and many other pestiferous diseases; by reason they do
consume the humidity of vapors, and exhalations, and so from thence they
engender choler, inclining men prone to discentions and civil wars, it
threatens Princes and great men with death, and all such as are of tender or
fiery constitutions; to this consents Cardanus, lib. 1 cap. 1. but the effects
of these are the more violent, and of longer continuance, by how much the
greater and permanent they are; and the like judge of all unusual fiery Meteors.

3. The shooting or glancing of seeming Stars through the Air do presage rain,
snow, or tempestious weather quickly after to ensue; and observe what point of
the Heavens these Metoors point at, from that quarter will the wind proceed; if
there be many of them falling often, and sevaral ways, it is a sign the weather
will be variable; but if they be numerous, and all tending one way, then expect
great winds, much snow or rain, and probably to continue long, for it argues
the Air to be very moist and cold, oppugnant to the Meteor.

4. When you shall behold in the sable night, the Hemisphere to seem more
gloriously adorned with glittering Stars, then usually it is in fair and serene
weather; or those Stars to twinckle, like spangles upon a sable vestment,
expect then suddenly to follow rain, snow, or misty weather; as you may judge
according to the present temperature of the Air, and season of the year
considered, the cause of either is thin and waterish vapors, transparent and
interposed between the Stars and our sight; and these Meteors moving, or
carried with the circular motion of the Air, upon which the Stars reflecting do
cause the apparition of many, formed in the clouds by their rays, as by
multiplying glasses may be demonstrated, or in shallow crystal streams of
rivers, wherein you may behold the Stars (by reflection of the water) to
twincle, and many Moons to appear at once.

5. Circles about the Stars (especially the Planets) that are pail and waterish
do presage rain or snow; but if these circles be of a reddish color, expect
some winds.

6. If the Stars in the night do appear dim, like a sullied or unpolished
diamond, or greater then they use to be, or seem to hang as if they were ready
for to fall, it argues that the lower Region of the Air is full of thick and
waterish exhalations, which their rays cannot directly penetrate, but by
reflection do appear thus unto us; yet these in Summer time, or in hot
Countries, do often prove but mists, and those chased away by the Suns
apapproaching the Hemisphere; but in Winter (especially) or in moist weather
they do commouly turn to rine-frosts, snow, rain, or very foggy weather.

7. When the Stars do appear bright, and on a sudden the Hemisphere shall be
veiled with spissious clouds, expect then some present change of weather, for
it shows the Sky to be full of vapors, and those by the powerful influence and
concurrence of the Stars, are drawn together and digested into snow or rain, so
that the Air cannot support them, but they must suddenly fall.

8. If the Stars do seem very low, it argues that the lower Region of the Air
is full of waterish Meteors, or transparent exhalations; for if the Stars do
seem pail and bright, it denuntiates rain; and if red, windy weather.

9. Red streaks in the Air, and all fiery impressions like flames, do presage
winds, and from that quarter whence they did arise; if they extend far, and
move down wards, expect a tempest; for the color shows the nature of the
Meteor to be not and dry, forces to retreat by the frigide moistness of the
Air.

By Thunder and Lightning.
10. IF there be more thunder then lightning, it argues a stresse of wind from
that part it thundered, if not rain.

11. When it does lighten, and no clap of thunder follow, it is a sign in
Summer time of much heat, and sometimes rain.

12. When it lightens only from the North-west, look for rain the next day.

13. Lightning from the North presages winds, and often times great tempests.

14. If from the South or the West it lightens, expect both wind and rain from
those parts.

15. Morning-thunder produces winds, but midday or in the afternoon generally
rain.

16. If the lightning appears very pale, it argues the Air to be full of
waterish Meteors; and if red or fiery, inclining to winds and tempests.

17. When the flashes of lightning do continue long before they vanish, the
tempest is like to be great, and it argues the Air to be very moist.

18. Thunder and lightning in Winter, in hot Countries is usual, and has the
same effects; but in these Northern Climates it is held ominous, portending
factions, tumults, and bloody wars, and a thing seldom seen, according to the
old Adigy, Winters thunder, is the Summers wonder.

19. Generally if it thunders from several quarters of the Heavens at once,
expect then moist violent storms immediately to follow.

The effects which these Meteors do produce, is evident; for these exhalations
being fiered and opposed by the cold of the middle Region, do violently break
forth of the clouds (in which they were involved) and dissipate them, causing
tumultuous riots amongst the windy exhalations, opening a passage for the
cataracts of water to issue down.

By the Sun.
THe two great Luminaries (in prognosticating the weather) Virgil and Pliny
does prefer before those observations of the Stars, which are but apparitions
in the clouds, and lower Region of the Air, as the others be; whose rays
falling upon these elevated vapors and exhalations do declare by their colors
what regiments they are of; from these apparitions of their colors, we do
judge the nature of the Meteor, and from thence conclude the prognostication of
the ensuing weather.

20. The Sun rising clear, and not fiery red, prenotes a fair day; but if pale
and warm, it argues snow, hail or rain; if purple color, wind and rain.

21. If the Sun at his rising appears hollow, it argues rain.

22. If before the Sun rising the clouds be red, intermingled with some that
are black, expect both wind and rain.

23. If the rays of the Sun be red, both at his rising and setting, there will
follow much rain or wind.

24. When the evening in the West appears red, and the morning following free
from any clouds at his rising, it foreshews fair weather.

25. If the clouds at his rising do disperse themselves some Southward, and
others Northward, expect that day both wind and rain.

26. At his rising or setting, if his beams be short, it is a sign of a shewre.

27. At his setting if it rains, or if his beams look dark or blew, or many
clouds about him like bulwarks, heaped one upon another, great florms and
tempests will ensue the next day.

28. If his rays seem not bright and clear at his rising, and clouds gather
toward him like globes or wool-packs, it argues stormy and winterly weather;
but if those clouds do retreat toward the West, it may prove a fair day.

29. Red clouds, or of purple color, appearing in the North or in the West, at
the Sun rising, denotes either wind or rain.

30 If the Sun 1 iseth pale or waterish, and quickly after proves obscured with
thick clouds, it will rain before his setting.

31. When you shall see at the Sun rising a circle of clouds invironing him, it
is a sign of rain; if he be enclosed with a double circle, tempests; and the
nearer these circles do circumvent him, the storm will be the greater; and if
these circles be red or mixed, expect then violent storms both of wind and rain;
if this circle breaks, observe from what part, for out of that quarter of the
Heavens, which the fraction represents, the storm will rise.

32. The Sun rising, if he appears spotted, or casts forth rays of several
colors, or part of his body eclipsed with spissious clouds, it argues rain and
tempestuous weather.

33. If the body of the Sun (at his setting) be mixed with sky-colour or
purple, expect then immoderate tempests, and storms of wind and rain.

34. If the Sun at his rising seem to be as it were affronted with clouds, in
tumults moving toward him, observe from what quarter of the Heavens they come,
from thence will the storm arise; and if they come from the South, expect then
both wind and rain, especially if the clouds were fiery red or, mixed.

35. If the Sun does cast his beams a far of amongst the clouds at his rising,
and some of them seem refracted, or the middle void, it presages rain.

36. If he spread his beams before he rises above the Horizon, expect both wind
and water.

37. If at his setting there appear a white circle about him, there will be
some troublesome weather the ensuing night; but withal, if there be a thick
mist invirons him, the tempest may be outrageous, both wind and rain.

38. If there be red clouds about the Sun at his rising, which do become black
or dark soon after he is up, it presages rain.

39. If the Sun all day, or before his setting an hour or two, appears with a
purple color, and coming to the Horizon, descending seems greater then at
other times, it foreshews both wind and rain.

A Paraphrase.
HEre with the setting Sun I will end his presages, and now behold the Luminary
of the night; for what has been said of his rising, is or may be applied (for
the most part) as rules in presaging the weather, at the time of his descending
the Horizon of any place; but not so certain and effectual as his first
apparition in the morning, because there be more gross and undigest^d vapors
raised in the night, or fall for want of hea^ to concoct and dispose of them
according to their qualities; the reason of all these presages is grounded upon
the color of the vapor or exhalation; on which the Sun reflecting does cause
these fiery and diversity of apparitions, elevated above the superficies of the
Earth, but near us, interposed between the Sun and our sight, which by the
virtue of his rays, he converts according to their qualities and quantities
into several Mereors: for if they seem pale, they are watery; if red, windy; if
black and mixed, both: if his rays seem refracted, broken or crooked, it is by
reflection of one cloud upon another, which argues their number to be many; and
if unpenetrable, it shows them to be great and gross: And so much for the Sun.

By the Moon.
40. THe Egyptians (whom Virgil and Pliny follow) did observe the fourth day
of the Moon (after the Conjunction) to be the surest sign; for if she does
appear after Sunsetting pure and bright, it argues fair weather; and if red,
wind; if dim or cloudy, storms and wet weather: also if the tips of her horns
be blunt, it foreshews foul weather; and if very sharp pointed, it presages
winds, fair, or frosty weather.

41. If her Northern horn be only sharp-pointed, it presages wind from that
coast; but if her lower or Southern horn be only so, the wind will be
Southward: and if she has a red circle about her, it is a sign of wind and
rain. But Varra, who makes these observations also of the weather, says, That
if the Moon has a circle or garland about her, and the same clear and bright,
it promises fair weather until the Full.

42. If the Moon after the change appear not until her fourth day, and the wind
blowing West, expect then cold and winter-like weather; the reason that the
fourth day is observed in these, is this, her fourth time ascending the
Horizon, reckoned from the New Moon inclusive, is but three days complete, in
which time she does recover light, and has then entered another sign of a
different nature from that at her change. But some would have these rules
observed when her age is ^/8 part of her whole course, that is, three days and
sixteen hours very near; but this cannot be strictly observed, the Moon not
being then always visible above any one Horizon.

43. The Moon increasing, and rising with her upper or Northern horn blackish,
presageth much rainy weather after the Full; but if the tip of her lowermost
horn be so aspected, then it will rain before the Full; but if it appears
blackish between her horns, that is, in the middle of her body, according to
Varre, it will be wet weather about the time of her being Full.

44. When the Moon is at the Full, if her body seem very fair and bright, it is
a sign of good weather; but if red, it argues wind; if inclining to black,
rain; and if a mist about her, it is a sign of snow, rain or wind; and if two
or more of these circles, it is the worse, and presages storms; and where the
circle is brightest, or most transparent, from that part of the Heavens expect
the winds.

45. Lastly, the eight points or angles which the Moon makes with the Sun are
observed by many, and are these days, viz. 3, 7, 11, 15, 19, 23, 27. and the
day in which the two great Luminaries do happen in Conjunction.

46. Observe what weather it is when the Moon comes to be South any day, if the
weather changes not then, it is like to continue that day, whether it be sair
or foul. This would also be observed in the other Planets, at what time they do
come unto the Meridian of any place, so well as their rising and setting.

But to find the coming to the Meridian, multiply her age by 4, and divide the
product by 5, the quotient will be the time required.

Example, admit the Moons age were 5, which multiplied by 4, the product will
be 20, and that divided by 5, the quotient will be 4, the hour of her being
South that day, and so for any time.

By Rain-bows.
46. THere have been Rain-bows in the nighttime seen, made by the Moon, and as
for their effects (being seldom known) they shall be omitted only as signs
conceived prodigious; but those of the Sun made by his rays are usual; and are
these, a Rainbow appearing presently after rain, is held a sign of fair
weather, and that the storm is past; but if two or more be seen at once, it is
a presage of future rain; for it argues the clouds to be very waterish, when
the reflection of the one can form the impression and figure of another in
several clouds, as it were in mirrours; a Rainbow broken presages tempests.

Of the Ignis fatuus.
48. THese pallid fires appear but at some times of the year, and that in
certain places; and in those parts where they are most usual, they are not
commonly seen, but as forerunners of fultry heat in Summer, and wet in the
Winter; they are usually observed to appear in open weather; yet I have seen
one in a very cold feason, both for frost and snow, moving but a little before
me, and within a few days after the frost did break; they are Meteors seldom
seen, little observed in prognostication of the weather, and so I shall lead
you no further, until a better discovery of their natures be made, and their
effects better known, which are generally held unwholesome; and so let them
pasle as Ignes fatui.

By terrestial fires.
49. WHen our common fires do burn with a pale flame, they presage foul weather.

50 If the fire do make a huzzing noise, it is a sign of tempests near at hand.

51. If the flame of a candle, lamp, or any other fire does wave or wind it
self, where there is no sensible or visible cause, expect some windy weather.

52. When candles or lamps will not so readily kindle as at other times, it is
a sign of wet weather near at hand.

53. When the fire sparkleth very much, it is a sign of rain.

54. If the ashes on the herth do clodder together of themselves, it is a sign
of rain.

55. When candles or lamps do sparkle and rise up with little fumes, or their
wicks swell, with things on them like mushrums, are all signs of ensuing wet
weather.

56 When pots are newly taken off from the fire, if they sparkle (the soot upon
them being incensed) it presages rain.

57. When the fire scorcheth, and burns more vehemently then it uses to do,
it is a sign of frosty weather; but if the living coals do shine brighter then
commonly at other times, expect then rain.

58. If wood or any other fuel do crackle and break forth wind more then
ordinary, it is an evident sign of some tempestuous weather near at hand; the
much and sudden falling of soot presages rain.

A Paraphrase.
THe natural cause of these (as I suppose) is this, the Air in the lower Region
(being apt for either heat or cold) does alter according to the inclination of
the weather, whether it be disposed to heat, cold, rain, or wind; the Air thus
altering, when it becomes waterish, makes the flaming fire appear pale; candles
nor lamps apt to light; their cotten-wicks to swell with tumors upon them like
horse-shooes, or mushrums, the moist air being got into them, which by
opposition makes the fire to sparkle, or being cold, inclining to frost, it
causes it to scorch; the Air which does infuse it self into the pores of the
fuel, being moist, and rarefied by the fire, turns into wind, and so wanting
room breaks a passage forth, which makes the wood to crackle, the flame to
wave, and sparkles to fly; and this in brief is the cause of them, so far as I
conceive; our fuel being commixed of the four Elements, and so by opposition
or participation these effects are caused; and this makes the soot in chimneys
for to fall, being by nature dry, and loosned by the moistness of the Air.

By Air, Winds, Clouds, and Mists.
THe Air in which we breath being commixt and no pure Element, does generate
several Meteors (as was said already in the second part) and the presages
these; if the Air seem dusky, hotter then ordinary, and unapt to breath in,
expect then thunder and lightning.

60. When the ringing of Bells, or other sounds are heard more plain then at
other times, and if by intervals it shows the Air to be dilated and disturbed,
which presages either wind or rain, if not both.

61. A sharp and cold wind after rain foresheweth more to come, the exhalation
or vapor not being spent in the former shower.

62. Winds that do continue long in any one point, will cause the weather for
to be generally the same, whether it be fair or soul; but if it shifts often in
changing the place, it presages rain quickly after to ensue; but in times of
frost it is a sign that the weather will break.

63. Whirlwinds do predict approaching storms usually of rain or hail; these
you may foresee by raising the dust, or any such light materials; and and
oftentimes these whirlwinds are forerunners of great tempests; for it is a
windy exhalation driven obliquely upon the horizontal plain, and forced down by
the coldness or moisture of the present Air in the lower Region; this
repercursion of the Air causes chimneys to smoke more then usually they do at
other times, presaging rain or great winds.

64. Sometimes these whirlwinds are caused by the meeting of one another, and
so raising light things, as in contention, hurling them to and fro, at the
pleasure of the prevailing party; and such as these do usually presage
tempests; as you see when the clouds are moved several ways at once, and from
the same cause above, as it is below.

65. It is probable that there is also many exhalations which do suddenly break
out of the Earth, and do produce these whirlwinds, which are by nature held hot
and dry; the cause how these do predict storms and tempests, is conceived this;
against rain, or any wet weather, the pores of the Earth does naturally open,
and so gives a passage to them; they being hot and dry, do strive for to
ascend, and so much the more then, the exhalation being opposed by the
moistness and the coldness of the Air infused into the Earth, which changes as
the Element does.

66. These whirlwinds are precursors of tempests, when the Air enclosed in the
Earth, is apt for to convert it self into these windy exhalations, and there
increasing so as it cannot be contained, yet not so restrained as to cause an
Earthquake, but finds an easy passage through the pores of the Earth, whereby
to evaporate and free it self from restraint into the open Air.

67. These exhalations when they happen for to be frozen in with extreme cold
weather in winter, and venting themselves in waterish places, as in the bottom
of great ponds, meers or rivers, where by Antiperistafis, or opposition of the
cold waters, it does congeal the bottom, when the outward air cannot freeze
the top or superficies of the water, by reason of the motion, but in the deeps,
where it is still and quiet; these are called anchor or subterranean frosts;
they are not usual, neither will they endure long; but when they do happen, it
is most commonly extreme cold weather, and little or no snow; these are
generally held very hurtful unto plants; and destructive to the fishes; and by
freezing up the channels, make the rivers overflow.

68. When the Air is dilated or rarefied, it is a sign of much heat, or against
rain, which by your smelling you may know when shoars, nasty places, or things
corrupted are more offensive then at other times.

69. When the clouds be dark, deep, and very spissious, it is a sign of rain,
and sometimes tempestuous weather.

70. Many scattering clouds wandering in the Air, and moving swiftly, argues
wind or rain, and from the North or South it is the worse; but if the rack
rides both ways, it foreshews a tempest.

71. If the rack in the forenoon rides in the Air, from the East westward, it
argues rain at night; but if from the West, it does foreshew a cloudy morning,
if not rain; and at any time of day, when the Sun beams and wind meet, it may
cause the same effect by virtue of his rays.

72. When the clouds seem piled upon heaps like fleeces of wool, it presages
wet weather, and near at hand.

73. If the clouds fly low in Summer, it is a sign of rain; and in Winter it
prenotes cold weather to ensue quickly after.

74. When the clouds seem white and jagged (as if rent asunder) gathering
together in a body, their forces united, do foretell a storm; the nature of the
exhalation is apparently turbulent by the form and color.

75. Hollow and murmuring winds do presage stormy weather; for it shows the Air
is moist and dilated, so cannot find an easy passage, but is opposed or
hindered in the motion, by hills, trees, and hollow places, which it gets into
and makes a noise.

76. The Air being a subtle body, infuses it self into the pores of timber,
boards, etc. and against rain being converted into water, or a moisture, which
makes boards to swell, and is the cause that Wainscot, and Joyners work does
crack against wet weather; doors will not easily shut or open, etc.

77. Paper against wet weather will grow weak, damp, and swell, the reason is
the same with the last; but in writing paper it will sooner be perceived, and
more certainly predict the weather; because it is done over with a thin
substance of a gummy nature, which with the waterishnesse of the Air, dissolves
and grows moist, giving way for the Incke to soke into the paper, which the Gum
in dry weather will not permit.

78. When the clouds seem overcharged, and white withal like towers, expect
then hail or snow, according to the season of the year.

79. After a storm of hail, expect a frost to follow the next day after.

80. When Spiders webs, poplare, and thistledoune, and such light things do fly
in the Air up and down, as it were to make nature sport, or a type of Fortunes
favors; these are signs of the weathers changing, and speedy mutability; for
these things of lenity are easily moved by the first insurrection of any
exhalation, precursor of the weathers change, and oftentimes wind.

81. Mists descending from the tops of hills, and settling in the valleys, is a
sign of a fair day, especially in Summer time, and then an argument of heat;
for they were exhalations raised by the ferver of the Sun, and by the Air in
the evening, (which in hot weather is coldest) it is converted into mists and
dews, as a necessary provision of Nature to cool the Earth, and refresh her
fruits, whereby to enable them that they may endure the next days heat. White
mists are the same; but more waterish, and inclining to rain; and if they do
ascend, it presages rain, and argues the middle Region of the Air not for to be
very cold, the lowest water^sh, and the vapor warm.

82. If in calm and serene weather you do observe the rack to ride a pace,
expect winds from that quarter; for it is evident that the exhalation above in
the clouds converts into a wind or rain, and will descend; but if clouds do
ascend any day, it presages the storm is past.

But neither this, nor some of the other observations are conceived general;
diversity of climates producing several and various effects, and besides, the
season of the year ought to be considered, the weather having peculiar
properties in several Countries and places; as the nights in Africa are dewy in
Winter; clouds in Egypt so heavy, as if the Air were unable to support them;
and in such tumults, as if they threatened the world with a deluge; yet march
all away without any drop of rain. Locri and the lake Velinus in Italy have no
day but there is a Rainbow appears; in Syracusa and Rhodes, no day in all the
year so cloudy, but that the Sun is seen to those places; most hot Countries
(near the torrid Zone) have frequent flashes of lightning, and in their Winter
often without rain, with many other observations purposely here omitted.

By Water and Earth.
83. THe water of the Fens, and standing pools, growing warm without heat of
the Sun, more then usually, is a sign of much rain; the Element of water being
rarisied, as appears by the parts.

84. The rain falling in small drops, argues those clouds were high from whence
it fell, and a sign of much wet.

85. If the rain be whitish, and falling into water rises up in bubbles, it
shows the rain will continue, and that the water is then full of windy
exhalations; and if the shower does cease, the wind will succeed it.

86. The rain falling upon the Earth, or floods, if soon drunk up, are signs of
more.

87. Linen or woollen cloth dipped in the water, and exposed to the Air, if it
soon freezes, it is a sign of much or violent frost.

88. Drops of water after rain falling from the eves of houses, slowly one
after another, is a sign of frost; for the Air works easily upon small parcels,
foreshewing in those parts an inclination of the greater.

89. If the Sea at low water within the harbor be calm, and yet makes a
rumbling noise, it presages wind; and if so by fits, expect both cold weather
and rain.

90. If the Sea or Sea-bancks, in calm weather make much noise, or the billows
seem to heave and rise up, it presages a tempest near at hand.

91. If the Seas be very rough and boisterous, the wind not great, the waves
have been disturbed either with a tempest past, or else at one approaching; and
if the billows do make a noise as with a refracted Air, like the murmuring
sound of woods, the storm is near at hand.

92. When the tops of high hills are clear and free from clouds or mists, it is
a sign of fair weather.

93. If a murmuring sound be heard in valleys, or from hollow caves within the
Earth, or rivers make a rumbling noise more then usual, running with troubled
streams, any of these do presage a storm.

Presages of Earth quakes.
94 The extraordinary swelling and rising up of the Seas, when there is neither
wind nor flood to cause it, foreshews an Earth quake, observed by Posidonius.

95. When the waters in wells, fountains, or deep pits, are much troubled, and
have an evil savor, and a taste of sulphur, that were pleasant before, it
does argue an Earthquake.

96. A roaring noise under the earth, resembling thunder, is the forerunner of
an Earthquake.

97. When the Air for a long time wants motion, and is still, that birds can
scarcely fly for want of wind, it foreshews an Earthquake.

98. Aristotle, with some others, do say that a black and narrow streak or
line, right under the Sun, stretched out to a great length, and remaining or
continuing long, does presage an Earthquake; but this does rather signify a
great tranquillity of the Air, and so a second cause, but not the immediate.

A Paraphrase.
THe reason of these and the former signs of tempests, by Water and Earth, are
both one; for in long continued calms, the material cause of winds, is detained
within the bowels of the Earth, and there being rarefied, searches the veins,
caverns, and hollow subterranean places to get a passage; but finding readily
none, and not able to contain it self, it forces a way, and according to its
quantity disturbs the Waters, and shakes the Land, or breaks forth into a
tempest, with horrid noises, according to the resistance made, or which is
aptest and most facile to be effected.

By sensitive Creatures; but first by Beasts and Reptiles.
99. BEasts eating greedily, and more then they use to do, prenotes foul
weather; and all small cattle, that seem to rejoice with playing and sporting
themselves, foreshews rain.

100. Oxen and all kind of Neat, if you do at any time observe them to hold up
their heads, and snuffle in the Air, or lick their hooves, or their bodies
against the hair, expect then rainy weather.

101. Asses or Mules rubbing often their ears, or braying much more then
usually they are accustomed, presages rain.

102. Hogs crying, and running unquietly up and down, with hay or litter in
their mouths, foreshews a storm to be near at hand.

103. Dogs tumbling and wallowing themselves much and often upon the earth, if
their guts rumble and stink very much, are signs of rain or wind for certain.

104. Cats coveting the fire more then ordinary, or licking their feet, and
trimming the hair of their heads, and mustachios, presages rainy weather.

105. Moles plying their works, in undermining the Earth, foreshews rain; but
if they do forsake their trenches, and creep above ground, in Summer time it is
a sign of hot weather; but when on a fuddain they do forsake the valleys and
low grounds, it foreshews a flood near at hand; but their coming into meddows
presages fair weather, and for certain no floods.

106. Spiders creep out of their holes and narrow receptacles against wind or
rain; Minerva having made them sensible of an approaching storm.

107. The Commonwealth of Emmets, when busied with their eggs, and in ordering
their State affairs at home, it presages a storm at hand, or some foul weather;
but when Nature seems to stupifie their little bodies, and disposes them to
rest, causing them to withdraw into their caverns, least their industry should
engage them by the inconveniency of the season, expect then some foul and
winterly weather.

108. The little sable beast (called a Flea) if much thirsting after blood, it
argues rain.

109. The lamentable croaking of Frogs more then ordinary, does denote rainy
weather.

110. Glowworms, Snayles, and all such creatures, do appear most against fair
weather; but if Worms comes out of the earth much in the day time, it is a
presage of wet weather; but in the Summer evenings it foreshews dewy nights,
and hot days to follow; and here ends the prognostications of the weather by
Beasts and reptiles.

By winged Creatures.
111. THe vigilant Cock, a bird of Mars, the good house wives clock, and the
Switzers alarm, if he crows in the day time very much, or at Sun setting, or
when he is at roost at unusual hours, as at 9, or 10, expect some change of
weather, and that suddenly, but from fair to foul, or the contrary; but when
the Hen crows, good men expect a storm within doors and without; if the Hens or
Chickings, in the morning come late from their roosts (as if they were
constrained by hunger) it presages much rainy weather.

112. The offspring or aliance of the Capitolian guard, when they do make a
gaggling in the Air more then usual, or seem to fight, being overgreedy at
their meat, expect then cold and winterly weather.

113. Birds that do haunt the Fens, if they often wash themselves, it presages
rain or wind, and so in most birds or fowls that do prune their feathers with
an oily substance, as a provision of Nature, in preparing themselves against a
storm.

114. Cormorants, Gulls, Ducks, Mallards, and all water-fowls, when they bathe
themselves much, prune their feathers, and flicker, or clap themselves with
their wings, it is a sign of rain or wind.

115. Cormorants and Gulls, flying from the Sea and standing lakes, presages a
storm.

116. Cranes soaring aloft, and quietly in the Air, foreshews fair weather; but
if they do make much noise, as consulting which way to go, it foreshews a storm
that is near at hand.

117. Herons in the evening flying up and down, as if doubtful where to rest,
presages some evil approaching weather.

118. Ravens and Crows, when they do make a hoarse, hollow and sorrowful noise,
as if they sobbed, it presages foul weather approaching.

119. Crows flocking together in great companies, or calling early in the
morning with a full and clear voice, or at any time of the day gaping against
the Sun, foreshews hot and dry weather; but if at the brinck of ponds they do
wet their heads, or stalk into the water, or cry much toward the evening, are
signs of rain; the Woodpeckers cry denotes wet.

120. Jack-daws, if they come late home from forraging, presages some cold or
ill weather near at hand, and likewise when they are seen much alone.

121. Buzards or Kites, when they do soar very high and much to lessening
themselves, making many plains to and again, foreshews hot weather, and that
the lower Region of the Air is inflamed, which for coolness makes them ascend.

122. Swallows flying low, and touching the water often with their wings,
presages rain.

123. Owls whooping after Sun set, and in the night, foreshews a fair day to
ensue; but if she names her self in French (Huette) expect then fickle and
unconstant weather, but most usually rain.

124. Peacooks crying loud and shrill for their lost Jo, does proclaim an
approaching storm.

125. Sparrows in the morning early chirping, and making more noise then
ordinary they use to do, foretells rain or wind: The Titmouse, cold, if crying
Pincher.

126. Doves coming later home to their houses then they are acustomed to do,
presages some evil weather near approaching.

127. Sea-mews, early in the morning making a gaggling more then ordinary,
foretokens stormy and blustering weather.

128. Halcyon, at the time of breeding, which is about 14. days before the
Winter Solstice, foreshews a quiet and tranquil time, as it is observed about
the coast of Sicily, from whence the Proverb is transported, the Halcyon days,
Pliny.

129. Bats, or flying Mice, coming out of their holes quickly after Sun set,
and sporting themselves in the open Air, premonstrates fair and calm weather.

130. Birds in general, that do frequent trees and bushes, if they do fly often
out, and make quick returns, expect some bad weather to follow soon after.

131. Bees in fair weather, not wandering far from their hives, presages the
approach of some stormy weather.

132. Wasps, Hornets, and Gnats, biting more eagerly then they use to do, is a
sign of rainy weather.

133. Flies in the Spring or Summer season, if they grow busier or blinder then
at other times, or that they are observed to shroud themselves in warm places,
expect then quickly for to follow, either Hail, told storms of Rain, or very
much wet weather; and if those little creatures are noted early in Autumn to
repair unto their Winter quarters, it presages frosty mornings, cold storms,
with the approach of hoary Winter.

134. Atoms, or little flies, swarming together and sporting themselves in the
Sun beams, is a good omen of fair weather: And so here I will end the
predictions by sensitive creatures upon the Land, and turn to the Seas to
behold the wonders of the deep.

By Fishes.
135. POrpaises, or Sea-Hogs, when observed to sport, and chase one another
about ships, expect then some stormy weather.

136. Dolphines in fair and calm weather persuing one another, as one of their
waterish pastimes, foreshews wind, and from that part whence they fetch their
frisks; but if they play thus when the Seas are rough and troubled, it is a
sign of fair and calm weather to ensue.

137. Cuttles with their many legs swimming on the top of the water, and
striving to be above the waves, do presage a storm, offended with the Meteor,
and the disturbed waters in the deep.

138. Sea Vrchins thrusting themselves into the mud, or striving to cover their
bodies with sand, foreshews a storm; for the windy exhalations disturb the
lowest waters first, in the bottom of the Sea, which makes the other fishes
rise and trust in their swimming; and the Vrchin unapt for that, and fearing to
be hurried away with the tumultuous waves, gets near the shore, and there
stays it self by creeping into the earth.

139. Cockles, and most shell fish, are observed against a tempest to have
gravil sticking hard unto their shells, as a providence of Nature to stay or
poise themselves, and to help weigh them down, if raised from the bottom by
the surges.

140. Fishes in general, both in salt and fresh waters, are observed to sport
most, and bite more eagerly against rain then at any other time, as agreeing
best with their phlegmatic constitutions; many other observations there be of
these creatures, as concerning winds, tides, floods, and seasons of the year,
well known unto Fishermen, but not to me.

By Vegetables.
141. Trefoile, or Clavergrasse, against stormy and tempestuous weather will
seem rough and the leaves of it stare and rise up, as if it were afraid of an
assault.

142. Tezils, or Fullers Thistle, being gathered and hanged up in the house,
where the Air may come freely to it, upon the alteration of cold and windy
weather will grow smoother, and against rain will close up his prickles.

143. Heliotropes and Marigolds, do not only presage stormy weather by closing
or contracting together their leaves, but turn toward the Sun's rays all the
day, and in the evening shut up shop.

144. Pine apples hanging up in the house where they freely may enjoy the Air,
will close themselves against wet and cold weather, and open against hot and
dry times.

145. The leaves of trees and plants in general, will shake and tremble against
a tempest more then ordinary.

146. All tender buds, blossoms, and delicate flowers, against the incursion of
a storm, do contract and withdraw themselves within their husks and leaves,
whereby each may preserve it self from the injury of the weather.

A Paraphrase.
IN these vegetables there be certain strings or nerves, which by the
alteration of the outward Air (distilled into them like a thin fume) do display
or open their leaves, or contract them like convulsion fits, according to that
thin vapors disposition infused into their veins, being grateful or oppugnant
to the natural temperature of the vegetable, etc. these vapors do make them
smell more fragrantly, as forerunners of dew or rain, especially all
odoriferous flowers to whom such dews are a comfort.

By Minerals.
147. Metals in general, against much wet or rainy weather, will seem to have
a dew hang upon them, and be much apter to sully or foul any thing that is
rubbed with the metal, as you may see in Pewter dishes against rain, as if
they did sweat, leaving a smutch upon the tablecloaths; with this Pliny
concludes as a sign of tempests approaching.

148. Stones against rain will have a dew hang upon them; but the sweating of
stones is from several causes, and sometimes are signs of much drought, and the
reason from hence is derived; the inflammation of the Air over-heating the
superficies of the Earth, attracts vapors from below, whereby to cool it,
according to the nature of all things that are dry, and one part still supplies
another, which makes our wells and fountains low, and tides high at or about
Michaelmas, the Summer past, the Sun having exhausted so many vapors and
exhalations from the treasury of the Earth; the sign of wet in Metals, as is
in stones, proceeds from the moistness of the outward Air, turned into water
by the coldness of the Earth, Metal or Stone, the Air being waterish, and apt
unto it, and this it does most usually presage.

149. Glasses of all foots will have a dew upon them in moist weather: Glass
windows will also show a frost, by turning the Air that touches them into
water, and then congealing of it; for the Air within the house being warmer
then that without, is by opposition, and the coldness of the glass between
them, quickly converted from Air into water, and so to Ice within-side, the
outward being predominant by an Antiperistasis.

150. Salt extracted out of the Earth, Water, or any Mineral, has these
properties to foreshew the weather; for if well kept, in fair weather it will
be dry, and apt to dissolve against wet into its proper Element; boards that it
has lain upon, and got into the pores of the wood, it will be dry in fair and
serene weather, but when the Air inclines to wet, it will dissolve; and that
you shall see by the board venting his brackish tears; and Salt-sellers will
have a dew hang upon them; and those made of metal look dim against rainy
weather.

But some here do question me for deserting my former intended tract and
method; as in placing Salt with Minerals, being imperfectly mixed, and composed
of fire and water, oppugnant to their natural qualities; as if I intended for
to delude men with words, or blind their fights with casting Salt into their
eyes, or dust raised with a whirl wind, against an approaching storm: No, this
was not my intention; but being this could not well stand with the first signs
of the weather, it made me lean or incline to the Chymick Philosophers, which
make this a Principle both in Vegetables and Minerals; and my conclusion
whereby to relish all the rest (being general in all) according to the Adage,
Sal sapit omnia.

Natural signs of the four Seasons.
A Stronomers do divide the year into four quarters or seasons, with certain
and prefixed times, the Sun entering four cardinal points, as was said already
in the Worlds Epitomy; others again do divide it into two parts, calling the
one Winter, and the other Summer; but Nature does seem to make four Seasons,
and those neither beginning nor terminating at any strict time, but according
to the temperature and disposition of the Air, least her fruitful womb should
produce abortives, or want time for maturity; so to avoid these
inconveniences, Nature, like a careful Mother, produces every plant, and all
her fruits in due and fit seasons; and least sensitive creatures should
miscarry, she delivers them her dictates by instinct, or some inward motion:
There are observed many signs in every Climate and particular Country, which in
England are these, and the diseases inherent and common in the 4. quarters.

Spring.
THis a comfortable and pleasant quarter, every thing beginning for to spring
and raise up their spirits from their roots, buried in the Earth, and fiezed
upon by the cold of Winter, as by the hand of Death: The first bird that brings
us tidings of the approaching Spring, is the Wagtail, or Water-Swallow, whom
some call the Barly-Bird, as observed a convenient time to sow that seed, being
a tender grain; next does appear the Swallow, but one will not make a Summer,
for when they come single, and obscure themselves again, expect some cold and
stormy weather; the Woodcock takes her leave, and departs the Land; next comes
the Nightingal, making the nights pleasant with her melodious harmony; and
lastly, the adulterous and ungrateful Cuckoo; the plants and vegetables do show
the Spring, by adorning the fields with pleasant and fragrant flowers; as
witness the oderiferous Violet, perfuming the Air with a grateful smell, and
diverse others.

Diseases incident to this quarter, are, Leprosies, Toothache, Fevers, Pushes,
Great and Small Pox, Falling Sickness, Ring-worms, King's Evil, Wens,
Squincies, and generally pains in the body and bones, proceeding from old
fractures, bruises, and inveterate maladies.

Summer.
THe days being long, and the Sun scorching hot; the Creatures of the Earth
having reared and brought up their young progeny to perfection; the fruits grow
now to maturity, ready to entertain them, and cherish their bodies, provided
for the use of Man; Ceres enjoying the fruits of her labors; the days all this
season declining, but affording many sweet and pleasant flowers in every
Country, as Clove-Gilliflowers, Roses, etc. Store of Acorns presages a hard
Winter to ensue.

The diseases most frequent in this quarter, are, pains about the Breast, Ribs,
and Spleen, Pushes, and diseases of the face, Leprosies, sore eyes, Plurisies,
pains of the stomach and belly; Pestilence, Fevers, Apostumes, Jaundise, and
diverse maladies and infirmities proceeding of Melancholy.

Autumn.
THe Wood-cock comes in with this season, and the Swallow departs, taking her
young retinue. Vindemiatrix now provides us Wine against cold Winter, whereby
to drown our cares and labors past, and refresh us to begin anew; the sap in
most vegetables returns into their roots under ground, or more rational to
humain capacities, the vegetable humor is contracted in their bodies with cold,
and heat extenuates or dilates that infused spirit, which attracts (by virtue
of the roots) a nutriment from the Earth, according to its natural faculty,
which supply failing in his proper season and time of year, the radical humor
and sap in the body contracting, their leaves must fall, and their glories
fade, an emblem of mortality, and transitory beauty; the Earth growing white
like declining age.

Diseases that reign this quarter are many; as Agues, Aches in the bone, Pains
in the back, dimnesse of Sight, retention of Urine, Fluxes of blood,
infirmities in the Face and Eyes, Cankers, Fistulaes, Emrods, Stone, Gravel,
pains in the secret parts, and all such diseases as attend the Spring; all
evil and inveterate humors in the Spring and Fall do increase and flow, which
were detained with the heat of Summer, and cold of Winter.

Winter.
THe flocking of small birds together foreshews the approach of this Season,
with the coming over of Feltisers, and diverse sorts of other little birds; the
days being at shortest, some things do flourish, as an herb called
Christ-worte, for at the time of Christmas it has constantly flowers, if much
frost and snow hinders it not; the terminating of this season is observed in
Ducks, and diverse other waterfowl.

The infirmities subject to man in this season are most usually these, viz. Red
spots, Pushes in the face, Fluxes of blood in the inferior parts, Scabs,
Leprosies, Toothach, pains in the Eyes, Palsies, Gouts, and all cold and
phlegmatic diseases; of these 4. Seasons thus writes Ovid. lib. 1. de Rem.
Amo.

Poma dat Autumnus; formosa est messibus Aestas;
Ver praebet flores; igne levatur Hyems.
Signs presaging good or bad Years.
1. AN overmoist Spring causes weeds to abound, fruits to be scarce and not
good; if dry and hot, grain will be good, but no great increase; if temperately
hot, and moderately moist it foreshews a plentiful Summer; but if overhot and
moist, a fickly year will follow.

2. The Broom having plenty of blossoms, or the Walnut-tree, is a sign of a
fruitful year of Corn, for that temperature of the weather is grateful and
nourishing unto them alike.

3. All Comets and great eclipses, at the blooming of fruits, is held generally
hurtful unto those which it then happens to.

4. A dry Spring, with Northern winds, following a wet Winter, with many
Southern winds, causes often abortives, and weak children, Gallen lib. 3.
Aphorism 3.

5. Great store of Nuts and Almonds, presage a plentiful year of Corn,
especially Filberds.

6. When Roses and Violets flourish in Autumn, it is an evil sign of an
ensuing Plague the year following, or some pestiferous disease; for much heat
in this Season corrupts the blood.

Winter over-moist and warm, is unseasonable for this Quarter, prejudicial to
the husbandman, and a friend to the Physician and Sexton, especially if it be
infected with many fogs, and great mists, which causes sterility, and
corrupts the Air; but much frost, with snow, presages a wholesome and
plentiful year to follow.

Many other presages I could have inserted, both of the weather and seasons of
the year, but such as would incumber the work, trouble the Reader, and perhaps
superfluous; as leaves in the wind, or down-floating upon the water, are signs
of tempests; others again doubtful, and not to be credited; as in Autumn (some
say) in the Gall or Oak-apple, one of these three things will be found, (if cut
in pieces) a Fly denoting want; a Worm plenty; but if a Spider, mortality.

Others observe the twelve days of Christmas, to foreshew the weather in all
the twelve succeeding months respectively.

Some again observe the 25: day of January, celebrated for the conversion of
St. Paul; if fair and clear, plenty; if cloudy or misty, much cattle will die;
if rain or snow fall that day, it presages a dearth; and if windy, wars, as old
Wives do dream; and since I can find no better authority for these, nor any
days presages, as a thing indifferent, I will leave them, and persist here no
longer, but subscribe the Verses upon the same account.

If Saint Paul 's day be fair and clear,
It does betide a happy year:
But if it chance to snow or rain
Then will be dear all kind of grain:
If clouds or mists do dark the Sky,
Great store of birds and beasts shall die:
And if the winds do fly aloft,
Then wars shall vex that Kingdom often.
A Conclusion with a Paraphrase upon the presages by sensitive Creatures in
general.
SIgns both of the weather, and the seasons I have hewn you, yet have omitted
many, but such as are best known to those who are sensible of them; and of
these there be some who suppressed with the heavy burden of many years, are
forced to stoop and strike sail to time, their bodies almost worn out with old
decrepit age, scarcely tenentable to the vital parts, which Nature can hardly
enable for to keep possession, being daily in danger to be ejected by rigid
Death, who admits no bail; such as these are sensible of the Airs alteration;
like an old ruined tenement, that lies open unto the assaults of every little
storm, and may unhappily know the weather and seasons of the year.

Others there be in the glory and prime of their youth that do know all this,
and more certainly then can the dictates of old age deliver it, having in every
joint a Calender that shows them the weather, with the Spring and Fall, as a
Memorandum of their fond and licentious youth, wherein they have incurred the
displeasure of just Heaven, and rewarded with the fruits of sin: Yet in this I
do not censure all, for some knows it through the crimes of others, and many by
casualties, fractures of bones, bruises, old sores, aches, cramps, gouts, corns
of their feet, agues, and almost innumerable diseases and imperfections of
Nature, incident to frail man, for excepting such like accidents, or signs
derived from experience, or grounded upon some reason to be held weather-wise,
is an argument of folly.

The cause why Idiots can so well foreknow the weathers alteration, is partly
they being defective in their understandings (as wanting the use of reason)
Nature does the more assist them; or they being cold and phlegmatic (as
appears by their slavering) they are the more sensible of the Airs change, as
it is agreeable or oppugnant to the temperature and constitution of their
bodies; whereas Man endowed with the use of reason and discourse, contemplates
of the cause and nature of things, which so implies the senses, that the Air
infused into the poars of such bodies, cannot have any powerful operation; and
besides, their constitutions are composed with a better concord of the 4
Elements, so that the Airs alteration cannot so soon and sensibly work those
effects in such bodies, being perfectly in health, and reason of their counsel.
For it is Natures care to provide best for those things which are in most danger
of shortest life, or can least help or shift for themselves; as to some she
gives strength in arms, to others swiftness of feet or wings, agility of body,
and the like; some little creatures are made a prey by others, or their lives
but short; to these she gives a fruitful offspring; as for example, what
multitudes of little Birds, more then Eagles, or fowls of prey? Herrings in
number exceeding Whales, with comparison; behold also the providence of the
immense Creator, that all these several kinds do subsist, and in such Springs
or Summers whose temperatures of heat shall produce cold Winters; there Nature
does commonly provide plenty before hand, as Akorns, Hipps, Hawes, and diverse
other sorts of Berries, for the subsistence of sundry sorts of little birds and
animals, that otherwise would have perished with cold, and for want of meat,
which is armor of proof against the weather.

By Natures instinct from these, Man (as in a Calender) may read the weather,
and the seasons of the year, every body having small poars, into which the Air
does continually infuse it self; and as it is rarefied or condensed, it alters
the disposition of the body; but more or less, according to the constitution,
and as it is agreeable or oppugnant to the natural temperature thereof; as for
an instance, Bees and Emmots being of a fiery nature, (as appears by their
choler and industry) the Air infused into their little members, toward rain
(being moist, and opposite to their natures) stupifies their senses, and makes
them heavy, and not apt to labor or go abroad.

This is the cause that Bees keep in their hives, or will not go far from
thence, when the Air grows moist; and the weather inclining to rain; from hence
is the motive that the laborious Emmots desire rest, and withdraw themselves
into the caverns of the earth, carrying their eggs with them, as by a natural
instinct, whereby to preserve their progeny; for by the fervor of the Sun,
they must be disclosed, and by a storm of rain they would be chill and perish;
the reason is generally the same in other sensitive creatures, whose corpse are
sensible of the Airs change, that alters them according to the natural
temperature and disposition of their bodies, some creatures requiring heat,
others moisture; what pleases one, distasts some other, and so of all living
things. Salamanders love Fire; Birds Air; Fishes Water; and Beasts Earth: So
these Elements (as they are mixed) and predominating, do offend or please the
natural disposition of the creature. This Monarchy and Commonwealth I choose
as for an explanation of the rest, they being the most industrious, the most
sensible, and most subject for to be prejudiced by the incursions or sudden
assaults of the weather, and so here I will conclude with Virgil; Geor. lib. 1.

Haud equidem credo quia sit divinitus illis
Jngenium, aut rerum fato prudentia major.
Verum, ubi tempestas and coeli mobilis humor
Mutavere vias, and Jupiter humidas austris
Densat, erant quae rara modo; and quae densa relaxant.
Vertuntur species animorum, and pectora motus
Nunc alios, alios dum nubila ventus agebat
Concipiunt: Hinc ille avium concentus in agris,
Et laetae pecudes, and ovantes gutture corvi.
diagram of a weather glass or perpetual calendar The Weather Glass, or
perpetual Calendar.


B^ this artificial means you may at any time, ^ither in the day, or night,
discover certainly the Airs alteration, as it does condense, or rarifie; and ^o
from thence presage the future weather: which the better, and the more sensible
to effect, I will prescribe a proportion for the Glass; the manner how to
devide it, and make a water that will not freez, much more beautiful and
conspicuous then ordinary water.

First provide a Bolts head of a clear transparent Glass, in form as you see
the figure; the end at A, like a Globe, in content to the whole or: let the
shanke be in circumference or of the head at A; then 1 or 1 of the Globes
circle the length unto B, where must be a Glass in content about half of the
bolts head; as for a cestern to receive the water, which you may thus provide;
if you would have a red water take Vermilion: a green color is more pleasant
and visible, which is thus made: take Verdigrease, and so much Roman vitrial,
beaten small, and put them into the best white Wine vinegar, the quantity as
you shall see convenient, the color, and bigness of the cestern considered;
these being infused and sturr'd together, let them stand 2 or 3 days until the
water be colored to your mind; if it proves too deep a green, pour in a little
more Vinegar or strong Water to it.

This being provided, take the circumference of the globe at A, (with part more
or 4 diameters if you can) and place it on the shank with a string equidistant
from the head, as at the cestern, there make two marks, and divide that space
into what parts you please, 15 degrees or equal parts I conceive the best, 8
being the Arithmetical medium (if the shank be not taper'd) write the figures
on paper, and past them upon the glass in a continued Arithmetical
Progression, ascending from 1 to 15: make a Frame that the glass may stand
fast, and about the cestern a rock, or what you fancy best. This done, put the
water into the Bolts head, and holding that in your hand, put it into the Frame
and Cestern; then turn it suddenly the right way, and upon the bottom let it
rest awhile.

Observe at what figure the water stands (let it at the first be too high,)
then raise up gently the long glass, so that the water may fall down into the
cestern, and try it for two or three days; and when it is at a place that fits
the temperature of the Air, and Season of the year, viz. 1, 2, or 3. if it be
in the heat of Summer; but at 13, 14, or 15. in the cold of Winter: if a little
frost (such as we have in September) place it at 9, or 10: but if very
temperate weather, as between hot and cold, the water must stand at 8 a medium;
having tried and fitted it well according to the temperature of the outward
Air, (for it must be kept from fire and accidental heat) close it or lute it up
at the neck of the cestern, leaving only some cane for a vent (as you see at
C:) whereby the Air may pass in or out of the cestern accordingly as the water
does rise or fall; for the long glass must always stand in the water, and
almost touch the bottom of the receiver or lower vessel, as at B; if the Air
gets into the long glass anywhere, (after it is placed according to the
weather) the work is frustrated.

A PERPETUAL CALENDAR, OR Diurnal for the weather, with general and particular
observations diligently selected, and compendiously inserted, demonstrating
perspicuously in a Glass the Airs mutability and the weathers vicissitude;
with the present temper and Season of the year, observing the water on serene
days at these degrees.
Viz. 1, 2, 3 Shows the extreme heat of Summer. 4 and 5 Is excessive hot and
sultry weather. 6 and 7 Is more hot than cold; a pleasant season. 8 The medium
betwixt Summer and Winter. 9 and 10 More cold than hot, with gentle frosts. 11
and 12 Is excessive cold and frosty weather. 13, 14, 15 Shows the extreme cold
of Winter.


1. THe efficient cause why this water rises and falls, is from the condensing
or dilating of the outward Air, made visible by a sympathetical imitation of
the parts here enclosed, upon any alteration of the weather, presaged from
hence by experience, observing that Cold and Drought do contract, Heat and
Moisture rarifies.

2 The sudden salling of the water foreshews an immediate approaching Storm of
Thunder, Lightning, Rain, Hail or Snow.

3 If the water falls a degree in 6 hours, it will Rain within 12 hours after,
if not misty, close, or sultry weather for the Season.

4 If the water falls much in the day, and rises but little in the night (yet
the weather continuing fair) expect then excessive heat, if not Thunder and
Lightning.

5 If the water falls never so little between Sunsetting, and his rising next
day, it will Rain or Snow before 12 the following night, if the Meteor converts
not to what is worse a Calydonian Mist.

6 If the water falls not in the time of artificial day, it prognosticates
northerly winds, a cold night to ensue, or storms of Hail at hand.

7 If the water keeps near any degree a natural day, the weather will continue
whether it be fair or foul; but if it rises or falls a degree, and stands, the
weather will quickly change to some excess.

8 If the water falls no more in the day then it did rise in the night, it is a
sign that the Air is temperate, the heat of the day equally qualifying the
coldness of the night, or else it argues the weather to be at a doubtful stay.

9 The often rising and falling of the water shows the outward Air very
mutable, the temper various, and the weather unconstant.

10 When the water rises not in the nighttime, expect then Mists, dark, foul
and foggy weather the next day, if not Thunder and Lightning in Summer.

11 The water rising any day in fair weather, presages a frost the following
night, or cold windy weather for the Season, if no immediate storm of Hail
invades the earth.

12 If the water rises in foul weather, whether it be day or night, it
prognosticates the storm is nigh past, and fair weather will consequently ensue.

13 The more that the water rises or falls at any time, the more violent will
be the change of weather, and of longer continuance, whether fair or foul, hot
or cold: as if it ascends 2 degrees in the day or 3 in the night, or falls 2 in
the night or 3 degrees in the day.

14 Observe at what figure or degree the water did rise or fall when the
weather changed; for the Airs temper will continue in the same state until the
water returns to that place again, excepting the extremes of Winter and Summer.

15 So long as the water shall continue above 10 ascending 'twill be frost; if
it falls below 9 'twill break, unless it rises within 12 hours after: if from
above 12, it descends a degree or two and stands, expect then Snow, Sleet, cold
or slabby weather.

If the Bolts-head be not prepared near the dimensions given, the water will
rise and fall, as the enclosed air contracts, or rarifies; but not in
proportion to satisfy curious expectation, nor exactly ratify all the 15
prescribed observations: Besides Countries, particular places, houses and
rooms, according to their situations, or accidental causes will change the Airs
temper; all which with other circumstances I refer to the ingenious, and my
following Paraphrase to their exposition.

A Paraphrase upon the Weather GLASS.
NAture in all her works abhors a Vacuum, so that no sublunary place can be
empty or void, but is supplied by one of the four Elements; from hence it is,
that the Air in Water-cranes and pumps being sucked out, the waters from
profound springs are forced to rise, contrary to their course and gravity; and
as the Air is sucked up; the Water ascends, whereby to avoid a Vacuum, so
repugnant to Nature; the reason is the same in this; for the outward Air, being
condensed with cold, that contained in the globe of the glass, must also
contract it self, being a member or part of the whole Element; and so
consequently the water in the glass must ascend to avoid a vacuum, which it
readily will do, having a vent below to supply the defect of water in the
lower vessel.

This is the sole cause, that glasses break in frosty weather, being close
stopped, and not full of liquor; for the Air contracting, and having no pores
or passage, for a supply of more, the vessel of necessity must crack: and by
rarifaction the same may be effected, as common experience proves in glass
Alembicks, or other close and concave vessels, which are burst by restraint of
the rarefied enclosed Air; and if these bodies could extend themselves like
bladders, the included air might be dilated unto an irruption at last, with a
noise like Meteors swelled to Tympanies in the wombs of pregnant clouds; from
rarifaction of Air proceeds this experiment; Take a globe, or round glass
luted up close, and having rarefied the confined air by natural or artificial
heat, you may throw the glass against a stone, 'twill bound and not break by
any violence that exceeds not the extension of the dilated imprisoned air: And
here in these small things I have briefly proved how active this Element is in
avoiding either excess or defect, superfluity or a vacuum, and in an instant
contracts or rarifies as Nature sees aptest or most facile to be effected, and
thus avoids vacuity in all bodies; for if any place be empty, 'twill be found
in some extravagant defendants, or in orbicular heads, enemies to order,
emblemes of a Chaos, Natures abortives or false conceptions; but lest this
discourse should be so much dilated for to make some break into choler, I will
return to the Weather glass (my former subject) not so fragile as they.

The falling of this enclosed Water is according to the natural property and
course of all ponderous bodies, inclining toward the center and seat of
gravity, if not hindered by some greater force, or natural affection to attract
them; so this tends downwards accordingly as the enclosed Air can dilate it
self; for the Element rarifying (as against rain or hot weather) that contained
above the water in the glass, must imitate it, in the same proportion; which
appears by this; for to be or part more in the extreme heat of Summer then in
the greatest cold of Winter; but not to be understood as general; for the
extremes of heat and cold, in the Winter and Sommer-Season in every year nor
Country is alike, as regions under the Torrid Zone, admits of no frost, and
parts near either Pole receives but little heat; some places enjoy a mean, and
diverse in excess, of both extremes: The divisions of this glass are intended
chiefly for England, or such Countries as are near this temperature of Air; yet
they may be made for any other Climate; but the observations must not be in all
points the same, for the former reason delivered.

The temper of your body you may try, by laying your hand upon the head of the
glass; for the hotter you are, the more the water will fall; and take your hand
off, the water will presently rise, recovering its former place or temper; and
for a demonstration let this suffice.

I have presented to your view as in a glass both natural and artificial
presages of the weather: for all knowledge (merely humane) is but as a shadow
of Science, or a superficial learning, reflecting upon man's imagination, as
objects represented on a mirror, and not substantially comprehending, the
least thing created: so expect not from me (the meanest of men) infallible
predictions, but conjectures, and most of those collected from the observations
of others, bound up in this little Volume, and ordered in the best form I could
devise: and as for better reasons in these natural causes and effects of
Metcors, I will refer them unto your calm and serene censure, for to paraphrase
upon, and explain the obscure and hidden mysteries of Natures secrets; and yet
She not absolute of her self; but strictly tied to the precepts of the Immense
Creator, to whose Sacred name be all Honor, Praise, and Glory; These and all
other being under the command of His Omnipotent word; And thus it is recorded
in the Regal Psalmist, cap. 148.8. Ignis, grando, nix, glacies; spiritus
procellarum, quae faciunt verbum ejus.

AN INTRODUCTION TO The Fourth PART. Showing The direful effects of some
prodigious Meteors, Epidemical diseases, and Memorable accidents; with brief
Historical observations, of their events, and final causes, as just motives to
the love and fear of God.
Benevolent Reader,
THe formal and material cause of Meteors, I have compendiously delivered you
already, according to my ability, selected from the ablest Astronomers and
Philosophers; amongst whom, I will not rashly presume to give a verdict in such
stupendous conceptions, but willingly do attend their Dictates, and
Hypotheses, which in many things do not concur: a common vice, in humane
learning to vary; many men, having many minds, with opinions so oppugnant, as
not to be reconciled: Some affirming Comets to be of a Celestial nature, other
sublunary, and extracted from the Elements; Some deny their motions to be
equal about their center, but sometimes high, and at other times low, according
to the matter that feeds them, so moving up and down in the Air, like an Ignis
fatuus; And thus by refractions deceive humane sight, and frustrate these
seeming demonstrations: But leaving their ambiguous arguments, and dubious
opinions of men (prone unto error) since the matter and form of them is
undoubtedly held natural, their effects portentious, and observed as the
forerunners of great calamities, to be inflicted upon whole Kingdoms and parts
of the habitable World. And thus the Poet Silius. Lib. 8.

-- Non unus crine corusco
Regnorum eversor, rubuit lethale Cometes.
Pliny in his natural History, makes a series or catalogue of these fiery
apparitions, which he divides into Ten kinds; but my intention (in this little
treatise) is to comprehend them under the title of Comets, Blazing-Stars, or
fiery Impressions in general: They are the hidden and secret mysteries of
Nature, portentious in their heights, magnitudes, courses and periods, various,
and manifold in their colors and form, but are generally observed
representative lights and figures of Stars; and their effects (according to the
opinion of Philosophers) are to purge the Air, by consuming those Meteors
whether exhaled, or engendered in the Skies: But these combustions inflame that
Element by which we draw our vital breath, and so begets Choler, and makes
us prone unto dissentions, and civil broiles; if the matter be extracted from
the Earth it causes sterility, by consuming the Humidum radicale; all this it
does presage and more, the iminent scourge of God, as the observations of
Historiographers and Poets do abundantly testify, and thus writes Manil. a
heathen, Nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus ether
Et nunquam Coelo, spectatum impune Cometem.


And although such prodigies do usually proceed from natural causes, yet God,
who is Omnipotent, did know from all eternity, the actions of the Worlds
inhabitants, and their rebellious proceedings against His Sacred Majesty;
arming themselves in vain with fortifications against just Heaven; and
combining together with the associations of evil Spirits, in League and
Covenant with them; when the Immense Creator (if he pleases) can make, not
only the Elements to destroy mankind, but the very Atoms, or the most
contemptible things, that ever were made for man's use, and those to execute his
commands; as witness the Egyptian plagues, where Nature produced those
stupendous effects; and little despicable creatures, almost destroyed a mighty
Kingdom; Yet these had forerunning signs, with mercy, to admonish Pharaoh and
draw his people to repentance. And thus speaks Esdrae 2. cap. 9. Et dedisti
signa atque portenta in Pharaone, and in universis servis ejus, in omni populo
terrae illius.

The State of Rome at the death of Julius Caesar was menaced with a dreadful
Blazing Star, presaging the effusion of much blood, which quickly after did
ensue, for these Meteors do beget choler, and from thence fury, rage and
madness, the Parents of commotions, ushring in Sword, Plague, or Famine. Of
this writes Virg. lib. 1. Geor. Non alias Coelo ceciderunt plura sereno
Fulgura, nec dir^, toties arsere Cometae.
The effects of Comets, or fiery impressions in the Air, are not universally
seen to all Countries, nor yet oftentimes to all places within those regions;
nor are their influencies obnoxious, to all men where they be visible, yet
motives unto every particular man to repent. Although there has been no
calamity yet in the World so general, but God out of his Mercy has preserved
many: and in acknowledging of his goodness, thus it is recorded in the Sacred
Records Joshuae, Cap. 24. v. 17. Fecitque videntibus nobis signa ingentia, and
custodivi nos in omni via, per quam ambulavimus.

Comets do declare the greatness of the Creator, and are as admonitions from
Him, who like a Father and a merciful Judge, infinite in his Love, as in his
Justice, giving us these signs as warnings, like an indulgent Parent who shows
us the rod before the Sentence be pronounced; the continuance of their direful
effects are as the rest in dispute, but by some observed thus: That for so many
natural days, as any Blazing Star or fiery Meteor shall continue, so long will
their sad effects endure, in succeeding years, answering the number of those
days; this is but a mere conjectural opinion, derived rather from the
annotations of doubtful Experience, then grounded upon any humane reason: But
whether this be true, or that these dreadful and stupendous Meteors be the
cause of these woeful ensuing events, I dare not subscribe my weak opinion; but
this I will confidently affirm that they are evident Demonstrations of an
Omnipotent Diety, and motives to make the proudest Creature strike Sail, to
amaze the wisest and terrify the most valiant. Eccles. 3.14, Omnia opera sua
fecerit Deus, ut timeatur.

The un usual tumults, or disorder of the Elements, presages the wrath of God
connexed with His Mercy, by his stupendous works, to draw us unto Him; if not
for Love, yet for fear of punishment: For if the Elements of Fire and Air do
rage, whither shall we run to save our selves? upon the Seas we shall suffer
wrack by the storm, or perish in the tumultuous waves; if the Earth does prove
unstable, where shall we set our feet? houses nor caves cannot defend us, when
the bases of Rocks and Mountains shake, and the whole Globe of Earth shall
tremble; whither shall we fly? who can secure us? Here I find comfort and hopes
of safety with St. Augustine, In te Domine speravi, non confundar in aeternum.
And Psalm. 121. ver. 2. Auxilium meum a Domino qui fecit coelum and terram.

Blazing Stars, though unusualy forerunners of sorrow, yet oftentimes commixt
with joy; of which there be many examples; one is recorded at the death of
Nero, the Emperor, a Tyrant, a Parricide a Murderer of Christians, and a
professed enemy to Mankind; and at last (contrary to the perpetual established
Laws of Nature) killed himself. A little before his death, there appeared a
fiery Comet, whose event in his fall was happy; This homicide raised the first
persecution, in the Primitive Church, and put to death St. Peter, and St. Paul,
Apostles; as you may read in St. Chrysostom, and in Lactantius, l. 4. c. 21. de
vera Sapientia.

God has given us Signs in the Heavens, both of His wrath and mercy; of which
I have shown you here some precedents, and do intend to manifest it with a few
more examples; but conclude the Introduction here with this; The Rain bow which
we often see, is from a natural cause, as the Comets fiery impressions and all
Meteors are supposed to be; yet the proclamations of the Creator, and their
significations oftentimes beyond the knowledge or reach of humane reason; the
Rainbow given to Noah was a Sign of Peace. Genesis cap. 9. ver. 13. Arcum nieum
ponam in nubibus coeli: and erit Signum foederis inter me, and inter terram.

THE FOURTH PART. Showing The opinions of some Men concerning Blazing Stars,
with a compendious Historical observation of their events; with diverse other
prodigies epitomized.
ALl Comets or fiery impressions, are generally observed swiftest at the first,
and their influences of greatest force, having then most matter, and
peradventure more violent and obnoxious, when newly inflamed; But all this is
oppugned by Scaliger, who conceives no Comet for to consist of a fiery nature,
but a crude and undigested vapor, illuminated by the Planets or fixed Stars,
as are those Meteors, commonly called falling Stars, which are like gellies not
enflamed, but transparent, and apt to receive light; and these Meteors being
illuminated by the Celestial orbs, do represent (as in a mirror) their figures
or apparent forms of the Stars or Sun, which apparitions, are common in the
Northern Climates, although held portentions to us; And such as do continue
long, where the material cause is great, and the rays of the Sun, wanting force
to dissipate them; As for an instance; in the year of Grace, 1596. the
Hollanders sailing by Nova Zembla, to search for a N. E. passage into China and
the East Indies, there did appear for 17 continued days the perfect effigies of
the Sun after the 17. of October; when as the true Sun was depressed; the
Horizon of that place, being in the latitude of 77 degrees; The like you may
read in Captain James searching for the N. W. passage into the South Sea. This
last discovery was attempted without success, in the Reign of Charles the first
of England.

Some would seem to demonstrate this, by a round glass, like a globe; which
filled with water, and suspended in a dark room, where placing a candle under
it, and then it will represent the form thereof, upon the sealing: or place the
light above, and some water underneath it; Or in a room made very dark, cause
an augure hole to be bored through into the open air, and so, as that the Sun
may shine in, or upon it: Take a globe glass filled with fair water, and hold
it at the hole, thus perforated; and within the room (by reflection of this)
you shall see many rays, representing the form of a Blazing Star, or fiery
impression; and this some thinks to be a sufficient demonstration, that Comets
are but illuminated parts of the darkened Air, or condensed parts of the
enlightened Spheres.

Rothmannus conceives that Comets are really enflamed Meteors, and that they
are moved by Angels, as for a terror unto mortals; but as for this
supposition: God does commonly use, and employ natural means, unto natural
causes; but yet an Omnipotent Creator, not confined to one, nor the other.
Galilaeus does suppose these Comets for to consist of a Celestial nature, and
generated in the Spheres, but dilated as are the clouds. Lodovicus Molina in
his 5. disputation of the Worlds Creation, would seem to gather from thence,
and out of Genesis, that the Heavens, both in Species and Matter, do agree with
sublunary things; and Thomas Fiennus inclines to this, as by his writings,
concerning the Comet which appeared in the year of Christ, 1618: whereby he
urges, that there may be matter in the Heavens both to generate and corrupt,
and that there is daily permutations in the Spheres, although not visible to
our weak sights: and this his erroneous opinion, seems something to be
confirmed by diverse apparitions of new Stars, that have been made visible in
sundry Ages, since the Creation; as they instance (who incline to him) in the
Constellation called the Pleiades, accounted but 6 Stars, before the Trojan
Wars; and since, as now commonly known by the name of the seven Stars: This
some Historiographers do testify; and likewise Homer, Pliny; and thus Ovid,
lib. 4. Fast. derived from a false conception of the sight; Pleiades incipient
humeros revelare pateruos: Quae septem dici, sex tamen esse solent. After many
and great conjunctions of the Planets, Comets and fiery impressions are often
seen; which moves some to suppose them to be the cause in raising the
exhalation, which produces the Meteor; and according to the Matter, it rises
the higher; and by the virtue of the fixed Stars, it may be drawn up above the
Planets, even to the Firmament; But if this were granted, it must require an
extraordinary time to elevate the Matter to that height; when as a stone let
fall from the Firmament, and supposed continually to descend 100 miles an hour,
this stone could not fall to the ground in 70 years; And as for these Comets,
which are sublunary, if they be enlightened by the Sun, they would at some time
happen of necessity to be eclipsed, moving within the conical shadow of the
Terrestrial globe; if their motions be caused, or attracted by any one Star or
constellation, they could not have contrary motions to them, as we have said
already in the second part of this Book; nor could these Meteors change their
places so much, nor be so violently swift, as they are observed: Some moving
parallel with the Horizon, and others in the Azimuths, rather then describing
parallels with the Equator, which the Stars do: Some fiery Meteors have
seemed fixed, and many so rapide in their stupendous accelerated motions, that
they cannot be attracted by the Stars nor Planets: As the Comet in the year of
Grace, 1618. did pass from one Tropic to another; that is, from to in the
space of 10 natural days, which the that is the lowest Planet cannot perform in
less then 13 days, 15 hours and something more; But lets return to the final
cause, and fatal events of stupendous Meteors delivered by reverend Antiquity.

Of fiery Impressions.
SOzomenus writes of a Blazing Star, as it were uspended in the Air, with one
end extending almost down unto the Earth; this was visible over the City of
Constantinople. Some again have been seen to fall from the Heavens; of these
Scaliger affirms one in his time that did descend: From the falling of the
fiery Meteors, is derived (as some conceives) the poetical fiction of Phaeton;
but Tertullian otherwise; Of these fiery precipitated impressions thus writes
Claudian. lib. Praeceps sanguineo delabitur igne Cometes
Prodigiale rubus --
Pliny lib. 2. cap. 35. writes how Licinius Syllanus did see a sparkle,
falling from the Heavens, and in its descent to increase unto the bigness of
the Moon; and this Meteor again drawn up, appeared like a lamp or burning torch.

About the year of Grace, 1450, being 3 years before the barbarous Turks
invaded Vrope, and took the famous City of Constantinople, there appeared a
fiery impression, representing the form of a two-hand Sword, which passing
under the Moon (then at full) obscured her light; about this time diverse
Countries under the Patriark of Greece were miserably infected with the most
diabolical herefie, against the incomprehensible and Sacred Mystery of the ever
blessed Trinity; which error (soon after) put a period to that Empire, and
brought all those Countries into a miserable captivity, and their servile necks
to the yoke of a heathenish Tyrant.

Many dreadful apparitions in the Air, are recorded in the Books of Machabees,
lib. 2. cap. 5. how for 40 days there was seen over the City Jevusalem,
horsemen running in the Air, having golden robes, with spears (like armed
bands) charging one another in order and manner of a fight, as hand to hand;
motions of bucklers, multitudes of glittering helmets, drawn swords, throwing
of darts, splendour of golden arms, and coats of Maile; This showed the
forerunning miseries of the Jews, persevering in their disobedience to God, and
neglecting his just Precepts, until left unto the pleasure of the insulting
foe. Antiochus giving Commission to his Soldiers to slay whomsoever they
should meet, sparing neither Men, Women, nor Children; where there was killed
in three days space the number of 80000: 40000 put in bands, and sold; Besides
this, they committed sacrilege, and violently took away the vessels and
ornaments of the Temple, with their profane and polluted hands; and left
governors there more barbarous then himself. There were also strange
portentious apparitions in the Air (before the Destruction of this City of
Titus Vespatian) as a fiery sword hanging over Jerusalem, the space of a whole
year, with many other prodigious visions; of which you may read in Josephus.

There happened in the Isle of Britain many portentious signs, presaging the
effusion of much blood, and menacing the subversion of the whole Island; all
which quickly after came to pass by their own intestine wars, and the invasion
made by Julius Caesar, who subdued it to the State of Rome, the people
subjugated to the Tyranny of the ensuing Emperors. As for the forerunning
signs of calamities this Island groaned under, there were seen in the Air,
globes of fire, and dreadful screaks and noises heard to the astonishment of
the people.

Anno 1558. began deformed reformation, whose infatuated doctrine, was attended
with a prodigious and fatal Comet, hanging over their heads, as a messenger of
God's wrath; In these times there fell out of the Air such multitudes of
strange and monstrous proportioned flies, that for many miles in Germany, they
destroyed the corn in the fields, and all vegetables, until with want they
died; the corruption of whose bodies infected the Air, and so begot an
Epidemical disease, in testimony of the protestation made.

In the year of Christ, 1588. it is reported by Snellius, how that at Amsterdam
(a little before Sunsetting) there was beheld in the Air the form of a
Seafight, which continued the space of an hour, where the conquered were seen
to fly: this was little before the Spaniards proud Armado came insulting into
our narrow Seas, who presuming of their strength to captive England, were by
the blessing of God, frustrated of their design, and put to flight, being
severed with a puff of wind, and many thrown upon our coast, with shipwrackt
fortunes, craving mercy of us, whom they presumed to conquer, under the
disguise of Religion, when it was to enlarge their Dominions, by enthralling
us; An Emblem of humane greatness, and how imbecile it is; a story paralleld
by Xerues, both in their pride and success.

Of these portentions, apparitions, and direful forewarnings of God's just
wrath against the finful World, there be many fearful examples, overlong to be
rehearsed in this Treatise; so that all of this kind I will here forbear, and
conclude with those immediately following the death of Julius Caesar Dictator,
murdered by the Senators in the Senate house: at which time there appeared a
Blazing Star, with diverse other prodigious signs of ensuing woe, and effusion
of blood, which presently after followed; For seven nights after his death,
there was heard hideous howling of Dogs and Wolves near their great Towns,
fatal Birds screaking in their Cities; Beasts did speak, the Images in their
Temples did sweat, Mount Aetna brake forth with dreadful globes of fire, where
stones were melted, the Earth gaped, Rivers stood still, the Alps trembled,
armed bands appeared in the Air, Trumpets were heard to sound, the Sun pale and
wan, and almost obscured for a year following; and of Cesar's slaughter thus
writes Ovid. Metam. Lib. 15. Arma ferunt inter nigras crepitantia nubes
Terribilesque tubas, auditaque cornua coelo
Praemonuisse nefas: Solis quoque trist is imago
Lurida solicitis praebebat lumina terris.
Of this writes Virgil. Geor. Lib. 1. and also Tibullus, lib. 2. Ele. 5.

Of Parelii, Lunary Rain-bows, and some stupendous Eclipses of the Luminaries;
also light nights and dark days.
Before the bloody conflict between Caesar and Pompey in the fields of
Pharsaelia, where blind Fortune was arbitrator, which of these two fond
ambitious Men should rule the subingated World; at that time there appeared 3
Suns, or 2 Parelii, as if declaring the greatness and glory of these two
Potentates, who were but as false lights, for they both soon vanished.

In the year of Grace, 1525, there appeared 6 Suns or 5 Parelii, all visible at
one time, Gem. Phri. Lib. 1. cap. 8. and quickly after this, was Francis King
of France, overthrown in Battall, and of a great Prince made a captive by the
Spaniards; about this time also, many false Prophets did arise.

Pliny Lib. 2. in his natural History writes of 3 Suns, or 2 Parelii that were
seen in Bosphorus, but neither registers the age, nor records the event; He
mentions also 3 when Lu. Plancus, and Marc. Lepidus were Consuls, and when
Claudius Caesar was Consul, and when C. Domitius, and Ca. Fannius were Consuls,
there appeared at one time 3 Moons; he affirms also, some nights so light, as
that they were not (but in respect of time) easily distinguished from the day;
but what followed, he relates not: But this happned about the Nativity of our
Lord and Savior, who was the light of the World, and did disperse the clouds
of error and idolatry, which had a long time infatuated the Heathens, in their
benighted understandings, and now to be illuminated with the Truth; and this
recorded to be seen not only in Judaea but in Spain, and other places of Europe.

Aristotle lib. 3. cap. 2. Mete. writes of two Rain-bows, made by the rays of
the Moon in the night season, these were seen in his days. Thimon writes of two
Rain-bows seen in the night, and both in the space of 3 years.

Albertus records one in his time, the Moon not at full in the Sgn of the Sun
in, ready for to enter the time of year being about the middle of April; the in
the South, and the Rainbow in the North part of the hemisphere. Americus who
gave the West Indies its name, writes of one Rainbow which he did see in the
north part of the Horizon, about midnight, but very pale.

Gemma Phri. lib. 2. cap. 2. Cosmo. writes of one that was seen the 12. of
March about midnight, the Air clear and temperate; this Rainbow, was described
with perfect colors, as those that we see in the day; And Daniel Sennertus a
famous Physician of Wittenberg reports of one Rainbow which himself did behold
(about Midsommer-time in the year of Christ, 1599, immediately after a direful
Tempest of Thunder and Rain; this Rainbow appeared very beautiful between the
North and East part of the Horizon, by which it should seem 'twas after 12 at
night.

Snellius lib. de Cometa, 1618 writes, how that in the year of our Lord God,
1617, and in the month of December, the Moon near the full, there did appear a
Rainbow in the night, and upon the 30. day of December following (going
toward the Hague) he did see another continuing from 5 to 6 in the evening;
these were a little before the beginning of the Palatinate wars, fatal unto
Germany and hurtful to all Christendom.

Diverse portentious Eclipses, both of Sun and Moon, have happened according to
the course of Nature; although prodigious: and Egyptian darkness too has
benighted us, continuing 3 or 4 days, as John Stow in his Annals testifies,
and that some days in Holland were not distinguished from the nights; and
diverse men (in the time of artificial day) did miscarry (by reason of darkness)
having lost their ways, mistook their Inns, and so fell into their graves,
shortning their voyages to their journeys end. And Sleidanus records the like
of this in Germany in the year of Christ, 1547, in the month of April, when
the Sun was obscured to their Horizon for four continued days; these were as
Emblems (in both places) of their rebellion against Heaven and Earth, which are
the ways of the Devil; For he that follows Christ, walks not in darkness. The
Romans were also thus benighted when the Prince of obscurity was adored by
them: which Virgil does apply to the death of Julius Caesar, and the civil wars,
Lib. 1. Geor.

Sol tibi signa dabit; solemn quis dicere falsum
Audeat? ille etiam coecos instare tumultus
Saepe mones, fraudemque and operta tumescere bella:
Ille etiam extincto miseratus Caesare Romam
Cum caput obscura nitidum ferrugine texit,
Impiaque aeternum timuerunt saecula noctem.
Portentious Storms of Rain.
BEfore the Nativity of our Lord and Savior 766, in the Reign of Rivallus (a
British King) for three days space it rained blood, out of which corruption,
there ensued multitudes of venomous Flies, which killed many men, and bred a
mortality, with desolation almost unto the whole Island; This is collected from
the British antiquities.

A little before the death of Nero the Tyrant and Emperor of Rome, it rained
blood with many other prodigies, as you may read in Livy.

In the year since the Sacred Virgin was a Mother 1534, about the Feast
celebrated for the Resurrection of the Son of God, it rained blood in Germany;
which falling upon Men's garments, did describe the form of red Crosses, to put
us in mind (peradventure) of His cruel Passion, a Sacrifice for the whole
World. In the Low Countries (near about this time) the skins of men and women
were signed in this manner, in a shower of blood.

In the year of our Redeemer 1571, at a place called Emden in Frisia, there
fell in the night time a great shower of blood, which discolored the earth,
and all it fell upon, for the space of 5 or 6 miles in compass; and in such
plenty, that diverse cups were filled the next day with it; about these times,
began cruel and bloody wars by the Sacramentarians. In the year 1601 the like
of these prodigies began and continued the space of 3 years, and then was
seconded with a woeful plague.

Marcus Varro affirms, how it rained Frogs in several parts, and in diverse
Towns of Gallia. Cardanus reports Anno Domini 1510, how that in Lombardy it
rained hard Stones of a sulphurious taste, in color like to rusty Iron; one
Stone (that fell in this Storm) was presented to the King of France. Avicenna
affirms how that in Persia it rained Iron; In the time of Augustus Caesar it
rained Silver, as Dion testifies. In Armenia there fell from the Clouds red
Snow, as if it had received a tincture of Vermilion; And befides these (as it
is recorded) there has fallen from the Skies, Flesh, Milk, Corn, Wool, and
diverse other prodigies, over long to be rehearsed, because they are doubtful,
and yet affirmed by Pliny, Livy, and diverse other well approved Authors; yet
they upon report of others have inscribed many Errors, so I will pass them
over, and proceed.

Of Deluges and portentious irruptions and courses of the Waters.
Besides many wonderful floods in particular Countries, there be three held
stupendous above the rest; the General Deluge in the time of Noah, in the year
from the Creation of the Stars 1656, this was 15 Cubits above the highest
hills; in this Deluge all the World perished, but what was with Noah in his
Arc, as you may read in Genesis cap. 6, cap. 7, and cap. 8.

The second great inundation, is accounted that of Achaia, in which flood, that
Province was submerg'd; This Deluge was 540 years after that of Noah; and by
Computists affirmed, to be about the 90 year of Jacob the Patriark.

Deucalion's was the third, in the Country of Thessalia, about 100 years after
the building of Rome; this Deucalion was son to Promethe us Prince of Greece,
who in a Boat, saved himself, and his Family from the fury of the flood, on
mount Parnassus; this is that Deluge which Ovid mentions in his Metam. Lib. 1.
which swallowed up the Atlantike, and diverse other parts, and great Territories
in Europe; Yet it is a general received opinion, that he had perused the old
Testament, by relating, how the World in time to come should be destroyed with
Fire, as in these Verses; Esse quoque in fatis, reminiscitur affore tempus
Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque regia coeli
Ardeat and Mundi moles operosa laboret.
In the last year of Nero Cesar's reign, new Rivers did spring out of the
Earth, and others did alter their courses and former channels, as it is
recorded by Pliny, lib. 2. cap. 103: and about that time some Rivers were
observed to run backward, as if they would have returned (contrary to course)
into the Earths bowels again; or to show the preposterous courses of the
Tyrant, that ripped open his Mothers womb, to see from whence he came.

Conimbricensis, Tract. 11. cap. 8. Mete. writes, how that in the reign of
Emanuel, King of Lusitania, the waters in the River Tagus, did part themselves,
running with two streams on either side, and the middle of the Channel void of
water.

Nilus the famous River of Egypt, and wonder of the World, upon the Cosmical
rising of the Dog Star does overflow the fruitful valleys, enriching the soil,
and so producing an annual crop: yet some years these floods have proved
extraordinary; as you may read in Pliny, lib. 5. cap. 9. the greatest flood
that ever was observed there, is recorded to be 15 cubits high, in the time of
Claudian the Emperor; the least that ever was known, is reported to be a
little before the bloody and fatal field of Pharsalia, between Pompey the
great, and Caesar the Conqueror.

In the year of Man's Redemption 1521, the Rivers of Rhine and Maze, with some
others of lesser note, both in Germany, and the Low Countries by the
extraordinary Tides, and swelling of the Seas, forced these Rivers to overflow
their banks; which inundation overwhelmed 72 villages, in which perished above
100,000 people, with inumerable multitudes of Cattle of several kinds: this I
find recorded by Mr. John Stow, in his Anuals of Henry the 8.

Many strange and portentious births have been produced in all ages, not only
to the terror of Man, but to the astonishment even of Nature; and these with
many other stupendous prodigies for brevity sake I let pass, and will conclude
with those recorded of the Romans, more furious and bloody then the worst of
civil wars, and thus Virg. lib. 1. Geor.

Vox quoque per lucos, vulgo exaudita silentes
Ingens: and simulacra modis pallentia miris
Visa sub obscurum noctis, pecudesque locutae
(Infandum) sistunt amnes, terraeque dehiscunt.
Of Earthquakes and their wonderful effects.
THe moving of a Coach or Cart will make houses sensibly to shake and tremble,
according to the motion or Weight of the Carriages; and more especially in
towns where there are many vaults or Cellers, and the streets paved in one
continuum with the building: For the pressure or violence upon one stone (the
pavements being connext) must continue to some end or dividuum, that the Air
may vent it self; The poarinesse of the Earth, and volubility of the Air, is
made by this apparent.

In a still Evening, place upon the ground a Drum; to which lay your ear, and
you shall plainly hear the Air beating upon the Drum, representing the motion
by which it was made, whether it be Men or Carriages; and this may be perceived
at two or three Miles distance, especially where the Number is great, or the
Motion violent, upon open Plains, or barren heaths most of all; for the ground
being poary in such places, where the soil is dry, and has ascents, with
hollow hills; These sounds will not be so plainly heard at a distance over
arrable lands, as it will upon any heath; because the turffe is as the Skin to
the Earth, restraining the subtle Air from evapourating forth, and by reason
of the concavity, it contains the more, and gives the freer passage.

Herodotus writes how Egypt was once Sea: Seneca lib. 6. cap. 21. does record
how the Isle Therasia did rise out of the Egaeon sea, the Mariners beholding
it, and the like of Thia in the days of Pliny, and now a firm Island, one of
the Sporades. And in the year of Grace 1538, in the fields of Puteoli, there
was a new mountain did rise near a mile high, from the foot of the hill;
Mountains and lower grounds have been removed from their places, where Nature
has fixed them; as you may read in Pliny, lib. 2. cap. 83. how two mountains
did remove, and run together with a terrible noise, as if assaulting or
contending with one another; In the last year of Nero Caesar, the meadows, and
Olive gardens of Vectius Marcellus were removed over a common highway, and
contrary in their motions, mutually changing their seats and situations: And in
the month of April An. Domini 1586, the like happned in Ireland, where the
ground was removed with the trees, and all the lower plants growing upon it;
This shows the Omnipotent Creator, as we read in Job: cap. 9. ver. 6. Qui
commovet terram de loco suo, and columnae ejus, concutiuntur.

The Cities of Hellice and Buris were buried with an Earthquake, and nothing
remaining of them, but the bare name only. And if Plato may be believed, Aeon
in the Atlantic, was equal unto Asia, and now all deep under water, the Sea
retaining yet the name; and it is very probable that many Countries thus have
suffered, whose foundations have been shaken with Earthquakes, and so
subjected to the insulting waves; For if the terrestrial globe had been thus
divided in the days of Noah, how could America, and diverse remote Islands from
any continent have been planted, as now they are, whose originals the Natives
knows not?

But some do object to this; that America might be planted by the North or South
parts of the World: First it is doubtful, whether Greenland be part of that
continent, or no; besides it is unlikely they should seek for a plantation
through so cold and unhospitable a Country, that can afford no relief, nor any
thing but hunger and cold. Others do better conjecture the first Colonies might
pass by the straights of Magellune, and thither out of Asia by Java, or into
new Guinea; but admit it were so; it is not probable they carried savage
Beasts, or venomous Serpents with them to a Plantation; but for that beasts
might grow wild with running in Desert places at their liberties, and serpents
breed out of the slime of the Earth; as Eeles and other living and sensitive
Animals, produced from corruption, and yet afterward engender and beget others
of their form; But it is generally conceived there has been many more Lands
then there be at this present, and diverse Islands by which at first they passed
and now devoured by the Seas; and supposed by some, that this British Isle has
been severed from France; Spain from Asrica; Sicily from Italy; and Ossa from
Olympia.

Some do infer, how that God promised Noah not to drown the World any more,
and that He had put bounds to the waters, which they should not pass; It Is
true, but yet part of it may be submerged, of which I could instance you many
precedents, as Rye, and other places in England under the Seas irrecoverable;
their Steeples visible at a low water within this hundred years, and those now
quite swallowed up with the yawning waves; For where these bounds are which God
has placed, it is known to Him, and and not to us, nor need we care if we serve
the Omnipotent Creator. Propterea non timebimus dum turbabitur terra, and
transferentur montes, in cor maris, Psalm. 45. ver. 2.

Before the Nativity of our Sacred Redeemer Jesus Christ, 374. Brennus a potent
Prince, whose territories being over-peopled, raised a puissant Army, to gain
renown, and seek new plantations; in which design, he was assisted by the then
overpopulous Gauls, through whose Country he marched into Greece with 300,000
Men, as some writes: on mount Parnassus stood the City of Delphos, famous in
those days of darkness, for the Temple of Apollo, whom those Idolatrous people
worshipped, whose dubious responses had drawn from all Nations a great
concourse of people, by which means, it was made the richest place of all
Greece, and by Nature fortified; the taking of this City was the sole ambition
of Brennus; partly by reason of the wealth, and partly it being the chief City,
which being subdued, all the other Provinces would easily submit unto his
power; So this Prince, with his multitudes of men, Stormed the City with Fire
and Sword; at which time, part of the Mountain fell down with an Earthquake,
and overwhelmed multitudes of his most valiant and forward men: this calamity
was seconded by a violent tempest of Thunder, Lightning and Hail, which
destroyed a great part of those that had escaped the former; Brennus sore hurt,
and in despair of future good, with his sword slew himself, as it is recorded
by Justine. This story I have related to show the judgment of God upon him for
his covetousness and pride; not done as against the worshippers of the Devil,
but as in contempt of a Deity. Proper. lib. 3.

Torrida sacriligunt testantur limina Brennum
Dumpetit intonsi Pythia regna Dei.
Three years before the Birth of the Worlds Redeemer, when Herod was King of
the Jews, there happened an Earthquake in Judea, by which there prished of
Men, Women and Children, to the number of 30000. precursor of the massacre and
number of Infants, as some records do testify.

In the 15. year of our Lord and Savior, and in the beginning of Tiberius his
Empire, there were 12. Cities in Asia in one night overwhelmed with the
inhabitants; and which is more, all swallowed up in the bowels of the Earth. In
the 18. year of this Empire, the Son of God (as a sacrifice for the World) was
accused by the perfidious Jews, condemned by Pontius Pilate (then Presedent of
Judea, under Tiberius Caesar) and crucified, at whose passion the World did
tremble with an Earthquake, and the greatest that ever was, or, as it is
thought, ever shall be until His coming again to judge the quick and the dead;
but some say this was miraculous, and not universal; these are the words of
Didymus; Mei Christi tempore, non privatus aliquis terrae motus, sed tota terra
conquassut^, and centro convulsa fuit.

In the year of grace, 1117. there was in Lombardy and Earthquake, which
continued 40. days, in which time it overthrew many buildings; but the greatest
wonder was, it removed one Town from its seat, and set it in another place, a
good distance from the former situation, with many of the houses standing; this
story you may read in Floriacensis: these are evident demonstrations of an
Omnipotent power. Job, cap. 9. ver. 5. Qui transtulit montes, and nescierunt
hi, quos subvertis, in furore suo.

In the year of grace, 1509. the City of Constantinople was shaken with an
Earthquake, in whose ruins there was overwhelmed 13000 Men, Women, and
Chridren. In the year 1531, the City of Lixborn trembled with an Earthquake,
which ruined 1500. dwelling houses. Fromondus, lib. 4. Meteo. does affirm how
that in the year 1570. Ferraria was miserably shaken with an Earthquake, which
had continued in Italy the space of two years, as some Authors do write: and in
the year following, being 1571, the Turks presuming of their strength, and the
divisions of Europe (by reason of the Sects and Schisms) raised a mighty Army,
intending to invade Europe both by Sea and Land, for which design a fleet was
rigged: And for the prevention of this general calamiy, it pleased God to unite
all the Christian Princes (as against the common enemy) who provided another,
and put to Sea; and upon the 6. day of October the Christians gave the Turks
battle, which Sea fight continued that day and the next, and then the
Antichristians fled, and many of them did run their Galleys a ground, whereby
to save their lives: The Christians in this Sea Fight sunck, and took 230
Galleys, and slew 30,000 Mahumetans, and multitudes were taken prisoners, who
with the prizes and spoils, were divided amongst the contibutors, according to
their adventures; In this fight 12000 Christians were redeemed from the Turkish
slavery; The Christian Princes lost in this fight 8 galleys, and 8000
Soldiers; This was called the famous Battle of Lepauto.

In the year 1601. there was a general Earthquake through Europe, which made it
all to tremble, but not the people, nor yet so much as moved them to repentance
for their transgressions against Heaven.

In the year of the Worlds Redemption 1638. March the 27. S. N. between 3 and 4
in the afternoon, the Kingdom of Naples was violently shaken with an
Earthquake, which subverted houses and Castles; the City of Necosia standing
by the Sea side, was made an Island, and five miles divided from the Continent;
the Earth finking, Nature brought in the waters, to fill the lower grounds and
cover her entrails: there perished in this Earthquake of men, women and
children (so near as could be gathered) the number of 40,000. this was a
forerunner of implacable tumults and commotions of the people, besides the
bloody Tragedies acted there betwixt the Kings of Spain and France.

Many prodigies I have here omitted, as partly fearing to be prolix: some again
I have found but not their sad events, and others I have let pass, as from
doubtful Authors; as the Earthquake and Tempest at the taking of Constantinople
by Mahumet the great from Constantine the last Christian Emperor of Greece; in
storming this City, there happned a direful Tempest of Thunder and Lightning,
and an Earthquake that killed 3000 Men, Women and Children, and ruined 800
houses, but Authors do not well agree in this, nor yet of the time; When it was
taken, one says Anno Domini 1452, May the 27. which was Whitsunday Eve; Knolls
writes 1453, May the 29. which was the Tuesday after Trinity Sunday that year;
But all agrees the City was quite depopulated, putting all to the Sword, but
what were reserved for Mahumet's pleasure, and those led away into a miserable
captivity; the Tyrant intending this for his Antichristian seat, called in the
Jews to inhabit it. Here you may see Heavens just revenge against a stubborn
people, perversely maintaining that diabolical Heresy against the Sacred and
ever blessed Trinity; at which time and Feast the Empire had a fatal period,
and the Grecians delivered into the hands of the most barbarous enemy; These
fatal Meteors are great motives to humble Man, to make him repent his
iniquities, and soberly remember the most dreadful day of Judgment, of which
these prodigies are forerunning fignes, according to Isaia cap. 24. ver. 1.
Ecce Dominus dissipabit terram, and nudabit eam, and affliget faciem ejus, and
disperget habitatores ejus.

Plagues and Epidemical Diseases.
Earthquakes are often forerunners of Plague and Famine (Heavens direful
revenge and just runishments) proceeding from excess or defect, and presaged
sometimes from subterranean vapors, restrained in the Earth, and by
rarifaction being grown over great to be contained, they do make violent
irruptions, and so by infecting the Air (in which we breath) they do breed
pestiferous diseases: but these exhalations are generally held most infectious
to beasts; For their heads being prone toward the Earth and near it, they do
draw in with their breath those crude exhalations into their bodies, much more
then Man, who stands erect: but beasts being genepally infected with the
viciated Air, and their blood contaminated, the eating of their flesh breeds
contagious Deseases in Man; and in such times, the greedy Grasier sends those
to the slaughter which he thinks to be infected, fearing they should die in his
hands, and keeps the soundest still for store; Of these general calamities I
could instance many; but fearing lest I should weary you with reading (as I am
with writing) I will briefly relate these.

Before the Nativity of Jesus Christ (the Worlds Redeemer) 18^. there happned a
Plague in Africa, that swept away 30000 Roman Soldiers, and of the Natives
1080,000, which depopulated not only many Towns and Cities, but some whole
Provinces.

In the year of Christ 171. Antoninus Emperor of Rome, it pleased God to visit
the World with a Plague, which made whole Countries like a Charnel house; This
general Pestilence began at Babylon, but spread its infection over a great part
of Europe.

In the year of Grace 254. there happned an Epidemical disease that raged
violently, and continued in several Countries the space of 15 years, all which
time the Church of God was persecuted by the Pagan and Tyrannical Emperors,
possesed with infernal spirits; in Rome at these times it rained blood, where
this Plague continued three years, while the living in the City were not able
to bury the dead.

From the Sacred Virgin's being a Mother 316. Maxentius in the Eastern
Countries, raised a terrible Persecution, putting all Christians to death that
he could find, and with several kinds of tortures to force them from their
allegiance and service to the Son of God: This persecution constrained many to
fly their Countries; and diverse for fear of Maxentius and his unhumane
competitours, obscured themselves in Caves of beasts in the Deserts, where from
savage Creatures they found more mercy then from Man; But this Christ revenged,
persecuting the Tyrants with Plague and Famine, which so consumed many
Countries, that they were destitute almost of Men, Women or Children, until the
Emperor had nothing but beasts to rule over, and not many of them neither.

From the Birth of our Lord and Savior 1346. there happned in that year three
great conjunctions of the higher Planets, viz. and, and these three all in in;
this year produced one of the most universal and destructive Plagues that ever
was inflicted upon wretched mortals; this pestiferous infection took the
original in the East Indies, and past over the world, no people safe either by
Land or Sea, the Air being generally contaminated as with a deadly poison; many
that year went to Sea, hoping by that means to avoid it, but in vain, for there
they were surprised with their whole families: this Epidemical disease was so
dreadful, that it banished all humanity, and perverted man from being a
sociable creature: Friends forsaking their Friends and Alies; Parents
unnaturally forsook their Children, and ungrateful Children their Parents: This
general disease continued 9. years in several Countries, and was as mortiferous
and raging as ever was Plague in any Country.

Some writers affirm how that this Plague began from fiery Exhalations risen
out of the Earth, whose malignancy infected the Air, and from those distempers
begot raging Fevers in Men, until the sword made incision of their inflamed
veins, a remedy worse then the disease. Others say this Plague took its sad
Exordium from fire that fell from Heaven: the most authentic Chronologers
record it thus; Lamech, a City of Arabia, now known by the name of Mecha, the
Metropolitan of the Antichristian Mahumetans superstition; in this City it
rained Blood and Snakes the space of three days and nights together; the
Serpents soon after perished in such multitudes, that the stench of their
corrupted bodies contaminated the Air in all the adjacent Regions; this
stupendous storm razed Mahumets Temple to the ground, and severed into many
pieces the Sepulcher of that infernal Impostor: The next year the Earth denied
her accustomed fruits, introducing a Famine more mortiferous then the former;
these direful calamities not moving man to repentance, (O incredulous and
obdurate hearts!) but contemning those dreadful judgments, were pleased with
their enemies fall, until they fell themselves; Piety expulsed, fled into
exile, while envy and confusion in Arms, put the world in an uproar, the sword
licensed in the hands of Furies, making a rude decimation of those who had
espaced both Plague and Famine.

These three last deplorable afflictions, were the most universal and
destructive that the world ever felt, or the Inhabitants groaned under since
the general Deluge, when in 40. days all living souls were destroyed from off
the face of the Earth, but what the Ark was fraighted withal, whereby to
replant the world again; and those for many months were wafted over the angry
waves, that lav'd the Earth polluted with enormous crimes, and transgressions
of unbelieving licentious men, only under the Law of Nature, to which brute
Beasts subject themselves. This Ark represented the figure of Baptism, 1 Pet.
3.20, 21. And moreover St. Hierome calls it a Type of the Catholic Church; the
raging storms and tumultuous billows (in opposition to one another) resemble
Herefies and Persecutions; the Ark outlived the fury of the Deluge, and so
shall the other to the worlds consummation; all perished that were not in the
first, so I need say no more of the last.

Historiographers conjecture that more Men, Women, and Children perished in one
of these Epidemical diseases, then in the universal Flood; the World being
conceived more populous then in the days of Noah, and the continuance much
longer; many will not believe these (being but humane traditions) and it is not
strange, since they want faith in divine Records; whereof some object that if
the Deluge were 15. cubits above the highest Hills, the superficies of the
Waters (on which the Ark floated) was swelled up to the middle Region of the
Air, in which no living creature can subsist; besides, they make queries from
whence should these magazins of Waters be extracted? the Fountains of the Earth
they conceive not sufficient; the Clouds are but thin dilated vapors; the
Waters mentioned above the Firmament could not descend so low in 100. years,
without a miracle.

To their objections, I might answer, 'twas the providence of God which
preserved them, to whom nothing is impossible, being sole Creator and Moderator
of the Universe; but since an Omnipotent and divine power condescended to make
Man's preservation by a humane means, humane reasons may be expected, for which
I refer the over curious unto the learned Expositors of Genesis; yet not to
leave them in a Sea at last, something I will say, not positively affirmed, but
conjecturally intimated only.

As for their Suppositions, the whole Element of Air is held naturally hot and
moist, and the middle Region cold but by accident, which frigid and restringent
cause being changed, the quality must cease, and so the Air (in general) might
convert to vapors innumerable; and the waters in the Earth (peradventure) were
dilated, and so made more fluxible, whose Fountains were opened for 40.
continued days, the Catarracts descending from their overburthned clouds; which
time (to humane apprehension) might increase the inundation to submerge the
terrestrial Globe 15. Cubits above the highest hills, whereof it is probable the
Armenian mountains were most exalted above the Earths center; and as the clouds
were exonerated by the waters that fell, it is like this inferior Air did
ascend, and assume the middle Regions Sphere, and so made apt for all living
creatures to breath in.

The Deluge ebbing, Mount Ararat appeared, on whose firm foundation the Ark
rested; the Waters by an orderly summons retreated* some to replenish the
Earths entrails and exhausted veins; others confined to channels of spacious
Rivers, ample Lakes, and Oceans almost unterminated; a great part (by the
influence of Stars) might be sublimed, and reconverted to vapors, thence
rarifying to Air, ascend their proper Orbs again, the grosser parts sink to
their seats of gravity, and so will I, this being above my Sphere; yet pleased
in recollecting my preservation past, the hope of one in future, transports my
mind beyond a Deluge, the landing Eternity.

A Compendium of Meteors, and Signs observed in former Ages, as at this
present, most prodigious in Nature, stupendous to Mortals, and portentious in
their dismal events.
THe Symptoms of Natures distempers I have rendered in a Chronological
breviate, with their direful effects, and sad events in general; and as for
others more particularly reflecting on England, I refer the Reader to my
History of Meteors, when it shall be produced to the public view. In this
Epitomy I have recorded some prodigies, and what succeeded them; yet not
presuming to presage what is to come (although I have a Solomon for it: Eccles.
c. 1. v. 8, and 9) that being reserved in the Creator's prescience only, and I
no Expositor; Yet generally when the Elements seem distracted from their common
course, most do conceive they are Admonitions to us of anger, and precursing
signs of punishment, if not remitted by repentance; and before the Sword (the
worst of mischiefs) is licensed in the hands of rude and merciless men, these
and such like are Alarums to the voluptuous Children of the World lulled into a
Lethargy by sin, charmed by Oblivion, Auditors to Vice, and deaf to Virtue.

Behold! malignant Planets, in the lowest House conjoin, presuming to affront
the Sun their Prince, while Night usurps the Throne of Day, illuminated by
intervals with Lightning, or by some dreadful Comet; the drops distilled from
Clouds convert to blood, the Earth denies her accustomed fruits, grows sterile,
or disabled through the discord of the other Elements, to nourish them unto
maturity; from hence corruption and Famine introduces Epidemical diseases, the
Ar infected for want of motion becomes offensive, not cool nor fit to breath
in, and on a sudden the giddy Winds burst forth in Hericanoes from their
obstruse Caves, hurrying all things down that hinder their blustering motions,
until opposed with eddie Winds, they turn all things topsie turvie! the Waters
in united streams stand still, or divide themselves; and at other times they
seem to scorn the Confines of their Channels, but in imitation of the Seas
swell above their Banks, as if ambitious to enlarge their Dominions! The Earth
grows unstable, and shaking as with an Ague, or laboring with some prodigious
birth, or from a Dropsy relapses into a burning Fever! Behold the backs of
angry Clouds, as if bestri'd by Furies hurried along by irrefrenary Tempests!
sometimes menacing the World as with a Deluge, at other times belching forth
flames of Fire, proclaiming combustions with impetuous Thunder! and many times,
sulphurous Meteors dilated within the obstruse Caverns of the Earth, seem to
beleagre Nature, and by springing of Mines, blow her up from the Center! the
aspiring heads of Rocks, by concussion of Meteors have been levelled with their
feet, Bulwarks of stone, ramm'd up with Mountains (made against the proud
surges of the Seas) have met, and others thrown down, sunk into valleys,
permitting the tumultuous billows to enter their breaches, and so invade the
Land; at which disorders Nature seems frighted, and in an Agony miscarries,
producing monstrous and abortive births.

These and all such prodigies are to humble the Mighty, and make the proud and
stiff-neck'd Atheists suppress their thoughts, abase their exalted minds, bend
their irreligious knees, and stoop to adore a Deity, beholding the Elements in
an uprore mutiny, and Nature their Mistress and Idaea fallen into an Ecstasy,
as if in a conflict betwixt Life and Death, or disenabled to rule the
subjugated Empire of the World: the Princes and Potentates of the Earth see
themselves impotent men; the sulphurious Ingeniers cannot be defended with
their Basaliscoes and Grenades, but frighted run to their Mines (intended for
the Throne of Horror) to shroud their fearful heads from the face of incensed
Heaven, acknowledging their fiery inventions but Squibs and Childish pot-guns.
These Meteors, though the meanest of the Almighties works, be pleased to accept
them from the meanest of his Servants, who truly wishes your prescience of
Meteors, and preservation from the fury and distemper of the Elements,
recommending you and all to the Sacred Protection of Heaven, remembering;
Protector in te sperantium Deus, sine quo nihil est validum, nibil sanctum.

A CONCLUSION TO This Book of Meteors.
Impartial Judges, and ingenious Jury, unto whose candid Verdict I submit,
hoping my faults are not capital, my Accusers not considerable, nor my Sentence
rigid; As for the escapes of the Pen and Press, they stand in this Sheet
corrected as for a Penance, yet expect a pardon by course of Law (if my Judges
be Civilians) or at least a Reprieve for another Sessions, and in the interim
licensed to go upon their Paroles, until exchanged for better; Yet asperge not
these sheets with the errors as if adulterated by me, but let them escape your
censures as they have done the Corrector, since I had no Revise nor Proof but
by accident; my abode remote from the Printer, who is the less culpable, the
Copy being much interlin'd, and the Corrector not conversant in the Subject,
whose faults (I hope) transcend not the Readers humanity, wishing they would
behold them as the Optic Science demonstrates contraction of objects through
concave Glasses; and if your clemency can extend its self to annihilate a few
interposed faults, I need not doubt your condescension to grant me an
Indulgence, stormed with injuries, rifled by pretended friends, false in their
words, perfidious in their trusts; these reflecting sometimes upon my weaker
cogitations, represent temporal objects that divert my mind which should direct
my pen: Yet I am contented (upon second and more serious considerations) since
it is the permissive will of God, who can raise me if he pleases above the
assaults of Fortune, or reach of malicious mortals, and graciously has placed
me above the degrees of Contempt, though underneath the lowest Sphere of Envy:
I wish those that want belief, were bound to make me reparations. If what has
been truly and positively affirmed, be not a sufficient Plea (for mistakes) nor
yet the Printers Table of Errors satisfactory, let those reflect, examine and
peruse their own, to which (while they live) they never shall subscribe

FINIS.
Manuscripts prepared for the Press.
Inprimis, The Scales of Commerce and trade: Geometry demonstrated both by
Lines and Numbers; from thence Astronomy, Cosmography and Navigation, proved
and delineated by the doctrine of Plain and Spherical Triangles, mentioned in
my printed Books of Arithmetic. The English Annalls from the invasion made by
Julius Caesar, continued to these times. Historical prescriptions,
Ecclesiastical and Moral. Speculum annorum, or an Ephemeris for 19 years to
come, ready to be published by the Author Thomas Willsford.

The faults escaped are thus corrected.
INtro. Page 2. line 1^^ dele they, p. 5. l. 6. dele so; p. 9. l. 15. read
miles; p. 10. l. 32. the r. these; p. 17. l. 17. r. counterpoysing; p. 18. l.
21. r. nor conducing; p. 26. l. 14 r. with the; p. 30. l. 21. r. 28 days; p.
33. l. 20. r. 1 H. 35 m. p. 40 l. 29. r. 1572. and l. 32. r. a Mother; p. 43.
l. 1. r. Alps; p. 48. l. 26. does r. do; p. 49. l. 3. r. repelled to; p. 53.
l. 28. dele he; p. 55. l. 9. r. not going far to seek, and l. 29 r. did
abrogate or alter; p. 57. l. 9. r. it is; p. 51. l. 31. as r. thus; p. 60. l.
10. r. and they; p. 58. l. 14. garment r. garland, and l. 32. reflection r
reflect on; p. 71. l. 22. r. and rising from low; p. 73. l. 11. r. Elements; p.
75. l. 19. 18 r. 28; p. 82. l. 29: r. warm at my time; p 88. l. 15. r.
stupifies; p. 99. l. 7. r. from; p. 104. l. 5. r, and l. 16. Summer r. Autumn;
p. 110. l. 3. r. levity; p. 112. l. 26. r. forced; p. 113. l 27. is r. are, and
l. 31. r. dissipates; p. 114. l. 14. warm, r. wan; p. 126. l. 20. r. levity; p.
136. l. 7. in, r. to; p. 139. l. 20. to, r. in; p. 140. l. 22. r. This is; p.
147. l. 31. r. without comparison; p. 149. l. 16. r. humidus; p. 164. l. 28. r.
usually; p. 171. l. 28. r. by Titus; p. 172. l. 20. r. protestation; p. 180. l.
30. r. Romans intestine tumults predicted; p. 185. l. 23. this r. his; p. 189.
l. 4. r. punishments

Reader, These Books following are Printed for Nath. Brook, and are to be Sold
at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhil.
1. TImes Treasure or Academy for the Gentry, for their accomplishment in
arguments of discourse, habit, fashion; summed up all in a Character of Honor:
By R. Brath, Esquire;

2. B. Morton on the Sacrament, in Folio.

3. That excellent Piece of Physiognomy and Chiromancy, Metoposcopy, the
Symmetrical Proportions and signal Moles of the Body; the subject of Dreams: To
which is added the Art of Memory; By R. Sanders, Fol.

4. Theatrum Chemicum Britanicum, containing several Poetical pieces of our
famous English Philosophers, which have written the Hermetick Mysteries in
their ancient language: By the truly noble, Elias Ashmole, Esquire;

5. Chiromancy: Or, the Art of Divining by the Lines engraven in the hand of
Man by Dame Nature, in 19. Genitures; with a learned Discourse of the soul of
the World: By Geo. Wharton, Esquire;

6. Catholic History, collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councils, and
ancient Fathers, in answer to Dr. Vanes lost sheep returned home: By Edward
Chesenbale, Esquire;

7. Tactometrica, or the Geometry of Regulars, after a new manner, in Solids:
with useful Experiments, never before extant, for Gauging; a work useful for
all that are employed in the Art Metrical: By John Wyberd, Dr. in Physic.

8. An Astrological Discourse, with Mathematical Demonstrations, proving the
influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon Elementary bodies: By Sir Chr.
Heyden, Knight.

9. Magic Astrology vindicated by H. Warren.

10. Catastrophe magnatum: by N. Culpepper.

11. Ephemerides for the year 1652. by N. Culpepper.

12. Lux Veritates, Judicial Astrology vindicated. and Demonology confuted; By
W. Ramsey Gent.

13. The History of the Golden Ass.

14. The painting of the Ancients, the beginning, progress, and consummating of
that noble Art.

15. Isreal's Redemption, or the Prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
earth: By R. M.

16. An introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a determination of the
original of the Soul: by C. Hothans, Fellow of Peter-house in Cambridge.

17. Teratologia: Or, a Discovery of God's Wonders manifested by bloody Rain
and Waters: by J.S.

18. Fons Lachrymarum: or, a Fountain of Tears; with an Elegy on Sir Charles
Lucas, by J. Quarles.

19. Oedipus: or a Resolver of Secrets in Nature, and resolution in amorous,
natural Problems; by C. M.

20. The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed soul from the depth of
everlasting darkness; by T. Fetisplace.

21. Nocturnal Lucubrations, with Epigrams, and Epitaphs: by R. Chamberlain.

22. The unfortunate Mother, a Tragedy by T.M.

23. The Rebellion, a Comedy; by T. R.

24. The Tragedy of Messalina; by N. Richards.

25. A Treatise of Contentation, fit for these sad and troublesome times; By J.
Hall, B. of Norwich.

26. The grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup
from the Laity at the Lords Table; by D. Featley, D. D. 4.

27. The cause and cure of Ignorance, Error, and Profaneness; or a more
hopeful way to Grace and Salvation: by R. Young, 8.

28. A Bridle for the Times, tending to still the Murmuring, to settle the
wavering, to stay the wandering, to strengthen the Fainting; By J.B. of Yarm.

29. Comforts against the fear of Death, wherein are several evidences of the
work of Grace; by J.C.

30. Jacobs Seed; or the excellency of seeking God by Prayer; By Jer. Buroughs.

31. The zealous Magistrate a Sermon. by T. Threscot.

32. Britanma Rediviva, a Sermon before the Judges, Aug. 1648. By J. Shaw,
Minister of Hull.

33. The Princess Royal, a Sermon before the Judges, March 24. 1650. By J.
Shaw, Min. of Hull.

34. New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, Aug. 1651.

35. Quakers cause at second hearing, being a full answer to their Tenets.

36. Divinity no enemy to Astrology: a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers,
for the year 1653. by Dr. Th. Swaddling.

37. Historical Relation of the first planting of the English in New England,
in the year 1628. to the year 1653. and all the material passages happening
there exactly performed.

38. Select Thoughts: or, Choice Helps for a pious spirit, beholding the
excellency of her Lord Jesus: by J. Hall, B. of Norwich. A new piece.

39. The holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion. To which is added,
Songs in the night: or, Cheerfulness under affliction: by J. Hall, Bishop of
Norwich. A new piece.

40. History of Balaam and Jonah, and John the Baptist in Verse; with other
Poems; by J. Harvie, Esquire;

41. Re-assertion of grace, Vindiciae Evangelii: or, the Vindication of the
Gospel. Or a reply to Mr. Anthony Burghess Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr.
Rutherford, by Robert Town.

42. All the Works of Astrology of Mr. W. Lilly, Gent.

43. Anabaptists anatomized and silenced, or a dispute with M. Tombs, by M. J.
Crag, where all may receive satisfaction in that controversy; the best extant.

44. The sum of practical Divinity; or the grounds of Religion in a
catechistical way; by Mr. Christopher Love, late Min. of the Gospel: a useful
piece.

45. The Yorkshire Spaw, or the virtue and use of those waters in the curing
of desperate diseases, with rules necessary to be known by all that repair
thither.

46. That complete piece called, The exact Surveyor of Land, showing how to
plot all manner of Grounds, and to reduce and divide the same: also Irish
measure reduced into English statute measure, useful for all that either sell or
purchase: by J. Air.

47. Judgment set, and Books opened, Religion tried whether it be of God or
Men: by M. Webster.

48. Milk for children, or a plain and easy method, teaching to Read, and to
Write; with brief Rules for Schoolmasters to instruct their Scholars in, and
Masters to instruct their families in: by Dr. Thomas.

49. Culpepper's last Legacies, left to his Wife, for the public good, being
the choicest and most profitable Secrets, which while he lived was locked up in
his breast, resolved never to be published till after his death; being
experiments in Physic and Chyrurgery, compounding Medicines, etc.

50 Culpepper's Semiotica, or his Astrological judgment of Diseases, much
enlarged from the Decumbiture of the sick, the way to find out the cause,
change, and end of the disease: also whether the sick be likely to live or die,
with the signs of life and death by the body of the sick party, according to
the judgment of Hippocrates, with a Treatise of Urines: by N. Culpepper.

51. Cornelius Agrippa, his fourth book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy;
Magical Elements of Peter de Abbona, the nature of Spirits, made English by R.
Turner.

52. A Glimpse of Divine Light, being an Explication of some passages exhibited
to the Commissioners of Whitehall for approbation of public Preachers, against
Joh. Harrison of Lund. Chap. Lancash.

53. The Queens Closet opened; Incomparable Secret in physic, chyrurgry,
preserving, candying, and cooking, as they were presented to the Queen,
transcribed from the true copies of her Majesty's own Receipt books: by W. M.
one of her late servants.

54. The Conveyancers of Light, or the complete Clerk and Scriveners Guide;
being an exact draught of all Presidents and Assurances now in use, as they
were penned and perfected by diverse learned Judges, eminent Lawyers, and great
conveyancers both ancient and modern; whereunto is added a Concordance from K.
Rich. 3. to this present.

55. A Satyr against Hypocrites; 4.

56. Iron Rod put into the L. Protectors hand, to break in pieces all
antichrist. power; by J. Sanders.

57. Wits Interpreter, the English Parnassus, or a guide to those admirable
accomplishments that complete our english Gentry in the most acceptable
qualifications of Discourse or Writings; also the whole mystery of those
pleasing Witchcrafts of Eloquence and Love, are made easy in the Art of
Reasoning, Theater of Courtship, Labyrinth of Fancies, Love songs, Drollery;
the perfect inditer of Letters a la mode: by J. C.

58. The Floating Island, a Trage-comedy acted before the King, by the Students
of Christ Church in Oxford: By Dr. Stroude.

59. Paracelsus Occult Philosophy of the mysteries of Nature, and his secret
Alchimy.

60. Wit and Drollery, with other Jovial Poems, by Sir I.M. ^am. 1. Sym. 5.
W.D. Never before printed.

61. Illustrious Shepherdess, the imperious Brother; translated out of Spanish:
a famed Romance.

62. Monarchy no Monarchy, with the Prophefies of the White King, and other
explained, to which is added several Hieroglyphics: by W. Lilly, Student in
Astrology. With his other Works.

63. Shorthand writing made most plain and easiest that ever was, newly
published by J. Rich, Mr. in short-writing.

64. Tectonicon, showing the exact measuring all manner of land-squares,
timber, stone, steeples, pillars, globes, also the making and use of the
Carpenters rule, etc. fit to be known by all Surveyors, Land-meters, Joyners,
Carpenters and Masons; by L. Diggs.

65. Heaven and Earth shaken, a Treatise showing how Kings and Princes, and
their governments, are turned and changed: by J. Davis, Minist. in Dever.

66. The Tears of the Indies, being an Historical Relation of the cruelties of
the Spaniards in the Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, etc. in the West
Indies: by Cosaus. B. in Spain, an eyewitness.

67. Them is Aurea, the Laws of the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, written by
Count Mayerus, and now Englished for to inform that honorable Society: by T. H.

68. Complete Midwifes practice, in the high and weighty concernments of the
Birth of Mankind: or perfect Rules derived from the Experiences and Writings,
not only of our English, but the most accomplished and absolute practice of
many French, Spanish, Italians, and other Nations, fitted for the weakest
capacities, in a short time to attain the knowledge of the whole Art: by T. C.
and others.

69. Sportive Wit, the Muses Merriment, a new spring of Drollery, Jovial
Fancies, etc.

70. J. Tradescan's Rarities, published by himself.

71. Most approved Medicines and Remedies for the diseases in the body of Man:
by A. Read, Dr. in Ph.

72. Art of simpling, an introduction to the knowledge and gathering of Plants,
wherein the Definitions, Divisions, Places, Descriptions, Differences, Names,
Virtues, times of flourishing and gathering, Uses, Temperatures, signatures of
plants. To which is added, a Discovery of the lesser World: by W. C.

73. Willsfords Arithmetic, made plain to the easiest capacity, in two books,
viz. Natural and Decimal, being most useful for all Gentlemen, Merchants,
Shopkeepers, and all others: by T. Willsford, Gent.

74. Adam in Eden, the paradise of Plants, a Description of all our English
plants, wild or otherwise, with their Signatures applied to the parts of the
body of Man, with their Physical use, that a man may be his own Physician, the
ingredients being to be had in every field and garden: made public by W.
Coals, M. D. for the benefit of all English men.

75. The perfect Cook; a right method of the Art of Cookery, restoring the
whole practice to a more finer way then ever before extant.

76. Medicina Magica, tamen Physica, the method of curing diseases by Sympathy
and Antipathy; a work fit to be known by all: by S. Bolton.

77. The Treasury of the Soul.

78. The expert Doctors Dispensatory; the whole Art of Physic restored to
practice. The Apothecaries Shop, and Chyrurgians Closet, with all safe
practices are maintained: a useful piece.

79. The History and Nature of Meteors, with the weathers prediction: by T.
Willsford, Gent.

80. The proceeding of the High Court of Justice against the late King Charles,
with his Speech upon the Scaffold, and other proceedings, Jan. 30. 1648.

81. Commentary on the 15. Psalm; by Mr. Christopher Cartwright, Min. of the
Gospel in York.

82. Sir Kellum Digby's and other Ladies of Honor, their Physic and
Surgery; with preferving, etc.

83. Cabinet of Jewels; man's misery, God's mercy, Christ's treasury, etc. in
eight Sermons; with an Appendix of the nature of Tithes under the Gospel; with
an Expediency of Marriage in public Assembly: by J. Cragg, Min. of the Gospel.

84. The mysteries of Love and Eloquence, or the Arts of Wooing and
Complementing; in which are discovered the pleasures, recreations of persuasive
Language, whether by Letters or other usual or more secret Dispatches, etc.

FINIS.

