NEW-ENGLANDS SALAMANDER, DISCOVERED By an irreligious and scornful Pamphlet,
called New Englands Jonas cast up at London, etc. Owned by Major John Child,
but not probable to be written by him. OR, A satisfactory answer to many
aspersions cast upon New England therein.

Wherein our government there is showed to be legal and not Arbitrary, being
as near the Law of England as our condition will permit.

Together With a brief Reply to what is written in answer to certain passages
in a late Book called Hypocrisy unmasked.

By Edw. Winslow.

LONDON, Printed by Ric. Cotes, for John Bellamy, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the three Golden Lions in Cornehill near the Royal
Exchange, 1647.

TO Major John Child in answer to his Preface.
SIR,
I Am sorry for your own sake, being a Gentleman reported to be peaceable in
your conversation, that you should be thus engaged in other men's quarrels;
especially to father other men's falsehoods and irreligious jeeres and scoffs,
whose spirits if you were so well acquainted with as my self and some others
that came lately from New England, as well as thousands in the Country, you
would be more wary then to engage as you do.

But first for answer to your Preface, and then I conceive I have answered
every word of yours in your seeming Treatise: And yet I would not be mistaken
that any should think I judge you unable to write such a piece, for there is
no solidity in it: but I am so well acquainted with this language and such
proceedings before ever I saw your face, as no man is or ever was better
acquainted with the phrase or writings of another, then I am with your chief
animator to this undertaking, whom I call New-Englands Salamander, because of
his constant and many years exercise, and delight in opposition to whatsoever
has been judged most wholesome and safe for the weale-publick of the Country
(from whence he last came) either in Politics or Ecclesiastics, being ever
willing to enjoy the common benefits of peace by government (which maintains
every man in his proper right) but never willing to bear any part of the
charge in supporting the same, as appeared by his constant cavilling thereat
when ever any rates came upon the country though never so easy and just.

But to come to the occasion of your printing the following relation, which you
say are the sufferings that not only my Brother Robert Child Doctor of
Physic, with some Gentlemen and others have suffered in their persons and
estates by Fines and imprisonment in New England, and false reports and feigned
miracles bear, etc. For answer, that your brother was in prison, and for what I
certified you at my first coming over; though to you grievous in regard of
natural affection, (which I honor where I find in any;) Then also being
occasioned thereunto I freely imparted to you the Countries colorable grounds
of suspecting his agency for the great Incendiaries of Europe, besides the
matter of fact for which he was committed, yea that the very year he came
over, a gentleman in the country (Mr. Peter's by name) was advised by letters
from a foreign part that the Jesuits had an agent that Summer in New England.
And that the Country comparing his practice with the intelligence were more
jealous of him then any; (though to me he was a mere stranger) and therefore
I marvel that Major Child should give me occasion, and force me to publish
these things which I neither affect nor intended: but I shall forbear in that
kind because I would not provoke.

As for their estates being weakened by Fines, that is yet to prove: for though
they were fined, yet the fines were not levied, nay so gentle was the censure
of the Court, that upon the public acknowledgement of the offense the Fine was
to be remitted to all or any one of them so doing. And for false reports and
feigned miracles fomented here to color their unjust proceedings, as you term
it; I answer, your book is the first reporter of many things I here meet with,
especially as you lay them down, as shall appear more particularly.

In the next place you say, They give out that my brother and others desire a
toleration of all Religions: This is the first time that ever I heard it so
reported of them.

Secondly, whereas you say they are accused to be against all government both
in Church and Common weak: This I know to be false: for I heard them demand in
Court the Presbyterian government, and it was granted them. Besides, before
this demand in Court, at a private conference with an eminent person (who well
hoped to have satisfied them) he demanded of the Petitioners what Church
government it was they would have? One of them answered, he desired that
particular government which Mr. John Goodwin in Colemanstreet was exercised in.
Another of them said, he knew not what that was: but he for his part desired
the Presbyterian government. A third of them said he desired the Episcopal
government if it might be, if not, the Presbyterian: And a fourth told me
himself that he disclaimed any thing in the Petition that was against the
government of the Churches in New England, etc. resting and liking what was
there done in that kind. Now the former three passages (and not without the
latter) were all told me by grave persons in New England, such as I believe.
And therefore if any so accuse them I must needs clear them: but withal
testify I never met with this accusation against them before I read it in your
book.

Thirdly, for their petitioning the Parliament; Take notice we hold that no
subject ought to be restrained this liberty, and therefore count it no
offense nor ever did, and therefore they were not committed for that.

A fourth false report you term, is, Their Petition brought from thence to be
presented to the Parliament (which they had named Jones) in a ship called the
Supply; being in a storm near Silly, out of horror of conscience the
petition was torn and thrown over board: and that then the storm immediately
ceased, and they ^ir^^^lously saved. To this I answer, I was not in the ship (I
praise God) and therefore what I say in it must be from others whom I judge
truly godly, and of the most grave and solid persons amongst them; And Sir,
let me tell you, and the world in answer to you, I have heard the passage from
diverse, but never as you print it; and do think verily your informers belie
themselves that they may have somewhat to cavil at. But though I had not
thought to have entered upon a large answer to any particular: yet it being one
of the heads of your Treatise, I shall be larger in answering that then
another thing; partly to vindicate Mr. C^^on who is much abused in your book,
and partly from their own pen to show the profane carriage of the party in
the ship by their fearful provoking the Almighty to follow them with his
terrors throughout the voyage from New England to Silley, where they had a
great deliverance, and yet nevertheless to show how they go on still to abuse
Gods mercy, patience and long suffering by this profane title and story
colored by your self. And thus much for answer to your Preface. As for the
four heads of your book and the Postscript, I shall answer them as they arise.

An answer to the imperfect relation of the Hingam case.
Were I not so well acquainted with our New-England-Salamanders ways, and what
a puther he made in the Country about this business, I should stand amazed
at the malice of men to see this brought against the government. To answer
either this case or the next at length would ask so much pains, and be so
great a bulk, as their book being but a two penny jeering Gigge, penned
rather to please the fancy of common understandings, then to satisfy any solid
judgments; would go much further then ever the answer would be like to
follow, that so he might bemire us with a witness. And if he can cause any
reproach to lie upon us (whether just or unjust, that matters not) then has
he hit the mark he shoots at. And therefore to avoid the many particulars
would fall in a distinct answer by giving an account of the whole business, I
shall desire the Reader to accept this general.

The Inhabitants of Hingam were known to be a peaceable and industrious
people, and so continued for many years; The Lord supporting them in the midst
of many straights in their first beginnings, crowning their endeavors with his
blessing, and raising them up to a comfortable and prosperous outward condition
of life, and such is their state through Gods mercy and goodness this day,
living very plentifully. But Satan envying their happiness (the Lord
permitting as it seems) on a sudden cast a bone of division amongst them,
which took mightily, to the great grief and admiration of their neighbors on
every side; which controversy indeed arose about the choice of their Captain
as is related. But our Salamander living too near them, and being too well
acquainted with them, blew up this to such an height by his continual counsel
and advise which the major part of the Town followed to their own smart, and
the great grief and trouble of Church and Commonweal, as they not only
filled their Court with complaints against each other, and wearied out the
chief Magistrates in place, but complained openly against one of them, viz.
the Deputy Governor, who upon hearing the Case thought good to bind some of
them over to the Court; some submitted and gave bond, others refused, and were
sent to prison, etc. This Gentleman, as on all other occasions so in this
particular much honored himself, by leaving his place upon the Bench and going
to the Bar, and would not be persuaded to cover his head or take his place
till the case was heard and ended, which continued many days, partly by reason
of the great liberty the Court gave the Plaintiffes in regard it reflected upon
one of themselves, (and I think the first case that ever befell in that kind;)
but more especially because our Salamander was got to Boston, where though he
would not openly show himself, yet kept close in a private room where they
had recourse unto him many days, yea many times a day for advice, and followed
it to the utmost, to the great charge of the Country (which came to much more,
as I have heard, then the hundred pounds fine which was laid upon them) in
providing the diet of their Court.

But the Court finding for the Defendant after much trouble in many days
agitation fined the Plaintiffes in an hundred pound, and laid it upon sundry of
them in particular amercements according to their several demeanours in the
action, and left the Deputy Governor to take his course with them, who only
rested in the vindication of his name; which the Country so far cleared, as
not long after, their election day falling by course, they chose him their
Governor, a place not strange to him, in which we left him, having more often
borne it then all others in that Government. And for the differences which
befell them in their Church; whether the Court or the Churches I know not, but
the one entreated diverse of the Elders to go unto them, who through Gods mercy
and blessing upon their endeavors prevented a division amongst them, though
they could not at first settle things so well as they desired. And thus much
for answer to the Hi^gam case which may be sufficient to satisfy any
judicious Reader: and foe those whose hearts are fraught with malice, the Lord
only can convict such, to whom I leave them.

An answer to the second head, namely the Petition of Doctor Robert Child, etc.
This Remonstance and Petition of theirs which has made so great a sound in
other places as well as here, notwithstanding their golden pretenses of respect
and reformation, was no sooner delivered, but before they could possibly
exspect an answer from the Court (notwithstanding the largeness of it) Copies
were dispersed into the hands of some known ill affected people in the
several governments adjoining, as Plym^th, Con^^tac^t, New Haven, etc. who
gloried not a little in it; nay the Petitioners spared no pains, for before
our coming away we heard from the Dutch Plantation, Virginia and Bermudas,
that they had them here also, with such expressions in their Letters as the
present governor of Barmudas was bold to affirm to a Gentleman from whom I
had it, who was then bound for New England to get passage for England, that he
was confident he should find New England altogether by the ears as well as
England; which he well knew by a Petition and Remonstrance which he had
received from thence, etc. Now had a peaceable Reformation been the mark they
aimed at, they would not have gone about thus to make the government so much
despised far and near, by casting such contempt upon them as they have
endeavored before ever they knew what acceptance their Remonstrance and
Petition would find; which was taken into consideration till the next general
Court, where they were answered at large, charged with manifold falsehoods and
contempts and fined for the same, after a solemn hearing of the Cause.

But however I shall forbear to give a particular answer in print to the said
Remonstrance, not because I cannot, for I have the whole Case, the Courts
defense against it, etc. which would be larger then both these books, being
as I said before too large in regard of the price of the buyer; and therefore
shall give such a general answer as may satisfy the indifferent and equal
minded Reader, and thereby deceive also our Salamanders expectation to draw out
from me the whole which befell since his coming away, that so he might find
more fuel to baske himself in, and satiate his contention humors to the full.

But for answer, good reader, take notice as well of the quality of these
Petitioners as of their demeanor before expressed, and then thou shall find
diverse of them to be inconsiderable in regard of propriety with us; who might
be justly suspected to draw in the rest who are much bewailed by many of us:
and in so doing it is possible thou may as well be jealous of their good
intents as those in the Country: For three of them, namely Doctor Child, John
Smith and John Dand, they are persons that have no propriety or known proper
estate in the government where they are so busy to disturb and distract: and
for Mr. Thomas Foul (who whether drawn in or no I know not) he joined with
them in this Petition and Remonstrance at such a time when he was resolved to
leave the Country, and since has done, and sent for his wife and family, as I
hear. As for Doctor Child he is a Gentleman that has traveled other parts
before h^e came to us, namely Italy; confesses he was twice at Rome, speaks
sometimes highly as I have heard reported in favor of the Jesuits, and
however he took the degree of Doctor in Physic at Padua, yet does not at all
practice, though he has been twice in the Country where many times is need
enough. At his first coming to New England he brought letters commendatory,
found good acceptance by reason thereof with the best; falls upon a dilligent
survey of the whole Country, and painefully travells on foot from Plantation
to Plantation; takes notice of the Havens, situation, strength, Churches,
Towns, number of Inhabitants, and when he had finished this toylesome task,
returns again for England, being able to give a better account then any of
the Country in that respect. He comes a second time, and not only bestows
some Books on the College, as Sir K^ Digby and many others commendably did,
but brings second Letters commendatory, having put in some stock among some
Merchants of London, and for the advancement of Iron works in the Country,
which through Gods goodness are like to become very profitable to them; but
has no more to do in the managing of them then any here who have other their
Agents being expert in the work. This Gentleman's carriage is now changed, and
is not only ready to close with such as are discontented, but to be a leader
of such against the government, affront the Authority God has hitherto
honored with his blessing, appeal from their justice, and thereby seek to
evade any censure; and if he might be thus suffered, why not others? and then
we must all give over; for if we have not the power of government, and cannot
administer justice seasonably on all occasions, well we may come back again
and take some other course, but we cannot there subsist.

A second of these is Mr. John Smith, who formerly lived about two or three
years in Boston, but before this Remonstrance, himself and wife were removed
to Road Island, but never had any personal inheritance in the Country, and was
now at the Massachusetts but as a stranger.

A third is one Mr. John Dand, who has lived in Boston as a so^ourner since
these wars in another man's house at Board hire, whose business and occasions
there are unknown unto us; and whose carriage till this present was seemingly
fair, but all on a sudden though no further interessed in the Country he
thus engages himself against the Authority of the place. Thus taking Mr.
Fowl^ with them who was upon departure from the Country as before, you may see
the persons to be such as have no considerable interest amongst us, at least
four in seven: And all this being true I have related, I suppose by this time
the Reader may conceive, or at least suspect their fair pretenses and great
glisterings are not pure gold.

But besides all this take notice good Reader, that our Salamander wintred many
months amongst them, very gracious and frequent in their companies, and no
doubt a great help in furthering their design in their Remonstrance, which
brake forth not long after his return home the spring following: and indeed
his company had been enough alone to have produced such an effect; and
therefore for my part so well knowing the man I cannot wonder at it as many
do, assuring my self be better knows how to ripen such fruit then all the
Costermongers in London.

And now let me go to the Title of the book which has its relation to the
Petition aforesaid; and after their Gigge called New-Englands Jones cast up at
London, they would make the world believe that diverse honest and godly persons
are imprisoned in New England for Petitioning for government in the
Commonweal, according to the Laws of England, and either for desiring
admittance of themselves and children to the Sacraments in our Churches, or
else for leave to have Ministers and Church government according to the best
reformation of England and Scotland. Now these charges are most notorious
false, and so known, for I came not alone from New England, but accompanied
with an hundred persons at least, which I believe can testify in the case. And
therefore Major Child take notice how you are abused by them to father such
devilish and slanderous reports as these.

For the first, There were none committed for petitioning, but for their
Remonstrance and the many false charges and seditious insinuations tending to
faction and insurrections sleighting the government, etc. And lest any should
think (as I hear some do) that the Court of the Massachusetts has dealt
rigorously with them, and that the Petition is very fair and orderly, etc. let
the Reader know that such thoughts must either proceed from great weakness in
not understanding or discerning the many gross charges in it, or else from
partiality or evil affection to the Government which they neither love nor
know; for in their Remonstrance they not only defame the Government, but
control the wisdom of the State of England in the frame of their Charter
which is under the broad Seal of the Kingdom by charging the Government to
be an ill compacted vessel. Secondly, they charge all the afflictions that
have befallen the personal Inhabitants either by sicknesses on the land, or
losses at Sea upon the evil of the Government. Thirdly, they go about to
persuade the people, that all the privileges granted and confirmed under the
broad Seal to the Governor and Company of the Massachusetts belong to all
freeborne English men; which contrariwise belong only to the said Governor
and Company, and such as they shall think meet to receive. Fourthly, they
closely insinuate into the minds of the people (as the jealousies of others)
that these now in authority do intend to exercise unwarranted dominion, and
an Arbitrary Government abominable to Parliament, etc. foretelling them of
intolerable bondage, which is enough alone to stir up a people to commotion.
Fifthly, how do they go about to weaken the authority of the Laws of the
place, the peoples reverence of and obedience to them in this their
Remonstrance, by persuading the people that partly through want of the body of
the English Laws, and partly that through the insufficiency and ill frame of
those they have, they can expect no sure enjoyment of their lives and liberties
under them: when as the State well knew the English body of Laws was too heavy
for us, and therefore as liberty is granted in our Patents to make our own
Laws, so it is with this proviso, that they be as near the Laws of England
as may be, which we understand as near as our condition will permit, which I
shall speak more of elsewhere. Sixthly, they falsely charge the Government with
denying liberty of Votes where they allow them, as in choice of Military
officers, which is common to the non-Freemen with such as are free. Seventhly,
their speeches in their Remonstrance are charged to tend to Sedition by
insinuating into the peoples minds, That there are many thousands secretly
discontented at the Government, etc. whereby those that are so may be
emboldned to discover themselves, and know to whom to repair; and what greater
means can be used to unsetle a settled people, and to kindle a flame in a
peaceable Commonweal, if the Lord prevent not, and Authority should suffer
such things to pass uncensured? Eighthly, they slander the Discipline of the
Churches in the Country, and the civil Government also, by inferring that the
frame and dispensations thereof are such, as godly, sober, peaceable men cannot
there live like Christians; which they seem to conclude from hence, that they
desire liberty to remove from thence where they may live like Christians: when
as indeed our arms are open to receive such both into Church and Commonweal,
blessing God for their society. Ninthly, they do in effect charge the
Government with Tyranny in impressing their persons to the wars, committing
them to prison, fining, rating them, etc. and all unjustly and illegally,
whereas no war is undertaken, nor any Press goes forth, but according to Law
established; but the thing they would have is that any English man may volens
nolens, take his habitation in any Government, be as free as the best, etc.
thus breaking all Order, Charters, and peace of Societies: for if he be English
borne (by their principles) no Government may refuse him be he never so
pestilent, whether Jesuit or worse. Tenthly, they ^ay a false charge upon the
Churches in affirming, t^^^ Christian vigilance is no way exercised toward
such ^^ are not in Church fellowship: whereas they cannot but know the
contrary. For however we have nothing to do to bring them to the Church, and
cannot cast out those that were never within, yet privately we perform the
duty of Christians toward them, either in holding private Communion with such
as are godly, or reproving and exhorting the rest also as occasion and
opportunity offers. Eleventhly, that this dirt might stick fast, and men
might more easily receive these injurious charges against the Government; in
the conclusion they proclaim, That our brethren in England (meaning the
Independents) dee flee from us at from a Pest. When as for my part I believe
that if our brethren were with us they would close with our practice, or at
least we should be dealt more brotherly withal, and then we should not only
hearken to what counsel should be of God, from them or any other in Gods way
but be willing to reform any thing that is amiss either in Church or
Commonweal. Twelfthly, that it may appear these injurious charges are their
own apprehensions, and pretenses rather then jealousies of any others, they
have publicly declared their disaffection to the Government, in that being
called to the Court to render account of their mis-apprehensions, and evil
expressions in the premises, they refused to answer: but by appealing from the
Government they disclaimed the jurisdiction thereof, (what in them lay) before
they knew whether the Court would give any sentence against them or not: when
as indeed their Charter injoyneth nor requires any appeal, but have the power
of absolute Government by virtue thereof: but these seven Petitioners, whereof
three are mere strangers and have no propriety within the Government (and a
fourth then to depart and now departed from it) will not bear it as the rest.
And for my part if these four that were Inhabitants were not drawn in by the
three strangers to make up the number of seven to trouble the Commonweal, I
should wonder (well knowing their abilities otherwise, especially of some of
them) there being no want of fit persons if many thousands discontented as they
say about them upon such a straight; but I look upon this speech of theirs as
tending rather to incite discontented persons to repair unto them, then having
any realitie in it. And for the matter of appeal from New England hither,
which is three thousand miles distant, it will be found to be destructive to
them that there live: for no Country can subsist without government, or
repair so far to it; nor will any wise man accept a place in Government
where he shall be exposed to go so far to give account of his actions,
though they be never so just: But the best is, the Parliament is known (and
it is their duty) to seek the good of the subjects by all due means: and I
doubt not (if ever tendered to them) but they will soon discover the mischief
intended by our adversaries, or at least like to ensue (if they prevail) by
overthrowing those hopeful beginnings of New England in straightning our
privileges at such a time, when Englands are restored; but we hope to share
with them rather by enlargement, being we went out in those evil times when
the Bishops were so potent being persecuted by them, and in that we suffered
since with the Parliament in adhering to them to the loss of Ships, and Goods,
etc. But I shall rest on God in what is said, hoping the Reader will be
satisfied in point of our innocence in regard of the evils charged on us; and
therefore to proceed.

In the next place whereas they complain of Imprisonment, one of them being to
go to Sea just when things were to be heard, was required to give bond to
stand to the award of the Court, leaving six partners behind him to plead his
cause; also Mr. Smith being a dweller in another Government and not there,
being present at that same time was required to do the like; which order they
withstood for an hour or thereabouts, and were that time under the Marshalls
custody, but no sooner advised they with our Salamander their Counsel, but he
advised them to give security, which they accordingly did, and so were
dismissed; now this I suppose was because he was to go to Sea with them
immediately, which they accordingly did.

Secondly, take notice that before Doctor Child, etc. were committed, the
business of the Remonstrance was ended, and they censured by Fine, every one
according to his particular offense, and carriage in managing the whole, and it
is not our manner to punish twice for one offense.

Thirdly, take notice that the Government they charge was proved in open Court
to be according to the Law of England, and therefore not committed for
Petitioning for that they had.

Fourthly, let the Reader know that the Presbyterian Government was as freely
tendered them by the Governor in the open Court without any contradiction of
any the Assistants or other, ^s ever I heard any thing in my life, though it
appears that our Salamander is not a little troubled at it, as I shall have
occasion to touch in my answer to the Postscript, which I verily believe he
penned every word.

Lastly, let the Reader take notice that Doctor Robert Child, Mr. John Smith,
and Mr. John Dand, were committed for certain Papers upon close search of
Dands Closet, there found the night before the Ship came away, which were far
more factious and seditious then the former. Doctor Child being committed
because one of the Coppies was under his known hand, another Copy under Mr.
Dands hand, and both in his custody; Mr. Smith in that he not only offered to
rescue the Papers from the Officers that were sent to make search: but when he
saw that he could not rescue them, brake out into high speeches against the
Government: and amongst other things said, he hoped ere long to do as much to
the Governors Closet, and do as much to him as he did for them, etc. or to
the like purpose. And now Major Child, let the world and you take notice
together wherefore your Brother and those honest and godly persons you pretend
to speak of were committed. Nor do I believe that any people under the heavens
that know what belongs to Government and have the power of it, would do less
then the Magistrates there did. But what the event will be God only knows;
but this I know, they are in the hands of merciful men, however they have
been abused, or may by our Salamander (whose reports I often meet with) or by
any other whatsoever.

And for answer to their relation of the effects this Petition produced, much
of it is false and answered before, the rest not worthy the answering; as
concerning the Elders, their long Sermons to provoke the Magistrates against
them, etc. no wise man will believe as they relate. And thus much for answer to
the second part of their Book concerning the Petition and Remonstrance.

A brief answer to the third head of their Book, concerning the Capital
Laws of the Massachusetts etc.
HEre I find the capital Laws of the Massachusetts reprinted, and the oath
they administer to their Freemen, which I suppose they are sorry they can find
no more fault with: And all these Capitalls rehearsed to show the danger Doctor
Child is under by virtue of the last, which follows in these words.

If any man shall conspire or attempt any invasion, insurrection or public
rebellion against our Commonwealth, or shall endeavor to surprise any Town
or Towns, Fort or Forts therein, or shall treacherously and perfidiously
attempt the alteration and subversion of our frame of Policy or Government
fundamentally, he shall be put to death, Numb. 162 Sam. 3. and 18. and 20.

Now if together with this they had manifestd a liberty the Court gives to any
notwithstanding this Law, fairly and freely to show their grievance at any
thing they conceive amiss, and needs either alteration or repeal, then they
had dealt fairly indeed: but because they leave it out, I take it my duty to
put it in. I know our Salamander is not without some exception at any thing we
can do: but because I find none more then as before, I shall pass to the
next head of their book.

An answer to their Relation concerning the throwing the Petition overboard as
a Jonas as they term it.
I Acknowledge that Mr. Cotton taught from that Text they mention in 2 Cant.
15. Take us the Foxes the little Foxes which destroy the vines, etc. and let
the Reader understand that this Text tell in his ordinary course of Lecture in
going through that Book, and not taken on purpose on that particular occasion.
The points he delivered from hence as I remember were these two. The first,
was When God had delivered his Church from the danger of the Bear, and the
Lion, then the Foxes the little Foxes sought by craft and policy to undermine
the same. The second was this, That all th^se that go about by Fox-like craft
and policy to undermine the state of the Churches of Jesus Christ, they shall
all be taken every one of them. The Text as I take it he showed belonged to
that time of the Church when they returned from Babylon, and were building the
Temple; and proved the first point of doctrine from that of Tobias and
Sanballat that would have built with the Jews; the second was amplified by the
History of Haman in the Book of Hester: and so brought many other examples,
and amongst others the story of the Bishops in the days of Hen. the eighth,
Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and to the beginning of these wars, who
under a color of building and being Master Builders in the Lords house laid
heavy burdens upon the Saints, corrupted the worship of God and Lorded it
over his heritage, and when they were come to the top of their pride the Lord
Jesus could endure them no longer, but they were taken even every one of them
in the same snare they had set for others. But I forbear the amplifying of it,
and hasten to the application so far as it concerns this scornful story
by them penned of their feigned miracle, as they call it.

His use of Exhortation was twofold. First, to such as lived in the Country,
to take heed how they went about any indirect way or course which might tend to
the prejudice of the Churches of Jesus Christ in the same, or the Governments
of the land, which through Gods mercy was not only in the hands of such as
truly feared the Lord, but according to his revealed will so far as we can
judge. And therefore if any (though never so secretly or subtly) should go
about any such thing, the Watchman of Israel that slumbreth not nor sleeps
will not take it well at their hands: For He that has brought his people
hither, and preserved them from the rage of persecution, made it a hiding place
for them whilst he was chastising our own Nation amongst other the Nations
round about it, manifested his gracious presence, so apparently walking amongst
his Churches, and preserving and prospering our Civil State from foreign
plots of the late Archbishop and his confederates, and the domestic of the
Heathen where we live; there was no question to be made but He would
preserve it from the underminings of false brethren, and such as joined with
them: And therefore, says he, let such know in the foregoing respect^ it is
the Land of (...), a Land that is precious in the eyes of the Lord, they shall
not prosper that rise against it, but shall be taken every one of them in the
snares they lay for it. And this, said he, I speak as a poor Prophet of the
Lord according to the word of his grace in my Text, which however in the proper
sense of the Holy Ghost, belonged to that age of the Church mentioned in the
Book of Nehemiah, yet it is written for our example and instruction: for God
is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; no less careful, no less able,
and no less willing to save and deliver his people by engaging himself in
their case; and who can stand before him?

In the second place, says he, whereas diverse our brethren are to go for
England, and many others to follow after in another Vessel, let me direct a
word of exhortation to them also; I desire the gracious presence of our God may
go with them, and his good Angels guard them not only from the dangers of the
Seas this Winter season, but keep them from the errors of the times when they
shall arrive, and prosper them in their lawful designs, etc. But if there be
any amongst you my brethren, as it is reported there are, that have a Petition
to prefer to the High Court of Parliament (which the Lord in mercy go on
blessing to bless as he has begun) that may conduce to the distraction,
annoyance and disturbance of the peace of our Churches and weakening the
Government of the Land where we live, let such know, the Lord will never
suffer them to prosper in their subtle, malicious and desperate undertakings
against his people, who are as tender unto him as the apple of his eye. But if
there be any such amongst you that are to go, I do exhort and would advise
such in the fear of God when the terrors of the Almighty shall beset the
Vessel wherein they are, the Heavens shall frown upon them, the billows of
the Sea shall swell above them, and dangers shall threaten them, (as I persuade
my self they will) I would have them then to consider these things: for the
time of adversity is a time for Gods people to consider their ways. I will
not give the counsel was taken concerning Jonah, to take such a person and
cast him into the Sea; God forbid: but I would advise such to come to a
resolution in themselves to desist from such enterprises, never further to
engage in them, and to cast such a Petition into the Sea that may occasion so
much trouble and disturbance. But it may be hardness of heart and stoutnesse
of spirit may cause such a person or persons with stiff necks to persist, and
yet in mercy with respect to some precious ones amongst you, (as I persuade my
self there are many such go in each Vessel) the Lord may deliver the Vessel
from many apparent troubles and dangers for their sakes: but let such know, the
Lord has Land judgments in store for such, for they are not now free (He
being the God of the Land as well as of the Sea:) and if you turn to Numb. 14.
36, 37. you shall there see how he threatened to destroy such as brought a
false report upon his land with the Plague: and truly God has still Plagues
in store for such as bring a false report upon his Church and people; Nay said
he, I hear the Lord has a destroying Angel with the Sword of Pestilence in
that Kingdom, striking here and there, as seems good unto him, (though not
vehemently, blessed be his name) and who knows what the Lord will do? and
therefore I advise such in the fear of God, and I speak it as an unworthy
Prophet of His according to that portion of his word I now speak from, to lay
these things to heart, for it is the Lord Jesus has said, Take us the Foxes,
the little Foxes, etc. or let them be taken. And believe it for a truth, all
those that go about by Foxlike craft and subtlety to undermine the Churches
of Christ Jesus, they shall all be taken, even in the very snare and ginne
they set for others.

And thus much for what Mr. Cotton delivered on this Thursdayes Lecture in
Beston, November. 5. 1646. which I have showed to many eminent persons now in
England who were present at this Lecture, and judge it not only to be the
sum of his exhortation but his very expressions, and are ready to testify it
on all occasions against all opposers, as Mr. Thomas Peter's and Mr. William
Golding Ministers; H^rbert P^lb^^ Esquire, Captain William Sails, Captain
Leveret, Captain Harding, Mr. Richard Sadl^^, etc. And take notice withal
good Reader, that I never heard the good man deliver any thing with more
earnestness and strength of affection then these things thus slighted by our
adversaries as thou see.

And for the second part of their story, viz* their passage, and the passages
of Gods providence befell them in it; take notice good Reader, that however our
Salamander turned things into a jest as soon as they were delivered, asking
whether he were a great Fox or a little one; yet many others that were engaged
to go but in the Ship, their hearts trembled that they were to go in such
company. And Mr. Thomas Peeters a Minister that was driven out of Cornwall by
Sir Ralph Hopton in these late Wars, and fled to New England for shelter,
being called back by his people, and now in London, upon sight of what I have
written gave me leave before many, to add this; that upon Mr. Cottons
exhortation, having shipped his goods and bedding to have gone in the Ship with
them, amongst other arguments this was the maine, that he feared to go in
their company that had such designs, and therefore took passage to go rather
by way of Spain, etc. And to speak the truth, as the ship rode out many
fearful stresses in the Harbor after they were ready, before they could go
to sail, the wind being fair but overblowing: so after they came to Sea had
the terriblest passage that ever I heard on for extremity of weather, the
Mariners not able to take an observation of Sun or Star in seven hundred
Leagues sailing or thereabouts. And when they were all wearied out and tired in
their spirits, certain well-disposed Christians called to mind the things
delivered by Mr. Cotton before mentioned, and seeing the Tempest still to
continue, thought meet to acquaint such as were conceived to be meant by Mr.
Cotton, and that had a purpose to persist in such courses, that they thought
God called them now to consider of the things delivered by him; and hereupon a
godly and discreet woman after midnight went to the great Cabin and addressed
her speech in sobriety and much modesty to them, whereupon one of the two
answered in these words, or to this purpose; Sister I shall be loath to grieve
you or any other of Gods people with any thing I shall do, and immediately went
to his Chest or Trunk, and took out a paper and gave it her, and referred it
to the discretion of others to do withal as they should see good: which the
woman not in a distracted passion (as they reported) showed to Mr. Richard
Sadler and others, who although they knew it was not the right Petition but
that they were deluded, yet because they judged it also to be very bad, having
often seen it in New England, but never liked the same, cut it in pieces as
they thought it deserved, and gave the said pieces to a Seaman who cast them
into the Sea. The storm for the present continued that night, say some, others
say, some abatement of wind befell presently after, but all conclude it abated
the next day; but that they had diverse storms afterward being then 200.
leagues short of the lands end, is most certain: And in one of these hideous
storms, having no sail abroad, the ship lying adrist with the helm bound up,
the master conceiving he was to the Southward of Silley laid the ship to the
Norward the night being very dark. In the last watch of the night one of the
Quarter masters going to the Pumpe discerned Rocks ahead within a Cables
length, and made such an outery as the whole ship was awakened, and nothing but
death presented them: there was much have made to let loose the Helm, and to
come to sail; but before it could be done the ship was engaged amongst the
Rocks of Silley, and nothing could be discerned under water, but by the
breaking of the waves, which was their best direction to cunne the ship: In
this laby^inth the Ship traveled for a quarter of an hour or more, in which
time it was generally observed the Ship readily obeyed her Helm, (or rather
the great Pilate of the Seas) upon the word given, which at other times she
was slow in. At length the Ship drove in and came a ground between two Islands,
and could not be got off being ^bbing water; and it was the special
providence of God to place her there in much mercy and compassion on his poor
afflicted ones, the vessel being full of passengers; for on both sides and on
head were desperate Rocks, which were not discovered till the morning light,
the Ship all this while lying fast upon a bed of Sand or Owse; when it was day
the dangers which they had escaped in the night to our admiration presented
themselves, nor durst the Master work the ship till he had gotten a Pilate
from the shore, who undertook to bring her to an Anchor ne^re Crows Sound.

The deliverance was so strange as the Inhabitants of Silly were amassed at it,
some saying it was a miracle, another that God was a good man that should thus
deliver us; indeed all the Island wondered, and the passengers themselves most of
all when they saw the Breaches at low water so far off at Sea near which
they passed before they knew the danger, and the Rocks they sailed by after
they found themselves involved as it were between S^pll^ and C^rybdis. Much
more might be added to account the mercy, but this may suffice to let the
world see it is no such trifle as is pretended in their profane relation, who
had then other thoughts, being passengers also in the Ship, and seemed willing
to joyn^ with the godly party in the Ship in testimony of their thankfulness,
to celebrate a special day of thanksgiving unto the Lord for so great
salvation, where Mr. Golding preached, being a passenger with them, and Teacher
to a Church of Christ in Berm^d^.

And now good Reader what will thou judge of such as can turn such
deliverances into a scoff, witness their profane Title, New-Englands Jonas
cast up at London; the naked truth whereof thou have heard related; in all
which Jonas was but once accidentally named, and that by way of direct
opposition to any such counsel. The Master of the ship never spoke to, no
speech between the woman and Mr. Vassal that I can learn, but between Mr.
Foul and her, she under no distemper of passion, but modest discreet and
sober in her carriage through out the whole. In brief, all that I can meet with
that were in the Ship, especially the most eminent persons, affirm this
relation of theirs to be false, yea Mr. Foul himself acknowledged it before
Captain Sails late Governor of Bermudas, Captain Leveret, and Captain
Harding all passengers in the ship, who all concu^^ed in the falsehood of the
same, and the three Captains not a little offended thereat, and Mr. Richard
Sadler and diverse others are ready to testify the same.

But put the case they had deluded a poor weak passionate woman by a shadow
instead of a substance: Me thinks if any fear of God had been before their
eyes, they might have trembled at so many and so great threatenings of the
Almighty, who followed them from one land to another over the vast Ocean with
his terrors, and have showed greater thankfulness for such a deliverance as
before recited, then to carry themselves as they do; laboring to delude the
Reader as well as themselves, and to ascribe all to the Winter season* as if
all our passages were ordinarily such (as appears by their note in the
Ma^gent, page 12.) when as that is false also, witness some that came with
them, who affirm they have bin in Winter passages, but never in the like; (the
Master and his company all concurring therein) being confident also they fared
the worse for their company. And thus much ^^^n affirm, and at least an
hundred more that came with me, who came away about the midst of December
(five weeks deeper in Winter then they) and yet through Gods undeserved favor
had a comfortable passage and landfall, which I throught good to add to the
rest that persons may not be discouraged from the passage, though I must
confess the Spring and Fall are the best seasons. But let them go on, if
nothing will reclaim them; and I will wait and attend the word of the Lord in
the mouth of his servant, and observe the dispensation of his providence
toward his Churches, and the enemies of the same. And thus much for answer to
the fourth head of their book published by Major Child^.

An answer to the Postscript.
IN this postscript which contains more matter then the whole ^ book, I can
trace our Salamander line by line, and phrase after phrase, in his accustomed
manner to del^de many simple ones, and weaken their respect to the government
of New England; where he did a great deal more hurt by his personal
presence, than he can do here by such slanderous invectives as he either
pin^^th upon others (witness this silly piece called New-England^ J^n^^) o^
any he shall publish hereafter. To answer every particular at length, would
be too tedious. But because he pretends an answer to some passages in a
book written lately by my self, called Hypocrisy Unmasked, concerning the
Independent Churches holding Communion with the Reformed Churches; at the
request of many I came to a resolution as to answer the former passages* so to
reply to his malicious cavils in this; who indeed has not answered any one
thing, but rather raised some scruples that may cloud what I did, and cause
such as are ignorant to doubt where things are most clear: but however I am
(...) with in this case not only by some of the Independent (...) to answer*
yet withal am come to a resolution not to write any more in this kind; partly
because the world are wearied with too m^n^ controverfies of this nature: but
more especially because our Salamander so much delights in them as a^ by many
year^^ ^^^ experience, being restless and (...) therein, (...) Answer.

He begins with the discovery of a (...) plot against the Laws of England,
and the Liberties of the English Subjects* etc* And then secondly, he would
render me odious to the world, as being a principal ^ppos^^ of the L^^^^ of
England in New England. Thirdly he would make our Government of New England to
be arbitrary. And fourthlyly, his malicious cavils and bitter indignation at
any thing may tend to union between brethren, I mean the Presbyterians and
Independents, but of these in order.

And First, for the subtle plot, etc. which is contrived, says he, by
writing against Gorton, a man whom they know is notorious for Heresy, that so
behind him they may get a shot at a bigger game, etc. Answ. It is well known,
and our Salamander is not ignorant, that however Gorton notoriously abused
himself and every Government of New England where he lived; yet when that
Country was grown too hot for him, he came over here and complained against
us, to that honorable Committee of Parliament; to whose care the well ordering
the affairs of foreign Plantations is referred. The Right Honorable the
Earl of Warwick, being Governor in chief, and Chairman of the same; who,
upon Gorton and his companions complaints, sent over to the government of the
Massac^^sets, whom it most of all concerned to give answer to the same, etc.
Whereupon they to show their respect to the Parliament, sent me to render a
reason thereof, which I still attend till their more weighty occasions will
permit them to hear. But when I came over, I found that Gorton had enlarged
his complaints by publishing a book called Simplicities defense against
Seven-headed Policy, etc. which being full of manifold slanders, and
abominable falsehoods; I took my self bound in duty to answer it, as I did by
that Treatise he mentions, called Hypocrisy Unmasked, which was but an
answer to Gorton as this is to him, being necessitated thereunto in Vindication
of the Country, whose Agent I am, though unworthy. And yet our Salamander would
blind the ignoram* and make them believe we took occasion to write such a
thing to make the Parliament have a good opinion of us, as it none of all this
had preceded.

Next that he might still turn our innocent simplicity into policy, he takes
advantage where none is, and lays hold on a request of mine, which I must
still prosecute (maugre his malice) and I trust in God the Parliament will be
sensible of it viz. That the Committee would take into consideration how
destructive it will be to the wel-being of our Plantations and proceedings
there (which are growing up into a Nation) here to answer the complaints of
such Malignant spirits as shall there be c^^^^red by Authority, it being three
thousand miles distant, so far as will undo any to come hither for justice,
utterly disabling them to prove the equity of their cause, etc. Now if he had
set down this request as it is, I would never have answered word to it, nor
need at present to any, but such as are ready to burst with malice, and the
more satisfaction I shall give, the worse they will be. And for the danger of
the State of England is in by this plot, he could not more clearly have
expressed the unevenness of his spirit to any indifferent Reader, then by such
expressions, and therefore need no farther answer thereunto.

Secondly, Whereas he charge me to be a principal opposer of the Laws of
England in New England, etc. He deals with me here in this particular just
as he did there. For our Salamander having labored two years together to draw
me to his party, and finding he could no way prevail, he then casts off all
his pretended love, and made it a part of his work to make me of all men most
odious, that so what ever I did or said might be the less effectual. As for
the Law of England I honor it and ever did, and yet know well that it was
never intended for New England, neither by the Parliament, nor yet in the
Letters Patents, we have for the exercise of Government under the protection of
this State: but all that is required of us in the making of our Laws and
Ordinances, Offices and Officers, is to go as near the Laws of England as
may be: which we punctually follow so near as we can. For our Letters
Patents, being granted to such, and their Associates* these Associates are the
Freemen, whereof there are many in every Town: Now take notice good Reader that
as every Corporation here send their Burgesses to the Parliament upon summons:
So diverse times a year the Governor sending out his Warrants, the Towns
choose their Deputies, viz. two of a Town out of these Freemen, which meeting
together with the Governor and his Assistants, compose and make or repeal
such Laws and ordinances as they conceive our (...) require: And however we
follow the custom and practice of England so near as our condition will give
way: yet as the (...) of a grown man would rather oppress and (...) if put
upon him, then any way comfort or refresh him, being too heavy for him: so have
I often said the Laws of England, to take the body of them, are too ^^w^ldy
for our weak condition: Besides, there were some things supported by them
which we came from thence to avoid* as the Hi^rar^^y, the cross in ^^ptisme,
the holy days, the book of Common Prayer, etc. All which I doubt not but this
renowned Parliament will utterly abolish as they have done in part to Gods
glory and their everlasting fame, (I mean whi^^t time shall be.) But I have
been so far from sleighting the Law of England as I have brought my own
book of the Statutes of England into our Court, that so when we have wanted a
Law or Ordinance we might see what the Statutes provided in that kind, and
found a great readiness in our general Court to take all help and benefit
thereby. And never did I otherwise oppose the Law of England: nor ever stand
against the liberties of the subject, but am ready to sacrifice my life for the
same, when ever I shall be called thereunto. Indeed this I have said in answer
to his cavils, that if the Parliaments of England should impose Lawe^ upon us
having no Burgesses in their house of Commons, not capable of a summons by
reason of the vast distance of the Ocean being three thousand miles from
London, then we should lose the liberty and freedom I conceived of English
indeed, where every Shire and Corporation by their Knights and Burgesses make
and consent to their Laws, and so oppose whatsoever they conceive may be
hurtful to them: But this liberty we are not capable of by reason of
distance, and therefore* etc. And thus much for answer to that point, which
will satisfy any equal minded m^n, but is nothing to him.

Thirdly, he charge our Government to be Arbitrary. Answ. I showed before
after what manner we made our Laws; and for the choice of our Officers once
every year they are either chosen or renewed by election, and this is done by
the Freemen who are the Associates to the Governor, to whom all the power is
granted. And these are to govern according to their Laws made and
established, and not according to their wills. And however there are many that
are not free amongst us, yet if understanding men and able to be helpefull,
it is more their own faults then otherwise oft-times, who will not take up
their freedom lest they should be sent on these service^ (as our Salamander
and most of his Disciples who are too many I must confess) and yet it is the
same with many thousands in this kingdom who have not liberty to choose: nor
yet may the Freeholders and Freemen choose, any that are not Freeholders,
Freemen, and Gentlemen of such a rank or quality that are chosen. So that for
my own part I see not but that as we go by the express of our Letters Patents,
so we go according to the practice of England; the Law made binding the Maker
as well as any other, having o^^ rule for all.

As for our trialls between man and man, he knows we go by Jury there as
well as here: And in criminalls and capitalls we go by Grand Jury and Petty
Jury. And where the death of any is sudden, violent or uncertain, the
^rowner sits upon it by a Quest, and returns a verdict, etc. and all
according to the commendable custom of England, whom* we desire to follow.
But their maine objection is; that we have not p^nall Laws exactly set down
in all cases? It Is true I confess, neither can they find any Common we^^^^
under heaven, or ever was, but some things were reserved to the discretion of
the Judges, and so it is with us and no otherwise, our General Courts meeting
together twice a year at least hitherto for that very end, and so continuing
so long as their occasions and the season will permit; and in case any
^^sdemeaner befall where no penalty is set down, it is by solemn order left
to the discretion of the B^nch, who next to the word of God take the Law of
England for their president before all other whatsoever. And as I said before,
if I would enter into particulars I could here setdowne in a line parallel as I
received it in answer to the Petition of Doctor Robert Child, etc. mentioned
in their book, the fundamentalls of the Massachusetts concurring with the
privileges of Magn^ C^^^^^ and the common Law of England at large. But as I
said before, it would be too tedious for answer to this worthless and
malicious charge. And yet I dare affirm that Virgini^, Barbados,
Christoph^rs, Mevis and A^^i^g^ have not all of them so many Laws as
New England, nor so many express penalties annexed. As for the ^^^ting of the
four Colonies, I briefly showed the reason of it in my former Treatise, being
necessitated thereunto ^^y a secret Combination of the Indians to ^^^ in all
off, as our Salamander well knows and approved; and if in* America we should
forbear to unite for offense and defense against a ^on enemy (keeping our
Governments still dist^^ct as we d^^) till we have leave from England, our
throats might be allout before the Messenger would be half Seas thorough*
but he that will c^rpe at this, what will he not do? And for not making of
our Warrants in the Kings name which is another thing he comp^^neth of: He
well knows the practice of the Country is various in that respect, some
constantly observing it, others omitting to express it, but all deriving our
authority from hence. But if any wonder why I say so much in answer to it as I
do, it is because I never purpose for reply to any thing he or any other shall
write in this kind to him, for it is to no end to write many books, especially
when we have to deal with such an one as delights in contention and nothing
else.

In the last place take notice good Reader how he cavills, and is vexed at,
rather then answers any thing I say tending to preserve peace and unity
between the Presbyterian and Independent Brethren. And whereas he says there
is fallacy in what I have written, how can that be? when I show the very
particular instances and persons that did and still do hold communion with us,
and our Salamander knows most of these persons, and I believe the very things
also, and has nothing to say against any one of the instances brought, only
he asks whether any of us the many thousands (a great word) that came from
New England, do communicate here with the Presbyterians. To which I answer by
way of question to any rational and indifferent man, whether a Church or
Churches of ours, allowing and admitting any of the Presbyterians or their
members into full communion with them, does not more fully answer the question
or his cavil, and prove communion of Churches on our part, then for a
particular member of ours to join in communion with some of the Presbyterian
Churches which it may be that Independent Church whereof he is may never
hear of? And sure enough if I should draw an Argument from his proposition to
prove it; he would be sure to say your Churches allow it not, etc. and
therefore it proves no communion of Churches at all. Secondly, were I where I
could not communicate with an Independent Congregation, and might with a
Presbyterian, and they walked orderly, I know nothing but I might comfortably
partake in that Ordinance of the Lords Supper with them: but I should not
forsake that communion I more affected for that I less affected where I might
enjoy either, nor I believe will any understanding Presbyterian Brother on the
other side. And so much for answer to that cavil, and the many branches of it.

In the second place, he cavills at this, that I say in page 96. of my Book
called, Hypocrisy (...), That the French and D^tch Churches are a people
distinct from the world, and gathered into ^^ holy communion: And then he
adds, ( ^ee should ^^^^ said C^^^n^^t, which is his sense) and that the sixth
person is not of the Church, meaning, amongst them, And this, says he, we
have but his word for, and makes is a falsehood in me: but I return it upon
himself, whose bold spirit dare affirm any thing against the apparent light
of the Sun; for however the Dutch baptize the children of all Nations that
are presented to them, as well as their own, as I showed in my former
Treatise; yet this their practice stands not upon the Presbyterian bottom, nor
do I know, I confess, what they take for their warrant in it; yet I affirm,
and that of my own knowledge, having lived diverse years amongst them, that
their Church is a select people, gathered together into an holy communion,
which holiness he scoffs at, and which they call the ^^ement; and that many
thousands of those whose children they baptize, never are admitted to the Lords
Supper, which they account Church communion; nor are ever brought before their
Classis, and there examined, admitted, occasionally admonished, yea,
excommunicated if they submit not to the Rule: and that all those that are
admitted are such as tender themselves, and thereupon are examined, etc. in the
Classis; as before. And for an instance of the truth of it, a godly English
Minister that had sometimes lived in Rotterdam, told me (upon this very
occasion) that the Deacons of the Dutch Church at Rotterdam, told him, that
although there were almost 7000. houses in their City, and in many of them
diverse families, yet they had but 2000 persons in Church Fellowship.

And for the French Churches, who know^ not that the Nation, I mean, the body
of them are still Papists, and yet (as blind as Bayard) our malicious
Salamander, whose tongue is known to be no slander from whence he came, does
charge me with falsehood herein. It Is true, through Gods mercy there are many
thousand Protestants amongst them, and I wonder that any man should be so
audacious, as to affirm these are not a distinct people from the rest that have
undergone so many massacres and persecuti^^^ for the testimony of their Faith,
and witness they have borne against the abo^inations of Rom^, and the Papacy,
still so much admired in that Nation by the body of it. And as I ^^^d of
Holland, the sixth person is hardly of the Church; so in France, the tenth man
for ought I hear, is not a Protestant. And how then they should be a National
Protestant Church, I know not.

As for his jeere about the Covenant, let him go on in his way of scorn and
contempt of the Covenant between God and his people; and yet he shall find
the Church in the Old Testament established by a Covenant; and after their
greatest desertions and declinings, upon solemn days of humiliation, their
Covenants again renewed throughout the same. And the Churches under the New
Testament are still the same, though the Ceremonies and Ordinances be altered
by the Lord thereof; yea, the Scottish Churches, (which he says are
National, and so would make a breach in that respect between them and us) are
solemn and serious in their Covenant; and the English in the late Reformation
no less serious, to Gods glory be it spoken; when as there are many hundred
thousands in both Nations that will not take these their Covenants, but remain
in Popish superstition, and wilful ignorance.

And for our tenders to the Scots to live amongst us, and enjoy their liberty
in the exercise of the Presbyterian government formerly, and the late tender of
the Court of the Massachusetts to their Petitioners for the enjoyment of it at
present, themselves providing for it, it is not so strange as true: But whereas
they say, they hear not of the latter (being since they came away:) It Is false;
I have told them, and they may hear it by many others: but they have not the
spirit of peace in them, nor will they take notice of any thing that tends
thereunto; but seek, as appears by this Postscript, to blow up the coal^s of
contention and division, so much as possible may be, hindering peace and good
agreement between Brethren, by all the means and courses they can use.

And for what h^saith concerning Mr. H^bbards censure; daring me to say,
Whether Mr. Hubbard were not punished directly or indirectly for baptizing some
children whose parents were not members of the Churches in New England.

For answer, I do and dare affirm in my conscience, that I am firmly
persuaded he was not; And however I do not desire to meddle in the case, nor
to engage in other men's controversies, but rather seek to heal them by all
due means, yet I thought good to answer his challenge in this particular, that
so that cloud of jealousy might also be dispelled, so far as concerns my own
thoughts in the case; and had he but so much charity in himself as becomes a
Christian man, I am confident he would be of the same mind with me. And so
much for answer to that particular, and the whole Book, wherein the Reader may
see more malice in our accusers, then policy in us, whose simplicity is branded
with subtilty, fallacy, and what not? but blessed be God, it is by such whose
tongues are their own, and will not be controuled by any, and from whom I
expect all that malice can invent; but am come to a resolution, that whatever
our Salamander shall vent either in his own name, or by others (as at this time)
I will leave him to God, and refer our Vindication to the Lord Jesus Christ,
who has all power in heaven and earth committed to him, in whose eyes, I
trust, we are precious, who undoubtedly will clear up our innocence, when these
our proud enemies shall be scattered before him. And to whom with the Father
and the Spirit, God over all, blessed for ever, be glory and praise to all
eternity.

Amen.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. l. 38. for another, r. any other; p. 4. l. 2. for the, r. their; p.
11. l. 35. for about, r. to put; p. 19. l. 24. for our, r. their; ibid. l. 30.
for us, r. them; p. 21. l. 28. for are, r. is.


