THE THRICE WELCOME, AND HAPPY INAUGURATION Of our most Gracious, and Religious
SOVEREIGN, King Charles II. To the CROWN and KINGDOMS of GREAT-BRITTAIN and
IRELAND. CONTAINING, In the first place, the Authors most humble Supplication
to the KING's most excellent MAJESTY, in order to the Reformation of Religion,
in Six particulars. In the second part, the Subjects duty to their Sovereign,
in sundry Heads, and diverse particulars very useful for these times: Together
with a recommendation of the Work to the Kings Majesty's Subjects. By Geo.
Willington, of the City of Bristoll.

Ezra 7.26. Whosoever will not do the Law of God, and the Law of the King, let
Judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or to
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.

London, Printed by R. D. and are to be sold at the Holy Lamb in S. Paul's
Churchyard, near the School. 1660.

blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE



1 Kings 10.9. 2 Chronicles. 9.8. Blessed be the Lord thy God which delights in
thee, to set thee on the Throne of thy Father, to be King for the Lord thy God:
because the Lord thy God loved [ENGLAND,] therefore made he thee KING over
[VS,] to do Judgment and Justice. (...).
TO THE MOST HIGH and MIGHTY, MOST GRACIOUS AND RELIGIOUS PRINCE, Charles II.
By the Grace of God of Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING, Defender of
the true Catholic and Apostolic Faith.
Christ Jesus, the Prince of Princes, bless your Majesty with length of days,
and an increase of all Graces, which may make you truly prosperous in this
life, and eternally happy in that which is to come.
THe Picture and Pattern of Piety (most Gracious and Dread Sovereign) S.
Bernard, by name, deciphereth out at large, the gross Enormity of that ugly
Vice, Ingratitude, saying, It is Iimica animae, exaninitio meritorum, dispersio
vertutum, etc. An enemy to the Christian Soul, an exile of Merits, a ruin of
Virtues, and a consuming fire that scorcheth up the Fountain of all goodness.
Lest therefore I should condemn my self guilty of this sensual sin, and
challenged be of gross Ingratitude to the God of our Mercies, who has, in
mercy to these Nations, brought your Sacred Royal Person, after upwards of
eleven years banishment, to the happy possession and enjoyment of Your CROWN
and KINGDOM, to the great joy and comfort of all your Loyal Subjects, whose
number God Almighty increase. I, who am the meanest, and most unworthy, have
presumed (most humbly craving pardon for my arrogant audacity herein) both in
token of my loyal duty to your sacred Majesty, as also of that transcendent joy
which I do conceive in my heart (the Searcher of hearts knows) for Your happy
Inauguration and Coronation; to transport these rude lines to the happy Haven
of your Princely Heart; wishing to Your Royal Grace the Silver of all earthly
prosperity, and the Gold of all Celestial felicity, prostrating my self upon
the bended knees of humble submission at your Highness footstool, for pardon
of my presumption herein, and do make bold to become an earuest, yet most
humble Petitioner to Your sacred Highness.

Seeing Almighty God (for ever blessed be his holy Name) has done so great
things for your sacred Royal Person, both in defending You, from the cursed
rage and hellish fury of Your traiterous Adversaries, who, like a kennel of
Bloud-hounds, hunted At the fight and flight from Worcester, Sept. 3. 1651.
for Your precious 2 Samuel 18.3.
life to destroy it; and also (which to me seems far greater) keeping 1 Pet.
1.5.
Your Pious Royal Heart, in the affection to, and zeal for the true Protestant
Religion (according to your godly Education notwithstanding your forced Exile
into those parts, and amongst such persons who are the professed Enemies, and
Opposers of it; and who (no question) left no stone unturned, nor means
untri'd, to betray your Sacred Highness into a love of, and compliance with
their erroneous and false worship; and (as the crown of the mercy) making use
of the worthy Service of the Lord General George Monck, who may be rightly
styled England's S. GEORGE, for the breaking the Ice of the former
impossibilities, and slaying the hidious Beast, and bloody Dragon that devoured
the Lords Heritage; and enslaved us, 2 Samuel 19.14.
bowing the hearts of your People to sue to You, and to declare for You; yea,
Dan. 4.36.
moving and uniting the loyal hearts of your Honorable COUNSELORS, and LORDS
assembled in PARLIAMENT to vote You May 6. 1660.
in, (which caused great joy and triumph Psalm. 14.7. and 53.6.
to all your distressed Subjects) and so preventing that effusion of blood
which Lambert, and the Phanatick party might have involved these Nations in; (a
Crown being seldom (if ever) won without battle, or worn without blood) and so
from Heaven proclaiming your Highness to the World to be Princeps pacis, the
Prince of Peace: and so (with a mighty hand, and stretched out arm) bringing
your Majesty (about the thirtieth year of your age) to your lawful Crown and
Kingdoms; which is such a choice work of Providence (your Enemies themselves
being witness) that present and future Ages have cause to stand and gaze at
it, saying (in the langnage of Moses) Stand still, Exodus 14.13. Psalm. 118.23.
Psalm. 102.18.
and see the salvation of the Lord. This is the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes. This shall be written for the generation to come, and
the People which shall be created shall praise the Lord.

The consideration whereof (sure I am) does move your pious Royal heart to
consult with the Royal Prophet; Quid retribuam Jehovae? Psalm. 116.12.
What shall I render to the Lord for all his goodness toward me? That You
might honor that Majesty that has laid Honor and Majesty upon your Royal
Person, and has (maugre force and fraud) set a crown of pure gold upon your
head: that the Highest may establish your Majesty's Royal Person, and make You
that indeed which some unloyal Subjects falsely Your Majesty's Proclamation
signed at Brussels, Jan. 25.1659. 1 Samuel 2.30.
pretended) a GLORIOUS KING. The high way whereunto being (as your Grace well
knows) to honor God; for those that honor me I will honor, says the Lord. Of
which your Grace has a double obligation; one as a Christian, the other as a
King; as a Christian King: which is done by establishing and preservation of As
in the 8. Article of you Majesty's Doclaration from Flaunders.
true Protestant Religion, which, of late years, has been in great danger Your
Majesty's Proclamation from Brussels, signed Jan. 25. 1659.
of being rooted out by Anabaptists, Quakers, and Atheists.

You are (Dread Sovereign) over us in the Lord, from whom you have your Power;
Rom 13.1. Prove. 8.15, 16. Isa. 9.6, 7. Revel. 1.5. Rev. 19.16.
Per me Reges regnant: Et Domini dominantur (says Christ) who is Princeps
Pacis: Princeps Regum terrae: Rex Regum Dominum (Dominantium:) By me Kings
reign, and Princes decree Justice. By me Princes rule and Nobles, even all the
Judges of the Earth. We All your loyal Subjects
most humbly beg, (and have good cause to hope) that as your Grace is over us
in the Lord, so You will be also over us for the Lord, Isa. 47.23.
by being a Nursing Father to Gods Church and People. Maintain his Kingdom,
Dread Sovereign, and he will uphold yours; your Dominion shall be stable; your
Name shall endure for ever, and shall be concinued so long as the Sun, Psalm.
72.1, 8, 17.

In order hereunto, I (the meanest of all your Majesty's Subjects) do upon my
bended knees most humbly beseech your Grace, and the Honorable Parliament, that
you will,

First cut off false Prophets, Heretics, and perverse and incorrigible
Seducers, and Blasphemers; for these are the pest of Church and State. This was
the practice of that pious King Josiah (after the corruption and decay of
Religion in the days of Manusseh) to his eternal praise, being but twelve
years old, 2 Chronicles. 34.3.
2 King. 23.5, 6, 7, 8, 20. and 2 Chronicles. 34.33. and of good King Asa, 2 Chronicles.
15.8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. So of good King Hezekiah, 2 King. 18.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
And that pious Ruler, Nehemiah, chap. 13. And it was (Dread Sovereign) the
grave Council of your Royal Father, of blessed memory, [in his EIKON ASILIK,
cap. 27.] directed in special to your Highness: With God I would have You
begin and end, who is the King of Kings, the Sovereign Disposer of the
Kingdoms of the world, who pulls down one, and sets up another.

Secondly, I most humbly beg Your Grace, that the holy Sabbath of the Lord,
viz. the Christian Sabbath may, by Your Majesty's strict command, be more
religiously kept and observed than heretofore

Because 1. the profane and loose nature of carnal men is apt and prone to
take liberty (where it is but tolerated) for the profanation and violating of
that holy rest.

Because 2. the religious observation of the Sabbath is a special help and
furtherance to the observation of the rest of the commandments and therefore
placed in the midst between the two tables.

Because 3. God has threatened in holy Scripture such and so many menaces to a
person or people, City or Nation that make no care of the observation thereof,
Nehemiah 13.18. Jer. 17.27. the truth of which Scriptures (and many more) may
be sadly verefied in our own days; for after the publication of that Book for
a tollerating of sports upon the Lords day, the Church of England (which was
famous before, both at home and abroad) never prospered after.

The blessings 4. which God has promised to the religious observation of it,
are so many and great, that I dare not make so bold to cloy your Royal ears
with the recital of them (your Highness knowing them far better than my
unworthy self, I being not an Instructor, but Petitioner) as Isa. 58.13, 14.
Jer. 17.19. to 27.

Most Gracious Sovereigne, your Highness very well knows that it is the duty of
all Magistrates (especially of the supreme) not only to observe the Sabbath
themselves, but also to cause others to observe it also, in respect of outward
conformity, that none within their Gates, Precincts, Jurisdict on, power,
habitation, or charge be suffered to violate that holy Rest. The example of
holy Nehemiah is eminently famo is in this particular, chap. 13. v. 16. to 23.

Thirdly, I do most humbly beg, that your Grace will uphold, Piety adorns
Learning.
cherish and foster a learned and pious Ministry in your Kingdoms, who were
accounted vile, and laden with reproaches and scorns while Faction flourished,
and Tyranny bear Rule; and in special, such Ministers whose loyal constancy,
and integrity does bespeake them to be (what Ministers of Christ's sacred
Gospel ought to be) not timeserving Politicians, to gratify men's Gal. 1.10.
humors, and serve their own sordid Interest; but Mat. 5.13.
Lux mundi, verse. 14.
Sal terrae; Eze. 3.17. and 33.7. Heb. 13.17.
Watch men for our Souls; Jer. 44.4. and 2 Cor. 5.20.
Gods Ambassadors, which Christ (the King of Kings) upholds Revel. 1.16, 20.
in his right hand; and has promised to Math. 28.20.
be with them to the end of the world: and is either received and honored, or
Mat. 10.40. Lu. 10.16. 1 Thessalonians. 4.8.
contemned and despised in them.

Fourthly, I humbly beg your Grace, that you would uphold a liberal and
sufficient Maintenance for the Learned and Pious Ministry of Christ's Gospel
(which was denied and withheld by the Sectaries,) because (your Highness
knows) the Archbishop of our 1 Pet. 2.25 and 5.4.
souls has ordained (this Canon Law) that they 1 Cor. 9. chap.
which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. And they that labor in the
Word and Doctrine are worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. viz. Countenance
and Maintenance: And that not a niggardly, but a liberal and sufficient
maintenance; that they may be encouraged 2 Chronicles. 31.4.
in the Law of the Lord. Nay, we find, that even King Pharaoh (though a Heathen
King, for ought I can find) had so much Religion in him, that when the People
of Egypt (in the great famine of seven years) were forced to mortgage and sell
their Lands, to buy food to keep them alive, Genesis 47.19. yet would King
Pharaoh, by no means, cause, or suffer the Priests Land to be morgaged or sold,
(though some in our days have done far worse) as we read, Genesis 47.22. Only the
land of the Or, Prophets.
Priests bought Pharaoh.
he not: For the Priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat
the portion which Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their Lands.

As Tribute Romans 13.6, 7.
is due to the Crown, so is Tithes Heb. 7.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
due to the Ministry; and those Sons of Belial which deny or withold either,
do Mal. 3.8.
rob God.

Fifthly, I do most humbly beg your Grace, that (in order to the establishing
of a Learned Ministry to Posterity) your Majesty will be a Fosterer, and Patron
of the Schools and Nurseries of good Learning, especially the two (once) Famous
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.

Lastly, I do most humbly beg your Grace, that the Seminaries of Sin, and
Satan, Wickedness, and Vice, may be beaten down and suppressed, (at least in
their numerousness and lawlesness, I mean the boundless tolleration of
unlawful places of drabbing and drinking, and such like, to the dishonor of
God, grief of his people, and scandal of Religion.

This will make your Royal Person to be Famous to succeeding Ages, and cause
You to be as your Royal Father of blessed memory has expressed Eikon asilike,
cap. 27.
it Charles Le Bon, and Le Grand.

Thus ceasing farther to trouble your Majesty's Sacred ears (hoping the
Ministry that are both eminent and famous for Religion and Learning, will
press forward such Motions as these) prostrating my unworthy self upon the
KNees of Submission, at your Highnesse's Footstool for my presumption herein,
I beg, without intermission, before the throne of the Almightie's Grace, that
he may bless your Majesty with many and happy days that your House, Throne,
and Kingdom, may be estalished for ever, to the honor of that Great God, and
the good of his Church, and that for Christ's sake, our only Lord, and
everlasting Savior. Amen.

Your Majesty's unworthy Subject, Geo. Willington.

CAROLE vive diu.
blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE



Luc. 19.38.(...) Psalm. 61.6, 7.Dies, diebus Regis superedito anni ejus sicut,
ut multarum generationum. Meneat coram Deo in seculum benignitatem, fidem
praepara, qui custediant cum. Tremel. (...)
The Second Part Of the Thrice Welcome and Happy INAUGURATION Of our most
Gracious, and Religious SOVEREIGN, King Charles II. To the CROWN and KINGDOMS
of GREAT-BRITTAIN and IRELAND. CONTAINING, The Subjects Duty to their
SOVEREIGN, in diverse Heads, and sundry particulars very useful for these
Times. Together with a Recommendation of the Work to all His Majesty's
Subjects. By Geo. Willington, of the City of Bristoll.

Joshua 1.18. Whosoever he be that does rebel against thy Commandment, and will
not harken unto thy words in all that thou command him, he shall be put to
death: only be strong, and of a good courage.

London, Printed by R. D. and are to be sold at the Holy Lamb in S. Paul's
Churchyard, near the School. 1660.

THE SUBJECTS DUTY TO THEIR SOVEREIGN.
THE saying of the Greeks (as a learned Divine notes) carries much of truth in
it, Dr. Sutton, lib. Disce vivere. cap. 21.
(...), Order is the Mother and Preserver of things: For, sure it is, that the
society of men consists in Ruling and Obeying. Where none do guide others,
what order can be looked for? Where order is not, Confusion will follow, and
the success of Confusion is plain Poor England has sadly found the truth of
this, since that dismal day, Jan. 30. 1548.
Ruin. Where men shake off Obedience to their King, and lawful Governors, (who
are from him who Rules and governs all) and live as they list, what peace
can be preserved? And where peace is not, what State either in Church or
Commonwealth can long stand? Where Rulers are not, some run headlong they know
not whither, in the bent of their own wills: others are waving up and down in
Opinions, all are as a body clean out of course, and subject to a Judge. 18.1
and 19.1. and 17.6. and 20.23.
Dissolution: On the contrary, when Governors ordain a Law, and all hearken
Viz. So hearken, as to obey.
unto the Law, (because a Law without partiality does speak indifferently unto
all) there is Obedience, there is Concord, there is continuance in well doing.

Now, for those of all other who live under the Law of Laws, to wit, the Law of
Grace; for those, I say, before all other to show all dutiful obedience to
their Kings and Governors placed over them Pro. 8.15 16. Romans 13.
by God, what more seemly? what more Christian? Branches of one Joh. 15.1.
Vine, Stones of one 1 Pet. 2.5.
Building, Fellows in Ephesians. 3.15.
one Family, Children of Mal. 2.10.
one Father, Members of Ephesians. 5.23, 30.
one Head; nay, Heirs of one Romans 8.17. The heavenly Kingdom.
Kingdom; what more beseeming, than among these, People to obey Rulers, and
Rulers to obey God? When Moses is praying, Joshua leading, Israel obeying, God
blessing and prospering all: O happy are the People that are in such a case.

And therefore, having showed unparalleld boldness, in directing the former
part of this Schedule unto His Majesty (our Gracious and dread Sovereign) by
way of most humble Petition, let me now address an humble request to the
Subjects (I my self being the most unworthy and inconsiderable) of our
Sovereign Lord and King.

The sum whereof shall be directed first to the disloyal Party, (whose number
I beseech God to extenuate.) Secondly, to the Loyal Party, (whose number I
beseech God to augment.) Thirdly, to all jointly, and without distinction,
(praying to God to make them both one, without distinction, as to their
Loyalty.)

To the two former Heads, (to wit, to the disloyal and loyal party, distinctly
and apart) I shall be very brief.

For the first. To you that are (either openly or secretly) disloyal to our
Gracious Sovereign Lord the Kings most excellent Majesty; give me leave to tell
you in the words of the Holy Ghost, by the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 1. v. 19, 20.
If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land: But if ye
refuse, and rebel, ye shall be devoureed with the sword; for the mouth Romans 3.4.
of the Lord has spoken Romans 2.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
it. Look back, and consider the Oath of Allegiance which you have formerly
taken all of you, (save only those minority made incapable of taking it) and in
consideration thereof, hearken to the words of the Royal Preacher, Eccles. 8.2.
I counsel thee to keep thy Kings Commandments, and that in regard of the Oath
of God. In regard of the Oath, viz. the Oath of Allegiance, called, the Oath of
God (as I conceive) for two reasons; either first, in reference to the King, to
whom you swear Allegiance, being a Titular Psalm. 82.6. 1 Cor. 8.5.
God: or more properly (as I conceive) called the Oath of God, in reference to
the true Jer. 10.10
God; and that upon a double account: either first because this Oath was taken
(in especial manner) in the sight and presence of God, who always does behold
Pro. 15.3.
us; but then especially (or in special manner) when we do in such a solemn
manner swear by Genesis 31.43. to 54. Ecc. 5.6.
his Name: or secondly, because the wilful violation of this sacred bond, or
solemn Oath of Allegiance, shall be revenged Eze. 17.19. Zac. 8.17. Mal. 3.5.
Levit. 19.12. Numb. 30.2. Eccl. 10.20. Isa. 48.1. Jer. 4.2. and 5.2.
by God, who is the Lord of Hosts, if not with temporal plagues in this world,
yet (sure I am) with eternal torments in Hell, without true repentance. [See,
and sadly consider the Proofs in the Margin.] But I shall speak more fully of
this matter (God willing) upon the third Head. But before I come to that, (the
main thing intended) let me, in the second place, speak a word (very briefly)
to the loyal Party who do fear God, 1 Pet. 2.17
and honor the King. And here give me leave first to inform you; secondly, to
admonish you.

That which I would inform you of, is briefly two things.

First, the sad odium that has been cast of late years upon the Loyal party,
and that party, if not wholly occasioned by the openly profane and scandalous
walking of the generality of those who were the Kings professed Friends, they
were so noted (above any other) for horrid Oaths in their common talk, and for
excessive drinking, and debauched drunkenness, that the re-Baptizers They are
since turned.
have new Christened them (though not at a Font) with a name to render them
odious, viz. Cavalier; a word as an ancient Doctor Viz. D. Green, But though
some render it otherwise, yet the word was cast as an odium upon the former
consideration.
often told me, (and others in my hearing) derived from the French tongue, from
a word which signifies a Swearer, a Drunkard, a deboist, profane Person. But
I trust, you will own neither the Name, nor the Practice (especially) for the
future.

A second thing I would inform you of, shall be by way of lamentation,
delivered (with a little inversion) in the words of Jeremiah's Lamentation, and
the words of holy Daniel and Ezra, etc. For our sins, and for the iniquities of
our Fathers Dan. 9.16
our Jerusalem, and our people have been a reproach to all that have been about
us. Thus we have been cast down, and not exalted, verse. 8. Bar. 2.5.
because we have sinned against the Lord our God, and have not been obedient
unto his voice. Yea, your Lam. 5.2
Inheritance has been turned to strangers, and your houses to aliens. Your
necks have been under verse. 5.
persecution, and you had no rest. Servants have ruled over us, verse. 8. This
was Cham's curse, after he had discovered the nakedness of his Father, Genesis
9.22, 24, 25. England did worse by her Father, the King, and therefore deserved
worse plagues.
and there was none (for certain years) to deliver us out of their hands: Yea,
(which is more to be lamented) the breath of our nostrils, La. 4.20.
the Anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his
shadow we shall live, though among the The very Heathen would not have
murdered him.
Heathen. And these tyrannical Usurpers have had dominion Neh. 9.37.
over our bodies, and over our cattle, at their pleasure, and we were in great
distress. For our iniquities have we our Kings, and our Priests been delivered
into their hands, Ezra 9. v. 7. Baruch 2.5.
to the Sword, to captivity, to a spoil, and to confusion of face.

Thus has it been with us, since that prodigious and unpresidented murder of
our dear Jan. 30. 1648.
Sovereign, KING CHARLES the first.

But now the Lord has begun to give us Isa. 14.3.
rest from our troubles, and to lift up our heads, and to compass us about
Psa. 32.7.
with Songs of deliverance. Grace has been showed us from the Lord our God, to
Ezr. 9.8, 9
leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place, and to
lighten our eyes, and to give us a little reviving in our bondage. For we were
bondmen, yet our God has not forsaken us in our bondage, but has extended
mercy unto us, in bringing our Gracious Sovereign through so many dangers,
difficulties, and sad revolutions, to be our Patron, in our lives, liberties,
Religion: Yea, to the happy settlement of (those so much looked, longed for
blessings) Peace and Truth, etc.

Having thus informed you (ye Loyalists) of your (heretofore) miserable
condition, and of your (present) delivered condition, by the happy Inauguration
of our Dear and long looked for Sovereign Lord the King. I desire You give me
leave to exhort You to two duties (in special) that are incumbent upon you in
lieu hereof.

First, to entire and hearty thankfulness to the God of our mercyes. Say with
the Royal Prophet Psalm. 103.1, 2. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is
within me praise his holy Name. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all
his benefits. Offer the sacrifice of Praise to God continually, that is the
fruit of our lips, giving Praise to his Name, Hebr. 13.15.

Secondly, to sincere obedience; not only to sound forth his praises with your
lips, but also (and that chiefly) to show forth his praises in your lives. The
mercies we have won by prayer and seeking God, we must wear by praises and
serving God. For to this end were we redeemed out of the hands of our enemies
(not only of our spiritual, but also out of the hands of our temporal enemies)
that we should serve God in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
lives. Luke 1.74, 75. But if after all this is come upon us for our evil deeds,
and for our great trespass, and seeing our God has punished us less than our
Iniquities deserve, and has given us such deliverance as this: should we (I
beseech you) again break his Commandments? Would he not (then) be angry with us
until he had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping? Ezra
9.13, 14. Read, and consider Nehemiah 9. from v. 25. to 29.

And now I come (through the gracious assistance of Almighty God, without which
I can do Joh. 15.5. 2 Cor. 2.16. and 3.6.
nothing) to the third Head, of which I shall speak more largely.

To presume to speak to all the Kings Majesty's Subjects jointly, without
distinction, that seeing Almighty God the great and mighty Sovereign of Heaven
and Earth) has placed us (in his gracious goodness) under so pious His Piety
and Religion shines as bright as the Sun at noon.
and Protestant a King, and so made you, as was before said, Branches of one
Vine, Stones of one Building, Fellows in one Family, Children of one Father,
Members of one Head, nay, Subject-heirs under one King; that you would all
strive and labor to be of one heart and Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Romans 15.5,
6. Phil. 2. v. 1. to 5.
one mind, in yielding obedience to that 1 Pet. 2.17.
Gospel-Command, to fear God, and honor the King.

Now, that I might drive this nail to the head, I shall endeavor in the
prosecution hereof, to speak distinctly to these six things:

1. The Author, Authority, and Necessity of Government and Governors, both
supreme and subordinate.

2. The heinousness of disloyalty, or rebellion against the King, as Supreme
and subordinate.

2. The heinousness of Disloyalty, or Rebellion against the King, as Supreme,
or subordinate Governors sent by Him, and established over Us.

3. I shall answer some objections that may be (and have been) made in this
particular.

4. I shall demonstrate the Plagues and punishments that do attend and follow
such Rebels and Traitors in this life, and something of the Plagues and
Torments that do wait, and are reserved for them, and which (without timely
Repentance) they shall eternally suffer in the life to come.

5. The Rewards that they shall be made partakers of, both here and hereafter,
that are loyal Subjects.

Finally, I shall endeavor to show wherein this loyalty does consist, or
(which comes all to one) what the Subjects Duty is to their Sovereign, or
subordinate Governors. And then (having made a recommendation hereof to several
degrees of persons (I shall make a Conclusion.

For the first, viz. The Author, Authority, and benefit of Government and
Governors; though I might (and did intend so to do) prove it from some
Meditations and Collections of my own; yet considering how distastful a point
it is to the distempered pallats of many brainsick persons, and how hardly they
can digest it: I shall suspend my own, and prove the matter (omitting Scripture
testimonies also) by the consent of all the Protestant Churches in
Christendom, in the harmony of Confession; as I find it collected by a very
reverend Dr. Featley in his Book, entitled (...), page 169. etc.
Divine of our English Church, now with God; that so it may be the more
convincing; except to those who are enemies to the Protestant Religion.

Concerning the Author, Office, and Authority of the Civil Magistrate
(understand it both of the King, as Supreme, and 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
also Governors sent by him) thus we read:

Helvetica posterior. cap. 30. Helvetian Confession.
Magistratus omnis generis ab ipso Deo est institutus, ad generis humani pacem,
ac tranquilitatem, ac ita ut primum in mundo locum obtineat, etc.

Englished thus:

The Magistrate, of what kind soever, is ordained of God, for the peace and
quietness of Mankind, and he ought to have the first place in the world. (And
a little afterward) God does work the safety of his People by the Magistrate,
whom he has given to be as a Father to the World: so all Subjects are
commanded to acknowledge this benefit of God in the Magistrate: let them
therefore honor and reverence him as the Minister of God; love him, and pray
for him, as their Father; obey him in all his just and righteous Commands: the
care of Religion chiefly appertains to a godly Magistrate, let him therefore
draw his Sword against all Malefactors, Murderers, Thieves, and blasphemous
Heretics, etc.

Damnamus igitur Anabaptistas, qui ut Christianum negant fungi posse officio
Magistratus; ita etiam negant quenquam a Magistratu just occidi.

We condemn therefore (say they) the Anabaptists, who as they deny that a
Christian may execute the office of a Magistrate; so also they deny, that any
man may be put to death by him.

The Bohemian Confession. Chap. 16.
Ex sacris literis docetur, Politicum Magistratum esse ordinationem Divinam,
and a Deo constitutum, qui and a Deo originem suam ducat, and efficacitate
praesentiae, and auxilii bujus perpetui conservetur, ad gubernandum populum in
iis rebus quae ad hanc in terris and corporis hujus vitam pertinent; universi
and singuli in omnibus, quae Deo tantum non sunt contraria, eminenti potestati
subjectionem praestent: Primum Regiae Majestati, postea vero omnibus
Magistratibus, and qui cum potestate sunt Nota.
sive ipsi per se boni viri sunt, sive mali.

Thus Englished.

From the holy Scriptures it is taught, That the Civil Magistrate is the
Ordinance of God, and appointed by God, who both takes his original from God,
to whose power all and every one ought to be subject, in those things that are
not contrary to God: First to the Kings Majesty, then to all the Magistrates,
and such as in Authority under him, whether they be of themselves Note this
well.
good men or evil.

The French Confession.
Credemus Deum velle mundum legibus, Gallica Confess. Art. 39.
and politia gubernari, ut aliqua sint fraena quibus immoderate mundi
cupiditates coerceantur: idioque constituisse Regna, respublicas, and reliquas
principatum species, Nota
sive haereditario jure obveniant, sive minus, etc.

Englished.

We believe, that God would have the world governed civilly, and by Law; that
there may be certain Bridles, whereby the desires of men may be restrained; and
that therefore he has appointed Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and other kinds of
Principalities, whether Note this
they come by As our Gracious King's does.
inheritance, or otherwise; and because he is the Author of this Order, we must
not only suffer them to rule, whom he has set over us, but also yield unto
them all honor and reverence, as to Deputies and Ministers assigned by him to
execute their lawful and holy Function; into their hands God has put a Sword
to punish all breaches, as well of the first Table, as of the second.

Gladium in Magistratum manus tradidit, reprimendis nimirum delictis non modo
contra secundam tabulam, sed etiam contra primam commissis.

The Low Dutch Confession.
Credimus Deum optimum maxim. Bell. Conf. Art. 36.
ob generis humani corruptelam, atque depravationem, Reges, Princeps, and
Magistratus constituisse: veleque ut mundus lic legibus ac certa politia
gubernetur, ad coercenda hominum vitia, and ut omnia inter homines recto ordine
gerantur. Idcerco Magistratus ipsos gladio armavit, ut malos quidem plectant
paenis probos vero tueantur, etc.

Englished.

We believe that Almighty God, by reason of the corruption and depravation of
Mankind, did appoint Kings, Princes and Magistrates, and that it is his will
this world should be governed by Laws and civil government; and to this end he
has armed Magistrates with a sword to punish the wicked and defend the good.
To these it appertains of duty, not only watchfully to defend the civil
state, but also to endeavor that the holy Ministry of the Word be maintained,
all Idolatry and false-worship removed, the Kingdom of Antichrist pulled down,
and the Kingdom of Christ propagated. Quamobrem Anabaptistas and turbulentos
omnes detestantur, etc. Wherefore we detest all Anabaptists, and Mark the
Connection.
seditious persons, who cast away all Government and Magistracy, pervert
Judgments and overthrow all men's Rights, make all men's goods common; and
lastly, abolish and confound all orders and degrees appointed by God among men,
for honesty and comeliness sake.

The High Dutch Confession at Ansperge.
Legitimae ordinationes civiles, Augustand Confess. Art. 16
sunt bona opera, and ordinationes Dei, sicut Paulus testatur, Romans 13.1.
damnat Anabaptistas, qui interdicunt haec civilia officia Christianis, etc.

Englished.

Civil Governments and constitutions are good works and Ordinances of God, as
S. Paul testifies, they condemn therefore the Anabaptists who forbid civil
offices to Christians, they condemn also those who place Evangelical
perfection, in abandoning all civil affairs: whereas Evangelical perfection is
spiritual) consistat motibus cordis in timore fide, dilectione, obedientia) and
consists in the motions of the heart, in the fear of God, faith, love, and
obedience.

The Basil Confession.
Let every Christian Magistrate bend all his forces this way that among all
that are under him, Art. 7.
the Name of God may be honored, his Kingdom propagated, and his will in the
rooting out of all wickedness and vice may be fulfilled, this duty was ever
enjoined, even to the Heathen Magistrates, how much more is it required of a
Christian Magistrate, (ut vero Dei Vicario) who is Gods true Vicar?

The Saxon Confession.
We teach, Saxonica Conf. Art. 23.
That in the whole Doctrine of God delivered by the Apostles and Prophets, that
Civil Government is maintained; and that Magistrates, Laws, Tribunals, and the
lawful Society of men, sprung not up by chance, but that all the good order
that is left is preserved by the exceeding goodness of God for the Church's
sake, [and so forth, which I omit for brevity sake.]

The Sueviek Confession is notable, and runs thus:
Our Churches teach, Suevica Con. Art. 23.
That the office of a Magistrate is most sacred and divine: whence it is, that
they who exercise this power, are in Scripture called Gods; and our Preachers
teach, that the obedience which is to be performed to Magistrates, is to be
placed among good works of the first rank; and that by how much a man is a more
sincere and faithful Christian, the more careful he is to observe the Laws of
the State.

To which add, the Confession of Scotland.
We confess and acknowledge, Empires, Kingdoms, Scotch Conf.
Dominions and Cities, to be distincted and ordained by God: that Powers and
Authority in the same (be it of Emperors in their Empires, Kings in their
Realms, Dukes and Princes in their Dominions, and of other Magistrates in their
Cities) to be God's holy Ordinance, ordained for manifestation of his own
glory, and for the singular profit and commodity of Mankind: so that whosoever
goes about to take away or confound the whole estate of Civil policy, now long
established, we affirm the same men not only to be enemies to mankind, but
wickedly to fight against Gods expressed will.

The Confession of England.
The King's Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and other
his Dominions; The English Confession, Art. 37.
unto whom the chief government of all estates of this Realm, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all cases does appertain, and is not, nor ought to
be subject to any foreign jurisdiction. The Laws of the Realm may punish
Christian men with death, for heinous and grievous offenses.

To all which let me add, the Confession of the Assembly of Divines. Chap. 23.
1. God the Supreme Lord and King of all the World, has ordained Civil
Magistrates to be under him over the People for his own glory and the public
good, and to this end has armed them with the power of the Sword, for the
defense and encouragement of them that are good, and for the punishment of evil
doers.

4. It is the duty of People to pray for Magistrates, to honor their persons,
to pay them tribute and other dues, to obey their lawful Commands, and to be
subject to their Authority, Note this well.
for Conscience sake. Infidelity, or difference in Religion, does not make void
the Magistrates just and legal authority, nor free the people from their due
obedience to him, from which Ecclesiastical persons are not exempted; much
less has the Pope any power and jurisdiction over them in their Dominions, or
over any of their People; and lest of all to deprive them of their dominions or
lives, if he shall judge them to be Heretics, or upon any other pretenses
whatsoever.

The sum of all is, the Civil Magistrate is a Divine Ordinance, and his chief
care is, or ought to be, Religion, for the defense and vindication whereof, God
has put a Sword in his hand to cut off the disturbers of the peace, as well in
the Church as the Commonwealth: and because he is the Minister Romans 13.4.
of God, for our wealth and Safety, his Authority is to be obeyed by all sorts
of men, for conscience sake, and not to be resisted upon pains of Damnation.

Thus I have, from the melodious Harmony of all the reformed Churches, proved
the Authority, and showed the author, and Benefit of Government and Governors,
but Supreme and subordinate. Wisdom. 6.3. Power is given of the Lord, and
Saveraignty from the bighest. See Prove. 8.15, 16. Dan. 2.21. chap. 4. v. 25.
32. Romans 13. v. 1, 2, 4. Job 36.7.

The next thing is, to show the hainousness of disloyalty or Rebellion.
Rebellion has all evil in it, as said the Greek Thucid.
Historiographer, in Rebellion is all kind of evil; it is (as one calls it) the
sink of all sin, and the Sea of all mischief. Of Rebels and seditious persons
to their Sovereign (whom the God of Heaven has made a Psalm. 82.6.
God on earth) does God himself say as he did of the Israelites, he did to
Samuel: They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, 1 Samuel 8.7.
that I should not reign over them. Yea, the Holy Ghost does amply set forth
the heinousness of this sin of It Is spoken there of Rebellion against God, but
it will hold in this case also.
Rebellion, when he does by the Prophet Samuel compare it with the sin of
Witchcraft, or the service of the Devil, 1 Samuel 15.23. Rebellion is as the sin
of Witchcraft, compared with the sin of Witchcraft (as I conceive) to denote
the heinousness of it. Witchcraft is such a heinous sin, that the Lord gave a
strict charge Exo. 22.18. Deuteronomy. 18.10.
to his ancient People, saying, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live. Surely
so heinous is this sin of Rebellion, that a Rebel against his King and Country
is not worthy to live. For instance, that Norman Gentleman, who confessed to a
Franciscan Friar, that he had a thought to kill Francis the King of France,
though he had changed his mind, repented, and asked pardon of that crime, yet
the Friar reporting it to the King, and the King referring it to the Parliament
of Paris, the grave Court of that great Parliament, though that King showed
himself very gracious, condemned him to death: Yea, so great detestation is
there to be had of the least show of violence to the Prince, that whereas the
Law excuses madmen from punishment, (madness it self being so great a
punishment;) yet when Capito (a man raging mad) drew his Sword upon Henry the
son of King Francis, he was therefore executed. Thus much in brief for the
second thing, viz. the heinousness of disloyalty or rebellion.

The third thing is (according to promise) to answer some objections that may
be (and have been) made in this particular. Of all which very briefly, but
plainly.

Object. Is it lawful in no case for Subjects to rise up in Arms against their
lawful Sovereign?

Answ. Mr. Lyford's Principles, page 158.
No in no case; 1 Samuel 24.6.
No Supreme power whatsoever, or wheresoever residing, ought to be resisted by
those that are under them, Note Eze. 17.15, 16. Judge. 9.19, 20, 24, 45, 56, 57.
especially if they have sworn Allegiance unto them. There is no power but of
Romans 13.1 Psalm. 82.6.
God; the powers are not from beneath, but Joh. 19.11
from above; he is Romans 13.4
the Minister of God. God is the Sovereign Lord of the whole earth, and Kings
are his Deputies and Vicegerents; in them God is resisted; whosoever resists
the Power, resists To. 13.2.
the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation. We read, Prove. 30. v. 31. That against a King there should be no
rising up. If we cannot with good conscience obey them, yet we must be subject
and submit unto them. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent by Mark that.
him, etc.

2. Object. May not Subjects resist their King in any case, though he be an
Heretic, an Apostate, or a Tyrant?

No, in no case. Nebuchadonosor was a wicked and ungodly Prince; yet was
Zedekiah grievously punished, Jerusalem sacked, Israel miserably afflicted for
rebelling against him.

Object. 3. But if the Prince, being ungodly, command me to do that which is
wicked and ungodly, must I herein obey him?

Answ. Such an objection as this might be suspended, living under so pious a
Prince and Religious a Sovereign as we do.

But secondly, A Caveat.
in such a case be sure that you be not misled, either by those whom S. Paul 2 Timothy 3.6
or S. Jude descrides Jude v. 19
, nor to such to whom Christ himself does denounce a woe Mat, 23.15
: and hereof being truly assured by the constant harmony, not private
interpretation, 2 Pet. 1.20
of that which thou ought to account a Lanthern unto thy Psalm. 119.105.
feet, and a light unto thy Paths: resolve with S. Peter Act. 5.29.
we ought to obey God rather then men.

4. Object. But if the King be such a one, and intends the destruction of the
People, what remedy have the Subjects?

Answ. Prayers and tears, as appears, 1 Samuel 8.10, 18. Let the King be never so
bad, they may not use other weapons against their King then Prayers and Tears,
as learned Mr. Perkins has it; though punishment be wrongfully and most
unjustly imposed by Rulers, yet it must be born without resistance, til we can
have our Read and consider 1 Samuel 24.3. to 16. and 26.11, 16, 23. and 2 Samuel c.
1. throughout, Ps 105.15
remedy, 1 Pet. 2.19.

So much as to certain Objections, which seditious Persons have forged in their
disloyal breasts to this particular.

The fourth thing to be demonstrated, are the plagues and punishments that do
attend and follow Rebels and Traitors in this life; and something of the
plagues and torments that are reserved for them, and which (without timely
repentance) they shall eternally suffer in the life to come. And that I might
avoid prolixity, I shall but touch and pass.

They that are Traitors to their Sovereign Lord and King, are punished
externally, internally, and (without Gods great mercy, and their own
repentance) they shall be punished eternally, with the Devil and his Angels.

First, externally. And that sometimes in House, Esther 8.2. 2. In Lands, 2 Samuel 16.4. 3. In Offices, 1 Kings 2.26, 27. 4. By extraordinary death, as
hanging, drawing, and quartering. 5. In burial, with the burial of an Ass,
Jer. 22.18, 19. 6. In good Prove. 22.1. Eccles. 7.1.
name: The name of the wicked shall rot, Prou. 10.16. Yea, the name of Traitors
and Rebels shall Genesis 34.30.
stink. What more odious smell to all true English hearts, than the unhappy
memory of Cade, Straw, Ket, Parry, and the Powder Traitors? Temporal
judgments, Sword, Famine and Pestilence: Read, and consider well Jer. 27.8.
Numb. 16.30, 31, 32, 35, 39, 45, 46, 47. 2 Samuel 18.9. etc.

Secondly, they are plagued internally, with the terrors of an evil conscience,
with the flashes (an earnest and sad omen of the flames) of Hell fire, Wisd.
17.3, 4. These be those Furies the Poets speak of, those accusing thoughts
whereof Romans 2.15.
the Apostle speaks, and that never dying worm spoken of by the Isa. 66.24.
Mar. 9.44, 45, 46.
Prophet, and our blessed Savior, Read Levit. 26. v. 36. Prove. 28.1. Dan. 5.5,
6. Genesis 4.13. Math. 27.3, 4, 5. 2 Samuel 16.23. and 17.23.

So that were there no other, I might say with Juvelal.

Juvenal.
-- Curtamen hos tu --
Evasisse putes, quas diri conscia facti,
Men's habet attomitos and surdo verbere caedit
Occultum quatienti animo tortore Flagellum.
How deem'st thou them acquit
Whom guilty mind of fact so foul does fright:
And scourge unseen does beat with unbeard blow
Their hangman restless conscience biting so?
But this is not all, Torments of Hell the portion of Traitors, unless they
timely repent.
neither does their misery end here; for thirdly (without repentance, and God's
great mercy.) they shall be punished eternally with the Devil and his Angels.
They that resist shall receive to themselves (...), Judicium, the same word
with that 1 Cor. 11.24.
damnation, Romans 13.2. which consists in the sad deprivation of the beatifical
vision Mat. 25.41, 46
of God (which is better than life) and the pain of torment to all eternity.
Would you know the Acerbity.
sharpness of these torments? Christ tells you, they go into fire. Would you
know the time it does last? he calls it Eternity.
everlasting fire. Would you know the company they shall have? he tells you,
the Society.
Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. Would you have it further expressed, assure
your selves, that as the Unspeakable.
Joys of Heaven purchased by the obedience of the Son of God, for those that
fear God and honor the King, are such as 1 Cor. 2.9.
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither can it enter into the heart of man
to conceive; such also (assure your selves) are the pains and torments prepared
in Hell (besides the worm of an accusing conscience here) for Traitors and
Rebels. And I beseech ye search and see whether you can find (I am sure I
cannot) any one example in the whole Bible of any one Rebel that everdied in
the outward possibility of Salvation. O consider this, and tremble to rebel;
lest you are resolved to go to Hell.

Having thus briefly discovered to you the Plagues and punishments of
disloyalty and rebellion, Dictum sapienti sat est.
I shall in the next place (with as much brevity as I can) display the Rewards
of Loyalty to the King, and they are, either External Rewards. Internal
Rewards. Eternal Rewards.


First external, and they are either General Rewards. or Particular Rewards.


1. General. And so the King he is the Minister of God to thee Loyal Subject.
for good: Do well, so shall thou have praise of the same, Romans 13.3, 4. To
this agrees the saying of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 32. v. 1, 2. Behold, It Is
meant principally of Christ, but it will hold in this.
a King shall reign in righteousness, and Princes shall rule in judgment. And
a man shall be a hiding place from the wind, and a Covert from the tempest, as
Rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary land.
Wherefore as Jeremiab wished the Israelites to seek the prosperity of the Jer.
29.7.
City whether they were carried: so I beseech all English All the Subjects of
our King.
men to seek the prosperity of the King under whom they are governed; Jeremies
reason may induce them, for in the peace thereof they shall have peace; in the
prosperity thereof they shall have prosperity, in the glory thereof they shall
have glory. Juda and Israel dwelt without fear all the days of Solomon, 1
Kings 4.25. The like may England, Scotland, and Ireland all the days of
Charles, if What Solomon was to them, that Charles is to us.
they prove loyal Subjects.

2. Particular rewards of loyalty. Kings favor.
Particular Rewards of Loyalty are, -- first from men.

1. The Kings favor, Prove. 22.29. See thou a man diligent in his business?
he shall stand before Kings, he shall not stand before mean men. Now as the
Kings wrath (which the disloyal incur) is as the roaring Prove. 19.12.
of a Lion (terrible, and as the Prove. 16.14.
Messengers of death;) so his favor (which the loyal Subject procures) is as
dew upon the grass. Prove. 19.12. In the light of the Kings Countenance as
life: and his favor is as a cloud of the later rain.

2. Preferment.
Preferment, as in the case of Mordecai, Esther 2.21. and 8.2. compared.

3. External pomp, as in the case of Joseph, Mordecai, Daniel, etc. Genesis 41.39.
to 45. Esther 6.6. to 12. and 103. Dan. 5.29.

4. Estimation of the People, as in the case of David while a Subject, 1 Samuel
187.

5. Favor of the worthiest, as in He was a loyal Subject, even to persecuting
Saul.
David's case, 1 Samuel 18.1.

Yea, 6. sometimes alliance with the noblest, as in the case of Joseph and
David, Genesis 41.5, 45. 1 Samuel 18.27.

7. Power and Authority. Thus in the case of Joseph, Mordecai and Daniel, being
loyal Subjects to their King and Country, the one was second in Egypt, the
other second in Persia, the third second in Babylon, Genesis 41.40. Esther 8.25.
and 10.3. Dan. 6.3.

8. A good Subject, through the blessing of God upon him, he is an Iustrument
of good (yea, sometimes much good to his Nation and Country, as (to avoid
prolixity) in the case of Mordecai, Esther 6.2. and 8.10. and 9.1. In our own
time that worthy General Monck.

9. A good Name, and perpetual Renown, is the reward of a loyal subject, as in
the case of Mordecai, Esther 10. 2, 3.

10. The Loyal Subject is rewarded with good in his posterity; so that when
dead (as to this life) he seems to live to his Posterity; as appears in the
case of Barzillai, 2 Samuel 19.32. to 40. 1 Kings 2.7. Barzillai was loyal to
David in his distress; David was grateful to Barzillai when delivered from
distresses; and not only to him, but also to his posterity.

All which rewards of loyalty, as they are due unto, Application of therewards
of loyalty.
so I make no question but they will be conferred upon that honorable and
valiant Commander the Lord General Monck, for his worthy service to his King
and Country, for which (no question) he and his will be famous to posterity.
And I beseech God from the bottom of my heart, that he may be rewarded also
with the blessings following, which none but the King of Kings can give.

Particular Rewards of Loyalty from God the King of Kings, are, first External.

If thou O Christian, do fear God and honor the King, this shall be thy
reward from God. Blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed shall thou be
in the field. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
ground, and the fruit of thy Cattle, the increase of thy Kine, and the flocks
of thy sheep. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store. Blessed shall thou be
when thou come in, and blessed shall thou be when thou go out, Deuteronomy.
28.3, 4, 5, 6.

Who is it that desires not to be blessed in these? be a Religious Fearer of
God, and a loyal Subject to the King, and these promises are made to thee by
him who is truth it self, and cannot lie.

2. Internal, in the peace of a good conscience: O what blessing greater than
the soul's continual banquet? a good conscience (says Solomon) is a continual
feast Prove. 15.15. What melody to that sweet harmony of Romans 2.15. and 8.16.
excusing thoughts? What comfort to that comfortable assurance that Rev. 20.12.
Luke 10.20.
the opening of the books will show, that our names are written in heaven? when
others wring their hands for grief, this will make thee clap thy hands for joy;
when others do tremble, thou shall triumph. This makes thee to sleep quietly,
to wake cheerfully, to be alone without fear, and with others without distrust;
in thy affairs confident, in thy recreation comfortable. If Rebels be behind
thee and before thee, as the Amonites and the Aramites were before and behind
Joab, yet would thou resolve with him; Be of good courage, and let us play
the men for our People, and for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do that
which seems him good, 2 Samuel 10.9, 12.

Thirdly, Loyal Subjects that do fear God and honor the King, shall have
eternal Rewards; which is (O Christian) when after all thy loyalty to thy
Sovereign, the Sovereign of all Princes shall advance thee into the great City,
the New Jerusalem, described in part (according to our apprehention, Rev.
21.10. to the end, and 22.1. to 6. In the contemplation of which my meditation
dazleth, and my pen falls out of my hands, the one not being able 1 Cor. 2.9.
to conceive, nor the other to express the transcendent joys that are laid up
in heaven, for all those who believing in Christ are careful to maintain Tit.
3.8.
good works, to fear God and honor the King. Therefore I shall forbear to
dilate it further.

And so I come to the last thing, which is to show the Subjects duty to their
Sovereign.

Friends and Beloved, our KING is Royal: your duty it is to be Loyal; that is
your duty in general. The Sovereign's Royalty, requires The Subjects Loyalty.

Thus in General.

Now the Subjects Loyalty to their Sovereign, is (that I might descend to
particulars) to be expressed in the practice of these six duties: 1. Fear. 2.
Honor. 3. Obedience. 4. Tribute. 5. Defense. 6. Prayer.


1, Fear. The Sword exacteth Fear. Be ye afraid of the Sword, (says Job) for
wrath brings the punishment of the sword, Job 19. ult. To fear the King, both
Humanity and Divinity teaches. Fear Princes, says Periander: My son, fear
thou the Lord and the King, says Solomon, Prove. 24.21. If thou do that which
is evil, be afraid, (says S. Paul) for Viz. The King.
he bears not the sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13.4. The King of the Land being
the Minister of God, will take vengeance on them that transgress the Law of
God. Job being as a King in the Army, Job 29.25. Why the young men (fearing to
be seen (where) and (when) they should not) hid themselves, Job 24.8. This
fear, as the Porters, keeps Traitors out of the Princes Court, keeps
treachery out of the Subjects heart, 1 Kings 3.28.

The God of Heaven imprint this fear in all our hearts.

2. Duty is honor: The Kings Crown imports honor. Fear God, (honor) the
King; the Holy Ghost has knit them both together, and what God has joined
together, let not man put asunder, Math. 19.6. Fear God, honor the King, 1
Pet. 2.17. To fear God, (to use the words of a worthy and Reverend Mr. Jones.
Divine in the City of Bristol) in a strict sense, is to acknowledge his
glorious, though invisible, presence in all our ways, and to be awfully
affected therewith, to tremble before his Divine and infinite Majesty, and that
1. in regard of the time past, because we have sinned; and 2. in regard of the
time to come, that we might not sin, etc.

To honor the King, is not to speak evil of his sacred person, Eccles. 10.20.
Curse not the King, no, not in thy thought, etc. Acts 23.5. Exodus 22.28. To
construe his actions in the better part; not to be ready (as is but the fault
of too many) to receive evil reports of him lightly, Jude v. 8. And to be
thankful to God that he has honored us with the defense of so pious a
Sovereign, 1 Kings 10.7. 2 Chronicles. 9.8.

This honor is due to Kings, for they are powers, Mr. Byfield's Light of
faith, p. 360.
Romans 13.1. The Sun and Stars shining in the firmament of the State, they are
Gods, both as Gods Deputies and Vice-Royes, and as they bear his Image in
authority and Soverainty, therefore honor them, Romans 13.7.

1. Honor him joyfully, as all the people with joy and musical Instruments
honored King Solomon at his Coronation, and Inauguration, 1 Kings 1.39, 40.

2. Let all Generals of Armies so honor him, that all be done to his honor:
thus Joab being General of the Field under King David, fighting against Rabbah
of the Children of Ammon, and being ready to take the City of waters, sent to
King David to come in person, that David (not Joab) might have the honor, as
we read, 2 Samuel 12.27, 28.

3. Let him be honored with great regard in access to his presence, even of
the nearest and dearest unto him, as Esther (though the Queen) being in her
Royal apparel, stood in the Court of the Palace until the King held out the
Golden Scepter, Esther 5.1, 2.

4. Let him be honored in his presence with most humble gesture, even of the
Ministers Romans 13.1.
of the eternal God; as Nathan the Prophet being come unto the King, made
obeisance before the King, with his face to the ground, 1 Kings 1.23.

Finally, let him be honored with grateful acknowledgement of the Lords
unspeakable blessing, in honoring us with so pious a Prince, 1 Kings 10.9.

The third Duty is Obedience; this the Scepter requires: Put them in mind
(says S. Paul to Titas) to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates, Tit. 3.1. The whole world swarmeth with examples of obedience. If
among the Insecta the Bees obey their King; if among the Beasts of the field,
the flocks follow their chief, and the Herds their head: If among the Fowls
of the air, the Cranes, when he that watches over them, calls, they come,
when he flies, they follow. If among men, the Servant obeys his Master; the
Son his Father; the Wife her Husband: If in Man, the Body obeys the Soul: If
all the Spheres of Heaven, notwithstanding their proper and peculiar motions,
be circumvolved by the first moveable: If the Angels which excel Psalm. 103.20.
in strength, are obedient to the voice of God, and do his Commandments, and
hearken unto the voice of his word: Nay, if the Son of God (who could have had
more than ten legions of Angels Mat. 26.53
to do him service here on earth) performed obedience. Obedience coming into
the world, John 6.38. I came down from heaven not to do mine own will, but the
will of him that sent me.

Obedience being in the world, John 4.34. Jesus said, It is my meat to do the
will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. Obedience also going out of
the world, as by these Scriptures appear, Matthew. 26.39, 42, 44. Luke 22.42.
Phil. 2.8. Wherefore being compassed with such a Cloud of Examples, let us cast
off all impediments, and obey all that the King commands us. As in my Book
entitled The Gadding Tribe reproved etc. Published 1655. p. 11.
Every Soul must be subject to the Higher Powers, and yield obedience to every
one of their Ordinances, though 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
humane, if not contrary to Gods Word, (for there Act. 4.19. Dan. 3. v. 15, 16,
17, 18. and c. 6. v. 7, 8, 10.
we are to obey God rather than man) and be it his Commands in point of Gods
Worship, so far as belongs to the circumstances, how, and when, being in things
indifferent in their own nature, and that he also profess to disclaim all
opinion of holiness, worship, merit, and necessity, there must we be subject,
and yield obedience readily, 1 Samuel 26.6. sincerely, Col. 3.22, 23. generally,
not what likes us, but whatsoever the King is pleased to command us, Josh.
1.16. Yea, earnestly, with all our might, Genesis 31.6. Phil. 2.8. And all this
for conscience sake; knowing, that God is the Author of Magistracy, and
Magistracy is also good, even when the Magistrate is evil, Romans 13.1. to 8.

The fourth duty the Subject owes to their Sovereign, is Tribute, Romans 13.6, 7.
Matthew. 22. v. 17. to 22. Mark 12. v. 14. to 18. Luke 20. v. 22. to 26. When we
consider, that many times the King's eyelids do not slumber, that our eyes may
safely sleep: that the Kings sword cutteth off Thieves, that honest Subjects
may enjoy their goods, that the Kings Scepter curbeth Adulterers, that we may
keep our Wives and Daughters in Chastity: that the King's government is our
safe conduct to pass the highways, wide Heaths, thick woods, wild mountains,
without danger either of Thieves, or cutthroats; these and many other singular
and choice benefits, (of which you cannot be ignorant) we do enjoy by the
government of our gracious Sovereign, the King's most excellent Majesty, and
therefore for this cause, pay you tribute also, etc. Romans 13.6. We must render
to the King his due of Tribute and Custom, as it does belong to him, by any
right of Law, Statute, Custom, or otherwise. Tribute (says a learned Mr.
Lyford's Principles, page 157.
Divine) is a duty, not a courtesy, and men sin if they withold it, for they
attend continually upon our good.

To take from a private man, (says another learned Author) it is Theft; to
take from the Church, it is Sacrilege; to take, or to detain from the Prince,
it is Peculatus, robbing of the Royal Treasure, the Royal Treasure to be
employed to the common good. He (says Solomon) that robs his Father or
Mother, and says it is no transgression, the same is the companion of a
Destroyer, Prove. 28.24. He, may any man say, that detaineth tribute, or other
duties from the King, being the Father Isa. 49.23.
of our Country, and says it is no transgression, is the Companion of a man
that destroys his Country. Before there was any King in Israel ('it is worthy
observation) to take tribute, the Lord himself took a tribute, as Exodus 30.14.
dato oblationem Jehovae. When they had Kings (it is worthy observation
likewise) the Flowers of all their Kings had for their tribute a peculiar
Office. David, the Pattern of devotion, over the tribute set Adoram, 2 Samuel
20.24. Solomon, the Mirror of wisdom, placed over the tribute, Adoniram, 1
Kings 4.6. When the people of God were under the Kings of the Gentiles (which
is very remarkable) there were amongst the People of God (whose example in this
particular is recorded Romans 15.4.
for our learning) that upon their Lands and Vineyards borrowed money for the
Kings Tribute, as we read, Nehemiah 5.4. Mutuamur pecuniam pro canone regis:
oppigneratis agris nostris, and vineis nostris. (Tremel. Jun. transl.) When the
blessed Virgin was very great by the Holy Ghost with the Savior of our Souls,
in the depth of Winter she traveled from Nazareth in Galilee to Bethlehem in
Judea to perform this duty to the under Officers of a Lieutenant to an Heathen
Prince, Luke 2. verse. 1. to 7. When the Son of God (the best pattern for
imitation that ever the Christian World had) conversed among the Sons of Men,
Peter was asked, if he paid not tribute, he taking tribute of an unreasonable
creature, that tribute for himself and S. Peter might be paid, bound all
reasonable men, though they do it with their great difficulty, to perform this
duty to their King and Sovereign, Mat. 17.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Wherefore I shall
conclude this point with that saying of S. Ambrose, Si censum filius Dei
solvit, quis tu tantus es qui non putas esse s^lvendum? If the Son of God paid
tribute, or subsidy, who so great a man art thou which think it not to be
paid?

A fifth duty Subjects owe to their Sovereign, is defense; his person meriteth
defense. Affectionate were the hearts of the People to David their King whom
God had set over them; what, should David adventure himself? Oh no, better it
were that many miscarry; yea, ten thousand, say the People (as it were with
tears of thankfulness) God save our David, for if David go, the light of
Israel is extinguished, 2 Samuel 18.3. They would not the least hurt should
befall him who was the stay of them all. Wherefore (dear Contrymen) I
beseech you, if you know of any King of Aram, take Counsel with his servants
against Israel, if God by any means reveal it unto you, that you would with
Elisha, make known his Majesty, even the words that the King of Aram speaks
in his Bedchamber. 2 Kings 6.8, 9, 12. If any Bigthan and Teresh seek to lay
hands on our Sovereign, that you would (and it is your duty) presently, with
Mordecai and Esther, certify our Sovereigne of it, Esther 8.21, 22

If your service at any time be protecting, that ye diligently attend him, as
that band of men, whose heart God had touched, did Saul, 1 Samuel 10.26. When he
rests, it is your duty to keep him, that none that be willing to hurt his
sacred person, come near the Lords anointed: otherwise, if David had the
judging of you, you are dead men for neglect hereof, 1 Samuel 26.15, 16. As the
Lord lives, ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your Master the
Lords anointed.

If you see any appearance of danger, that you with King David's true hearted
Subjects be careful that His Majesty (being worth ten thousand of us) come not
into any peril, 2 Samuel 18.3.

If his Sacred Majesty be in the least distress (an the good Lord keep him
from all distress) his soul desires any thing which may preserve him, it is
your duty with all alacrity to provide it, as the three Worthies, even with the
hazard of their lives, brake into the host of the Philistines, and drew water
out of the wels of Bethlehem, and brought it to David, 2 Samuel 23.15, 16. If any
with Ishbi-benob think (my tongue faultreth in pronouncing the word, and the
Lord confound them that entertain any such intent) to slay David, to kill King
CHARLES, (what aileth thee O my pen to tremble, and to fall out of my hand?)
your duty is in such a case to defend the King's Majesty's Person, with
Abishai, though with exposing your own bodies to peril, to keep his sacred body
from peril, presently succor the King, and smite them that so presume, and
kill them, 2 Samuel 21.16, 17.

I hasten to the last (but not the least) duty of Subjects to their Sovereign,
and that is prayer for him; this the Lord commands. Little does fear of the
Sword, honor of the Crown, obedience to the Scepter, tribute to the Throne,
defense to the Person, prevail to the King's happiness, (as might be showed in
several Instances) without Prayer to the Inthroner and Preserver of the King.
The Apostle exhorting us to pray for all men, he exhorts especially to pray for
Kings, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort, that Supplications, Prayers, Intercession, and
giving of thanks be made for all men, especially for Kings, and for all that
are in authority, etc. especially for Kings, in respect of the greatness of
the cares 1 King 3.9. Host. 6.1.
they take, in respect of the perils 1 King. 22.31
whereto they are exposed: in respect of the abundant Ezra 6.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
good which descends from the Royal Majesty to the whole estate. If thy purse
be so poor that it can pay no tribute to the King; if thy body be so feeble,
that it can do nothing for the defense of the King: yet if thy heart be not too
lewd, too wicked; if thy heart be not void of all piety, of all Christian duty,
thy heart will daily and often every day pray for the King. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
If S. Paul exhorted to pray for Nero, (for it was in, and under the time of
his Reign S. Paul lived) a man so wicked, that (as one writes of him) he
murdered his Tutor, his Mother, and was Natures Monster: If the Prophets
commanded the Israelites to pray for the life of the King of Babylon, who had
wasted 2 Kings 24, 25. chap.
Judea with sword and fire, besieged and taken Jerusalem, burned the Temple,
carried away the holy Vessels, set fire on the whole City, brake down the walls
of Jerusalem round about, murdered many people, enslaved others, slew the sons
of the King before his eyes, afterward pulled out the Kings eyes, bound him in
chains, carried him to Babylon, and (as if this were not impiety enough) set up
a golden Image, and by a Herald proclaimed, Dan. 3.1, 4, 5, 6.
that whosoever did not worship it, should be cast into the midst of a hot
fiery Furnace: If the holy Prophet commanded the Israelites to pray for wicked
Nebuchodonosor, what would that Holy Spirit, by whom both the Prophets and
Apostles did write, that all English, Scotch Irish, all others under the
subjection or Protection of his most gracious Majesty should do for KING
CHARLES II. See a small Book, entitled The Character of King Charles the II.
who is so Pious and Protestant a Prince, as any the Christian world enjoys,
his Piety and Religion is so eminent and splendorous, that should my rude wit
presume to dilate it, I should but light a candle to the Sun. Shall we not pray
for such a King? Pray for him (says S. Paul) in respect of your selves, and in
respect of God. In respect of your selves, that you may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. A quiet life, that we may have no
Insurrections at home: A peaceable life, that we may have no evasion from
abroad: In all godliness, that it may be said of England, as once Jacob said
of Bethel, Surely the Lord is in this place.

And in honesty, that the Name of the Lord be not blasphemed among the Gentiles
(amongst the Anabaptists, Quakers, and Sectaries) through you, Matthew. 5.16. 1
Pet. 2.12.

In respect of God our Savior, pray for the King; For (says St. Paul) this is
good in the sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.

I would have spoken somewhat largely of this duty of the Subject to their
Sovereign; but in regard Esquire Prynn has both learnedly and largely
published a Treatise of this Subject, entitled, The signal Loyalty and
Devotion of Gods true Saints, and pious Christians toward their Kings: I shall
suspend my poor labor in discussing it further, heartily wishing, that that
Book before cited might honor every Family in the three Nations; that is, that
every Family might have one, and that they would make a good use of it, not (as
the guise of the most is) to peruse it, and then throw it aside to the Mothes
and dust, but that they would frequently read it, carefully regard it, and
constantly practice it, for in this (and nothing so much as this) does the
Subjects loyalty signally appear to our Sovereign Lord King Charles.

So that these fix duties (the several branches of Loyalty) of the Subject to
the Sovereign, viz. Fear, which the Sword exacteth; Honor, which the Crown
imports; Obedience, which the Scepter requires; Tribute, which the Throne
deserves; Defense, which the person meriteth; and Prayer, which the Lord
commands, are carefully to be remembered, and conscienciously to be practiced
at all times, and upon all occasions, as ever we would approve our selves good
Subjects or good Christians, without the practice of which duties (so far as
belongs to our place and calling) we can be neither good Subjects, nor good
Christians; for those that truly fear God, will, and do, loyally honor the
King, 1 Pet. 2.17. To sum up all these duties in the words of Tertullian, His
debetur honor, propter excellentiam; timor, propter datam potestatem;
obedientia, propter morale debetum; amor propter affectionis operationem: To
these honor is due, for their Excellency; fear, for their power given them;
obedience, for civil duty; tribute, for the Mat. 17.24. to the end.
preservation of peace; love, for affection, which brings forth prayer and
piety. The like comprehension, or abridgement of the Duty of Subjects to their
Sovereign (that I might help memory) is couched in that famous Collect of our
mother the Church (I hope none will be offended for the citation of it) in the
second service, next ensuing the ten Commandments, and preceding the Nicene
Creed, which is very pithy.

ALmighty God, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite, have mercy
upon the whole Congregation, The Kings duty.
and so rule the Heart of thy chosen servant CHARLES our King and Governor,
that he knowing whose Miisister Romans 13.4.
he is) may above all things seek thy honor and glory: and that we his
Subjects (duly considering whose authority he has) may fully serve, honor,
The Subjects duty.
and humbly obey him in thee and for thee, according to thy blessed Word and
Ordinance, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who with thee and the Holy Ghost
lives and reigns ever one God world without end. Amen.

Thus in the Liturgy.

So likewise in a godly Prayer made by Mr. Bradford, that blessed Martyr in
Queen Mary's days, amongst other godly Petitions toward the later end of the
Prayer (entitled, A Prayer necessary for all persons) there is this pithy one
to my present purpose: -- that I may obey our King and all Governors under him
1 Pet. 2.13, 14
unseignedly, and receive all Laws and common Ordinances (which disagree not
from thy Holy Word) obediently, and pay every man that which I owe him truly.

Thus I have showed you the Author, Authority, and necessity of Government and
Governors, both Supreme and subordinate. 2. The heinousness of disloyalty, or
rebellion against the King as Supreme, or subordinate Governors sent by him and
established over us. 3. Made answer to some objections in this particular. 4.
Demonstrated the Plagues that do attend Rebels and Traitors. 5. The Rewards of
Loyalty, and these both temporal and eternal. Lastly, the duties of the Subject
to the Sovereign; the God of Heaven make these things profitable to us, and
powerful in us, that we may religiously fear God, and really honor the King;
that so the blessings of loyalty may attend us both here and hereafter. Amen.

AND now that these rude lines of mine being (through God's assistance thus
composed) to go abroad and show themselves to public view, to whom shall I
tender and present them? May I to you, most honorable Counselors? But who am
I, that knowing your Lordships (as Gedeliah did not himself serve, but also
incite others to serve his King) not only obey, but most principally draw
others to obedience to our King, that I should interrupt your grave
Consultations with so slight a Sheeduse? yet I do most humbly beseech your
Honors to suffer it to pass abroad with your approbation. Most and right
reverend Fathers, and Pastors of the Church, to whom God has given his Vrim
and his Thummim, may I present it to you? Non sum Propheta: long minimo omnium
sanctorum, peccatorum maximus: I know you put your people in mind Tit. 3.1.
to be subject to principalities and Powers; to fear God and honor the King: I
beseech you that this poor mite may be cast into the Lord's Treasury, and that
you will not discourage it, (for it will meet with enough of that from the
disloyal party) but that you will look upon its scope and end, which is to show
(after the best manner it can) its loyal respect to those two great Ordinances
of the Gospel, viz. Magistracy and Ministry, bringing Gods Word, and the
example of reformed Churches both at home and abroad, to bear it out, and to
witness the truth of its assertions. Most grave Judges and Magistrates, may I
present it to you? not to be an Instructor of you (which it cannot do) but that
it may pass safely in the Kings dominion, without having its throat cut, or
pocket picked, or passage stopped?; for, wherever it comes or goes, it labors
to make your people subject and obedient to you, and the Sectaries will sure
stop its passage if they can.

And you my dear and much honored Kinsman (by whom I am not worthy to be owned)
Waldin Willington, Esquire, and Justice of the Peace in Living at Hurly Hall.
Warwickshire: Seeing the Creator who has made of one blood Acts 17.26.
all Nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the Earth, has knit your
worthy and my inconsiderable self so nigh, as to be Brothers Children, let me
humbly beg that you will protect this poor Orphan (left to the wide World) in
your County also, as being somewhat distant from the place both of its
Conception and Birth: that it may without danger pass in those parts, as
coming to you to signify my humble thankfulness to your Worship for the great
kindness I found from you when with you, and that since I have received from
you. Tutors and Instructers of Youth (of which I am the most unworthy) Dressers
of the Plants of England, shall I tender it to you, you being accounted most
necessary members of every Weal-publick? In nothing more can you show your love
to your Country, nor discharge your duties to your Sovereign, than by tutoring
your young ones in the knowledge and practice of such Rules.

Masters of Families, and Keepers of Servants, shall I tender it to you? As you
are to do unto your Servants that Col. 4.1.
which is just and equal; as you are to provide for them of your own 1 Timothy 5.8.
House, so you are to instruct your household in the knowledge of God and
exercise of Religion. Is not God highly displeased with you for not instructing
your Household, who was so highly pleased with A rabam for instructing his
Household? Genesis 18.17, 18, 19. Now, in what can you better instruct your
household and servants, next to the knowledge and fear of God, than to honor
and obey the King and his Ministers. Fathers, shall I tender it to you? you
know who enjoined you to teach your Sons and your Sons Sons, Deuteronomy. 4.4. you
know who said, These words that I command thee this day shall be in thy heart,
and thou shall teach them diligently Whet, or sharpen.
unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and
when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest
up. And thou shall (not only for thy own remembrance) bind them for a sign
upon thy hand, and as frontlets between thine eyes (but for thy children and
Servants) write them on the Posts of thine house, and on thy Gates, Deuteronomy. 6.6,
7, 8, 9. As you love your children omit not this; as you love your selves omit
it not. Isocrates accounted, Bristol found the truth of this in Febr. 1659.
that not Revenues and Riches, not Laws and Ordinances, but good nature of
youth make a City happy and quiet. Aristotle affirmed, that in vain do men make
Laws, if Youth be not brought up in good manners. And Plato averred, that small
need had his Commonwealth of Laws, by reason of the good discipline, wherein
his Citizens had been nourished. Yea, Solomon (who spoke by Divine inspiration)
has delivered this for a truth: Instrue, so Junius. Instruct, or chatechise a
child in his way.
Train up a child in the way be should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it. As ever you would have your Children (whom you love) happy; as
ever you would they should escape those fearful Plagues that are due to
Traitors and Rebels; as ever you would they should enjoy the blessings of
loyalty, (both specified before;) as ever you would they should miss Hell, and
come to Heaven, O bring them betimes to the School of Virtue and good manners:
suffer them not (as some do) to mock the aged, to rebel against their Tutors,
lest they come to do worse, even to oppose Magistrates, to despise Ministers,
yea, to curse their Parents to their very saces, (as I have known some do) and
then the vengeance of God will betide them, if God may be believed before man:
read else, and sadly consider that Scripture, Prove. 30.17. The eye that mocketh
at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall
pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. And I am ashamed to disgrace my
native soil, by saying there are any such there.

Mothers, whom Nature, or rather the God of Nature, has made most kind to
your children; let not your too great kindness to them be too great hurt to
them, and too great hurt to your selves. The wisest Son that by the course of
Nature ever any Mother had, has left this lesson for all Mothers for ever; and
oh! that you would mind it. A child left to himself brings his Mother to
shame. Prove. 29.15.
To the like purpose I have read of a too-wantonly brought up Son, who being
led to execution, by the clamor of his tongue (says my Author) and sharpness
of his teeth, took irefull revenge of his own Mother. Also I have read of
another Mother, who, to maintain her two sons in drinking and gaming, defrauded
her Husband in his life; but soon after his death, with her own eyes beheld them
both (robbing following upon rioting) openly executed; the one with the Sword,
the other with the rope. I beseech all Parents of children to turn to, read,
and consider these following Scriptures, 1 Samuel 3. v. 12, 13.14. Prove. 13.24.
Chap. 19. v. 18. Chap. 22. v. 15. Chap. 23. v. 13, 14. and Chap. 29. v. 15, 17.

Children, and all sorts of Youth, Remember your Creator in the days of your
Youth, Eccles. 12.1. And in the days of your Youth as carefully learn to
honor those that are set over you by God, as you desire earnestly that a long
life may be given you of God, Exodus 20.12.

Last of all, I say to all, If there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit; if any bowels and mercies,
fulfill ye my joy, (faith the Apostle) that ye be like minded, having the same
love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through strife or
vainglory, but in lowliness of mind; let each esteem other better than
himself. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things
of others; namely to further one another good, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. And as we
are once again become a happy Nation by the government of our gracious
Sovereign Lord and King, so let us and ours perform all dutiful allegiance to
our King, and pray, and pray fervently, and pray continually, that his days
upon earth may be as the days of Heaven; that God would be his Defender and
Keeper, giving him the Victory over all his Enemies, and that under him we may
be godly and quietly governed, and may live a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty.

Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on them and mercy,
and upon the Israel of God.

Luke 2.14. (...).

FINIS.

