Mount EBAL Levelled, OR REDEMPTION FROM THE CURSE.

Wherein are Discovered, 1. The woeful condition of Sinners under the Curse of
the Law. 2. The nature of the Curse, what it is, with the symptoms of it, in
its Properties, and Effects. 3. That wonderful dispensation of Christ's becoming
a Curse for us. 4. The Grace of Redemption, wherein it stands, in opposition to
some gross Errors of the times, which darken the truth of it. 5. The excellent
Benefits, Privileges, Comforts, and Engagements to duty, which flow from it.


By Elkanah Wales, M. A. Preacher of the Gospel at Pudsey in Yorkshire.

O piissime, frange esurientibus panem tuum, meis quidem (si dignaris) manibus,
sed tuis viribus

Bernard. super Cantic. Sermon. 1. London, Printed by R. Trott, for Tho. Johnson,
at the Golden Key in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To the Right Honorable THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX.
Right Honorable,
IT may seem somewhat strange, that one of so low a name, and as low desert
(especially being so far gone toward the Sunset of his day here below) should
now in this press-oppressing Age, hazard himself thus upon the public stage, I
hope, I may speak it in truth: it is not any itching desire to be seen in
print, that has prevailed with me to make this adventure. The great Motive was
this. Sundry of my worthy friends both Ministers, and private Christians
(which conceive a better opinion of me, than I do of my self) have sometimes
expressed their desires, that I would leave something behind me, before I shall
go hence and be no more, which might conduce to the building up of my hearers
in their most holy faith, and obedience. This invitation, coming from several
hands, and so frequently renewed, after along time of serious debating it
within mine own breast, I inclined to think it might be the call of God.
VVhereupon I resolved to make choice of some fit subject, to handle in mine
ordinary ministration at home; and having pitched upon this, and brought it to
a period by the good hand of God upon me (notwithstanding many interruptions),
I shall now send it forth, to shift for it self in the crowd. I have no reason
to account it any thing worth, as it comes from me. I freely acknowledge, that
I fail very much in the manner of handling? yet the Argument it self is of
special necessity, and worth, touching upon the three maine Pillars, or
principles of Christian Religion. viz. Man's misery by the fall, his Recoverie
by Christ, and his Duty, arising thereupon. If the Lord be pleased to give it
favor in the eyes of his people, and to make it useful to raise the price of
the grace of Redemption in the hearts of those that heard it, or of any others,
and to engage them more strongly to the love, and service of their dear
redeemer, I have my whole desire.

I humbly crave leave, that I may inscribe it to your Lordships Name, thereby
to manifest some small Testimony of my thankfulness for your many undeserved
favors. You were pleased to take notice of me in the time of the first wars,
and ever since, as occasion was offered, to look upon me, with a far fairer
aspect, than I could desire. Although I am a man of a mean parentage, and
condition in the world, and formerly a stranger to your Honor, yet you
received me as a minister of Jesus Christ, and have showed forth a tender care
of my welfare (a rare condescension in persons of so high rank), besides many
real kindnesses, making me at sundry times very noble offers of places of
considerable profit, for my better support, and more comfortable progress in
the Lords work.

How much your Lordship has deserved of this Nation, by managing the military
affairs of it, to the apparent hazard of your estate, health, and life too, is
so famously known to all, that I am willing to hope, that this age (although
otherwise unthankful enough) cannot so easily forget it, as not to send down
the memory of it to posterity.

Your love to true godliness in the power of it, your readiness to supply the
necessity of the Sts. your affectionatness to faithful Ministers, your care to
provide godly Preachers for all places, where you have power, or interest, and
to allow them comfortable saleries for their labors, these and the like good
works do praise you in the gates, in the hearts and tongues of all those, which
either know, or have heard the report of them.

But I am persuaded that the lowlines of your spirit, cannot willingly hear a
trumpet sounding forth your praises. Therefore I forbear. The Lord direct your
heart into the love of God, and the patience of Christ, put under his hand, to
support you in all your weaknesses, and afflictions, and confer upon you all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places preparing for salvation, which shall be
the daily prayer of.

Your Lordships humble servant Elk: Wales

To the Reader
THe doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction by his bloody death to the Justice of God
for the sins of all who believe in him is so clearly held forth in Scripture,
that there are none found to contradict it, but such who deny his eternal
Godhead; and thereby are forced by adding one Heresy to another, to renounce
the Doctrine of his satisfaction also. For who but a God could rescue us out of
the hand of the Devil, give a Ransom for sin, satisfy infinite Justice, and
redeem us from the curse of the law? Who but a God could reconcile us to God,
and purchase Justification, sanctification, and eternal salvation for us?

And therefore let all those who beleev that Christ Jesus is the true God one
in essence with the Father, be also confirmed in the Doctrine of his
Satisfaction. The whole comfort, and happiness of a Christian is wrapped up in
these two fundamental truths. For if Christ be not God, or if he be a God
only by Office (as Magistrates are called Gods) and not by nature, then is
Christian religion a Compound of folly, Madness, and Idolatry, in worshipping a
mere creature, or a made God (as the Socinians blasphemously call him) with
Divine worship, in praying to him, in trusting and believing in him. And if he
has not made satisfaction for our Sins, then are we still under the curse of
the Law, liable to the revengfull justice of God, and must of necessity perish
everlastingly.

Indeed the word satisfaction is not in Scripture (no more then the word
Trinity or Sacrament) but there is that in Scripture which is every way
aequivalent to it. For it says. That we are Redeemed by Christ. Col. 1.14.
And not Redeemed by way of Permutation (as when one Prisoner is exchanged for
another) or by way of free manumission (as Ahab freely dismissed Benhadad) or
by way of force and power (as the Israelites were delivered out of Egypt)
unless it be in reference to the Devil, out of whose clutches we are by force
rescued by Christ. But by way of Justice, by paying a sufficient and
satisfactory price unto God for the party Redeemed. 1 Cor. 6.20
Therefore we are said to be bought with a price. And this Price is called a
ransom price Matt. 20.28. A price to ransom us out of our spiritual
captivity, Matt. 20.28
and it is said to be laid down (...). Now the preposition (...) (as learned
men know) signifies a substitution and Surrogation of one in the room of
another (As Matt. 2.22. Archelaus is said for to reign (...) in the room of
Herod) Add further. That this Price which Christ laid down for our Redemption
is called not only (...) but (...) A Counter-prise or a price correspondent
and answerable, 1 Timothy 2.6.
to the debt it is paid for. It was (...)

If any shall ask what this price was Saint Peter tells us. 1 Pet. 1.19. Act.
20.28.
It was the most precious blood of Christ, and Saint Paul tells us. It was the
Blood of God. It is called the Blood of God, because shed in his humane nature
by him whose Person was God blessed for evermore; Romans 9.5.
and hereby it came to have an infinite virtue and efficacy in it. Ex infinita
Personae dignitate infinitum erat pretium sanguinis et carnis quam pro nobis
obtulit. Hence it was that the Blood of one man became sufficient to Redeem all
believers, and the Blood shed in a little space, able to satisfy for sins which
deserved eternal punishment, because the Person that suffered was God as well
as man. All this, and much more which might be added does clearly prove That
Jesus Christ has made Satisfaction to God for the Sins of all who believe in
him.

This great and fundamental truth is very pithily, soundly, Orthodoxly,
practically, and profitably handled in this ensuing Treatise. It is written by
a grave, ancient, and religious Minister of very good repute amongst the Godly
in Yorkshire. A Master Builder in Gods House. If any shall not relish, and
taste the sweetness of it, he will thereby make it appear that his Palate is
much out of tune. For to a real Christian it must needs be very welcome. Let not
our ignorance of the Author hinder us from buying, and reading of it, but let
us consider that it is recommended to us by one who well knows him, Mr. Edw.
Bowls Mininster at York.
and who is well-known to the world, and in whose judgment we may safely
confide.

The subject matter of this discourse is to show how Jesus Christ, who is the
fountain of all blessedness volutarily submitted himself to be made a curse
(not only accursed, but a curse) to Redeem us from the curse of the Law due to
our sins. And that this may not seem a riddle, or a Paradox, you must know that
Christ Jesus may be considered 2 ways

1. As he was the Son of God. 1 Pet. 2.24.


2. As our surety bearing our sins in his body upon the Cross.

In the first respect he was always the well-beloved Son of God in whom he
is well-pleased But as he was our Representative in this respect he underwent
the wrath of God and the curse of the law due to us, not due to him simply,
M^tt. 3.17.
but due to us, and born by him, as our surety. The hatred was against us, and
our sins. God never hated his Son. But yet as he stood in our stead and was
made sin for us who knew no sin, he suffered the effects of Gods hatred even
the puishment due to our sins. 2 Cor. 5.21


And whereas the Socinians, and those who are against Christ's Soule-sufferings
say. That Christ is therefore only said to be made a curse because he suffered
the bodily death of the Cross, which by the law was a cursed way of dying; and
this they say is evident, by what the Apostle adds in the latter end of the
curse -- for it is written, Gal 3.13.
Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree.

This is notoriously false, as appears

1. Because that curse which Christ redeemed us from, that curse Christ was
made; or else the Apostle had not reasoned soundly in saying. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the law being made a curse for us. That curse
which Christ redeemed us from, that curse he was made. But Christ redeemed us
from the corporal, spiritual and eternal curse; And therefore such a curse he
was made secundum aequipollentiam, though not secundum omnimodam Identitatem.
Jesus Christ for our sins suffered so much of the curse of the law, as was
possible, D. Willet
and necessary for him to suffer. And (as a learned man says) he suffered all
such pains of hell which were neither dishonorable to his person, nor defiling
to his nature, nor obstructive to the works of Redemption.

2. The bodily death of Christ upon the Cross is brought in by the Apostle (as
one very well says) not as the formal reason of the Curse, Calov^us in his
Socinismus profligatus.
but only as a sign and declaration of it. The Curse did not precisely
consist in the death of the cross, neither were they that were hung upon a Tree
therefore accursed, because hung upon a Tree, but the hanging on the Tree, was
a sign they were accursed; as Hierome excellently, Hier. upon Galat. 3.13.
Non quicunque pependerit in ligno maledictus coram Deo, sed qui propter
scoelus suspensus. Not every one that hangs on a Tree is cursed of God, but
he that hangs there for his sin. If Haman had prevailed for the hanging of
innocent Mordecah upon the gallows, he should not have stood accursed.
Wherefore it was not the death of the Cross, but our sins, hanging upon the
Cross that derived this curse upon Christ. This is evident by the very words of
Moses, quoted by the Apostle. Deuteronomy. 21.22, 23.
If a man has committed a sin worthy of death, and he be to be put to death,
and thou hang him on a Tree, his body shall not remain, etc. By which words it
appears, That it was not so much the kind of death, as the desert of death,
which made it ignominious. It was our sins hanging with Christ upon the
Cross, which made the same an accursed death:

Add what Moses says, Deuteronomy. 21.23. He that is hanged is accursed of God. But
now, no death is in it self more ignominious then another before God. 3.
The shame thereof is external, and concerns men. Ergo the Curse was not
only nor especially, in the shamefulness of the death. The ordinary gloss thus
notes upon the words, Non est hoc in contumelia Domini, quid mirum si
maledictus dicitur a Deo, qui habet in se, quod Deus odit. id est peccatum.
This redoundeth not to the reproach of God; for what marveil, if he be said to
be accursed of God, in 3 Gal.
that has in himself that which God hates, namely sin, not his own, but
ours. And therefore I conclude. That Christ was made a Curse for us, not only
by the ignominious manner of his death, but by suffering in our stead the Curse
due to our sins.

The Lord give us grace, so to study Christ's being made a curse for us, that
by faith in him, and love to him we may be freed from it, and the blessings of
Abraham may be our portion.

Thy servant in Christ Jesus, Edm. Calamy.

TO THE READER.
ALthough this Treatise, in regard of its worth and weight, might without any
Testimonial, have adventured it self, even upon this censorious, and froward
generation, yet seeing something by way of recommendation is desired, I look
upon it, not only as a duty, but an honor, that I may be serviceable, in
leading forth so useful a book into the world, as I apprehend this to be, and
certainly I can make no better use of my Name, than to prefix it to this
discourse, if it may be an inducement unto any one to read it.

The Author (concerning whom my affectionate esteem will not suffer me to be
wholly silent) is a person of long standing in the faith, and much experience
in the things of Christ, now passing the seventieth year of his age, and about
the forty fifth year of his Ministry. And having well-nigh fulfilled the days
of our years, which are said to be Threescore and ten, Psalm. 90.10.
being within sight of Eternity, he has set before his eye the infinite
obligations of eternal Redemption, and not thought it sufficient to serve his
own generation, by preaching the Gospel, but has been persuaded to leave this
labor of Love as a Legacy to the generation to come, that the people yet to be
borne, may know, and praise their Redeemer. The work, thou have in thine hand,
is the fruit of a well-grown tree, that brings forth fruit in its old age, and
though the leaves and branches thereof, may not be so seemingly fair, and
luxuriant, as some younger plants do afford, yet taste of the fruit, and thou
shall find it of good relish, sound, and nourishing. It grew indeed in a cold
Northern Climate, which men think, brings little to perfection; but it had the
advantage of a warm heart, which is the best soil, and the beams of the son
of righteousness for the ripening of it. If any say, It is a common Subject,
let him remember, Titus 1.4.
that it is Common Faith, and Common Salvation, Jude 3.
and must be known by more then a common knowledge. It Is plain indeed, as being
reached, not to Curiosity, but to Conscience; but plain work, clean wrought, is
very commendable, and many times, where is most of Art; there is least of Use.
Yet it is not so plain, but the lines and engravings of the Holy Ghost may be
discerned in it, by an eye well enlightened* and although, the Treatise was
intended mainly for Practice, yet our reverend Author like a wise, and
vigilant builder, has (as the exigents of these times require) carried on his
work with a weapon on the one hand, Neh. 4.17.
and a working Instrument in the other, defending the Truth against its
adversaries, as well as recommending its followers.

Let it not therefore be grievous to thee, for it is safe for thee (Christian
Reader) to retire a little from the Curiosities, and Contentions of this
pretending Age, to a serious Consideration of this most necessary, and weighty
subject. For though thou understood all Mysteries, and all knowledge, and had
Faith to remove mountains, it will profit thee nothing, unless thou can find
this Mount EBAL levelled, zechar. 4.7.
this great Mountain of CURSES made to thee a plain before the Lord JESUS, who
builds up his Church, as an Holy Temple unto God. But I will not detain thee
from the work it self, whith set's before thee DEATH, and LIFE, a CURSE, and a
CHRIST. The Lord by his special grace incline thine heart unto, and establish
it in a sincere choice of the Lord Jesus, that thy soul may live.

So prays Thy servant in the Gospel, Edw. Bowls.
YORK, April 19. 1658.
To the Inhabitants of PUDSEY, LEEDS, and BRADFORD.
Beloved Brethren,
I Need not say much to you concerning the Reverend Author of the ensuing
Treatise. You fully know his doctrine, manner of life, purpose, 2 Timothy 3.10.
Faith, Long-suffering, Charity, Patience. That he has labored long in his
masters Vineyard, as with great diligence, so not without some success. It is
the high commendation of blessed Paul, that from Jerusalem, and round about,
even to Illyricum, Romans 15.19.
he fully preached the Gospel of Christ: So our Reverend brother, not only in
the populous places near unto us, but in lesser Villages, has frequently
sounded the Gospel of Salvation, not confining his labors to that obscure
Congregation wherein he has officiated as a painful overseer for many years,
but communicating the sweet savor of Christ to many others: and let us add
this; He has been so far from heeding the preferments of this world, (though
tendered him at several times) as he has contented himself with a mean
allowance, not worthy to be named, considering his worth, and industry. but I
shall say no more of him, though I might say exceeding much, as knowing his
modesty to be such, as he would rather blame than thank me for it. Give me
leave to say a little unto you who have so often been partakers of his
Ministerial labors: and

1. To you of Pudsey, whose Pastor he has been, and still is, much precious
seed he has sown among you; and therefore from you is expected much precious
fruit: If you after so much Preaching, Catechizing, and expounding, be found,
either ignorant, or secure, profane, or dissolute, as you are left without
excuse, so the many years pains of so faithful a Teacher will rise up in
Judgment against you. Luke 12.45.
To whom much is given, of him much is required. God has given in to you much
instruction, He exspects from you much knowledge of the best things, endeared
affections thereunto, and abundance of those fruits, Matthew. 3.8.
which John the Baptist calls Fruits meet for Repentance, worthy of amendment
of life. Which, I desire, may be considered, that so you may not be found
barren, and unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming. 2 Pet. 1.18.
The goodness of the soil should be seen in the plentifulness of the Crop; and
the pains of the Pastor, in the peoples knowledge of God, and Christ, in their
Faith, hope, love, meekness, humility, patience, holiness, and obedience.

2. For you of Leeds, and Bradford, as you have all, and often participated of
his godly labors, so I heartily wish and desire, it may appear, you have not
done so in vain, and therefore exhort you, to remember how you have heard,
Revel. 3.3.
and received, and hold fast, and repent. Yea, to hold fast these good and
ancient truths, you have so often heard from his mouth: And forasmuch, as to
the weak endeavors of your own Teacher, the Lord, as it were by the way of
largess, has superadded the pains of this Reverend brother, I am sure, ye
ought to be gracious, yea, to grow in grace, and to abound in every good word,
and work.

But alack, it is to be feared, that according to the old Proverb, We are
better Fed then Taught, much preaching little reforming of men's hearts, and
ways. It should be otherwise, else it will one day be known, and little to the
comfort of many, that there have been painful and faithful Teachers among them.

Call to mind the days of old, when the harvest was great, the laborers few,
many converts, though scarcity of able, and faithful Teachers. Now the
Laborers are many, shall the Harvest be small? Shall few or none be found, who
look Zion-ward, and with their faces to that Jerusalem which is above. My
brethren, I speak a little to awake the drowsy: Who can tell, what a little
may do? It will do much, if he, who does all, afford his blessing.

Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and you that are awake,
take heed of slumbering in these declining times. There is much in the
following Treatise, to awaken the secure, because they may find therein, a
plain and full discovery, what their condition is by nature, as they spring
out from the loins of fallen Adam, and there is much also, both to direct, and
instruct, and comfort such as fly for help to the Refuge set before them. But
I shall spare to mention what every one may read. Pray, that the life of the
aged Author may yet be prolonged, and his Labors blessed, and pray for him
also, who desires you may profit by this work of his, and other the holy
Labors of his servants, which are according to godliness.

I rest, Yours to serve you in the Gospel of Salvation, Rob. Todd.
From my Study, in Leeds. April 26. 1658.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Introduction, showing the Coherence, scope, and sum of the
Text. Page 1
Chap. II. The first Conclusion. All men are under the Curse of the Law, Page 6
Opened in four Propositions. I. All men are under the Law, Page 6 II. All men
have broken the Law, Page 7 for, 1. Our first Parents broke it, Page 8 2. We
all broke it in them, Page 9 3. We do all break it in our own persons, Page 16
III. All men are found guilty of sin by the light and verdict of the Law,
Page 12 IIII. Being thus found guilty, they stand accursed by the doom of the
same Law, Page 13
The Curse of the Law wherein it stands, Page 15 The Curse on the body, Page 16
The Curse on the soul, Page 18 The Curse on the whole man, Page 21 Use. 1.
Mankind is not in that Condition wherein it was set at first, Page 26 2. Our
Condition by the fall is woeful, Page 27 Evidenced by six sad effects of the
Curse, Page 28 1. Subjection of the Creature to vanity, ib. 2. Spiritual
bondage to Satan, ib. 3. Vnfruitfulness toward God, Page 29 4. Liableness to
all plagues, Page 30 5. Punishing sin with sin, Page 31 6. Hellish terrors,
fear of death and judgment, Page 31, 32
And by 5 strong Properties of it, Page 32 It Is 1. Grievous, and bitter, Page
33 2. Grounded and authoritative, ib. 3. Impartial and thorough-dealing, Page
34 4. Subtle and spiritual, Page 35 5. Standing and abiding, Page 36

3. Admire the Lord's goodness in mitigating the Curse, Page 38 4. No
possibility of Justification by the works of the Law, Page 40 Four sorts which
vainly seek Blessedness by the Law Page 42 Professed Papists, ib. Ignorant
Protestants, Page 44 Civil Livers, Page 45 Some religious Professors, Page 46
5. No marvel if Law-preaching be so unwelcome and displeasing, Page 48 6. Yet
the Law must be preached, Page 50 7. Exhortation to two streams, Page 53 1. All
should be convinced of this, and make haste out of this estate, Page 55 2.
Parents and others should use all fit means for the recovery of children, etc.
Page 55
8. A disswasive from the wicked practice of cursing our selves, or others,
Page 56
CHAP. III. The second Conclusion. Christ was made a Curse for us, which are
under the curse of the Law, Page 60 Cleared by enquiring, Page 61 1. Wherein
his becoming a Curse for us, stands, ib. And that is in Three things, 1. Taking
our Nature upon him, Page 62 2, Imputation of our sin unto him, Page 63 3.
Undergoing the wrath of God, and the sad effects thereof, Page 64
Considered in 1. The preparation to it by lighter skirmishes, Page 66 2. The
main brunt it self, Death of body, Page 66 and of soul, Page 67 1. In the
withdrawing of the sense of his Fathers love, Page 68 2. In the full seizing of
the Lords wrath on him, both in the garden, and on the Cross, Page 69


Some additional Observations, especially of the mitigation of his
soul-sufferings, Page 72 1. In the place, Page 73 2. In the time of
continuance, Page 74 3. In the companion, Desperation, ib.
2. By whom, or by what power he was thus made, Answered, Page 78 1.
Negatively, not by any Authority which the Law had over him, nor by any
contrivement of the Creature, etc. ib. 2. Positively, by a divine power exerted
in 3 Acts, Page 80 1. The Fathers fore-appointment, ib. 2. The Sonn's
condescension, Page 81 3. A compact betwixt them, arising from both these, Page
82

Use 1. Information, in 4 particulars, Page 86 1. The mischievousness of sin,
Page 87 2. The greatness of misery by sin, Page 88 3. The Impartialness of
Gods Justice against sinners, Page 89 4. Christ's unspeakable love to sinners,
Page 91
2. Exhortation, in 2 branches, Page 93 Learn 1. a point of wisdom for our
selves: give free way to Christ, to bear the curse for us, ib. 2. Our duty to
him answerably: be willing to be made a curss for him, Page 96 3. Lamentation:
the sinners put him to bear the curss still. Page 99
Obj. Are there any that do so? Page 100 Ans. Yes, many, especially 5 sorts,
ib. 1. Heretics, which acknowledge not Christ in his Natures, Offices, etc.
ib. 2. Those which contemn, or slight the Doctrine, or Ministry of the
Gospel. Page 101 3. Those which make an Apostasy from the truth, and profession
of Christ. Page 102 4. Those which accustom their tongues to outrageous
swearing, tossing his name by blaspemous oaths, Page 103 5. Those who exspect
salvation by him, and yet continue in sin, taking encouragement to be more
licentious, or remiss in their course, Page 105
The Conclusion of this Use, Page 107
CHAP IV. THe Third Conclusion: Christ, by being made a Curse for us, has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, Page 108 Redemption flows from Christ's
becoming a curse, ib. 1. In Gods intention, and purpose, ib. 2. In the effect,
and event of the thing, Page 109
The Doctrine: 1. Cleared by showing what Redemption is, name and thing, ib. 2.
Confirmed by Scripture-grounds, ib. 1. The fitness of the person to undertake,
being true God, and true man, Page 114 2. The efficaciousness of his
sufferings, Page 116

Whereby he has 1. given abundant satisfaction to justice, ib. 2. broken the
Serpents head, etc. Page 118
An Objection [If by Ransom, then not by Rescue] Answered by 3 Considerations,
in reference to 3 persons, with whom the Redeemer had to deal, Page 120 1. God,
the sovereign Lawgiver, being wronged by man's sin, the chief thing to be
done, was to satisfy Justice, by paying of a Ransom, ib. 2. Satan, into
whose hands man is delivered, to be his Jailour, or executioner, being man's
deadly enemy, does oppose his deliverance, and holds him captive still,
therefore he must be rescued by conquest, Page 122 3. Man's slavery is
voluntary in respect of himself, and his heart is averse from deliverance;
therefore the Redeemer must put forth an Almighty power, to subdue him, and
make him willing to accept of liberty Page 125 Another Objection, It might have
been done in an easier way, answered, Page 126 1. This was the good pleasure of
his will, ibid. 2. Most agreeable to his holy nature, 1. Suitable to his
sovereign ends, and setting forth the glory of his 1. Justice, 2. Truth, 3.
Wisdom, 4. Goodness, Page 127


CHAP. V. 1. USE. Confutation of enemies to this grace, Page 131 1. Papists,
which add several parcels to make up the price of Redemption, Page 132 2.
Socinians; which teach, that Christ's becoming a curse for us, was not for
satisfaction, but only for an example of imitation, Page 134.

CHAP. VI. 2. INformation, in sundry branches, Page 143 1. The love of God and
Christ is unspeakable, ib. 2. The work Redemption is a very costly piece, Page
144 3. The grace of the Gospel is very precious, Page 145 4. God will have a
Church, Page 146 5. The Church is very dear to Jesus Christ, Page 148 6. The
condition of the invisible Church is incomparably happy, discovered, Page 149
1. In three excellent properties of Redemption, Its 1. Free and gracious, ibid.
2. Full and plenteous, Page 150 3. Eternal, and without period, Page 151

2. In rare spiritual benefits which flow from it, Page 153, 154, 155 4.
Adoption, Page 160 5. Sanctification, Page 162 6. Final Redemption, Page 163 7.
Full Glorification, Page 166

3. In seven precious privileges attending on Redemption Page 169 1. It makes
us truly blessed, Page 170 2. And the Lords peculiar people, Page 171 3. The
Redeemer is at Gods right hand, carrying on the work Page 172 4. He has
purchased the gift of the Spirit, to bestow on the elect, Page 175 5. By
personal interest in it, we become the Lords freemen, Page 177 6. All the
promises are ours, Page 179 7. We have a special interest in Gods providence,
Page 181 Four privileges more common, Page 186 1. Redemption opens a sluice for
the waters of life to run among the Gentiles, ibid. 2. It is the foundation of
the general Covenant made with mankind Page 187 3. By the merit and virtue of
it the Jews shall be called, Page 189 4. It overflows to the bettering of the
whole Creation, Page 190


CHAP. VII. 3. COnsolation against the annoyances, Page 193 1. Of sin, 1. In
our old estate, ibid. 1. The hainousness, Page 196 2. Multitude, ibid. 3. Long
continuance, Page 196 4. Advantage by neglecting the offer of grace, Page 197
2. In our new condition, Page 200 1. Its presence, ibid. 2. Its prevalence,
Page 212 3. Advantage by frequent neglects and swarvings, Page 214
2. Of terrors by new guilt, Page 216 3. Of cursing and reproaches, Page 208 4.
Of temporal afflictions, especially, Page 209 1. Persecutions for righteousness,
Page 211 2. Sufferings in innocence, Page 212 3. Punishments for sin, Page 213
Quest. Whether the evils which the Redeemed suffer, may properly be called
curses, answered by a distinction, Page 214

CHAP. VIII. 4. EXamination, Actual interest in Redemption, tried by sundry
evidences, Page 216 1. Dear love of the Redeemer, which is incorrupt, if it be
1. Single, Page 217 2. Superlative, Page 219 3. Invincible, Page 220 4.
Accompanied with self-jealousie, Page 222
2. Weariness under the bondage of sin, past, and present, Page 224 3. Sincere
resolution, and actual endeavor to abandon all sin, Page 227 4. Separation
from the world, etc. Page 229 5. Walking after the Spirit, Page 230 6. Purity
of heart and life, Page 233

CHAP. IX. 5. EXhortation, 1. To senseless sinners, which lie secure under their
slavery, Page 235 Advice in five particulars, ibid. 1 Give way to the Law to
convince you, ibid. 2. Resolve not to abide in this condition, but take counsel
from Gods Ministers, Page 238 3. Fall down before the Lord in an humble and
full confession, Page 239 4. Still take notice of this Ransom, and of the
feaseableness of deliverance by it, study it, and be affected with it, Page
241 5. Walk in the way which God has limited, forgetting an actual share in
it, Page 242
Which is, 1. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Repentance from dead works,
Page 243
Motives to set upon this way, Page 245 1. No possibility of deliverance in any
other way, Page 247 2. Else Christ will glorify his justice in leaving thee a
prisoner to the Curse for ever, Page 248 3. Now the Lord offers this mercy in
the Ministry by his Spirit, Page 249 4. The welfare and comfort of Gods
Ministers depends much upon this, ibid.

CHAP. X. 2. TO sensible sinners, which are burdened with the Curse, Page 251
Counsel to thee in three particulars, Page 252 1. Ponder the weight and
strength of this great design, ibid. 2. Continue instant in prayer, Page 253,
254 3. Learn self-denial, abandoning thine own wisdom, sense, etc. Page 255
5. Objections of an humbled soul, Page 256 1. I know not whether I be redeemed
or not. 2. Christ never meant to redeem all, Page 257 3. Only the Elect are
redeemed, but I know not that I am elected, Page 264 4. I have neglected so
long that my day is past, ibid. 5. I do not see that it is my way, thus to
believe, I do not, I cannot believe, Page 267 All these answered severally,
Page 269
10. Encouragements to accept of Redemption, Page 273 1. The name of God is
most sweet, ibid. 2. It is a clause in the Mediators Commission, that he shall
proclaim liberty, ibid. 3. The terms are reasonable and easy, Page 274 4.
Faith engages Christ to relieve a soul in extremity, Page 275 5. This is the
way to self-abasement, Page 276 6. And to exalt Jesus Christ, Page 277 7. Its
the best part of thy thankfulness, Page 278 8. And the most commendable
selflove, ibid. 9. A blessed thing to believe when all things persuade the
contrary, Page 279 10. Thousands of captive sinners have gone this way and
speed well, Page 280 The conclusion of this passage, with further satisfaction
to the broken soul, Page 281, 282

CHAP. XI. 5. TO the Lords Redeemed ones, walk as it becomes such in five
Duties, Page 283 1. Admire this mercy, rejoice in it, and let this joy break
forth in praises, Page 284 2. Hold fast your liberty, and return not into a
second bondage, either more palpable by Apostasy, or more covert, of
conscience, or conversation ibid. 3. Give your selves up wholly to the pleasure
and obedience of the Redeemer, both in doing and suffering Page 290 The equity
of this showed in three Motives, ibid. 1. He only has propriety in you, Page
293 2. Your safety and comfort here depends very much upon this, Page 294 3.
This shall be most insisted upon in the great day of Inquisition, Page 295 The
general neglect of this duty bewailed, with further pressing it, Page 297 4.
Labor to bring others to partake of this benefit, which concerns, Page 299 1.
Ministers of the Gospel, Page 300 2. Governors of Families, Page 302 3.
Neighbors and friends, especially allied in blood or affinity, Page 305 5.
Love the appearing of your Redeemer, manifest it by the actings of Page 308 1.
Vehement desires, ibid. 2. Lively hope, Page 309 3. Hearty rejoicing in the
foresight of it, Page 310
Helps to this duty, Page 312 1. Keep thy self unspotted of the world ibid. 2.
Preserve in thy self a willingness to dye, Page 313 3. In thy whole course
after conversion, commit thy soul and hopes of happiness unto Jesus Christ,
Page 314 4. When death arrests thee, commend thy spirit into the hands of the
Lord thy Redeemer, Page 316

CHAP. XII. 6. ADmonition, to beware of cursing our selves, or others, inferred
upon this new ground, and further pressed by motives, as being both irrational,
and irreligious. Page 317



Mount EBAL levelled, OR, Redemption from the Curse.
Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us.


CHAP. I. The introduction, showing the coherence, scope, and sum of the Text,
in three conclusions.
THe Apostle Paul writ this Epistle to the Churches of Galatia, with his own
hand; so we find chap. 1, 2. and 6.11. This country was situate in Asia the
less, See Calvin, P^scator, Bullinger, Paraeus, etc.
and the inhabitants thereof (as some Historians report) were anciently
descended from the Galli or French, who growing a very numerous people, were
enforced to seek abroad into foreign coasts for convenient habitation; some of
them coming into these parts, and lighting upon a country which bordered upon
Cappadocia and Bithynia, sat down there, and called it (in reference to their
first Original) Galatia, see 1 Pet. 1.1.

Who was the first that preached the Gospel among them, and was the instrument
to reduce them from their Gentilisme to the faith, and profession of Christ,
whether it was S. Paul or some other of the Apostles, as it is not easy to
determine, so neither is it necessary for us to know. This is certain; 1. That
there were Churches planted in that region, chap. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 16.1. 2. That
Paul and his companions traveling through those parts, were forbidden to
preach the word in Asia, Act. 16.6. Yet, 3. That he preached the Gospel unto
them in his own person, see chap. 1.8.11. and 4.13. (probably at that time
when he passed through that region, before the inhibition came to him) and 4.
That after all this, he went over that country again, and strengthened all
the disciples in the truth of the Gospel, which they had received, Act. 18.23.

But as it often fell out, that the Churches began too soon to degenerate, and
decline from their primitive purity: Vergere in pejus.
so these Galatians were quickly removed from the simplicity of the Gospel, by
the instigation of the false Apostles, pressing a necessity of circumcision,
and the observation of the Law of Moses, to be joined with Christ unto
justification and salvation. And to the end they might the more easily prevail,
those deceitful workers went about to slight, and debase the authority of the
Apostle by all means possible.

Upon this occasion he sends them this Epistle, wherein (after the
inscription) he chides them sharply for their Apostasy; then he asserts the
truth of his doctrine, and authority of his Apostleship; for the clearing
whereof, he sets down the story of his life past, both in his Judaisme and
Christianisme: After which, he sets upon the main business, to maintain the
doctrine of justification by faith alone, which he prosecutes in this chapter,
and the next; adding thereunto, an earnest exhortation to stand fast in their
spiritual liberty, and to the practice of other Christian duties of special
concernment, and so concludes.

We shall fetch the coherence no higher, then from the 6 verse of this chapter.
The hinge of his disputation runs upon this conclusion, We are justified by
faith alone, without the works of the Law.

To make the proof more clear and full, he brings Arguments both for the
Affirmative, and for the Negative.

The Affirmative part is, We are justified by faith alone: To prove this, he
lays down two Arguments.

1. Drawn from the example of Abraham; look by what way or means Abraham our
Father was justified, by the same are all his children justified, but he was
justified by faith alone: Ergo ver. 6, 7.

2. Drawn from Gods mind touching this, made known beforehand, Look how the
Scripture chalks out Gods way of justifying the Gentiles in aftertimes, that
way they are justified, but faith in Christ is the way which it has chalked
out, Ergo ver. 8, 9.

The Negative part is, We are not justified at all by the works of the Law; and
for this also he brings two Arguments.

1. Drawn from the sentence of the Law it self. If the Law it self do solemnly
pronounce a curse upon all that depend upon it, then justification is not by
the works of the Law: for if it justify it blesses: if it curse, how does it
justify? but the Law does so pronounce, Ergo ver. 10.

2. Drawn from the inconsistence of these two, the Law and faith. Its only by
faith that the sinner is justified, and so lives; but the Law is not of faith.
These two in the business of justification fly asunder, and cannot stand
together; even as grace and works do in the decree of election, Romans 11.6. Ergo
ver. 11, 12.

Now whether these words be intended for a new argument, Summum et
potentissimum argumentum, Jun. Paral.
or only for an amplification of something before delivered, is doubtful; if
the former, then the ground of the argument must be the near connection of
Redemption and Justification, thus,

If Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, then we are not
justified by the works of it: for if Justification may be had by the Law, then
there is no need of Redemption by Christ; so the Apostle reasons, chap. 2.
But Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law. Ergo.

But I rather choose to take it for an amplification of that, ver. 10.
concerning the curse of the Law (although to our purpose it matters not,
whether way we take it) by way of prevention of an objection. Some might say,
if that be so indeed, that the Law doomes all men accursed, which do not keep
it; then we are all in a woeful case Magna vox: Quomodo igitur sanab^mur?
Olevian. in Loc.
; for none of us are able to keep it; therfeore the Law having pronounced us
accursed, we are accursed with a witness, past help and remedy, and then your
doctrine of Justification proves a bootlesse thing. Not so, says the Apostle:
for although by the sentence of the Law, we lie under the curse, yet we are not
therefore helpless; for Jesus Christ has wrought our redemption, disanulled
the curse, and rescued us from it, and so has laid a groundwork for
Justification by himself alone, and eternal blessedness thereby, as v. 14.

I may call my Text a sacred Oracle, or a Divine Axiom, holding forth the great
work of Redemption by Christ. Observe in it.

1. The miserable estate of mankind, employed, under the curse of the Law.

2. The remedy provided, Christ has redeemed us from it.

3. The means whereby he has procured this benefit, being made a Curse, etc.

Or thus. Three main Truths are here presented to our view.

1. What we are in our selves, under the curse of the Law.

2. What Christ is made for us: a curse.

3. What good he has procured for us thereby; he has redeemed us from it.

So that we have here three conclusions or Doctrines, which I shall propound,
and prosecute in their order.

1. All men are under the curse of the Law.

2. Christ was made a curse for us, which are under the curse of the Law.

3. Christ, by being made a curse for us, has redeemed us from the curse of
the Law.

CHAP. II.
Sect. 1. The first Conclusion cleared in four propositions.
THe first Conclusion or Doctrine is this. All men are under the curse of the
Law. This is the condition of all mankind, as they stand since the fall, that
they are liable to the curse of Gods Law.

I shall evidence this Truth by four Propositions.

I. All men are under the Law; I speak now of man in his first condition, and
as he was made in Adam. God did set the first man, and all his posterity with
him, in the day of his Creation, under the authority and command of his own
Law. We may look upon it under a double Notion.

1. As a Platform of righteousness; and thus we were under it by conformity:
the Law was written in man's heart; so much is employed Romans 2.15. God made man
after his own image, Genesis 1.26. Which stands in knowledge, righteousness,
and holiness of truth, Col. 3.11. Ephesians. 4.24. His mind, will, and affections,
and all being conformable to the mind of God, as the counterpart to the
Original.

2, As a rule of obedience; and so we were under it by subjection, As God
bestowed upon man sufficient ability to obey the Law, so likewise he tied him
to walk according to the prescript thereof exactly. Man was not made (...).
self-soveraign, or Independent, there was never any creature formed, that
might stand upon it is own bottom, and say, as Psa. 12.4. Who is Lord over me?
or as those Jer. 31.2. We are Lords, we will no more come unto thee.

Yea further, besides the moral Law written in his heart, God gave him a
positive Law, restraining him from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
upon pain of death; and this was to serve both for the probation; and the
manifestation of his obedience to his Maker: I need not insist longer on this
proposition, but shall take it for granted.

II. All men have broken the Law; they have swarved from this Platform, and are
gone aside from this Rule. This must be branched out, and explained in three
particulars.

1. Our first Parents broke the Law, flew off from the holy commandment given
to them, and so made an escape from God their Master. The story is plain, Genesis
3. which Solomon expresses thus. Man has found out many inventions, Eccl.
7.29. Adam having a strict charge given, not to eat of tha^ one tree, hearkened
to the counsel of his wife, who was before bewitched and ensnared by Satan,
speaking to her in the Serpent. And although he had strength enough to have
repelled the temptation, and to have kept himself free, yet he willingly
yielded, and withdrawing his heart from God, went cross to his charge. Being
set in an estate of happiness, and honor, he proved disloyal, and departed
away wantonly, and causlesly from the blessed God, and betook himself to the
creature, this was a woeful breach, being not one single Iniquity, but a
compound, or fardell of many, as Divines observe, especially these 4.

1. Distrust of God, giving credit rather to the false tales, and whisperings
of Satan, then to the word of the everliving God, and entertaining thoughts
tending to question, the realnesse and sincerity of his commands, promises, and
threatenings.

2. Unthankfulness to God, who had set him in such an excellent condition; but
he plays the part of an ambitious discontented subject, who is displeased with
that preferment which the Prince confers upon him; he slights it, and will have
a better.

3. Rebellion against God, in going point blank against the commandment of God,
adventuring upon that, which he had expressly forbidden, not fearing the
threatening, but putting the Lord to it, and tempting him, to see what he would
do.

4. Apostasy from God, (...)
a falling away, a revolting from the Lord, and so from righteousness,
holiness, obedience, and subjection to him, unto the service and obedience of
Satan, casting off his Creator, and leaving his Sovereign and Commander (as it
were) on the plain field, and running into the tents of his Enemy.

2. We all broke the Law in them. We were all in Adams loins, what he was, we
were; what he did, we did. Although we did not in our own persons, either talk
with the Serpent, or put forth our hands to take the fruit, yet we did eat the
forbidden fruit as well as he, and so broke the Law, and turned aside in him:
for he was not a single person, standing for himself alone, but a public one,
standing in the room of all mankind: therefore his sin, being not merely the
sin of his person, but of the whole nature of man, is justly imputed to us all.
If Adam had stood in his uprightness, we should have been partakers of the
gains, he forfeiting all, we must share with him in the loss. See Romans 5.12.
In whom all have sinned, and ver. 19. By one man's disobdience many are made
sinners. Adam was the Head, all his posterity the members: If the Head plot,
and practice treason against the State, is not this judged the act of the whole
body? He was the Tree, we the branches: when the tree falls, all the branches
fall with it Corruit, and cuncti simul in genitore cadente, corruimus.
.

3. We do all actually break the Law in our own persons, and that 2 ways.

1. in the frame and disposition of our natures, which are corrupt, filthy,
crooked, wholly broken off, and turned aside from conformity, and subjection to
the Law. Our disobedience in Adam draws along after it, a woeful depravation of
our natures; so that we are all bred and born transgressors, Psalm. 58.3. Isa.
48.8. Adam begat a son in his own image, a sinner like to himself, Genesis 5.3.
David in his penitential confessions, after his grievous fall, bewails this,
as the rise of all the mischief, Psalm. 51.5. This leprosy this poison, has
overspred all mankind, and the whole nature of it; all sorts, sexes, states,
degrees, and not one free; and all the parts and powers of every man, in soul
and body throughout. Our first Father being a corrupt tree, has infused
corruption into all the branches, and being a poisoned fountain, has shed his
poison into all the streams flowing from him. Hence every man is born, not
only destitute of all goodness, but also wholly averse from it: not only
prone to all evil, but also full of it, as a Toad is full of poison, Romans 1.29.
and this sinful stain is as fresh at this day, and so will be till the worlds
end, as it was at the first: it is renewed in every succeeding generation with
advantage.

2. in the course and practice of our lives: we do according to our kind; the
bad tree brings forth bad fruit, the corrupt spring brings forth unwholesome
waters; if the powers or habits be depraved, the operations and actings which
proceed from them can be no better Laesae facultates, lasae actiones. Prove. 21.4
; all the workings of man in his corrupted estate are evil and sinful, like
himself. See Psalm. 14.1, 2.3. Laesae facultates, lasae actiones. Prove. 21.4
All our ways in reference to the first Table, are unholinesse; in reference
to the second, unrighteousness. It were easy to demonstrate this, by running
over all the Commandments. We are still breaking the Law.

1. In thought: all the buddings, and imaginations of our minds, are only evil
continually, Pro. 24.9
Genesis 6.5. Matthew. 5.19. Tit. 1.15.

2. In affection: the motions and actings of our hearts are perverse and
wicked. We love the evil, and hate the good, Mich. 3.2. so our trusts, fears,
joys, etc. they all run cross, and counter, Jer. 17.9.

3. In speech evil, corrupt, loose, unprofitable communication, falsehood,
flattery, pride, scorning, censuring, and a thousand extravagancies of the
tongue, Psalm. 5.9. and 36.3. Romans 3.13.

4. In action: we commit evil, and omit good, or mar it in the making, Psalm.
14.1. abominable works; none that does good, not one, Gal. 5.19. etc. These and
such like are the sparks which do daily fly out of the hellish furnace of our
woeful natures, as Hos. 7.6. And thus much of the second proposition.

III. All men are found guilty of sin by the light, and verdict of the Law. The
Law of God is a right line, which at once discovers what is straight and what
is crooked. Index sui, and obliqui.
As it shows unto man what is good, and what the Lord requires of him, Micah
6.8. so when man has swarved, and transgressed, it shows him his contrary
evil, and charge him with doing that which he ought not to have done. It Is a
glass, which might both let him see his native beauty (if he had any) and his
deformity, and spots, which he has brought upon himself. It Is a finger, which
both points at the right way, and discovers to the traveller the wrong way. As
it is in humane Laws, the very same Statute that forbids treason, murder,
theft, etc. does also (when any of these facts are committed) charge them upon
the Actours; and the ordinary Rule, and Warrant, to proceed by in trying the
parties is this, or that Statute or Law of the land: so it is in the Law of
God; it has a voice, whereby it can cry aloud to the conscience of the sinner,
and tell him, This is a misdemeanour, and that is a miscarriage, for which thou
must answer. Thus it was with our first Parents, as it may very probably be
inferred from Genesis 3.7. And yet it is not material (as to the truth, and
authenticknesse of the verdict) whether the sinner see this light, and hear
this voice, or not: the Sun sends forth his light, although all the world were
blind: the candle will shine, although all in the room were asleep, so the
righteous Law of God, cries out of violence and wrong, although sinners be
deaf, and cannot hear it; and charge them with iniquity, although they
(wretched souls) be so blockish that they will take no notice of it. In brief,
the Law charge all the world to be under sin, and guilty before God, Romans
3.9.19. Thus of the third Proposition.

IV. All men being found guilty by the verdict of the Law, do therefore stand
accursed by the doom of the same Law: for there is a necessary connection
betwixt guilt, and curse. If Adam, and his posterity be justly chargeable with
sin against the Law, then are they also justly liable to the Curse of the Law;
for the Law breaths out a curse against all the sons and daughters of Adam,
and claps it on their backs, because of sin; so that they are all under the
curse, even the curse of Almighty God revealed, and expressed in the Law

To clear this further, let us look upon it. 1. in the sentence. 2. in the
execution of it.

1. In the sentence. This is the voice of the Lord, sounding out in the Law,
which both threatens it to the transgressors, and declares them to be
accursed. The Law pronounces the curse against all sinners in the Name of the
Lord: it tells Adam, and his posterity that they are accursed: it says to
every one in particul^r, without respect of persons, to Kings and subjects, to
fathers, and children, to Masters, and servants, to rich and poor, etc. Thou
man, thou woman, art accursed. se Deuteronomy. 27.15.16. etc. Genesis 4.11. Jer. 11.3.
Psalm. 119.21. It is the flying Roll 20 cubits long, and 10 cubits broad, which
goes forth over the face of the whole earth. Zach. 5.2. etc.

2. In the exicution; as the Law, declares, and denounces the curse, so the
Lawgiver strikes the sinner accordingly. Look what the Law speaks, the
Lawgiver makes good; he executes (by his own hand, or by his instruments) the
judgment written, as Psalm. 149.9. As the just judge on earth executes the
sentence passed upon the Malefactor, according to the Law: so does the Lord,
the Judge of all the world; he inflicts the curse, which the Law awards, in
such manner, and measure, as he pleases; thus he cursed Adam, when he had
sinned. Genesis 3.17. and he is said to bring curses on a people, and to give a
people to the curse, and to make them to be an Execration. Pro. 3.33. Isa.
24.6. and 43.28. Jer. 42.18. and the curse is said to be powered upon men. Dan.
9.11.

Sect. 2. A more particular Enquire, what the Curse is, and wherein it stands
BUt it may be worth the labor, to enquire more particularly, what this Curse
is, and wherein it stands: we may express it thus.

It is the abandoning of the sinner from God, and so from all happiness, and
the throwing of him down into the folds of his wrath, and so into all misery
we read Jos. 6. of the accursed thing. * God laid a curse on the spoil of
Jericho, that is, devoted it to utter destructions, Ver. 17, 18
* giving a strict charge that no man should meddle with it, upon pain of
being accursed, and devoted to destruction himself, which was accordingly
executed upon Achan. chap. 7. Truly, sin is that Accursed thing; there is
nothing in all the world so accursed, as sin, and whosoever meddles with it,
God from heaven pronounces that man accursed, and devotes him to the uttermost
of his wrath, even to eternal destruction, Deuteronomy. 27.26. God is blessed, yea
blessedness it self; therefore the blessedness of the creature must needs
stand in the enjoying of God, and so of all good in him: contrariwise then the
cursednesse of the creature stands in its being cast off from God, and
consequently implunged into his displeasure, and the greatest misery. It is set
forth sometimes by darkness; for God is light, and to be separated from him, is
to be compassed with black darkness: sometimes by death, as in the threatening,
Genesis 2.17. for he is life, and to be removed from him, is to dwell in the very
shadow of death. Thus did the Lord curse Adam after his sin, q. d. Seeing thou
have a mind to depart from me, be it so, I do abandon thee out of my presence,
be gone from me; Thou art accursed, and accursed thou shall be; and to seal up
this sentence, he thrusts him out of Paradise, Genesis 3.24.

Now this Curse (even as the sin) has spread, and derived it self to all his
posterity, so that all are accursed in, and with him. And that we may view it
more fully, let us consider it in the parts, as it lies. 1. On the body. 2. On
the soul. 3. On both together.

I. The curse on the body shows it self miserable, 1. Birth. 2. Life. 3. Death.

1. A miserable birth, attended with pain and sorrow, both to mother and child:
the mother cries, the child weeps: there is a curse in the begetting,
conceiving, bearing in the womb, and bringing forth, Genesis 3.16. the curse is
derived to us, and descends upon us all from the loins of our fathers, and the
wombs of our Mothers, Deuteronomy. 28.18. it takes hold upon us, and is in force
against us as soon as ever we have a being.

2. A miserable life: the Curse attends us, and goes along with us, during our
continuance here: in our persons, names, estates, callings, and in all that
ever we either do or suffer. The poison and power of it breaks forth, either,
1. In infflicting on us positive evils, as on our persons, sicknesses,
diseases, deformity, weakness, toilsome labors, Genesis 3.19. Deuteronomy. 28.21, 22,
27, 60. etc. on our estates, crosses, losses, plunderings, poverty, ver. 16.17.
-- 31, 32. -- 51, 52. on our names, disgrace, reproach, ver. 37. on our
callings, and all our ways, ver. 20.29. Or 2. in withholding from us good
blessings, ver. 23. -- 33. -- Jer. 5.25. Or 3. in blasting the blessings which
we enjoy, or putting a sting into them, so that they become either hurtful or
unprofitable, Mal. 2.2. Yea, the earth which is given to the children of men,
is cursed to the sinner, Genesis 3.17. etc. denying its strength for his
sustenance, bringing forth briars, etc.

3. A miserable death: the body is continually murling away, and old age it
self tastes deeply of this bitter cup. For although the hoary head be a crown of
glory, yet that is no thanks to it self; its only when its found in the way of
righteousness, Prove. 16.31. still the sinner of an hundred years old, shall be
accursed, Isa. 65.20. We are all of the dust, and shall at length return to it,
Genesis 3.19. Psalm. 89.48. The body, by its union to the soul, enjoyed life; but
by separation it becomes a livelesse carcass. This separation is a curse; not
only in it self, but also 1. in the manner of it; for its a parting of two old
friends, and usually is done with violence, and painfulnes, as if you would
rend an arm from the body, or pluck the heart out of the belly. 2. In the
consequent of it, the body must lie in the grave, and rott there. Psalm. 49.14.
so that now the sinner has no more place in the land of the living; a full
period is put to all his earthly contentments, and sometimes he leaves his name
for a curse to posterity. Isa. 65.15. and it rotts. Psalm. 10.7.

II. But oh! all this is nothing in comparison of that curse, which falls upon
the soul. I shall reduce the things which appertain to this head, to 3
particulars.

1. An utter forfeiture of the special sweet favor of God, even in this life,
together with a woeful subjection unto his hot displeasure. We may suppose the
Lord speaks thus to our first Father, and in him to us all, you had my favor,
my countenance was toward you, I embraced you once with loving kindness, and
you were happy in it; and if you had continued in your obedience, you might
have continued in my love, and I would still have compassed you about with my
goodness: but seeing you have set it so light, you shall have no more of it, you
shall know, how you come by it hereafter, yea the fire of mine indignation
shall smoke against you to the uttermost: ye were once my Hephzibah, a chosen
generation, the dearly beloved of my soul: now ye are become a smoke in my
nostrils, the generation of my wrath, and a people against whom, the Lord will
have indignation for ever. Thus we are all struck dead, with the loss of Gods
favor, and plunged over head, and ears in the sea of his dreadful
displeasure. We are deprived of that, which is better than life, and filled
brim-full of that, which is worse than death, see Isa. 27.11. Romans 1.18. Ephesians.
2.3.

2. An utter loss of the fair pure image of God, which was put upon us in the
day of our Creation, and in stead of that a putting on us the foul black image
of the Devil, and sin. We may suppose again, the Lord speaks thus. I
created thee after mine own image, I did put upon thee the stamp of the divine
nature, in wisdom, righteousness, and holinese of truth: but seeing thou wast
so far from taking care to preserve it, that thou did wantonly cast filth
upon it: therefore I do remand it from thee, it shall no longer abide in that
base unworthie soul of thine: henceforth let that ugly image of sin, and
hell, which (it seems) pleases thee better, seize upon thee; take it to thee,
and fills thy self with it. Thus we are all alienated from the life of God. Ephesians.
4.18. This part of the curse lies heavy on the whole soul.

1. On the Mind, and understanding part: which is impotent, and unable to
conceive the things of God, and to discern of things that differ, our
understandings are darkened. Ephesians. 4.18. see. 1. Cor. 2.14.

2. On the Conscience, which is defiled, Tit. 1.15. being either sensles, and
so excusing, when it should accuse, Ephesians. 4.19. or when awaked, wanting just
matter of excusing, and so unpeaceable. Isa. 57.21.

3. On the will, which is rebellious against the truth, and ways of God
revealed to the mind, depraved in its power of choosing, can will only, that
which is evil, cannot will that which is good. see Pro. 17.11. Jer. 5.23. Math.
23.37.

4. On the affections, which (being the Wills Waiting-Maids) are of the same
temper, disordered, affecting evil, disaffecting good, running into extremity
of excess, or defect, and so spoiling the conversation. Thus man, once made
upright, yet by seeking out many inventions, Eccl. 7.29. is become without God
in the world. Ephesians. 2.12. ergo accursed.

3. When the soul, and body are parted, then the wretched soul is sent down
to hell, to take possession of those everlasting flames. As soon as ever the
first death has done its office, forthwith the doom of the second death
passes upon the immortal soul, and then the great Jaylour of hell lays
hold upon it, and drags it into the presence of the Almighty, on whom it shall
look, with horror and amazment. Thy now sleeping conscience shall then be
awakened, and all thy sins shall be set in order before thee, thou will not
see them now, but they shall then stare in thy face; yea thy secret sins
shall be set in the light of Gods countenance, and thy most pleasing iniquities
shall appear before thee in their proper black hiew, to gaster thy soul into
final desperation. No place left for repentance; the door of mercy, and the
gate of heaven, shall be thenceforth shut up against thee for ever; thy
wretched soul must take up its lodging in the loathsome prison of hell with the
Devil and his Angels; Luke 16.22, 23. 1 Pet. 3.19. where it shall lie, filled
with the wrath of God for the present astonished, and swallowed up with the
apprehension of the eternity of that to come, and tremblingly waiting for the
great day of reckoning, and the dreadful hour, when it shall be poured down
in full vials upon the whole man.

III. The curse, which comes upon body, and soul together, or the whole man,
may be summed up in these 3 particulars, also.

1. The loss of his right unto, and sovereignty over the creatures, The Lord
invested Adam in the day of his creation into a title, and power Jus (...)
pot^sta^e v^.
over the work of his hands, especially the creatures here below, he had free
liberty to use them and they were given to be serviceable to him; even the
Sun, Moon, and stars to give him light; the garden and all the trees of it
(except that one) for his necessary, and comfortable sustenance, and
refreshing. God has given the earth to the children of men. Psalm. 115.16. yea
the Patent extended to dominion over the creatures. Genesis 1.28. in which respect
the Psalmist greatly admires the Lords high honoring of mankind. Psalm. 8.4, 6.
etc. But now by the fall, Adam has forfeited all this interest, so that the
creatures might justly deny us their service, the Sun, Moon, and stars might
withhold their light, heat, and influences from us; the fire, air, water etc.
might refuse to act, or work for our good; yea contrarily, the creature setts
it self against us, in the quarrel of its Creator, as if it owed us a
mischief; the Lion, Bear, Woolf, would devour us, the beasts of the field make
head against us, yea, every worm will turn again. All the hosts of heaven
and earth, are ready even like to rebel against us. This is a curse, which
all the sons, and daughters of Adam feel in some measure, and sometimes
reaches to the taking away of life, limb, and all comforts. And although the
sinner enjoy the benefit of the creatures both for necessity, and delight, yet
that is only by the indulgence of the most High, who makes his Sun to shine,
and his rain to fall upon all: and the choicest enjoyments are but as the
Accommodations afforded to a Traitor in the Tower; there is a deadly curse
lying hid in the bowels of them, which will make sad work in the latter end.

2. The general Judgment after death, which is called the Judgment of the
great day. Jude. 6. The Lord Jesus shall come in the clouds, and shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flameing fire, 2. These. 1.7,
8. He shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel,
and with the trump of God. 1. These. 4.16. When the trumpet sounded at the
giving of the law, Exodus 20 18 Heb. 12.19.20, 21.
it was (doubtless) to set forth the terribleness of the curse, which attends
the Law; but at this great day, it shall sound far louder, to fill the ears,
and hearts of sinners, which have broken it, with the dreadful report of it,
to their conviction, and confusion, Jude. 14.15. Their bodies shall be raised
out of the dust, and united to their souls, and their persons shall be
presented before this glorious Judge, and arraigned at the bar of his great
Tribunal. The books shall be opened, and all their foul businesses, (although
now cast behind their backs, and laid to sleep in the darkest vaults of
forgetfulness) shall be unmasked before the whole world, Eccl. 12.14. The
process, and result of the transactions of that day, will be no small part of
this curse, when the Goats, which shall stand at Christ's left hand, shall hear
him solemnly sounding out, that most doleful sentence, Depart ye cursed, etc.
Math. 25.41.

3. The full, and final Execution after Judgment. As soon as ever this great
work of judging the world is over, and the last doom awarded, then shall
follow the execution thereof accordingly: then shall the great black curse be
poured down upon sinners; all the curses of the Law (and Gospel too) shall
meet together as in one Sea, and fall upon the souls and bodies of all
impenitent ones, in their perfect strength, and fury, and abide on them for
ever. this is called everlasting punishment, Math. 25.46. and it stands in 2
things.

1. Some that is privative, called the punishment of loss. Paenae damni.
an utter expulsion, or banished from the blessed face, and presence of God,
and the glory of heaven. Depart from me, Math. 7.23. 2. These. 1.9. They shall
be shut out as incurable Lepers, or as, Dogs, from communion with God, and the
society of the Saints. They shall be deprived not only of all possibility of
soul-blessings, which they never cared for, but also of the good things of this
life, which were their only portion. The glorious God will not own them any
more, Jesus the Mediator will offer them salvation no more, the Spirit of
Christ will strive with their souls no more; there shall be no Minister to
preach peace to them, to weep over them, and to beseech them to be reconciled
to God; no friend to comfort them, and to wipe away their tears, no Sun to
shine upon them, no bitt of bread, or drop of water to refresh them: No
blessing of God once to come near them; no good to be seen, enjoyed, or ever
to come within their kenning (unless it be to aggravate their misery, that
they may gnash their teeth for madness, in considering what they have lost) unto
all eternity, without remedy.

2. Something that is positive, called the punishment of sense, or pain Paena
sensus.
a total subjection to the heavy, yea intolerable wrath of God in the
torments of Hell. Everlasting fire, Math. 25.41. The vengeance of eternal
fire, Jude. 7. And the wrath to come, 1. These. 1.10. The whole person, soul
and body, shall be companion with the Devil, and his Angels, and bear a part
with them in torment. The worm of a guilty conscience shall lie gnawing at
the hearts of sinners, like a snake, or a viper, and never die, Mar. 9.44. The
Lord himself, (who is a consuming fire) will power all the full vials of his
wrath upon them; troops, and swarms of woes shall encompasse them; the raging
waves of hellish flames shall roar against them, and overwhelme them: thus
they shall have their portion in the lake, that burns with fire, and
brimstone, which is the second death, Rev. 21.8. God will set his infinite
wisdom on work, to extract the Quintessence of all the curses of the Law, and
his Almighty power shall second this wisdom, in inflicting them to the full.
The fire shall be unquenchable, never go out, Mar. 9.43.44. see Rev. 14.9, 10,
11. The breath of the Lord does kindle it, and still blows it, and keeps it
in, Isa. 30.33. He will hold up the wretched creature with the one hand, that
it may continue in being, and beat it with the other hand, that it may ever be
dying, and never die. The perfection of curses.

Thus I have presented to your view, some small scantlings, or shadows, (and
but shadows) of that, which no understanding of man, or Angel is able to
conceive, or express to the life. Viz: the curse of the Law, due to sin. I
proceed to the Application.

Sect. 3. Use. 1. and 2.
And 1. Hence we may be bold to conclude, without the least haesitation or
doubting, that Mankind is not now in that condition, wherein it was at first
created. For Mankind is under the curse of God, and of the Law: but certainly
God did not create man accursed in the beginning: No such work could possibly
come out of the hands of the Lord Jehovah, who is God blessed for ever. Oh no,
God made him a blessed creature, his posterity with and him, putting upon him,
some parcels of his own blessedness. The Lord looked upon him, and saw he was
very good, Genesis 1.31. And said, Oh man, I have set the stamp of mine own image
upon thee, and thou art a blessed creature by that blessedness, which I have
put upon thee. The Law looked upon him, and saw him every way conformable to it
self, and said, Oh man, I can find no flaw in thee, therefore I bless thee in
the Name of the Lord. But oh lamentable change. Heu, quantum mutatus ab illo?
The Law looks at him angerly, and says, Oh vile accursed creature. The Lord
looks on him in deep displeasure, and says, surely some mischeivous hand has
been here. Did not I sow the seed of blessedness in this field? how comes it
then, to be so full of cursed tares? oh, the Enemy has done this. As, Math.
13.27.28. Thus man is woefully flitted from the top of Mount Gerizon, to the
topp of Mount Ebal, and is quite another, than God made him; as far differing
from what he was once, as cursing is from blessing.

Oh, consider this; look back, and see what we have been. He that was once
blessed in the shine of his Princes favor, and has now lost it, how sensible
is he of it? how does the remembrance of it, even pinch and sadden his spirit,
oh then! what desperate brutish hearts have we that can look upon the ruins
of our first blessedness with dry eyes?

2ly. We should seriously consider, and take notice of the woeful condition of
all men by nature. What can be spoken more to the aggravation of our misery
than this, that we lie under the curse of the Law of the most high God? The Law
speaks aloud to all the sons, and daughters of Adam jointly, and severally,
as Mal. 3.9. ye are cursed with a curse: oh ye wretched Backsliders, draw near
hear, and tremble; yea, let every one suffer himself to be convinced of this,
and take it home, and say, woe is me, I am an accursed creature. And to drive
this Nail home, I shall insist a while on the consideration, both 1. of the
sad effects, and 2. the strange properties of this curse.

Sad effects of the Curse.
1. The sad Effects, or consequence of the curse, (I mean, such as are felt even
in this life) are sundry; as

1. The subjection of the whole creature to vanity. It groaneth, and
travelleth in pain together, Romans 8.20, etc. The curse, that lies on thee for
sin, makes the creature sick, causes heaven, and earth to quake. Every
creature was full of beauty, and virtue according to his kind, and capacity;
but that beauty is greatly decayed, and that virtue much wasted, and almost
dried up. They were all made to serve thee, but now, that thou art a convicted
Rebel, and therefore accursed by the doom of the Law, they all fare worse for
thy sake; the curse reflects upon them, because of thy treason against God:
even as when a Nobleman is found a Traitor, and so obnoxious to the Law, all
his servants, and retayners are sharers with him (less or more) in his
sufferings.

2. Spiritual bondage, and thraldom unto Satan. This curse is attended with
lamentable soule-slaverie, infinitely worse, than that of the body. Every
natural man is a prisoner, under the power of the Jaylour of hell, even while
he lives here in this world. God the great King, and Judge of the world, has
said, Take him Jaylour and he has taken him, and holds him captive to do his
will. 2. Tim. 2.26. * He has strong holds in the hearts of sinners, he
possesses them, and leads them at his pleasure; he says, go, and they go;
come, and they come; do this, and they do it. He blinds their minds, hardens
their hearts, and works in them powerfully, Ephesians. 2.2. Indeed they spitt at him,
and say, they defy him; yet nevertheless they are his drudges, and carry his
pack, and do his work. And while they profess that they scorn to serve him,
yet even then they serve him willingly, and with both their hands. Oh misery,
beyond all expression!

3. Unfruitfulness toward God. He may complain of Mankind, as once of Israel,
Jer. 2.21. I had planted the a noble Vine, wholly a right seed: how then art
thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange Vine unto me? All our fruit
is fruit unto death: we can bring forth no fruit unto God. The curse of the Law
has blasted us: we are (as it were) Thunderstruck, and made unserviceable. We
can do nothing that is truly good, or well pleasing to God, Romans 8.8. When
Christ came near to the figtree, and saw nothing on it, but leaves, he cursed
it, and then it withered, Mat. 21.19. So the Lord, seeing Adam, and his
posterity now by their Apostasy become degenerate plants, pronounced a curse
upon them, saying, Never fruit grow on you any more, and so we are become no
better than withered stumps. Thou think, that thou do good duties, this
and that good work thou had thy hand in, such, and such good fruits thou
can show; but alas its nothing so, thou art a dry, and a barren tree.

4. Liablenes to all the plagues, and judgments of God. The curse setts us in
such a posture, as we are continually exposed to some mischief, or other. The
ground, which brings forth briars, and thorns, being near unto cursing, its
end is to be burned, Heb. 6.8. The foolishman thinks his tongue is his own, to
use as he will; Psalm. 12.4. But Solomon tells him, his mouth is near to
destruction, Pro. 10.14. See Ezech. 7.5, 6, 7. 2. Pet. 2.3. Speaking of false
Teachers, he says, their judgment lingers not, but is hastening on its way;
their damnation slumbreth not, it keeps waking, to seize on them in due time.
And indeed, what is it, that hinders vengeance from falling on sinners, but
only the Lords patience? Tha^ consuming fire is at hand ready to lick thee
up, and to destroy thee: there is but one stepp betwixt thee, and death. The
Lord might forthwith stop thy breath, an^ then thou art gone for ever, the
ladder i^ every moment like to be turned: tho^ hangest but by one weak thread,
and when that is broken, then thou droppest into the flames of hell.

5. Punishing sin, with sin, a very sad effect of the curse, when the Lord
has determined to set home the curse upon a sinner with a witness, then he
leaves him to himself for his former provocations, either to run himself deeper
into the same sins; or else to fall into more vile, and vicious courses, and
so to heap up wrath against himself. As sometimes a father says of an hopeless
child: Seeing he will not be reclaymed, let him take his course, let him run
himself out of breath, and hasten to his own ruin. Thus he scourged the
Gentiles for their wild courses against the light of Nature, Romans 1.26.28. And
the Jews for their contempt of the word, Psalm. 81.11, 12. And their opposing
the Gospel, 1. These. 2.15, 16. Thus the Lord deals with many of the secure
sleepie sinners: they give no regard to the offer of mercy, therefore the Lord
shutts them up in ignorance, and says, let him, that is ignorant, filthy,
carnal, be so still: they are not bettered by mercies, or judgments, therefore
they shall be made worse. The close deceiver becomes a gross robber, and God
gives him over to lying, swearing, forswearing, etc. The immoderate use of the
creatures becomes grossly riotous; God gives him up to beastly drunkenness,
mispending of his time, wasting his estate, yea sometimes to wantonness, and
bodily filthyness, to hatred yea scorning of good counsel, and the like
abominable practices.

6. Hellish terrors, startlings of conscience, fear of death, and of the
Judgment to come. These are the sparkles, which fly up out of these
everlasting burnings, while the furnace is in heating to devour the ungodly of
the earth, Isa. 33.14. Fearfulness surprizeth the hypocrites, Heb. 2.15. Its
one maine branch of man's natural misery that through fear of death, he is
all his life, subject unto bondage, Act. 24.25. When the Aostle Paul, preached
of the Judgment to come, Felix trembled. The sinner feels many a privy nippe,
while he is walking on in the ways of his own heart; he has gripings in his
spirit, that torment him, and he feels the flashing of hell fire sometimes in
his conscience, so that he is appaled with the foresight of the wrath to come.
His heart smites him, and tells him, that Vengeance lies in wait for him,
because of ignorance, drunkenness, contempt of the Gospel, etc. The thoughts
of death, and judgment damp him, and strike him to the heart, and he says, oh
I must once go down into the dust, what shall then become of this poor
soul? Animula vagula blandula. Quae nunc ab^bis in loca.
I must be brought to judgment, how shall such a sinful wretch as I, look the
great Judge of heaven, and earth in the face. Alas poor sinner, thou set a
good face on the matter, before men, but thy heart knows, that it is thus.

2. The strange properties, or qualities of the curse, Strange properties of
the Curse.
are especially these 5. (I call them strange) because. 1. Most of them lie out
of the road of the natural man's apprehension, and belief, they are hid from
his eyes, he will not easily be persuaded of them. 2. Yea, the godly themselves
do not so clearly discern, nor so carefully observe, or make use of them, as
they might.

1. It is a grievous, and a bitter curse. Can there be any thing more grievous,
and bitter, than the abandoning of the creature from God? It was a very
girevous curse, which Shimei the Benjamite shot against King David, as David
himself terms it, 1. Kin. 2.8. A strong sore, forcible curse, -so the
original word signifies. How much more rightly may all this be spoken, of the
curse of Gods Royal Law? When the Angel of the Lord would measure out a curse
against the Merozites, according to the breadth of their sin, he bids curse
them bitterly, Jud. 5.23. Gods curse against sinners is bitter, Jer. 4.18. Its
made up of gall, and worme-wood. Ier. 8.14.9.15.
When Solomon would give warning of the danger, which may come by the ensnaring
of an whorish woman, he tells us, that in his own experience he finds her more
bitter than death, Eccl. 7.26. If he had known any thing more bitter, he would
have mentioned it. Now the curse of the Law is the death (...) ^he sinner, Genesis
2.17. The curse of the people upon Merciles self-seeking persons is grievous,
it bites sore, Pro. 11.26. and, 28.27. Oh, but what then is the curse of him,
who is the God of all people? that is but a flea-biting to this.

2. It Is a grounded, and authorative curse. It has a superscription, and
stamp of divine warrant upon it: the power of heaven goes along with it, which
puts weight upon it, and makes it heavy and bitter. Elisha cursed the mocking
children in the name of the Lord, and that curse commissioned, and enraged the
2 she bears to tear them in pieces, 2. Kin. 2.23.24. So the Law curses the
sinful children of Adam in the name of the Lord, and this curse armeth all
Gods judgments against them. The causles curse is contemptible, it shall not
come, Pro. 26.2. But the Law of God finds abundant cause in the sons of men,
and therefore it curses with authority, and efficacy. When a natural father
curses his children, as Noah, Cham, Genesis 9.25. And Jacob Simeon and Levi, Genesis
49.7. This breaths out authority; and therefore it strikes deep. When the Pope
curses with bell, book, and candle (as they say) his seduced slaves, which
have received his mark, tremble at it, because they apprehend (though falsely)
the authority of Christ himself to be in it, how much greater cause of
trembling is there, when the father of the spirits, who is God over all,
curses transgressors?

3. It Is an imp^^^iall, and thorough-dealing curse; it overtakes all sinners;
none can escape, or avoid it. Cursed is every one, that continues not in all
things etc. verse. 10. Before, No ability of nature, or religious privilege,
or any excellency whatsoever, can possibly shelter or safeguard thee from it,
till thou arrivest at Jesus Christ. We read of Levi, that he knew not his
father, nor his mother, nor his brethren, nor his own children, Deuteronomy. 33.9. So
the curse of the Law says unto every one without exception, I have not seen
thee, I do not know thee; it falls downright on all, without respect of
persons. They use to picture Justice blind, even the justice of humane Laws,
so the justice of the divine Law is (after a sort) blind; it can neither be
bribed, nor dashed out of countenance: it cannot be swayed either by fear, or
favor; it takes no notice of any by considerations, which might turn it aside
from it is right course. Zach. 5.3.
The flying roll goes over the face of the whole earth, to cut of every one
that steals, and every one that swea^eth, etc. Yea it is so impartial, that
it will not spare, or favor a justified person, who is now under the wings of
Christ's blessing, but will look grimly upon him, and reach him some sharp
lashes if it find him faulty, or miscarrying.

4. It Is a subtle, and a spiritual curse, it peirceth into the inwards, and
goes down into the bowels of the belly, it can strike the very spirit of the
sinner; so that oftentimes when no curse appears without, yet then there is
nothing but curse within: when the outward man is compassed about with
blessings, the inward man lies in the midst of all evil, yea is filled with the
curse of God. The body is fat, and fair liking, the bones flourish like an
herb, the Estate prospers, their name is up, no bands in their death, etc. but
even then God sends leanness into their souls, Psalm. 106.15. Their minds are
more blinded, their hearts more hardened, their consciences more seared, they
are more crusted, they grow more secure, and incapable of any good, Lam. 3.65.
Give them obstinacy of heart, thy curse upon them. Let their hearts be covered
over, as with a buckler, to keep of every blow from Gods word, or hand. This is
Gods curse on the heart; so that while all things are so well composed without,
that they promise to themselves nothing but blessing, yet even then the curse
of God sits close on their spirits, and ripens them insensibly for destruction.

5. It Is a standing, and abiding curse. The Justice of God has brought it so
home, and given it such a deep expression into the nature of man, that it is
unremoveable. No power either of man himself, or of any, or all the creatures
in heaven, or earth, is able to take it off. The sinful soul under the curse
of the Law is like to a prisoner, bound hand and foot, and thrown into the
dungeon, ready for execution, he cannot loose the chains nor get himself out;
he is sure for starting: No power, ability, disposednes in, or from the sinner
himself can avail any thing, toward the ridding of him from the jaws of the
curse: No footsteppe, or possibility of help by, or from the creature, man, or
Angel, to put to a little finger toward his release from it. The flying
Roll, which enters into the house of the Theife, and swearer, must remain in
the midst of his house and consume it, timber, and stones, and all, Zach. 5.4.
The wrath of God abides on the disobedient sinner, Jo. 3.36. Time cannot wear
it out, Isa. 65.20. If a remedy be tendered to the sinner, he is utterly
incapable of it. 1 Cor. 2.14
He has nothing, which can concur with grace: whereby to further his recovery,
in the least measure, but contrariwise, he fastens the curse more upon himself,
Romans 2.5.
and runs more, and more into the clutches of it, and further still out of the
reach of blessedness.

Lay all these things together, and judge in your selves, what cause we have to
reflect sadly upon our selves, and to lie down in dust, and ashes, under the
sense of our own misery, as finding, and knowing our selves to lie under the
stroke of his great, and terrible curse? Woe is me, for the lamentable
ignorance, and sottishnes of our people generally, which sport, and sing, and
walk merrily under this burden, as if they were the happiest creatures under
the Sun. But oh, be convinced of it, and put it not away from you any longer.
Why will you not acknowledge your selves to be such, as the Lord, and his Law
have found, and voted you to be? will you go about to make the Law a vain
thing, and the Lawgiver a liar? That thou can never do, the word of the Lord
endures for ever, let God be true, and every man a liar. Come down into the
dust, cast away thy plumess, thy corrupt fancies, of an imaginary blessedness,
thou art really a cursed man. Please not thy self in this Hell of thine as if
it were an Heaven: but be advised to take down this unquestionable truth, and
know it for thy self, that it may lie near to thy heart, and thou may be
humbled under thy woeful condition. Thus much of the 2d use.

Sect. 4. Use 3d, and 4th.
THirdly let us hear pause a while, that we may consider, and admire the
wonderful condescension of the Lords goodness, and wisdom toward the sons
of men, in that he does so sweetly allay, and mitigate the curse, that it does
not pour out all it is fury upon us. All the inhabitants of the world being
accursed through sin, it is a wonder, that the first, and second death have
not fallen pel-mel upon them all, and devoured them at once: its a wonder, that
the curse has not dashed us all to pieces, and brought the whole world into a
Chaos long ago. This is from the wise, and good providence of God, who for the
preservation of the whole frame, and for the comfort of his own people, does
snub, restrain, and moderate the curse, and keeps it within certain
bounders, as the Sea within its banks, that it cannot overflow, and destroy the
earth, We see that the horse, the Ox, and other such like creatures have not
quite renounced man's service, but are easily brought into subjection: Yea, the
most savage creatures are not invincibly rebellions but God affords to man both
skill, and power to tame them Jam. 3.7. And 2. What a merciful dispensation is
this, that such swarms of curses should fly abroad in the world, and yet so
very few of them (in comparison) should touch us? That so few are born blind,
deaf, maimed, idiots? That nature is sustained in health, strength, vigor?
yea, that we live upon the earth, and enjoy the influence of heaven? That the
heaven over our head is not brass, and the earth under our feet, iron, yea,
that we are in any estate short of hell, who might justly have been stripped of
all at once, and made the common Butt of all his curses? And further, Isa. 3.
What a sweet providence is it, that when the Lord inflicteth evils or
judgments, which are properly, and in themselves the bitter fruits of the
curse, he does not always inflict them merely as curses, in reference to the
sins of the persons, but sometimes only praeventions of sin, and the
miseries which follow it, as. 1. Cor. 11.32: Or as exercises of patience, as in
the famous example of Job; or as means, which his divine wisdom is pleased to
use, for the manifestation of his own glory, in some, way, or other. Whereof
we have a notable instance in the man, which was blind from his birth, Jo.
9.1.2.3. The disciples ask our Savior, whose sin was the cause of that
judgment, his own, or his parents? He answers, neither of both, but that the
works of God should be made manifest in him, his meaning is this; you think
this man is thus marked out for some notorious sin either of his own. Or his
Parents: but you are mistaken: for although sin be an universal cause of all
judgments, See Piscator and Gualter on the place.
yet in this case the Lord did not look upon the sins of either of them, as
the adaequate, or next mooving cause of inflicting this blindness: but he
intended hereby the manifestation of his works the work of justice, and
severitie, in afflicting him so sadly, and so long; the work of goodness, and
mercy, in bestowing the blessing of sight upon him; and chiefly, that this
miracle wrought by me (says Chirst), may be a clear, and undeniable
demonstration, that I am the Son of God, seeing it could not possibly be done
by any other hand. ab v. 32.
To shut up this use; let us not reckon our selves the less miserable, because
of these, and the like providence, but rather ascribe them to the indulgence
of mercy, and adore the glory of his dispensations, who suffers us not to
be so accursed, as we deserve.

4ly. Hence I infer, that there is no justification to be had, no, nor any
possibility thereof by the works of the Law. It is a vain thing once to
expect it. The Law curses sinners; how then does it bless them? but if it
justify them, it blesses them. All men are under the curse of the Law:
therefore no man is under the acquittance, and absolution of the Law. This is
one of the Apostles arguments in the verses before to look for justification,
and blessing from the Law, is not only to lose our labor, but also to bring
upon our selves more mischief. Its the way to inwrappe us more in the folds of
the curse, to implunge us into a deeper Sea of guilt, yea to seal up the curse
against our own souls, and to make it sure to our selves. Observe, what is
the conclusion, which the Apostle would prove, from the text alleged out of
Deuteronomie. verse. 10. before, It is, that those, which are of the works of
the Law, are under the curse, that is, not only those, which break the Law, or
do not keep it perfectly, but those that depend upon it, and reckon of
justification by the works of it, even these also are accursed, so Romans
3.19.20. The Law charge all men with sin, and thereby stoppes every ones
mouth, and makes all the world subject to the vengeance of God. (...).
Whence it follows unavoydably, that no flesh shall be justified by the deeds
of the Law. Therefore the Apostle professes, that he would by no means be
found, having his own righteousness, which is of the Law, Phil. 3.9. As if he
should say, If I should appear before Gods judgment seat, clothed in that
habit, he would abhor me, and I were utterly undone. So then, there is no
justification to be had by the Law; No man can possibly reach that conformity
to the Law of God, either inward, or outward, in the frame of the heart, or
carriage of the life, which will be able to plead his justification in the sight
of God, It is not any good quality within us, or any goodwork, that comes from
us, or both joined together (though never so excellent for kind, or degree),
that can set us right in the court of heaven. There is nothing at all, which a
man has, nothing at all, which he does or can do, for which God will
pronounce him righteous: but when he has done all, and is got up to the
highest pitch, the Law will tell him to his face, that he is still Accursed.
This is needful to be urged: for not only the world, but the churches of
Christ, are full of justitiaries, which carve unto themselves an imaginary
self-righteousness according to the Law. Oh that these persons would open their
ears to this truth, and take it down. Of these I observe 4 sorts, I mean
such, as seek a Blessedness by the Law, which they shall never find.

1. Professed Papists, which submit unto, and hold fast the established
doctrine of the Church of Rome, especially as it is set forth in the council
of Trent; where they determine thus. The alone formal cause of the
Justification of a sinner before God, or that which gives being to it, is
Righteousness implanted, or a new quality of grace, or frame of holiness
wrought in the soul: which what is it else, but personal, and inhaerent
conformity to the Law of God? They tell us further, of a, first justification,
whereby of unrighteous, a man is made righteous; and secondly, whereby of
unrighteous, he is made more righteous. The former (if I mistake not) they hold
incomplete, and so insufficient; being but a kind of entrance made by faith,
and other preparative dispositions: the latter is that, on which the maine
weight of the business lies; and its done (say they) by the improovement, and
exercise of those good dispositions, according to the command of the Law. So
that a Papist, keeping to the principles of his religion, must either have his
blessedness from the Law, or stand accursed still: and if we make the best of
it, he is chargeable with that folly, for which the Apostle taxes the
Galathians. verse. 3. Of beginning in the spirit, and seeking to be made perfect
by the flesh. And herein the hand of God is remarkable, either in mercy, or
justice, or both, to some of them, in taking them off from their old plea, so
that when they are to die, they dare not trust their souls in so crazie a
bottom: yea their great Champion Bellarmine, when he has bett his brains,
and stretched his wits, in sundry pages to uphold the doctrine of
justification by inhaerent righteousness, yet at length he comes to this
resolve. * Because of the uncertaintie of our own righteousness, and the danger
of vain glory, therefore it is * the safest way to trust only in the mercy
and goodness of God. In which words, he does (upon the matter) unweave his own
web, and destroy what he had built. For if this be the safest way, it is so,
because it is Gods only approoved way for the justification of a sinner; and
conseq. this way alone must be taken, and all other ways must be rejected, and
avoided, as being not only not the safest, but positively unsafe, and
certainly full of danger, yea, unquestionably destructive.

2. Blind ignorant Protestants, which have nothing of religion, but only the
bare name, a mere outside, their Christendom, the faces of Christians. They
were baptized, they keep their church, they come to the communion, and receive
their Maker (as they carnally, and grossly speak), they have a share in the
outward privileges of the church, saying, Lord, Lord, and therefore they
think, that no blame lies upon them, the curse is far enough of from them,
they are accepted of God, and in a blessed condition thus the Jews gloryed in
the Temple of the Lord, which the Lord condemns, as a trusting in lying
words, Jer. 7.4. They boasted of their privileges, that they were Abraham's
seed, never under bondage, yea, that they had one father, even God, etc. The
Lord Jesus tells them plainly, that they were the servants of sin, and of
their father the Devil, Jo. 8.33, 34, 41, 44. A clear glass, wherein the
generality of our people may see their faces; all their religion stands in
this, that they are called Christians, and go among the people of God: this is
their blessedness. But oh woeful people, how came you by this blessedness?
whence had you it? you are under the Law; it holds you under guilt, and
pronounces you accursed; and (alas) these privileges and services are far too
weak, and poor things to take off that guilt, and to remove that curse which
sticks to your wretched souls. Oh my soul pitties your sottishness. Awake from
your slumber, and deliver your selves from these delusions, before ye perish in
them.

3. Civil livers, which go far in the observation of the outward duties of the
second Table, they are honest in their dealings, equal in their actions, sweet
in their behavior, and as far as the letter os the Law will carry them,
unreprovable; these are the righteous men which justify and bless themselves,
as the young man, Matthew. 19.20. and the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. but these went
away unjusti^^ed, and therefore accursed. Thus it was with the Apostle Paul
before his conversion, who had more to boast of in the flesh than any man; for
besides circumcision, and many other Jewish privileges which he enjoyed, he
came up so high in conformity to the righteousness required in the Law, that as
touching it, he says he was blameless: and these things were his gain; but
when he found Jesus Christ, he looked upon them all as loss, and cast them away
as dung, yea as dogs-meat, (...) q. (...), alluding to (...), v. 2. before.
Phil. 3.5-8. as if he had said, If those dogs, those evil workers (the Jewish
Teachers, which press circumcision and legal righteousness) do taste such
savor and sweetness in this kind of meat, let them take it to themselves, as
fittest for them, it will not down with me; I have other meat, which these men
either do not know, or cannot digest. This is just the case of many among us.
But oh man, if thou will bring thy self and thy work to the standard, thou will
find, that although thou blessest thy self, and others bless thee too, yet
thou art without the sunshine of Gods blessing. For if it were granted, that
thou have gone thorow-stitch in thy duty to men, yet still the business is
lame, and halts on a side; all this while thou have neglected thy duty to God,
and do thou look to be accepted for thy partial obedience? would this be a
sufficient acquittance to a child in his fathers house, that he has discharged
himself well in all his carriage to his brethren, and servants in the family,
while he has never regarded his duty to his father? or can he expect his
fathers blessing? may he not rather fear his curse? This is thy case, who
restest in the moral righteousness of the second Table.

4. Religious professors, who besides all these, have also a form of godliness;
they have the form of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law, Romans 2.20. and in
the Gospel too 2 Timothy 3.5. they have seen, and sorrowed for their sins and bad
courses; they have broken off their iniquities, and reformed their ways; they
perform religious duties, pray, read the Scriptures, hear the Word preached,
observe the Lords day, show some degrees of love and respects to good men. In a
word, they have sundry commendable abilities within, and bring forth many
(materially) good fruits without; and hereby they work out unto themselves a
carnal peace, persuading themselves that they are in good case, and accounting
themselves righteous, and blessed of God; but all this will go for no more in
the Court of Heaven, than the righteousness of the Law, which holy Paul durst
not stand to for his justification. He did not only disclaim those
privileges, and that righteousness, which before he had accounted his gain,
but all things whatsoever; yea doubtless (says he) I do count all things but
loss; I do, even at this present, since I came truly to know the Lord Jesus
Christ, renounce and cast away all things, whatsoever I am, or have, in the
business of my justification before God, save the righteousness which is
through the faith of Christ, Phil. 3.8, 9. Let a man reach out as far as is
possible in conformity and obedience to the first Table (as well as to the
second) both in religious dispositions, and holy performances, and let this be
joined with a glorious external profession of Christ and the Gospel, yet he may
still abide under the Law, and so be a stranger to the grace of justification.
It is not any one of these, or the like qualifications and workings, nor all of
them put together, that can raise the soul into a justified condition, but
still it abides under the curse. What high characters of more than ordinary
holiness does the spirit of God put upon the Jews? Isa. 58.2. they sought God
daily, they delighted to know his ways, as if they were a Nation that did
righteousness; yet they are rejected and disallowed, even in their choicest and
strictest duties; Jesus Christ professes that he will send away many at the
last day, which have done wonderful works in his Name, Matthew. 7.22, 23. This
is a fine spun, but (I fear) too common hypocrisy, to make graces, duties,
reformations, performances, the matter of our righteousness before God. Let
Christians take heed, lest while they reckon on the blessing, they be found
under the curse.

The issue of this use is, to knock us all off from thoughts of justification
by the Law, seeing we are all under the curse of it. Let us not make account of
such a thing, it will prove but a dream, and we shall be deceived. Let us by
all means shun this most perilous work.

Sect. 5. Use 5 and 6.
5. It Is no wonder then, if the preaching of the Law be so unwelcome, so
burdensome; yea (I may say) so hateful and abominable to the greatest part of
our Congregations. If you would prophecy unto them of wine and strong drink,
speak unto them smooth and pleasing things, and tell them of nothing but
Gospel, and promises and comforts, you are very welcome, oh this is excellent
Doctrine. But contrariwise, the Ministry of the Law is as unwelcome to their
hearts, as water into a ship, or fire into their bones; and can ye blame them?
Ier. 5.14.
alas the Law breaths out nothing but curses against the men of the world; its
like the roll of the book which was spread before Ezekiel, written within and
without, with lamentations, and mournings and woe, Ezekiel. 2.10. which way soever
the Minister turns it, it speaks cursing to wicked men, it flasheth hell fire
in their faces continually; how should this be endured, to hear themselves
cursed to their faces all the day long? therefore they hate him that rebukes
in the gate, Amos 5.10. sometimes they break out into gross and open
distempers, they rage and storm, and persecute us; they smite us with their
tongues, and call us railers, and preachers of damnation; they go away with
their hearts filled with gall and malice, and their tongues with clamours and
outcries against us; they say to us, as the possessed persons said to Christ,
Are you come hither to torment us before the time? Matthew. 8.29. Others can bite
in their wrath, but they grumble in their hearts, and sometimes say, they could
wish that their Minister were more discreet; and it were well if he would keep
him to his Text. But truly, he that threateneth the curse of the Law against a
natural man, is not gone far from his Text. Thus it is, and thus it will be
while Satan is the God of this world, and sin reigns in the hearts of the men
of the world, we cannon expect it should be otherwise: Even John Baptist, when
he comes to cast down mountains, must look to find no better entertainment.

6. Yet every hour we may strongly infer a necessity of preaching the Law,
although John Baptist be censured as a busy pragmatical fellow, yet he must do
his work for all that; although the preaching of the Law be both tedious and
odious to carnal men, yet must we not neglect that piece of our Ministry in
any case; this Law-work must be attended in its due place: for seeing man lies
under this misery and danger, its needful that he should see and know it, that
so he may come to be affected with it, as the case requires. There is no wise
man (I suppose) but would willingly be informed of any mischief that is toward
him; if he be under the displeasure of the supreme Power, or in danger of some
mortal disease; or if he fear an adversary at Law, every one would know the
worst of his own cause: for he may possibly by this means be put into a way to
prevent or avoid it, which otherwise (ordinarily) he cannot. How much more
needful is this wisdom in the business of the soul? Now the best and most
regular way to attain this end, is the Ministry and preaching of the Law it
self, that the wretched sinner by a particular home-application of it, may get
acquaintance with his woeful condition, and so apply himself to the use of
means, whereby he may escape the danger. Every natural man lies under the guilt
of sin, and therefore under the displeasure of the most high God; sick of a
mortal soul malady, which brings him under the power of the second death; cast
in his cause before the judgment seat of heaven, to his utter ruin and
undoing. It concerns him therefore to attend upon the Ministry of the Law,
that he may know how the case is with him. A malefactor or trespasser amongst
men, may discover by searching into the Law of the Land, what danger he is in:
so may the sinner by searching into the Law of God. Whence (I conceive) I may
be bold to conclude, not only the convenience, but also the necessity of the
seasonable preaching of the Law in our ordinary ministration. This is not a
politic device of Preachers, or purpose to screw into men's consciences, that
they may Lord it over them (as carnal men are apt to judge) but a way approved
by God himself, in order to the conversion of sinners, and seconded by the
practice of his servants in former times. The Law is the Lords candle to reveal
sin, Romans 3.20. and ^y consequence to reveal the curse due to sin. Its the
Lords hand to work wrath in the soul, by striking it with conviction, and with
fear thereupon, Romans 4.15. God the great Lawgiver has put upon it such a beam
of purity and authority, that it is able to manifest sin to the conscience,
even in the most sly and hidden aberrations. It Is the Lords Bailiff, to hunt
out sin in the several kinds, degrees and colors of it, and to lay his arrests
upon the sinner. It Is the Lords voice, to call and fetch every Adam out of his
thickets, Genesis ^.^, 10. yea, it is the Lords sword, or slaughtering-knife,
whereby he kills and slays the sinner in himself, that he may live unto God,
Gal. 2.19. Now that the Law may do all this, it is not enough that the sinner
have an overly and general knowledge of it, but it must be opened, and applied
in some competent measure of distinctness to his heart and conscience; for
doubtless every natural man may say of the Law, as the Eunuch of the Text, in
the Prophecy of Isaiah, How can I understand it, except some man should guide
me? Act. 8.31. God sends Moses to conduct the children of Israel toward the
Land of Canaan, but they must go through the wilderness, and there the Law must
be promulgated in a terrible manner, with thundrings and lightnings, etc. that
the fear of the Lord might be before their faces, Exodus 20.20. Sinners must
come to mount Sinai before they come to mount Sion. Jesus Christ himself when
he comes with healing in his wings, and his heart and mouth full of blessing
for sinners; yet even then he will send his messenger before his face to
prepare the way before him; they must remember the Law of Moses in the mean
time, and before his coming he will send them one to go before him in the
spirit and power of Elias, etc. lest he come and smite the earth with a curse,
Mal. 4.2, 4, 5, 6. Luke 1.17. So that (to shut up this use) we must crave your
excuse if we harp sometimes on this harsh string; for although it be not
toothsome physic, yet it is wholesome. We should be both unfaithful to our
great Master, and treacherous to your souls, if we should withhold from you
this so necessary a part of Gods counsel. We were not worthy to be admitted
Counselors at Law, if we would not plainly tell our Clients the worst of their
causes. We know the terror of the Lord, therefore we persuade you by the light
of the Law, to consider of your misery, 2 Cor. 5.11. That speech of the
Pharisees is a truth, though ill meant, and worse applied by them John 7.49.
The people which know not the Law, are cursed. When people cannot endure to
hear of their sin, and curse by the ministry of the Law, it is too probable a
sign that they lie fast bound (hand and foot) under the curse. Oh my brethren,
were it not better to hear the curse ringing aloud in your ears in this world,
while there is a possibility of escaping it, than to feel it lying on your
souls and bodies, in the full power and fury of it in the world to come, when
the time of mercy and blessing is expired; Oh consider it, and the Lord give
you understanding.

Sect. 6. Use 7 and 8.
7. SUffer the words of exhortation, and give me leave to impart unto you
counsel from God. Oh that your ears were open, and your hearts pliable, that
this counsel mght be acceptable unto you, about a matter of so great
importance. Let this exhortation run in two streams: 1. To all the sons and
daughters of Adam; you see in what woeful case you stand by the just verdict of
the holy Law of God. I beseech you weigh it well; its the great curse of
Almighty God that you lie under. Would you see it yet more clearly in its
hideousness? then look upon it in all its dimensions; for breadth, it wraps in
all mankind, Adam and his whole generation, to the last man that shall stand
upon the earth, and all creatures which serve for his use; for length, it
reaches to eternity; for depth, it goes down to hell, and there puts forth its
greatest mischief; for height, it gets up to heaven, and in^ects it, the moon
and stars are not pure in his sight, Job 25.5. Review the sad effects and
strange properties before mentioned, and then tell me, are you now convinced of
your misery? is it come so near to your consciences, that you cannot now shake
it off any longer? Oh then, I entreat you, for the love of your souls get from
under it; how dare ye abide in this condition? how can ye eat or drink, or
sleep with such a massy weighty curse lying upon your souls? Say, Oh wretch
that I am, I was born at first to blessedness, but I am now implunged into a
most woeful curse; and shall I lie still under it, and not go about to recover
my first estate? Oh no, haste away, and escape for thy life; the longer thou
continuest under the curse, the more sinfulness and guilt thou contractest, and
so make thy self more accursed. Deliver thy self betimes; how long will thou
linger in this black Sodom?

2. To parents, and such as have the charge of others; alas, your children are
under the curse of the Law. Suppose that some of them were infected with the
leprosy, pestilence, or any contagious disease threatening death; or were
under any calamity at present, which would certainly be their ruin, if not
timely prevented, would ye not use the best means for their help? especially if
your hearts can tell you, that you have had a great hand in bringing them into
this danger? Oh then, if you have the bowels of parents earning in your
bellies, you will spare no cost nor pains, but lay out your selves freely in
all ways possible for their seasonable recovery: you, you have been the
immediate instruments of putting them into this lamentable pickle; you have
begotten and brought them forth, and from you they have derived (together with
their being) this doleful curse; and will you suffer them to lie under it
still, and not put forth your hands to help them out? Do ye not tremble to
think, into what a deep gulf you have implunged them? Oh what joy can you have
in them, in their beauty, comeliness, towardliness, or their sweet natural
parts, whiles this sad thought is ever and anon coming into your minds? Alas,
these tender babes, these hopeful children, are in themselves no better than
accursed creatures. But we may well mourn over the desperate carelessness of the
greatest part of parents and masters, which suffer those that are under them to
continue in that woeful plight, without looking after their recov^ry; yea, give
them leave in these licencious days to run up and down from one sect to
another, and from one wickedness to another, and to make themselves still more
vile, and yet do not restrain them; as it is said of Eli, 1 Samuel 3.13. And what
shall we think of those parents that encourage their children to sinful ways?
they may swear, scorn at godliness, break the Lords day, profane his worship,
neglect, yea trample upon his Ordinances, and they give them good leave to do
so, saying (in effect) to them, as Rebecca said to her darling Jacob, when she
set him on to get the blessing, Upon me be thy curse, my son Genesis 27.13.
. While you carry thus toward them, I tell you, you may bless them morning and
evening, yet God curses them. Ah cruel father, mother, master, dame, you must
one day answer for their souls, and their blood will be required at your hands.
You say you love them, and would see them do well; but I beseech you, love them
better than thus, or you will one day wail and wring your hands, to see them
irremedilesly miserable.

8. This truth being duly taken down (before we dismiss it) may serve to bring
us all out of love with one wicked practice which is too common every where,
and that is cursing; and to discover it to be a thing both desperately sinful,
and even in it self unreasonable. Some profane unsavory ones are not afraid
upon any trivial occasion to curse themselves, if this or that be not so, I
would I were hanged, I wish this meat may be my poison, Let me never thrive,
etc. and these dreggish dangerous times have brought forth a generation of men
of corrupt minds, and dissolute principles, which can curse themselves with a
kind of authority and bravery; If I do not such and such a thing (and it may be
some desperate abominable crime) God damn me, God confound me, etc. As for
imprecations against others, how ordinary are they? there be deboist unnatural
children, which blush not to curse their parents; so parents curse their
children, masters their servants, and one neighbor another; you shall hear a
man sometimes curse his horse, if he do but stumble; or his cattle, if they
turn out of the way; or his very axe, hammer, or the working-tool in his hand,
if it miscarry. In short, there is no language so ready to our common people,
if they be displeased or put into passion, as hangment, vengeance, the devil, a
mischief, the pox, or the like; when as the mad man, they cast firebrands,
arrows and death, Prove. 26.18. And some have so accustomed their tongues to
such hellish speeches, that they are to them but words of course, they curse
when they mean no harm; which is an abominable taking of Gods Name in vain;
seeing every imprecation is (virtually at least) a prayer to God to do the
thing expressed or intended therein. Let me advise you therefore to consider
what you are doing; you are under the curse of the Law, and will you be so bold
and busy with it? Oh that you were wise, and that ye would cause these words
to sink down into your ears, and seriously ponder in your hearts these
particulars following:

1. Cursing is given in Scripture, as the mark and brand of persons that are
notoriously profane, and such as are strangers from God, and in the bond of
iniquity, Psalm. 10.7. his mouth is full of cursing. See 1 Samuel 17.43. and 2 Samuel 16.5, the practice of Shimei, Jud. 17.2. Micahs mother, Romans 3.14. its
sometimes followed home with remarkable judgments, Exodus 21.17. Prove. 30.11.
see the exemplary punishment of Shelamiths son, Lev. 24.14.

2. It is very unbeseeming, and inconsistent with the profession of Religion,
not becoming those which have given their names to Christ; and from that very
consideration sometimes forbidden, Romans 12.14. Ephesians. 4.31. 1 Pet. 3.9. it is so
foul a thing, that the practice of it (if habituated and frequent) will
scarcely stand with saving grace; Christians that give way to it, and suffer
themselves to be overcome by it, do very much forget themselves. See Jam. 3.4,
10. etc. Peter foully overtaken, Mat. 26.74.

3. It argues a great measure of flintiness, and strange audaciousness of
spirit, when a man dare adventure to play with such edgetools, to bandie so
terrible a thing as the curse is, and to dally with it upon every trifling
occasion.

4. In thus doing, you take upon you the office of the Law; yea you step into
the Lords own seat. God has put this burden on the Law (as to bless the
observers, so) to curse the transgressors of it; how dare thou then incroach
upon it? who made thee a Lawgiver; or who gave thee this authority? Oh take
heed, thou make thy self guilty of most unwarrantable usurpation.

5. You invite the curse, and call for it to come and seize upon your selves,
or others, as if it were too slow, and made not haste enough; but thou may be
well assured it has wings; its the flying roll; and thou will find to thy
sorrow one day, that it comes with too much speed, thou need not to hasten
it.

6. You add more misery to the miserable. Thou art wretched above measure
already, through the curse of the Law which lies upon thee; will thou increase
thy wretchedness by sealing up the curse against thy self, and that with thine
own mouth? Thy children are in a woeful condition, by means of the sin and
curse which thou have derived unto them; and will thou make it more woeful by
pronouncing a curse upon them with thine own lips? may not many a child say to
his father and mother, Is it not enough that you have brought me into the world
accursed by the Law of God, but I must have your curse also?

7. Yea lastly, you provoke the Lord to take you at your words, and to say,
Well, be it unto you, even as you will. Thou say, God damn me; its a bargain
thou shall be damned. The Lord does oftentimes send down the curse upon the
children, according to the imprecation of their parents, the prints whereof
stick upon them visibly all their days. They that love cursing, shall have
cursing enough, Psalm. 109.17, 18, 19.

Therefore put away this bad language from you, and let it not be heard any
more amongst us.

Chap. 3.
Sect. 1. The second Conclusion; what this imports, that Christ was made a
curse for us.
THe second Conclusion or Doctrine which these words hold forth unto us, is
this: Christ was made a curse for us which are under the curse of the Law;
Jesus Christ the Son of God, the second person in Trinity, became a curse for
the sons of men, who stand accursed by the doom of Gods righteous Law.

Let it be observed, that he is not only accursed, but a curse; and this
expression is used both for more significancy and fullness, to note out the
truth and realness of the thing, and also to show the order and way he took for
bringing us back unto that blessedness which we had lost. The Law was our
righteousness in our innocent condition, and so it was our blessedness, Jam.
1.25. but the first Adam falling away from God by his first transgression
implunged himself into all unrighteousness, and so inwrapped himself in the
curse: Now Christ the second Adam, that he may restore lost man into an estate
of blessedness, he becomes that for them, which the Law is unto them, namely a
curse; Romans 10 4.
beginning where the Law ends, and so going backward to satisfy the demands of
the Law to the uttermost; he becomes first a curse for them, and then their
righteousness, and so their blessedness.

For making good this truth, I shall endeavor to clear these two things:

1. What this is, that he is made a curse for us; and wherein it stands?

2. By whom, or by what power he was made a curse for us?

For the former:

Christ's becoming a curse for us, stands in this; that whereas we are all
accursed by the sentence of the Law, because of sin, he now comes into our
room, and stands under the stroke of that curse which of right belongs to us;
so that it lies not now any longer on the backs of poor sinners, but on him,
for them, and in their stead; therefore he is called a surety, Heb. 7.22. the
surety stands in the room of a debtor, malefactor, or him that is any way
obnoxious to the Law; such is Adam and all his posterity: we are by the doom of
the Law, evil doers, transgressors; and upon that score we stand indebted to
the justice of God, and lie under the stroke of his wrath. Now the Lord Jesus
seeing us in this condition, he steps in, and stands between us and the blow;
yea, he takes this wrath and curse off from us unto himself; he stands not
only, or merely, after the manner of a surety among men, in the case of debt:
for here the surety indeed enters bond with the principal for the payment of
the debt; but yet he expects that the debtor should not put him to it, but that
he should discharge the debt himself, he only stands as a back-set of good
security. No, Christ Jesus does not expect that we should pay the debt our
selves, but he takes it wholly to himself, as a surety for a murderer or
traitor, or some other notorious malefactor, that has broken prison and is run
away; he lies by it body for body, state for state, and undergoes whatsoever
the malefactor is chargeable withal for satisfying the Law: even so the Lord
Jesus stands surety for us, runnagate malefactors, making himself liable to all
that curse which belongs to us, that he might both answer the Law fully, and
bring us back again to God. As the first Adam stood in the room of all mankind
fallen: 1 Pet. 3.18.
so Christ the second Adam stands in the room of all mankind which is to be
restored; he sustains the person of all those which do spiritually descend from
him, and unto whom he bears the relation of an head.

But to open it yet more fully, I conceive that to this making of him a curse
for us, these three things do concur:

1. His taking upon him the nature of man, which is both sinful and accursed;
the children were partakers of flesh and blood, and he also took part of the
same, Heb. 2.14. he came in the likeness of sinful (and therefore of accursed
flesh) Romans 8.3. he took upon him the nature, not of this or that particular
man, as Abraham, David, Peter, or any other, but the nature of mankind in
general; even that self-same nature that sinned, and is therefore accursed. It
was not a similitude or shadow of flesh, or a mere show of being a man, but
truly, really, sensibly flesh or manhood, as himself avouched to his Disciples
after his resurrection, bidding them handle him, that they might be satisfied
that it was not a spirit which they saw, but the very same true body which he
had before, Luke 24.39. The Word or second Person in Trinity, took the nature
of man into the unity of his person, that it might dwell and have its
subsistence in the Godhead only, John 1.14.

2. The real imputation of our sin (or the guilt of our sin) to him. Isa. 53.6.
He was made sin for us, even he which knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. All the sins
of the Elect were charged upon him, both original and actual, and he had them
all by imputation, without any inherence of sin in him at all; he had no sin of
his own, neither of nature nor practice, for he was conceived by the
overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, and so was born holy, Luke 1.35. And besides,
had the guilt but of one, even the smallest personal sin been upon his soul, it
would have utterly disabled him from the work of his Mediatorship, Heb. 7.26.
yet he had the sins of others; the sin of the world was laid at his door, as if
it had been his own; he was numbered with the transgressors, Mar. 15.28.
Isaiah 53.12. Luke 22.37. And thus the Lord looked upon him as a sinner upon
our account. If this had not been so, how could either death have been justly
inflicted upon him, or his merit have been imputed unto us? This must be
Luthers meaning, when he says Christ was the greatest sinner; he was Manasseh
that Idolater, David that adulterer, Peter that denier of his Master, etc. to
wit, by imputation only, he being made sin for them, as the Apostle speaks.

3. An actual undergoing and suffering the wrath of God, and the fearful
effects thereof, in the punishments threatened in the law. As he became a
debtor, and was so accounted, even so he made payment thereof; he was made a
sacrifice for sin, and bare to the full all that ever divine justice did or
could require, even the uttermost extent of the curse of the Law of God. He
must thus undergo the curse, because he had taken upon him our sin: The justice
of the most high God revealed in the Law looks upon the Lord Jesus as a sinner,
because he has undertaken for us, and seizes upon him accordingly, pouring
down on his head that curse and those punishments which are threatened in it
against sin; for the curse follows sin, as the shadow the body, whether it be
sin inherent, or sin imputed: even as the blessing follows righteousness,
whether it be righteousness inherent, or righteousness imputed. The Scripture
is very clear and full in holding forth this, as the main part of the curse; it
was prophesied of long before, Isa. 53.4, 5. etc. he was stricken or smitten,
and this striking was even unto wounding, and this wounding was accompanied
with bruising. And because all our iniquities (in the punishments of them) met
in him, as all rivers in one sea, all arrows in one butt, all the Regiments of
an Army in one place of rendezvous, therefore he was oppressed; for he was
brought forth as a Lamb to the slaughter, in his humiliation his judgment was
taken away, Acts 8.33. yea, he was cut off from the Land of the living: It was
also fore-typified and represented by many sorts of Sacrifices in the Law. 1
Cor. 5 7.
All those Prophecies and types were accomplished in him; he told his disciples
often in the days of his flesh, that he must suffer many things; and so he did;
see Heb. 9.26. and 28. He has appeared once in the end of the world, to put
away sin by the sacrifice of himself; and, He was once offered, to bear the
sins of many. All this suffering is comprehended in that sentence, Genesis 2.17.
In the day that thou eatest, thou shall die; this was the punishment which
Divine Justice did award against sin; therefore this he must suffer.

But because the main s^^ess, and (as it were) the very dregs of this bitter
cup, lies here; it may be worth our labor to consider it a little more
particularly; and that, 1. In the preparation thereunto. 2. In the main brunt
it self.

1. There was a preparation to it by many smaller and lighter skirmishes; for
(having emptied himself of his glory, so that he did not appear to be that
which indeed he was, and subjected himself to the state of a servant, and so a
meet object of suffering) he became a man of sorrows all his life long, Isa.
53.3. compassed about with infirmity, Heb. 5.2. as soon as he was born he was
laid in a manger, because there was no room for him in the Inn; while he was
very young he was persecuted, and forced to fly into Egypt (...), he was
tempted of Satan. Quod illud dictum civium satis arguit. Usser. Annal. per
poster. p. 552.
; he wrought for his living at the trade of his reputed father, as it is more
than probable by that speech of the Mazarenes, Mar. 6.3. Is not this the
carpenter, etc? He was the object of man's reproach, he was called a
wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners, an enemy to Caesar, one that
has a devil; he was subject to the infirmities which are incident to mankind,
as hunger, thirst, poverty; he was betrayed by Judas, forsaken by his
disciples, abused by the Jews, mocked, buffetted, spit upon, crowned with
thorns, accused, arraigned, condemned as the vilest malefactor. In one word, he
was a worm, and no man, Psalm. 22.6.

2. The main brunt it self was, that he was struck with death. The Sacrifice in
the Law was to be slain; the goat which was to be offered for a sin-offering
for the people, must be killed, and the blood of it must be brought within the
veil, Lev. 16.15. The same courses (as to killing) was to be taken with the
burnt-offering, peace offering, and trepass offering; as we may see in the 1,
3, 5, 6, 7. chapters of Leviticus. So it was prophesied, Isa. 53.12. he poured
out his soul unto the death; and elsewhere often.

Now this death which Christ did undergo, was both of the body and soul.

1. He suffered the death of the body, called the first death; this Gabriel the
Angel revealed to the Prophet Daniel some 1006 years before, Dan. 9.26. the
Messiah shall be cut off; the accomplishment whereof the stories of the
Evangelists relate very largely, Isa. 53.8. Acts 8.33. his life is taken from
the earth. We by sin had deserved the first death, the taking down of this
earthly frame, by the separation of the soul and body, therefore Christ our
surety must die that death for us; the particular end of death which he should
and did suffer, was the death of the cross; which was so designed and ordered
by the all-wise counsel and providence of God, both because it was very
painful and grievous, and also because it was a most shameful and ignominious
death; but especially because it was, even by divine appointment, stigmatized
with this brand of infamy, that whosoever was hanged on a tree, was to be
accounted ceremonially accursed, as it is avouched in the close of the verse.
It was not necessary that he should suffer all the several sorts of death, as
stoning, burning, sawing, beheading, etc. it was sufficient that he suffered
that one kind of death, which the wisdom of God saw to be most fit and
suitable; neither yet was it necessary, that his death should be attended with
such cruelties, as some men have been enforced to suffer, as pulling the flesh
from the bone, pinching it with hot pincers, and the like: These are rather
personal, than natural, and merely accidental, not essential to the first
death: Therefore the legs of Christ were not broken; and although his body was
laid in the grave, yet he saw no corruption, because these infirmities did not
consist with the dignity of his person; and the latter would have made void the
fruit and effect of his sufferings. Therefore the Scripture declares both these
to be contrary to Gods will. See Jo. 19.33-36. Acts 2.31.

2. He suffered the death of the soul, or that which is called the second
death. Sin brought death into the world; not only that death which pulls down
this earthly frame, but also that which makes a woeful separation of the whole
man from God: Therefore the Lord Jesus must undergo this death too, Isa. 53.10.
he made his soul an offering for sin. And this death stood in these two things.

1. There was a stoppage or withdrawing of the sense of his fathers love and
favor from his soul. This he complains of as a forsaking, Psalm. 22.1. and it
answers to that [poena damni] punishment of loss, which we should suffer. But
we must understand this to be done in such manner and measure as becomes the
person suffering; (...).
it was not a pulling the Godhead from the manhood; this union continued entire
all the time of his sufferings, and shall do to all eternity. Neither was it a
deprival of the spirit, wherewith his humane nature was filled even from the
womb, that did still abide in him, and shall never be taken away from him;
according to that precious promise, Isa. 59.21. which I conceive must be
fulfilled first in him, and then in his seed with him. Neither was it a total
or perpetual withdrawing, but only in part, and for a time; the Lord turned
away his face from him for a little season, he hid himself out of his sight,
and would not be found; he took off the sweet influence of the joy and comfort
of the spirit, suspending them for a time, and keeping off from him at a great
distance, Psalm. 22.1. yet all this while God was present with him by his
supporting grace, so that he had some intermissions, and an Angel came to
comfort him, Luke 22.43. (...).
and he was heard in that he feared, H^b. 5.7. or he was heard from his fear;
that is, he was heard and delivered.

2. There was a letting out, and seizing of the Lords wrath and indignation
upon his soul; God did put into his hand a cup of the red wine of his wrath
full of the mixture of the bitterest ingredients, and he drank it off. This
answers to that [p^na sensus] punishment of pain which we should suffer. All
the waves of Gods displeasure went over his head. See Psalm 18.4, 5. and 88.6,
7, 16, 17. This supernatural death he suffered in both the kinds before
mentioned; first in the garden, and after that on the cross.

In the garden, Mat. 26.36. John 18.1. there the wrath of God did encounter
him, and he was put to grapple with it hand to hand; he bare three several
storms one after another, and so took a deep draught of this bitter cup. The
manner of it is described by sundry expressions, (...).
Mark 14.33. [he began to be sore amazed] which notes a dreadful astonishment,
arising from a sudden commotion of all the powers of his soul together; [and to
be very heavie] that is, (...).
to be surprised and possessed with a very great and pressing anguish of
spirit, through the unspeakable horror of divine wrath. And verse 34. he
complains thus [my soul is exceeding sorrowful; or, (...). Crux anto crucem.
(...).
beset round with sorrow, unto death.] So Luke comprehends all this in one
word, calling it an agony, Luke 22.44. where he also describes it by the
effects, both that it put him upon more than ordinary vehemence, and (as it
were) more outstretchedness in prayer; which the Apostle expresses by strong
crying and tears, Hebr. 5.7. and also that it caused him to sweat, as it were
great drops of blood trickling down to the ground.

2. On the cross; here was the main blow; he bare our sins on the tree, 1 Pet.
2.24. here the wrath of Almighty God lay on his soul, in the whole weight of
it. Now the justice of God musters all his forces, and gathers together all his
regiments, to fall upon Christ with his whole army, as if he would rout him at
once. He descended into hell, I mean not locally, into the place of the damned;
for after death his body went down to the grave, and was locally there for the
space of three days; and his soul went into paradise; that is, into heaven, the
place of bliss and glory; as Luke 23.43. but only virtually and effectively,
in that being Mediator, and standing in our stead, he did, even while he was on
the cross, before he gave up the ghost, undergo those hellish pains and sorrows
in his soul, which were due to us for sin. The Lord took him and plunged him
into the sea of his wrath; all the waves and billows of it came rouling over
his head, and he sunk down into the very depths of death. The Prophet Jonah
being in the belly of the whale, was a type of Christ, both in his corporal and
spiritual death; therefore those things may truly be applied to his
soul-sufferings, which he complains of, John 2.3, 4, etc. the extremity whereof
forced him to cry out with a loud voice, Why have thou forsaken me? Matthew.
27.46, even as Jonah had said long before, I am cast out of thy sight, Jon.
2.4. To conclude this; Christ on the cross has the fury of the battle poured
down upon him, so that he bare the very heat and burden of it; here he drank up
the very dregs and bitterness of the cup, even to the bottom.

Sect. 2. Some useful observations, tending to clear it further.
FRom all these particulars we may observe (only as by the way) these three
things:

1. That the sufferings of Christ were not seeming, and in show only, but
real, and indeed.

2. That the bodily sufferings and death of Christ, were not sufficient to
satisfy for the sins of the world, but he must also undergo the sufferings and
death of the soul. For the proper seat and subject of sin is the soul, not the
body (which is but as the souls shop, using it as the Smith does his hammer and
anvile) therefore if he had not suffered in soul, the plaster had been
narrower than the sore.

3. That the sufferings of the soul were not barely mediate, or by consent from
the body, as sympathizing only with it, but proper and immediate. The soul is
the first and principal in sin, the body but the instrument. It is most
agreeable to justice, that the principal should be rather deeper in the
punishment than the instrument; which holds not here, if the body suffer
immediately, and the soul only by sympathy. Doubtless, that same wrath of God,
those terrors and torments of hell (for the substance of them) fell downright
upon the soul of Christ, which sinners should, and reprobates must endure in
their souls for sin.

Yet still this must be understood (...), in such a way as suits with the
dignity of the person suffering; there was a mitigation or abatement in his
soul-sufferings from the rigor which the damned shall be put to, in three
particulars:

1. In the place of suffering; this is but a circumstance in the business; hell
[the place of the damned] is no part of the debt, therefore neither is
suffering there locally any part of the payment of it: no more than a prison is
any part of an earthly debt, or of the payment of it. The surety may satisfy
the creditor in the place appointed for payment, or in the open court; which
being done, the debtor and surety both are acquitted, that they need not go to
prison; if either of them go to prison, it is because they do not, or cannot
pay the debt: for all that justice requires, is to satisfy the debt, to the
which the prison is merely extrinsecal: even so the justice of God cannot be
satisfied for the transgression of his Law, but by the death of the sinner; but
it does not require that this should be done in the place of the damned. The
wicked go to prison, because they do not, they cannot make satisfaction
otherwise; Christ having fully discharged the debt, needed not to go to prison.

2. In the time of continuance; the damned must bear the wrath of God to all
eternity, because they can never satisfy the justice of God for sin, therefore
they must lie by it world without end; but Christ has made an infinite
satisfaction in a finite time, by undergoing that fierce battle with the wrath
of God, and getting the victory in a few hours, which is equivalent to the
creatures bearing it, and grapling with it everlastingly. The lenth or
shortness of durance, is but a circumstance, not of any necessary consideration
in this case. Suppose a man indebted 100 l. and likely to lie in prison till he
shall pay it, yet utterly unable; if another man comes and lays down the money
on two hours warning, is not this as well, or better done? That which may be
done to as good or better purpose, in a short time, what need is there to draw
it out at length? The justice of the Law did not require, that either the
sinner or his surety should suffer the eternity of hells torments, Non
aeternitatem, sed duntaxat extremitatem.
but only their extremity. It does abundantly counterpoise the eternity of the
punishment, that the person which suffered was the eternal God. Besides, it was
impossible that he should be detained under the sorrows of death, Act. 2.24.
and if he had been so detained, then he had not spoiled Principalities and
Powers, nor triumphed over them, but had been overcome, and so had not attained
his end.

3. In a companion of the pains of the second death, unavoidably attending it
in reprobates; to wit, desperation; an utter hopelesnesse of any good; a
certain expectation and waiting on the worst that can befall. I shall not enter
into a dispute, whether the despair of the damned in hell, be properly a sin ot
not; there be good Divines, both ancient and modern, that hold the negative;
which to me seems most probable, not so much from that ground on which they
go, that there is no sin in hell (it being the place of suffering, not of
doing) nor from this, that despair being the privation of hope, as hope is not
of the things which are seen, Romans 8.24.
so despair is not of the things which are already felt. Whence some would
infer, that as hope in the glorified Saints cease, because they have now the
enjoyment of the blessedness which they expected: so despair shall cease in the
damned, because they are possessed already of everlasting destruction. But I
suppose it cannot rationally be denied, that the damned in hell do despair;
only I say, it is very probable that this despair is not properly a sin; for
as hope does ever suppose and eye a promise of some good thing to come,
apprehending it as certain, and waiting for the accomplishment: so desperation
(hopes contrary) must needs be exercised about the same object, but puts forth
a contrary act, apprehends the promise as impossible, and casts off all
expectation of the accomplishment of it. Now promises are confined to this life
only, although the things promised (for the best part of them) are to be
enjoyed in the life to come; there are no promises made to them that are
actually damned in hell, of any future good; and therefore as it would be no
virtue in them to hope, so it is no sin in them to despair. But to return;
the wretched sinner in hell seeing the sentence passed against him, Gods
purpose fulfilled, never to be reversed, the gates of hell made fast upon him,
Luke 16.26.
and a great gulf fixed betwixt hell and heaven, which renders his escape
impossible, he now gives up all, and reckons on nothing but the uttermost
misery. Now this despair is not an essential part of the second death, but
only a consequent, or (at the most) an effect, occasioned by the sinners view
of his irremedilesse woeful condition. But this neither did, nor could possibly
befall the Lord Jesus; he was able by the power of his Godhead, both to
suffer, and to satisfy, and to overcome, therefore he expected a good issue,
and knew that the end should be happy, and that he should not be ashamed, Ps
16.9.10. Acts 2.26, 27, 28, 31.
Isaiah 50. ver. 6, 7, etc. Even as a very shallow stream would easily drown
a little child, there could be no hope of escape, unless some man should come
in due time to relieve it, because it wants strength to save it self; whereas
a grown man might hope well enough to escape out of a far deeper place,
because by reason of his stature, strength and skill, he could wade or swim
out. Truly the wrath of the Almighty manifested in hell, is like the vast
ocean, or some broad deep river, and therefore when the sinful sons and
daughters of Adam (which are without strength) are hurled into the midst of it,
they must needs lie down in their confusion, as altogether hopeless of
deliverance or escaping; but this despair could not seize upon Jesus Christ,
because (although his Father took him, and cast him into the sea of his wrath,
Isa. 9.6. and 57.16. and 63.1, 3, 5.
so that all the billows of it went over him, yet) being the mighty God, with
whom nothing is impossible, he was very able to pass through that sea, which
would have drowned all the world, and to come safe to shore. Thus of the first
Branch.

Sect. 3. Showing by whom, or by what power, he was made a Curse.
BUt then secondly, we may make a further inquiry, by whom, or by what power he
was thus made a Curse for us; we find that he was made of the seed of David,
according to the flesh, Romans 1.3. made of a woman, and under the Law, Gal. 4.4.
made Surety of a better Testament, Heb. 7.22. and so here made a Curse: But who
made him, or how comes he, who is the Son of God blessed for ever, to be a
Curse? For the clearing of this, I shall speak something to it, 1. Negatively.
2. Positively.

1. Negatively. It was not done, 1. By any power, or authority which the Law
had over him, in respect of himself, for he did no sin, neither was guile found
in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22. 1 Pet. 1.19. (...). 1 Timothy 19.
Yea, he was as a Lamb without blemish, and without spot, therefore the Law
could not take hold on him; it had nothing at all to lay to his charge, nor
could possibly fasten the least guilt upon him, save only as he stood engaged
for us, it lay not against him.

2. Much less was it not by any power or contrivement of the creature, for then
it must be either Satan, or man, but 1 Satan could not do it; for although he
be the Prince of the world, and had an heart brim full of malice against him,
yet he had nothing at all in him, no power, or authority over him, no not in
the least measure, (...).
Joh. 14.30. How could he, when the unclean spirits were at his command, he
cast them out with a word. 2. Neither was man able to put him into this
condition, to make him a Curse, no, nor all the men in the world. It was not
the iniquity of the times, into which he was fallen; although it was a very
evil time (their very hour, and the power of darkness, Luke 22.53.) yet that
was not the proper working cause of it. Neither was it the perfidiousness of
Judas his household servant; that was but a remote interveening means for the
bringing, of it on, or raising it up to the height. Nor was it the mischievous
disposition, and plottings of the high Priests, and Jews against him; he could
easily have befooled, and prevented them all; he could for a word of his mouth
have had a guard of more than twelve legions of Angels for his assistance, or
rescue, Matthew. 26.53, 54. And when they came to apprehend him, he did but speak
a word, and they went backward, and fell to the ground, Joh. 18.6. Neither was
it lastly, the timorousness of Pilate, whereby he yielded to the importunity of
the Jews, even against his own conscience. See Mat. 27.18, 24. Luke 23.4,
14.22. etc. And when Pilate did proudly boast of his power over him, he checked
him, and told him roundly, that all his power was no more, but an inferior,
delegated power, merely at the pleasure of an higher, Joh. 19.10, 11. So then
it was not any one of these, nor all these put together, that could possibly
bring the Son of God under the Curse; they were only subordinate instruments,
acting in some parts of it; but he was infinitely above them all. We must seek
out some higher cause; Therefore,

2 Positively. The Scripture holds forth three things, very remarkable to this
purpose, which (being taken jointly) are that sovereign power, whereby Christ
was made a Curse.

1 The decree and appointment of God. As he was foreordained before the
foundation of the world, 1 Pet. 1.20. so he was delivered [to death] by the
determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God. The hands whereby he was taken,
crucified, and slain, were wicked hands, yet those hands therein did that very
thing, which the hand and counsel of God determined before to be done, Act.
2.23. and 4.28. Therefore he is called the Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world, Rev. 13.8. that is, 1. In respect of Gods eternal purpose manifested
by the promise made in Paradise, That the seed of the Woman, shall break the
Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. And 2. Of the efficacy of his death upon all the
Elect from the beginning of the world, although the world was four thousand
years old, before he was actually slain. It is observable, that the Scripture
ascribes the dispensation of this whole work to God the Father, as the first
moover, and sovereign Manager of it; He laid on him our iniquity, Isa. 53.6. He
made him to be sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. He set him forth, Romans 3.25. He sent
him, Romans 8.3. Gal. 4.4. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, Isa. 53.10. The
Lord calls on the sword, Zach. 13.7. to awake and smite his Shepherd, the man
that is his fellow, he means Jesus Christ, God-man, who is equal to the Father
as God, but inferior to him, as man, appointed to be the great Shepherd of the
sheep, the Lords little flock: But, says the Lord, I will smite the Shepherd.
Symbol. Athanas^^.
The application of this Prophecy we have, Matthew. 26.31.

2 Christ's voluntary condescension thereunto, Joh. 14.31. having disavowed
Satan's power over him, he professes his own willingness (and that from a
principle of love) to do that which his Father had commanded him. Compare this
with Joh. 10.18. where he says, I lay down my life of my self, etc. And it
will appear, that this was his own act, to be made a Curse for us, in that he
did freely, and of his own accord, submit to his Fathers Commandment touching
the laying down of his life, God the Father made him perfect by sufferings,
Heb. 2.10. and he sanctified himself, Joh. 17.19. by preparatory sufferings
first, and then by offering up himself, even as the Priests in the Law were
first sanctified by the sprinkling of blood upon them, and then they offered
for the sins of the people, Exodus 29.20, 21. He gave himself for our sins, Gal.
1.4. He made himself of no reputation: He took on himself the form of a
servant, he humbled himself, and became obedient, etc. Phil. 2.7, 8. yea
although he knew before, what was his Fathers will, and his own duty, yet by
the sufferings themselves he learned obedience, that is, he came experimentally
to know (as a man) what it is to obey, and how hard a thing it is for the
creature to grapple with the wrath of the Almighty, and to submit to the
pleasure of his justice in conflicts with the second death, Vide Bezam Pareum,
Gerhardum in Locum.
Heb. 5.8. His willingness appears further, by his setting his face steadfastly
to go to Jerusalem, when the time of his suffering drew near, Luke 9.51. by his
taking up Peter very sharply, for discouraging, and dis-swading him from it,
Matthew. 16.22, 23. and by his speech to him at his apprehension when he had cut
off the ear of Malchus; The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not
drink it? Joh. 18.11.

3 A compact or agreement solemnly made betwixt God, and Christ the Mediator,
which is the result of the two former, Gods Commandment, and Christ's
obedience. We may present it to our understanding in this form. God the Father
says to Christ the Mediator, I look upon Adam, and his posterity, as a
degenerate seed, a generation of Apostates and back-sliders, yea Traitors and
Rebels, liable to my severest wrath, and utterly undone; yet I cannot find in
my heart to see them all perish, I have determined to show mercy upon a
considerable number of them, to save them, and bring them to glory: If
therefore thou will undertake for them, becoming a Curse in their stead, and so
making satisfaction to my justice for their sins, I will give them unto thee,
to take care of them, and to bring them up to my Kingdom, for the
manifestation of the glory of my grace. Well, says Christ, I am content, I
will do it with all my heart, and so the agreement is made. This may be
gathered from Psalm. 2.7, 8, 9. and Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8. Christ the Son speaks in
both places. In the former he publishes the Decree or Ordinance of heaven
touching himself, and brings in the Father installing him into the
Priesthood, or office of Mediator, for so the Apostle applies that Text, Heb.
5.5. Thou art my Son, etc.
and also avouching this Covenant, and agreement in the two main parts of it.

1 The Condition, which he will have performed on Christ's part, or what Christ
must do: He must ask of God; that is, not only verbally by prayers and
supplications, beg mercy, pardon, righteousness, and salvation for poor lost
sinners, but also really, by fulfilling the righteousness of the Law both in
doing and suffering, and so by his satisfaction and merit, purchasing
acceptance for them at his hands.

2 The Promise, which he ingageth to perform on his part, or what he will do
himself thereupon. The Son must ask, and the Father will give, he will give him
the heathen, etc. that is, he shall both be the Lords salvation to the ends of
the earth, Isa. 49.^6. M^t. 28.18. Phil. 2.10, 11.
and have all power given him in heaven and earth, so that all knees shall bow
to him, and every tongue shall confess him to be Lord. In the other Text before
mentioned, Psalm. 40. Christ declares his compliance to the agreement; and his
subscribing the Covenant on his part, when he came into the world, as the
Apostle explains it, Heb. 10.5. etc. Mine ears (says he) have thou dug, or
pierced, Lo I come to do thy will; as if he should say, Oh Father, thou do
engage me to be thy servant in this great work of saving sinners, Lo, I come to
do the work, I here covenant and agree to yield up my self to thy disposing,
and to serve thee for ever. It seems to be an allusion to the Masters boaring
through the servants ear, Exodus 21.6. we have an abridgement of this Agreement,
Isa. 53.10. in both parts:

Si posuerit sacrificium pro reatu animam suam, or Si posuerit sacrificium
anima e^us.
1 On Christ's part, his soul shall be made an offering for sin.

2. On the Fathers part, he promises that thereupon Christ shall see his seed,
he shall have a numerous spiritual posterity, begetting and bringing many
thousands to the obedience of his Father; Yea further, verse. 11. So ample shall
be the fruit of his sufferings, that he shall be satisfied, in seeing the
travel of his soul, he shall have abundant joy and contentment, even in that
which has cost him dearest, he shall justify many poor guilty condemned
sinners, by their knowledge of him, or by faith in his Name, for he shall take
upon him their iniquities, and acquit them from blame.

And this Covenant of God with Christ, is the very basis or bottom of the
Covenant of Grace. God made a Covenant with Christ, the spiritual David, Psalm.
89.3, 4. that he might make a Covenant with all his Elect in him, Romans 11.26,
27. He made this Agreement with Christ as the Head, and on this is reared up
the whole frame of precious promises, comprised in the Covenant of Grace, as a
goodly building upon a sure foundation. And herein the Levitical Priesthood was
a type of the Priesthood of Christ. That was settled on Aaron, and his
successors, and continued unto them by Covenant, their anointing was to be an
everlasting Priesthood, Exodus 40.15. and more fully, Numb. 25.12, 13. he gave
to Phineas, and to his seed, the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood; and by
virtue thereof, they were enabled to manage the Covenant of life and peace,
which was with them, Mal. 2.5. as to the Legal and Ceremonial administration of
it; even so the true Priesthood is settled on Christ, and continued to him by
Covenant, and by virtue of this he manageth the Covenant of Grace in its
Evangelical and Spiritual administration. And as they must bear the iniquity of
the Congregation, and so be made [typically] a Curse for them, Lev. 10.17. So
Christ must be made a Curse [truly by imputation] by bearing the iniquity of
the Congregation of the firstborn, which are written in heaven. Only the
Apostle gives us this difference betwixt these two Covenants, that those in the
Law were made Priests without an oath, but Christ was made with an oath, Heb.
7.20, 21. For the proof of which, he brings Psalm. 110.4. noting out a special
pre-eminence of his Priesthood above theirs, that theirs was changeable, and so
had an end; but his is unchangeable and perpetual; the Lord having confirmed
the Covenant by his Oath, and so infeoffed him in it by a grant never to be
revoked. Therefore Covenant and Oath are sometimes put together, as Psalm. 89.3.

But I am sensible, that I have expatiated too far. The issue of all is this in
short; Christ being made a Curse for us, proceeds from the purpose, and good
pleasure of God appointing him, and calling him out thereunto; and it is the
execution of a wonderful and glorious design, or contrivement agreed upon by
God and Christ, for working out the salvation of the Elect. I hasten to the
Application.

Sect. 4. Use 1. Information in four particulars.
ANd first, This Truth will afford us matter of very useful Information, to
establish our judgments in some particulars of special concernment.

1 It holds forth unto us the strange mischievousness of sin in the nature and
workings of it. Oh the excessive sinfulness, the unspeakable poysonfulness of
sin, that could reach as high as heaven, and bring the Son of the Eternal God
under the Curse. Oh that the sons and daughters of Adam would look about them,
and begin at length seriously to consider, what an hideous Monster they
nourish, what a venomous Serpent they keep, yea hug in their bosoms. Look upon
it in this glass, and see how black, and ugly it appears. If you have not seen
it by the Ministry of the Law, so as to humble you, and to lay you low before
the Lord, I beseech you, turn your eyes unto Jesus Christ, and see what foul
work it has made, what mischief it has brought on him. Behold here a strange
sight, a sad spectacle, the blessed Son of God made acursed. The justice of the
Law has found him amongst sinners, and singled him out from all the company,
and set him as a mark to shoot at, yea, has spent all the arrows of its quiver
upon him, and thereby has mangled, and rent, and torn, and wounded him
grievously, yea has brought him down to the gates of death, even as low as
hell. When thou have presented him to thy mind in this pitiful pickle, then
reflect upon thy self, and say, What evil beast has done this? Was it any
offense that he has done against the Law in his own person, that has provoked
it to pour out such a flood of curses upon him* Oh no, he was holy, harmless,
undefiled, there was no spot of unrighteousness in him. It was for my
rebellion, treason, apostasy from my Maker, Me, me, adsum qui feci.
I have sinned, and Christ has suffered the curse for my sin. Take now a
survey of the several branches of this curse, and see how it dogged him all
along from his birth, to his burial, especially the griefs, and the groans,
the sorrows, and the sweats, the tears, the terrors, and the torments of his
soul under the power of the second death, and then say in thy heart, Oh fool
that I was, I did not believe, that sin had been so exceeding bad as it is, I
see now it is no tame beast, but an unreasonable ravenous devouring Serpent,
full of deadly poison. Can thou see all this heavy load lying on the back of
Christ, and yet judge any sin to be small, or go on with a proud heart, and a
high look, maintaining thine old league with sin, and continuing in the hell of
thine accursed natural condition, as if it were thy heaven?

2 It re-mindes us further of the greatness of that misery, whereinto man is
implunged by sin: For if Christ be made a curse, who had no sin of his own, but
only ours laid upon him; What a grievous curse then, must needs lie upon them,
who have the guilt of their personal sins sticking close to their consciences,
and still lie weltring in their own gore-blood? especially on those wretched
souls which must bear the wrath due to sin in their own persons for ever? The
men of the world put the evil day far from them, they feel no harm, they fear
no danger, and therefore they bless themselves in their present state, and
say, No curse shall take hold upon them: But oh how much better were it to
reason thus? Christ was made a curse for sinners, therefore surely sinners in
themselves, and without Christ are in a desperate condition. If we should see a
man grievously tormented, and put to death with extraordinary tortures, and
should withal understand, that he suffered all these things for another man's
crimes, and not for his own, we would conclude thus, Surely, that man was a
notorious Malefactor; and if the stroke of Justice had fallen upon his own
head, what a terrible death must he have endured? If this curse was so bitter,
his wrath so heavy on Christ our Surety, how unspeakably bitter, and heavy
would it be on us the principals? Yea bring it home to thy self, and say, Alas,
What have I done? I have surely spun a fair thread, I have brought my self into
a lamentable condition, that either the Son of God must come down from heaven,
and be made a curse for me, or else I must lie by it for ever. Let us work this
meditation on our hearts for our deeper humiliation.

3 It presents unto us the exactness and impartialness of the justice of God
against sinners, in that he will let the curse fall even on the head of his
only begotten Son, if he find sin upon him. Tribulation, and anguish must be
upon every soul of man that does evil, without respect of persons, Romans 2.9,
11. An unquestionable Maxim, for we see tribulation, and anguish have fallen
heavy upon the soul of the Man-Christ, though he did no evil himself, only
because he was numbered with the Transgressors, and bare the sins of many by
imputation. We may look upon it as a miracle of Justice, and stand wondering at
the Lords proceedings against Christ, how the curse was inflicted on him; in
all the punishments of it; yea, the most grievous and piercing that can be
imagined. If any might have escaped, who more likely than the Son of his
bosom, the Son of his delights? but he might not be spared. Justice will not
suffer it, but puts in its plea, and says, I expect reparation for the
transgression of my righteous Law; If therefore Jesus Christ has undertaken to
pay this debt for sinners, let him look to it, I must, and will be satisfied to
the uttermost farthing. He is willing to be their Surety, and to stand in their
room; let him therefore bear the whole burden, I will not acquit him, till he
has discharged the whole debt. No, no, his loud crying, and tears, his bloody
and painful sweats, his fervent, and heaven-piercing prayers, his often renewed
petitions, that this cup might pass away from him, not any one of these, nor
all these could prevail, to stay the hand of Divine justice, but he must take
off this cup of the Curse, and drink it even to the bottom. Oh that our secure
sinners in Sion, would weigh these things sadly, and take the measure of the
Lords severity against sin, by his dealing with his own Son, and think thus, If
these things be done in the green tree, what shall be done in the dry? Luke
23.31. If he was so strict with his Son, what will he be to his slave? If he
dealt so sharply with his darling, how will he deal with his enemy? If his
righteous servant escape thus hardly, where shall the ungodly, and sinner
appear? Prove. 11.31.

4 It commends unto us the unspeakableness of the love of the Lord Jesus to
poor undone sinners. Behold here, the Son of God, the only begotten of the
Father, who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every
creature, the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the dearly beloved of his
soul, who is clothed with honor and majesty, and whom all the Angels worship,
even he is come down from heaven, has laid aside his Majesty, put off the
robes of his glory and abased himself to the lower parts of the earth, to
become not only a worm, and a reproach of men, but also a curse for Adam, and
his wretched posterity, to take off the curse of the Law from their shoulders,
and to stand accursed in their stead? Listen, and hear, (...). Dien. Carth.
how sweetly he bespeaks the Lord on our behalf. Holy Father, here is a company
of poor miserable debtors, very bankrupts, wretched malefactors, which lie
under thy heavy displeasure, and are the children of death; but I appear here
as their Surety, I have taken all upon me, require no debt, inflict no
punishment on them, put it all on mine accounts, I will discharge all their
scores, I will answer whatsoever can be laid to their charge. Oh incomparable
love, surpassing all that can be found in the creature; the highest pitch
whereof reaches but to friends, Joh. 15.13. that is, to such as are friendly,
kind, beneficial to us, from whom we have received such good turns, as do
oblige us to a return of thankfulness; and yet even this love is very rare. To
dare to dye for a good man, that is, a kind man, that has been good to us, is
but a peradventure, So much does (...) import in some places, as in Mat. 20.15.
and Ephesians. 4.29.
Romans 5.7. But God commends his love to us, in that while we were sinners, and
therefore enemies, Christ dyed for us, verse. 8.10. So then, here is unparalleld
loving kindness; for who would stoop thus low? Who would become contemptible,
yea, abominable for others? who would be content to lie under the extremest
miseries for enemies, traitors, and the worst of creatures? Who would
entertain, and embrace a curse upon any terms, and not rather shun, and avoid
it? yet this has the Lord Jesus done for us. Oh that we had hearts to admire
this miracle of mercy.

Sect. 5. Use 2. Exhortation in two branches.
SEcondly, Hence we may also draw wholesome matter of Exhortation. Has Christ
undergone the Curse? Was he made a Curse in our stead, who lie under the curse
of the Law? Oh that all the sons and daughters of Adam would take this into
their serious thoughts, that thereby they may be excited to learn, and to
practice two very necessary lessons.

1 Of wisdom for themselves. 2 Of duty to the Lord Jesus.
1 Such poor sinners as have been convinced by the former doctrine, of their
accursed condition, should now be wise for themselves even to give free way to
him to take the curse from off them, that he may bear it, and not to take it to
themselves. Art thou now sensible of thy sinful condition? Do thou hear the
Law cursing thee aloud in thy conscience? And do thou feel the sting and
venom of it drinking up thy spirit? Then take to thy self the boldness to send
it to Christ, tell it, Jesus Christ has removed the curse from thee, and laid
it on his own shoulders: Say, Indeed I am a great sinner, deeply implunged in
transgression, mine own iniquities have prevailed against me, and are gone over
my head, and therefore the curse does justly lie upon me, and might press me
down into the nethermost hell; but the Lord Jesus (blessed be his name for
ever) is become a curse for me, he has born it in my stead, it lies not now on
me, but on him. If thou have ought to say against me, go to him, he will answer
thee to the full. This might be very seasonable (if well digested) to such
convinced humbled sinners, as are of so little faith, that they dare not reckon
of any good by Jesus Christ. Oh says the poor broken soul, Woe is me, I am
undone, for I am a vile accursed wretch: I hear indeed, that the Lord Jesus is
becomed a curse for sinners, but as for my self, I fear the news are too good
to be true, I cannot be persuaded, that he is made a curse for me. What? the
Son of God made a curse for me? for such a base, sinful, worthless creature as
I am? It is not probable I cannot believe it. No, no, I must bear the curse my
self, and for ought I see, it will press me down to hell. But stay a little,
and consider, Christ is made a curse for sinners, which are under the curse of
the Law, thou art one of this unhappy number, thou see, and bewaylest thy
woeful condition, and abhorrest thy self. Wherefore then do thou not own
this, and take it home, and say, Christ is made a curse even for me. If thou
were oppressed, See 1 T^m. 1.15, 16.
and overburthened with debt, Creditors coming in on every side, so that thou
could not tell which way to turn thee, no remedy but to prison; Suppose now
a man of very great wealth, should offer himself to be thy Surety, to satisfy
all for thee, were it not great folly in thee, to refuse him, and to say, I
have not deserved such favor, or to distrust him, and to say, I cannot believe
that he will do it? Or suppose thou were a Traitor to the supreme Magistrate,
convicted, condemned; if his Son should undertake for thee, and yield up
himself to justice in thy stead, Were it not madness in thee to reject him?
especially if thou should understand, that this is done, not only by the
Fathers consent, but also by his appointment and approbation? Poor sinner, this
is thy case. Thou art this Debtor, this Traitor, and therefore under the curse?
Jesus Christ is made a curse for thee, even by the appointment of his Father,
he comes to take it off from thee, and to lay it upon himself. Will thou now
put him from thee, and say, This cannot be, he will never do this for me; and
the rather pause a while, and resolve to give him leave to take it. If thou be
wise, thou will not stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children,
Hos. 13.3. Thou art in darkness; here is a glympse of light, thou art in
prison; there is a door of hope to escape. The curse is too heavy for thee,
Christ is willing to ease thee of it. Do not thou keep it to thy self to be
swallowed up by it, but let thine eye be toward him; Look upon him as made sin
and curse for thee, and upon this ground dispute for thy soul thus; Has he
indeed become a curse for me? Why then, there is hope I may escape it.

2. And if we can take down this truth, so as to make account that he is made a
curse for us in particular, then we may look on our selves as engaged upon this
score, to the practice of a necessary duty. If the Lord Jesus did not stick to
be made a curse for us, then should not we be unwilling to be made a curse for
him. The only begotten Son of God, blessed for ever, did abase himself, he
became a worm for us, the reproach of men, and contempt of the people, Psalm.
22.6, 7. he was despised, reviled, abused; yea, scorned, spitted on, and
trodden under foot for us; and shall we think it too much to suffer those
things for him? he was content to undergo the displeasure, the wrath; yea, the
curse of the most high God for our sakes; and shall we, the sorry sons and
daughters of the earth, the right heirs of the curse, refuse or shrink to
undergo the displeasure, the wrath, the curse of man for his sake? Oh no, let
us lie down at his feet, let us lay our bodies as the ground, Isa. 51.23.
and as the street to them that go over; let us submit to become any thing for
Christ; let us not be evil doers, but if we be so accounted, and be put to
suffer as evil doers, let us bear it patiently: we should be ready to meet in
the midway, and cheerfully to embrace the greatest injuries, the foullest
indignities, which the devil or man can possibly heap upon us, either for
Christ and his testimony, or with Christ in the prosecution and maintenance of
any good cause, wherein the Lord calls us to appear. Let not all the
black-mouthed curses that hell it self can invent, knock us off from
well-doing, or discourage us in the work of the Lord Jesus. Whatsoever the work
is, let it suffice us, if he accept us, and be glorified. Take, my brethren,
the Apostles and Saints of God in times past, for your examples herein, 1 Cor.
4.9-13. I think (says S. Paul, speaking of himself and his fellows) that God
has set forth us, as it were men appointed to death; we are fools, weak,
despised for Christ's sake -- we are made as the filth of the world, and the
offscouring of all things; For thy sake I have born reproach, says David,
Psalm. 69.7. yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long, says the Church,
Psalm. 44.22. which the Apostle applies to himself, Romans 8.36. Mind well that
serious exhortation, Act. 5.41.
and the ground from whence it is inferred, Hebr. 13.11, 12, 13. As the bodies
of those beasts whose blood was offered for the expiation of sin, were burnt
without the camp, Lev. 6.27.
Lev. 4.11, 12, 21. so Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his
own blood, suffered without the gate. Thus the Lord Jesus submitted to the
curse for us; what must we do now for him? Why, even go forth unto him without
the camp, bearing his reproach. He went out of the city, and bare his own cross
to Golgotha, Jo. 19.17. We must with Simon the Cyrenean, bear it after him,
Luke 23.26. We must deny our selves, take up our cross and follow him, Mat.
16.24. If we hate not all, even our own lives for him, he disclaims us from
being his Disciples, Luke 14.26, 27. yea our spirits should be all on a flame
within us, in affectionate desires of the glory of Christ; so that we should be
content even to be accursed from Christ, Vide Zanch. de Not. Dei l. 5. c. 3.
at least in the loss and forgoing of our share in eternal blessedness, for the
further enlargement of his kingdom, in the salvation of many. This was the mind
of holy Paul, Romans 9.3. and it should be our mind also. Those nice and delicate
Christians which look for every man's blessing and good word, which cannot
endure a frowning brow, an harsh word, or an ill turn for Christ: but they are
ready to faint in their minds, and to cast off all, do requite the Lord Jesus
very badly, who endured such contradiction of sinners, yea the cross it self
for them, Heb. 12.2, 3. Jer. 12 5.
If running with footmen weary you, how will you keep pace with horses? If some
sprinklings and dashings of rain water in a fair day of prosperity do so
disquiet you, that you are ready to sit down, and desert your Savior, then how
will you do in the swelling of Jordan; when not only the rain falls, but the
floods come, and the winds blow, and the storms of persecution assail you on
every side, threatening your utter overthrow? Oh then, what will you say to
bonds and fetters, to the dungeon and little-ease, to racks and strappadoes, to
gibbets and gallows, to fire and faggot, to boiling oil and scalding lead,
boring out your eyes, plucking off your skins, pulling the members of your
bodies asunder by piece-meale, and many the like barbarous usages, devised by
brutish men, skillful to destroy, which Christians have been put to suffer in
ages past? and who can secure you from them in times to come? Poor soul, if
thou can not with patience bear the curse of a man, whose breath is in his
nostrils, bethink thy self how thou will bear that grievous curse, which will
surely overtake thee if thou be ashamed of Jesus Christ.

Sect. 6. Use 3. Lamentation, that sinners put him to it still.
THirdly and lastly, from this conclusion thus presented to us, we may take
just occasion to enter upon a sad lamentation, while we look upon the great
wickedness of too many, who not thinking it enough that Christ has taken the
curse off from them, and laid it upon himself, do heap upon him still more
cursing, and lay a greater weight thereof on his back every day. If we should
see a brute beast (as an horse) so laden with one pack upon another, or with
one fardell added to another, that he is even falling down under it; and much
more, if we should see a poor servant having a burden heavy enough lying on
him already, to have still more heaped upon his shoulders, till his back be
ready to break under the load, we would all pity the oppressed creatures, and
cry out of the oppressors, as most unmercifull and unreasonable men. Oh then,
what bowels of tender compassion should be in us toward the Lord Jesus, who
has still new loads of curses laid upon him from day to day? and how should
our hearts rise in an holy indignation against them which deal so basely with
him?

But methinks I hear some say, What, are there any such monsters in the world?
or at least in the Church? we can hardly believe it.

Yes verily, both in the world, and in the Church, and those very many, and of
sundry sorts; as

1. All those which deny, or do not acknowledge Christ Jesus to be that which
indeed he is, in regard of the incomparable excellency of his person, in both
his Natures Divine and Humane, and his Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King,
etc. as those Heretics which began to spring up in the days of the Apostles,
which denied that Jesus was the Christ, 1 John 2.22. and did not confess that
Jesus Christ was comed in the flesh. Ioh. 4.2, 3.
2 Jo. 7. the old and new Arrians, which deny the Godhead of Christ, and hold
him to be but a creature; and the Jews, as in the days of his flesh they looked
on him as a mere man, John 10.33. so they have still from that time persisted
in the same error, calling him the son of Mary, denying him to be the Lord and
Christ. The Manichees also of old denied him to be true man; and the Papists by
their fiction of transubstantiation, by consequence deny the same. It would be
needless expense of time and paper, to bring in a list of all which might be
instanced under this head. These heretical and erroneous conceits of Christ,
are in Gods interpretation no better than blasphemies, yea curses pronounced
against Christ. Observe those expressions, 1 Cor. 12.3. where to say, that
Jesus is the Lord, and to call Jesus accursed, are set down as opposites;
whence it follows, that to deny him to be the Lord, is to call him accursed.
S^e Beza, Morton.


2. Those which abhor, contemn, despise (at least in their hearts) the word of
the Gospel, the doctrine of salvation by Jesus Christ. All Atheists, newters,
sensual wretches, which reject the counsel of God against themselves, and
trample that pearl of truth, which is held forth and freely offered unto them,
under their feet, preferring their pottage before their birthright, as Esau;
What profit will this birthright be to me (says he) being at the point to
die? Genesis 25.22. so say the profane unsavory people of these times; when
righteousness and blessedness are tendered to them in the Gospel, through the
cross and curse of Christ Jesus, they are resolved to look to their bodies, and
estates in this world, whatsoever become of their souls. They choose rather to
forfeit their interest in that glorious privilege of the Lords firstborn,
than to forgo their part in the base pleasures of the flesh, and profits of the
world. As the Gadarens would rather have Jesus Christ depart out of their
coasts, than lose their hogs, Mat. 8.34. so these persons prize the vilest
things of the earth, before grace, and the things of eternal life. Christ
crucified, 1 Cor. 1.23.
is a stumbling block to the Jews; and to the Greeks he is foolishness. Oh what
a mean estimation have our people generally of those spiritual riches, for the
purchasing whereof Jesus Christ was made a curse? where shall we find the
door, at which this damnable sin does not lie? yea, I fear it lies at the doors
of some which account themselves the choicest friends of the Lord Jesus, and
think the truth is with them only; even those that slight the Ministry,
Ordinances, and appointments of Christ in his Church; and in effect say unto
him, We have no need of thee.

3. Those which make an Apostasy from the doctrine which they have received,
who having once entertained the truth, and made a profession of Christ,
according to the Gospel, do shrink away from the truth, fall off from Christ,
cast away their profession, and undo that which they have done, turning from
the holy commandment delivered unto them, and embracing this present world.
Christ was once looked upon as precious, now he is a reproach; once they
accounted him a blessing, now they fly from him, as from a curse. Oh poor
miserable creature, has not Christ abased himself to bear on his own
shoulders the heavy curse of thine enmity, thy rebellion, thy disobedience
against the Almighty, and all thy treacheries and abominations, whereby thou
have provoked the eyes of his glory? and have not thou once escaped the
pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ? and will thou now tarry back with the dog, to lick up thine old
loathsome vomit? will thou betake thy self again to that state and trade of sin,
which put him to grapple with the curse of the Law, and whereof thou wast once
ashamed? Truly in doing thus, thou even rollest the curse back upon him, as it
were with both thy hands. But he will have it no more; the curse will fall upon
thine own head, thy latter end will be worse than thy beginning, 2 Pet. 2.20.
etc. especially those which revolt so far, as to sin against the Holy Ghost, in
their judgments professedly contradicting, in their hearts, maliciously
opposing, and in their words and works with all their power persecuting Christ,
his Gospel, and the professors of it; these crucify to themselves the Son of
God afresh, and put him to an open shame, as if he should say, they lay the
curse upon him again, Heb. 6.6. The apostasy of Julian recorded in the History
of the Church, reached even to blaspheming and cursing Christ, and the doctrine
of the Gospel, and his end was lamentable; for in this case there remains no
more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and
fiery indignation, etc. Heb. 10.26, 27. etc.

4. Those profane and graceless persons which have taught and accustomed their
tongues to outrageous and grizly swearing, such as even rends the body of Jesus
Christ in pieces, and plucks it from his soul again, makes more wounds in it,
tears away its flesh, and squeezes his blood out of the veins. We are commanded
when we take an oath, to swear by his name, Deuteronomy. 6.13. this must be both very
rarely, and with great solemnity. The bounders of it are, truth, righteousness,
and judgment, Jer. 4.2. An oath thus taken, is an act of religion, and so a
kind of blessing of God: but if it swerve from these rules, it is a fearful
sin, straightly forbidden by Christ himself, Matthew. 5.34. etc. and by the Apostle
James, chap. 5.12. and is no better than a cursing of God; especially that
hellish kind of swearing, which is attended with such outrageous blasphemies
against the Lord Jesus. If because of swearing, Ier. 23.10.
the Land mourns; then much more for those desperate and bloody oaths, which
reach to the cursing of Christ our Savior. The word there used, signifies
both swearing and cursing; which shows the near affinity betwixt these two, and
implies to us, that every irregular taking up of the Name of God, or Christ in
an oath, is in effect a cursing of them. Alas my brethren, the heavy curse of
the Law of God, which is due to us all for sin, and might have crushed us for
ever, is fallen upon him, and has torn and mangled him pitifully; and shall
wretched creatures be so barbarous, as to toss his holy Name up and down in
their unhallowed mouths, and to tear and mangle him anew, by their horrible and
villainous oaths? Is not this to lay more curses upon him, and even to oppress
him with curses?

5. Those, who making a general profession of Christ, and expecting salvation
by him, do yet walk on in their sins, and take occasion by the abounding of
grace in the Gospel, to be more licentious, and to add sin to sin, as
drunkenness to thirst, making the pretense and profession of Religion an
emboldener to looseness, to the abuse of lawful liberties, and to
unwarrantable practices. The Apostle Jude gives us the character of these,
calling them ungodly men, which turn the grace of God into lasciviousness, and
deny the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, Jude 4. And S. Paul gives
us an hint of them, Romans 6.1. the abounding grace of God manifested in Christ,
is both the Motive and End of their continuing in sin; they sin both because
grace does abound, and that it may abound. But oh! little do these persons
consider, that this grace could not have been feasible, but by Christ's bearing
the curse for our sins. And if it cost so dear a price, shall we cause him to
pay it again? shall we be so bold, as sin still, and thereby put him to bear
the curse over and over again, as often as we sin? far be it from us to do so
wickedly. The loose and careless Christian, which makes account that Christ
became a curse for him, and yet follows his old trade still, does (as it
were) give Christ this malapert language; Lord Christ, I know thou art richly
able to bear the curse, were it a thousand times heavier than it is: therefore
I will put thee to it, I will sin still, and thou must bear the curse still, I
will not restrain my self from any of those courses which some men call
sinful, but I will walk in the ways of mine own heart, and fill my self with
the delights of the flesh. Its pity thou should not have load enough, that
art so good at bearing the curse. Oh abominable ranting! that terrible
denunciation, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. etc. may be applied to this case, by an argument
from the less to the greater, thus: He that hears that Christ is made a curse
for him, and yet blesses himself in his heart, and encourages himself in sin,
the Lord will not spare him, but all the curses of Gods book shall lie upon
him, etc. Yea lastly, every miscarriage in the profession of Religion,
willingly allowed, or continued in, through negligence or remisseness, is in
some degree a cursing of God; which I gather from that speech of Job concerning
his sons, Job 1.5. It seems the sin which he suspected they were guilty of, was
the neglect of their watch, that they willingly suffered looseness and vanity
to seize upon their spirits, See the English Annot. and Caryl. in loc.
which might bring forth some unsavory fruits without. A malady to which even
good men are subject, especially in times of feasting. And this he calls
cursing God in their hearts.

Unto these, and all the rest of their brethren in evil, I must speak a word or
two, taking up a lamentation, and pleading against them on the behalf of
Christ. Oh ye sons of men, what abominable thing is this that ye do? why do ye
offer such hard measures to him who has put himself upon such perilous
adventures, yea extremities, that he might save you from utter destruction?
Give ear, and hear the Lord Jesus pleading his own cause against you thus, what
iniquity have you found in me, that you deal thus basely with me, that you
handle me so cruelly? you can find none in me but that which lay first at your
own doors, and is charged upon me on your account; or as Jerusalem in the day
of her sore affliction bemoaning her condition, Lam. 1.12. Jer. 2.15.
Is it nothing to you; all you that pass by, behold and see if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow; or, as Job earnestly begging the compassion of his
friends, who persecuted him with great violence by their mis-grounded
accusations, and thereby heaped more misery upon him, Have pity upon me, have
pity upon me, O ye my friends, etc. Job. 19.21, 22. Is it not enough, that I
have born such sorrow as never man bare such a curse as would have pressed you
all down to hell, but I must have more burdens laid upon me still, and that by
my friends too? new curses every day? I beseech you have pity on me, and hold
off hands; I have had enough of the curse already, oh do not put me to it
again. And if for all this thou will shut up thy bowels from him, and walk
contrary to him, thou shall find it true at length to thy cost, Jam. 2.13.
that there shall be judgment without mercy to him, that has showed no mercy.

CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1. The third Conclusion, What Redemption is.
THe third Conclusion or Doctrine, is the marrow and sum of the Text.

Christ, by being made a Curse for us, has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law.

This is the result, the issue, the fruit of the Lord Christ's becoming a curse
for us, that hereby we are redeemed from the curse of the Law, under which we
were held. This Truth may receive proof from the consent of other Scriptures.
Let us hear but two or three of the fullest testimonies, that thereby it may be
established, Gal* 4, 5. God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the
Law, to redeem us, etc. Tit. 2.14. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us, etc. Heb. 9.11, 12. Christ, by a greater, and more perfect Tabernacle than
that under the Law, and by his own blood -- has obtained eternal Redemption
for us. Observe here, that this Redemption follows upon, and flows from
Christ's becoming a Curse for us, two ways.

1 In the intention, and purpose of God and Christ. God the Father in his
eternal counsel, did propound unto himself this end of giving Christ, and
Christ in the fullness of time, did set before his eyes the same, and in giving
himself to become a curse, that poor inthralled sinners might be redeemed
thereby from the curse of the Law.

2 In the effect, and event of the thing. Look what the Lord did intend to
work, and to bring about by Christ's undergoing the curse for us, the same was,
and is thoroughly wrought, and brought about to the full. The thing is done, as
to the making of a plenary satisfaction to Divine justice, and so obtaining the
benefit of Redemption, on the behalf of all those, for whom the Lord has
appointed it in his eternal purpose.

But for a more particular clearing, and beating out of this Doctrine, I shall
endeavor,

1 To show what this Redemption is, and wherein it stands.

2 To give some arguments or grounds of Scripture-reason, for the confirmation
of it.

For the former, the Scriptures of the New Testament afford us several words to
express the nature of this benefit. The most general word is rendered
[Deliverance] and notes out a setting one free by any means whatsoever, as in
the Lords Prayer [Deliver us from evil] Mat. 6.13. and 2 Pet. 2.9. [T^e Lord
knows how to deliver, etc.] This word is used to express the work of
Redemption, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. [Who delivers us from the wrath to come.]

There is another general word of the same signification, (...)
Luke 12.58. properly it imports a changing from, or an alienation. It is used
once (and but once that I know) in this argument, to wit, Heb. 2.15.

(...).
There be some other words of a more restrained signification, one which is
sometimes rendered [Delivering] as Act. 26.17. (...).
but properly notes a taking away by force, or by an act of justice, as 1 Cor.
5.13. and Act. 12.11. The Apostle Paul in mentioning this benefit, makes use
of this word, (...).
Gal. 1.4. [That he might deliver us, etc.]

There be other two words more frequent in Scripture, which signify a setting
free, by paying of a price. The former is in reference to Captives or
Prisoners, who being in bondage to others, are set at liberty by the payment of
a Ransom. This is called Redeeming, or redeeming from, Luke 1.68. and Romans 3.
(...).
We are all in slavery, under sin, the Law, Satan, etc. Christ comes, and by
laying down his life for us, pays our ransom, and so delivers us out of
their hands. The latter word is borrowed from the Condition of such persons,
(...).
as having been abridged of their former liberty, or of such things as having
been alienated from their first owners, and so being under the power of others,
are now brought out from that condition, and brought into a state of freedom.

We read in the Law of sundry persons, and things, who being under the power of
others, might yet be redeemed; as servants, which had sold themselves; lands
and dwelling-houses, which were sold by their ownners, Levit. 25.23. etc. And
this Redemption was made, by paying a valuable consideration, according to the
number of years to the Jubilee, more or less, and so buying them out. (...).
This is the import of the word here used, and seems to be an Allusion to that
Levitical Ordinance. We had sold our selves to the drudgery of sin, and were
become Satan's servants, and so liable to all that curse and woe, that attends
upon that slavery; Now the Lord Jesus comes, and because our case is desperate,
no revolution of years could ever have brought us a Jubilee, but we must be
bondmen for ever, therefore he has paid an infinite sum, that he might buy us
out clearly from this accursed servitude, and bring us into true liberty, we
are said to be ransomed, not with corruptible things, but with the precious
blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. and to be bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20.
and Christ is said to be slain, and to buy us with his blood, Rev. 5.9.

The Scripture is exact and copious in discovering this great work in the
particulars of it, showing us the different terms. 1 From which. 2 Unto which
Christ has redeemed us.

1 From what has he redeemed us? From sin, Mat. 1.21. From all iniquity, Psalm.
130.78. and Tit. 2.14. From death, Hos. 13.14. From the power of the grave,
Psalm. 49.15. from the Law, Romans 7.6. Gal. 4.5. and here, from the curse of the
Law. From this present evil world, Gal. 1.4. From the earth, and from among
men, Rev. 14.3, 4. From the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Out of the hands of
our enemies, Luke 1.71, 74.

2 Unto what has he redeemed us. To himself, Deuteronomy. 4.34. 2 Samuel 7.23. To God,
Rev. 5.9. to be the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb, Rev. 14.4. to be a
peculiar people to himself, Tit. 2.14. to serve him without fear all our days,
Luke 1.74, 75.

Yet further, the Redemption of Mankind is considerable in a double respect.

1 As it is an act and work of Christ the Mediator, and so the immediate
product of his sufferings, thus it exists in Christ himself, as Romans 3.24. the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, therefore he is called the Redeemer, Isa.
59.20. Romans 11.26. and he is said to send redemption to his people. Psalm.
111.9. he has laid down the price, and so effected the business, Heb. 9.12. he
has obtained redemption. He professes, that he came to give his soul to be a
ransom for many, Matthew. 20.28. and the Apostle tells us, (...).
That he gave himself a counter-ransome for all, a ransom every way equivalent
and full, 1 Timothy 2.6.

2 As it is a benefit actually brought home, and applied to elect sinners by
effectual calling, Jesus Christ was made a curse, and so became a sacrifice for
sinners, not that they might immediately without any more ado, be made
partakers of the redemption purchased thereby, or be actually redeemed upon the
very offering made, but that, having first made this benefit feasible, so that
now there is such a thing to be had, which without him (neither is, nor could
be) he might afterward communicate it to the Elect, and give them the personal
possession of it, that they might enjoy it for themselves. And this he does by
a powerful drawing them to himself, and so by union to him, they have a real
interest in this benefit. Therefore the Apostle sometimes speaks of it as
appropriated to believers, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. and Jehovah styles himself the
Churches Redeemer, Isa. 49.26. as often elsewhere, and Job calls him his
Redeemer, Job. 19.25.

Both these considerations are here implied, as depending necessarily the one
upon the other, in respect of those that shall be saved; and that they are not
to be confounded, but distinguished, appears by Heb. 9.15. where we may observe
a clear difference betwixt the death of the Mediator for the redemption of
transgressions, and receiving the promise of the inheritance. This latter being
laid down as a consequent, or fruit of the former, and limited to them, that
are called.

To conclude, Take the whole in this short sum, Redemption is the buying out,
and delivering of sinners from the curse of the Law, and so from the guilt of
sin, and the wrath of God, and the condemation of hell due thereunto by the
death and satifaction of Christ the Mediator.

Sect. 2. Proof from Scripture-reason.
FOr the latter, this main truth concerning the redemption of sinners by
Christ, now made a curse for them, may receive further confirmation from
grounds of Scripture-reason, whether we consider the fitness of the person, to
undertake such an enterprise, or the efficaciousness of his sufferings.

1 The person was every way fit to redeem us, being both God and man.

1 He is true God, 1 John 5.20. blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. the only begotten
of the Father, Joh. 1.14. the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the
Father, verse. 18. and therefore very gracious with him; which the Father
himself did solemnly testify by a voice from heaven, Matthew. 3.17. He is the
mighty God, Isa. 9.6. therefore the Father has laid help on him, Ps. 89.20.
the Horn of David, Psalm. 132.17. and the Horn of salvation, Luke 1.69. mighty
to save, Isa. 63.1. he was infinite liable to break through all difficulties,
and with an holy scorn to slight an whole host of the most terrible enemies,
to march through them without danger, and in despite of them all, to fetch
waters of life for us out of the Well of Bethlehem. He is the Lord; 1 Chro.
11.18.
Is there any thing too hard for him? Jer. 32.27.

2 He is true man also, in one and the same person, flesh of our flesh, and
bone of our bone, next a kin to us, therefore he is not ashamed to call us
brethren, Heb. 2.11. It was a Levitical Ordinance, that if an Israelite were
fallen into decay, and had sold himself to a stranger, any of his brethren, or
nigh of kin unto him, might redeem him, Lev. 25.47, 48, 49 and the same might
be done, if he had sold any part of his possession, verse. 25. therefore these
two phrases are used indifferently to note the same thing, a near kinsman, and
one that has right to redeem, Ruth 2.20. and 3.9. Of this we have an instance
in Hanameel, Cosen-german to the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 32.7, 8. etc. This
doubtless had some reference to Christ. We had sold our selves to a stranger,
even to Satan, to serve him; Christ is a near kinsman, one of the same stock
and blood with us, therefore the right of redemption is his. It was also a
statute, and a custom in Israel, That if a man dyed, having no child to
inherit after him, then his brother, or next kinsman should take his wife, and
raise up seed to his deceased brother, Deuteronomy. 25.5. etc. and withal, if the
inheritance were alienated, or set to sale, he was to buy it out, or redeem it,
for the use of the firstborn, that so it might continue settled upon the
Family of the dead man. We have a clear instantial Gospel Truth lys hid (as I
conceive) Old Adam dyed, and left no seed behind him, that might inherit
heaven, and moreover the inheritance was quite extinct, and lost, as to him,
and all his; and therefore the Lord thrust him out of Paradise, Genesis 3.24.
Only Jesus Christ is found the next kinsman, who begetting sons and daughters
by the word of Truth, does thereby raise up a seed of God, and redeem the
forfeited inheritance, and so settle it upon the firstborn of Adams family for
ever; yet with this difference, that this seed shall not be called after the
name, nor inherit in the right of the first Adam, but they shall be called by a
new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name, Isa. 62.2. And they shall
inherit in the right of the second Adam only, Act. 26.18. Ephesians. 1.11.

2 The sufferings of Christ were fully efficacious to redeem us; for thereby,

1 He has given abundant satisfaction to the justice of God, and so has
weakened, yea nullified, (...).
and taken away sin in the guilt and condemning power of it. God sent his Son
in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin, that is, upon the sad, and
woeful occasion of sins being in the world, or that he might abolish and destroy
it. And what is the fruit of this glorious design? Why, he has condemned sin
in the flesh, that is, by laying the curse, which the Law threatened against
sinners, upon that very flesh, or nature, which had sinned, he has cast sin in
its own plea. A man's work may be said to plead for his pay; the crime of a
Malefactor cries for the execution of the Law upon him; so sin pleads against
the sinner, and calls for death, its wages to be inflicted upon him. Sin,
although as an act it be transient, yet in the guilt of it lies in the Lords
high Court of Justice, filed upon record against the sinner, and calling aloud
for deserved punishment, saying, Man has sinned, and man must suffer for his
sin. But now Christ having suffered for sin, that plea is taken off; Lo here,
says the Lord, the same nature that sinned, suffers, mine own Son being made
flesh, has suffered death for sin in the flesh, the thing is done, the Law is
satisfied; and so he nonsuits the action, and casts it out of the Court, as
unjust. Thus whereas sin would have condemned us, he has condemned sin, and
there is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1, 3. The
blood of the Mediator outcries the clamor of sin. We read Lev. 16.7. etc. of
two Goats which were to be presented before the Lord; the one to be offered for
a sin-offering, the other to be kept alive, for a Scapegoat, that Aaron having
laid his hands on his head, and confessed over him all the iniquities of the
children of Israel, might afterward send him away, bearing their iniquities
into a Land not inhabited. All this is fulfilled in Christ; he has both given
himself to be a sin-offering for us, and thereby removed guilt so far, that
when it is sought, it cannot be found, Jer. 50.20. So much is implied in that
expression, Heb. 9.26. He has put away sin by the sacrifice of himself,
therefore redemption and propitiation are put together, as the effect and cause.

First, (...). P^acamentum.
he is a propitiation pacifying Gods wrath, and rendering him propitious to
sinners, and thence follows Redemption, Romans 3.24, 25. When the debt is
discharged, then the Law with the arrests and executions of it, are void, and
of no force: So Christ having paid our debt, has thereby both removed sin and
guilt, and voyded the curse of the Law, so that now it has nothing against us.

2 He has broken the Serpents head, according to the ancient Prophecy given
out in Paradise, Genesis 3.15. by taking part of flesh and blood with us, he has
through death destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the devil,
and so wrought our deliverance, Heb. 2.14, 15. The Son of God was manifested,
that he might loose [or dissolve] the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. he has
(as it were) shattered them all to pieces, Isa. 30.14.
and will still be shattering them, he will not spare, so that there shall not
be left so much as a shred. Now this was one of his works, to hold poor sinners
fast bound, and shut up under the brazen bolts of the curse of the Law unto
condemnation; but he has broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron
in sunder, Psalm. 107.16. He has met those terrible enemies, the Philistims of
hell, and grappled with them hand to hand, he has discomfited them, and
brought them under, and he will not cease, till he has beaten them small, as
the dust before the wind, nor turn again till they be consumed. That which
David spoke of himself as the Type, See Isa. 63.3, 4, etc.
is eminently fufilled in Jesus Christ only, Psalm. 18.37, 38-42. He is that
little David, that prevailed over the great Champion Goliath of Gath, with a
sling and with a stone, and smote him, and slew him, 1 Samuel 17.50, 51. He is
that strong invincible Sampson, that rent in pieces that infernal roaring Lion,
as easily as if he had been a Kid, Judge. 14.5, 6. that slew the Philistims hip,
and thigh, with a great slaughter, Chap. 15.8. and when they had him fast bound
with new cords, they became as flax upon his arms, and with the jaw bone of an
Ass, laid heaps upon heaps, verse. 14, 15, 16. that carried away the door of the
gates of Hell, to set the prisoners at liberty, Chap. 16.3. and made the
noblest conquest, when he seemed to be wholly conquered, and no hope was left,
that ever he could look up again, slaying at his death far more than he had
slain in his life, verse. 21-30. He has spoiled Principalities and powers, and
triumphed over them on the Cross, Col. 2.15. When the High commission Court,
and Star Chamber were cast down, then all fell with them, that appertained to
them; as there are no more informations, pleadings, censures, punishments: So
there are no Sergeants, Bailiffs, Apparitors, Pursevants; even so this Lord
Jesus, having thrown down the Court of sin by his death, and thereby disabled
the Law, he has also judged the great Catch-pole of hell, and put him out of
office, so that he cannot now execute the curse, and wrath of God upon poor
sinners, as gladly he would; and although for the present, he can reach to
bruise their heel, and does often work them woe, yet the Redeemer will tread him
under their feet shortly, Romans 16. ver. 20.

Sect. 3. An Objection, [If by Ransom, then not by Rescue,] Answered.
THus much for the clearing, and prooving of the Conclusion: but here lies a
Doubt in the way; for answering whereof, we may borrow a little light from the
premises. If our Redemption was by Christ's becoming a Curse for us, and so by
buying us out with the price of his blood, How could it then be by strength of
hand, and a forcible rescue?

These two seem to destroy one another, Ransom and Rescue. V^de Musculum, loc
com. de redempt^one.
To be delivered by the paying of a price, and to be delivered by conquest, are
inconsistent, as to the same persons. The nature of the things is so different,
that they cannot concur in the same deliverance.

Ans. Although these two do usually stand at a distance, yet in this great
business of the Redemption of mankind they close well together. To clear this,
take these three Considerations.

1. Mankind, by the breach of the Law, being become a debtor to justice, and
under the curse, even in the extremity of it; and Almighty God, who is the
party wronged, being the only sovereign Lord, and Lawgiver; Therefore the
principal and most proper way to effect man's deliverance, was to give
satisfaction to justice, so that either sinners must die the death in their own
persons, or Christ their surety must give his life a ransom for them, being at
an utter loss in themselves.

Against this, it may be objected, Then we must say, that Christ redeemed us
from God, and himself being God, he redeemed us out of his own hands, by paying
a price to himself; which is absurd. Ans. This seeming absurdity will vanish,
if we keep to Scripture phrase, and take along with us these Two things.

1. The person of the Redeemer was not only God, but also man, and although as
to the sufficiency for the work, and the valor, and efficacy of it, he must
necessarily be God, yet both the right, and act of Redemption belonged to him
properly as man; so that we may say, It was the man Christ, that bought us out
of the hands of the curse, and wrath of God.

2. God the Father himself had a special hand in this business; the whole
dispensation, and managing of it was by his supreme, and sovereign appointment
(as we heard before); and thus it is no more absurd to say, that God took a
course to satisfy his own just^ce, and to redeem us from himself, than to say,
that a King does so, when he gives his own son, to lay down his life, Or a
Creditor, when he requires the debt of his own Son, for which the son was
surety by the Fathers consent.
for the saving of Traitors from the stroke of his Law.

2. Man being thus obnoxious to the justice of God, and therefore delivered up
by him into the hands of Satan, as his jaylour, or executioner, to keep him as
his prisoner, till he shall pay the uttermost farthing; and Satan being also
his deadly enemy, and unwilling to let him go; in this respect there is a
necessity of an heavenly might to be put forth, for rescuing the poor prisoners
from him, that they may be actually, and thoroughly redeemed.

But here again some may say, There is no need of any such Conquest or Rescue;
for when justice is satisfied, then the prisoner must be discharged, and the
jaylour can hold him no longer: so Christ having paid the debt, and given full
satisfaction to the justice of the Law for the sin of man; God does now
discharge the poor sinner; and how can the Jaylour of hell hold him under his
power still?

Ans. 1. Admit for the present, that [de jure] he cannot, he ought not to keep
sinners under, now that the ransom is paid; yet for all that, [de facto]
indeed he does it, and will do it, till he be forced to let them go. Let us
suppose a jaylour, having notice of a Goal-deliverie to be shortly, or having
received a writ for setting at Liberty such and such prisoners by name, should
yet 1. wilfully refuse, yea oppose, and resist the execution thereof with
force, and arms. 2. serve himself of them, and strive to keep them in bondage
for his pleasure. Is it not now high time, for the King, or the supreme power
to come against this jailor, to suppress him, to put him out of office, that so
he may perfect his own grant and rid the poor prisoners out of his hands.

This is the very case in hand, God has long ago declared his will, Isa.
52.10. Hos. 13.14. Job. 33.24.
concerning the redemption of mankind, and he is daily sending out Writts for
setting free some of his prisoners: but Satan, out of an inbred malice against
the Redeemer, and Redeemed, 1. does oppose, and resist with all his might. He
has been an adversary to this work from the first; he endeavored to strangle
it in the cradle, by stirring up Herod to kill all the young male-children in
Bethlehem, Matt. 2.16. Mat. 4.6. Mat. 16.22. Jo. 13.2.27.
hoping that the child Jesus might go to the pot among them; he tempted him to
self-murder; he suborned Peter to diswade him from suffering; he filled the
heart of Judas to betray him, that he might be cut off at once; And when he
could by no force or subtilty prevent the payment of the price, but it was done
in despite of him, yet he has set himself ever since by all means to hinder
both the publication of it by the Gospel, and the efficacy of it by the Spirit,
in the hearts of sinners, to render it altogether useless, 2 Cor. 4.4.
as water spilt on the ground. 2. He holds his Captives still, that he may
serve himself of them, by setting them to do his work, and ruling, and riding
them at his own pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26. Ephesians. 2.2. As Pharaoh and the Egyptian
taskmasters kept the children of Israel by strong hand, to work in mortar, and
brick, and in all manner of service in the field, Exodus 1.14. and after that
the Assyrian oppressed them, and last of all the King of Babylon brake their
bones, Isa. 52.4. Jer. 50. 17. and no way of deliverance, but by conquest: Even
so do those infernal Taskmasters keep under the sinful sons and daughters of
Adam, and will not let them go, till the Redeemer fetch them with an
outstretched arm. In a word, it was Satan that first by his lures brought them
into this snare, and being now the God of this world, he is so settled in his
vast dominions, by prescription of a long time, that he will not relinquish his
title, but must be ejected by violence.

2. As for that branch of the Objection, that upon Christ's paying the ransom,
God does discharge the sinner, it may not pass for a truth, without some
explication. It was not the mind of God the Father, or Christ the Mediator,
that this benefit should actually inure to the Elect, immediately from the time
of the payment it self: God did determine, and prescribe a certain order, and
way, whereby they should come to the personal enjoyment of it, and have it laid
in their bosoms; which will be at the time of the respective conversion of
every of them, I spe^k of G d's ordina^y course, excepting the case of Infants.
and not before. The Apostle grants this, when he says, Romans 7.6. Now we are
delivered from the Law. [Now] in opposition to the verse before [when we were
in the flesh] So that, although we be redeemed, as to the price, and
satisfaction of justice, yet Satan will keep us still in bondage, till Christ
bring the benefit home to our souls by the work of Conversion.

3. I add this third consideration. The bondage and slaverie under which
wretched man lies through sin, although it may be truly said to be forced in
respect of Satan, yet as to sinners themselves, it is voluntary. When Cyrus
had proclaimed to the Jews a dismission from the captivity of Babylon, many of
them slighted it, and chose rather to stay in captivity still: Their practice
is the very temper of all the children of Adam, what they are, that they will
be. Slaves they are to sin, and slaves they will be; and consequently accursed,
and under condemnation, Liberty is proclaimed by the Gospel, and the hearts of
sinners are averse from it; the wisdom of the flesh is enmity in this, more
than in any thing, yea they resist, (...).
[or fall cros] against the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. Therefore the Redeemer must
come with an almighty power, to subdue every high thought in man, to demolish
all his strong holds, and even to force this Redemption upon him with holy
violence, or else he will not embrace it, while he lingers, the Angel of the
Covenant must lay hold upon his hand, and bring him forth, as Lot from Sodom.
Genesis 19.16.

Sect. 4. Another Objection, It might have been done in an easier way, Answered.
BUt here lies another Rub in our way, which must be removed. Some may say, It
was not necessary, that Christ should become a curse for us, as is before
expressed, Might not the work of Redemption be wrought by some other means?
Could not God the Father have chalked out, Cur per sanguinem, quod potuit
facere per sermonem.
and Christ the Mediator have walked in a more smooth and easy way, but he
must go in this rough, and thorny path of subjection to the curse, for the
effecting of this business?

Ans. 1. Seeing the holy Scripture does ascribe the whole administration of
this mystery from first, to last, to the good pleasure of God's will, as the
first, and supreme cause. Ipsum interrogatum mihi scire licet, quod ita: cur
ita, non licet. Bernard.
Therefore it may be judged, an unwarrantable over-bold curiosity in the silly
sons of men to enquire, or determine, what God might have done by his
absolute power, or why he would do it thus, rather then otherwise. His Word
tells us, what he would do, and we see by the event, what he has done. This
way was the will of God, and none other, and therefore this way Christ took,
and none other, and thereby attained his end, Heb. 10.9, 10. We may safely rest
here, and make no further search; for who has known the mind of the Lord? Romans
11.34. His mere will, and pleasure, Volunt as Dei est pro lege, pro causa
causarum, pro ratione rationum.
is a reason abundantly sufficient, and beyond exception.

2. The Lord has revealed his mind so far in this particular, that we may be
bold to go a little further, and to resolve thus. God, who is great in
counsel, and excellent in working, had store of means at hand, whereby to set
free, and recover lost mankind; yet he was pleased to pitch upon this, as
being most agreeable to his holy nature, and most suitable to his high, and
sovereign ends, man's salvation, and his own glory.

I explain it thus. God is infinite in all his attributes, in his justice, as
well as his mercy. These two cannot interfeere; as justice may not entrench
upon mercy, so neither may mercy encroach upon justice; the glory of both
must be maintained. Now by the breach of the Law the Justice of God is wronged,
Nec misericordia Dei praescribit justitiam, nec just^tia aufert misericordiam.
Aug.
so that, although mercy be apt to pardon, yet Justice requires satisfaction,
and call's for vengeance on sinners. Every transgression must receive just
recompense. Heb. 2.2. and God will not in any case absolve the guilty, Exodus
34.7. till this be done, the hands of Law-mercy are tied, that she cannot act.
And seeing satisfaction could not be made to an infinite Majesty, but by an
equal person, and price, therefore the Son of God must become a Curse for us,
by taking our nature, and pouring out his soul to the death; and by this means
Justice, and Mercy are reconciled, and mercy has her free course to save
sinners.

So that now, presupposing God's Decree, we may safely say, It must be thus,
and it could be no otherwise. God will have his Justice satisfied to the full,
and therefore Christ must bear all the punishment due to our sin, or else God
cannot set us free: For he cannot go against his own just will. Quod vuli,
necesse est esse.
Observe the force of that phrase Luke 24.26, and 46. Christ ought to suffer:
and Matthew. 26.24. Thus it must be. A just earthly Prince holds himself bound to
inflict punishment impartially upon the malefactor, or his surety; it stands
upon his honor, he says, it must be so, I cannot do otherwise. This is true
much more of God, who is Justice it self.

And as this great design of Christ's redeeming sinners, by being made a curse
for them, does sound out aloud the glory of divine Justice, so it also bears
visible characters of some other Attributes: as,

1. His Truth. He had passed a peremptory doom, and made a solemn declaration
of it in his word, that he that sins shall die the death, Genesis 2.17. Romans
6.21, 23. and he will not break his word. So he had foreordained Jesus Christ,
and set him forth to take upon himself this burden, to become a propitiation
for sin through his blood, Romans 3. 25. 1 Pet. 1.20. and made known his mind
eoncerning it in his written word, plainly, Isa. 53.7. If we read the words,
[It is exacted, or strictly required] meaning, Exigitur. as Junius, and some
others.
the iniquity, or punishment of us all, verse. 6. is required at his hands, he
must answer for it in our stead; and so he is afflicted, and this affliction
reaches even to the cutting him off, ver. 8. yea the Spirit of Christ in the
Prophets, did signify unto them not only his sufferings, but also the very
particular time of them, 1 Pet. 1.11. Therefore when Christ puts this work upon
an [ought, and must be], he lays the weight of all on the Scriptures, [thus
it is written] as we may see in the texts before-cited, as if he should say,
God has spoken it, and his truth ingageth him, to see it done.

2. His wisdom. For hereby, 1. he maintains the authority of his righteous
Law, when a law is solemnly enacted, with a penalty in case of transgression,
all those, whom it concerns, may conclude for certain, that the Lawgiver will
proceed accordingly: And it is a rule in policy, That Laws once established,
and published, should be vigorously preserved. If the Lord should have wholly
waved the execution of the Law upon sinners, or their surety, it might have
tended greatly, both to the weakening of its authority, and the diminishing of
the reverence of his Sovereignty in the hearts of the sons of men.

2. He provided a curse against Licentiousness. Impurity is apt to lay the
reins loose upon the necks of sinners. If sin had been pardoned, without
exacting the penalty of the Law, it might have emboldened men in their sinful
ways, their hearts would have been wholly set upon mischief, Eccles. 8.11.
they will say, Where is the God of Judgment? Mal. 2.17. But now he lets
sinners see, that he will not pardon sin, no not to repenting persons, but upon
condition of Christ's bearing the curse for them; whence they may conclude,
that he will not spare them, if they be bold to continue in their rebellion.

3. And probably, that he might hereby also cut of all occasions, which the
devil his enemy might take to calumniate, and traduce him. He might accuse him
1. of inconstancy, and changeableness; that having threatened death to
transgressors, he did quite forget himself, in waving the threatening, and
dispensing wholly with his Law, by granting them free remission: Yea, 2. of
partiality, and respect of persons, that he should be so easy, and forbearing,
as to let them pass without any punishment at all, Quasi tam facilis fuisset,
antea s^verus erga seipsum.
having been formerly so severe, and rigid against himself in casting him and
his angels into everlasting flames, without hope of recovery. Satan might say,
Lord, thou might have spared me, as well as man: But the Lord may answer,
man has made satisfaction; he has borne the curse, and thereby fully
discharged all the demands of the Law: if he had not, I would not have spared
him any more, than thee.

3. His goodness, and loving kindeness. God the great Lord, and Governor of
the world might have rigorously exacted the penalty of the Law, on the persons
of sinners themselves, but he has so far dispensed with the Law, as to admit
of a Surety, by whom the end of the Law, that is, the manifestation of his
justice, and hatred of sin, might be fulfilled, and yet a considerable part of
mankind might be preserved from the jaws of the second death, which otherwise
must have perished eternally. Says the Lord, I may not, I will not suffer this
high affront of Adam, and his posterity, against my holy Law, whereby the
honor both of my justice, and truth are in danger, to be trampled under foot.
And yet if I should let out all my wrath upon them, the spirit would fail
before me, and the souls which I have made, Isa. 57.16. I will therefore let it
out upon their Surety, and he shall bear it for them, that they may be
delivered; and thus the Lord in wrath remembers mercy, Hab. 3.2.

I have done with the doctrinal part of this Conclusion: I proceed to the
Application.

CHAP. V. Use 1. Confutation of Papists and Socinians.
1. THis main Gospel Truth may afford us some help toward the Confutation of
the damnable Doctrine of two grand Enemies of the cross of Christ, and of this
great and glorious work of Redemption, by his becoming a curse for us.

1. Papists, who not being content with this way of Christ, have devised other
means, and put into the hands of sinners something else to make up the price of
their Redemption. They present us with several parcels to this purpose; as,

Bellar. De poenitentia. lib. 4. cap. 2, 3, 6, and 7.
1. That a man may redeem himself from the temporal punishment of his sins, by
some notable and extraordinary good works, while he lives, as by fasting,
pilgrimages, almesdeeds, building, and endowing of Churches, hospitalls, and
the like. They grant, that Christ by his sufferings has made satisfaction
immediately, for the guilt of eternal death; but then, when the sin is
remitted, there remains still on the sinners, an obligation to temporal
punishment, for which we must make satisfaction our selves, one way, or other;
and so in part redeem our selves.

But oh, where shall we find that man, (except Jesus Christ,) that can show us
such a good work? Verily, the best, choicest, the eminentest works of any mere
man, that ever the Sun saw, or shall see, are poor, weak, blemished things,
like a menstruous cloth, infinitely short of the purity of God's Law, and
therefore no way equivalent to the injury done to him by sin.

2. That there is a Purgatory-fire, wherein all those must be purged, Bellar.
de purgatorio.
which die in the guilt of Venial sin, who yet may redeem themselves at length
by their own sufferings there, or they may be ransomed before, by the prayers,
and offerings of the living.

But the Scripture holds forth nothing to us concerning this; nay it affords us
many strong arguments against it, if it were worth the while, to produce them.
They say, this fire, is every whit as hot, as hellfire; but I am confident, it
never burnt any body, nor do I know, to what use it serves, but only, to warm
the kitchen of that Man of sin.

3. That there is a certain Treasury in the Church, Idem. De Indulgent^^s. Vide
Ames.
wherein are laid up the remainder of the superabundant satisfaction of Christ,
and those sufferings of the virgin Mary, and other Saints, which were more, and
greater, than they needed, for themselves: and the keys of this chest, are
committed to the Pope of Rome, that he may upon just, and reasonable cause
dispense Indulgencies, either by himself, or by his Delegates, unto them that
need, and desire them, to make satisfaction for the temporal punishment oftheir
sins.

But this is no better than the former. For besides that Christ's satisfaction
(although in it self infinite) has nothing more in it than needs, as to the
application of it to those, for whom God did intend it; where shall we find
the man, that has done, or suffered more then he ought to have done, or
deserved to suffer? In truth these are but as Babies for children to play with,
or as when a mother promises her child an apple to till it on to some good
action, Bell. E^^ de Indulg cap 6.
which yet she does not give it, as some Papists do confess: O rely because
they come off at good round rates, they serve to fill the coffers of the great
merchant of Rome.

In a word, all these are mere fancies, yea, lying vanities, which cannot stand
with this Truth. For if Christ was made a curse for us, and thereby has
wrought our Redemption; then either there is no other way to effect it in
whole, or in part, or else it will follow, that Christ's work is imperfect,
which who dares once imagine? As for us we may ascribe to the Psalmists
Resolve, Psa. 49.7, 8, 9. No man can redeem his brother: If not from temporal
death, how much less from eternal? we shall leave these offals to the dogs of
Rome, for we have enough in Christ.

2. Socinus, and his followers, who teach, that Christ's becoming a Curse for
us, and the whole course of his humiliation in doing, and suffering was not at
all for satisfaction, but only to set forth himself to us an example for our
imitation, and in his own person both by doing, and suffering, to show us the
way to heaven.

This Heresy was first hatched by Pelagius, about the time of S. Augustine,
and about 700 years after, revived by Abailardus, in the time of holy Bernard,
(as it seems by his writing against him, Vide Gr^tii d^f^ns. cap. 1. and V^scii
respons. cap. 3. ex Socino and aliis.
) and now of late, started again by Socinus, with an advantage of more
liveliness, as it is usual with heresies, when they come to a second, and third
resurrection: For thus they deliver themselves more particularly:

Jesus Christ came into the world on this errand, both to declare unto sinners
the way to eternal life, and to bestow it on them, in case they will follow his
counsel. And for this purpose, he was content to suffer death, that thereby he
might,

1. Seal, confirm, and put out of question, the truth and certainty of his
doctrine.

2. Purchase to himself the right of bestowing eternal life upon them.

3. Persuade them to that, which is necessary for the obtaining of it, to wit,
faith to believe his word, and promise, and sure hope to wait for the
accomplishment of it.

4. Hold forth himself before them a remarkable, matchless example of patience
and obedience.

And whereas the Scripture does frequently ascribe remission, and salvation to
the death of Christ, that (say they) is a figurative speech. They are the
proper effects of his resurrection, and the glory which followed; and are
attributed to his death, only because he must necessarily die, before he could
rise again.

But now, that Christ was so made a curse for us, as to suffer the punishment
due to our sins, in way of a satisfaction to divine justice, and thereby to
redeem us from the curse, this they will flatly deny, and condemn it,
Se^tentia va^d. p^^n (...). D^^na^^ (...) ^la^phemis
as an opinion, that is deceitful, erroneous, and very pernicious; yea false,
absurd, and horribly blasphemous. and it is observable, that when they make use
of any Scripture, either for the strengthening of their own Tenants, or the
answering of Objections brought against them, they do generally turn aside from
the usual, and received signification of the words, and offer violence to the
Text, to make it speak what they please. For to touch a little on the 4 ends
beforementioned.

To the first; Where does the Scripture make the confirmation^ of his Doctrine
the professed adequate end of his sufferings. He says indeed, that he came
into the world, that he might bear witness to the truth; but this most properly
belongs to his prophetical office; Jo. 18.^7.
whereas his death belongs to his priesthood: and besides, his miracles served
more peculiarly for the confirmation of his doctrine.

To the second; Christ had power to forgive sins, even while he lived on
earth, Mat. 9.6. and exercised that power frequently. There was therefore, no
absolute necessity of his death, for the purchasing of a privilege, which he
had in possession already: although it was necessary for the satisfying of
Justice, J^h. 10.28. and 17.2. He died, to purchase for sinners a right to
rec^iv; ^ot for himself a power to give them eternal life.
that mercy might have a free course to give out pardons, which otherwise
could not be.

To the Third; It is credible, that the death of Christ, and such a death as it
was, in all the circumstances of it, should be able to persuade sinners to that
faith, and hope, nay rather, it should be the ready way to diswade, and knock
them off. Luke 21.21.

To the Fourth; it is granted, as a secondary subordinate end, 1 Pet. 2.21. Nec
humil^tatis exempla, nec charitatis insignia, praeter Redemptionis sacramentum
s^nt aliquid Bern.
but does not take away the other, which is the chief and principal. These two
accord well [hee dyed to satisfy for our sins] and [he dyed to to leave us an
example of patience and obedience.] Great is the example of his humility, and
of his charity, but they have no foundation to rest upon, if there be no
redemption.

But to go no further than the Text. There be three expressions, which they
wrest for the supporting, and maintenance of their Error.

1 He was made a curse: True, say they, as he was made sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. that
is, he was judged by men to be a sinner, and he was used accordingly; so he
was accounted a cursed man, and therefore was sentenced to suffer a bodily
death on the Cross, which was a death proper to an accursed person. But this
falls short, for God (says the Apostle) made him to be sin, and consequently a
curse for us. Man was no more but an instrument, sinfully acting what God had
holily purposed, and Christ's voluntarily undertaken. Besides, the Text which is
here cited from Moses, Deuteronomy. 21.23. runs thus [He that is hanged, is the curse
of God, or a curse unto God] which being applied to Christ, can import no less
than this, that God laid upon him our sin, and the punishment due unto it by
the doom of his righteous Law, that the pleasure of the Lord, might be executed
upon him, for answering whatsoever the Law could exact.

Nostra causa nostro bono. Ut a peccatis retrahamur. Nostra v^ce nostro loco.
2 He was made a curse for us, yea say they [for us] that is, for our cause, on
our behalf, for our good, and so he gave himself, he dyed for our sins, that
is, our sins were the occasion of his death, and he died, that we might be
drawn back from sin. We yield all this, but is there no more? Yes assuredly. We
say [for us] that is, in our room and stead, who should else have born the
curse in our own persons, and [for our sins] to wit, as the foregoing meriting
cause thereof; and that satisfaction being made to justice, the curse might not
fall on our heads. The Greek word which is most frequently used in this
argument, (...).
and is rendered [for] although sometimes it be put to note no more, So Romans 5.7.
but the good or profit of another, yet it signifies also in another stead;
and in some places cannot be fitly taken otherwise, as 2 Cor. 5.14. If one dyed
for all, then were all dead, which implies plainly, that the death of that One,
was in stead of the death of All. And when the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.
Was Paul crucified for you? Thereby denying it, he must mean that he was not
crucified in their stead; for he professes elsewhere, that he suffered for the
Church, and for the Elects sake, that is, for their spiritual benefit, as Col.
1.24. 2 Timothy 2.10. But to put all out of doubt, (...).
the Scripture sometimes makes use of another word, which signifies
commutation, or exchange, or being in the place or room of another, and must
necessarily be so taken, when its applied to this business, as Matthew. 20.28. 1 Timothy 2.6. He bare the curse, and gave himself a ransom in our stead.

3 Hereby he has redeemed us from the curse. Being made a curse for us, he
brought us out of the hands of the curse, so that God was moved hereby to set
us free from the guilt and punishment of our sin. Here they bring two things to
darken the clear truth.

1 That the term of Redemption, Apud Grot. in defens. c. 8.
must be taken improperly for a deliverance without price, or satisfaction,
such as that of the Children of Israel from Egypt, whom God redeemed by the
hand of Moses, yet he paid no price, nor gave in consideration, either by
death, or otherwise for the compassing of it.

To this we say, when the Scripture makes Redemption the effect of Christ's
bearing the curse, of his suffering death, of the shedding of his blood, etc.
it can signify no less, than redemption in propriety of speech, that is, the
freeing of poor sinners from the stroke of justice by giving due satisfaction.
This high extraordinary cause should in all reason produce a nobler effect,
than such a loose and frozen gloss gives to it. Yea how does this derogate from
the worth of that glorious benefit, to say it comes at so cheap a rate? As for
the redeeming of Israel by Moses, although it was a type of our redemption by
Christ, yet we know, that the type, and thing typified, do not answer one
another in all things. Christ and Moses are compared as Redeemers, but with a
vast difference, both as to the nature of the thing, and the special means by
which it was effected. That of Moses was only corporal, from the servitude of
the body; This of Christ, is chiefly spiritual from the bondage of eternal
death. Therefore there was no need that Moses should dye for them; and if he
had, as it could have been no way effectual to their spiritual deliverance; so
it might (probably) have been rather destructive to their temporal freedom.
But Christ our Redeemer must necessarily dye for us, else no possibility of our
redemption at all.

Lastly, We find that Christ is called our Ransom, which is never spoken of
Moses; and that is enough to show, that there is an huge distance betwixt them
even in this business of Redemption.

Apud eundem ubi supra.
2 That this Redemption is ascribed to Christ's suffering an accursed death, not
in respect of God, but of us; that is, not that God was moved hereby, as by a
valuable consideration to set sinners at liberty, but only that they might
thereby be brought effectually to the enjoyment of it, by faith, and obedience.

To this we answer, that the bringing of sinners to enjoyment of this benefit,
is not the next, and immediate effect of Christ's death; that belongs to the
application, which supposes Redemption in being; for the thing must be, before
it can be applied.

Now the Scripture does every where make Christ's accursed death the next, and
immediate cause of the benefit of Redemption, but to the application, and
personal possession of this benefit its only a remote cause. There be sundry
others nearer, even in respect of the Redeemer himself, as his Resurrection,
Ascension, Intercession, the publication of it by the Ministry of the Gospel,
the sending of the Spirit to make it effectual. So that, our redemption is
ascribed to Christ's accursed death primarily in reference to God, the Lord and
Lawgiver, that his justice might be satisfied, and but secondarily, and at a
further distance in reference to us, that we might reach to the enjoyment of it.

Much more might be added, but I shall refer you to those godly learned men,
which have purposely confuted them. I have no delight to rake in this dunghill,
nor would I have insisted thus much upon it, but for these two reasons, because,

1 I conceive it to be a fundamental falsehood, undermining the very being of
the Gospel, and pulling down the chiefest pillar of our salvation by Christ.

2 Yet this soul-killing plague having broken out, is dangerously spread abroad
in this wanton licentious age, and too many of all ranks are infected with it.

Yea, there is a strange generation of heretics, called Quakers, lately sprung
up, which have borrowed their abominable opinions, and wild practices from
other sects, and patched them up unhandsomely like a beggars coat. Among other
errors, they broach us this down right Socinianisme, See the perfect Pharisee
Pos. 5.
That Christ in the flesh, with all that he did, and suffered therein, was but
a figure, and nothing but an example, whereby both Masters and Scholars, do
with one blow destroy the satisfaction, and merit of Christ, and consequently
the whole work of our Redemption.

Let us abhor this damnable doctrine, and cleave to the truth of Scripture,
which is delivered in such plain and familiar expressions, as cannot without
too much impudence, and palpable wresting be eluded. Truly, besides many
pregnant Texts in the New Testament, almost the whole fifty third Chapter of
Isaiah may serve for a sufficient confutation of it. They might with a little
dishonor to Jesus Christ speak out, and say flatly, that he died not at all,
as say, that he dyed to a small purpose. But it is no marvel, if they that have
robbed him of the truth of his Godhead, do dispoile him also of the principal
office of Priesthood, and the efficacy of his satisfaction with the choicest
benefits purchased thereby for the salvation of lost sinners.

CHAP. VI. Use 2.
Sect. 1. 1 Information in six particulars.
2 HEnce we may infer matter of Information in sundry particulars.

1 See, and seeing, admire the unspeakable love of God, and of Christ, to
wretched mankind; not only that Christ is made a curse in our stead, but much
more that this strange dispensation should work so noble and glorious an
effect, as Redemption is. Assuredly, both God the Father in giving Christ to be
a curse, and Christ the Mediator in submitting thereunto, had this great end
all along in their eye, and upon their hearts (next to the greatest end of all
the glory of free grace) even the rescuing of poor lost sinners from that
hellish slavery wherein the curse of the Law had entangled them. Oh the rich
love of the Lord our God. It was the fruitful womb which did first conceive,
and then warm, and at length in the fullness of time bring forth this heavenly
birth, Joh. 3.16. 1 John 3.16. and 4.9, 10. Should an earthly Prince disburse a
great sum of money, of his own accord, undesired, for the ransoming of a
company of slaves, which were not only strangers, but also enemies to him, and
his Fathers house being convicted Traitors, and so continuing: this would be
accounted an act of such singular clemency, as could hardly be paralleld by
any report of story. What wonderful loving kindness then is this? that the
Prince of the Kings of the earth, Rev. 1.5. has laid out the price of his
dearest blood for the redemption of the backsliding traitorous brood of Adam,
and is found of them, that sought him not, that never looked after him, Isa.
65.1. Romans 10.20.

2 The work of Redemption is a very costly piece, a business of infinite
charge. The Redeemer must be no meaner person than the Christ of God: the price
to be paid, no lower a price, than the accursed death of the Cross. Might not
the incomparable dignity of the person have dispensed with the means of the
price? or the extraordinary costliness of the price, have over-weighed the
means of the person? so that either a lower price from a person of such eminent
worth, or a meaner person paying such an extraordinary dear price, might have
served the turn? Oh no, neither of these. If the whole world, yea ten thousand
worlds, with all the riches, and treasures of their several Indies had been
laid down upon the nail for this ransom by the greatest Potentate, that ever
the earth knew, they would have been contemned, as falling infinitely short. It
was a most costly Redemption, and so we should account of it. We reckon of our
earthly privileges, Can. 8.7.
liberty, immunities, freedoms, according to the rate which they cost, if we
know they cost a great price, we value them the more. He that said, he had
bought his Roman freedom with a great sum, Act. 22.28. did prize it
accordingly; even so, and much more should we set an high rate upon this choice
spiritual benefit, which cost so vast a sum.

3 The grace of the Gospel is a very precious thing, Out of the eater came
meat, etc. Judge. 14.14.
for it is the purchase of Christ's satisfaction, and the sum and kernel of
the work of Redemption. The curse of the Law did even break his bones, and this
has opened a spring of spiritual marrow and fatness, wherewith the souls of
dry empty sinners might be both filled and satisfied. Were it not for this,
there could be no grace, nor mercy, we should never have heard of any such
thing as the Gospel, to bring the glad tidings of peace, and salvation to the
lost world, but every mothers child of us had continued in the bond of
iniquity, and had suffered the extremity of the curse in our own persons for
ever. For this is the very next bottom, whereupon all Gospel Grace, and
whatsoever is necessary to the salvation of sinners, does stand; and as it were
the soul from which it has both being and breathing. The excellency of the
cause has a strong influence into the effect, to make it excellent also. If we
look upon the nature and frame of man in the first Creation, his body curiously
wrought out of the dust of the earth, his soul breathed into him from heaven,
to be both a living creature, and made after the Image of God, Genesis 1.26. and
2.7. and all this done with a word; we cannot but say, it is a very excellent
and precious work. David stands wondering at it, Psalm. 139.14, 15. How much
more excellent and precious is the work of grace, which is the fruit of
Redemption (our second Creation?) for the effecting whereof, the Lord did not
only, Let it be, but (as if that were not sufficient) the second person must
lay aside his glory, and take upon him the form of a servant, and not only
bear our nature, but also our sin and curse, even to the death Phil. 2.7, 8. By
this we should estimate the exceeding great worth of that grace which is
brought unto us by the revelation of the Gospel. If some good things of nature
be precious, much more are those of grace, Deuteronomy. 33.1. etc. Prove. 3.14, 15.
And if we cannot but wonder at some of the eminentest works of nature, how
much more cause have we to admire the beauty and glory of that great work of
grace, which the Apostle calls mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. See 1 Pet. 1.12.

4 God will have a Church. Although Adam, and all his posterity revolted from
God, and ran away into the tents of Satan his utter enemy, to his dishonor,
and their own ruin, yet for all that he has a design to fetch back, and
recover a number of them to make them his own people, and thereby to glorify
the riches of his grace toward them in an eminent measure; Me thinks I hear
the Lord speaking on this manner, What? has the crooked Serpent of hell served
me thus? Has he enticed Adam unto rebellion against me? and cheated him into
the curse of my Law? Alas poor man! I pity thee, that thou have suffered thy
self to be thus ensnared. How art thou fallen from thy dignity? Into what a
gulf of perdition have thou implunged all thy posterity? Ier. 48.30.
But I know Satan, his pride, his malice, and his envy, that he would not leave
me a people on the earth to serve me; I know his wrath, but it shall not be so,
his lies shall not so effect it. I will take a speedy course to befool him in
his own plot, I will have a people that shall be for my praise in despite of
him. Having therefore predestined from eternity a considerable number of this
forlorn generation, and finding them now among the pots, covered all over with
filth and shame, through their Apostasy, his infinite wisdom devises a way to
recover them out of captivity. He gives the Lord Jesus out of his own bosom,
tha^ by taking upon him the curse due to them, he might ransom them from the
curse, and separate them from the lost world which lies in wickedness, and
under the power of Satan, and so form them for himself, that they might show
forth his praise, Isa. 43.21. These are the very matter, whereof the Church
consists (I mean the invisible Church) which may be defined a chosen company of
the posterity of Adam, whom God has purchased with his own blood out of every
Kindred, and Tongue, and People, Mat 16.18.
and Nation to be a peculiar people to himself, Act. 20.28. Rev. 5.9. Tit.
2.14. Thus out of the ashes of this ruined world, God raises up to himself a
glorious Phoenix Ephesians. 5.26. A Church which shall never dye, but shall be
established for ever, Psalm. 102.28. and 125.1.

5 The Church is very dear and precious in the eyes of the Lord Jesus. They are
the purchase of his own blood, and thereby are become his peculiar people. The
costliness of any commodity, puts upon it a suitable preciousness, endearing it
to the person which bare the cost of it. Jacob served a hard service for
Rachel, and that inhanced her worth in his heart, and increased his love to
her, so that the days seemed to him but a few, Genesis 29.20. Michal, David's wife
cost him two hundred fore-skins of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 18.27. A great
adventure, an high exploit. This doubtless rendered her the more dear to him,
which appears by his peremptory requiring her, after she was unjustly taken
away from him, and had been some years another man's wife, Probably seven years
2 Samuel 3.13, 14, etc. Jesus Christ served a very hard service, and wrought a
very great exploi^ that he might purchase unto himself a Church to be his
Spouse, and having compassed her with much difficulty, he looks upon her as his
Sister, his Love, his Dove, his fair One, yea all fair, the fairest among
women, the One, the only One, the choice One, his heart is ravished with her,
Cant. 4.9. she is as the poor man's little Ewe Lamb, that lay in his bosom, and
was unto him as a Daughter, 2 Samuel 12.31. A Kingdom, or City, won in battle,
with confused noise, Hephzibah Isa. 62.4. Multo sanguine, ac vulneribus ea
victoria stetit.
and garments rolled in blood, Isa. 9.5. is so much more dear to the
Conqueror, because it cost so dear. The Kingdom of heaven, the City of the
great King is conquered out of the the hands of Satan at a very dear rate. It
cost the Lord Jesus strong crying and tears, yea much blood, and many wounds;
therefore surely it is very near to his heart, and precious in his sight, Isa.
43.4.

6 The condition of the invisible Church, and all the members of the Lords
chosen people, is incomparably happy. They are the only renowned Society in
the world, for they are the Lords Redeemed ones. This glorious design, when
once it takes place in poor lost sinners, and is laid in their bosoms, puts
them into a glorious estate. We may say of the Church, as Moses of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou, who is like unto thee, O people, saved by the
Lord, etc.

That we may take the length, and breadth of this happiness, let us look upon
Redemption, in its 1 Properties. 2 Benefits. 3 Privileges.

Sect. 2. Three properties of Redemption, and three Benefits issue from it.
1 REdemption by Christ, has these three excellent Properties.

1 Its free and gracious. As the Israelites sold themselves to their corporal
enemies for naught, so we became slaves to our spiritual enemies without price,
and as they, so we are redeemed without money, Isa. 52.3. Although it cost
Jesus Christ the price of blood in an accursed death, yet it was according to
the riches of Gods grace, Ephesians. 1.7. In regard of Christ our Surety, it was not
free, but dearly bought; for as Almighty God, the person offended, did require
satisfaction to be made to Justice; so Christ undertaking for us, answered his
demands accordingly. But in all other respects it is free. The appointing of
such a thing, as Redemption for lost sinners, the providing of such a Surety to
undertake the work, the managing of it all along in such a way, as it might not
fail of its accomplishment, the accepting of it when it was done, for full
satisfaction, the particular application of it to the needs of all the Elect,
all these were acts of free grace and mercy. Poor soul, the Lord does not
expect the worth of one farthing from thee, toward the purchase of thy
Redemption; Look thou upon it, as the mere fruit of rich grace.

2 It is full and plenteous, Psalm. 130.7. Jesus Christ has gone
thorough-stitch with it, he has done it to the full, for there is no defect or
flaw in it at all. He does not work one, or some few parts of it, making an
entrance for us, and leaving us to grapple with the rest, to bear the heat and
burden of the day, and to wrestle out as we can; but he makes complete work of
it, he redeems us from all our iniquities, he delivers us out of the hands of
all our enemies, he takes off from our backs the whole curse, and sets us in a
state of true freedom. Therefore in the bringing of it home to poor sinners,
they are said to receive abundance of grace, Romans 5.17. 1 Timothy 1.14. I grant,
it is not made out to us at present in all the parts and degrees of it, but it
shall be entire and perfect in heaven; there shall not an hoof be left behind.
Take it in the whole from first to last, and it is every way plenteous, he will
save to the uttermost, Heb. 7.25.

3 It is eternal, and without period, Heb. 9.12. The liberty whereinto Christ
Jesus brings the Elect, is permanent, it shall never turn into bondage, it
abides irrevocable, and unchangeable to all eternity. The Jews which had sold
themselves to be servants, were to be set free at the Jubilee, yet that
Jubilee lasted but for one year, therefore the same persons might afterward
become bondmen again; but this acceptable year of the Lords Redeemed, Isa.
61.2. and 63.4. is an everlasting year, it shall never end, therefore they
shall never be subject to bondage any more. When the Lord would comfort the
Jews with hopes of a return from Babylon, he usually annexeth Evangelical
promises, respecting the deliverance of poor sinners from the slavery of Satan,
whereof that captivity was a type; some of which promises do plainly express,
the perpetuity of that spiritual freedom, which they shall enjoy, Isa. 35.10.
Isa. 51.6. and 60.19, 20. Jer. 31.11, 12. and 32.39. Ezekiel. 37.25, 26. and
39.29, and these shall begin to be fulfilled most visibly at the calling of the
Jews.

2 Redemption by Christ does beget, and bring with it many rare spiritual
benefits. It is a rich Mine, containing a mass of treasure of unspeakable
worth. Could we dig into it, we might find variety of the choicest pearls, in
comparison whereof, the most orient pearls, that this world can afford, are no
better than dross. What the Lord said once to his Anointed Cyrus, a temporal
deliverer of his people, the same he has spoken much more to his Anointed
Jesus, the Churches great Redeemer. I will give thee the treasures of darkness,
the hidden riches of secret places, Isa. 43.3. These are the unsearchable
riches of Christ, Suscepit mala nostra ut ^hueret bonasua, Aug.
Ephesians. 3.8. The things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. 1 Cor. 2.9.
He has taken upon him our evil things, that he might bestow upon us his good
things.

That we may rightly understand the nature of these several benefits, in
reference to the mother-benefit from whence they spring, I shall briefly make
way to them by these three considerations.

1 The Redemption that is in Christ, has in it not only satisfaction,
Impunitas, and pramium
but also merit; from the former arises freedom from deserved punishment;
from the latter the conferring of everlasting reward. Hence it is, that some
benefits consists in deliverance from evil, and others in bestowing of good
things.

2 As the woeful condition of the sons of men through sin is made up of two
sorts of evils, some referring to what they are in Gods account, others to
what they are in themselves; answerably the condition, whereinto Redemption
brings them, consists of two sorts of benefits. 1 Relative, importing a change
in Gods account of them. 2 Real, standing in an alteration of qualities in
themselves.

3 The benefits which flow from Redemption, do not immediately follow the
sufferings of Christ on the Cross, so as thereby, and thenceforth to be
actually existent, and to enure to all the elect, but are only made feasible
by them, yet so, as to be communicated infallibly in due time. They are
contained in the womb of redemption, but yet their several births are according
to the time of life; I mean, they are in it virtually as the fruit in the seed,
but not actually laid in the bosoms of sinners, till redemption it self be
applied unto them. I may compare the whole fabric of the salvation of sinners
to a mighty tree; the root of it is upward in heaven, the decree of it
election; the boil of it is redemption, having many spiritual benefits, as so
many branches growing out of it, virtually contained in the boil, breaking
forth, and deriving their several fruits to poor sinners at the time of their
conversion.

These things being premised, let us take a view of them, as they are scattered
here and there in the Scriptures; I shall present them in that order, which I
conceive to be most proper.

These things being premised, let us take a view of them, as they are scattered
here and there in the Scriptures, I shall present them in that order, which I
conceive to be most proper.

Falling out with God. was the beginning of our Apostasy; and Reconciliation
is the beginning of our actual recovery.
1. Reconciliation: This is so near a kin to Redemption, that for substance, it
is the same, differing only in some respects. As treason, murder, or the like
crime committed against the Law of the Magistrate, does not only make the
offender liable to the penalty of the Law, but also sets them at a distance,
and provokes the wrath of the Magistrate against him: Even so, the sin of man
did not only make him a prisoner under the Curse of the Law of God, but
brought on a woeful enmity betwixt God, and him. The Scripture often presents
the Lord displeased with sinners, and gives all men (as they stand in their
first birth) this Livery, that they are children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and his
wrath is revealed from heaven against sin. Romans 1.18. yea, the Lord is said to
hate not only sin, but sinners, Psalm. 11.5. Hos. 9.15. and they are called
haters of God, Psalm. 5.5. (...) Dei osores, Deo exosi Pareus* sic Theophyl.
Deuteronomy. 5.9. Romans 1.30. But now by the Redemption which is in Christ, as the
Curse is taken off, so the enmity also is slain, wrath is turned away,
reconciliation is wrought. The Messiah was to make reconciliation for iniquity,
Dan, 9.24. which is as much as that. 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ,
reconciling the world to himself. Being enemies, we are reconciled, by his
death, Romans 5.10. and when poor sinners, being by sin enemies, and strangers,
do receive Jesus Christ, then in him they receive the Atonement, Romans 5.11. so
that now they are actually reconciled. Col. 1.20, 21. (...).
and set in an estate of firm amity and friendship with the glorious God,
through the blood of the Covenant. In the first Adam he disclaimes us as base
Rebels, but in the second he owne's us, as reconciled friends. Let the Lord's
Redeemed ones lift up their heads, and know their happiness. Jesus Christ has
slain the enmity, which was betwixt God and you. This price of Reconciliation
has broken down the wall of separation; and although the Lord be still a
consuming fire, marching against the briars and thorns, and burning them
altogether, yet even then he says to his vineyard, Fury is not in me. Isa.
27.4.

2. Remission of sins. This goes hand in hand with reconciliation. 2 Cor.
5.19. As the violation of the Law of an earthly Governor, brings upon the
offender (besides the Governor's displeasure) an obligation to punishment, and
when that obligation is voyded, then he is said to be pardoned: so man's
disobedience against the great Lord of heaven and earth, did oblige him to such
punishment as the royal Law had threatened; but Christ our Surety, by bearing it
for us, has voided that obligation, and so we are discharged from it, and in
this stands our Pardon. Therefore the Apostle joins Redemption, and Remission
together, as being (upon the matter) both one. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. and
expressly ascribes them both to his blood, as the meritorious cause.

Vide Grot. defens. cap. 6. and Ludov. Luc. Assert. contra Mich. Gittich. arg.
Iun. Non idem sed tantundem.
Whence (by the way) we may discover the weakness of that Socinian Argument,
against Redemption by Christ's satisfaction, because our Redemption is called
Remission. For where satisfaction is made, (say they) by undergoing due
punishment, or paying a valuable price, there is no place for pardon. But
surely the Holy Ghost knows better then we how to speak properly. It Is
Redemption by his blood, and yet it is forgiveness of our sins. And their
argument has more show then weight: For this satisfaction was not made by
paying the very same, but the as much, not the proper strict debt, which the
Law changes upon the sinner, but the full value or weight of it, with some
alteration. The Law says, The soul that sins shall die: even the self same
person, and it must be death eternal, because the sinner can never pay the
uttermost farthing. Had this been, there had been no place for pardon. Psa.
69.4.
But now Christ comes in, and voluntarily undertakes to restore the things,
which he took not away, that sinners, which took them away, might be set free.
Suppose a subject has committed a crime, deserving in rigor of Law perpetual
imprisonment; if now the King's Son be content to undergo 6 months
imprisonment in his stead, which (considering the quality of the person) is as
much, as a mean man's suffering it during life; the King indeed may refuse this
way of satisfaction, because it is not the very letter of the Law; but if he
accept it, what does it import less, then a pardon to the subject? This is the
Case. The Son of God giving himself a sacrifice for sin, does in a short time
wrestle through, and master those sufferings, which would have mastered
sinners, and hold them under to all eternity. Now although Almighty God, the
great Lawgiver might have refused this kind of payment, as not being the very
same, which the Covenant of works exacteth; yet having not only consented, but
devised and settled it, as the most covenient way for the security of sinners,
and the manifestation of his glory, thereupon he is well pleased with it, being
as full satisfaction to justice, as if the sinner had satisfied in his own
person. So that the Lord's accepting of it upon this account is so far from
excluding remission, that it rather makes way for it, and gives it a being.
This appears further by the Apostles ruled case, Heb. 9.22. See Jun. paral. and
Pareus.
without shedding of blood no remission, which holds both in Legal sacrifices,
and in the great sacrifice of Christ, typified thereby, as the scope of the
place shows. But to return,

The Law charge the curse upon the sons of men. The Lord Jesus takes the
curse upon himself, and thereby makes an end of sins, for this was one of the
works, which he was to do, Dan. 9.24. the debt being paid, the book is crossed,
the bond is cancelled. No forfeiture to be taken, no penalty to be undergone.
Let wretched sinners take notice of their happiness in this also. Christ was
sent to purge away all your iniquities. 1 Ioh. 1.7. Psalm. 65.3.
Redemption blots out all your Items, and lays up pardons in heaven for your
use, to be ready for you, in the time of need.

3. Justification of our persons. Obligation to punishment does imply
liableness to accusation, and condemnation for the offense, which deserves such
punishment. The righteous Law of God finding man a transgressour; and so
unrighteous, threatens death as his due: And in order to the inflicting of it,
stands up as an Accuser, and passes sentence against him. Now Christ, being
made sin, and a curse in the sinners stead, does thereby with one, and the
same labor, both set him free from the punishment of sin, and acquit him from
the accusation, and condemnation of the Law: Whereupon he may plead, that
although the demerit of his sin does cry aloud for punishment, yet it is not
due to his person, because Jesus Christ has borne it for him, and made full
satisfaction to justice, Romans 3.24. The Apostle makes justification an effect
of the Redemption, which is in Christ Jesus. Dan. 9.24. the Messiah was to
bring in everlasting righteousness, Jer. 23.5, 6. a righteous Branch is
promised to be raised up to David, and his name shall be called Jehovah, our
Righteousness. And thus he is made of God to us Righteousness. 1 Cor. 1.30.
When the offense is taken away by a pardon, the person is accounted righteous.
Therefore the not imputing of sin, and the imputing of righteousness go
together, as it appears by the Apostles explication of the Prophet David's
meaning, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Romans 4.6, 7, 8. God sees no iniquity in Jacob, and
when the sins of Judah are sought for, they shall not be found, Jer. 50.20.
understand this not in regard of the inordinacie and blameableness of the acts,
nor yet simply, in reference to the just desert of sin considered in it self
(for these are of the very nature of sin, and cannot be separated from it) but
in respect of the particular guilt, and punishment of those persons, which
being taken away, they do thereupon stand right in the Court of heaven. We see
it here in Courts below, if nothing come in against a man, if there be no
accuser, he is quit, and stands as innocent in point of Law, as if he had not
been questioned: So, when Christ has by his satisfaction disabled the Law,
from giving in any evidence against the poor sinner, he then is absolved, and
stands clear before the great Judge: when the Lord has found a ransom, then he
does not only say, Deliver the sinner, but he shows unto him his uprightness,
that is, he makes him partaker of the righteousness of Christ, Job 33.23, 24.
etc.
and so looks upon him as righteous, through his satisfaction. This was one
end, why the Lord made Christ sin for us, 2 Cor. 5, 21. Let the poor convinced
soul take notice of this also. Thou feel much guilt on the spirit, thou
groanest under it, and fear damnation: but here is thine acquittance. When
the poor woman's accusers were slunk away, Christ said to her, Woman, has no
man condemned thee, neither do I, John 8.10, 11. so says the Lord to thee: See
poor soul, the Law says nothing against thee: the mouth of thine accusers are
stopped, none can condemn thee, neither will I: yea, thou may make the same
challenge, that the Apostle make's, Who shall lay any thing to my charge? God
justifies, etc. Romans 8.33, 34.

Sect. 3. Other four benefits flowing from Redemption.
4. Adoption. by Creation we were the sons of God; we bare his image, as a son
bears the image of his father, Luke 3.38. but yielding to Sathan's temptation,
and affecting a new fancied Divinity, we fell from God, lost the title, and
dignity of sons, forfeited all our birthright, and made our selves no better
then the bratts of hell. But the son of God manifested in the flesh, has not
only washed off our sin in the guilt, and curse due to us, but has restored
us to the dignity of children. This was one of those high ends, which the Lord
had in his eye, when he sent him in that humbled posture, to redeem us, it was,
that we might receive the adoption of sons, Gal. 4.4, 5. The Apostle Paul
reckoning up eight several honors, which God had conferred upon the people of
the Jews, wherein they excelled all other nations, he sett's adoption first, as
the most eminent, Romans 9.4. according to that Exodus 4.22. Israel is my son,
even my first born. This being but an external dignity, to continue for a time
till the partition wall should be broken down, was a shadow, and resemblance of
that Gospel-honour, which we have by the work of Redemption, even the right, or
dignity to be the sons of God. Jo. 1.12. the Congregation of the first born,
Heb. 12.23. and if children, then heirs yea joint heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17.
for being now in Christ, and made partakers of his righteousness, we have
fellowship also with him in his Sonship, Gal. 3.26. This is a fruit of the
abundant grace of Christ, and an high advance of the work of Redemption
applied. If the Lord be pleased to have pity on base runagate prodigalls, he
might have bought us out into the condition of hired servants; that had been
favor far beyond expectation: But to adopt us into his family, Luke 15.19, 22,
23. Dignitas quaedam sablimis. Ames.
to kill the fatted calf for us, to put upon us the best robe, to set us at his
table, and to grace us with the honor of sons, yea heirs of God, a better
estate than Adam lost, what an high dignity is this? behold what manner of
Love, the Father has bestowed on us; and admire it, 1 Jo. 3.1, 2. Indeed it
does not yet appear, what we shall be: our happiness lies under a cloud, veiled
from the eyes of the world, and in a great part from our selves also; but yet
we are, even here the Lord's first born, and the glory of this condition shall
one day be revealed in despite of hell, and the world. Judge not your selves
miserable, because your neighbors so account you: but know that your Redeemer
has purchased your enfranchisement, and now the Lord takes you for his sons,
and daughters, never to be disinherited, or cast out any more.

5. Sanctification. The first Adam having wantonly engaged in a rebellion
against his Maker, did thereby not only implunge himself, and all his, into
the gulf of Gods curse, but also forfeit that matchless Jewel of his Image,
which was infinitely too good to be prosticuted to his inordinate lust. Whence
follows a woeful change in our natures, by a depravation of the whole frame of
our souls, in all the powers of them, and making us like unto Satan. So that
now we are every way dead (as to our spiritual estate), both by sin, in the
loss of God's favor, which is better then life; and in sin by the loss of that
conformity to him, which once we enjoyed. But our great redeemer frees us from
this death, also by Sanctification. This was one end of Christ's giving himself
for the Church, that he might sanctify, and cleanse it. Ephesians. 5.25, 26. his
death has a sovereign virtue, to work the death of sin, as his life, has to
work the life of righteousness. Romans 6.4, 5, 6. He is made of God to us
Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. and now as there is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ, so they are set free from the Law of sin, and death, by that law
of the spirit of life, which is in Christ; and all this arises from God's
sending him to condemn sin in the flesh. Romans 8.1, 2, 3. Christ was put to
death in the flesh, and for a requital he puts to death the flesh, that is, the
body of sin in us. The law laid the Curse upon him, and he having borne it,
turn's it upon the Law of sin, which is in our members, and blasts that rotten
stump, saying to it, as once he said to the unprofitable fig tree, Let no fruit
grow on thee henceforth for ever, Matthew. 21.19.
and seting a new plant of holiness in the soul, to bring forth fruit unto God.
Indeed we see it not yet fully done, but the Curse is gone out against the old
man, and he is wasting, and shall be utterly destroyed in time. Let the Lords
people see their happiness in this also. Poor soul, thou cryest out unclean,
unclean, I have a very foul nasty heart, my soul is a very stie of all
uncleanness, I am carnal, fold under sin, Romans 7.14.23.34.
I can do no good thing; Oh miserable man, who shall deliver me? why? Christ
thy Redeemer has made thee a new creature, he has put into thee a principle
of holiness, and he is still at work in thee, weakening sin, by degrees, so that
though it will dwell in thee, yet it shall not over-master thee, nor bring thee
under its feet. Corruption shall go down, and grace shall get up more, and
more. The Lord Jesus will not spare either pains, or cost in prosecuting this
business. he will wear of that filthy slough of the old nature, and the image
of hell, and make thee partaker of the divine nature, that thou may be
conformed to his own image, Sigh, and breath after it.

6. Final Redemption. Which stands in the total removal, and absence of all
misery, and imperfection, begun at death, to be perfected, at the
resurrection. The Apostle calls it, the Redemption of our bodies. Romans 8.23.
(as I conceive) for these reasons,

1. To distinguish it from the first, and great act, wrought by Christ on the
Cross, to wit, Redemption by way of merit, whereon the main stress of the
business lay, which was not intended so much for the body, as the soul, to
deliver it from guilt, and curse.

2. To intimate that part of Redemption, which we shall be partakers of by
death, whereby we shall be set free, from manifold evils, and annoyances, which
compass us about, and molest us, while we are in the body.

3. Because the accomplishment of this benefit at the last day, shall be more
visible in the body. The souls of righteous men, even before the
resurrection, are fully delivered from all bondage, wanting only that
perfection, which stands in their union to their bodies. These lying in their
graves, as in prison under misery, shall then be united again to their souls,
and so both shall be equally sharers (according to their several capacities,)
in this final Redemption.

So then, this is a certain effect, or consequent of the great work, wrought by
Jesus Christ, the price is paid for the whole and full deliverance shall come
in the day of Resurrection; which is therefore called the day of Redemption.
Ephesians. 4.30. and Christ is made of God to us. Redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30. At that
day, (oh most desirable day) there shall be a clear riddance from all those
unwelcome guests, which sin has brought into the world. As 1. from the evils
of the body, or outward man, all crosses incident to our imperfect condition
here, whether attendants on mortality, or corrections for our wanderings, and
miscarriages, or sufferings for righteousness.

2. from the evils of the soul, or inward man, from sin, with all the rags, and
tatters of it, which being fast on us here; from the temptations of Satan, and
the inticements of an evil world, wherewith we are encompassed; and also from
the second death, the wrath to come, in the damnation of hell. Glad^us mort^s
retusus, vulnerat adhu^^* sed c^^^a p^^^cu^um. Calv. in (...)
The first death indeed will hold us under a long time, but at length it shall
be destroyed. 1 Cor. 15.26. and in the mean time it is but as a sword without
edg, which may wound a little, yet without danger, it shall do us no hurt, but
be as a wicked door, to let our souls into immortality; and the grave with the
corruption of it, shall be as a bed of spices to perfume our bodies, and to
prepare them for the resurrection. Briefly, whatsoever there is in all the
world, that can be called evil, we shall be set free from it all forever, all
imperfection both of parts, and degrees shall be done away: Matt. 22.30. 1 Cor.
13.10.
yea, Gods own ordinances, as marriage, preaching, and sacraments, which (are
given as remedies of weakness here) shall take their leave, as things whereof
we shall have no further need, or use. Let the Lords redeemed lift up their
heads, and see this part of their happiness afarr off. Your souls and bodies
both lie under a thousand wearisome vanities, in this pilgrimage; but your
redemption draws nigh, when there shall be no more sorrow, nor crying, but
all tears shall be wiped away, from your eyes. Rev. 21.7. never to know, or
taste of misery any more.

(...).
7. Full Glorification. We have some foretasts of it in this life, therefore the
Apostle speaks of it, as a thing done in those that are justified, Romans 8.30.
when God gives poor believing souls assurance of his love, sense of his favor,
and fills the heart with joy and peace, then he begins to glorify them.
Therefore this joy is called unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. these
are a choice portion of the first fruits of the spirit. Romans 8.23. we shall
reap the whole harvest of glory in heaven. Its called by way of Eminency, the
salvation of our souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. Redemption, and the former benefits flowing
from it, are salvation begun, and continued, for we are saved here Ephesians. 2.8. 2
Timoth 1.9. but this shall be salvation consummate.

The Scripture sets forth this benefit by variety of appellations, as Eternal
life, Matthew. 25.46. Everlasting habitations, Luke 16.9. Paradise, Luke 23.43.
The recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26. A Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. A
Crown of glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. The glory which is to be
revealed in us, or into us, Romans (...), ^^to us N^n n^m ast^b^mus q as^inanes
and vacui Spectateres nec g^oria quasi extriae s^cus revelab^tur n^b^ sed in
nobis Bernard.
8.18. For we shall not stand as idle spectators, looking upon it, as a thing
without us, but we shall be possessours of it within us, the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 1.11. The inheritance of
the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. and the riches of the glory of it, Ephesians. 1.18.
Yea an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and which withers not away, 1
Pet. 1.4. And on this account the Apostle calls it the Adoption, Romans 8.23.
because that shall be the time of our entering into the full possession of the
Kingdom, which is prepared for us, and unto which we are entitled by
adoption. It was a main end of Christ's giving himself for the Church, that at
length he might present it to himself a glorious Church without spot or
wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.25, 27. And the Apostle reasoning from reconciliation by
Christ's death, to salvation by his life, Romans 5.10. intimates, that this is a
necessary consequent of that. This estate shall be the perfection of all
created contentments. Here shall be riches, which cannot be plundered,
treasures which corrupt not, pleasures which vanish not; whatsoever is truly
desirable which men enjoy severally (some this, some that) in this world;
heaven has all these, and infinitely much more, in a far more excellent manner,
and measure to bestow on every one of the Lords Redeemed. It shall be a full
age of communion with God, in knowledge and holiness; the whole man shall be
made partaker of unspeakable glory, and filled with all the fullness of God to
all eternity. Here is now the top of all. If we have our part in this
Redemption, 1 Cor. 13.12 1 Io. 3.2. two parallel texts.
let us stand a while, and consider, what great things the Lord does for us. We
read of Abraham, that he sent away Hagar and Ishmael her son with bread, and a
bottle of water (and that by Gods own appointment) because the Son of the
bondwoman must not be heir with Isaac, Genesis 21.10, 12, 14. And after that
Isaac had been rescued from death by the offering up of a Ram in his stead,
Genesis 22.13. Abraham growing old, gave small gratuities to the sons of the
Concubines, and sent them away from Isaac, but unto him he gave all that he
had; the inheritance was reserved for him, Genesis 25.5, 6. You that are ransomed
from the curse by Jesus Christ the great Ram of Consecrations, you only are the
Lords Isaac's, the children of the promise; The Ancient of days measures out
to the men of the world, (the servants of sin) some pittances of his good
things, temporal blessings, for their subsistence here below, but you are they,
that shall go away with the Inheritance; It is your Fathers good pleasure to
give you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. Oh then, let us contemn all worldly glory,
let it fall out of our hands, and hearts, and let us rejoice in the hope of
this heavenly glory, Romans 5.2.

These are the rare spiritual benefits, which Redemption brings forth (seven
fair Daughters of one blessed Mother.) Look upon them, and behold their beauty.
Are they not exceeding fair? Incomparably lovely? Did you ever see any beauty
like unto their beauty? Oh that we could all fall in love with them, that we
might never rest, till we get an interest in them, to enjoy them in their
goodness and sweetness, both here, and hereafter for ever.

Sect. 4. Four precious privileges of actual Redemption.
3 REdemption by Christ, invests those that are partakers of it in sundry
precious privileges. The benefits before mentioned give us a being, and
standing in the state of grace. These concern our well-being, and help to make
our condition both more honorable, and more comfortable: For they are
secondary effects of the Cross of Christ, and his Legacies left to his friends,
wherein the world has neither part, nor portion. Let us make a little inquiry
after them, and take a short taste of some of them for our use.

1 It makes us truly and properly blessed. The Apostle assures us of this in
the next verse [That the blessing of Abraham might come on us Gentiles through
Jesus Christ] God had engaged himself to Abraham by express Covenant, Genesis
22.18.
that in his seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed, Genesis 22.18.
that is, in the seed of the Woman, bruising the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. This
blessed seed Christ Jesus, should destroy all Satan's power, which he had over
sinners, by means of sin, and the curse, and thereby render them really
blessed. And certainly those, and only those are singularly blessed, which are
made partakers of this Redemption. All other blessedness is but a show, a
shadow, a complement, scarcely deserving the name of blessedness. At the best,
the world can hold forth, only some poor shreds, or scraps, but the soul, and
the marrow of it is here. The Elect are happily carried by the hand of their
strong Redeemer from Mount Ebal, over the valley to Mount Gerizim, Psalm. 115.15
while their neighbors are left behind under the curse. They are the Lords
Jacobs which get the blessing from Esau, for they are called to inherit a
blessing, 1 Pet. 3.9. See a notable Text for this, Isa. 19.23, 24, 25. which
tells us that in aftertimes, when the Gentiles, Egypt and Assyria shall be
brought into the fellowship of the Gospel with Israel, then the Lord will
solemnly bless them, as being his inheritance (even by purchase) and they shall
be a blessing; yea all that see them, shall acknowledge them, that they are the
seed which the Lord has blessed, Isa. 61.1.9. Who are they that shall be thus
acknowledged? even Captives, to whom the Lord Jesus proclaims liberty. And who
are they, that shall make this acknowledgement? All that see them, even
strangers, and such as have no share in it, as Laban, Genesis 24.31. Saul, 1 Samuel
15.13. and Balaam, Numb. 23.26. This is the prime privilege, and has an
influence into the rest.

2 By the grace of Redemption, we become a special, a peculiar people to the
Lord above all other people, Deuteronomy. 7.6. Tit. 2.14. This follows upon the
former, being a choice branch of blessedness, Psalm. 33.12. When a man has paid
a great ransom for some poor Captives, he challenges them for his own, and
they account themselves not their own, nor any others, but only his that has
bought them; so the Lord says to the Redeemed, You are mine, Exodus 19.5, 6.
Mal. 3.17. and they echo again to him, Lord we are only thine, Psalm. 119.95.
Cant. 6.3. and 7, 10. Hos 2.23.
The Redeemer himself owns all those whom the Father had given him, to be
peculiarly theirs, Joh. 17.9, 10. St. Paul insists much on this privilege upon
the very same ground. Ye are not your own, but the Lords, for ye are bought
with a price, Romans 14.8, 9. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Oh let us lift up our eyes, and
consider, what an excellent privilege this is, to be the Lords, and only his;
to be a Garden enclosed, a Spring shut up, a Fountain sealed for him, and to
his use only, Cant. 4.12. to be graven upon the palms of his hands, Isa.
49.16. to be a people near unto the Lord, Psalm. 148.14. What can we desire
more? Beloved Christians, It is not material, in what condition thou art in, as
to men, whether high, or low, rich, or poor; if you be in the number of the
Lords ransomed ones, you are his, and you may humbly glory in it. How do some
men pride themselves in their relations and dependances? I am such a man's son,
brother, cousin-german, tenant, servant, etc. Poor matters to boast of in
comparrison of this, to be one of the Lord Jewels, or a golden vessel in his
house, while many are looked upon, as base, contemptible rubbish, and wholly
laid aside.

3 Our Redeemer is in heaven at Gods right hand, carrying on the work, that it
may not fail, but be effectual to all the Elect. Oh glorious privilege! He is
at work,

1 For those of them, that are still under the curse, to whom this benefit is
not yet brought home. He made intercession for the transgressors, having first
born their sins, Isa. 53.12. this he did while he was on earth, he prayed for
them that crucified him, Luke 23.34. Father forgive them, etc. and in that
Prayer, which he put up so solemnly before his passion, he makes requests for
those that should believe hereafter, Joh. 17.20.21. Non humiliter supplicando
quasi genibus flexis, sed gloriose representande, etc. Ames Medul. l. 1. c. 23.
And what he did on earth, he does much more in heaven, although not in the
same manner, but in such a way as agrees to a glorified estate; not by falling
down on his knees in humble supplications, but by presenting his sufferings
with the satisfaction and merit of them, and procuring at the hands of his
Father, the actual application of them to poor sinners, for their conversion
and salvation: according to that, Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me, and I will give thee
the heathen for thine inheritance, etc. It was by virtue of his prayer on the
Cross, that so many thousands were brought in (as the first fruits) immediately
after his Ascension; and it is by virtue of his intercession in heaven, that
the whole harvest of the Elect shall be brought in also in all succeeding
generations.

2 For those that are actually made partakers of this grace of Redemption: He
appears continually before God to plead their cause. Aaron had a brestplate of
Judgment, wherein were set twelve precious stones, with the names of the
twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel, engraven upon them, that he might bear
them upon his heart, when he went into the holy place, for a memorial before
the Lord, Exodus 28.15.-29. So our Lord Jesus, the High Priest of our
profession, has the names of all his redeemed people, as signets on his heart,
and presents them continually to his Father in heaven, that upon the account of
his All-sufficient Sacrifice offered for them, he may persuade and prevail
with him, for all necessary supplies of grace in all their concernments, to
continue them in their reconciled condition, to give them daily strength to
obey him, to issue out pardons for their daily slips, (...) In opposition to
Satan, who is, (...). Rev. 12.10.
1 John 2.1, 2. (He that is our Propitiation, is also our Advocate with the
Father) and to hold them close to him, so that not one of them shall perish,
but they shall all arrive at the happy haven of eternal glory. All this was
prefigured in the Law. The High Priest, having first offered a Goat for the
whole Congregation of Israel, must come the same day into the Holy of Holies,
and bring the blood with him, and sprinkle it on, and before the Mercy-seat,
withal burning Incense, that a cloud might arise and cover it; that by thus
doing on one solemn day every year, he might make an Atonement for all their
sins, Lev. 16.15, 16.-33, 34. Even so Jesus Christ our High Priest, having
given up himself a sacrifice for the sins of the world, and thereby obtained
eternal Redemption, entered into heaven, and there appears with his blood, to
make Intercession through the merit of it, for guilty sinners, sprinkling their
consciences with it to purge them from dead works, Heb. 9.12.-14. to render
them accepted by the Incense of his prayers, and to manage the whole business
of their salvation to the end. Christ our Surety carries the price of our
Redemption to heaven, and renders it in his Fathers house. See here righteous
Father, (says he) this is the ransom for lost Mankind, I have brought the
full sum, my will is, that it shall be effectual, both to deliver those that
are still captives, and to bring those home thou have given me infallibly to
salvation. Thus ou^ redemption by Christ becoming a Curse for us, was not only
fully satisfactory to justice, (...). A savor of rest, Genesis 8.21. Numb. 28.2.
but also an offering and sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. Oh
what an happiness is this! Dear heart, thou have a fast friend in the Court,
who is both able and willing to look to thy cause, and to follow thy business,
that it shall not miscarry, thou need not fear, but he will save thee to the
uttermost, Heb. 7.25.

4 Our Redeemer has purchased of his Father the gift of his holy Spirit, that
he may bestow it on all the Elect, Having purchased it by h^s passion, he
conveyes it by his intercession, Ioh. 14.16.
and thereby both fetch them in, and carry them on in the state of grace. The
Apostle acquaints us with this privilege also in the 14. verse following, God
sent his Son to redeem us [that we might receive the promise of the Spirit
through faith] Christ in his Sermon at Nazareth, applies to himself that
notable Prophecy which is set down, Isa. 61.1, 2. concerning his anointing,
and sending to heal the brokenhearted, and to set at liberty them that are
bruised ascribing this to the Spirit, Luke 4.18.21. The Redeemer coming out of
Zion, shall not only turn away ungodliness from Jacob, but convey unto them
his Spirit, which shall never be taken away from them, Isa. 29.20, 21. The Lord
promises to put his Spirit on the Messiah his Servant, that he may bring forth
judgment unto victory, Isa. 42.1, 2. etc. which was fulfilled in part, Matthew.
12.17, 18, etc. Christ promises the Apostles, to send the Spirit of Truth from
the Father to testify of him, Joh. 15.26. and that even for the conversion of
those that hated him, as verse. 24. Yea, he shall convince the world of sin,
righteousness and judgment, Joh. 16.8. etc. showing them the things which he
receives from Christ, and so glorifying him, verse. 14. They that are freed from
condemnation by Christ coming in the flesh, have the Spirit of God dwelling in
them, Romans 8.1, 2, 9. for all necessary supplies in the way of salvation, to
teach them all things, Joh. 14.26. to soften their hearts, and to enable them
to obey, Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. to change them into the image of the Lords glory, 2
Cor. 3.18. to frame them to the affections of children, and to stir up in them
groans of prayer, Romans 8.26, 27. Gal. 4.6. to witness with their spirits their
adoption, As Christ is (...) to plead for us with God in heaven; so the Spirit
is (...) to plead for Christ with us on earth. Ioh. 14.16.
Romans 8.16. to be a seal and earnest of their inheritance, until the day of
final Redemption, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and to raise up their mortal bodies at the
last day, Romans 8.11. Oh admirable privilege! Judge in your selves, If a King
having ransomed a company of his subjects from Turkish slavery, should send to
every one of them a Nobleman to be always near them, were not this an
incredible favor? And if Jesus Christ, the King of Saints, should send a
glorified Saint, or a good Angel, to abide with his redeemed people, what an
honor were it? But if he should give his Spirit to be our Keeper, Comforter,
Leader; yea our All under himself; Oh this would be incredible, if the word of
the Lord did not put it out of question.

Sect. 5. Other three Privileges by Redemption.
5 BY personal interest in the grace of Redemption, we become the Lords
freemen. We were perfect slaves before; now we are brought into a condition of
liberty, so that although we do not enjoy the whole length and breadth of it at
present, yet we are freemen in right, and actually also in good measure. The
Son has made us free, therefore we are free indeed, Joh. 8.36. Being ransomed
out of slavery into the dignity of children, we are accounted no longer
strangers, and therefore we are free, Matthew. 17.26. Although in reference to
Christ our Redeemer, we are servants, he having all the right of power over us;
yet considered, as now actually partakers of this glorious benefit, we are his
freemen, 1 Cor. 7.22.

The Natives of a Kingdom are free by their birthright, and so are those,
that are naturalized by special favor, or by a sum of money: We are not
freeborn, but by a vast sum paid out of Christ's stock, we are naturalized,
and so made Spiritual freemen. This Gospel-liberty might be exemplified in
sundry things; as,

1. Whereas in our old sinful condition, we were wholly locked up in our
spirits from God, and so clogged, that we could not walk one step with him in
his ways; now the heaviest of our bolts being knocked off, we may walk, yea
run in the way of Gods Commandments, and not faint, Psalm. 119.32. Isa. 40.31,
32.

2. Our hearts were altogether shut up from h m, so that we could not pray to
him, being insensible of our needs, yea and the gate of heaven was fast barred
against us, that our petitions could not enter; now the Throne of grace is set
open for us, and a spirit of liberty is put into us through the blood of Jesus,
that we may draw near with boldness, and confidence, Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 10.19-22.
Our Redeemer assures us of speeding on his account, Joh. 14.13, 14.

3 We had forfeited the right to the creatures, which God gave us in the day of
our creation; now we have our Charter renewed, and a full assurance of the free
use of them, by a more honorable title, even the right of Christ our Lord
Redeemer, whom God has appointed Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. and by him all
things are ours, even things to come, as well as present, 1 Cor. 3.21. etc.

4. We were subject to the traditions and impositions of men, we bowed down our
backs, and suffered them to ride on our consciences, and to make us their
vassals; now we are delivered from that servitude by the price which Christ
has paid for us, 1 Cor. 7.23. So that although we must needs be subject to
the powers ordained of God, even for conscience sake, Romans 13.5. yet not so, as
to have dominion over our faith, but only in the Lord.

Briefly, as no earthly freedom can prejudice Christ's interest in us, as his
servants; so neither can any earthly obligation hinder us from having our share
in this honor of being his freemen.

Beloved Christians, take notice of this for your selves, Liberty is a thing
very desirable; all men would be free. This you have by Christ in a most
excellent manner. All other liberty in comparison of this is no better than
pure villanage. Oh that we could admire it! and improve it to advantage.

All the promises of God belong to the Lords Redeemed in a special manner. They
are primarily intended for them, and made unto them; they are authentic only
in, and through him, 2 Cor. 1.20. and therefore claimable only by those that
have interest in him; yea all the marrow, and goodness of them shall be given
in unto them, and laid in their bosoms only, as their proper portion.

1 Promises of spiritual blessings, the love and favor of God, acceptance of
their persons, and services, pardon of sin, power against sin, an heart of
flesh, heavenly wisdom, sufficiency of grace, preservation from falling away;
all these, and many the like great and precious promises, whereby we are made
partakers of the Divine nature, do properly belong unto those, which have
obtained the precious faith of the Elect through the righteousness of God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ, and shall be made good unto them only, 2 Pet. 1.1, 4.

2 Promises of temporal good things are theirs also. Indeed we find sometimes
promises in Scripture, both made, and accomplished to the men of the world,
which live in sin, Genesis 17.20, and ^7, 39, 40. 1 King. 21.29.
and are strangers to the grace of Redemption, as to Ishmael, Esau, Ahab. But
these are not properly called Promises; they are rather declarations of Gods
willingness, and purpose to do something for them, which they need or desire;
And the performance of them, is not so much the fulfilling of a promise, as the
indulgence of his general goodness, who as a good housekeeper makes provision
for his whole family, for his servants, as well as his children, according to
their several conditions, and qualities; or rewards for some temporal good
service done for him, as in the case of Jehu, 2 King. 10.30. and of
Nebuchadnezzar, Ezekiel. 29.17, 18, etc. The promises even of these inferior good
things are fruits of the Lords special good will, and therefore proper to the
Redeemed.

The Old Testament promises pertained to the Israelites, and severed from the
rest of the world, Romans 9.4. all others being strangers to them, Ephesians. 2.12. And
the promises of the New Covenant belong to the Lords Redeemed, as severed from
all the servants of sin; therefore they are called Heirs of Promise, Heb. 6.17.
When the Lord says, those that seek him, shall want no good thing, Psalm.
34.10. and he will withold no good thing from them that walk uprightly, Psalm.
84.11. he fixes the propriety in the persons so described, as those only that
can groundedly claim them; and this right to the promises, arises upon the
account of his giving his Son to death for us, this being infinitely the greater
favor, and therefore he will not stick to give us the lesser, Romans 8.32. And
now, dear brethren, which are now partakers of the great benefit of Redemption,
much joy may you have in this sweet privilege. In the volume of Gods book you
have a treasury of promises, which is able to afford you a rich supply,
whatsoever your needs are. Oh, that we were so wise, as to get acquaintance
with them, and to make them familiar to our selves, that we may know where to
find every Jewel, and every Ear-ring, and every Bracelet, to deck our souls
with on all needful and convenient occasions.

7 By the grace of Redemption, we come to have a peculiar interest in the
providence of God. Our Apostasy in Adam deprived us of our best safety, for
thereby we provoked the Holy One to leave us to shift for our selves, and not
to take care of us any more, but to say, as Jer. 15.1, 2. Cast them out of my
sight, and let them go forth; or as Zach. 11.9. I will not feed them, that that
dies, let it dye, etc. So that we may sadly complain and bewail it, that our
defense is departed from us, and we are exposed to all dangers, that not only
judgments, but also mercies may become poysonful, and baneful to us. But now
the Lord Jesus, by paying our ransom from the curse, has renewed our interest
in the providence of God, so that he looks after us, and watches over us in a
special manner for our good. It is said of the earthly Canaan, that it is a
Land which the Lord cared for, his eyes were always upon it from the beginning
of the year to the end of it, Deuteronomy. 11.12. It is true much more of the heavenly
Canaan, the invisible Church, whereof that was a type. His special providence
is at work for the whole, and every particular member of it continually. He
will keep his Vineyard of red wine both night and day, Isa. 27.3. This is the
Theme, or Argument of the 90. and 121. Psalms, where it is largely handled.
And the Apostle says, That God is the Savior of all men, specially of them
that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. This privilege is very comprehensive, and might be
enlarged in many particulars. We may take a short view of them, thus,

The special providence of God toward the Redeemed, is exercised about good,
and evil.

1. About good things. It goes before them, Psalm. 5.11.12 and 103.4, 5.
compasses them round, and is their rereward. The Lord takes care of them, and
(as I may say) fore-casts what may be best for them, puts them upon honest and
warrantable courses in their going out and coming in, prospers them in all
things they take in hand, Psalm. 1.3. as Joseph, Genesis 39.3.23. and H^zekiah, 2 Chronicles. 31.21. blesses a little unto them, and makes it to go far, Psalm. 37.16.
It is our Redeemer Christ, that turns our water into wine, and multiplies a few
loaves and fishes, to feed many thousands.

2. About evil things, by saving them, 1. From; 2. In; 3. Out of evils.

1. He saves them from evils. The Lord is not only a Sun to inlighten, and to
warm us, but a Shield to pro^ect and guard us, Psalm. 84.11. He saves the
poor from the sword, etc. Job 5.15.19, 20. Sometimes he does so carefully
watch over his people, that troubles and dangers do not overtake them, the
floods of great waters do not come near them, Psalm. 32.6. for he hides them in
the hollow of his hand, till the storms be blown over, and so they are safe.

2. He saves them in evils. When afflictions, and troubles are upon them, He
keeps all their bones, and^. Psalm. 36.20. Dan. (...), 2^, and ^.2^, 23.
he bears a part with them, Isa. 63.9. he sustains and succors them, he gives
them patience in suffering, he strengthens them with heavenly might, he
conforms them to himself, purging out their dross, and making them partakers of
his holiness, yea sometimes he conveyes for them miraculously, preserving them
safe in the very mouth, and midst of mischief, as the three Children and
Daniel, restraining the rage and violence of the creatures, even contrary to
their natures, that they could do them no hurt.

3 He saves them out of evils. Although in his wise and just counsel, he
suffers troubles to seize upon them, and chastens them with rods, yet he has
his times of deliverance here, sooner, or later. The godly enjoy many petit,
partial redemptions in this life, before that great day of Redemption come,
Psalm. 34.22. He knows how to deliver them, 2 Pet. 2.9. Jacob has his time of
trouble, but he shall be delivered out of it, Jer. 30.7. For the rod of
wickedness shall not always rest on their lot, Psa. 125.3. Yea their death is
precious in his sight, Psalm. 116.15. so that even then they have hope.

And in a word, this providence does so order all things (both good and evil)
that all shall work together for their good, Romans 8.28.

All the parcels of this precious privilege flow from the Redemption, which is
in Christ Jesus. It is prophesied of Christ under the type of Solomon, that he
shall deliver the needy, and redeem their souls, Psalm. 72.12, etc. When the
Branch of the Lord shall be beautiful and glorious, there shall be a Tabernacle
for a shadow, and a covert from the storm, Isa. 42.6. When Christ shall reign
the man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, Isa. 32 1, 2. It is Jacobs
Redeemer, that will help him, Et erit vir sc. Christus Rex, etc. Jun. in Sch.
ad loc.
and be with him in the water and fire, Isa. 41.14. and 43.12. God will save
Judah by the Lord their God, that is, by the Messiah to come, Hos. 1.7. See
that special promise, Mark. 16.18.

What say you to this, ye ransomed souls? your own experience may make out all
these things. For has not the Lord made provision for you, Psalm 94 13.
and laded you with benefits even beyond expectation? Do ye not see how he
keeps some sad strokes off from you, while some of the Devils slaves are beaten
black and blue, gives rest to you, while the pit is in digging for the wicked?
bears your hearts up, while some of your neighbors sink under the burden,
rescues you out of six and seven troubles, while they are swallowed up of them?
you may rejoice in Benjamins portion; The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in
safety by him, etc. Deuteronomy. 33.12. and say, as David, The Lord is my Shepherd, I
shall not want, Psalm. 23.1.

Thus you have a Septenary of privileges (besides that of benefits) which are
the peculiar portion of the Lords Redeemed. Let our hearts breath out the
Psalmists admiration; Oh, how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up
for them that fear thee? etc. Psalm. 31.19.

Sect. 6. Four privileges more common?
I Shall add other four, which though they be more common, and not proper to
the elect, yet deserve the name of privileges too.

1. Redemption by Christ is the opening of a sluice, for the waters of life, to
run amongst the Gentiles. The Prophets are very frequent in holding forth this
privilege, that strangers shall come in, and submit themselves Psalm. 18.43.
etc. all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of God, Psalm. 98.2, 3.
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, Psalm. 86.9. Psalm. 87.4.
Isa. 65.1.
Isa. 11.9. waters shall break out in the wilderness, etc. Isa. 35.6, 7. and
41.18, 19. This was the work of Christ our Redeemer, so it was prophesied. Genesis
49.10. Shiloh, shall come, and to him shall be the gathering of the people,
Psalm. 22.27. David tells us, that all the ends of the earth shall turn to the
Lord, and that upon this ground, because he is King and governor among the
nations, verse. 28. but how comes he to this Soveraigntie? it was the consequent
of his great sufferings, which are largely described before, Isa. 52.14, 15.
the Lords servant shall have his visage marred, (by a deep humiliation) yet he
shall sprinkle many nations. God gives Christ for a Covenant of the people, for
a light of the Gentiles, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, Isa. 42.6,
7. There was a famous prophecy of the shining of great light upon the people,
that walked in darkness: Isa. 9.2. this was fulfilled, when Christ sojourned in
Capernaum Matt. 4.13, 14. By the blood of Christ, the middle wall of partition
being broken down, those that were far off, are made near. Ephesians. 2.13, 14. and
so no more strangers, but fellow-citizens, with the Saints, verse. 19.20.
therefore Christ having said, I lay down my life for my sheep, presently adds,
I have other sheep, which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, etc.
John 10.15.16. This is a great privilege, and so to be accounted. The Apostle
Paul calls upon us gentiles to glorify God for his mercy, Romans 15.9. etc. for
alas what would have becomed of us sinners of the Gentiles, if this Redemption
had not opened a door of hope, we had been left as dead bones, altogether
helpless, and undone for ever.

2. Its the foundation of that general Covenant, which God is pleased to strike
with all those, whom he makes willing, to come in, and to join themselves unto
him in a visible profession of his name, and with their seed both of old among
the Jews, and now with all nations, to whom he sends the Gospel. The Apostle
Peter presses the men of Judea, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to a
thorough entertaining of Christ, by this argument, because the promise is
general. Acts 2.38, 39. which implies, that Christ crucified is the basis of
the Covenant. Circumcision was a visible sign of the external Covenant, whereby
God owned the Jewish nation for his people above all others, therefore its
called the Covenant it self, Genesis 17.10, 11, 13. and Baptism now is a visible
sign of it, to all those throughout the world, which submit to the Gospel. Both
these institutions have reference to Christ, as the inward marrow, and
substance of them* for we are said to be circumcised in Christ, and by the
circumcision of Christ; and to be buried, and raised again with him in
Baptism, Col. 2.11, 12. Assuredly, if the Lord Jesus had not undertaken, to
buy out sinners from the curse, by becoming a curse for them, there had been no
such thing as a Covenant. God would never have owned any of the sons of men, in
order to eternal life; no, nor so much as have suffered them to be called by
his name, But now by the work of Redemption, all that are retainers to Christ,
in the visible Church, (though strangers to the life of grace,) have some kind
of right to all Church-ordinances, Jus ad rem. if not in re.
and are allowed a share in sundry boons of favor; they may get a general
acquaintance with Christ, and attain to some common graces, whereby it may go
better with them, and they are nearer the kingdom of God, than those that are
mere strangers; Oh, take heed of slighting this mercy, If the Lord will
vouchsafe to own you, and your seed in the way of a Covenant, thereby making
you (in some degree) capable of the choicest good things, even heaven, and
eternal life, you may thank your redeemer for this: and if you do not improve
it to better proficiency, to raise you to an higher form in his school, and
kingdom, it will make a sad reckoning one day.

3. It shall be by the all-sufficient merit and virtue of the grace of
redemption, that the people of the Jews (once the people of God, but now
rejected, and under wrath for their unbelief, and hatred against the Lord
Jesus) shall be called to the knowledge of the truth, and obtain mercy; and the
fullness of the Gentiles shall be brought in, to make up one glorious Church,
and new Jerusalem. There be many excellent promises, in the writings of the
Prophets which hold forth both these: The restoration of the Lords ancient
people, is plainly foretold, in those texts, which I have formerly made use of,
on other occasions, Isa. 59.20, 21. compared with Romans 11.26, 27. The Apostle
cleares the meaning, of that prophecy, and applies it to the calling of the
Jews, Psalm. 69.35, 36. God will save Zion, and will build the Cities of Judah,
etc. Isa. 24.22, 23. the prisoners shall be visited after many days, and the
Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, etc. see also Jer. 30.8.9. and 18.
Ezekiel. 20.34, 37, 40. etc. This is lively represented by the resurrection of the
dry bones, Ezech. 7.31.1.14. The coming in of the Gentiles is spoken of, Isa.
60.3, 4, etc. and 66.19, 20. etc. Rev. 21.10, 11, 24, etc. zach. 8.20, etc.
all this flows from the Redemption which is in Christ, Isa. 11.10, 11, 12.
the root of Jess shall stand up for an ensign, both to the Jews and Gentiles,
Jer. 50.33, 34. Israel and Judah are held captives, but their Redeemer, the
Lord of hosts is strong, and will thoroughly plead their cause, etc. Zach. 9,
11. it is by the blood of the Churches Covenant, that the Lord sends forth her
prisoners out of the pit: Zach. 10.8.
yea, the house of David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem shall look upon him,
whom they have pierced, and mourn for him, Mal. 4.2.
Zach. 12.10. the white robes of those, which came out of great tribulation,
were washed, and made white in the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7.14. which our
Brightman referrs to the calling of the Jews. Oh, how glorious shall those
times be? when the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the
light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, Isa. 30.26. and he that is feeble among
them shall be as David, etc. Zach. 12.8. Let us long for this day, and have it
much on our hearts. Pray the Lord, to bring again the captivity of his people,
and to plant them upon their Land, to send forth watchmen, which may call upon
the Shulamite to return. Amos 9.14, 15.
Can. 6.13. and to stir up remembrancers, which may give him no rest, till he
establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isa. 62.6, 7.

4. The overflowings of this glorious work, do reach even to the bettering of
the whole Creation. The whole company of reasonable creatures, Angels, and Men,
are the purpose of Jesus Christ; he has bought them into his own hands, to be
their Lord, to possess, command, and dispose of them at his pleasure. He
commanded not only the winds and the Sea, and they obeyed him, but also the
evil Spirits, and they owned his authority, Matthew. 8.27. Luke 4.35, 36. He
bought even those that denied him 2 Pet. 2.1. God's patience toward the
wicked, preservation of them, provision for them, their breathing in the air,
treading on the earth, and the like common favors, are the fruits of
Redemption. Every Son, and daughter of Adam, is beholding to the grace of the
Redeemer for their very lives, and their reprival from the damnation of hell:
yea, were it not for this, the whole world might (probably) have been turned
into a Chaos again. It Is certain, that this great visible fabric, with all the
creatures in it, both living, and liveless, Sun, Moon, Stars, Elements,
Plants, etc. is subject to vanity; God has subjected it, in his just
judgment, for man's Apostasy. So that it lies under the bondage of
corruption, the creatures have lost much of their beauty, and virtue; they are
forced to do service to the servants of sin, Matthew. 5.45. The good things of
the earth are put to bad uses, (...). Mundi partium in ea summus est consensus,
quod omnes una finem istorum malorum expectant, Beza.
and employed to the dishonor of the Creator, Hos. 2.8. under this heavy
burden they sigh, yea they travel in pain, and that together, with joint
consent, earnestly exspecting an end of these evils: which shall be at the day
of the general judgment, when all things shall be restored. Acts 3.21. and the
children of God shall be possessed of full redemption. The creature was made
for man, and as it became a sharer with him in the bondage of corruption; so it
shall be also (according to its capacity) in his deliverance, and glorious
liberty to come. Romans 8.19, 20, etc. How this shall be, by what means, and in
what manner, it is not easy to determine. Some think, by a total abolition of
the substance; and if it cease to be, it ceases to be under bondage. The most
say, by an alteration of qualities; it shall be so changed, as it shall seem to
be, not the same, but another, and the Scripture tells us, that the heavens,
and earth that are now, are reserved to be burnt, with fire, 2 Pet. 3.7.10.
which (say they, So some expound Job 14.12. see Caryl on that text, at large.
) is meant of their purgation, not their annihilation. Howsoever it be for the
manner, the thing is without question, the creature shall be delivered.

Now this privilege flows from the Redemption wrought by Christ. For,

1. As it was man's sin, that brought the curse upon the creature: so the
taking away of the sin of man, is the taking of the curse from the creature;
even as the restoring of a Traitor is the restoring of all that depends upon
him.

2. The present Liberty, and glory of the sons of God is an effect of
Redemption: therefore so is the Liberty, and glory, which the creature shall
enjoy, with them; this being an appurtenance to that, and as the shadow to the
body.

It behooves us to take notice of this for our selves. It should sadden our
hearts, when we consider, that the Creature fares worse through our Apostasy;
and yet it may rejoice us, that it fares better by our recovery.

But I have dwelt too long on the use of Information: I shall therefore dismiss
it, and proceed to another.

CHAP. VII. Use 3.
Sect. 1. Consolation against sins, old and new severally.
3. THe Lords Redeemed may with joy draw up cordial waters of Consolation out
of this well of salvation. The former use has afforded us much matter of
refreshing, having sent forth sundry crystal streams of comfort, to make glad
the city of our God. Yet there is moee behind. The main Conclusion, Isa. 12.3.
[that Christ has ransomed us from the curse, by becoming a curse for us] is a
solid ground of consolation to poor sinners, against sundry distempers, or
annoyances, whereunto they are subject in this life. as,

1. Against sin, which may be considered 1. as it was in there old estate of
bondage. 2. as it is now in their restored condition.

1. For the former, The humbled soul, looking back upon his old slavery under
sin, may conceive cause of discouragement, by sundry aggravations of it, which
will present themselves unto him: But the right understanding of this truth
will afford him help against them. I observe especially four,

1. The greatness and heynousness of his sins in particular. Oh, says he,
were mine iniquities of an ordinary size, I could have hope; but alas, they are
mighty ones, like the great mountains, some of them are of a deep die, crying,
crimson, scarlet sins, outrageous miscarriages, they are gone over my head,
and reach up to the heavens, But oh poor soul, do thou think that thy sins
can be greater than Christ's satisfaction, or that he took upon him the curse of
small sins, Dicat terra redempta sanguine. Magna iniquitas mea sed ma^or est
redemptio tua. Aug. 2 King. 21.1, 2, etc. 16.
and not of great ones? Assuredly, this is a mighty redemption, a great
salvation. God made his power wonderful, in the work of Creation, and he makes
his mercy as wonderful in this work of new creation. Art thou a greater sinner
then Manasseh? Read his story, where the Holy Ghost points him out in his
black, and ugly colors, and tell me, if thou did ever hear of such a
monster: yet the fruit of this Redemption reached even unto him: for upon his
humiliation, the Lord was entreated of him, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. thy greatest
sins are finite, but the merit of Christ's redemption is infinite. If some
mountains were removed, and hurled into the great Ocean, it would swallow them
up, that they could not be seen: So the Sea of Christ's blood will drown the
huge mountains of thy iniquities. Though thy sins be as scarlet, thy Redeemer
will make them white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool, Isa. 1.18. Oh then! never lay the weight of thy guilt in the balance with
Christ's satisfaction, never fear, that that will overweigh this. Thy surety
has made thy peace for the greatest, as well as the smallest faults. He was
charged with thy most heinous crimes, that thou might be delivered from the
curse of them.

2. The multitude, and numerousnes of them. Though I have not committed such
greisly enormous sins, as some others have done, yet I have made that up in
the number, which is wanting in weight: my transgressions are manifold, yea
innumerable, more than the hairs of mine head, Psalm. 40.12. or the sands that
are on the sea shore. Be it so, But do thou think, that they are more than
Christ's merits? Has he born in his body, and made satisfaction for all the
sins of all the Elect, from Adam to the last man on earth, and do thou
fear, thy sins are so very many, that this satisfaction cannot reach to take
them away: The Apostle comparing the guilt of the first sin with the free gift
by Christ, gives the pre-eminence to this, in that the former brought
condemnation for one, but this latter brings justification for many offenses,
Romans 5.16. and Christ testifies of the woman that was a sinner, that her sins
which were many, are forgiven her, Luke 7.47. Be thy sins never so many, if
they fill a roll, that reaches from the East to the West, or from earth to
heaven, they can but wrap thee in the curse, and Christ has taken upon him the
whole curse, that he might redeem thee from it, If thou have multiplied to sin,
God will multiply to pardon, Isa. 55.7. he will cast all our iniquities into
the depths of the Sea, Mic. 7.19. If thou should fill a thousand baskets
with sand, and cast them all into the midst of the Sea, the waves would so
sweep them all away, that no remnant of them would appear, so the streams of
Christ's blood are able to wash away thy manifold sins, that not one of them
shall remain: When the dew is fallen upon the ground, thou may see infinite
millions of drops, but when the Sun breaks out, and shines in its strength, it
licks up, and scatters them all in a very short time, and thou see not one
left: So the Son of righteousness can dispel thy numberless transgressions,
as a cloud, or a mist, that they cannot be found, Isa. 44.22. Jer. 50.20.

3. Long continuance in the state and trade, and under the guilt, and power of
sin. Oh, I am a sinner of a long standing, I am old and aged in sin, Ierem.
2.33. Ier. 22.21. Eze. 23.43.
I am soaked in iniquity, I have served many apprentiships in it, and am grown
gray headed, I have drawn out a long train of vanity, and sin, as it were with
cartropes, Isa. 5.18. Methinks, I feel the guilt of it so sodered into my
spirit by daily custom, that it cannot be plucked out. But stay a while, poor
soul, if the Lord has begun to draw thy heart to seek an interest in the grace
of Redemption, let not this dismay thee. Although thou have spent all thy days
in a course of sin, spun out a long thread of iniquity, lived under guilt, even
to the age of Methuselah, yet the Redemption that is in Christ is richly able
to set the free. He, to whom a thousand years are but as one day, can take of
thy guilt of 1000 years standing. There were means for cleansing an old
Leprosy of long continuance, and sacrifices to be offered to that end, Lev.
13.11. and 14.2. The Israelites after the death of every Judge returned to
their old trade of sin, and ceased not from their stubborn way. Judge. 2.19.
Yet the Lord stirred them up Saviors still; and though thou have continued
long in sin, yet Christ continues still a Savior. The sinner that is 100 year
old, is accursed. Isa. 65.20. but the curse which thy Redeemer did undergo, is
strong enough to shatter in pieces the most inveterable curse, and to turn it
into a blessing. The removal of guilt so deeply rivetted into thy soul by
length of time seems to thee impossible, but to him all things are possible. To
shut up this, I would have the humbled soul to resolve thus; Christ Jesus has
offered up himself to God through the eternal spirit; and wherefore thus?
surely, that he might by his blood purge my conscience, from dead works, and so
deliver my soul from that eternal guilt, and curse wherein it is intrapped.
Heb. 9.4.

4. The advantage which Justice might have against the sinner, for rejecting,
or neglecting the offer, and season of grace. Oh, how often has the Lord made
a render of salvation to me by the Gospel? how affectionately has he invited
me to come in, and to take hold on the strength of this great Redeemer? yet I
have resisted the spirit, and trampled this great grace under my feet, or at
least slighted it shamefully; therefore I have cause to fear, that the time is
past, and that mercy shall never reach to my soul. Had I thoroughly closed at
the first call, or seen some reasonable time to lay down arms, and submit, I
could hope, that the Lord would have passed by all my former offenses: But that
he should now accept me after the abuse of so much mercy, such unprofitableness
under his ordinances, strong opposition against grace so unweariedly offered,
and settling my self on the lees of mine old sinful condition, contrary to the
light, which I had received, this is quite beyond mine expectation. These and
the like aggravating circumstances cannot but exasperate divine Justice, and
even compel it to vindicate its own honor, and to avenge it self on such a
notorious wretch, as I am: Surely the Lord has determined to glorify himself
in my final condemnation. Thus the poor afflicted soul is apt to plead against
its interest in this redemption. But oh my dear heart, be not so peremptory;
open thine eyes and thou shall see mercy glorying against Judgment. James
2.13. None of these aggravations shall obstruct the sweet fruit of this
glorious benefit, but it shall break through them all. True it is, one of the
Lords ends in suffering sin to abound, and showing forth so much patience to
sinners, is the manifesting of his Justice upon the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction, Romans 9.22. as in the case of Pharaoh, Exodus 9.16. But what is this
to thee, who have laid down thine arms, and art gasping for mercy? He has
another, and a more desirable end in respect of thee, namely, that grace may
much more abound, and may reign thorough righteousness unto life. Romans 5.20,
21. And what will thou say, if the glory which he gets by delivering thee from
the curse, be double to that, which he might have by leaving thee under it. By
this he only glorifies his justice, but by the former he glorifies both his
justice, and mercy, this, in rescuing thee from guilt, and wrath: that, in
laying the curse upon his only Son, that mercy might have free way to serve
thee. Why then do thou not rather conclude thus? surely the Lord which does
all things for his own glory; will more regard a greater then a lesser glory,
my unbelieving heart says, it will be his choicest glory to destroy me, being
guilty of such foul rebellions: But the mercy of the redeemer says, No, not
so, I have borne the whole curse for thee, that justice might have no advantage
by thy rebellion; therefore I will rather raise up my glory by thy deliverance.
The Jews did always resist the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51.
and trample the grace of God under their feet, even to the shedding of the
blood of the Son of God, yet a great number of them are, and shall be ransomed
by the merit of that same blood which they shed: Zach. 12.1^ and 13, 1^ Ioh.
6.9.
Peter having plainly confessed, that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of the
living God, Matt. 16.16. yet shortly after he rebukes Christ for speaking of
his suffering and death, verse. 22. whereby (although ignorantly) he opposed the
work of redemption; and when the time of suffering came, he disowned him with
swearing and cursing, Matthew. 26.70, etc. yet the Lord Jesus passed by all these
provocations, and he became both a witness of his sufferings, and a partaker of
the glory, to be revealed, Acts 13.9.
1 Pet. 5.1. Saul (who was also called Paul,) did not only reject Christ, and
the tender of Salvation by him, but also was injurious, a persecuter, a
blasphemer, played the mad man against the Saints, and compelled them to
blaspeme. Might not Paul have despaired of favor, and said, surely God will
plead the cause of his Justice against me, he will never put up such high
affronts against mercy; But we hear no such language. No, the grace of our
Lord (says he) was exceeding abundant, etc. 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. Herein he was set
for a pattern to us. (...)
ver. 16. Let the same mind be in us.

2. For the latter. The converted soul, who is actually made partaker of the
grace of Redemption, and all his scores cleared, as to his estate of
unregeneracy, yet even he may see matter of discomfort, by reason of (...).

1. Its presence, or in dwelling. Oh (says the Godly soul,) I feel a lump of
sin still ^^^^ing in me, there is a troublesome Inmate that still hampers me,
a continual dropping, (...) ^o^ome-enemy, which besets, and clogs (...)
woefully, it is as near me, as my very bowels: I cannot be quiet for it, if I
lie down, or if I rise up; if I go forth, or if I come in, it is still about
me, In the business, and employments of my ordinary calling, it't' putting in an
oar, and in performance of Religious duties, but it act's with all its might,
raising up oftentimes such base passions, and lusts, as like a malignant
East-winde, are ready to blast my best fruits. Oh sad complaint. But pause a
while, and take one thing with another. Thou think thou art still under the
Curse, while the case is thus with thee: but it is not so. The great design of
thy Redeemer in destroying sin, and delivering thee from it, does not take
place fully whilst thou art in this mortality. His meaning was not, to remove
it wholly out of thy soul, so as no footstep of it should remain, but only to
take away the sting, and deadly ruining power of it for the present: The total
abolishing of it must be a gradual work, not to be perfected till thou shall
put on incorruption. Thy happiness here stands not in the not having sin, but
in the Lords not imputing of sin, through the satisfaction of Christ. It is the
wisdom of our heavenly Father, thus to exercise those, whom he prepares to be
vessels of mercy; He will have their remaining time here, to be a warfare, that
they may know the fellowship of Christ's sufferings. He was burdened with thy
sin, and could not be rid of it, till death: thou must be conformed to thine
head, and make account it will be thy neighbor, while thou art in the body.
But remember, that while thou art yoked with this body of sin, and groaning
under it, thy Redeemer has compassion on thee. If the Canaanite be in the
Land, he will be a thorn in Isreal's side, yet he shall not prevail. Holy Paul
had a law in his members, which led him captive to the law of sin, and made him
cry out, Oh miserable man; yet even then he can thank God in the view of full
deliverance by Christ, Romans 7.21, 23, etc. Thine head is now conforming thee to
himself, and will not cease till he has wrought out thy victory with triumph.

2 It is prevalency or domineering. Oh! if I had it under, I could have some
ground of comfort; but alas, it is exceeding masterful, it does not only lead,
but hold me captive. Oh! how does sin rage within me? Strong lusts, like the
Anakims? If there be any grace in me, any thing of the new man, it is but as a
grasshopper in comparison of a Giant: One cries out of the lust of the flesh,
which soon kindles and gets up into a flame of inclination to bodily
uncleanness: Another of the lust of the eyes, in too eager desires after the
world: A third, of pride of life in ambitious aspirings after great things. A
fourth of rash anger which bears him down as with the stream, and puts him upon
unseemly language and carriage. And although I pray, and strive against my lust
(says the Christian) yet it still, ever, and anon gets the upper hand. I have
been overtaken with a gross sin, I have fallen into it again and again, yea I
have sinned willingly, against knowledge, and with delight: I fear I shall one
day perish by the hand of sin. But stay a while, and hearken what the Lord will
speak to thee. It is a sad thing that Christ's freeman should be so hankled in
a snare, and so trampled under the feet of a masterful lust; and more sad, if
he should lay under the power and command of a gross sin in the actual
committing of it, yet there is hope in Israel concerning this: Only take
notice, that I have no design to bolster up the sinner in his way of inquity,
my endeavor is to speak peace to the disconsolate Saint. I say then, thou art
not alone (poor soul) others of the Lords people have been and may be in this
very condition. Noah foulely overcome with wine, yet commended by God himself
to be a righteous man. Sampson entangled in the love of one Harlot after
another, yet numbered among those which by faith obtained a good report. David
deeply implunged into those two gross sins, Adultery and murder, and abiding
under the guilt of them a long time; yet who among all the Lords Worthies
registered in Scripture, was comparable to him? There were sacrifices in the Law
for sins against knowledge, as well as sins of ignorance. A man that was
grievously infected with the Leprosy, Levit. 6.1, 2, 6, 7. Levit. 13.^. and
14, 4 etc.
had means of cleansing at hand, as well as he that was defiled with ordinary
uncleanness. The blood of the Redeemer can purge all sorts of sins, and
therefore the mercy of God does reach out to pardon all, Exodus 34.7. Is thy sin
in too great power? Remember, that Christ crucified is the power of God, he
will break the head of Leviathan, he came to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. Have thou sinned willingly, and with delight? Jesus Christ delighted
to do his Fathers will, Ps. 40.8. he suffered willingly for thy sin. The Lord
sometimes gives lust and sin leave to rage, and master his servants, for a
season but it shall not totally prevail. Although thy corruptions be as the
sons of Zeruiah to David, too hard for thee, yet if the bent of thy soul be
against them, if thou fightest against them with the heart of an enemy, thou
shall at last be conqueror over them through the Cross of Christ. See the
promise, Romans 6.14.

3 The advantage, which Justice might get against him, by reason of frequent
neglects, faylings, wanderings, swarvings from the rule of the word since his
conversion. Oh (says the godly soul) I can do nothing aright; how often do I
miscarry in the manner, motives, and ends of obedience? Methinks I am fettered,
that I cannot go a foot pace, much less run in the way of Gods Commandments.
To some kind of evil, ready and free enough, to some kind of good too often
dead and sluggish. If I be redeemed indeed, why am I thus? or what comfort can
I have in the work of Redemption, while I am in this case? Does the prisoner
when he is released, feel the shackles still on his legs? If Christ by
undergoing the curse of my former bondage, has brought me into liberty, why am
I still in bondage? who shall answer for me now? or where is the ransom for
it? But now consider, if these distempers are the unavoidable workings of
remaining corruption which cannot be wholly shaken off. The best Saints may
find in themselves an indisposedness to good, and forwardness to evil,
especially about those things which are most spiritual, and require much
self-denial in their carnal and earthly interest of ease, credit, and other
outward enjoyments, as in a constant course of secret prayer, private reproof
of others upon just occasion, acknowledging a miscarriage to their own
disgrace, putting up wrongs, for the maintaining of peace, and such like. Why
is thy heart dejected for that which is the common lot of all the godly? Thou
may think it is well, that the Lord has not left thee to grosser sins; and
although thou have many failings, yet the Lord looks upon thee according to thy
better part; he will own his own grain in the midst of much chafe. And here is
the crown of thy comfort. Christ Jesus has offered a sacrifice for every one
that erreth, and for him that is simple, Ezekiel. 45.20. and he can reasonably
bear with the ignorant, and those that are out of the way, Heb. 5.2. and he
will carry on his work in thy soul, till thy sinful distempers be wholly
subdued, and thou shall have no more cause to complain.

Sect. 2. Comfort against inward terrors, reproaches of men, and outward
afflictions.
2. AGainst inward fears and terrors of conscience, arising from sense of
guilt and liableness to Gods displeasure. Even the Lords redeemed may have
shrewd remainders of the spirit of bondage upon them; their spirits are
sometimes startled and terrified with the fear or feeling of Divine wrath. God
lets Satan loose against them, to bring their old sins to remembrance, or to
roar upon them as a Lion, for new miscarriages. And when he meets with a
timorous unbeleeving heart, he plies it so long with his fiery darts, till at
length he bereaves the sinner of all comfort. Sometimes he is dejected, and
laid low in the sight of his own vileness: Sometimes he is tossed and
disquieted as the Sea with storms and tempests: Sometimes he is even swallowed
up with waves of soul-trouble, as a ship ready to sink, so that Satan seems to
have his will of him, Lam. 3.18.
and he says, My strength, and my hope is perished from the Lord. A sad and
unwelcome business, I confess, yet many of Gods dear servants have been thus
put to it, as both Scripture and experience do testify. Job complains that God
held him for his enemy, and made him to possess the iniquities of his youth,
Job 13.24, 26. and therefore the poison of his arrows did drink up his spirit,
and the terrors of God did set themselves in array against him, Job 19.25.
Chap. 6.4. yet elsewhere he professes his faith in the Redeemer. David cries
out, that Gods arrows stuck so fast in him, and his hand pressed him so sore,
that there was no soundness in his flesh, nor rest in his bones, Psalm. 38.3, 4.
The like we may see in Heman the Ezrahite, Psalm. 88.3, 6, 7, 14, 15, etc. But
let the afflicted soul now have recourse to this harbor of Redemption, and
there he shall find good shelter against all these storms. What have thou to
fear, save the curse of the Law? why? but that is removed and gone. Thy Surety
has freed thee from it, by making an end of thy sins. No sin, no curse. If the
Lord hide his face, and frown upon thee, it will be for a moment, for a small
moment, but he will return, and with everlasting kindness have mercy on thee:
And for this thy Redeemer has engaged his word, Isa. 54.7, 8. As for Satan,
that Lion of hell, when he can neither hold; nor recover his prisoners, it is
his next policy to disquiet them, and to make their lives uncomfortable. But
tell him, that thou art Christ's devoted servant, by virtue of a dear ransom,
and he has nothing in thee, neither shall he rule in thy conscience; he may
go, lash, and torment his own marked slaves, but thou art out of his reach. And
if the Lord and Satan do still pursue thy soul with terrors, remember that thy
Master Christ has drunk of this bitter cup before thee, and be assured, that
he will plead thy cause with his Father, and at length he will take that
roaring Lion underhand, and rend him, as he would rend a Kid, as it is said of
Sampson, Judge. 14.6. Know it, dear Christian, for thy comfort, there are no
storms in heaven.

3 Against the cursings, evil speakings, reproaches, contradictions of the men
of the world. Their tongues are set on fire of hell, and they are very eloqu^nt
in the hellish art of cursed language, especially against the Lords Redeemed
ones, smiting them with bitter words, and heaping upon them the basest
indignities, which either the Devil can suggest, or their malicious hearts
invent. Have thou been acquainted with such unwelcome salutations? Do thy
profane neighbors open their mouths against thee? And do thou hear the
words of cursing and bitterness, yet be not troubled at it. These arrows,
though they be very sharp, and sent from a strong arm, yet they shall not reach
to pierce thy heart; these coals of Juniper, though they keep in the fire, a
whole year, yet thou need not fear scorching by them; the malignity of them
is taken away by the grace of Redemption. If the curse of Gods righteous Law be
voided to thee, much more is the curse of man's unrighteous law. If the Lord
has reversed, and disanulled his just sentence, passed against thee in heaven,
will he suffer the unjust sentence of sinful man on earth to stand in force
against thee? If the curse which is deserved shall not come, much less shall
that which is causeless, Prove. 26.2. Say thou to God, as David, Let them curse,
but bless thou, Psalm. 109.28. thou may hope, that the Lord will requite thee
good for their cursing, as 2 Samuel 16.12. when the children of Israel were
brought out of Egypt, and upon their way to the promised Land, Balaam was hired
to curse them; but the Lord turned the curse into a blessing, Deuteronomy. 23.3, 4. So
if thou be redeemed out of thy cursed condition, and art traveling
heavenward, thou shall meet with curses by the way, but thy Redeemer will turn
them into a blessing; yea he has blessed thee already, so that all their
imprecations, censures, slanders, are but the flashings of powder without shot,
or like squibs, which breath out fire, but suddenly vanish and dye. Thou may
pity their folly, in speaking evil of the things which they know not. The day
is coming, wherein they shall hang down their heads for shame, and say, We
counted their life madness, but indeed we are the madmen, they are the Lords
Redeemed, and numbered among the Saints, we are the Devils bondmen, and must go
in the black band. How have we raved against them by cursing and railing, and
all malicious language: But now we find that they are the blessed of the Lord,
and we (Woe, woe unto us) are the children of the curse.

4 Against outward temporal afflictions which they meet with in this life.
These are the lot of the Lords people, whereunto they are appointed, 1 Thessalonians.
3.3. Every one must have his several cup of one kind, or other. None of us can
be wholly discharged from this war, while we are in the body, yet here is
safety in the hand of our great Reedeemer. The Ch^ldren of Israel, being
brought out of the house of bondage, had a troublesome journey through the
wilderness to the Land of Canaan, by reason of many difficulties they must
encounter withal in the way; but the Angel of the Covenant went before them,
and carried them forward, as on E^gles wings, and at length gave them rest. You
that are happily rescued from the Curse and bondage of hell, may expect to meet
with much tribulation in the way to the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. But this
may be your comfort, Jesus Christ your strong Deliverer looks after you, and
will not suffer you to be trodden under foot, He is the Captain of your
salvation, and he knows by experience, what it is to be afflicted; for the
Father thought it most convenient, to make him perfect by sufferings, Heb.
2.10. and he has drunk the bitterest cup even to the bottom, and will so
sweeten yours, as you shall have no cause to shrink at it.

I shall enlarge this further in some particulars. Not to insist on such
grievances as the godly suffer in common with the men of the world: The grace
of Redemption affords some relief against these. There be three sorts of
Afflictions very remarkable, which do oftentimes deject and weaken the spirits
of Gods people, so that they need to be comforted with the savoury, and
restorative Apples which grow upon this Tree.

1. Persecutions for righteousness. By this excellent benefit we are made
capable of high enjoyments, but it is with the proviso of suffering
persecutions, so has Christ himself determined, Mark. 10.29, 30. and his
chosen witness Paul tells us positively, All that will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.13. which has been abundantly
verified in all ages. See David's complaint, Psalm. 38.20, and 119.86. Act. 8.1.
1 Cor. 4.12. Gal. 4.29. But now the Saints which suffer for the truth, or for
well-doing, may cheer up their hearts, when they consider that the Redeemer
himself has led them the way in this fiery trial. Did ever any undergo so
much? his whole life was a continued persecution. Herod sought his life while
he was a child, and when he was grown up, the Jews persecuted him to the
death; and he has given us warning before hand, that we may not think it
strange, if we be baptized with the same baptism, Joh. 15.20. Let the poor
suffering Christian then resolve thus, Luke 4.28, 29. Ioh 5.16, 18. and 8 59.
and 10.30, etc.
If my Redeemer was persecuted for righteousness sake, in defense of his
heavenly doctrine, the avouching of his eternal Godhead, the Fathers sending
him to be the Savior of the lost world, and the doing of good works, and all
this for me, and on my account; then it is but equal, that I should undergo any
kind of persecution for him, and not stick at it. This is but to help to fill
up the remainder of Christ's sufferings, Col. 1.24. and for thine encouragement
take notice that he has pronounced those blessed that are thus persecuted,
Matthew. 5.10, etc. Look up unto him, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, Heb. 12.2. and do thou likewise.

2 Sufferings in their innocence. The godly are exposed to hardships in the
world, not only for bearing witness to the truth, and for well-doing, but also
when there is no cause at all, save the unreasonable will and malice of men.
Thus it was with David, Psalm. 13, 4. and 35.7. and 59.3. Prove. 1.11. They lurk
privily for the innocent without cause. So Joseph, Genesis 39.8, 12, 20. and
Daniel 16.4, 16, 22. Some men are so malignantly affected against sincerity,
that rather then fail, they will forge, and invent matter of mischief against
the godly. If this be thy case, thine integrity, and innocence may bear up thy
spirit; thou need not fret against the Agents, but consider that the Lord
has an hand in it for thy good, at least for the trial of thy faith,
self-denial, patience. Above all, remember, that this also was the lot of thy
Redeemer. He had no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, yet he suffered;
he was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, yet opened he not his mouth, Isa.
53.7. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22. Say then, Although I suffer without cause, yet I will
not be cast down, but I will commit my way unto the Lord, and he shall bring
forth my righteousness as the light, Psalm. 37.5, 6. The Redeemer which pleads
my cause with God, will plead it also with men. Rejoice not against me, O mine
enemy, when I fall, I shall arise, Mic. 7.8. He will awake to judge my cause in
due time.

3. Punishments for sin. The Redeemed of the Lord, by giving way to the
temptations of the wicked one, and the prevailing of lust, do so far forget
themselves, that they even wax wanton against him, and provoke him to take
them underhand, and to inflict some judgment upon them. Thus he punished David
for his sin in the matter of Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 12.10, 11, 14. and Moses for not
sanctifying him before the people, Number. 20.12. and Deuteronomy. 32.50, 51. and the
Saints of Corinth for unworthy communicating, 1 Cor. 11.30. which is called
judging, verse. 31. The godly sometimes by their miscarriages bring upon
themselves, sickness, poverty, losses, crosses in children, or good name, yea
bodily death. By complying with the sins of the times, they become partners in
the judgments, Ezekiel. 21.3. Wise Solomon observes it, as very remarkable,
prefixing a [Behold] to it, that the righteous shall be recompensed in the
earth, Prove. 11.21. even he is not spared, but paid home for his folly; there
is a time, that judgment begins at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4.17. Say then, Is
this thy case? Thou have sinned, and now thou suffer. I advise thee to be
humbled for it, yet not to be discomforted. The Redeemer has born the heat and
burden of Gods wrath for thy sin, and these punishments are not the effects of
indignation steeled with hatred, but anger meekned with love.

Mind it, good Christian, the Lord has annexed this proviso to the Covenant
of grace, If you transgress, you must expect to be visited with the rod, yet
the Covenant shall stand fast, Psa. 89.30. etc. As poison duly mixed and
ordered by the art of the skilful P^ysi^ian, does not kill, but help to bring
health; So the wise God will temper the punishments which he lays on thee for
sin, that they should not hinder, but further the fruit of thy Redemption. Thy
Savior learned obedience by the things which he had suffered for thy sin, Heb.
5.8. Take thou out the same lesson.

I might here take occasion to start and dispute this question, Whether those
which are actually made partakers of the grace of Redemption, be so fully freed
from the curse of the Law in this life, that the evils which they suffer for
sin, have nothing of the curse in them, nor can be truly so called: But I look
upon it, as a strife about words; the controversy may be thus decided. (...).
The curse may be considered, either materially, as it is a thing contrary to
the good and welfare of the creature, and so unwelcome; or formally as it the
sinners liableness to the avenging wrath of God for sin: Or, it may be taken,
either largely, for any evil whatsoever, which is the reward of sin, or
strictly for that great evil of evils, which stands in the separation of the
sinner from God, and his eternal perdition. Take it materially, or in the
largest sense, and both Scripture and experience speak it aloud that believers
are not fully delivered from the whole curse in this life: But take it formally
and str^ctly, and thus the elect sinner is wholly set free from it at the
instant of his conversion. The terrible tempest, that would overwhelme him, and
render him utterly and everlastingly miserable is pass^d by, and shall not fall
upon his head; only some drops and sprinklings may dash him, but they shall
not hurt him; yea the nature of them is so altered, Med^^inales (...) A^g.
(...), corr^^^^nes^ and (...) ^nes, fabr^^^ lo^^s, ^^siones ^^^^t^on^s, and
candidat^^^es Guil P^^is. apud Ames. Bell. Enerv.
that they do him good, as the Lords Warning-peeces, to bring him to repentance
after his falls, and a Physical receipts, which though they be not toothsome,
yet are wholesome to the soul, Heb. 12.10, 11. Jer. 24.5. If thou be well
advised, thou will not look upon them, as eff^cts of revenging justice, but as
fatherly chastisements, and medicines to cure thy folly, and helps to promote
virtue, as hammering or squarings, and knockings, or washings, and whitenings,
Dan. 11.35. And this may minister sweet refreshing to thee under the ro^^, even
when thou have the greatest cause of humiliation for thy sin.

CHAP. VIII. Use 4. Examination.
Sect. 1. The first mark of actual interest in Redemption.
4. BUt now, lest some bold sinner should snatch at this Consolation, under
pretense of an interest in the grace of Redemption, and the benefits and
privileges thereof, it is requisite to add something for Examination, that
every one may know, whether he be actual partaker of them, or no. If this was
the great design of Jesus Christ, in taking upon him the curse, to buy poor
sinners out of the hands of the Law, and to deliver us from the Curse, then it
concerns us all, to search our hearts, and to try our ways, that upon due
consideration, we may be able to give a true satisfying answer in our own souls
to this weighty case of conscience: Whether am I indeed, and truth redeemed
from the curse of the Law? For what shall it avail thee to claim that as thy
right, which upon due search, will be found to be none of thine. Shall not the
Lord judge thee an Usurper, and a Thief in so doing? Therefore judge thy
self, by inquiring, how thy heart can answer to these marks, and evidences of
a redeemed soul.

1. Dear love of the Redeemer. Suppose a poor guiltie-slave tugging, and
sweating in an hard service under a cruel Lord, and ready to breath out his
soul for very anguish, by reason of his bondage, if now some happy man, shall
in mere compassion disburse a great sum for his ransom, and set him at
liberty, how does this engage the silly captives heart to his Deliverer? How
does the esteem of him, and commend him? Oh! says he, had it not been for such
a man, I had lien by it for ever. I even owe him my self, and all that I am,
and I shall love him dearly, as long as I live. This is thy case, if thou have
left Christ actually redeeming thee from the Curse. Thou can look upon him,
and consider both those depths of misery from which he has rescued thee, and
that height of felicity, whereinto he has ensta^ed thee, and also the
desperate hazzards, which he was constrained to run, for the perfecting of
this great work, and thou can seriously profess, and say with David, I will
love thee dearly, O Lord my strength, and my deliverer, Psalm. 18.1, 2. and
116.1, 2, etc. Thou can now speak it in the uprightness of thy heart. Oh, my
soul is exceedingly indeared unto the Lord Jesus, for looking upon such a
miserable creature. I was as a dead dog before the Lord, the curse of the Law
was ready to weary me, but Christ has taken it off, and delivered me from
it. Therefore I love him, he has my heart, and shall have it for ever, well
then, says every pretender, I doubt not but I am redeemed, for I love Jesus
Christ, else I were not worthy to live. But alas, there is much false, unsound,
Properties of sincere love of the Redeemer. (...), quae ad splendorem solis
examen sustinere potest Pasor. Lexic.
dissembling love in the world; only that which is pure, sound, and incorrupt
will evidence your interest in Redemption, Ephesians. 6.24. Let us therefore hold up
this Eagle before the Sun, that we may try, whether it be right bred, or a
bastard. True love to Christ the Redeemer, is,

1. Single, carried to the person of Christ in a direct line, the eye looks
straight toward Christ, so that he loves him primarily for himself, and the
good things which he enjoyes by him, but at the second hand. I grant that the
benefit of Redemption applied, is both a means to produce, and an help to
advance this love: but when the soul begins to know Christ somewhat
experimentally, then he sees that beauty, and excellency in him, which renders
him altogether lovely, Can. 5.16. now he loves him entirely, and longs to be
more nearly united to him. He desires not to be delivered from the curse, and
so to be righteous, and holy, that he may have an interest in Christ. That is
not his method: But contra, he desires to have real interest in Christ, that he
may be freed from the Curse, and so be clothed with his righteousness, and
conformed to him in holiness, Bona tua non nisi tecum, Domine.
If thy heart can say yea to this, thou have an evidence of sincere love to
Christ: but if thou love him only for lumps, for the benefits which thou
gettest by him, deliverance from hell, and the glory of heaven, thy love is
mercenary.

2. Superlative. It transcends, and overtops all the Love of the creature. The
redeemed soul loves wife, children, friends, his own life, and the good things
of this world according to their several degrees of goodness, and he loves
them, (not fainedly, and in show, but) truly and indeed, within due limits, and
in such proportion, as they are capable of, but yet he loves Jesus Christ
far, and far above them all; This love leaves all other loves many thousand
miles behind it, so that none of them can come near it. He is precious,
(singularly precious,) to them that believe: 1 Pet. 2.7. he is an honor to
them, they have a very high esteem of him: His interest prevails in their
souls infinitely above all other interests, in the world. Christ disownes, yea
rejects all love tendered to him, which is inferior to the love of our dearest
relations, Matthew. 10.37. yea, we must hate these in comparison of him, Luke
14.26. Ask thy soul, what it can answer to this? Does thy soul set an high
price on thy Redeemer? Does thy heart embrace him as incomparably excellent?
do thou find the enjoyment of him more sweet, and contenting, than all other
enjoyments? and his absence, hiding of his face, and restraint of his gracious
influences from thy spirit, more bitter, and grievous then all other wants, or
burdens, which thou may meet with? But if thy heart set up any thing above
him, so that Christ and his party, when they stand in competition with some
other party, which has gotten the chair in thy soul, are slighted, and must
sit at its footstool, or be thrust out of doors: Oh, this is a base beggarly
love, which will not stand thee in stead.

3. Invincible. To clear this: the love of Christ in an elect person, actually
redeemed, may possibly be overcome by the prevailing of the contrary
corruption. It is not simply impossible, being a created quality, and therefore
no more able to stand of it self without divine support, than Adam's love to
his Creator, which was so easily mastered, by the suggestions of the serpent,
to the ruin of himself, and his posterity: yet notwithstanding this
possibility, it shall never be totally vanquished, and lost in the soul. It may
be greatly decayed, and driven into a corner: so that the godly Christian may
want the sense of it, and may verily think, that the love of Christ dwells
not in him at all; yet it is there, and shall abide in him for ever. This fire,
(as that on the Altar) shall never be wholly extinguished, Because the Spirit
of God, which first kindled it, is still present, blowing it up less or more,
that it cannot die. It Is a part of the seed of God, which abides in the saints
and preserves them from sinning unto death, which they must needs do, if the
love of the Redeemer, be totally routed, 1 John 3.9. It Is a stream flowing from
the well of water, which springs up in the believer unto everlasting life. John
4.14. The world thrusts sore at this love, that it may fall. Prosperity on one
side presents the beautiful and pleasing objects of riches, honors, eternal
delights, Genesis 49.24.
to draw the love of the soul to themselves. Adversity on the other hand, will
endeavor to affright the soul from the love of Christ, by the stern and
unwelcome shapes of troubles, afflictions, persecutions, and death it self; yet
it is bow abides in strength, by the hand of ^he mighty God, as Joseph's did.
The Saints love not their lives to the death. Romans 12.11. because they love the
Lord Jesus, as Jonathan loved David, not only, as their own souls, 1 Samuel
20.17. but also with a wonderful Love. 2 Samuel 1.26, Jonathan's Love to David
was admirable in this, that it could not be taken off, either by the frowns,
threats, and violence of his Father, Saul against David, and against himself
for adhering to David, or by the consideration of his own interest, which was
deeply concerned in this business, he being heir apparent to the Crown, and
David standing in his light: so the love of the right Christian, to Christ
cannot be wholly overcomed, by temptations on the right hand, or the left; it
can envy, and despise both the sweet enchanting of pleasure, and the bitter
affronts of danger; and keeps its ground in some good measure against them all.
Love is strong as death, the coals of this fire make a most vehement flame;
many waters cannot quench it, nor the floods drown it, Can. 8.6, 7. Try thy
self, if this be thy temper, thy love is right bred: but can thou give way to
any thing in the world, to take off the edge of thy love to Christ? This fire
which is so soon put out, came not down from heaven. Yea (mind it) thou love
Christ, but thou feel not a return of love from him to thy soul; yet if thy
love be incorrupt, thou will still hold on, in prison, as well as Liberty, in
death as well as life, it will not be quite tired out by long delay of comfort;
but the hope of an answer of peace, will keep it acting, in thee, and the days
of thy waiting, and serving him will seem to thee but a few, for the love thou
have to him, as Genesis 29.20.

4. Accompanied with self-jealousie. Although the love of the godly soul to his
Redeemer be thus divinely qualified, yet he has, and keeps up within himself
an holy suspicion concerning himself, that he may work out his own salvation
(now actually begun) with fear and trembling; Phil. 2.13.
Look as it is with a poor maid, who is deeply in love with some young man of
Eminent parts. She considers the great worth, and excellency of the person,
and her own means and unworthiness: She sees a vast distance betwixt her self
and him, so that she shall never be able to answer him according to his
condition; hence she apprehends some danger of miscarrying, least he should
reject her, and her love should be lost: yet still her affection goes out
freely toward him, and he has her whole heart; only she sees cause to fear,
least some undue or uncomely carriage of hers, should displease him, and
provoke him to distaste her; and this fear makes her the more cautelous, and
helps her to endeavor to give him all possible contentment, that she may not
fail of her desires: Thus it is with a poor son of Adam, now made partaker of
Redemption by Christ; he is greatly in love with his Redeemer, but considering
the great inequality betwixt them, and his proneness to offend, he is jealous
over his own base heart, least some unworthy walking should give his love the
lie, and Christ the dearly beloved of his soul should turn him over to Satan
again, and leave him to be a slave to sin, and the curse; or lest his love
should decay, or cool, and Christ his only one should be displeased at him,
and frown upon him. The Gentiles grafted into the Olive Tree, must not be
high-minded, but fear, Romans 11.20. Such are pronounced blessed, Prove. 28.14. If
Paul was jealous over the Corinthians, much more might they themselves, 2 Cor.
11.2, 3. If this jealousy be a stranger to thee, thy love may well be
suspected.

By these signs thou may try the truth of thy love to Christ, and if thou
find this frame of spirit, thou may conclude, that thou art redeemed. A
love thus qualified, is a sure evidence of thy Redemption. For none can
possibly love the Redeemer at this height, but those, which are actually
partakers of the benefit. By nature we do not, we cannot love him; only the
banner of his love in the work of Redemption, displayed to the sinner by the
spirit of God, draws his heart to love him. It may be, thou have no assurance
of any interest in this benefit: but if thou find in thy soul such an high
estimation of Christ, and grace, and such an advised complacency of spirit in
him, as inclines thee to fix the dearest love of thy heart upon him,
(notwithstanding the contrary struglings of the flesh within thee) though it
certainly draw after it the loss of all worldly interests whatsoever: I say, if
this be thy frame, thou have no cause to fear thy condition.

Sect. 2. The second and third mark of interest in Redemption?
2. WEariness under the bondage of sin, both that which is past, and present.

1. The remembrance of his late woeful thraldom under the guilt, and power of
sin, does sometimes sadden his spirit, he cannot think of it without some
degree of regret and sorrow. The misery of his former slavery under sin, is
his wormwood, and gall, when he has it in remembrance, his soul is humbled in
him. Yea, although he has good hope through grace, that he has escaped the
danger of it, yet that does not damme or dry up the spring of sorrow in his
soul, but rather renders it now spiritual, and kindly. Now he says in the
language of the Prophet, Oh let me never return into the house of this prison
again, lest I die there. Try thy self: Iere. 37.20.
It Is no sure sign of a good estate, if upon supposal of thy interest in this
benefit, thy soul be lifted up to such an height of joy, as drownes all
thoughts of thy old sinful condition, and leaves thee altogether unaffected.
If the Apostle had judged this a commendable disposition, he would never have
exhorted the saints of Ephesus to remember in what a pitiful condition they
had formerly been, while they were far off, and in the flesh, Ephesians. 2.11, 12.

2. The sense of that heavy clogg which lies upon him, the body of death,
with the lusts thereof, which as fetters on his legs, are continually pinching
him, makes him to sigh, and cry out, Oh wretched man, who shall deliver me?
and that not only when he is in the dark about his spiritual estate, but also
in the day of his choicest assurance, when he can heartily thank God in the
view of his full deliverance to come, Romans 7.24, 25. I conceive, S. Paul does
there represent the temper of every right Christian (as to this particular) in
his own example. Suppose the arms, legs, and other parcels of a dead carcass,
were chained to the body of a living man, although the trunk of that carcass
were taken quite away, yet, Oh how noisome would it be? It would make a man
weary of himself. Thus it is with the ransomed soul. The bulk of the flesh (as
I may call it) is destroyed by the cross of Christ, the life of it is (in a
great measure) laid in the dust, when he is set free from the Law, that is, the
commanding, overruling, masterfull power of sin; yet still the members of this
carcass, the affections and lusts of the flesh, are sprawling and stirring, and
working in him; and these are as troublesome to a gracious heart, as the
stinking members of a dead body would be to a living body, if they were coupled
to it. Consider thy self now, and see, how it is with thee? Art thou (as
Rebekah) weary of thy life, Genesis 27.46.
because of those daughters of Heth? Can thou say with all thine heart, Oh
that I were altogether freed from them? oh that this vexatious Inmate, with all
her unwelcome train, might be once packed out of doors, that I might see it no
more? When shall it once be? This is a sweet sign, that thou art actually
redeemed. But now, Art thou a stranger to this frame? Is the body of sin no
burden, nor grief of heart to thee? Can thou go under it without stooping?
Do thou not rather bless thy self in thy civil carriage before men, or (at
the best) in thy religious outside profession, and performances before God,
wondering at the preciseness of some persons, which make so much ado, in
sighing, and lamenting under that pressing bondage of corruption which thou art
not acquainted with, nor know what it means. This is a clear evidence, that
thou art still a wretched slave, a mere stranger to the grace of Redemption.

3 A sincere consolation, and real endeavor to abandon all iniquity, and for
ever to relinquish a vain conversation. He that has laid a long time in iron
fetters for his misdemeanors, if he be wise for himself, will utterly renounce
those courses, which has brought him into that misery; and he that has felt
the iron curse of the Law pinching his soul, and is set free by the Lord Jesus,
the grace of God will effectually teach him to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, Tit. 2.12. When the Lord has found a ransom for an humbled soul, whose
life was drawing near to the destroyers, and has sent his Commission to the
Minister of the Gospel to deliver him, the poor soul forthwith reflects upon
himself, and says, I have sinned, and perverted that which is right, and it
profited me not, that is, I have gotten nothing by the trade of sin but woe and
sorrow, therefore I will follow it no longer, Job 33.23.-27. I will not offend,
I will do no more, Job 34.31, 32. The Apostle Peter writing to the dispersed
Jews, tells them, that they are redeemed from their vain conversation which
they had received by tradition from their Fathers, 1 Pet. 1.18. (...).
They had sundry idle, needless, unprofitable customs, both in Religion, and
in common conversation, which they kept on foot from father to son, as things
of necessity, and helps to holiness, as standing by themselves in the Synagogue
to pray by themselves, Luke 18.11. that they might not be defiled by being near
to sinners, washing their hands to their very elbows, lest some uncleanness had
crept beyond the wrests, before they eat, washing of cups, and tables, and many
other things, in a superstitious imitation of their predecessors. From this
vain conversation they were redeemed by the blood of Christ, and the grace of
the Gospel taught them not only to abandon the lusts of their former
ignorance, and the apparent breaches of the Law, but also those foolish and
unsavory traditions. Will thou now bring thy state and ways to this
Touchstone? Thou hopest that thou art redeemed, but can thou show us these
tokens, this resolution and endeavor? Have thou learned to cast away thy old
iniquities? Do thou feel really a separation betwixt thy soul, and thy
formerly beloved sin? If not, thou deceivest thy self.

But observe further, there be sundry by -- courses, too usual not only with
the men of the world, but those also that profess Religion, some clearly
sinful, others at least groundless and unprofitable, as communicating only, or
necessarily at Easter, coming to the Sacrament, fasting, as more holy, dropping
down to prayer in the Assembly in time of public worship, idle, and
unnecessary meeting in the Alehouse to drink shots for good-fellowship, mixed
dancing, garish attire, curious dressings, flaring long hair; Doing one ill
turn for another, Mat. 5 38, ^9. So did they, and so do we.
these, and the like practices are (at the best) but so many parcels of a vain
conversation; and if thy soul have truly tasted the sweetness of this precious
benefit, thou can freely let them fall both out of thine heart and hands, and
say unto them, Get you hence. If thou have no mind to part with them, but
hold them fast, and stretchest thy wit to plead for them, I fear thou have
yet no portion in this benefit.

Sect. 3. Other three marks of interest in Redemption.
4. SEparation from the world, from the earth, from men. They are not of the
world, even as their Redeemer is not of the world, Joh. 17.14. St. Paul does
solemnly profess, that the world was crucified to him, 1 Ioh. 5.4.
and he to the world by the Cross of Jesus Christ, Gal. 6.14. Those hundred
forty four thousand which stood on Mount Sion with the Lamb, are redeemed from
the earth, (...).
and from among men, Rev. 14.3, 4. They are partakers of the Divine nature, and
so escape the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4. They
are more excellent than their neighbors, Prove. 12.26. Their designs desires,
delights, aims, are higher than the earth, they aspire above it. On the
contrary, those that abide in their sin, have their portion in this life, Psalm.
17.14. And its one bad property of the enemies of the Cross of Christ, that
they mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19. What says thy heart to this? Art thou
carried up above the world? Does the earth and the things of it, seem mean and
base, and vile in thine eyes? Art thou in the frame and carriage of thy soul
above the common pitch and scantling of the sons of men? So that thou think
not, willest not, affectest not as they do, but go in an higher orb? thy
conversation is more in heaven, than in earth, Phil. 3.20. This is a sweet
evidence of a redeemed soul. But art thou a friend to the world? Is it thy
Darling? Do the profits, pleasures, Iam. 4.4.
contentments of it allure, and prevail with thee to fall down and worship
them, and to devote thy self to their service? Is the earth thine element? Do
the things of this life take up thy thoughts, thy cares, thy employments, so
that thou art even drowned in them, and thou have not an heart that can savor
things of a better life? Do thou walk as a man? Are thy words, actions, aims
like thy neighbors? Are they no better, nor higher than other men's? Why, then
it seems, thou art still in thine old bondage.

5. Walking in, and after the Spirit. The walk of the natural man, who is the
Devils bond-slave is in, and after the flesh. The corrupt wisdom of the old
man, which is enmity to God, Romans 8.7. is his light, and the will thereof, is
the very life of his soul. He has neither light, nor life within him,
available to salvation; the instinct and dictatings of his fallen nature, carry
him on in his whole course. But when the grace of Redemption is brought home to
the soul, and the Son has set him free, then the Spirit of the Son (who of a
slave has made him a Son) does animate, act, lead, and guide him all along in
the residue of his conversation, according to that remarkable promise, Ezekiel.
36.27. and the Apostles grave Aphorism, Romans 8.14 The flesh abiding in him,
will be still lusting against the Spirit, and drawing him out of his way; but
his frame, bent, desire, and constant endeavor, is to be at the direction and
appointment of the Spirit in all his ways: He looks upon the flesh as a very
bad guide, and not to be trusted, therefore if at any time he be misled by it,
when he perceives it, he turns away from it, with sorrow for his folly. It is
the Spirit of God, which he chooses for his guide; unto it speaking in the word
he repairs continually for counsel, and resignes himself up to follow it in all
things. This is the signal evidence, which the Apostle gives of those that are
freed from condemation by Jesus Christ, and he makes it out upon this ground,
Because the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has freed them from the
law of sin and death, Romans 8.1, 2, 3. When the Angel of the Lord had rowsed up
Peter in the prison, and caused the chains to fall off from his hands, he gave
him a command to follow him; Peter being now set at liberty, goes after him
from one place to another, Act. 12.7, 8. etc. Even so, when the Spirit of God
has loosed a sinner from his bonds, by settling upon him the benefit of
Redemption, he is then fit, and ready to walk after the same Spirit from one
stage of duty to another. As in Ezekiels Vision, the Spirit, that was in living
creatures, acted the wheels to go when they went, and to stand when they stood,
Ezekiel. 1.19, 20, 21. So the members of Christ, are carried on by the breathings
of his Spirit dwelling in them, in all their ways. But take notice, that it is
not a private spirit, but the Spirit of God speaking in the word, not a spirit
opposed to the Scriptures, but the Spirit speaking in the Scriptures, which is
the Guide, whom the Redeemed follow. The word of God revealed in them, is the
breathing and voice of the Spirit; the same spirit presents the way of God
prescribed in the word, to the eyes of the mind, and then bows the heart to
the obedience of it, so that the Soul says, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears, 1 Samuel 3.9. Christ's sheep hear his voice, by his Spirit speaking to
the Churches, and they follow him, Joh. 10 27. Rev. 2.7. Consider this,
Christian, where lies thy walk? which way goes the genius, savor, minding of
thy soul? Have thou given up thy self to the guidance of the Spirit speaking in
the word? when it persuades thee to godliness, humility, love, peace, etc. Does
thy soul embrace its persuasions, and art thou free to obey them? Its well. But
does thy palate relish the things of the flesh? Do thou walk more willingly
after it? Are thy wisdom, reason, sense, e^amples of others thy counselors?
When thy carnal heart eggs thee on to some ungodly practice, hatred, malice,
brow-beating of thy neighbor, revenge, contentions, selfishness, and
tenaciousness, in case thou art called to help forward a good work, it is a
shrewd sign, that thou art a stranger to this grace, if thou followest its
counsel.

6 Purity of heart and life, at least an unfeigned desire, study, endeavor
after holiness in the whole frame of his soul and course of his conversation.
By our Apostasy from God, we have implunged our selves into the ditch, and are
become (every mothers child of us at one clap) filthy and stinking, Simul
putrefact^. Psalm. 14.3.
being slaves of Satan that unclean Spirit, who labors to make us more and
more black, that we may be as foul as himself. But when the Lord is pleased to
draw any poor sinners out of this horrible pit, by applying them to the grace
of Redemption, he will not suffer them to lie any longer in their blood, and
filth, but he washes away their filth, and cleanses their blood by the
unspotted sacrifice of his Son, and by the Spirit of judgment, and of burning,
Heb. 9.14. Isa. 4.3, 4. See Heb. 10.^2 Hearts sprinkled, and bodies washed.
If an Israelite having taken any women captives in the war, did espy one whom
he had a mind to make his wife, she must first be prepared by shaving her
head, and paring her nails, and putting off the raiment of her captivity, and
the like usages; upon these terms, and not otherwife, she might enjoy the
privilege of being his wife, Deuteronomy. 21.10. etc. That Hester a poor captive-maid
may be capable of advancement to the Royal estate of a Queen (wife to one of
the greatest Monarchs in the world) she must first be purified with the oil of
myrrh and sweet odours, for the space of fix months, and then she is preferred
to that honor, Hest. 2.12.-16, 17. Even so when the Lord Jesus has brought
back the captivity of poor sinners that they may be married to him in heavenly
glory, they must first be purified in their consciences from the guilt, and in
their hearts from the reigning pollution of sin, and they must still proceed to
cleanse themselves, from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, that they may be
presented to him holy, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and without blame, Ephesians. 5.27. This was one of Christ's great designs in giving
himself for us, that he might redeem us, and purify us to be a peculiar people
unto himself, The walk of the Redeemed is in the highway of holiness. Isa.
35.8, 9.
Tit. 2.14. and he will not be bafled in any of his designs. The Lord will not
own thee for a redeemed soul, if thou lie still in thy filthiness and art a
stranger to this spiritual purity. What say thou to this? how stands thy
heart affected? is true holiness beautiful in thine eyes? do thou desire and
hunger after it? do thou study, and stretch out continually toward it? art
thou still complaining of the remnants of impurity, and can thou not be
satisfied without a greater measure of purity both of heart and life? This is a
good sign that thou have an interest in Christ's Ransom. But do thou
distaste purity? can thou jeer it, and scoff it, and slight it, as
needless? is it burdensome to thee? and likest thou rather to abide in the old
sent, and to lie in the dung of thy corrupt estate and ways, than to rise up,
and to follow after holiness? Surely thou art still in the bond of Iniquity.

CHAP. IX. Use 5.
Sect. 1. Exhortation to senseless sinners.
5. THis important Truth may afford us matter of very profitable exhortation.
The knowledge of this main Gospel-principle, concerning the buying out of poor
sinners from the curse of the Law, by Christ's becoming a curse for them, is
very useful for all the sons, and daughters of Adam, to excite them to such
duties, as are most proper to their present conditions respectively. None of
Adam's brood, but it has somewhat to say to them:

1. It cries aloud in the ears of senseless sinners, which lie secure in their
old slavery, under the curse, unto this day. Oh wretched creatures, what thing
shall I take to witness for you? or what shall I equal to you? Lam. 2.13.
What tongue can utter words, or what eyes can send forth tears sufficient to
lament your sad condition? You lie bound hand and foot, under the power of
darkness, and here is Redemption to be had by Christ. Oh then, why will you
choose to lie so still, and not rather accept of seasonable deliverance? Should
a Prince send a message to imprisoned Captives, that their ransom is paid, and
they may come forth upon reasonable terms, and be freemen; if now none will
stir to embrace the offer, might it not well be thought, that either they are
all dead, or in a deep sleep, or strangely besotted. God sends these glad
tidings to sinners, every day by the Gospel, and they never regard it. Either
they say, as the Jews, Jo. 8.33. We are not in bondage; or they sit secure, and
say, no evils shall befall us. Woe, woe to the inhabitants of the world, which
slight this precious grace, choosing rather to lie still under the brazen
bars of the curse of Gods fiery Law, which accepts of no man's person, and
cannot admit of any plea of exemption for noble or base, rich or poor: All are
alike, Romans 3.21. Oh what pity is it, and how should it humble us, even unto
the dust, to see such a precious jewel trampled under the feet, or carelessly
cast behind the backs of sinners? to observe in the greatest number such an
indifferency of spirit, as they are no whit affected with this pearl, that
neither sorrow for want of it, nor desire to enjoy it, nor any serious regard
of it can take place in their souls? that though they be told of deliverance by
Christ, and profess, that they believe it, yet the Devil prevails with them to
resist their own good, and willingly to abide in the chains of the curse all
their days? I beseech you, if there be any spark of lawful selflove in your
breasts, if you have not wholly abandoned all compassion of your selves, and are
become your own enemies, be awaked from your sloth, and look about you. Do you
thus requite the Lord Jesus, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy father,
Romans 7.9.
that has bought thee? Rather, let my counsel be acceptable to you in these
few particulars.

1. Give way to the Light, and authority of the Law, (in the ministry of it) to
bring thee to a thorough conviction of thy misery, and extreme need of the help
of their Redeemer. Think it not sufficient that the Law has lent thee light
enough to say, All men are sinners, and so to wrappe thy self in gross with
them, and to be content to be reckoned among them, seeing thou can not avoid
it, but bring it home to thy conscience, believe thy self to be his accursed
sinner, and say, I am the man. Imprison not the truth in unrighteousness, but
let it so overpower thy soul, that thou may be no longer able to resist it,
but may yield thy self into the arrest of God's justice, that the spirit of
bondage may cause thee to fear the curse and wrath of God, and thou may lie
slain, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
and dead in thy self, utterly unable to recover thy self, and therefore
helpless, and hopeless, as to thy self, or any thing in the world. Let the Law
have its free course to work thee into this frame. When the Lord meane's to
apply the ransom to a poor sinner for his deliverance from the pit, he first
open's his ears, and scale's his instruction, that he may hide pride from him,
Job 33.17.-24. If thou be wise, thou will meet the Lord in this way; though it
be unpleasant, yet it is profitable. But if thou either continuest dead, and
blockish under the discoveries of the Law, or favourest thy self in thy sloth,
and ease, or liftest thy crests in confidence of the safety of thy condition,
there is no hope for the present of any saving good toward thee. And yet alas,
how is the Spirit of the Law straitened in these sad times? Our people will not
suffer it to come near them, much less to master them. If any thing be offered
them in way of conviction, they either drown it in their cups, or sing it away
in merry Jiggs, or laugh it out of countenance, or (at the best) suffer it to
wear off, and to die in their hands. But in the fear of God, beware of these
things. I tell thee, thou may be quite dismounted and cast down, at the
Lords feet: All ways must be blocked up, whereby the carnal heart may take
occasion to nourish hope of escaping out of this prison.

2. Being at this loss, advisedly resolve, not to abide in this condition, but
to make have out of it. Say to thy self, O my soul, Where? in what case art
thou? It Is no tarrying here: It Is too hot to be under the curse, in the flames
of hell. Who can dwell with the devouring fire? with everlasting burnings, Isa.
33.14. Search, enquire, ask counsel. Go to the ministers of Christ, and say
unto them, as these, Acts 2.37. Men and brethren, what shall we do? and the
Jaylour, Acts 16.30. Sirs, what must I do to be saved? They are the messengers
of the Lord of hosts, their lips should preserve knowledge, and you must seek
the law at their mouths, Mal. 2.7. Their office is to publish this ransom, and
to declare unto the humbled sinner his righteousness, in pronouncing him
delivered by virtue of that Ransom, Job. 33.23, 24. But oh, alas, if there be
a Minister in the Town, an Interpreter, one that is willing, according to the
measure of the gift bestowed on him, to reveal the counsel of God to poor
sinners, how long may he sit at home, before any of his neighbors will knock
at the door, to tell him, that they are wretched prisoners, under the Curse,
and know not how to get out? yea, although he be accounted one of a thousand,
scarcely four persons in a whole twelve-moneth, will come to him, traveling
under their burden, and propounding such questions as these: Oh how shall I
get from the Curse of the Law? who shall draw me out of this woeful dungeon,
wherein I ly? Truly this speaks sad things to such a people, and testifies
against them, that they are seared in their consciences, and sealed up unto
condemnation.

3. Fall down before the glorious Majesty of the great Lawgiver the Lord of
heaven, and earth, as forlorn prisoners, and condemned Slaves. Spread your
case before him, by a free and full Confession, ripp up the bowels of that
darkness, and death, that sinkhole of hell, that lies in your souls. Tell him,
in what a desperate state thou art, deal plainly, seriously, and sincerely,
leave no covert, or shelter, or figg-leaf, to hide thy self under, but lay thy
soul bare, and naked before him; Let thy Laughter be turned into mourning,
James 4.9. and in the sense of thine undone condition, cry mightily, as the
prisoner at the bar, for mercy and deliverance; Jonah 3.9.
who can tell, but that the Lord will return, and have compassion on thee,
that thou perish not in the hands of the Curse? When Saul was stricken down to
the earth, by a light, and voice from heaven, and stood before the Lord
trembling; and astonished, he forthwith falls to this work, Lord, (says he,)
What will thou have me to do? as if he should say, Lord, thou have overcome, I
must yield; what shall I do in this exigent? If thou will show me thy mind,
and the way which I should go, Lo, I am here, willing to obey, Acts 9.3, 4,
etc. and the Lord speaking of him to Ananias, mentions it, as a thing very
remarkable, (even with a star in the forehead) Behold, See Job 3^.26.
he prays, verse 11. And certainly, If the Spirit of bondage has brought the
Curse close home to thy soul, and caused it to sting thee to the purpose, thou will not be restrained; but thy chamber, and closet, and every corner, where
thou can have Liberty to disburden thy self, will be witnesses of thy
complaints and petitions, and thou will let the Lord see, that thou art in good
earnest. But, woe is me, while our people continue so sottish, and profane, and
their hearts so unaffected with their misery, that they cannot bow, nor bend,
they have neither expressions, nor affections of prayer, it is no marvel, if
the grace of Redemption lie altogether neglected. Restraint of prayer argues
security. Job 15.4.
If the bankrupt debtor be so stout, and stiff, that he will not fall down, and
beseech his Creditor to have patience, and compassion on him, he may lie by it,
who can pity him?

4. In the mean time take notice, that there is a Ransom paid for sinners by
Jesus Christ, that he has taken upon him the Curse, to buy them out from it.
Take it for granted, and write upon it, as unquestionable, that redemption is
feasible, so that there is hope, that even thou may be actually delivered,
out of this woeful prison. Labor to understand the nature of this mystery, be
persuaded of the realness of it, get thy soul bottomed on the certainty of this
main Gospel Truth, work on thy heart the consideration of the necessity of it,
in reference to thine own state. Study it, and dwell upon it in thy most serious
thoughts, that thy heart may be duly affected with it, as a thing most nearly
concerning thine own particular. But alas, our people, although they hear this
Doctrine frequently, yet either they are as the horse and mule, without
understanding, or they hear it, as a common story, deserving only some weak,
confused assent, or they look upon it, as an ordinary mercy, or as dry Manna,
never so much as going about to ponder the personal importance of it, but
busying themselves about, and enslaving themselves unto the profits, and
pleasures, and poor contentments of the world, so that they have neither mind,
nor leisure, to think of saving their souls from the stroke of God's curse; It
cannot be expected, that these persons continuing such, should ever attain to
an actual interest in this benefit; they forsake their own mercy, by observing
lying vanities, Jon. 2.8. and judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life,
Acts 13.46.

5. But then take this along with you, and be it known unto you all, that the
Lord has measured out, and appointed a way wherein you must go, if ever you
will come to this city of Refuge. Reckon not on actual Redemption, merely upon
this score, because Christ has taken upon him the Curse, and thereby satisfied
the justice of the Law: God has as well fixed the means, as the End: He has
prescribed something in the nature of a condition, Cum unusquisque actui ex sua
voluntate pendenti legem possit imponere, etc. Grotius, de Satisfac, cap. 6.
to be performed on our part, (yet by his strength) in order to the obtaining
of a real interest in this benefit. In every act, which depends upon a man's
will, and pleasure, to do it, or not to do it, he has liberty to set down his
own terms, as that the effect or fruit of it shall enure, either absolutely,
or under a condition: As, in case I am willing to be at cost for the ransoming
of a slave out of Turkey, I may lawfully impose upon him some honest,
reasonable conditions, whereunto if he do not submit, he shall have no benefit
by the ransom. If this may be allowed to a man, whose breath is in his
nostrils, how much more to God, the great Monarch, and Governor of the world?
Although he was very well satisfied with the price which Christ paid, as being
fully satisfactory to his justice: Yet it was not the mind either of the
Father, or the Son, that any sinner should actually be discharged forthwith
upon the payment of the price, but only upon a condition of something in
himself, which may be a ground of a personal title thereunto. Suppose the
Prince or state should accept of the satisfaction given by another, (be it his
eldest Son) for the crimes of certain prisoners, resolving that their release
should become actual, only upon some conditions to be performed by themselves,
(although not by their one power): should any of them, under pretense of this
satisfaction, take it ill, that they are not forthwith set at liberty, and
thereupon offer to make an escape, may not this be justly interpreted, a breach
of prison? may not they expect to. hear some say, Stay friends, you make too
much haste, there goes too words to a bargain. Look to your task, do that which
you are enjoined, and the prison doors will instantly fly open; else you must
be fetched back again, and your bonds made more strong: Even so if you will
snatch at this freedom, as soon as ever you he^r that the price is paid,
creeping out at the window, and not going forth by the door, you will find at
length, that you are wretched Bondmen still: if you will take possession by
leaping over the hedge, and not by the way of Liverie, Romans 10.3. Luke 13.28.
(...). Ejected out of illegal possession: If not from eternity, or before they
were borne.
and Seisin, you must be cast out, as Intruders and Usurpers. Yet alas, this is
a very common, but a dangerous Solaecisme in Christianity, (which is rendered
more plausible by the late Antinomian doctrine, of the actual acquittance of
all the Elect, at, and from the very time of Christ's sufferings), Men hear the
report of the Redemption of the world by Christ, and they presumptuously claim
a part in it, at the first news, not regarding the terms, upon which it must
become theirs, if ever they enjoy it. If a Minister go to a careless sinner
lying on the bed of languishing, and present unto him his sin, and the Curse,
that he may see his danger, and look out for the remedy, he will confidently
avouch, that Christ has shed his blood for him, and will save him, he never
fears it, and yet this man has all his life time rejected the counsel of God,
against himself, concerning the way to get a particular interest therein. Alas
poor soul: this confidence is nothing else, but a pleasant dream, and there
will be a sad awaking at last, when thou have cheated thy self into everlasting
chains.

Sect. 2. The way to get an actual Interest in Redemption.
BUt what is that way, or mean, which God has fixed, as a kind of condition
of the sinners actual interest in this grace of Redemption?

I Answer: 1. The proper, and most principal mean is faith in the Lord Jesus.
The Scripture lays the stress of this business mainly upon Faith. As Christ is
the way to the Father, John 14.6. so Faith is the way to Christ, therefore it
is called the faith which is into Christ, Acts 26.18. (...); u^t^ me: So 2 Timothy
2.15.
by which sinners receive forgiveness, and an inheritance: and it is described
to be a coming unto Christ, John 6.39. God has set him forth to be a
propitiation; and he becomes such actually to me, through Faith in his blood,
Romans 3.25. This is as an hand created in the soul, by the Spirit of God, to
receive, and take home Jesus Crist the Redeemer, with all his benefits unto
eternal life. It is, when a sinner sensible of his sin, and the curse, and so
lost in himself, renounceth his own righteousness, and all creature-helps, and
betakes himself to Jesus Christ alone, accepting him as he is offered in the
Gospel, that is, both to be his Savior, and his Lord; both to rest upon him
for righteousness, and salvation: an to resign himself up to his Government,
in subjection to his Laws. This is the Faith of the Gospel, which, as it has
a special aptness, in that it acts (as the eye sees,) Non extramittendo, sed
intramittendo.
to be a mean of interessing us in the grace of Redemption; so we cannot doubt,
that the Lord has, put upon it this office also, to be after the manner of a
condition, if we observe these Scripture-expressions, Romans 4.24. if we believe
on him that raised up Jesus, it shall be imputed to us for righteousness. Romans
10.9. If thou shall believe in thy heart, -- thou shall be saved: and the want
of this condition is threatened with death, Jo. 8.24. See also, Jo. 20.31. Acts
8.37.

But 2. This faith toward the Lord Jesus, is ever accompanied with repentance
toward God; which is called repentance from dead works, and coupled with faith
in God, as twins in the doctrine of the foundation of Christ. Heb. 6.1. This is
the souls irking with its former sinful estate, and ways, and a deep
displeasure at himself for them, together with a forsaking of them, and turning
away from them unto God, in the sincere purpose of the heart, and serious
endeavor of the conversation. And that repentance has some hand in this
business, to be a mean, (and as a condition too, in part,) of interest in
Redemption, may appear by promises of mercy, pardon, and healing made to it,
Pro. 28.14. Job 33.27, 28.
Job 11.14, 15, etc. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Acts 3.19. and the contrary threatening,
Luke 13.3. which plainly implies, that without this there is no escaping of
perdition, and therefore no actual Redemption. So that, the sinner now, as by
one hand of faith he takes Christ's Righteousness unto himself; so by
Repentance, as by the other hand, he thrusts away sin from himself, out of
his heart, and hands, that he may enjoy a part in the grace of Redemption.
Christ the Redeemer himself made these the chiefest subject of his preaching,
Mark 1.15. and so did his Apostles, to whom the publication of this Doctrine
was committed, Acts 20.21. and directed humbled souls to both these, as they
had occasion. S. Peter ascribes Repentance with Baptism, Acts 2.38. and S.
Paul says, Act. 16.31. not that those two preachers differed in their
judgments, or that either of these two graces were sufficient alone by it
self, but rather to show their near affinity, that they cannot be separated,
that the right and thorough performance of the one, is the performance of both.
This is the Kings Highway: if you hope to compass Redemption, and salvation in
any other way, you will certainly be deceived. Oh that you, the careless
sinners in Zion (for unto you I speak all this while) would at length be rouzed
by the sound of this trumpet, to look out for deliverance by Christ, before the
prison doors be made so fast upon you, that there will be no remedy, and to
provoke you the more to a thing so necessary, consider these Motives.

1. There is no possibility of deliverance from sin, and the Curse, by any
other means. A redeemer you must have, or you are undone, and the redeemer must
pay a vaste sum for your Redemption. This is done to your hand by Jesus
Christ, if you will accept it upon his terms: If you will not, I would ask,
where will you find a Redeemer? Do you look for another to come? He that must
do this work, must bear the Curse for you: But where is the man, that can, or
will undertake this? God has found none in heaven or earth mighty enough to
lay this help upon, Isa. 63.5.
but Jesus Christ, therefore he has laid it upon him, Psalm. 89.19. and now
there remains no more sacrifice for sin. There is no wisdom, nor power in
all the world, that can relieve or bestead the sinner, which will not submit to
this way of God.

2. If thou will not give way to Christ, to glorify his mercy in rescuing
thee from the Curse, and Condemnation, he will glorify his Justice, in letting
thee lie an accursed prisoner for ever. If thou will seek the Lord, his hand
will be upon thee for good: But if thou forsake him, his power, and his wrath
will be against thee, to thy ruin, Ezra. 8.22. If thou will not kiss the
Son, he will be angry, and thou shall perish in the way, Psalm. 2.12. His
taking the Curse upon him, will not serve thy turn, to secure thee from the
danger of it, unless thou will be persuaded to come up to his terms, and
heartily embrace him, as thine only Lord-Redeemer, will give a large
commission to it, to destroy thee without mercy. He that obeyes not the Son,
the wrath of God abides on him, John 3.36. and he will come with vengeance in
his hands against them, that obey not the Gospel, 2 These. 1.18.

3. Now the Lord offers you this incomparable mercy, you have the render of it
still continued in the Ministry of the Word, and the Spirit is Still
inviting, and beseeching you to accept of this redemption, and reconciliation
thereby. Oh then hearken to the motion, and yield your selves forthwith unto
the Lord. For although you do not give a peremptory denial, yet if you sit
still, and triffle, your hearts will be hardened, Psalm. 95.7, 8. I know thy
thoughts; thou take it for granted, that thou can come, and get a part in
Christ, when thou please, but it is not so. It Is easy to say, God be
merciful to me, and it is in thy power to presume; but to repent, and to
believe unfainedly, and in truth, thou shall find to be a work above thy
strength. I tell thee, thou bold sinner, God will one day come near, and plead
thus with thy conscience, I gave thee Twenty, thirty, forty years, and all
that while my Spirit has been wrestling with thee, to draw thee to Christ, and
thou say, I can come at my pleasure. If thou can, why have thou not come
all this while. Seeing therefore, thou have dallied with my grace, and rendered
all my importunity and waiting void, and ineffectuall, thou shall never enter
into this blessed rest of Redemption.

4. If you have any true love to the Ministers of Christ, or any desire of
their welfare, and comfort, then come in, and seek for a share in this benefit,
We are the servants of the Lord Jesus, sent forth to proclaim Redemption to
the world. How would it glad our hearts, to see you all flocking in, as doves
to the windows, for your interest therein! that we may rejoice in the day of
Christ, and say* Behold, here am I, and the souls whom thou have ransomed with
thy blood, which have yielded themselves to thee, through our Ministry. If you
set light by this grace, and love the world, and the contentments of it better
than Jesus Christ, you break our hearts, and you will bring down our heads with
shame, and sorrow to the grave. But if you have no regard of us, yet, at least
pity your selves. When the Lord of the whole world shall call us to give an
account of our stewardship, and we shall be forced to give in this true
evidence against you, Lord, we have stretched out our hands, all the day, all
the year, all our life long, to a careless, and disobedient people, Romans 10.12.
Our words came to their ears, but they would not suffer them to reach their
hearts; Oh then! how can you lift up your heads? or whether will you fly for
relief?

And now, I could heartily wish, that his word might follow you home, and the
sound of this trumpet grow more, and more shrill in your ears, till it has
awakened you thoroughly. Still remember, that it is a business of the greatest
importance, requiring your choicest pains and diligence, if S. Austine said
truly, He that has made thee without thee, will not save thee without the
(understanding it of full savation, or the whole course of it, means as well as
end) then may we say as truly, he that has paid the price of thy redemption
without thee, will not give thee the full possession of it without thee. That
which a man seeks, he may probably find; if thou will bestir thy self in the
use of means, there is hope that thou may enjoy this mercy: But if thou
sleightest, and neglectest it, thou shall be sure to lose it. As free a gift as
it is, God will not drop it into your mouths, while you snort and sleep; if
you think it not worth your most serious endeavors, you shall never be better
for it.

I have delivered mine errand, and I must leave it with you. Now advise, and
see, what answer I shall return to him that sent me.

CHAP. X.
Sect. 1. Exhortation to sensible sinners.
2. THis precious Truth holds forth an Olive Branch of peace to sensible and
broken sinners, which are convinced of their misery by the curse, and lie under
the bondage age of it, unable to get out. Poor soul, thou feel thy self
accursed thou hear, that Christ by becoming a curse, has ransomed sinners
from the curse, yet something still knocks thee off, that thou can not reach
up to the enjoyment of this happiness, but walk mournfully as a mere stranger
to it, expecting the uttermost mischief that it can work against thee. I
beseech thee in the bowels of our dear Redeemer, take special notice of this
weighty Truth, and bring it home close to thy spirit. Ar^ thou persuaded that
Christ has done this for wretched sinners? Why then do not thou set thy
heart upon it, and improve it seriously for thy best advantage? Thou poor
weather-beaten soul, be of good cheer, the Lord Jesus has paid thy ransom,
and now he bids thee come out of prison. Will thou not give him leave to redeem
thee, but choose to lie by it still? Oh do not nourish this bondage of
conscience any longer, by holding off from this blessed remedy. Say to thy
soul, I see the Redeemer has paid a price, which is abundantly sufficient to
redeem many thousands, and has made them prisoners of hope. Well, I will
humbly hope, that I am one of that happy number. And that thou may be really
happy in the personal possession of this grace of Redemption, I will give thee
counsel, and God shall be with thee. Take it in three particulars.

1. Seriously ponder the weight and strength of this great design. It is
bottomed on the everlasting love of God, and managed by his admirable wisdom.
The spring from which it flows is love, and wisdom carries it on from first to
last. It is the good pleasure of his will, founded on his everlasting decree,
that sinners should be delivered and saved in this way, and in none other.
Hearken what the Lord says to thee poor sinner, I have given my Son to take
upon him thy curse, that thou might be freed from it: And here I give thee
my faithful promise, that if thou will heartily accept him for thy
Lord-redeemer, and resign up thy self unto him, thou shall both be acquitted
from all the mischief which the curse would bring upon thee, and moreover
instated in all that righteousness and glory, which he enjoyes as Mediator, and
that by a sure Covenant, never to be forgotten; my word may be sufficient
security to thee, but if that will not serve, behold here are my seals [the
Sacraments] visible evidences of my well-meaning, which may put all out of
question. Oh then, I beseech thee bring thy heart to rest satisfied in this,
unless thou dare slight the Lords free love, or think that thou can
disanull his eternal purpose, and resist, or alter the counsel of his will, and
be wiser than thy Maker, what may hinder but thou should lay hold on this
strength, and make peace, Isaiah 27.5.

2. I suppose, thou art skared out of thine old profane temper, and see
great need of plying the Throne of grace, a with supplications for mercy,
deliverance, pardon, and acceptance. Psalm. 130.1. Lam. 3.55, 56.
Well, continue still instant, and watch thereunto, let not thy sales fall,
especially pray earnestly for grace and strength to perform the condition.
Although the benefit of Redemption be far out of thy reach, and seem impossible
in thine eyes, Mar. 9.23.
yet if thou can believe, it is thine, all things are possible to him that
believes. And because faith is the gift of God, and no man can Come to Christ
unless the Father draw him, Joh. 6.44. therefore it behooves thee to be
importunate for this drawing power, to bring thee to Jesus Christ, that thou
may rest upon him, and be happy. And unto prayer, join other Ordinances,
waiting on God in the use of them all in their several degrees, and seasons,
till the Spirit shall breathe a spark of faith into thy soul. Hearken not to
those, which bid thee lie still, Prove. 19.15
and wait, but do nothing; idle waiting may lull thee asleep in security, and
lay thee open to delusions and false hallowS concerning thy spiritual
condition, which may tend to thy undoing, but it is not the way wherein the
Spirit of God delights to draw near to the soul of the humbled sinner. Wait on
the Lord, and keep his way, Psalm. 37.34. The Lord is willing to do great things
for poor sinners, yet he will be enquired of by them, they must seek unto him
for the performance of them, Ezekiel. 36.37.

3. While thou art thus sighing toward heaven, and begging faith to be
ransomed, and freed from thy sore bondage, be careful to learn self-denial,
trampling under-foot, not only thine own righteousness (which I presume, thou
do already) but also wisdom, reason, sense, and whatsoever else may
unhappily stop thy way, and keep thee off from Christ; and still ever, and
anon, be trying thy heart toward the acting of faith; do not sit down in the
sullenness of thy spirit, saying, I do well to hold of, but struggle with thy
unbeleeving heart. Set thy foot upon this way, and lift up one foot after
another, that at last thou may come to close with thy Redeemer. See he is
here waiting for thy coming: Oh, says he, Hos. 13.13.
How long will the poor child stay in the place of breaking forth of children?
Stick at it no longer, but overleaping at difficulties, forthwith betake thy
self to Jesus Christ, and thou art actually set free. Ioh. 16.9.10.
Let thy heart be convinced of righteousness, as well as of sin, that as thou
have seen thy sin powerfully working toward thy condemnation, so thou may
see, and gladly embrace the righteousness of Christ's Salvation, working as
powerfully for thy acquittance and justification. Say, Lord, although I find
no encouragement either in my self, or from the creature, to expect any good by
the work of Redemption, yet seeing thou have graciously promised deliverance to
all poor captives that will betake themselves to Jesus Christ, and give up
themselves to him by faith, behold here I am, I believe, help thou mine
unbeleef, Mar. 9.24. he shall have the cream of my heart, I will make bold to
go to him, and cast my burden upon him for ever.

But here the humbled soul is ready to plead against himself in this manner.
Sect. 2. Answer to two Objections.


Object. 1. If I knew that this benefit did indeed belong to me, then I might
have some ground to believe on Christ, for the obtaining of it. But I have no
assurance of that; and thus to believe might be to believe an untruth, and so
instead of doing a duty, I should commit a sin.

Answ. 1. This Objection arises, 1. From ignorance of the extent of the grace
held forth in the Gospel, as if it did except some particular persons, whereas
it makes an offer to all, and every one indefinitely, under the conditions
before expressed.

2 From a mistake about the proper nature of faith; supposing it to be an
assurance or persuasion of heart, concerning the love of God in special to me,
and my actual interest in redemption, whereas in truth it stands,

1 In the understandings assent to the doctrine of the Gospel, or a belief of
the certainty of those things which Christ has done for us as Mediator.

Nemo jubetur credere se redemptum esse, pri^squam credat in ipsum
And 2. The hearts willing consenting, and accepting of him with all his
benefits freely offered. I must not first know, that I have right unto actual
Redemption, and then believe on Christ, but I must first believe on Christ,
that I may have an actual right in it. No man can be groundedly persuaded of
his personal interest in Christ, and the grace of Redemption, till he has
heartily consented to the match which the Gospel offers, and given up himself
to him, as his Lord Redeemer.

2. Yet thou have sufficient, yea abundant warrant thus to believe (that is, to
take Christ, and to rest on him for Redemption) both from Gods express command,
as 1 John 3.23. and from his invitations by promises of rest, righteousness and
salvation, Matthew. 11.28. Act. 13.39. and 16.31. Christ himself tells us
plainly, Joh. 6.29. (...) etc.
answering them that asked him, what they should do, that they might work the
works of God? That this (says he) is the work, or the work of God [by way of
eminency, that work, which he would have you to do, and which is well-pleasing
to him above all other works] that ye believe, etc. This is thy work, fall to
it presently; stand not disputing or questioning whether this Redemption be for
thee, but believe, that by believing thou may be instuted in it, and it may
be actually thine.

Object. 2. But I have heard, that this benefit is not for all; Christ never
intended to buy out all and every one of Adams posterity from the Curse, and it
may be I am none of that number, for whom it was meant.

Answ. 1. To the former branch of the Objection. Divines have various
apprehensions concerning the extent of Redemption. The most received doctrine
amongst orthodox Writers (as I take it) is, that it is as narrow as Election
and effectual vocation, that the Lord did not intend, that the curse and
sufferings of Christ, should be paid as a price for the ransoming of all, and
every one, but only of those, who were singularly designed in Gods eternal
purpose according to Election to the enjoyment of it, by effectual calling.

There be other two opinions, which hold an universality of Redemption, yet
with a very great difference: The Arminians teach that Christ dyed for all
alike, that by his death he obtained that all men should be restored into the
state of grace and salvation, that Almighty God, did not will, or intend the
redemption of any one more, See Wards Conc ad Clerum, page 19.20.
or less than another, that both the price was paid for Judas, as well as for
Peter, and the application of it (on Gods part) is equally for them both, not
more for Peter than Judas; but the difference is made by themselves, the one
accepting, the other refusing the grace tendered by the power of his own will.
But this doctrine is to be rejected as false and dangerous. It does clearly
make void the grace of God, and exalt man's free will; lifting him up into the
seat of God, to be his own Redeemer; for (say they) when God has put forth all
those workings of grace which he is wont to make use of in the way to
conversion, See Suffrag. Colleg^ate in Ar^. 1.2, and 3.
yet still the will is left in an equal poise, betwixt believing, and not
believing, able indifferently to incline either way; so that in case a man
shall hearken, and answer the Lords call by believing, and so turn effectually,
this man now has struck the main stroke in the business, in as much as he
might have refused it, if he would, and he has whereof to boast, and may say,
I had no more grace given toward conversion than others, yet they have
rejected it, and remain unconverted, but I by the freedom of my will have
embraced it, and so am converted and consequently in actual possession of the
grace of Redemption. The Scripture speaks otherwise, 2 Cor. 3.5. We are not
sufficient of our selves to think any thing, if not to think, than much less to
will, or to work, Phil. 2.13. It is God which works in you both to will and to
work. Oh wretched man! by thine Apostasy, thou have lost thy self, and made thy
will a perfect slave to sin, so that unless it be first set free by grace, it
cannot possibly be free to any good.

There be some other Divines, Voluntas in tantum libera, in quantum liberata.
Aug.
both learned, judicious, and godly, which allow an universality of Redemption;
and they deliver their judgment thus, or to this effect: That Jesus Christ, by
the appointment of his Father, taking upon him the curse due to sin, did give
himself a sacrifice, and paid a price for the ransom of all mankind; yet not
with an equal intention and resolution for every one, but thus, Effectually to
redeem, and perfectly to save all those whom the Father had given him, that is
the Elect, by applying unto them his satisfaction and merits, and inabling them
by his Spirit to perform the conditions of actual interest therein, having no
such purpose, or resolution for all, or any of the rest of mankind. So that
Christ dyed for all in this sense, that all, and every one may obtain actual
deliverance and salvation thereby in case they do believe; but yet he dyed for
the Elect only in this sense, that they through the merit of his death, which
was specially designed for them, might be brought infallibly both to faith, and
to eternal life. The difference of this from the first, which limits even the
paying of the price, to the Elect, is not so wide, as to give just cause to
either party, to brand the Dissenters with heresy or schism; both of them
having the letter of the Scriptures to warrant them: The former we may find,
Joh. 10.15. I lay down my life for the sheep, Act. 20.28. He has purchased the
Church of God with his own blood, Ephesians. 5.25. etc. He gave himself for the
Church to sanctify and glorify it: The latter, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the
world, that he gave his Son, Joh. 4.42. The Christ, the Savior of the world, 1 John 2.2. A propitiation for the sins of the whole world. He gave himself a
ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. He tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. Neither
am I so confident of the strength of mine own judgment, as to determine
whether of these, is the naked truth of God: For who am I, that I should
adventure professedly to side with either party, against men of so great name
and worth in the Churches of Christ? Only (reserving to my self the liberty of
mine own thoughts) I shall crave leave to mind you of three things.

1. I suppose, that this latter opinion cannot justly be charged to wrong any
fundamental Truth of Christian Religion, or the Doctrine which is according to
godliness.

2 It seems the fairest way to a right reconciliation of those Texts before
mentioned, which speak different things.

3. I am apt to think, that if both were laid together, and well weighed, they
would be found to come near to a friendly agreement, and not to stand at so
wide a distance, as some imagine; for both sides do readily grant,

1. That the satisfaction given by Christ is abundantly sufficient for the
redemption of the whole world, yea of ten thousand worlds, it being the blood
of God, Act. 20.28.

2. That the offer of it is freely made to all the posterity of Adam, by the
appointment of God in the ministry of the Gospel, and therefore the Ministers
must both publish this grace to all, and exhort them to embrace it, Mark.
16.15. Col. 1.28.

3. That it is only from a special discriminating grace of God, that some
sinners are brought off to submit to Gods terms, while others refuse, Act.
18.27. 2 Timothy 1.9.

4. That only the Elect are effectually wrought thus to submit, and to accept
of Christ offered, and so are actually redeemed, Act. 13.48.

5. That all the rest of the world, not having this effectual grace vouchsafed
them, but being left unto themselves, do refuse redemption and salvation
offered, Ioh. 8.24 and 15.22.
and so perish in their sins justly through their own default, Matthew. 23.37.38.

2. But to dismiss this discourse: I answer to the latter branch of the
Objection thus: Neither of the Opinions named, will bear such a Conclusion. It
is but a weak kind of Logic to argue thus. Christ did not intend to pay a
price for the ransoming of every sinner, and therefore it may not be of me; or
thus, he did not intend to apply this ransom to every one for his actual
Redemption, therefore perhaps he meant, it not to me. This is absurd, and
unreasonable reasoning: For,

1. Why may thou not as well say, It may be, he does graciously intend it
for me? seeing thou can not plead any unworthiness, or uncapableness against
thy self, which may not be as just a bar against all others.

2. Thou have an offer of this benefit made to thee every day, and thou art
invited to entertain it? Will thou now stand off and say, I cannot tell whether
it be intended for me, or no? If a Creditor shall say to his imprisoned Debtor,
Come forth, for thy debt is paid, and I am satisfied, what a folly were it to
answer thus. It may be, my debt is not discharged, I know not whether thou
intendest my liberty. No, rather wave this intention, and close with his offer.

3. The only way to put the matter out of doubt, is this, Apply thy self in
the diligent use of Gods Ordinances, to the serious and sincere performance of
the condition, and rest not till thy heart be drawn off from all other things,
to repose it self on him, according to his command, Mat. 11.28.

4. Although (I suppose) we may safely conclude, that every child of Adam,
even continuing in his sinful estate, may lawfully take it for granted, that
Christ became a curse to buy him out from the curse, that is, that he gave
himself a ransom for all men, and therefore for him also, for ought he knows
to the contrary; and that he may, and certainly shall be partaker of the fruit
thereof, if he submit to the Lords terms (for otherwise what ground have I to
make, or he to take the offer of Christ) yet for all that, we may not say, that
any sinner continuing under the obedience of sin, that is, that he has a
present interest in Redemption, or is actually partaker of it; for this implies
a contradiction, Joh. 8.34. A servant of sin (while such) cannot be the Lords
free man; nay rather he ought to be persuaded of the contrary. But as for thee,
poor sensible humbled soul, thou may groundedly believe, that thou art one
of the Lords Redeemed; this is thy privilege, and accordingly it is thy duty,
by the daily acting of faith on Christ, and the constant exercise of all other
graces, to endeavor after a full assurance thereof in thy soul; and in the
mean time to stay thy self on the Lord, and his sure word for the
accomplishment.

Sect. 3. Answer to three Objections more.
Object. 3. BUt if the actual enjoyment of this benefit be limited to the
Elect, then I am still where I was; for I know not any thing concerning mine
election. If you can make it sure to me, that God has not cast me out by an
eternal Decree, but has appointed me to salvation, then I shall have some
courage in the using of any means, and taking any pains for attaining that end:
But if I be none of that number, then I have nothing to do with Redemption, and
all my labor of believing and repenting, and doing good will be lost, and I
shall run in vain.

Answ. 1. I grant it to be an undeniable truth, that whatsoever we do, whether
we run, or sit still, we shall all in conclusion be found such (as to our
everlasting estates) as God has decreed we shall be.

But then 2. Hence to infer, that it is no matter what a man does, or how he
walks, is a wicked and dangerous conclusion; for the Decreee of Predestination,
has made a necessary connection, betwixt the means, and the end; but that
godless inference, breaks this golden chain all to pieces. To live in
ignorance, security, unbeleef, disobedience is the ready way to hell, and
consequently a fearful mark of Reprobation. To neglect means of saving
knowledge, faith, repentance, and new obedience, is to forfeit salvation, and
to declare thy self to be none of Gods Elect.

A learned Divine illustrates this by a similitude thus, Davenant,
Animadversions on a Treatise called Gods love to mankind. p. 512
Put case (says he) a battle were to be waged betwixt two Armies, and God
should reveal some way or other that the greater part of the soldiers sho^^d
perish in the fight, and some few escape, not mentioning the particular persons
which should be slain or preserved; if any soldier should now either pass
sentence upon himself beforehand, or suffer his heart to be fore-stalled with
a strong conceit, that he is one of them that shall be slain, and shall
thereupon despairingly run upon his enemies swords, or throw down his weapons,
and neglect himself, and so perish; I demand, whether this despair, and the
effects thereof, are not rather to be imputed to his own indiscretion than to
the divine revelation? without doubt he may justly blame himself, for taking
occasion, where none was given.

The application is easy. To walk in the state and ways of sin, or to avoid
the way of faith and holiness, out of a conceit or fear that thou art not in
the number of the Elect, is damnable madness.

3. It is a groundless supposition, to say, If I be not elected, all my labor
of believing, repenting, and holy walking will be lost; for it implies, that a
man may do all these, and yet be damned. But this is altogether inconsistent
with the frame of the Gospel, which holds forth the quite contrary, that he
that does these things, shall be saved, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. Romans 2.7, 8, etc.

4. No man in the world can give thee an infallible assurance of thy election
immediately, neither ought thou to seek for such assurance. Scripture and
reason both will tell thee, that ^ods eternal counsels are so deep, as they
cannot possibly be found out, no man ought to conclude peremptorily of himself,
that he is a Reprobate, rather let every one that lives in the Church, and
under the sound of Gods Ordinances, conceive, hope, that he is one of the elect
number, provided that he improve this hope, to be a spur to diligence in the
use of means toward salvation. But then take heed, that thou suspend not this
upon the certain knowledge of thine election; say not, I will first know that I
am elected, before I take pains in the way to salvation; If the King should
grant a pardon to a hundred Traitors, whose names are enrolled in the
Exchequer, upon certain conditions to be performed by them, expressed in a
Proclamation, it would be a foolish preposterous course, first to search the
Rolls, before they look after the performance of the conditions; no, they must
first do this, and then sue out their pardon: Even so, thy way to heaven, is
not first to climb up thither, to search the Records, whether thy name be
there, the word is near thee even in thine heart; Say not, who shall go up to
heaven for me? Romans 10.6, 8. Think not of jumping into heaven at once: Begin at
the bottom of the ladder, and go up by steps. He that will not set himself o^
the way to salvation, unless God will first make him of his Cabinet-councel, is
sure to meet with damnation, as the deserved reward of his desperate folly.
Therefore, poor soul, if thou have begun, go on by the exercise of Faith,
Repentance, and all other graces, to make thy calling sure; this will make
thine Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. and then thou need not fear thy Redemption.

Obj. 4. But I have so long neglected to hearken to the counsel of the word,
calling me to believe, that it may be, the day of grace is past to me; If the
Lord had any thoughts of good toward me, he would have persuaded my heart
before this time: but now I am grown into such a settled habit of unbelief, that
I may fear, the Lord has even determined to leave me under the power of it for
ever.

Ans. 1. God is the Sovereign Lord of time, he works at all houre^ of the
day, he calls at the Eleventh, as well as the sixth, or nineth hours; Matthew.
20.5, 6.
he has his several seasons of offering grace, bringing Christ home to the
soul, and satisfying the soul with the comfort of enjoying him, according to
his good pleasure.

2. I confess it is a very dangerous thing for a sinner to resist the motions
of the Spirit, till he be even wearied out, till the Lord say peremptorily, my
Spirit shall no longer strive with this man, I will leave him to his own
counsels. And it is to be feared, that this is the case of very many, who
living under quickening means, yet grow old in a secure senseless state and
course, and it is ten to one, that these persons have sitten out their day of
grace: Yet let no sinner (no, not he that is of the blackest grime, or longest
standing) set down this absolutely against himself, [that this day of Grace is
quite past,] Say not, it is now too late to Repent, and believe, or if I do, God
will not regard me. This were to deny the grace of the new Covenant. If now at
length thou will open thine ears to the counsel of the Gospel, and laying
aside thine enmity, wilt heartily come in, thou shall find by good
experience, that there is abundant grace in the Lord Jesus for thy recoverie,
and salvation. See the example of Paul, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14.

3. But as for the poor afflicted soul, although thou have turned a deaf ear to
the encouragements of the Spirit of God, and hearkened to thine own heart too
long, yet thou have no such cause of fear. For thy practice does constantly
proclaim, that thou fear the Lord, and obeyest the voice of his servant,
Isa. 50.10.
in departing from all known iniquity, and endeavoring to walk worthy of the
Lord, unto all pleasing; Only thou art in darkness, as to thy right unto Jesus
Christ, and the grace of Redemption, and although thou breathest after him in
the desires of thy soul, yet thou can not reach up sensibly to close with him
by faith. In this condition, as sad as it is to thee, the Lord looks upon thee,
as a tender mother looks upon her child, that will not take the breast, he
pities thy waywardness, and will not make it an advantage against thee, but
still invites thee to stay thy self on his Name. He can easily change thy heart
of stone into an heart of flesh, and pluck up that bitter root of unbelief,
though by long custom deeply rooted in thy spirit, and plant in stead of it,
the contrary habit of faith. Nothing is too hard for him, yea, he will
certainly do it, and never lay to thy charge thy former unbelief, if thou will
now cease to lean to thine own understanding, and humbly thrust thy self into
his bosom, and make thy refuge in the shadows of his wings, whether thou must
come after all thy contrary strugglings, and where only thou may be safe.

Obj. 5. Although I cannot gainsay these things, yet still my heart misgives
me, I cannot see it to be my way, thus to believe, and if I should, I much
fear, that it would not prove well. To be short, I do not, I cannot believe.

Ans. 1. This is a malady incident to sensible doubting souls, to be obstinate
in that which they have fixed upon, to hold fast the Conclusion, when they
cannot prove the premises, and rather to study out Arguments, to strengthen
themselves in their unbelief, than to yield to the truth laid before them. But
I beseech thee, in the bowels of our Redeemer, look upon this as a piece of
Sathan's policy, that he may undo thee. He would lock upon thine ears, and
heart from all those truths, which are most usual for thee. Oh! do not hearken
to him, but yield thy self to be overcome by the strength of Scripture reason
for thy good.

2. These groundless misgivings of heart, are not the persuasions of him that
has called thee, but the buddings of thine own wisdom at the best, and
therefore they are wisely to be resisted. Call them to the bar of Gods
testimony, and examine them narrowly, what they are, whence they come, and
whither they go, and if thou find them Vagrants, whip them out, and send
them away.

3. If thou see not this to be thy way, the fault is not in the way, but in
thy eye: It has been told thee again, and again, that this is thy way; If
thine eye cannot discern it clearly, or thou fear, that it is not, yet do
as a wise traveller would do, when he is at a loss. He sees several ways
before him, but the way, which he must take, has a pillar set up at the
entrance of it, with this inscription. This is the way to -- for there comes to
him an Inhabitant of those parts, and assures him, that is the way: yet to him
it seems very unlikely, and he still suspects, that it will never bring him to
the place, where he would be. In this case, what does he? Why? He resolves to
lay aside his own judgment, and to adventure on the way, which he is directed;
He does so, and holding on in it, at length he obtains his desire. This is thy
case, poor soul, thou art travailing heavenward, the Gospel, as a standing
pillar, points thee out the way, and directs thee to Jesus Christ the Redeemer,
and tell's thee, that if thou will heartily accept of him, lay the stress of
thy soul upon him alone, and abide in him, not turning to the right hand, or
the left, thou shall undoubtedly be happy; Isa. 30.21.
The Minister of the Gospel assures thee of the same by the warrant of the
word. But thy unbelieving heart boggles at this, and thou say, surely this
is not my way: What? such a wretch as I go to Christ, and exspect any good from
him? I dare not, I may not be so bold. Say not so, rather play the Wiseman's
part, and adventure on this way, contrary to thine own reason, and thou shall
see, the issue will be good. Bear down thy fears concerning a good success,
with the stream of God's command; up, and do as thou art bidden, and prove him
herewith, whether he will not pour thee out a blessing. 2 King 7.3, 8.
Observe the practice of the four Lepers in the gate of Samaria; apply their
arguments to thy case, and make an adventure as they did. Say, if I go back
into the world, I shall die, and if I sit here without Christ, I shall die; I
will therefore betake my self to Christ, and th^^st my self into his bosom,
let him do with me what he pleases. Thus doing, thou man ^^t hope to speed as
well as they. Why? what got they? Not only the saving of their lives, but good
cheer for their hungry bellies, and raiment for their naked backs, and gold
and silver for their empty purses: Even so, if thou will fall in unto Jesus
Christ, thou shall not only be saved from the curse of the Law, but the flesh
of Christ shall be thy meat, and his blood thy drink, his righteousness thy
clothing, thou shall be enriched with all spiritual blessings in him. Follow
the example of Queen Esther: When the necks of all the Jews, her dear
countrie-men were almost on the block, and their was a present necessity of her
interceding with the King, which (if he had not taken it well) might have cost
her life, yet she resolves, to put it to the uttermost; I will go in to the
King (says she) and if I perish, I perish. The issue was sweet, and
comfortable; she was not only saved from the danger of the Law, but the King
held forth the golden Scepter to her, and granted her Petition for the lives of
her people; And if thou will make the like adventure for thy soul upon the King
of Saints, thou shall both be freed from the danger of a more rigorous Law,
Esther 4.16. and 5.2 etc.
and be invested in his favor, and he will accept thy services, and fulfill
all thy lawful desires. Thou have better ground of hope, then either this
Queen or those lepers; for they both went merely upon hazzards, but God would
have thee to overleap all difficulties, and trust upon the account of certain
profit, coming in to thee hereby, Isa. 55.3.

Sect. 4. Encouragements.
BUt to provoke thee yet more to this important work, which does so nearly
concern thy condition, take notice of these encouraging Considerations.

1. The Name of God is a most sweet name. Read it in that solemn Proclamation,
Ex. 34.6. and spell every syllable of it for thy self. It will present unto thy
mind the unspeakeable goodness of his glorious Being, and render him eminently
amiable. Thou judge thy self extremely miserable, as one lying under the
dreadful guilt of the highest treason: But the first letter of his Name is
Merciful, he has bowels of compassion, he is not hardly drawn to it, but he
delights in mercy, Mic. 7.18. Thou art most unworthy, and thy desert is
damnation, but another part of his name is Gracious, he is free to bestow his
best bounties, on those that account themselves most unworthy. If Satan can
present him to thee, as a cruel Enemy, or one that would ruin thee, then he
might easily drive thee away from him: But look thou upon him, as love it self,
1 John 4.8. and therefore infinitely more tender, Corpora magnanima satis est
prostrasse Leoni.
than the dearest mother can be over her child. The lion of the Tribe of Judah
will not hurt that soul, which lies prostrate before him.

2. It is a special clause in the Mediators Commission, that he should
proclaim Liberty to the Captives, Isa. 61.1. God the Father says to him, Lo, I
give thee for a Covenant of the people, that thou may say to the prisoners,
Go forth, Isa. 49.8, 9. Be sure thou take special care of poor sensible
sinners, pour oil into their wounds, and give them beauty for ashes: Cherish
those distressed souls, which lie sighing and sobbing under the burden of
their bolts, and fetters, those that are lost in themselves, and come running
to thee, like the chased Heart, panting after the waterbrooks, and cannot be
satisfied without thee. Do thou think, that Jesus Christ will not execute his
Commission to the full?

3. The terms on which thou may actually enjoy Christ, and Redemption, are
very fair, being both reasonable, and easy, 1. What can be more reasonable,
then that the poor slave, should, in the sense of his undone condition,
heartily own him for his only Redeemer, who has both paid his ransom, and
fetch him out of prison? and what is faith, but the lost sinner's acknowledging
and accepting of Jesus Christ for his All in all? 2. What can be more easy,
than to do a work, the stress whereof lies upon another hand, not on thine?
It Is true, of thy self thou art no more able to believe, than to keep the whole
Law, (for the dead man can stir his right hand, no more then his left): but
the Gospel, or Covenant of grace affords strength to believe, whereas the Law,
or Covenant of works affords none at all to obey: Ier. 31.37, Heb. 8.6, ^, 10.
Therefore Christ tells them, His yoke is easy, and his burden light, (in
opposition to those Law-burthens, which the Pharisees imposed, and call's them
to come to him upon that account. Matthew. 11.28, etc. Thus Christ makes
believing an easy work to a self-denying soul: Even as it is easy for one,
that knows not how to fashion a Letter, to write a word, or a sentence
legibly, if he will wholly refigne his hand up, to be holden, moved, guided,
and carried on by the hand of a cunning Writer throughout. I may now say to
thee, poor captive soul, as the servants said to Naaman; If the Prophet had
bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it? how much more,
etc. 2 Kin. 5.13. So here, If the Lord did enjoin thee some difficult exploit,
or some desperate adventure, as the condition of thy salvation, would thou
not have put forth thy self to the furthest? how much more when he says,
Believe, and be saved?

4. Faith lays a kind of engagement on Jesus Christ to relieve a soul in
extremity. When a poor creature lies succourless, if he can now advisedly look
after him, and cast his burden upon him, this does after a sort oblige him to
come in with succor: An honest man, will the rather do his neighbor a
pleasure, if he see, Psalm. 55.22. Donabile tuum quod tibi dari desideras.
Buxtorf. Io. 6.37. (...).
that he depends upon him. A merciful man will make this an Argument why he
must do this or that for a poor man, Oh, says he, the man put's confidence in
me, it is a matter of weight, if I fail him, he may be undone: so Christ takes
himself bound to help thee, if thou will come and commit thy way to him.
Otherwise Christ looks down from heaven upon thee, and says, There goes a
wretched sinner, that would gladly be delivered from the Curse, and saved; but
alas, he is not capable of help, for he dares not trust me, h^ will not come at
me. The poor servant m^ have his wages paid, because he set's his heart upon
it, Deuteronomy. 24.15. and if thou set thine heart upon Christ, and his
satisfaction, he will render unto thee thy righteousness. If the ship of thy
soul be covered with waves through sense of sin, and wrath, and Christ be
asleep, thou have no way, but to jogge him by the hand of faith, and to awake
him, as the disciples did, Mat. 8.24. etc. and if thus thou do, he will turn
the storm into a calm: Yea, if he see thee but offering to come to him by
faith, and thou art beginning to sink, by reason of the weakness of it, yet if
thou can but sigh toward him, he will stretch forth his hand, and save thee,
as he did Peter, Matthew. 14.29, etc.

5. I know, thou art vile in thine own eyes, thou art willing to be abased,
even unto the dust, thou think, thou can not cast down thy self low
enough: Well friend, this is the right way to self-abasement. If thou will not
come to Jesus Christ, till thou can bring something with thee, which may
commend thee to him, or till thou can get into a more pleasing posture, thou
take the course, to raise up thine own Crests, and to glory in thy self. But
if thou will deny thy self, in the thoughts of unworthiness, as well as
worthiness, and without further disputing put thy self wholly upon his grace,
and strength for thy deliverance, this is the way to a more kindly abasement,
than any Legal humiliati^^ can possibly work. For while thou stand (...)
from Christ, thou will fly from God, and thy heart will be hardened against
him: But if thou can but touch the hemme of his garment, thou shall come in
due time, to know that in thy self which will lay thee humbly at his feet, and
melt thy soul in the bosom of his love. See the example of the woman,
laboring long under her bloody Issue, and the manner of her cure, Mark 5.26,
etc.

6. I know, thou would advance Jesus Christ, thou would give him all the
honor thou possibly can, thou would make his praise glorious. Well, if
thou will break through all difficulties, and heartily accept the offer of
deliverance through him alone, this is the way to exalt him, this is his Crown,
and his glory. It may be, thou can say, Let God have his glory, whatever
become of me. Why? if thou will now come to him, in the sorrowful sense of thy
woeful bondage, and lay the whole stress of thy soul-affairs upon him, thou
shall see that he will work out his own glory by thy salvation. Thy Design is,
to set up his glory, by lying down in thy sorrow, as altogether helpless, and
pining away in discontent, but that will not do it: thou can not honor him
in thy condition wherein thou art, by any other way, than by believing. It is
by trusting in Christ, That poor sinners come to the praise of his glory, Ephesians.
1.12.

This is the best part of thy thankfulness.
7. If thou will still hold off from embraceing this free mercy, then thou
addest one sin to another, even ingratitude to unbelief: thou art basely
unthankful to the Lord Jesus. Has he laid aside his majesty, and descended
into the lower parts of the earth, yielding himself a prisoner to the Curse of
the Law, and all, that he might rescue thee from it, and make thee a freeman of
heaven? Has he purchased thy ransom with so great a sum, and made so hard
an adventure to hale thee out of hell? Has he brought thy deliverance even to
the very nick of enjoyment, and now is ready to lay it in thy lap, and to
thrust it into thy bosom, and do thou shrink back from the gift? will thou
render all this cost, and labor of love to be as water spilt on the ground,
which cannot be gathered up again? Oh! do not requite him so badly. There be
some, that draw back, and that threaten's their perdition; and there be some
few, that believe, and this tends to the salvation of their souls, Heb. 10.39.
Now consider whether of these two companies is the more desirable, and betake
thy self thereunto without delay.

(...), etc. It Is the most commendable Self-love.
8. Yea, and besides, thou art else very injurious to thy self. If it might be
any gain to thee, or at least no loss, to be so unthankful to thy Redeemer,
(and yet this can admit of no excuse), something might be spoken toward the
extenuation of thy folly, but truly thy loss will be invaluable, thou foregoest
that commodity which can never be recovered, and implungest thy self into that
mischief, which will stick by thee for ever. If thou were floating on the Sea,
or some deep river, in danger of present drowning, should any well-willer of
thine come, and venture his life to save thee, if thou shunnest him, and
refusest his help, is not this to destroy thy self? But oh, thou have cast thy
self headlong into the Sea of God's curse, and Jesus Christ has (as it were)
put his life in his hands, that he might fetch thee out. If now thou will not
apply thy self to him, but hold off from him, thou perishest through thine
own default, for there is no salvation in any other, Acts 4.12. If thou missest
it here, thou may bid it farewell for ever.

9. It is a blessed thing to believe, when there is nothing visible to the eye
of reason, which may give encouragement thereunto, but all things speak the
contrary, this is the excellency of faith, it presents things which are not
seen, and convincingly evidenceth them to the soul. They that reach up to this
height, are pronounced blessed, John 20.29. Mary was eminently blessed in
bearing Christ, and this was an addition to her blessedness, that she believed
the message of the Angel concerning it, though cross to her reason. Luke 1.28,
42, 45. God's appearances are sometimes dark; he threatens to condemn, (...),
Heb. 11, ^.
when he mean's to save; he rejects, when he will embrace, as the woman of
Canaan, to whom he gave sundry sad repulses, and yet both entertained her and
highly commended her faith, Matthew. 15.28. The tender Mother does sometimes set
her self out of her childs sight, yet even then her eye is upon it, she takes
care of it, and it is then safest, when it apprehends danger nearest. Thus does
the Lord deal with thee; therefore now stir up thy self to trust in his name.
There is a choice promise, Isa. 41.17. If thou seek water, and find none,
and thy tongue fails for thirst, yet then the Lord will hear thee, and not
forsake thee. Every word has weight, and sweetness. Take hold upon it, and let
it not go.

10. Consider, that thousands of poor captive souls have gone this way, and
have sped well. When David said, he was cut off, and gave himself for lost, he
did but cry, and the Lord heard him, Psalm. 31.22. The Psalmist sighing out of
the depths, hoped in the word, waited on God, and at length was able to say out
of his own experience, With the Lord is mercy, and plenteous redemption, Psalm.
130.1.5, 7. The Jaylour comes trembling to Paul and Silas, and being exhorted
to believe on Christ, he follows their counsel, and rejoices, Act. 16.29.-34.
This use we may make of the Parable of the Prodigal; when he comes to himself,
and resolves to return, his Father meets him, falls on his neck, kisseth him,
puts on him the best Robe, with a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet, and
kills for him the fatted Calf, which holds forth Gods wonderful graciousness to
impoverished sinners that return to him by faith and repentance, Luke 15.20.
etc. and the Publican in sense of unworthiness, crying to God for mercy, goes
away justified rather than the Pharisee, Luke 18.13, 14. But especially look
upon the example of Saul (who is after called Paul) the Lord meeting him on the
rode, as he was posting to persecute the Saints, having convinced him of his
sin, sends him to A^anias, by whose Ministry he is brought to embrace Christ,
and to preach him zealously, Act. 9.6, 17, 20. and herein he is set forth, for
a pattern to others in time to come, that they might be encouraged to believe,
1 Timothy 1.15, 16. Do thou so too, and expect the same success.

Thus the Lord speaks to thee (O desolate soul) as Laban to Abraham's servant,
Genesis 24.31. Come in thou blessed of the Lord, wherefore stand thou without!
(as a mere stranger to me, and to the grace of Redemption) my Sons
satisfaction by his bearing thy curse, has made room for thee in mine house,
and he has provided for thee all spiritual accommodations to make thee happy.
I am loath to leave thee till thou art persuaded; therefore I shall add one
thing more: Thou say, I do not, I cannot believe: But what if I make it
appear, that thou do believe, even now when thou verily think, thou do
not. Observe then, the very stress of faith lies in the wills hearty consenting
to the offer of Christ in the Gospel. Thou art a wretched sinner, accursed by
the sentence of the Law, utterly unable to help thy self; Thou hear the good
news of Redemption by Jesus Christ. The Lord invites thee, and says, If thou will renounce all confidence in thy self, and the creature, and unfainedly
accept of Christ alone for thy Redeemer, to save thee, and thy Lord to
sanctify and rule thee, he shall both free thee from the curse, and bring thee
to the Kingdom of glory. See, here he is for thee. Art thou willing to have
him? Thou say yea, with all my heart, if I might. And is it even so with
thee; thou can not deny it, else what mean those breathings and groanings
toward him in prayer? those solicitous inquiries and searchings after him in
addresses to Gods Ministers? Oh, where shall I find Jesus Christ? Whither is
he turned aside? When will he own me? That restlesness of thy spirit, that thou
can not be satisfied without him? These are plain demonstrations, that he
has thy heart, and that the strength of thy will is carried toward him, in
desires and longings to enjoy him for thy All in all. So that now, poor soul,
Christ is willing, and thou art willing; the match is made, thou enjoyest him
by faith although thou do not perceive it; only stand not here but endeavor
to scrue it up to more sensible resting on him, and so to the riches of full
assurance.

CHAP. XI.
Sect 1. Exhortation to the Redeemed, in two Duties.
3. THis Doctrine calls upon the Lords Redeemed ones, for such a carriage, as
is most suitable to their condition. Every remarkable change of estate,
requires an answerable change of course and practice. If a prisoner (suppose
Joseph) be hastily brought out of the Dungeon, to stand before a King, he must
shave himself, and change his raiment, his speech, apparel, gestures, and all
his behavior must be quite of another strain than they were in his low
condition. Even so, beloved Christians, if you feel your selves bought out from
the slavery of the curse; I beseech you to consider, that this excellent
benefit lays a strong engagement upon you to walk as it becomes the Lords
ransomed people.

And this walking must be manifested and held forth in sundry remarkable
duties, Genesis 41.14. Ergo and tu dignum te gere tali pretio. Ambros.
which I shall rank in such order, as I conceive to be most proper.

The first duty which the Redeemed soul has to do, is this, Admire the riches
of the mercy of God in Christ, laying this benefit in thy lap, and let it stir
thee up to an holy rejoicing, yea glorying in God, and let this joy break forth
in praises.

1. Let this glorious work take up thy heart, and fill it with an holy
wondering. Say, Oh, what admirable condescension is here, that Jesus Christ
should be at such cost for me, to buy out such a wretch from the curse of the
Law, and to make me actually partaker of this blessed liberty! The thought of
this incomparable design thus brought home to my soul, does even astonish me,
that the Lord should pluck me, as a brand out of the fire, and when I had
little savor, or desire that way, did break open the prison doors, and set me
free, Psalm. 126.1.

2. Tune, and teach thy soul to rejoice in Jesus Christ. Entertain this gift
with all gladness. Let the inwards of thy heart be much affected with joy in
the consideration of the Lord's mercy to thee: Mary rejoiced in God her
Savior, Luke 1.46, 47. When the Jews were rescued from destruction, by the
dashing in pieces of Haman's bloody project, they had joy, and gladness,
Esther 8.16, 17. Thou have now received the atonement by Jesus Christ;
therefore thou may now glory in him, Romans 5.11. Thou see sin, the
Curse, condemnation, vanquished by the Cross of Christ, and thy self a
Conqueror through faith in his blood, therefore thou have abundant cause to
rejoice in him, and in his salvation, Hab. 3.13, 17, etc.

3. Let this joy vent it self on all fit occasions, by thanksgiving, both in
songs, Psalm. 126.2.
and other expressions of his praise, speaking good of his Name. When the L rd
has redeemed his people, they shall come to Zion with singing, everlasting joy
shall be upon their heads, sorrow and mourning shall flee away, Isa. 35.10.
This Prophecy does either wholly or chiefly concern the Churches spiritual
deliverance, and shall be most fully verified, when their deliverance is
complete. The four beasts, and Twenty four Elders sing a new song unto the Lamb
upon this account, because he was slain, Vide. Pareum, in locum
and had redeemed them, etc. Rev. 5.8, 9. which some apply to the Church
triumphant in heaven, Solomon in Type, but Jesus Christ in truth should redeem
the poor and needy, and shall daily be praised, Psalm. 72.14, 15. Psalm. 71.23.
Take notice of this, and practice it, Oh, It Is a mercy, that calls for all
that is within us, to praise him, and all little enough, Psalm. 103.1, 2, etc.
Keep in thy heart the remembrance of this benefit; Let it still be warm upon
thy spirit, that thou may express some thankfulness every day, but
especially, on the Lord's day, which being the day of Christ's resurrection,
Psalm. 118.24. is applied by the Fathers to the Lords day.
is therefore to be observed as a solemn weekly Commemoration of the work of
Redemption, which was perfected thereby: and that (I doubt not) by Divine, or
Apostolical warrant. Let this be the principal work of the day, and let it have
an influence into all the parts of your lives. It is to be bewailed, that too
many of the Lords ransomed ones spend their days in sorrow, lowrness, and
dejection of spirit, Whereas they should rather give up themselves to delight
in him, who has plucked their feet out of the net.

2. Hold fast the Liberty, which Christ has given you, Seeing you are now set
free, inslave not your selves again, unto a second bondage, which may be,

1. More gross* and palpable, by apostasy from Jesus Christ, in the Doctrine,
profession, and obedience of the Gospel. When thou have entertained this truth
of Redemption, by Christ, and have gone so far in applying it to thy self,
that thou dare claim a part in it, beware now of backsliding, that thou leave
not Christ on the plain field, in casting off the truth, and abandoning the
profession of it, before men. If thou drawest back, the Lord will have no
pleasure in thee, Heb. 10.38. Let these terrible thunderclaps be ever in thine
ears, that those which fall away, cannot be renewed unto repentance, Heb. 6.4,
etc. That if we sin willingly, by a total Apostasy from the truth received,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but an expectation of Judgment,
and fiery indignation, etc. Heb. 10.26, 27. See also 2 Pet. 2.20, 21.

2. More covert or refined, and that either of conscience, or of conversation.

1. Bondage of conscience is when the redeemed soul gives way to the threats,
and terrors of the Law, and suffers them to get so far within him, as they
cause him in some degree to lie down under the power of them. Yield not to this
slaverie, Only know, and make account that every sin is in it self of such a
malignant quality, that it would certainly bring the curse, and wrath of God
upon thee, If it were not prevented: And therefore when thou art overtaken with
it, thou must judge thy self worthy to be destroyed, and that the Lord might
justly charge it upon thee, and follow the Law against thee, to thy
condemnation; and hereupon it will be necessary, that thou be often renewing
thy repentance, in Godly sorrow, with faith on the Redeemer for pardon, and
fencing thy soul more against thy sin, by hatred of it, and resolution
against it. Do all this and spare not; but let not the Law throw the fireballs
of hell into thy conscience. Look not on thy self as one that lies under the
Curse, Thy Redeemer has cleared the score, and disanulled the Law, as to the
Curse of it, so that, it has nothing to say against thee. This lion may roar
upon thee, but be not dismayed, the Lord has sent the Angel of the Covenant,
and has shut the Lyon's mouth, his, Dan. 6.22.
rage is abated, his undoing power is taken away, he may show his teeth, and
snatch at thee, but he cannot wound thee mortally. Thou have now a just and
clear ground to go upon, in answering all the demands, pleeas and accusations
that can lie against thee in God's high Court of Justice. Therefore do not
nourish Legal fears any longer, but turn the Curse over to thy Redeemer, and
boldly tell it, that it has nothing to do with thee. The Apostle in telling
the believers of Rome, that they had not received the spirit of bondage again
to fear, Romans 8.15. intimates that such a condition (to be held down under the
slavish fear of condemnation) does not well consist with the estate of the
Redeemed sons of God.

2. Bondage of conversation, when a sinner having hearkened to the Call and
counsel of the Gospel, in accepting the offer of Christ, and redemption by him,
gives leave to the body of sin, dwelling in him, to act its part too much,
and to bring him into some degrees of willing bondage, under those lusts, or
sinful practices, which formerly he had escaped and relinquished. Do thou
challenge a share in this ransom? Oh, then do not enslave thy self again unto
any sin; Art thou fetched out of the house of spiritual bondage with a
mighty hand? Take heed, that thou hanker not after the flesh pots of Egypt, or
attempt a return thither, as the people of Israel did, Numb. 14.4. Has the
Lord spoken peace to thee? will thou then turn again to folly? God forbid.
Psalm. 85.8. Oh! alas, that any of us should (after continuance in the
profession of Christ, for some considerable time) suffer our selves to be
ensnared in our old lusts, or fall into new ways of sin, which yet is the
sad case of some, who at their entrance gave hopes of better things. Jesus
Christ that mighty Champion, has cast the Curse of the Law on a dead sleep.
If thou will give liberty to thy self, to commit iniquity, or to trade in any
forbidden way, thou may fear, that the noise of thy sin will awake this
fierce Lion, ere thou be aware, to tear thy soul in pieces. Hearken to the
Apostle's counsel; Fashion not your selves according to your former lusts, 1
Pet. 1.14. If the Manslayer, having fled to the city of Refuge, would
afterward make bold to wander without the border of it, the Avenger of blood,
findeing him, might lawfully kill him, his blood must be on his own head, Numb.
35.26. etc. Even so, if thou have once betaken thy self to Jesus Christ as thy
refuge, and after that, stragglest out of his liberties, into any sinful
practice, thou art then within the reach of the Avenger of blood, the Curse may
meet with thee, and slay thy soul. Thy Redeemer has hedged thee out from all
such base courses, as are contrary to the end of thy Redemption. If thou will
take Liberty, where he gives none, at thy peril be it. The best, thou can
expect, is that when he comes, he will complain, and say, Alas, what profit is
there in my blood, that I have gone down to the pit, to deliver thee out of it,
seeing thou art returning thither again? Be advised then, thou ransomed
Christian, to lay a strict injunction upon thy self, and say, O my soul, thou
art now set free, sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee, Ne veniat
Christus, etc, si te in peccato invenerit, dicat tibi, Quae utilitas in
sanguine, meo, etc. Ambros. alluding to Psa. 30.9. Ier. 37.20.
John 5.14. and when, through the prevailing of corruption, thou art drawn
aside into some vagarie, make haste to return by repentance, and pray
earnestly, that the Lord would keep thee, from going back into that old prison
of sin, and the Curse, out of which, through the grace of Christ, thou art
escaped.

Sect. 2. Third Duty.
3. GIve your selves up wholly to the pleasure, service, and obedience of your
Lord, -Redeemer. Resign your selves to him, to be at his appointment, and to
his glory. So does the Apostle exhort, from this very ground, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
The Lord Jesus having paid thy ransom, and made thee a freeman from the Curse,
challenges thee now for his own, and says, Thou art mine: It is thy part, to
Echo, and say, Lord, I am thine, and to dedicate thy self to him, with full
purpose of heart, in the whole stream of thy conversation: and that,

1. In doing. Isreal's deliverance from Egyptian bondage, was an engagement to
obedience. See the Preface to the Commandments, Deuteronomy. 5.6. and one end of our
Redemption from the hands of our spiritual enemies is, that we might serve him
in holiness, Exodus 20.2.
and righteousness all our days, Luke 1.74, 75. Christ died, and rose again,
that he might be Lord of quick, and dead, therefore whether we live, or die, it
must be, not to our selves, but to him. Romans 14.7, 8, 9. Those that are
redeemed, to be Christ's peculiar people, must be zealous of good works, 1 Pet.
1.15, 18, 19.
Tit. 2.14. Christ has suffered, that we being made partakers of the benefit
of his sufferings, might live all our time after the will of God, 1 Pet. 4.1,
2. It was no part of our Redeemer's business, to free us from obedience, but
rather by adding this engagement of Redemption to that of Creation, to make the
bond more strong, that a twofold cord might not be easily broken. We are too
carnally selfish, If we think that Christ had no aim in this great work, but
only to deliver us from hell, and bring us to heaven. Doubtless he had a
further end in his eye, even to reduce us unto our first subjection, and
obedience (from which we had wickedly departed), with the advantage of better
ability to serve him, that we might be to his glory. In all which, not our own
wisdom, or will, but the word of God must be attended, as our line to work by;
especially the Moral Law, which is the platform of righteousness, (...).
an eternal fixed Canon for the ordering of our conversation. Therefore it is
called the Royal Law, because the King of Kings has appointed it to be the
Highway for all his Subjects to walk in: yea, even believers must fulfill it.
Jam. 2.8. So that, the Law cease to condemn, but not to command; It is no
longer a curse to destroy us, yet it is still a Rule to direct us. It Is
strange, that some men either cannot, or will not see, a clear difference,
betwixt the mark, or finger which shows the way to the Traveller, and the
strength of body, whereby he is enabled to go on in the way; betwixt the
command of the Law, which prescribes us our work, and the grace of the Spirit,
which gives us power to do it: The Spirit, and the Letter are not opposite, but
sweetly subordinate: Romans 7.6.
The opposition is only betwixt the newness of the spirit, and the oldness of
the Letter; That service which we before performed as slaves, we now perform
as sons, Christ makes a change in us, in relation to the Rule, but no change
in the matter of the Rule it self.

2. In Suffering. Christ has undergone hard measures for thy sake, and has
thereby purchased thy freedom. Be thou willing to undergo hard measures for
his sake, that thou may advance his honor. If thou have tasted the
bitterness of thy bondage, and the sweetness of Redemption, thou will not
grudge to lay down, all thy worldly contentments at the feet of thy Redeemer,
yea, thou will not refuse to put thy life in thy hands, and to be sacrificed
for the promoting of his glory, and be thankful that thou art thought worthy
to suffer for his Name. Yea, more, Acts 5.41. Phil. 2.17.
if Gods providence shall so order, that a black night of darkness, and trouble
shall come upon the Church, which may threaten to destroy, or (at least) to
shake the faith of Christians, in this case, it seems necessary, that such of
the Lords Redeemed, as are grown strong, should put their necks under the
heaviest yoke of extraordinary afflictions, if it may conduce to the
establishing of others in the Truth, and the furthering of their salvation. S.
Paul professes his readiness hereunto, 2 Timothy 2.10. and the Apostle John
enjoines it as a necessary duty upon this very ground. (...), etc. We owe it
as a d^bt.
He laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the
brethren, 1 John 3.16. Oh the noble heroik spirit of Moses, and Paul, who were
willing to forego their parts in the glory of heaven, on condition that the
Lords wrath might be turned away from their countrymen the Jews, that they
might be saved. Exodus 32.32. Romans 9.3. And oh, that we could thus far deny
our selves for the honor of him, who has denied himself infinitely more for
us.

Conclude then for certain, that the Lord's Redeemed ought to resign
themselves wholly unto the will, and service of Jesus Christ, their Lord, The
equity (yea necessity) whereof may further appear, if ye mind these few
motives.

1. He only has the right of propriety in you. The ransomed Captive is not
his own, to dispose of himself; nor can any other person claim an interest in
him, to require service of him, save only he, that has paid the price of his
Redemption: Even so, neither thy self, nor Satan, nor the world, but only
Jesus Christ has the unquestionable title of dominion over thee, to order and
to rule thee, so that thou art no debtor, to live, either to thy self, or to
them, but to him, that died for thee, Romans 6.11. The Sacrament of baptism
holds forth this lesson. Thou wast baptized into the name of Jesus Christ, and
hereby art really engaged unto his service. To withdraw thy self from his
service, and betake thy self to other Lords, is an high degree of theft, and
Covenant Breaking. The Prophet speaks of witholding Tithes, and Offerings, as
of a strange unheard of kind of robbery. Will a man rob God? Mal. 3.8. What
unreasonable brutishness is this? Romans 12.1.
What is it then for a Christian to rob God of himself, and his reasonable
service? Shall the petty Thieves be severely punished, and the grand Robbers
escape? Resolve then, and say, Lord, other Lords besides thee have had dominion
over us, but now we disclaim them, and we will remember thy name only, Isa.
26.13.

2. The safety and comfort of your standing all along in this pilgrimage here
below, depend very much upon this. If you will forsake your selves, and all
other Lords, and refer your selves to the guidance, and appointment of Jesus
Christ, you need not fear any hard measures from him, in whom there is no
unrighteousness; you may trust him, he will see, Psalm. 92.15.
that you shall fare no worse for that, but better. He that has saved you in
the swellings of Jordan, will assuredly look after yo^ in smaller dangers. This
is the way to secure your own peace and happiness, if, having owned Christ by
faith, for your alone Redeemer, you will yield up your selves to him, in
unreserved obedience, in every condition, to do and suffer according to his
will. But if you will needs be your own masters, or put your selves under the
command of other Lords, you do hereby discharge him from taking care of you,
and expose your selves to infinite perils. Thou, that hopest thou have an
actual share in this benefit, and yet either refusest to live wholly to him, or
else do capitulate with him, and wilt have a vote in the managing of thine
own ways, thou may fear, that God will give thee up to follow thine own
counsels, and to shift for thy self in all the storms, which thou may meet
withal. And woe to that poor creature, whom God does leave to himself, and to
his own carvings; he must needs be in a very tottering condition, far from
peace.

3. In the great day of reckoning which is to come, Christ the Redeemer shall
be judge: for the Father has committed this business unto him, and has given
assurance thereof, in that, after his sad conflicts with the Curse, and death,
he raised him up a Conqueror, Acts. 17.31. Now in that great Assize,
Inquisition shall be made among those which are retainers to Jesus Christ,
chiefly concerning 2 things.

1. Whether have thou, in the sense of thy woeful bondage under the Curse of
the Law, heartily accepted of Christ offered in the Gospel, and renouncing all
other helps in thy self, or the creature, rested on him, as thine only
Redeemer?

2. Whether have thou willingly resigned thy self up to him, as thy sovereign
Lord, to rule, and order thee in thy whole conversation, so as thy main study,
and work has been to mind, and to seek his interest, to live to him, and to
die to him, and so to be entirely for him, and for his glory.

This Latter shall then be insisted on, and put home, Matthew. 25.35, 42, etc.
to try the truth of the former. Therefore it concerns you, to bethink your
selves before hand, what answer you will make, when you shall stand before the
judge. If your hearts tell you, that you have only given Christ good words,
calling him, Lord, Lord, but have not made conscience of coming up to his
commandes, or yielding obedience to his will, or submitting to his pleasure,
and disposing hand in all things, Oh, what a black day will that be, when you
shall not be able to lift up your faces before him, but must stand speechless?
Then shall you be sensible of your desperate folly, and condemn your selves
for it, sadly lamenting, that you have so grossly neglected both your Redeemer,
and your own souls: but all too late, your day will be past. Happy is that
man, 2 Pet. 3.14.
that shall then be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless,
although his lot should be to live in beggerie, and misery in this world, all
the days of his appointed time.

Yet alas, what a woeful guilt lies on the consciences of too many Christians?
We all confess with our mouths, Christ's authority over us by the right of
Redemption, but how few of us make any proof thereof by suitable obedience. The
most have given up themselves to seek the interests of the flesh, and the
world; their desires, designs, endeavors, employments, delights,
contentments, run wholly in the^e channels; but the will, service, honor of
Jesus Christ, is not in all their thoughts. He bids us be holy, be sober, and
watch, deny our selves, take up our cross, love our enemies, have our
conversation in heaven, seek things above, crucify the flesh, walk in newness
of life, grow in grace, and the knowledge of Christ, etc. But these are strange
things to many of us, which challenge a part in the grace of Redemption, and
yet walk contrary, denying Christ his right, making provision for the flesh,
and inslaving our lives to the lusts and pleasures of this world. What a number
of hollow-hearted, self-seeking Clyents has Jesus Christ, which follow him,
that they may escape wrath and the damnation of hell, and enjoy Gods favor and
salvation in heaven, and yet are never like to attain that which they expect,
but are even at the next door to destruction? And all because they have not
devoted their hearts and lives sincerely to the service of the Redeemer, but
fancied such a carnal salvation, as will comply with the service of sin, and
requires no p^ins for compassing it, but may be had with a wish, and sno^ting
on their beds, and allows them sparing from the diligent study, pursuit, and
practice of holiness in their conversation.

Perpend^, qui talem pro nobis dedit pecuniam quale a nobis sit exasturus
usuram. August.
But as for you that love your Redeemer, I beseech you lay to heart, the
dishonor that is done to him, and look to your own souls. If Jesus Christ
has disbursed so great a sum for you, he may justly require some
considerable profit. If he has even emptied himself to save thee from the
curse, what can thou do less, than devote thy self wholly to his honor?

I remember a story of a young man, which being arraigned for some foul crime,
was condemned to dye. The Judge looking upon him, and taking some liking to
him, told him, that he would reprieve him. At which unexpected favor, the
young man being astonished, professed that unless the Judge would take him into
his service, that he might wait upon him as long as he lived, he would rather
choose to dye. Be thou like minded, let it not satisfy thee, that Christ has
rescued thee from the curse, and there an end; but now take him for thy Lord,
let his will be thy will, let the bent of thy desires, and endeavors be to
please him in all things, breath after the highest pitch of obedience, be
willing to be at his disposing in the greatest difficulties, (...), Non tam
efficient^m notat, quam finem. Zan. in locum.
and make it thy daily work to further thy Masters interests some way or other.
And whereinsoever thou failest, or fallest short, make it up by godly sorrow,
and faith in the Redeemer. Rest not till thou can say with St. Paul, To me to
live is Christ: I am striving to live up to the mind and will of Christ, he
shall be my utmost end, Phil. 1.21. In a word, Christ accounts it his honor,
and do thou account it thine to serve him for ever. See the Apostles
profession, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. and turn it into practice.

Sect. 3. The fourth Duty.
4. Labor to bring in others to the participation of the same benefit. When
thou art redeemed, help forward the Redemption of thy poor brethren. If the
Lord Jesus has taken compassion on thee, and delivered thee from the curse of
the Law, by the actual application of his satisfaction to thy soul; then it
behooves thee to have compassion on thy fellow prisoners, and to use thy best
endeavors, that they also may be set at liberty. Christ has given himself a
ransom for many, Matthew. 20.28. and he has abundance both of merit and spirit
to impart unto them, so that if many millions of poor souls were brought in,
Romans 5.17.
there would be no less for thee. Do thou then what lies in thee, that many may
be brought to the real possession of this benefit. Oh, that there were such an
heart in all the Lords Redeemed, to study the advancement of their Redeemers
glory, in furthering the salvation of captive-sinners, that all (if possible)
may be made partakers of this grace. I would gladly press this duty upon my
self, and you, according to the several relations, wherein we stand. It
concerns,

1. Ministers of the Gospel. We are Christ's Heralds sent forth to proclaim
deliverance to the Captives, and to persuade them to embrace it; Lev. 25 9, 10
even as one part of the Priests office was by sound of Trumpet to give public
notice of the year of Jubilee, and to prepare the people for the enjoying the
privileges of it. Our work is very important, therefore it behooves us to be
very faithful, and diligent in it. We have many under our oversight (alas, too
many) which lie in the bond of iniquity, strangers to Jesus Christ. Our maine
business is in reference to these, that we may turn them from the power of
Satan unto God, and bring them to the enjoyment of true spiritual liberty by
Jesus Christ. We may look upon those truly miserable souls, as the ruful
objects of our choicest pity, and we ought by all due means, especially by
public preaching, and private instruction, to labor their conversion, and to
save them from dropping into those everlasting burnings. See the grave counsel
of the Apostle to this purpose, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. And here we must have a
special eye upon those whom we perceive to be awakened, to look out toward a
change. When the Lord sends to us any poor souls that are struck down by the
Ministry unto conviction, and humiliation, he does then call us, to hold forth
such spiritual direction and consolation, as may suit best with their several
conditions, according to the word, Mal. 2.7. Job 33.23. When the Lord appointed
Cities of Refuge for the manslayer, he gave charge, that a way should be
prepared, and the coasts of the Land divided into three parts.

It seems this division was in favor of the persons, that every one might take
the benefit of the nearest City, lest the length of the way might occasion
danger, Deu. 19.3, 6. And when the Lord promises to bring in his people by the
call of the Gospel (which may possibly refer to the calling of the Jews) he
bids, Cast up, cast up, prepare the way of my people, gather out the stones,
take up the stumbling blocks, Isa. 57.14. and 62.10. which expressions seem to
allude to the preparing of the way to the City of Refuge. This burden lies
chiefly on us Ministers of the Gospel, as it appears by the Prophecy
concerning John Baptist, Isa. 40.3, 4. Matthew. 3.3. It is one part of our Office
to make the way plain, that no rub may lie in it to hinder guilty distressed
souls in their march toward their only Refuge Christ Jesus. And after all
this, we have variety of work in reference to you, which are actually redeemed,
to stablish you in the present truth, to fence you against errors, temptations,
corruptions, to build you up in knowledge, faith, holiness, and so to bring you
on unto perfection. The charge of the holy Apostle is very punctual and full,
Take heed to all the flock, etc. Act. 20.28. I would awake my self, and my
brethren, and thus be-speak my self, Oh these sheep are the purchase of Christ's
blood, he became a curse for them, that he might redeem them from it. Has he
bought them, and shall I lose them? Has he undergone the curse to set them
free from it, and commanded me to improve my uttermost endeavors to bring them
to the enjoyment of this benefit, and shall I suffer them to continue in that
woeful prison, and to perish eternally, through my silence and unfaithfulness?
God forbid! Let us consider beforehand, how sad it will be, if at the great
day, our Master Christ shall bring forth his curse, blood, satisfaction, and
set before our eyes the preciousness of poor souls, to plead against us for our
negligence, and to aggravate our just condemnation, when there will be no place
for repentance.

2. Heads and governors of Families; Husbands in reference to their wives,
Fathers to children, Masters* and Dames to servants; while the bond of these
particular relations continues, the oversight of these persons belongs to you,
not only of their bodies, but souls; and the Lord expects, that you should
put forth your authority in requiring them to keep his way. He had no doubt of
Abraham, but made full account, that he would command his children, and his
household thus to do, Genesis 18.19. and if thou be a right-bred child of Abraham,
thou will follow his steps. Certainly this great work of Redemption from the
curse, is one of the chief of Gods ways; therefore ye should see, that they
keep this way especially, using all means to bring them to the knowledge and
love, and so to the personal enjoyment of it in due time. Go to then. Thou art
an Husband, thou claimest a share in this liberty, but thy wife abides still in
her old woeful bondage. If thou have any love to her soul, thou will pity,
exhort, pray for her, and say, Alas, alas, for the wife that lies in my bosom;
for ought I can perceive, she is still under the curse of the Law, her great
ignorance, and uncapableness, her unsavouriness, and coldness, yea her
aversness, and backwardness in matters of godliness, especially where it most
concerns her own spiritual good, do even proclaim it aloud, to my grief. Oh
that the Lord would have compassion on her, that at last I might see her
partaker of the blessing. Thou art a Father, or mother, you that are such, may
look upon your children with weeping eyes, while you see them chained in the
bolts, and fetters of the curse, and consider withal, that you were means to
bring them into this bondage, and that they are your bone, and your flesh, a
part of your selves. Oh then, if you have the bowels of Parents, help them at
this dead lift. Will you turn every stone to provide large portions for their
bodies, and will you do nothing in the mean time for their souls? If they were
in prison for debt, or upon any other account, you could not find in your
hearts, that they should lie there still, but you will try all ways to procure
their liberty, and can you be content to see them lie under the curse in the
dungeon of hell, for want of share in this Redemption.

Thou art a Master or Dame. Look upon your man-servants and maidservants. Are
they not servants of sin, slaves to lusts and diverse pleasures? Addicted to
vain conversations, as in the profaning, and mispending of the Lords day? And
so strangers to Jesus Christ, and heirs of the Curse? Oh pity their souls,
and do what you can by prayer, and good counsel, to recover them out of the
gall of bitterness. It may be, thou can say truly, they are good servants to
me, they do my work faithfully, I cannot blame them: But what does this avail,
while thou may say as truly, that they are deeply engaged to the service of
Satan, and aliens to the grace of Redemption? my soul bleeds for their
ignorance, and obstinacy. Oh that I might see my servants to become at length
the servants of the Lord Jesus. But where shall we find such governors of
Families? one City, or two in a tribe, so few that a little child may count
them. If the wise be provident, frugal, helpful toward the increasing of the
estate; if the children be dutiful, apt to learn that, which may be their
livelihood hereafter, only keeping themselves free from such courses as may
ruin them, or expose them to shame: If the servants be strong to labor, and
bring in advantage by their diligence: The Husbands, Fathers, Masters do not so
much as put the question in what case their souls stand, whether they be made
free by Christ, or still continue slaves to the curse, they suffer them to lie
in their gore-blood of their first birth; and if three words of savoury
instruction and exhortation would save their souls, they cannot have them. Oh
cruel Husband, Father, Master, will the love of your Relations reach no
further? Truly, as it a sign, that your selves have no part in this benefit,
so how can your hearts endure, or your hands be strong, when you shall see your
wives, children, servants lying woeful prisoners under those everlasting
chains, Ezekiel. 22.14
for want of an interest in Jesus Christ? and your consciences shall tell you,
that you are one cause of their misery, in that you would not stir one finger
toward their help or deliverance.

3. Neighbors and friends, especially persons that are near, either in blood,
or by affinity; you that are related to others by kindred, can you look upon
your brethren, sisters, and kinsmen which lie still under the curse, and not be
affected with their sad condition? Oh! acquaint them with Jesus Christ, let
them know that he has paid their ransom, show them the way to get an actual
interest in it, that they may be delivered from the wrath to come. The rich
Glutton being in hell, entreats father Abraham to send Lazarus to testify to
his five brethren, lest they also come into that place of torment, Luke 16.27,
28. as if he should say, While I lived on earth, I was a very slave to my
sinful pleasures, and utterly neglected all means of freedom, Vide Jansenium
in Comment. ad haec verba, Whether he speak from natural love to them, or
self-love, lest his punishment should be increased by their ^ollowing his bad
example, I shall neither dispute, nor determine.
and therefore here I lie under the wrath of God, burning in this flame. And I
have some kinsmen still living, who are posting on in the ways of their own
hearts, and in great danger ere long to be cast into this prison. Oh! that some
good pitiful body would take a little pains, to convince them of their sin, to
set before their eyes the curse under which they lie, and to discover unto them
the way of recovery, that they may escape that woe which I feel. So it may be,
some of your predecessors, that are gone to their long home, and are now lying
in the chains of the pit, have sad thoughts of heart for you that are left
behind, when they consider, that you are following their steps, intent on the
service, and pursuit of your lusts, and do wish, that some effectual means were
used, whereby you might be reclaimed, and saved from hell. And now may we not
hence safely conclude, that it is a shameful thing, and sadly to be lamented,
if the damned in hell, do express more affectionate care of the eternal
happiness of their kindred than those, which pretend to be their best friends
on earth; you who either by advised choice, or by long acquaintance, are grown
into intimate familiarity, may make use of this help, to put one another into
the possession of the grace of Redemption. Amicus est alter idem.
A friend is another the same. Two persons joined in a league of friendship,
are one soul in two bodies. Your inward society, and dear esteem of one
another, may both afford you more frequent opportunities, and may qualify you
with greater freedom in carrying on the work for mutual benefit. Thou say,
such a one is to me even as mine own soul. Why then do thou not endeavor,
that it may go as prosperously with his soul, as with thine own? And you that
are neighbors, what do you? Oh further one another in this way. Do ye not see
some that dwell about you fallen among the Thieves of hell, left wounded, and
half dead? Be you Samaritans, do what you can to deliver, and to heal them.
Your cohabitation, and sundry occasions of conversing together, give you these
advantages of doing good, which others cannot have. Thou art commanded to love
thy neighbor as thy self, but if thou do not labor to bring him into the
fellowship of this grace with thy self, then where is thy love? It is sad to
observe, that at the meetings of neighbors, one shall scarcely hear three wise
words in a whole year tending to the good of souls. To make short, the desire
of our Redeemers glory, and zeal of the salvation of captive souls, should
constrain us to lay hold upon all advantages, which Gods providence shall
offer, for doing good even to mere strangers, if by any means we may be
serviceable, in furthering their eternal happiness, by the enjoyment of this
rich benefit. See Psalm. 119.45, 46.

Sect. 4. The fifth Duty.
5. LOve the appearing of thy Redeemer, which shall be at his second coming.
Believers are described by this property. 2 Timothy 4.8. His first coming was to
pay the price of Redemption, and then to apply it to all those, whom the Father
has given him, in due season: He will come again to fill up all empty Places,
to perfect the work, and to save them to the uttermost. Heb. 7.25.
He was once offered to bear the sins of many; and he shall come the second
time, in the end of the world without sin unto salvation, Heb. 9.28. He came
at first burdened with the curse of the Law: he shall come then in the fullness
of the blessing of his Gospel. Then shall thou reap the full harvest of
Redemption, and all the fruits of it shall be laid in thy lap at once. Oh then
stir up thy self! thou redeemed soul, to salute this happy day afar off,
and to embrace it with an affectionate love; and let this love discover it
self, by threatenings of,

1. Vehement Desires. Let thy heart be every like breathing after it, and
longing to enjoy it. The godly, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, do
sigh and groan within themselves, Romans 8.23. and the Apostle Peter call's upon
us, to look for, and hasten unto the coming of the day of God, 2 Pet. 3.12.
These expressions note the earnest desires of the soul. The traveller would
fain come to the lodging place, where he may rest at night: The
Day-taile-labourer breathes after the evening, that he may be dismissed from
his work, and receive his wages. Job 7.2.
They that journey from day to day in hot and dry countries, and they that
sweat and broil at harvest-work in the heat of Summer, do gape after the
cooling and refreshing shadow. That shall be the time of thy rest, thy
refreshing, thy reward, after all the labors of thine obedience in doing, and
suffering the will of God here below. If thou have entered upon the possession
of this grace, by an unfeigned faith in the Redeemer, and have truly tasted the
goodness of it, in the first fruits, how can thou forbear to sigh, and pant
in the strength of thy desires, for the enjoyment of the whole crop, which is
reserved for that day?

2. Lively Hope. Let those desires be attended with a patient expectation of
that happy day of thy complete deliverance, Romans 8.23. waiting is joined with
groaning. The Apostle mentions it, as a property of believers both there and
elsewhere often. 1 Cor. 1.7. they look for him (as it were) afar off, (...).
to be their Savior, Phil. 3.20. and to them that thus look for him, he will
appear for their salvation, Heb. 9.28. and the grace of God, as it teaches us
to abandon sin, and to live godly, so it inables us to look for that blessed
hope, and glorious appea^ing of Christ, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. How vigorously
(think you) did the Inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead wait for the coming of Saul to
their timely aid, according to his solemn promise, that they might be rid out
of the hands of Nahash, and delivered from the fear of that slaverie, which he
had threatened? 1 Samuel 11.1, 9, etc. And how vigorously should we wait for the
coming of Christ, to set us absolutely free from that Nahash, Serpens, Augur,
Incantator.
that Serpent, and conjurer of Hell, and to tread him under our feet, that he
may never whisper more? As Ruth was advised by her mother, to sit still, till
she should see the issue of the business betwixt her, and her kinsman,
concerning the Redemption and marriage motioned, upon assurance, that the man
would not rest, till he had finished the thing, Ruth. 3.18. So much more should
we learn silently to wait for the happy issue of this great transaction betwixt
Christ and us, in our complete Redemption, and full marriage in heaven.

3. Hearty rejoicing in the foresight of it. Let those strong desires, and
lively hopes be carried on, and sweetened with the mixture of spiritual joy,
which may comfortably refresh, and cheer your souls all along in every
condition, upon the view of this day beforehand. The Apostle speaking in the
Name of justified persons, says, We rejoice in hope of the glory of God, yea,
even in tribulations, Romans 5.2, 3. and of himself he says, a crown of
righteousness is laid up for me, having fought a good fight, etc. The manner of
his expression breathes out joy, and contentment in the forethought of it, 2 Timothy 4.8. and long before this, holy Job discovers the same spirit of gladness,
I know (says he) that my Redeemer liv^th, and that he shall stand up at the
last day, and then I shall see God in my flesh, Job 19.25, 26. How does the
apprentice or hired servant rejoice to think on the expiration of his Term,
and the last day of his service! Thou poor soul who art still forced to serve
the Law of sin in thy flesh, look forward, and see the time of thy freedom
coming on, and be comforted. How do the Mariners and Seafaring men, that have
been wether-beaten, and tossed with tempests, rejoice, Psalm. 107.30.
when they see the haven afar off, where they may be quiet? If thou be put
upon hard adventures, and art sailing through a rough sea of storms and
troubles in this world, yet lift up thine eyes, and behold the haven of perfect
liberty, and glory, whereunto thy Redeemer will waf^ thee shortly, and let this
cheer up thy Spirit. How greatly does it glad the heart of a condemned
prisoner, that lies bound in affliction, and iron, to hear the report of a
pardon sealed at Court for him, which shall be put into his hands at the
Assizes, and solemnly proclaimed for his benefit? the welcome thought of these
things makes his heart even leap for joy, and he begins to insult upon the
prison, his bonds, and fetters, and all the instruments of his restraint, and
says, I shall get rid out of all your hands ere long. Thou ransomed soul. Thy
pardon is sealed in heaven, the report thereof is comed to thine ears, and
heart, by the ministry of the Gospel; It shall be effectually pleaded for
thee at the day of Christ's appearing, and thou shall be possessed of an
absolute freedom, never to know bondage under sin, and the Curse any more.
Oh then! Plal. 126.1, 1.
let thy mouth be filled with laughter, and thy tongue with singing: Let thy
meditations on this subject be sweet, and feast thy soul thereon with great
delight. Say thus to the glory of thy Redeemer, Lord Jesus, thou came once to
be accursed for me, [that was my shame]; but thou will come again at that day
to be admired in me; [that shall be thy honor,] 2 These. 1.10.

Beloved Christians, let us learn these lessons, and practice them. But truly
such carriage requires a spiritual frame of heart, I shall therefore add a few
particulars, commending them to your observation, as necessary helps to further
us in the main duty.

1. Carefully keep thy self unspotted of the world, let not the pleasure of any
carnal lust so tickle thy soul, as to get within thee, and seize upon the
vitals of grace, give not liberty to thy foot, to walk in any forbidden path,
but take pains to purge out thy dross, and baggage more and more, that thou
may be pure in heart, and undefiled in the way. Through this gross neglect,
too many Christians, suffering iniquity to cleave to their hands, disable
themselves from loving the appearing of Christ; they do not desire it, but are
averse from it, they do not hope for it, but rather fear it, they cannot
sensibly rejoice in it, but the thoughts of it put them into dumps and sadness.
Only this taking heed to thy self, will dispose thee to lift up thy face,
without spot, yea, thou shall be secure, because there is hope, J^b 11.14, etc.

2. Preserve in thy self a willingness to die. Th^s was the failing of Elijah,
1 Kin. 19.4. and Jonah, Chap. 4.3, 8.
I mean, a well-grounded, real willingness, not slavish, or constrained
through impatience under sufferings, or discontent in an unwelcome condition,
but sincere and cordial, from a longing after Jesus Christ, to enjoy him in the
full fruit of his Redemption. This was S. Paul's temper, Phil. 1.21. There is
indeed in every man naturally an aversness from death, being the dissolution of
his frame, and an evil of punishment, and the grace of Regeneration does not
wholly take it away, but only keeps it within due Bounders, and raises up in
the soul a supernatural desire of blessedness with Christ in heaven, and a
willingness to submit to death in order to the attaining thereof, Get thy heart
wrought to this frame, and held up. By death the Lord will set thee free from
all thy chains, and not till then; if thou can not make it welcome, it
seems, thou art not weary of thy chains; yet alas, how common is this
distemper? We look upon the grace of Redemption as very desirable, and we
would enjoy it at the very height, yet we hang still in the body, and are loath
to die. The prisoner that knows his Supersedeas is granted, or his pardon
sealed, will he be loath to see the prison doors set open, or shrink at the
knocking off his bolts from his legs? If the Lord Jesus came down from heaven,
took upon him the curse of the Law, and bare the wrath of God, due to us
Rebels, and all that he might bring us to God in glory, shall we stand off, and
so cause him to lose his labor? Is heaven, and the pleasures of God's right
hand of no more worth in thine eye? Oh Christians, death may well be terrible
to such, as are strangers to Christ; but he has taken away the sting of it for
you: Therefore labor to get up above your fears, and be freely content to be
unclothed, that you may be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.1, 8.

3. In thy whole course after conversion, commit thy soul, and all the hopes of
thy happiness unto Jesus Christ. Lay up thy crown with him, commend thy
darling, thy choicest treasure unto him, and let him keep it for thee. He has
ransomed thy soul, which thou had lost, and recovered the inheritance of
heaven, which thou had forfeited by thy treason, therefore put them over into
his hands by faith, and hope, and let him have the custody of them. Do this in
every condition of life, wherein the Lord shall set thee. When the light shines
about thy Tabernacle, and thou enjoyest prosperity in things below, say not,
my mountain stands strong, I can manage all things my self, my welfare is in
mine own hands. When thy soul is filled with comfort, by the light of Gods
countenance lifted up upon it, do not now trust thy self with thy spiritual
happiness; say not, I shall carve so for my self, as it shall be ever thus with
me, but lean upon thy Redeemer, as the sovereign disposer of all thy
concernments. Psalm. 138.8.
Especially look to this in the days of adversity, or danger, by afflictions
of soul, or body; then thou shall be put to it; thrust thy self under the wings
of thy Savior, and deliver up all thine interests into his hands, who has
bought thee for himself, and will not see thee miscarry. Is there any person or
creature in heaven or earth, whom you can betrust with them, in assurance of
safety? None besides him. The Apostle Peter gives this savourie counsel to
suffering Christians, 1 Pet. 4.19. and we have two choice examples pertinent to
this purpose: The former of the Psalmist Psalm. 49.5-15. who, in the days of
evil, when the iniquity of his heels should compass him about, that is, when he
shall be exercised with afflictions, and chastisements, for his sinful
strayings, and uneven walking, yet resolves, that he will not be afraid,
because he has committed his soul unto God, being assured, that he would
redeem it from the power of the grave, in the morning of the resurrection;
while the men of the world, whose trust is only in the broken staff of the
creature, shall fall short of their hopes, and be miserably devoured by death
eternal. The latter example is the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. who bears up
courageously in the midst of his sufferings for the Gospel, upon this ground;
He has deposited his soul, (...). vide Bezam.
and the glory prepared for him, in the hands of Christ, and he was persuaded,
that he was able (and willing too, that is employed) to keep that, which he had
committed to him against that day.

4. When the summons of death come to arrest thee, and call thee hence, then
commit and commend tby spirit into the hands of the Lord God thy Redeemer. Thus
did David, when Saul and his men hemmed him in on every side, so that there was
no way of escape open, but he said, he was cut off, a gone man. Psalm. 31.5, 22.
Some interpreters do probably take this, See Mollerus, and Piscator.
to be the occasion of his penning that Psalm. The story is 1 Samuel 23.26. Jesus
Christ thy Redeemer, being ready to give up the Ghost on the Cross, utters
the same words, Luke 23.46. and in this commending his soul into the hands of
his father: He has respect to his members, and thereby undertakes the safe
keeping of all their souls: Omnes suorum animas custod^endas suscep^t. Calvin.
So that thou need not fear to commit thy spirit at death unto him, as he
committed his to his Father: Some of the most precious servants of God, are
recorded in Scripture, as Presidents herein. That expression of holy Jacob,
breathed out in the midst of his solemn speech to his sons on his death bed,
does clearly imply this gracious practice, Genesis 49.18. and Stephen the first
Gospel-martyr, followed the example of his master Jesus herein, Acts 7.59. Go
thou, and learn that lesson, that thou may have it in readiness on the day
that thou shall go hence, and be no more. Say thus, Oh Lord, here I am, an
unworthy creature, but thou have in pure love to my soul, bought me out from
the Curse, and so delivered me from the pit, of corruption, Isa. 38.17. and
now, that I must lay down this earthly Tabernacle, I do freely render thee
thine own. I am thine, save me, Psalm. 119.94. I humbly wait for that Crown of
righteousness, the full possession of glory, (in perfect union with thy blessed
self) which thou have purchased with so dear a price, and is laid up for me,
and many poor souls in heaven, 2 Timothy 4.8.

Thus much of the Fifth Use, which was for exhortation.

CHAP. XII. Use 6. Admonition.
6. LAstly, I would improve this Truth by way of Admonition, and from this, as
a new ground, briefly whet upon your hearts, that inference, which I drew from
the first Conclusion, concerning Cursing, that it is both irrational, and
irreligious. So shall the just condemnation of that wicked practice be
established in the mouth of two approved witnesses. Deuteronomy. 17.6.
As it is madness, to wish a curse to our selves, or others, seeing we are all
under the stroke of it by nature: So truly it is a double madness to do it, now
that we are redeemed from it by grace. Your own reason may dissuade you from it
on the former ground, unless you be so desperate as to continue still under the
curse, and to implunge your selves deeper into the gulf, and Religion may take
you off on the latter ground, unless you will resolve thus, Christ indeed has
delivered sinners from the Curse, but we are content to tamper with it still,
and so make your selves a thousand times more the children of wrath than you
were before. Yet alas, how common is this miscarriage, even among them, that
profess themselves to be redeemed by Christ? It is too usual with some men, to
wish a curse to their own souls, thereby either to confirm the truth of
something, or to bind themselves to do that, which they have purposed in their
hearts to do. It is true, we have examples of the best men in Scripture, which
have so done, as Job chap. 31.7, 8. etc. and David, Psalm. 7.3, 4, 5. but these
were for the most part rather necessitated than voluntary, for the clearing of
their innocence, always advised, and weighty, with solemn reverence in the
presence of God, from whom they did certainly expect the accomplishment of
their wish against themselves, in case they should be found faulty. And thus
they may be lawful, being used very sparingly. But this cannot justify the
too frequent use of them, without necessity, upon trivial occasions, rashly,
headily, brutishly, when the fear of God in the heart does not manage the
business, to render it accepted. As for the cursing and banning of others; Oh
how rife is it! How easily do the common people fall into that base language?
If they be but a little provoked, if passion get the upper hand in a small
measure, their tongues are forthwith all on a flame in bitter imprecations.

It is true also that some holy, men are reported in Scripture to have cursed
others, It is commanded, Jud. 5.23. It was practiced by David, Psalm. 69.22.
etc. By Elisha, 2 King. 2.24. By Nehemiah, chap. 13.25. and Jeremy, chap.
18.20, 21. But these are merely extraordinary, being predictions of evil
against others, uttered by the Spirit of Prophecy, which cannot warrant us to
do the like.

And I suppose, we shall scarcely meet with one approved example in the Book of
God, which will bear us out in the cursing of others. Jobs and Jeremies cursing
the day of their birth, and the man that first brought tidings of it, with the
overflowings of inordinate passion, in no case to be looked on as presidents.

And some have a Curse [Ah, fie upon him] ready on a short warning to fling at
a godly man, even because he is godly, as if the Lords Redeemed, were the
proper marks at which these sharp arrows should be shot. Oh most abominable
Bedlam-practice! If you love your souls, beware of it. Consider these motives.

1. Such language is the breathing, and framing of the Angel of the bottomless
pit, it is the Dialect of hell, fit for none but blind heathens, strangers
from the Covenant, such as Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.43. or for profane, hardened
sinners, which give themselves up to all iniquity, and professedly hate the
righteous, as Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.5, 7. Would ye not be in an higher form then
these are? Can ye be content to be so far from the very suburbs of heaven?

2. The sentence is passed long ago, and shall never be reversed: Cursed is he
that curses the people of God. It is the Lords own doom, though it was
delivered by the mouth of Balaam the false Prophet, Numb. 24.9. he was hired on
purpose to curse Israel, and came with a mind free enough to do it, but the
Lord turns him aside from his own byas, puts words of blessing into his mouth
which he never thought of, and causes him against the bent of his own heart to
pronounce those accursed that curse Israel. And now dares any of you adventure
upon a practice, which will be so far from taking the curse from off your
selves, that it will seal you more surely under the power of it?

3. It is a very gross, and dangerous taking Gods Name in vain, which may
appear thus. Every blessing and curse is virtually a prayer. As praying to God
to do some good thing for our selves or others, is a reverent using of his
Name, because it is a petitioning for that, which he has promised to do; so on
the contrary, praying for some evil to befall another, is a taking of it in
vain, because it is a petitioning for that, which he has resolved not to do,
or at least has given no intimation of his purpose concerning it, which may be
our warrant for such a prayer.

4. It carries along with it apparent injustice, and that in an high degree;
for godly men are blessed men: So the Lord tells Balaam, and upon that ground
forbids him to curse his people, Numb. 22.12. Hereby thou wrongest God himself,
giving him the lie, opposing him in his way, and undoing what he has done; and
them also in bearing false witness against them, and representing them to the
Lord in the most odious posture. If a man should be spread before a great
Prince some false accusations concerning his favorite, thereby to incense the
Prince against him, what an injury were this to them both? Surely cursing the
godly is a greater injury both to God, and them.

If then thou do not like to bear the black brand of an unrighteous man,
resolve against this wickedness in the language, which God himself put into the
mouth of Balaam, How shall I curse, whom God has not cursed? or detest whom he
has not detested? Number. 23.8.

But truly, snarling Dogs will bark, and bite too, if they can, and the
children of Belial will tear us with Curses: Who can hinder them? And we may
observe, that some men's tongues are so set on fire of hell, they are so full of
the poison of Aspes, and are so desperately transported beyond all reason, that
the very expressions are able to make the hearts of moderate men to tremble.

Indeed the dishonor of God, and the danger of their souls may give us cause
to mourn, but they need not trouble us, on any other account.

For first, they are causeless, Prove. 26.2. Godliness is no just cause of
cursing, but rather of blessing; the Lords Redeemed, are not Buts for such
poisoned arrows, the persons are mistaken, such curses are like Birds which
fly at rovers, aiming at no set place, or prevented in the flight, Saepe
sinistra cava praed^x^ ab^i^les corni^^ V^rg.
that they do not reach it. No wise man will regard the flying of Swallows. The
flying or chattering of some birds on the left hand, as ominous, or boding ill
luck, was an heathenish observation, grounded merely upon superstition, without
reason. And the imprecations are the issues of profane hearts, and therefore
not to be feared, but contemned.

2. Therefore they are bootless, they shall not come, they are vain, they
cannot effect that which they are sent for. As Wasps which have lost their
stings, as the report of powder without shot, as a crack of thunder without a
bolt, or as an arrow shot upward in the air, which soon spends its force, and
falls to the ground; For,

1. The Lord has settled his blessing upon them, by so firm, and indefeasable
a title, that all the power and malice of the gates of hell cannot take it off,
or make it void. God says of them, as once Isaac said of Jacob, I have blessed
them, yea, and they shall be blessed, Genesis 27.33.

2. And he will also, as a most expert Physician, extract sweetness out of
their poison, send down a blessing instead of a curse, and do his servants
good, even the rather, as David hoped, 2 Samuel 16.12. See this more fully
pressed in the Use of Consolation before.

To conclude, Let the godly abandon this wicked practice, even upon this score,
because they are redeemed from the Curse. Say thus: If the Lord Jesus has
ransomed sinners from the Curse, and made an everlasting separation betwixt it,
and them, then what have I to do with any more? God forbid, that I should be
so bold, as to fasten it on my self, or others, or endeavor to revive it.
Nay, I will not so much, as take the name of it once into my lips. I am called
by the mercy of God to be an Heir of Blessing, 1 Pet. 3.9.
and I will behave my self accordingly.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed, and sold by Thomas Johnson, at the Golden Key in St.
Pauls-Church-yard.
THE History of Four-footed Beasts and Serpents, describing at large their true
and lively figure, their several Names, Conditions, Kinds, Virtues, Countries:
Of their breed, and the wonderful work of God in their Creation, Preservation,
and Destruction. Together with the Theater of Insects, or Lesser living
Creatures, as Bees, Flies, Caterpillars, Spiders, Worms, etc. A most elaborate
work. By T. Muffet, Dr. of Physic, in Folio.

The Lord Francis Bacon's Natural History in Folio.

Lexicon Anglo, Graeco, Latinum, Novi Testamenti, or a Complete Alphabetical
Concordance of all the words in the New Testament, both English, Greek, and
Latin, in three distinct Tables: Showing also the several significations,
Etymons, Derivations, Force, and Emphasis, and diverse acceptations of each word
in Scripture. A work of very great use for the furtherance of
Scripture-knowledge.

Spiritual Refinings in two parts. The first treating of Grace and Assurance
(both practically and controversally) delivered in an hundred and twenty
Sermons. The second treating of Sin, with its Causes, Differences, Mitigations
and Aggravations, the deceitfulness of Man's heart, of Presumptuous and Reigning
sins, and of Hypocrisy and Formality in Religion, in two and forty Sermons. By
Anthony Burgess, Pastor of Sutton-Colfield in Warwickshire. Folio.

A brief Exposition on the twelve Small Prophets. By George Hutcheson, Minister
of Gods word at Edenborough. Folio.

Phisiologia Epicuro-Gassendo-Charltonia, or a Fabric of Science Natural upon
the Hypothesis of Atoms, founded by Epicurus, repaired by Gassendus, augmented
by Walter Charlton, Dr. in Medicine, and Physician to the late King Charles.
Folio.

A Choice Garden of all sorts of rarest Flowers, with their nature, place of
birth, time of flowring, names and virtues to each plant, useful in Physic,
admired for beauty: As also a Kitching-garden furnished with all manner of
Herbs, Roots, and Fruits, for Meats or Sauce, with the Art of planting an
Orchard with all sorts of Fruit Trees, etc. By John Parkinson Herbarist to the
late King. Folio.

The Lusiad or Portugal's Historical Poem written in the Portugal Language. By
Luis de Camoens, and put into English by Richard Fanshaw, Esquire. Folio.

Elise or Innocence become guilty, a New Romance, made English. By John
Jennings, Gent. Folio.

Trigonometrie, or the manner of calculating the sides and Angle of Triangles
by the Mathematical Canon, Demonstated by Mr. Will. Oughtred in Quarto, both in
Latin and English.

A clear and full Vindication of the Church and Universities of England in
their Orthodox Tenets, and Righteous Practices, against the Calumnies of the
Anabaptist, and other Sectaries. By Jeffery Wats, B. D. and Rector of
Much-Leighes in Essex. Quarto.

Universal Redemption, Asserted and Cleared from the Restrictions of Mr. John
Owen in his book called, The Death of Death, in the Death of Christ. By John
Horn, Preacher of the Gospel at Lyn in Norfolk. Quarto.

The Fullness and Freeness of Gods Grace in Christ, declared, 1. In the point of
Election, by a middle way between Calvin and Arminius, and different from them
both. 2. How God orders and appoints men to their final end. Some to honor,
some to dishonor to Eternity; In an uniform body of Divinity. By Francis Duke.
Quarto.

Anglo Judaeus, or the History of the Jews whilst here in England, relating
their manners, carriage, and usage from their first admission by William the
Conqueror to their Banishment.

Will. Bagnals Ghost, or a Continuation of that Witty Poem, the
Counter-scuffle, with some Characters. By William Gayton Esquire Quarto.

The English Parnassus, or a Help to English Poesy, containing a short
Introduction to that Art, a Collection of all Rhyming Monosyllables, the
choicest Epithets and Phrases, with some general forms upon all occasions,
Subjects and Theams Alphabetically digested. By Joshua Pool, M. A. of
Clare-Hall Camb. Author of the English Accidence.

The History of the French Academy, erected at Paris, by the late famous
Cardinal de Richileiu, and consisting of the most refined Wits of that Nation,
showing its Original and Establishment, its Statutes, Days, Places, and manner
of Assemblies, etc. With the names of its Members, a character of their
Persons, and a Catalogue of their Works; Written in French by Mr. Paul
Pellison, Counselor and Secretary to the King of France. Octavo.

Theses Sabbaticae, or the Doctrine of the Sabbath, wherein its Morality,
Change, Beginning, Sanctification are clearly discussed. By Tho. Shepherd,
Pastor of the Church of Christ at Cambridge in New England. Octavo.

Subjection to Christ in all his Ordinances and Appointments, the best means to
preserve our liberty. With a Treatise of ineffectual hearing the Word, by the
same Author. Octavo.

The Art of Short-writing by Characters, fair, short, swift, easy, and
legible. First, invented by J. Willis, afterward more illustrated by H. Dix,
and now more largely composed and completed. With an additional table of
words, and every way made easy to the meanest capacity. By Tho. Ratcliff.
Octavo.

A Treatise concerning Euthusiasme, as it is an effect of Nature, but is
mistaken by many, for either Divine Inspiration, or Diabolical Possession. By
Meric Casaubon, D.D. Octavo.

Martial's Epigrams, translated with sundry Poems and Fancies. By R. Fletcher,
Octavo.

The Rogue, or the Life of Guzman de Alfarache, the Witty Spaniard, in two
parts. Octavo.

Diatrita fidei Justificantis, qua Justificantis, or a discourse of the Object
and Office of Faith, as justifying; distinct from other Objects, Acts and
Offices of the same Faith, as sanctifying; wherein the Lutheran and Protestant
Doctrine is asserted against the Pontificians, Socinians, Arminians, and
others. By John Warner, Pastor of the Church of Christ, at Christ Church in
Hampshire.

A View of the Jewish Religion, containing the manner of Life, Rites,
Ceremonies, and customs of the Jewish Nation throughout the world at this
present time, together with the Articles of their Faith as now received. By
A.R. Octavo.

The Triumph and Unity of Truth in two Treatises; Intended as a preservative
against the many Errors and unhappy Divisions of these times. By Jo. Robinson,
M. A. and Minister of Gods Word.

The Birth of a Day, or a Treatise representing the Vicissitudes of all humane
things, with their Causes and sacred uses, by the same Author.

Brachy-Martyrologium, or a Breviary of all the greatest persecutions that have
befallen the Saints and people of God from the Creation to our present times.
Composed for the help of memory into English verse. By Nich. Billingsley of
Mart. Col. Oxon.

A Copy of the Covenant of Grace, with a discovery of several false pretenders
to that Eternal Inheritance, and of the right Heir thereunto, with such safe
instructions as will enable him to clear his title, and to make it
unquestionable. By Robert Bidwell, Minister of Gods Word, etc.

Englands Warning-peece, or the Prophetical Trumpeter, sounding an Alarm to
England, exhibiting the fate of Great Britain, past, present, and to come;
such wonderful things to happen in these seven years following, as have not
been heard of heretofore. By John Haydon Gentl. Octavo.

The Examination and Trial of Old Father Christmas at the Assizes held at the
Town of Difference, in the County of Discontent. Written according to Legal
proceedings, by Josiah King, of Modbury in Devon. Octavo.

A Grave opened, or a View of the Chambers of Death, a Poem alluding to
Weaving; entitled, The Silver Shuttle, and other Divine Fancies and Epigrams,
by the same Author.

Tabulae Suffragiales de terminandis fidei litibus ab Ecclesia Catholica fixae,
etc. Authore Thoma Anglo ex Albiis East-Saxonum. Duodecimo.

A Manual of Divine Considerations in English, by the same Author.

A Treatise of Spiritual Infatuation, being the present visible disease of our
English Nation. Delivered in several Sermons at the Hague by W. Stamp, D. D.
Sometimes Minister of Gods Word at Stepney near London, Duodecimo.

Man's inbred Malady, or the Doctrine of Original sin maintained: As also the
Necessity of Infant Baptism. By George Burches, late Rector of Wood-church in
Cheshire.

The Academy of Eloquence, or a Complete English Rhetoric, etc. By Tho.
Blount, Gentl. Duodecimo.

Ignoramus: Comoedia coram Rege Jacobo habita Cantabrigiae, etc.

The Cabbinet-councel, containing the chief Arts of Empire and Mysteries of
State discabinated in Political and Polemical Aphorisms grounded on Authority
and Experience, and illustrated, with the choicest Examples, and historical
Observations. By Sir Walter Rawleigh Knight.

(...), or a Treatise of Self-denial, wherein the Necessity and Excellency of
it is demonstrated, with several Directions for the practice of it. By
Theophilus Polwheile, Teacher of the Church at Terverton in Devon.

Wales's Redemption from the Curse.


