The Fourth Paper, Presented by Mayor Butler, To the Honorable Committee of
Parliament, for the Propagating the Gospel of Christ JESUS. Which Paper was
humbly owned, and was, and is attended to be made good By Major Butler. Mr.
Charles Vane. Col. Danvers. Mr. Iackson. Mr. Wall. And Mr. Turner.
ALSO A Letter from Mr. Goad, to Major BUTLER, upon occasion of the said PAPER
and PROPOSALS. Together with A Testimony to the said fourth Paper, By way of
Explanation upon the four PROPOSALS of it.

BY R. W.

Unto which is subjoyned the Fifteen Proposals of the MINISTERS.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spred-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's. MDCLII.

To the truly Christian Reader.
IF all the Angels in Heaven were turned into a grand Committee, to consult
upon this high point of Propagating the Gospel of Jesus Christ, they must needs
agree in one unanimous Consent and Vote (as Paul once spoke upon the like
occasion) Who is sufficient? We are not sufficient for these things.

The Honorable Committee (according to the Parliaments order) has freely (and
with abundance of Christian Civility and gentleness) received many and several
Papers from many and several sorts of Men and Consciences.

I acknowledge a most wise providence of God, furnishing this fourth paper with
many Christian Volunteers, who cheerfully subscribing, left no convenience for
my subscription: But since the number of Proposals is so increased, that little
hopes appears of their Honors Time and Purpose (if of Reading, yet hardly) of
Examining and debating all of them. I am therefore humbly bold to present this
Explication and Testimony, together with the Scriptures at large, for the more
clear and easy discovery of the sense and scope intended.

The Stationer was solicitous of gratifying the desire of many with the sight
of the Ministers fifteen Proposals, as also of Mr. Goads Letter, and therefore
are they both presented. The liberty of Prophesying, and the liberty of Trying,
and the liberty of presenting unto Trial, are Mercies now vouchsafed to us, of
higher value, then if our streets (like those of Jerusalem to come) were
(literally) of pure Gold, or if all our stones were the richest Diamonds and
Rubies.

My humble desire is, to all that fear God, to cry to him to guide by his own
Spirit, both the Honorable Committee, and the high Court of Parliament, to be
jealous of their own Insufficiencies to perceive the height of this business:
the easiness of mistaking, the subtlety of the Serpent (who is not yet bound up
from deceiving whole Nations) the Piety and Equity of Soul-freedom, the guilt
of this Nation, As to National superstitions, and Will-worships: As to the
setting of the spiritual Crown of Christ Jesus upon Henry 8. his head, and so
ever since, As to the stopping the breath of the Spirit of Christ Jesus, and
the persecuting of the said Lord Jesus in his Witnesses and Servants.

And since I have mentioned that point of persecution, I will end with two
excellent late Speeches of his Excellency the Lord General, upon occasion of
these Papers. The one before many witnesses, to this purpose. I shall need no
Revelation (said that Noble Lord) to discover unto me that man that endeavors
to impose upon his Brethren. The other, at a Debate of the Honorable
Committee, and in a confluence of many Auditors; when it pleased an Honorable
Gentleman of the Committee, zealously to argue against a Laodicean, and
lukewarm indifferency in Religion, professing for his part, That he had rather
be a Saul then a Gallio. His Excellency with much Christian zeal and affection
for his own Conscience professed also, That he had rather that Mahumetanism
were permitted amongst us, then that one of Gods Children should be persecuted.

Such a spirit as it is from God, and the Lamb of God; so is it only like to
guard this Nation from the Terrors of Ecclipses, of Pestilencies, of Navies,
of Armies, of Men and Devils: For the pouring forth of this Spirit, and the
Peace and Tranquillity of this Nation, humbly prays

The unworthiest of all the Followers and Witnesses of Christ Jesus. R. W.

Certain Proposals from the Scriptures, humbly Presented to the Honorable
Committee for the Propagating of the Gospel.
Propos. I.
FRom Mat. 9. ult. Pray therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send
forth Laborers, etc.

Mat. 10. 5. 16. Behold I send you forth as Sheep amongst Wolves, etc.

Act. 4. 19, 20. But Peter and John said unto them, whether it be right in the
sight of God to hearken unto you, more then unto God, judge ye: For we cannot
but speak the things which we have seen and heard.

Ephesians. 4. 11. And he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers: for the work of the Ministry, etc.

1 Cor. 12. 3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Spirit,
etc.

Gal. 1. 12. But I certify you, that the Gospel that was preached of me, is
not after man, for neither received it I of man, neither was I taught it but by
the Revelation of Jesus Christ.

John 10. 11. Verily I say unto you, He that enters not in by the door into
the Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Thief and a
Robber: but he that enters in by the door, is the Shepherd of the sheep.

James 2. 1. My brethren, have not the faith of the Lord Jesus, the Lord of
glory, with respect of persons.

1. It is humbly Proposed, Whether Christ Jesus, the Lord of the Harvest, does
not send forth Laborers into his Vineyard, furnishing them by his Spirit, and
bearing witness to their Labors, without the Testimony and Reward of men?

Propos. II.
FRom Mat. 13. 24. The Parable of the Tares. ver. 38. The Field is the world;
the good seed the children of the Kingdom, but the Tares the children of the
wicked one.

Acts 5. 34. to the 40. Gamaliels advice concerning the Apostles.

1 Cor. 11. 19. For there must be also Heresies amongst you, that they which
are approved may be made manifest amongst you.

2 Pet. 2. 1. But there were false Prophets amongst them: even so there shall
be false Teachers amongst you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies,
even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift
destruction. So on to ver 10.

Jude 3. 4. 15. Contend earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to the
Saints, for there are certain men crept in etc.

2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, 26. And the servant of the Lord must not strive, but be
gentle toward all men; If God peradventure will give them Repentance, etc.

Luke 9. 49, 50. And John answered and said, Master, we saw one casting out
devils in thy name, and we forbad him, because he follows not with us. And
Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not, for he that is not against us, is for us.

2. It is humbly Proposed, Whether it be not the Will (or Counsel) of God that
there must be Heresies, yea damnable Heresies, that such who are approved may
be made manifest? And whether it be not the pleasure of God, that the Judgment
and Condemnation of such false Teachers and Heretics be left to himself?

Propos. III.
FRom Romans 14. 4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant?

1 Cor. 7. 23. You are bought with a price, be not the servants of men.

Gal. 1. 16. I conferred not with flesh and blood.

Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast in the liberties wherewith Christ has made you free.

Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is impossible to please God.

1 John 4. 1. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of
God.

Romans 14. ult. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, etc.

3. It is humbly Proposed, Whether for the Civil powers to assume a Judgment
in Spirituals, be not against the Liberties given by Christ Jesus to his people?

Propos. IV.
From Romans 11.
4. Whether it be not the duty of the Magistrate to permit the Jews, whose
conversion we look for, to live freely and peaceably amongst us?

Mr. Goads Letter TO Mayor Butler.
Major Butler,
YOur Paper which you left with me, has set my thoughts on work about the way
of the propagating of the Gospel, concerning which, quot homines tot
sententiae; we are neither of Paul, nor Apollo, nor Cephas: we are come into
the unity of the Spirit, we are come to God the Judge of all, and to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Covenant, we are returned unto the Archbishop of our Souls,
and we cannot go back to men's Judgments, though seeming Pillars, nor give our
voice for the use of any Carnal weapons; knowing such as are mighty through God
to cast down strong holds, and high imaginations, and to wrestle with
principalities and powers, and the Ruler of the darkness of this world, to
which all the power, wisdom, and righteousness of man is altogether
insufficient, whilst reaching not unto the Conscience, where only comes the
demonstration of the Spirit and power: and if it be said that the Spirit goes
forth in these, it is answered, that the Spirit going forth, dismisseth these,
as Gideon did his Soldiers: Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Not by might, nor by
power, but by my Spirit, when he was to build the Temple: it is the Cross of
Christ by which we are saved, and God forbid we should rejoice in any thing
save that, by which the world is Crucified unto us, even in its wisdom and
righteousness, and to undertake to carry the Cross by these, is nonsense and
contradiction; it is to make it of none effect, which is weakness and
foolishness unto the world, stronger and wiser then the world. God has made us
able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; and
to go forth in any strength and wisdom, but in the Spirits, is to doubt of the
Spirits truth and power: and if it be asked where this power is, we answer,
that it has been long withdrawn, that the man of Sin might be revealed: but it
will come forth, and is now coming, and we are resolved to be weak, and fools
in Christ, till we come forth in him, the wisdom of God, and the power of God:
to go forth in man, according to the Proposals of some unto the Committee, is
to go forth for Christ, against him: The Spirit of God his presence did let and
hinder the revealing of the man of sin, as the light keeps out the darkness: It
is his return only that can destroy that sin: and All goings forth of man
against it, is the going forth of darkness, and sin, and Satan, and so is but a
further revealing of the man of sin, whose appearance is in all deceivableness
of unrighteousness in them that perish. Blessed are they who go forth in, and
with the Lord, to the propagation of the Gospel, pray that it may have free
passage, and be glorified: The Causewayes that we make for it, obstruct it,
that is, not preparing the way of the Lord: Christ is the way, the truth, and
the life: let me have no God, no Christ, nor Truth that cannot defend
themselves and me, or deliver themselves and me into freedom: having upon
design suffered bonds to be put upon them, and therefore let error, sin, and
hell, and darkness come forth in their power, it is the will of God they should
do so, and that Pharaoh should rise unto his full greatness, that he may appear
to be above him, and get himself honor upon him. Antichrist is now getting up
upon his last legs, whose feet are Iron and Clay, there is life no where but in
his stump, which is not enough to quicken him thoroughly in this his last image
and form, in which he is coming forth: how soon was he thrown down in his last
appearance and rising among us? even before he could bite, his teeth were
broken: God smote him on the Cheek bone: before the Thorns were grown hard to
prick, the fire took hold of them, and God is finishing the work apace, and
cutting it short in righteousness, even his utter consumption and destruction
by the brightness of his coming. There is no cause to fear for the tail of this
smoking firebrand, for the fire of the Lord upon it is not quenched, God will
be a swift witness against this Sorcery, for so are all the dealings of men in
the things of God: and this foundation that some Proposers are laying, will
appear to be the abomination of desolation* When there is talking of foundation
doctrines, when Christ is thrust out of his office, who is the Corner stone
refused of the builders, setting up themselves in his place, and putting
weapons into the evil servants hands to beat his fellow servants, because the
Lord and Master defers his coming, not knowing that our strength is to sit
still; other foundation can no man lay but that which is laid, even Jesus
Christ: and to make Paul or Apollo any thing, is by the Spirit of God in Paul,
interpreted to be the laying of another foundation, and defiling the Temple of
God, which he that does, him shall God destroy, 1 Cor. 3.

That which is now held forth in some Proposals, has been the foundation of
all the persecution and confusion which has been in the Churches: how has the
God of this world blinded men's eyes? how are those which were clothed in
Scarlet, now embracing the dunghils? my soul goes forth in pity to them, sure
they shall be saved, but it will be by fire; but how would I save them from
that fire, God is going on his way conquering and to conquer, who will set the
thorns and briars against him? he will go through them, and burn them together:
Mark where the indignation of the Lord has of late fallen, even upon those
that have stood in his way, and would not give him free passage: there is no
weapon has prospered against our present State, every tongue that has risen
up in Judgment, has been condemned: The hostility of the Bishops, and the
treachery joined with hostility in the Presbyters, and now that Balams
incantations are in vain, he has nothing left him to do but this; Midian,
bring forth your women to them, snare them with your prudential way of Gospel
propagation* tell them what a reproach lies upon them from all Nations, that
they have no care of Religion, and that they give liberty to all heresies and
fantastical spirits, but ere they begin again to vex with these wiles, the Lord
by his Spirit will suddenly be upon them from his Temple, and his voice will be
heard, vex the Midianites, and smite them, and to the Moles and Bats, they go
from the glory of his Majesty, from henceforth be silent all flesh.

The Philistims know where Sampsons strength lies, but he has been weak and
blind long enough, he shall make you no more sport with him, your house is left
desolate, his hands are shaking the main pillars of it, O ye Philistims! All
the risings and puttings forth of Antichrist are fair and well looking, and
there is nothing intended but weeding out the Tares, and the good of the Corn;
but the Husbandman knows that by this husbandry the Wheat will be pulled up
with the Tares; nay the Wheat will be destroyed, and the Tares nourished, and
the Lord is now resolved that the Wheat shall spread and flourish, and he will
come himself and sever the Tares from it, and throw out these husbandmen, with
them, into the fire.

The Spirit of Christ says, Remove from these men's Tents. Your last Querie is
concerning the Jews, whether they may be tolerated among us, or no? I am sure
that this is now in design in some Proposals, which I believe the Proposers do
not see, therefore Father forgive them, for they know not what they do; even to
cast out, scatter, and destroy those inward spiritual Jews, the seed of the
blessed, which rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh; I
have given my testimony in this thing, and it stands before the world in Print,
and now I look when the Lord will witness unto me, not secretly to them; which
he does already but openly, for which work he is at the door. And so wishing
you the presence of the Lord with you, I rest, waiting with you for his
Kingdom, which is not of this world.

March 8. 1651. Yours CHRISTOPHER GOAD.

A Testimony to the 4th. Paper presented by Major BVTLER to the Honorable
Committee for Propagating the Gospel.
IT is my humble Petition to the God of Heaven, to vouchsafe that Honorable
Committee Time and Hearts to examine the Scriptures alleged in that Paper: And
at present, that they may please to weigh (with those double weights of the
Sanctuary) this humble Explication of the Four Proposals.

First, As to the first Head, viz. of Christ Jesus sending forth of his own
Messengers: I humbly pray it may be remembered, that there is a twofold Ministry
of Christ Jesus.

1. The one of Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4 11. The twofold Ministry of
Christ Jesus.
feeding the Flocks already Christian and Converted.

2. The other of Messengers or Apostles, sent forth to convert and beget to
Christ. Of this sort I humbly conceive is the Sending now in debate before you:
and of this sort is that Sending and Questioning so large and punctual ( Rom*
10.) How can they Preach, except (...), except they be Apostliz'd, or Sent?
Upon which Distinction I humbly offer three things to be necessarily supposed.
First, Apostolical Gifts and Abilities in the Men sent. Secondly, a greater
spiritual power in the Senders, according to that Rule; Greater is the Sender
then the Sent. Thirdly, it supposes an unconverted estate in the People to whom
such Messengers are sent to preach and bap^ize. Which are three such Knots,
that none that I know of professing Christ Jesus, these many hundred years,
have been able to untie, and to prove such a Ministry extant, otherwise then
by some (seeming) Prudential Inventions, or the Power of the Sword. Yet,

Secondly, Christ Jesus his first immediate sending.
Christ Jesus did immediately send forth his Messengers (Legatos a Latere) his
LXX. Luc. 10. his XII, First to the Jews, Mat. 10. afterward to all Nations,
Mar. 16. Christ Jesus did immediately send forth by his Spirit, and mediately
by the Church at Antioch, Act. 13. He immediately stirred up Paul and Apollos,
etc. not only without Civil, but also without Spiritual and Church power. Yea
since the Apostasy and Rising of Antichrist, He has in all Ages stirred up
his Prophets to witness (in a poor and mournful sackcloth) Rev. 10. and 11. and
14 Chapters. The Waldenses, the Wicklevists, His sending of Prophets all the
Reign of Antichrist.
the Hussites, the Lutherans, the Calvinists, etc.

These Protestant Witnesses could never clear up their Functions or Ministeries
(as Bishops or Presbyters) yet doubtless has Christ Jesus endowed them with
Prophetical Gifts of Translating and Expounding the Scriptures. I say, they
were as Prophets immediately stirred up by Christ Jesus; who doubtless has now
stirred up more then ever were in this Nation, men of Prophetical Gifts and
Spirits, [ Gentlemen, Lawyers, Physicians, Soldiers, Tradesmen] some adorned
with Humane Learning, others only with the Scriptures. And doubtless such is
his faithfulness and love to his Chosen, that he will yet stir up his Witnesses
and Prophets, yea and in his time Apostles and Messengers to the Nations of the
World, whose Of which I have spoken more particularly in the Hireling. Ministry
etc.
Gifts, Calling, Work and Wages shall all be from Himself.

Lastly, as to those Terms of Testimony, or Reward of Men; I am far from
obstructing any countenance or encouragement to any whom Christ Jesus stirs up.
This only I say, 1. It seems to be an ungospel or unchristian task put upon the
Civil State, viz. To grant Licenses (as the Bishops) for Preaching, etc. 2. It
is not hard to guess, Were it not for the Magistrates sword and money, his Test
or testimony would be little regarded.
That were it not for the Magistrates Pay and Sword, very few would be found to
solicit his Test or Testimony. But doubtless such Preachers, who (either
above or under board) make a Bargain for so much, or so much, without which
they will not be sent; I humbly conceive they can never be said to be sent by
Christ Jesus, although all the Civil Powers in the World should subscribe to
their Commissions and Sendings.

To the second Head, of Permitting False teachers and Heretics: I am humbly
confident, that (from the Scriptures alleged) it will appear to be the will
of God, that Christians and Antichristians, the Wheat and the Tares, should be
permitted to dwell, to trade, to live and die in the common Field of the World
together.

2. Upon a due survey it will be found, that the Lord Jesus Christ himself, and
his Servants, have most commonly been accounted, and have suffered as the
greatest Deceivers, Seducers, Heretics and Blasphemers in the World.

3. The Body of this Nation, and of all Nations professing Christianity,
professing to know Christ Jesus in word, and in works denying him, cannot but
be acknowledged to live and die (if without Repentance) in constant real and
practical Denyings and Blasphemings of Christ Jesus.

4. Christ Jesus has not been without Care against Heretics and Blasphemers:
Christ Jesus his course with Blasphemers.


First, by judging them that are within among the Saints: therefore (1 Timothy 1.)
Paul delivered Hymineus and Alexander unto Satan, that they may learn not to
blaspheme.

Secondly, by judging them without: First, sometimes by horrible judgments in
this life; sometimes by subduing them by his Spirit, as Paul from his
persecuting and blasphemous courses.

Thirdly, As for the wilfully and finally obstinate, they are ordained (says
Peter and Jude) to condemnation; And their judgment and damnation sleeps not.

To the third Head, The full debate of this point, may be seen in that great
Controversy of the Bloody Tenet, between Mr. Cotton and my self.
concerning the Civil Magistrates Commission in Spirituals, I humbly conceive,

1. That in these late years GOD has made it evident, that all Civil
Magistracy in the World is merely and essentially Civil; And that the Civil
Magistrate can truly take cognizance of nothing, as a Civil Magistrate, but
what is proper and within his Civil Sphere. The Magistrate, if a Saint, has a
Spiritual power, and so have all Saints; and he that partakes more of Christ's
Spirit, has more of Christ's Power, whatever his outward condition be.

2. By the last Will and Testament of Christ Jesus, we find not the least title
of Commission to the Civil Magistrate (as Civil) to judge and act in the
matters of his Spiritual Kingdom.

3. That great pretense from the Land of Canaan, and the Kings of Israel and
Judah, has been in these late years proved but weak and sandy, and the Lord
Jesus Christ himself to be the Antitype of all those Figures, the King and Head
of all the Israel of God, Forming, Reforming his people, etc.

Hence, The Saints will be Saints, whatever the Magistrates and the Times be.
although it be the Duty of Kings, Queens, Magistrates to be nursing Fathers
and Mothers to the Saints: Although it be the Saints Duty to pray for
Magistrates, that they may live peaceably under them in all Godliness and
Honesty, Jer. 29. and 1 Timothy 2. Yet suppose the Magistrates to be never so
ungodly, idolatrous, blasphemous, bloody, (as they were in the first 300 years
after Christ) yet Christ Jesus failed not, nor will, to preserve his Saints in
the Power and Spirit of true Christianity and Godliness: And contrarily, the
Saints never discovered so bright an Image of Christ Jesus since, in those
times wherein Constantine and so many after him have used and drawn their Civil
swords in Spiritual causes.

Our Fathers before us in England, though famous for Civil Laws, and Wars, and
Victories, yet have they but trod the Round, and walked in a Circle; plant and
pluck up, plant and pluck up; as we their Children do: and all for want of
Commissions from Christ Jesus, and his Instructions and Promises in such a
Work. The Parliament established King Henry the 8. Head of the Church: this
Supremacy has continued in four Protestant Princes since. The bickerings of
the Clergy from H. 8. his time, all zealous for the Civil sword.
Yet first, what Disagreements about the Title? For while the Clergy have
preached the Jus Divinum of the Princes Authority in Spirituals, after the
pattern of the Kings of Israel and Judah; the truth is, that Parliaments and
People since have pleaded, That Princes could not receive but what the
Parliaments gave them, and the Parliaments could not give them but what the
People gave the Parliament their Representative; which could not possibly be a
Spiritual and Soul-power.

Secondly, the Work has never prospered: but succeeding Times, more
enlightened by Christ Jesus, have still been breaking down and pulling up. For
instance: The Protestant Bishops with their English Common Prayer, supplanted
the Popish Bishops and their Latin Mass: The Presbyterians and their Scotch
Directories, after some Disputes, at last rout the Protestant Bishops and their
Common Prayers: Now the Parliament being graciously pleased to remind the
Providence of the most High, in using Instruments of various Consciences in
their late Service, cannot but expect to be solicited by some of these
Consciences, and to be zealously told, that Christian Kings and Magistrates
succeed the Kings of Israel and Judah, in the power of Establishing Religion,
and Reforming it; of Defining Doctrines, especially Fundamentals; of Punishing
the contrary as Heretics and Blasphemers; of Granting Licenses and Authority
to Preachers, of seeing their Wages paid them, etc. And therefore that they
are bound, as they will answer it to God, to Christ, to their own souls, and
the souls of others, to settle Religion, to Establish something, etc. But,

My humble Prayer shall be to Him that is only wise, so to guide this Renowned
Parliament, that they may see and shun the Rocks on which our Fathers (as
touching a State-Religion) both Papist and Protestant have made most woeful
shipwreck. And that they may be pleased to remember, that be the Plants never
so new, so fair, so hopeful; yet while National, while State-plants, and
enforced, our Spiritual Lord the Lord Jesus will sooner or later eradicate and
pluck them up, until at last the work and glory be given to Himself, to work
freely and in his own way, by the free Breathings of his most powerful Spirit,
in the mouths and hearts of such by whom and in whom he freely pleases.

Hence, oh that it would please the Father of Spirits to affect the heart of
the Parliament with such a merciful sense of the Soul-Bars and Yokes which our
Fathers have laid upon the neck of this Nation, and at last to proclaim a true
and absolute Soul-freedom to all the people of the Land impartially; so that no
person be forced to pray nor pay, otherwise then as his Soul believes and
consents. Soul (...) of mighty ^^^sequence to th^s Nation.
This Act, as I believe it to be the absolute will of God, as to this and all
the oppressed Nations of the World; so will this most prudent State find it to
be a principal Expedient for two great ends: First, the easing and sweetening
the minds of the people of this Nation, who have so long cried out of Burdens,
etc. Secondly, the preventing all the Clergical Designs of one sort or another,
when the whole people of the Nation shall be engaged as one man to maintain
that Power, that has from Heaven set them free from so great and so long
continued Slavery.

Such a Service for God and the Nation, cannot but be attended with many
Objections: To all which (as also for some merciful and humane consideration
(at least for a season) to such of the Clergy, whom any Town or people of the
Nation shall not freely close with in Worship and Maintenance) the wisdom of
the most High is infinitely able to direct the Commonwealths High-Senate of
Parliament; and doubtless will, if they humbly see their want, and beg supply
from him.

Upon the Scriptures, and the fourth Head, as touching the JEWS: I humbly
conceive it to be the Duty of the Civil Magistrate to break down that
superstitious wall of separation (as to Civil things) between us Gentiles and
the Jews, and freely (without their asking) to make way for their free and
peaceable Habitation amongst us. And the rather, because that People (however
for a season under a most terrible Eclipse) yet,

1. The holy Scripture says, Arguments for permission of the Jews.
that they are a Beloved people, and beloved (as we sometimes love unworthy
children) for their Fathers sake.

2. They are a people above all the peoples and Nations in the World, under
most gracious and express Promises.

3. We Gentiles by their fall have had the occasion of our rising to the
blessed and joyful Knowledge of a Savior.

4. Their rising again to own and embrace Christ Jesus, is promised to be as
life from the dead, not only to themselves, but as to the propagating of Christ
Jesus to other peoples.

5. Out of some kind of sense of these things, we pretend to look, and long,
and pray for their Return and Calling.

6. As other Nations, The Guilt of England, and the Kings of it, as to the Jews.
so this especially, and the Kings thereof, have had just cause to fear, that
the unchristian oppressions, incivilities, and inhumanities of this Nation
against the Jews, have cried to Heaven against this Nation and the Kings and
Princes of it.

What horrible oppressions and horrible slaughters have the Jews suffered from
the Kings and peoples of this Nation, in the Reigns of Henry 2. K. John,
Richard 1. and Edward 1. Concerning which not only we, but the Jews themselves
keep Chronicles?

For the removing of which guilt, and the pacifying of the wrath of the most
High against this Nation, and for the furthering of that great end of
propagating the Gospel of Christ Jesus; It is humbly conceived to be a great
and weighty Duty which lies upon this State, to provide (on the Jews account)
some gracious Expedients for such holy and truly Christian Ends.

Lastly, Objections against the Jews.
I humbly crave leave to say, That I am not without thoughts of many
Objections, and cannot without horror think of the Jews killing of the Lord
Jesus; of their cursing themselves and their posterity; of the wrath of God
upon them; of their denying the Fundamentals of all our Christian Worship; of
some crimes alleged for which they have been so afflicted by this Nation; of
their known Industry of enriching themselves in all places where they come. But
I dare not prejudice the high wisdom and experience of the State, abundantly
rich and able to provide answerable Expedients, if once it please the most High
to affect their Honorable breasts with the piety and equity, the duty and
necessity of so great a Work.

R. VV.

The humble Proposals of the Ministers who presented the Petition to the
Parliament, Because many have earnestly desired a sight of the Ministers
Proposals, they are therefore here subjoyned.
Feb. 11. and other Persons, for the Furtherance and Propagation of the Gospel
in this Nation: wherein they having had equal Respect to all Persons fearing
God, though of differing judgments, do hope also that they will tend to Union
and Peace.
1. THat Persons of Godliness and Gifts, in the Universities and elsewhere,
though not Ordained, may be admitted to preach the Gospel, being approved when
they are called thereunto.

2. That no person shall be admitted to Trial and Approbation, unless he bring
a Testimonial of his Piety and Soundness in the Faith, under the hands of six
Godly Ministers and Christians gathered together for that end and purpose, unto
whom he is personally known; of which number two at the least to be Ministers.

3. That a certain number of persons, Ministers and others of Eminency, and
known Ability and Godliness, be appointed to sit in every County, to examine,
judge and approve all such persons, as being to preach the Gospel, have
received Testimony as above. And in case there shall not be found a competent
number of such persons in the same County, that others of one or more neighbor
Counties be adjoined to them.

4. That care be taken for the removing the Residue of the Ministers who are
Ignorant, Scandalous, Nonresident, of Disturbers of the Public peace: and of
all Schoolmasters who shall be found Popish, scandalous, or disaffected to the
Government of the Commonwealth.

5. That to this end, a Number of persons, Ministers and others of eminent
piety, zeal, faithfulness, ability and prudence, be appointed by Authority of
Parliament to go through the Nation, to enquire after, examine, judge of, and
eject all such persons as shall be found unfit for the Ministry, or teaching
of Schools, being such as above described.

6. That for the expediting this work, these persons may be assigned in several
Companies or Committees, to the six Circuits of the Nation, to reside in each
of the Counties for such a convenient space of time as shall be requisite,
until the work be done: And calling to their Assistance in their respective
Circuits such Godly and able Ministers and others in each of the Counties where
they shall reside, to assist them in this work, as they shall think fit.

7. That these persons so sent and Commissioned, may be empowered, before they
shall depart out of each County, to return and to represent unto the Parliament
the Names of fit and sufficient persons, Ministers and others to be appointed
and approved of, such as shall be called to preach the Gospel in such Counties:
And in the mean time, the persons so Commissioned as aforesaid, shall have
power while they reside in each County, to examine, judge and approve of such
persons, as having a Call to preach the Gospel in such Counties, shall upon
such Testimonial as aforesaid, offer themselves to such Examination.

8. That it be proposed, that the Parliament be pleased to take some speedy and
effectual course, either by impowering the persons in the several Counties to
be appointed for Trial and Approbation of such persons as shall be called to
preach the Gospel there: Or in such other way as they shall think fit, for the
uniting and dividing of Parishes in the several Counties and Cities within this
Commonwealth, in reference to the preaching of the Gospel there; saving the
Civil rights and privileges of each Parish.

9. That all Ministers so sent forth and established, be enjoined and required
to attend the solemn Worship of God, in Prayer, Reading and Preaching the Word,
Catechizing, and Expounding the Scriptures, as occasion shall require, visiting
the sick, and instructing from house to house; residing amongst the people to
whom they are sent, and using all care and dil^gence by all ways and means to
win souls unto Christ.

10. That it is desired, that no persons be required to receive the Sacrament,
further then their Light shall lead them unto. Nor no person sent forth to
preach, and already placed, or which shall be placed in any Parish within this
Nation, be compelled to administer the Sacrament to any, but such as he shall
approve of, as fit for the same.

11. That a Law may be provided, that all persons whatsoever within this Nation
be required to attend to the public Preaching of the Gospel, every Lords Day,
in places commonly allowed, and usually called Churches, except such persons as
through scruple of Conscience do abstain from those Assemblies.

12. That whereas diverse persons are unsatisfied to come to the public places
of hearing the Word, upon this Account, that those places were Dedicated and
Consecrated: That the Parliament will be pleased to declare, that such places
are made use of, and continued, only for the better conveniencie of persons
meeting for the public Worship of God, and upon no other consideration.

13. That all persons dissenting from the Doctrine and Way of Worship owned by
the State, or consenting thereunto, and yet not having advantage or opportunity
of some of the public Meeting-places, commonly called Churches; be required to
meet (if they have any constant meetings) in places publicly known, and to
give notice to some Magistrate of such their place of ordinary meetings.

14. That this Honorable Committee be desired to propose to the Parliament,
That such who do not receive, but oppose those Upon occasion of which motion,
the Ministers were desired to instance: who therefore presented 15.
Fundamentals, the Copy whereof is not yet come to my hand.
Principles of Christian Religion, without acknowledgment whereof the
Scriptures do clearly and plainly affirm that Salvation is not to be obtained,
as those formerly complained of by the Ministers; may not be suffered to preach
or promulgate any thing in opposition unto such Principles.

15. And further, That the Parliament be humbly desired to take some speedy and
effectual course for the utter suppressing of that Abominable Cheat of Judicial
Astrology, whereby the minds of Multitudes are corrupted, and turned aside
from depending upon the Providence of God, to put their Trust in the Lies of
Men, and Delusions of Satan.

Upon this new Project of these Fifteen Proposals, and Fifteen Fundamentals: I
do humbly beg of the Father of Spirits, that He will either graciously please
to stir up the Hearts of these Worthy Men to put in some Christian
Retractation; or else the Hearts of some of his Faithful Witnesses (against
such Graven Images) to present some faithful and truly Christian Observations.

FINIS.

