THE SAINTS PARADISE: OR, The Fathers Teaching the only satisfaction to waiting
SOULS. WHEREIN Many Experiences are Recorded, for the comfort of such as are
under spiritual BURNING. The inward Testimony is the Souls strength

By Jerrard Winstanley.

Jer. 31. 34. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every
man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the
least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord. 1 John 2. 27. But the
anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you: and ye need not that
any man teach you: But, as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and
is truth. London, Printed for G. Calvert, and are to be sold at the
black-spred-Eagle at the West end of Paul's.

To my beloved friends, whose souls hunger after sincere Milk.
Dear friends:
IT has been the universal condition of the Earth (Mankind) to be overspread
with a black Cloud of darkness; and the knowledge of the King of
righteousness has been manifested but in some few scattered ones, which as
they have had the spring in themselves, so they have been as lights in the dark
world, and others have walked in their light, and rested content to drink of
their streams, as if their declaration of truth had been the very Fountain it
self.

I my self have known nothing but what I received by tradition from the mouths
and pen of others: I worshipped a God, but I neither knew who he was, nor where
he was, so that I lived in the dark, being blinded by the imagination of my
flesh, and by the imagination of such as stand up to teach the people to know
the Lord, and yet have no knowledge of the Lord themselves, but as they have
received by hearsay, from their books, and other men's words.

I spoke of the name of God, and Lord, and Christ, but I knew not this Lord,
God, and Christ; I prayed to a God, but I knew not where he was, nor what he
was, and so walking by imagination, I worshipped that devil, and called him
God; by reason whereof my comforts were often shaken to pieces, and at last it
was showed to me, That while I builded upon any words or writings of other men,
or while I looked after a God without me, I did but build upon the sand, and as
yet I knew not the Rock.

And now know friends, That this ignorant, unsettled condition is yours at this
time, though I know, that the proud King flesh that is in you, will be ready to
speak within you, and tell you, that you do know God, and Christ, and be
offended with me, because I say you know him not. I do not write any thing, as
to be a teacher of you, for I know you have a teacher within your selves (which
is the Spirit) and when your ^^esh is made subject to him, he will teach you
all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, so that you shall not
need to run after men for instruction, for your eyes being opened; you shall
see the King of righteousness sit upon the throne within your selves, judging
and condemning the unrighteousness of the flesh, filling your face with shame,
and your soul with horror, though no man see, or be acquainted with your
actions, or thoughts but your selves, and justifying your righteous thoughts
and actions, and lead you into all ways of truth.

And this is the Spirit, or Father, which as he made the Globe, and every
creature, so he dwells in every creature, but supreamly in Man; and he it is by
whom every one lives, and moves, and has his being; perfect man is the eye and
face, that sees and declares the Father, and he is perfect when he is taken up
into this spirit, and lives in the light of reason; and there is no man or
woman can say that the Father does not dwell in him, for he is every where;
there is no a creature in the compass of the creation, but he is in that
creature, but disobedient man knows him not, and why? Because flesh is not
subject to the spirit within it; his covetous flesh has deceived him, for he
either looks abroad for a God, and so does imagine and fancy a God to be in
some particular place of glory, beyond the skies, or some where he knows not,
or in some place of glory that cannot be known till the body be laid in the
dust.

Or else if men do look for a God within them, according as the Record speaks,
God is within you; yet they are led by the motions and commands of King flesh
within them, and not by King spirit; and here they are at a loss, not being
able to distinguish between flesh and spirit, by reason that covetousness and
self-will blindes their eyes. Truly friends, King flesh is very covetous,
self-loving, and self-honouring; it likes them that say as it says, but it
would imprison, kill, and hang every one that differs from him; he is full of
heart-burning, either of open envy, and bitter distemper, or else carries
himself in a smooth, quiet way of hypocrisy, walking in a show of truth, like
an Angel of light, but when he gets an opportune power, he turns to be a
tyrant, against the way of the spirit.

And so all his love was but for by-ends, to satisfy self in some particular
or other: But now the King of righteousness within you, is a meek, patient,
and quiet spirit, and full of love and sincerity, he burns up the proud and
hasty flesh, he loves truth, and hates a lie; if the creature acts
unrighteously, he checks and shames him, if he act righteously (according to
the creation of a man) he speaks peace within, and so makes the man to walk
sincerely, and warily.

And when you come to know, feel, and see that the spirit of righteousness
governs your flesh, then you begin to know your God, to fear your God, to love
your God, and to walk humbly before your God, and so to rejoice in him; and
therefore if you would have the peace of God (as you call it) you must know
what God it is you serve, which is not a God without you, visible among bodies,
but the spirit within you, invisible in every body to the eye of flesh, yet
discernable to the eye of the spirit; and when souls are made to have community
with that spirit, then they have peace, and not till then.

For this let me tell you, that if you subject your flesh to this mighty
governor, the spirit of righteousness within your selves, he will bring you
into community with the whole Globe, so that in time you shall come to know as
you are known, and you shall not need to run after others, to learn of them
what God is, for as you are a perfect creation, every one of himself; so you
shall see, and feel that this spirit is the great governor in you, in
righteousness; and when you come thus to know the truth, the truth shall make
you free from the bondage of covetous, and proud flesh, the Serpent that held
you under slavery all your life time. Well, as darkness has overspread the
Earth (Mankind) so now is the time come, that knowledge shall abound, and
cover the earth (Mankind) light begins to arise, the spirit begins to appear
in flesh, he spreads himself in his sons and daughters, so that as the Sun
shines from East to West, so shall the appearing of this Son of righteousness
he; he comes not now in corners, but openly; the poor receive the Gospel,
(which is this everlasting spirit) wise men in the flesh are made fools, fools
are made wise, scholars are declared to be ignorant, the ignorant ones in men's
learning, become abundantly learned in the experimental knowledge of Christ.

I do not write to teach, I only declare what I know, you may teach me, for you
have the fountain of life in you as well as I, and therefore he is called the
Lord, because he rules not in one, but in everyone through the globe, and so we
being many, are knit together into one body, and are to be made all of one
heart, and one mind, by that one spirit that enlightens every man. I have
yielded to let these few experiences come abroad, and partly unwilling, because
I see more clearly into these secrets then before I writ them, which teaches me
to rejoice in silence, to see the Father so abundantly at work; and it shall
cease speedily for men to stand up as they do to teach one another, for every
one shall be taught of him, and I shall be as ready to hear as to speak, and to
give as to receive, and every one delighting to do as they would be done unto.

This is the King of righteousness that shall reign in the earth, this is the
spirit that is now pouring out upon sons and daughters; though it yet seem
small, it shall speedily increase, and the Father will not despise that day of
small things; proud flesh shall die, and reign King and governor in man no
longer: they that have understanding know what I say, others may reproach, and
be offended, but after they have been tried in the fire, which is the spirit,
they will acknowledge a truth herein, and he made to speak as a friend to truth.

Your friend, whose peace, liberty, and life lies in the spirit that governs
within the Globe. Jerrard Winstanley.

THE FATHERS TEACHING is the only satisfaction to WAITING SOULS.
CHAP. I.
THe teachings of men, and the teachings of God, are much different: The former
being but the light of the moon, which shines not of it self, but by the means,
and through the help of the sun: The latter is the light of the sun, that gives
light to all, not by means and helps from others, but immediately from himself.

Men's teachings are two fold, first, when men speak to others what they have
heard or read of the Scriptures, or books of other men's writings, and have seen
nothing from God themselves. And thus by natural industry, study, length of
time in such an exercise, or education from childehood many men Preach, or
teach others, and think, and so do others think of them, that they are sent of
God; but Gods time is drawing near, that he will make it appear that these men
do run before they be sent: Eze. 34. 3.
And that it is not the zeal of God which sets them to work, Jer. 31. 34.
but the desire and sweetness of a temporal living; But this kind of teaching
and teachers must vanish: And though God has suffered them, and yet awhile
will suffer them; for he sits upon the throne, therefore let them alone, and
wait upon God.

Secondly, Others speak from their own experience, of what they have heard and
seen from God, Act. 4. 20.
and of what great things God has done for their souls, Ps. 66. 16.
and this is from God: And it is that ministry of the Gospel which God has put
into the hands of men, whereby God does mightily manifest himself; and if any
man take up this trade of teaching, to get a living by (for preaching is now
adays become a trade) and speaks not from God by experience what they speak;
Jude 12.
they are clouds without rain, Zach. 13. 4. 5.
and such as meddle with holy things, that as yet they have nothing to do
withal. But this teaching in Gods time must vanish too; for this moonlight,
that is, conveying knowledge to others by helps and means, is to be swallowed
up into the light of the sun, and God shall become all in all, 1 John 2. 27.
as it is said, ye shall be all taught of God, and you need not that any man
teach you; for the anointing which the Saints receive from the Father does
teach them all things.

And that prophecy of Jeremiah must be fulfilled, Ier. 31. 34.
That the time shall come, Isa. 54. 13.
that men shall not teach one another, saying, Know the Lord, for all shall
know him (by Gods own teaching) from the least of them to the greatest And when
God and the Lamb are the light of the City, Rev. 21 23
there shall be no more need of the light of the sun, nor of the moon. By the
mentioning of sun and moon in this place, God speaks to the capacity of men,
and points out the whole creation of night and day, and that all creature-helps
and means should fail, though they were, or are as glorious helps as the
created sun that gives light to the day, or as the created moon that gives
light to the night. And that the time shall come, nay, it is begun, that God
himself will be the light of men, without creature-helps, or means. And so
Paul, seeing that the indwelling of God in man, is, and would be a glorious sun
shine light, said, That knowledge (or rather this way of conveying verbal
knowledge one to another) shall 1 Cor. 1. 8.
cease, but love, which is God, endures for ever.

But thirdly, The teachings of God shall never cease; Isa. 54. 13.
Gods teaching differs from men very much, Ioh. 6. 45.
for men speak words to the ear, but God works out the serpent and works
himself into a man, and so gives words of a feeling experience to the heart,
and causes the man to see light in Gods light; as thus, I have been proud
envious and discontent, and I have heard words from men against these, yet in
those days I thought I was good, and I knew not those evils; but when God
came, and wrought humility, love, and contentedness in me, he then taught me to
see, and know by experience what the strength of God in me is, which is
humility love, and patience, which has thrown down the strength of the
serpent, which was pride envy* and discontent: And this teaching of God I
cannot forget, Ioh. 6. 63.
it sticks lively in me, though the ^ords of men are forgotten by me: and thus
God takes up the soul more and more into himself, and the soul finds much
sweetness in feeling, seeing, and sensibly understanding the nature of God
working, dwelling, and ruling in him; this is Gods teaching, Romans 11. 29.
in making men to know, and to enjoy God, and this shall continue; for the soul
shall ever be learning what God is, and shall be more and more fed with this his
teaching; and as the divine being is infinite in all his attributes, so the
teachings of God in a soul shall be infinite, 1 These. 4. 17.
without end; for God will still be leading the soul to know by experience the
mystery of God more and more: this I say is GODS teaching.

And without Gods teachings in this kind, Ioh. 6. 45.
all the teachings of men will do no good, Ier. 31. 34.
for hence it is that there are so many Hypocrites amongst Professors, 1 John
2. 27.
they know much in the letter, Ioh. 15. 5.
as men teaches them; but they know nothing in spiritual power, which is the
way that God teaches. And truly let me tell you, if this power of God be
wanting, you will feel an inclinableness in you to give way to every evil
action, when a temptation thereunto is before you; for though a man know from
the letter, that injustice, covetousness, rash anger, hardness of heart toward
others, and uncleanness of the flesh are evil; and that the wrath of God will
break forth upon such as commit such and such evils.

And though he know likewise from the letter, Gal. 5. 22.
that Justice, Faith, Meekness, and tenderness of spirit, holiness and
chastity are good, yet this very man will be ready, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
nay strongly drawn by the powers of his flesh to do the evil, and refuse the
good, unless the powers of God be established in him, and be his keeper: As
thus, The power of justice delivering him from the power of injustice; the
power of a meek and patient spirit delivering him from the power of pettish
frowardness; the power of chastity delivering him from the power of
uncleanness: for this is the Anointing, or that Son of God ruling, a King of
righteousness and peace within you, that sets you free.

And truly when God is pleased to set you free from the Serpent, Ephesians. 3. 20.
and to let you see and feel his divine power thus ruling in you, your heart
and tongue cannot be silent, but you will with life, delight, and power be
cheerfully returning praises to your heavenly Father, that has made your
nature conformable to his son Jesus Christ.

Another thing let me tell you, and truly it is to let you see what danger you
are in, Romans 6. 14.
if you only know the letter, and want the power of God, if you hear Paul
speak, that Believers are not under the Law of works, but under the Law of
love; and if you hear the Saints of God speak out of experience that Christ
has set them free:

Now observe, I say, you that only hear the letter, or outward report, and do
apprehend, and can speak again what you hear, Rev. 3. 16, 17.
you begin to think your selves some body; I speak to you that think you are
free, and yet are not: Here is a self conceit presently arises in you, for
knowledge in the letter only puffs up, and this is one danger, but this is not
all.

For now this wise flesh will be yet presuming, and will argue thus within thy
heart, God has set us free from the Law of works, we shall neither be
condemned nor saved by that, for we are under grace, that is, the the law of
Christ, and therefore says the flesh, thou mast take thy pleasure, that which
was sin formerly, while thou wast under the law of works, is now no sin while
thou art under the law of love: This is the temptation, and now thou art upon
trial.

But if the Son set thee free, he does not only set thee free from the Law, but
from the Serpent too; not only from Gods Law, of Do this and live, but from the
Serpents law of works too; for thy proud flesh would be reconciled to God by
his workings, but this is thy bondage, and it shall not.

And if thy thoughts run, that thou art freed from Gods condemning Law of
works, and yet find no power of God within, casting out the strong man,
truly for the present the father of lies, the subtle flesh has deceived thee.

This tickling delight of thy flesh, is the same Serpent that tempted Adam; if
thou eat hereof, that is, if thou join hands, and take delight according to the
whisperings thereof, as to be unjust, secretly to seek revenge, to be unclean,
or adulterous, or the like, thou will find that this is the father of lies,
that promises much pleasure, but cannot perform, for it will throw thee into
the fire, that is, under the lashes of Gods law, which thou thought thou wast
freed from.

But if thou have such whisperings, and find a strength to reject them, thou will then see by experience, that the strength of God is stronger then the
flesh: I believe the dear servants of God are much tempted; for my own
particular, I can hardly hear a sin named, but I have been tempted to it, but I
have found the teachings of God very, useful, and the only power of the Father
at such times has kept me from wicked actions.

Well, if thou find that the power of God in thee, which is sincerity and
truth, treds the aspiring of injustice in thee under foot; and the power of
God, which is chastity, Ioh. 8. 36.
treds adulterous, unclean enticements under foot; and the power of God, which
is love, treds envy and heartburning grudge under foot, and the like: This is
the wisdom and power of God, even that Son of righteousness that sets you
free; Psalm. 133. 3.
for this is the powerful oil that was poured upon the Head, Jesus Christ,
and runs down to the lowest member.

This power of God within thee, answers the whisperings of that liar the flesh
within thee, and tells thee, Romans 6. 14.
it is true, thou art not under the law of works to be condemned or saved by
it, but thou art under the law of love and holiness. The wisdom and power of
God is thy keeper; is God unrighteous, is God froward, is God envious, is God
unclean, or does he take delight in strange flesh, or in any creature without
himself, or does he not delight in himself, in whom there is all glory?

Indeed friends, mind what I tell you, The flesh always delights in its self,
Heb. 3. 3. 8.
and in the enjoyment of creatures; 1 Cor. 1. 31.
but the power of God in thee always glories, and delights in God, and finds
rest in none but in God.

I speak this, because I know that this is the most subtle, most ensnaring, and
most dangerous temptation of the professing flesh, of any I know: And if God
appear to be your strength at this time of trial, you will then say feelingly,
and with a rejoicing thankful heart, O the mighty God indeed is my strength, I
had been unjust, theevish, envious, proud, given to all uncleanness of the
flesh, but the power of Gods truth, love, humility, and chastity has cast
this strong man armed out; Luke 11. 22.
and now I see what truth is, what chastity is, what love to enemies is, what
sincerity is; this is the power of God, this is the anointing, this is the King
of righteousness that rules in earth, this is the Son that has set me free,
will keep me free: every particular measure of this sweet power of God are so
many particular Angels of light, or manifestations of love sent from the
father, to be my keeper: Well, I only mention this experience, that men may
prize Gods teachings more then they have, and to be afraid of men's teachings
when Gods is wanting; for truly the most glorious Preacher, or professor of
literal gospel, either are, or will prove the subtilest hypocrites, if this
power of God be not their strength, and life, for without God we can do
nothing, and by him, we are able to do all things.

Some truths I shall here write, which brought along with them much life and
peace into my heart, when God sent them down into me, (or rather when he took
me up into them) and caused me to behold, and feed upon the glory of them: But
I do not write to teach any one my words to be their knowledge, for what I
know, I speak, and leave it upon the spirit of the Reader, 1 Ioh. 1. 14.
that if he find the same workings of God in him, his joy may be confirmed by
a witness, and so fulfilled; that more hands may be lifted up together to set
the Crown upon our God, and that more mouths may be opened, Rev. 5. 13.
to sing Alleluia, and praises of honor to our Father, and to the Lamb for
evermore.

It is very possible, that a man may attain to the literal knowledge of the
Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, and may speak largely of the History
thereof, and draw conclusions, and raise many uses for the present support of a
troubled soul, or for the restraining of lewd practices, or for the direction
of a civil conversation, and yet both they that speak, and they that hear,
may be not only unacquainted with, but enemies to that Spirit of truth, by
which the Prophets and Apostles writ.

For it is not the Apostles writings, but the spirit that dwelt in them that
did inspire their hearts, 1 Ioh. 5. 6.
which gives life, and peace to us all: And therefore when the Prophets,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Isaiah spoke what they saw from God, they spoke, thus
says the Lord, out of experience of what they saw, and felt, and they were
called true Prophets.

But when others rise up, that spoke their words and writings* and so applying
them to another age, and generation of men, saying, Thus says the Lord, as the
other did, yet they were called false Prophets, because they had seen nothing
themselves from God, but walked by the legs, and saw by the eyes of the true
Prophets; for God does not threaten death to every City in every age of the
world, as to Sodom and Gomorrah; neither captivity to every people, as he did
to Israel, under Nebuchadnezar in Babylon; 2 Chronicles. 20. 15* 16, 17.
neither does he promise victory and deliverance to every Army or people from
enemies, as he did to Israel in Jehosaphats time.

Now if any man speak, Number. 23. 7.
and assure others of victory, when God purposes destruction, or speaks of
destruction, when God purposes a victory; these men speak at random, and though
they speak the very words of the scriptures, yet they speak not the mind of
him that gives life, or destroys, and so having seen nothing from him, they
are to be reckoned among false Prophets, that run before they be sent* though
their words be many and eloquent.

A man may know the scriptures as they are written, John 5. 46.
and yet a stranger, yea an opposing enemy to the God of the Scriptures, as
the Jews were, they knew the writings of Moses, 1 Cor. 2. 8.
who writ of Jesus Christ and yet they persecuted, and killed Jesus Christ,
when he who was the great Prophet was come, because they knew him not; for if
they had known him to have bin the great power and wisdom of God, they would
not have killed him.

And so many now a days do, and may know the Scriptures of the Gospel, and yet
may and do persecute the spirit of the Gospel through ignorance and unbelief;
truly friends, it is not the knowledge of the Scriptures only, 1 Cor. 8. 7.
but the knowledge of the God of the Scripture, as God is pleased to make known
himself by his Almighty working to you, that gives life and peace to you; if
you know, or can speak of Scriptures, and have seen nothing of God, you are
like Parats, that speak the words of another as you have been taught by humane
education.

But if the same anointing, or power and wisdom of God dwell and rule in you,
Ephesians. 3. 5.
as did appear in the Prophets and Apostles that writ, then you can see into
that mystery of the Scripture (which is God manifest in flesh) and so can
speak the mind of the Scriptures, though you should never see, hear, nor read
the Scriptures from men.

If your peace and comfort in God should only remain with you while you are
either hearing, or reading Scriptures, or while you have the society of such as
can speak or discourse thereof, and then find again that your comfort and
peace is gone, when you are deprived by any occasion of that society of Saints;
truly let me tell you, that though you prize and know the Scriptures, yet there
is a great strangeness between you and the God of the Scriptures.

It has been such a time with me, and I see it is thus with others at this
very day; let them enjoy outward hearing, reading, and liberty in prayer, and
Saints communion, and they are in peace, and they live in heaven as they
conceive, and it is a sweet life, but it is not The life; for if the wisdom of
God hedge up all those enjoyments with Thorns, and leave these poor souls
alone, as it was Christ's case, all forsook him and fled, and left him alone to
stand in the midst of enemies; why truly here is your trial for God has
denied you the opportunities of hearing, reading, praying, and Saints
fellowship* and does not your heart now look after those helps, and mourn in
their absence? If so, as I know it is with you, then where is your knowledge,
Isaiah 32. 12. and 28. 9.
experience, and your peace in, and with God; it shows plainly that at such a
time we sucked refreshment from the creatures breasts, but not from God.

Or further, when you have all opportunities to hear, to read, to pray, and to
communicate with Saints in their society, and yet if God deny you peace and
life under all this enjoyment, then you begin to mourn, to see your barrenness
and condition, like a fruitless Fig Tree, or ruinous Wilderness; which is
well it is thus with you, God will have you lie here for a while under this
bondage, before he give you liberty; and if it be thus with you, as I know it
is, then where is your rest and peace in God? for truly God will take up his
people into such a height of glory, that he will make them lie down in rest and
peace in him, when no visible help or means appear, when there is no Cows in
the Stalls, Hab. 3. 16, 17.
nor blossoms on the Vine* when no creature speaks peace, but every creature
is barren of giving refreshment* then God will make his people to suck life
from him, who is the God of their salvation.

Well, when I was under your bondage, my God, who is the best teacher of erring
souls, let me see that I rested first upon outward helps and means, and such as
you call Ordinances, though I thought not so, but was offended at any that told
me I rested thereupon.

And when God gave me those enjoyments, and yet denied me a heart to suck
sweetness from them, or rather withheld their sweetness from my heart, then I
was troubled to see my barrenness; And if at any time God was pleased to let a
beam of light and peace shine into me, and gave me enlargements of heart, then
I thought my self to know God, but when this sun was clouded again, then I was
in bondage again.

Well, here God taught me that I knew him not, but that I knew his gifts, and
the beams of his presence that he sent down to refresh my drooping spirit, and
that I rested in those beams, not in him that was the sun from whence those
beams come; And this I know is your condition, who know the Scriptures it may
be at your fingers ends, as we say, and that you are unacquainted as yet with
the God of the Scriptures. Be not offended with this expression, for it is a
truth, and your souls either do or will know it to be true*

But when Gods time is to set you at liberty from your bondage (for he works
when he will, Ioh. 8. 36.
not when you will) then you shall find this frame of spirit in you, That if
God deny you all outward means and helps, Heb. 4. 3.
and Saints communion, yet you are content, and rest in him who is your
portion, your teacher, and who you find, see, and feel is present with you.

And if you find an emptiness, that you cannot understand nor speak, Gal. 1.
15* 16.
yet you are content (though you were not content formerly) and you rest in
your Fathers will till he give you understanding of such and such mysteries, or
till he give you power to speak or act; and you have as much peace to eye God,
1 Cor. 1. 31.
and to wait upon him, and rest in him, as if you were full of actings or
enjoyed much of the Saints communion; so that you are taken off from either
glorying in the presence, or mourning in the absence of any creature-help, or
fruit. If you never see the faces of the Saints, but live in prison, in a
wilderness, or in some private place, yet you are at rest in God, you are
satisfied in him, and you glory only in his presence; Luke 21. 13. etc.
and if he seem to withdraw from you, by slacking his hand in giving
discoveries, you know he is your Father still, he does not withdraw in anger,
but in wisdom and love, for your good, that he may teach you more experiences;
for that soul that God purposes to give plentiful experiences unto, it is his
will to cast that soul often into straits; but yet you are content, and wait
quietly in spirit, till he speak and appear in powerful presence, both in you,
and to you. Now in the midst of these National hurly burlies, if you want
riches, food, or clothing, if you want communion of good people, and such like
creature-contentments, and yet for all that you can rest quiet in God, and be
at peace in him, and you know he is your Father, and that it is his will to
cast you into such straits: Why now you are able to say, That to rest and lie
down in God alone is the sweetest rest that every you tasted of.

CHAP. II.
WE see in these days the bottomless pit is opened, and the mystery of
iniquity is begun to be made manifest to men; 1 Cor. 1. 24.
That is, corrupt flesh is laid open to the view of such as God manifests his
wisdom and power in; and the secret workings of this wise, but corrupt flesh
appears very plentifully by the spreading forth of unbelief, hypocrisy, envy,
cruelty, slavish fear of men, and in shame to own God and his ways, and by
violent and subtle endeavoring to wear out the appearance of God in man, and
to destroy the mighty and the holy people; first by slanders, lies, and bad
names, and then threatening, and likewise endeavoring to destroy them all by
the sword.

By reason whereof, some through weakness are troubled, and a slavish fear
does possess them, that the sincere hearted ones shall suffer much in these
troublesome times. Indeed I believe God may suffer some few of his Saints to
endure wasting in their estates, and may give up the liberty and lives of their
bodies into the hands of wicked men: Yea, but the number of Saints are limited,
and the length of their sufferings are limited; all the Saints shall not die,
neither shall the sufferings of some be always, for the devil must cast but
some into prison (not all) and there shall be tribulation but ten days, Rev.
2. 10.
a little while, not always. And therefore you see, while Pharaoh did only
oppress Israel, God suffered Pharaoh to live, but when his malice rise so high
(or rather his spirit fell so low from Godward) as to destroy all Israel at the
red Sea with open mouth, then God appeared to preserve his son, Exo. 14* 5.
even to deliver Israel, and drowned Pharaoh and all the Host of those risers
in the red Sea; and when this storm was over, God set Israel in a condition of
greater liberty and freedom, from the oppression of enemies then ever he was in
before. And in King David's time, Psalm. 83. 4.
when the uncircumcised Nations endeavored to destroy not only here and there
one, but began to strike at the root, and sought to destroy all Israel, that
the name of Israel might be had no more in remembrance, then God appeared for
their protection.

Even so, while the mystery of iniquity, which rules in the unbelievers of our
days, have sought to wear out formerly some of his Saints by High Commission
Courts, Sessions, Canon Laws, Whips, Prisons, and death, God let them alone, he
had appointed some of his Lambs and Sheep for such a slaughter; as in the time
of Martyrdom, not all, but some were slain, here and there one, and God
suffered it.

But when malice, and the hypocritical subtle flesh strike at all; and not
only one Mordecay, Ester 3. 6.
that torments proud Hamon, must die, but all Mordecayes friends and people.
Not only Christ must die, but Lazarus, or any that is Christ's friend must be
put to death, and suffer too; As in these days unbelief in men will destroy
all Gods people; it is the general language of all the scoffing sons of
bondage, they will destroy all the free born Isaacs under those reproachful
names of Roundheads, Anabaptists, Independents; nay, there were some that were
not ashamed to say, that when the Countries rise against the Parliaments Army,
they would destroy men, women, and children of the Independent party, and root
them all out. Alas poor creatures, God may suffer you to do something in this
kind, but you shall find that God will hide his people under the shadow of
his wings, and when you have killed all, yet those that you would kill shall be
left alive.

For as God made the Nations formerly to kill one another while Israel looked
on, Judge. ^. 19
and were saved from their malice: Even so God can make an
outside-professing-Service-book man, to kill an outside-professing Presbyter,
and God may suffer an outside-professing Presbyter, to kill an hypocritical
Independent, and so make the seed of the Serpent to sheath their swords in one
another bowels, while his sincere hearted ones, scattered abroad in the
Kingdom shall stand and look on, and be preserved by Gods protecting care, from
the danger.

For you hot spirited men, if you will believe Scripture, which you Idolize so
much, for you prefer those writings before the God of the Prophets and
Apostles; Ezekiel. 38. 14, etc.
you shall find that God told Ezekiell, That when Gog and Magog purposed to
destroy Gods People when they were at rest, and dwelt at ease, why says God,
when my people are at rest thou shall not know it, but I will sanctify my self
upon thee, O Gog, before their eyes.

And so let these hot spirited people in these days do the worst they can,
they shall never destroy all Gods people out of the Land, Rev. 11. 11, etc.
God will have his witnesses to rise up, that shall torment these inhabitants
of the earth, for though God suffer persecution, scoffs, reproachful names and
oppression, yet he will not suffer a small rooting out of his Saints.

For if the Nations of old could not root out Israel after the flesh, which
were one single nation, visible among all the nations of the earth, though they
did endeavor it; neither can you now, you hot spirited people, root out all
the Saints, much less, you will find it now the more difficult, for now the
Saints do not live all in one Nation, but are scattered through all Nations,
kindreds, tongues, and People; The appearence of God among them is not
altogether in out ward formal worship, and Temple service, as it was to the
Jews, visible to the eye of the world.

But the appearance of God now, 1 John 3. 1.
is in the Saints, Joh. 1. 10.
that they worship the Father in spirit and truth, in such a secret manner as
the eye of the world cannot, nor does not always see; And therefore though the
mystery of iniquity seek to kill all, as these unbeleevers that are the
actors thereof do say they will, yet they cannot, because they cannot know
them; And when they have killed all as they think, if God should suffer them to
act their bloody intents and words, yet in conclusion it will appear, that the
enemies kill one another, and spiritual Israel will be preserved; Herod killed
all the children about two years old. Mat. 2. 13.
I, but the Child Jesus whom he sought chiefly to kill, was gone, sent by God
far out of Herod's reach; and when it shall appear in conclusion, that they
have killed their own hypocritical people, and the sincere hearted, whom they
aimed at are escaped, their vexation will increase, and they will dye with
sorrow.

Therefore now Judge if God be not the chief sufferer, because they will not
leave God a seed on earth; you Saints of God, be not troubled to hear that your
neighbors will plunder and kill you, and root out all Israel out of the land,
2 Chronicles. 20. 15, etc.
they cannot do it, God will fight for you against them, the cause is Gods, not
yours; And in seeking your ruin, they will pull their own ruin speedily upon
themselves, Pharaoh thought to destroy Israel, and his own destruction, which
he thought least upon, was accomplished.

Be not troubled at these threatenings, but stand still, wait with a quiet
peaceable heart on God, Exo. 14. 13
and see what a deliverance he will work for you; Assure your selves I see God
working a great deliverance for you, your number shall increase, the number of
bloody minded men shall decrease, therefore do you meet God by faith, and
honor him, by owning him in the midst of these storms; the enjoyment of
your riches, friends or bodily life does not make you happy, nor the loss of
these cannot make you miserable; if you have these, it is the enjoyment of God
within that gives you a sweet use of them without; if all be taken from you, it
is your Fathers will to suffer it, and he will be honored by it, your
oppressions and sufferings will bring glory to him; And if you lose your life,
then your work in done, therefore stand still with comfort, in the place and
condition God has put you in; And say, Father, do with my estate, my body, my
life, what thou will, honor thy self in me, and by me, and thy will be done.
Now if once God has brought your spirit to this frame, then God is glorified
on your behalf, for now the glory of Christ, the King of righteousness has
subdued the Serpent, 1 Pet. 4. 13, 14.
and is revealed in you. But God is evil spoken of, and does suffer on their
behalf that persecute.

Now know you weak ones, that it is not you, but God, who is the greatest long
sufferer in these times; it is not men, but the appearance of God in men, which
the mystery of iniquity strives against, 2 These. 2. 4, 5.
for do you not see how the spirit of lies would root out the spirit of truth,
the spirit of envy would root out the spirit of love, Rev. 13. 6, 7.
the spirit of hypocrisy would root out the the spirit of sincerity, the
spirit of pride, and self honoring, would root out the spirit of humility that
honors God, the spirit of self-will would root out the spirit of meekness and
patience, that waits upon the will of God, the spirit of unfaithful rashness
and discontent, would root out the spirit of quietness that is at restin God,
the spirit of greedy covetousness, injustice and oppression, would root out the
spirit of justice and tenderness that depends upon God. And in one word, the
mystery of iniquity, Beast, whorish spirit, or flesh, having a time given him
of God, to act and show its wisdom and power, strvies might and maine to root
out all appearance of God out of mankind. But alas poor Serpent, thou must die
thy self, Gods time is near expired that he gave thee, and he is rooting thee
out of mankind, and consuming in the fire of his wrath; Ier. 23. 9.
for he will become the Lord our righteousness, and dwell in flesh himself;
this is Gods mystery, which he is in and about to make publicly manifest
amongst men.

But as yet hypocrisy reigns, and would reign as King; And sincerity, which
is God, is laughed to scorn. The national peace and liberty is pretended (that
is, the outward show of love to God) but secretly most men, both of high and
low degree, intend either to enrich themselves with the kingdoms moneys and
ruins, or else by their secret underhand working, endeavor to vent their
malice upon the kingdoms friends, even the Saints. And alas poor blind
creature, you work your own ruin; take Lot out of Sodom, and the vengeance of
Gods Law falls immediately, therefore you weak ones that are troubled, take
notice, That God is most persecuted, hated, and fought against in these days,
for the plain truth is, the mystery of iniquity would not have the God of
love to have any appearance in earth; So that God is the greatest sufferer.

And therefore that truth which my soul most drives at, is this which follows:
that though God suffer most, Job 1. 12.
yet it is not against his will, Dan. 12. 7
but with his will; And that this spirit of darkness, or mystery of iniquity,
that fights against God, has no power to act like it self, till God limit him
that power, and limit him a time to act that power in. And here I shall show in
my experience, what I see and know the Devil is; And what the power of the
Devil is, and by what power he works.

The Devil or father of lies, in the full body of him, is unrighteous flesh,
and the imaginations thereof. Genesis 3. 15.
He is that Beelzebub that sat among the sons of God, Job 1. 6.
that is, among the five senses or spiritual lights which God has set in the
soul; for the imagination of flesh will not submit it self to God, but is found
a chief enemy against him.

And the pride of the flesh, envy, slavish fear, distrust, hypocrisy, carnal
thoughts, self love, Iam. 1. 14.
and the like, are particular Devils, that first intices the soul, and
afterward brings him to trouble; and every one of those have particular
degrees, like legions of Devils, which holds the creature man, in bondage.

While a man enjoyes his lusts, he has a seeming peace within himself. But
when the holy law appears to discover those lurking Devils, then begins the
creatures torment and slaverie; And this lets me see what the enmity of nature
is between God and me.

The enmity in flesh, it is the spirit of envy and darkness, which is Gods
opposite, as darkness is opposite to light, and heat opposite to cold. And
this works in the creature, man, to maintain its unclean being, Luke 11. 22.
in opposition to the being of God. And while it has its liberty, sinful man
is in peace. But when God pleases that the declaration of righteousness shall
take hold upon that enmity, it throws the sinner presently under sorrows, and
breaks his peace to pieces. And this is that which the scriptures in my
experience calls the Devil or murderer; Even the enmity that is in my nature
against God, Ephesians. 2. 15, 16.
which threw me under the flashings of Gods righteous law, which was enmity
against me, and this I shall endeavor to clear.

CHAP. III.
BUt first of all, what is the righteous Law here to be understood? I Answer;
It is not the words of the letter, called the ten Commandments, and therein
only bound up; Isa. 8. 20.
But it is the manifestations of God in all, or any one of his Attributes,
shining forth upon, and in his creature, endeavoring by his spiritual power
to swallow up all the motions and imaginations of the flesh into God. And so
burning up, (by the spirit of burning) all the dross of the flesh, that the
creature may appear pure gold. As thus, the manifestation of Gods wisdom to
the heart, 2 Cor. 5. 4
is directly opposite to the wisdom of the flesh, and declares it to be folly,
which inward discovery troubles and shames the man, though none see and know
it but himself. The manifestations of Gods love, humility and truth, is
directly opposite to the carnal love, carnal humility, and unrighteousness of
the flesh. The chastity and holiness of God lets a man see his uncleanness
and filthy lust. 1 Cor. 15. 54.
The sincerity of God, shining forth upon the heart, discovers its hypocrisy,
and so of all other manifestations of God, being darted into the heart by the
father; He declares the creature his weakness, and that every way he comes
short of the glory of God, by reason whereof the creature is filled with horror
and torment, which the eye of other men sees not, but stands and admires.

So then (here lies the mystery, though to me it is an unfolded truth, for I
speak what I know.) The Serpent or proud flesh, in all the imaginations of it,
endeavors to maintain its corrupt self, and to swallow up the Law of God,
which is the pure spirit. But the Law of God, which is the wisdom and power of
God, manifested in all the branches of it, to, and in the heart, does swallow
up the other into himself, and destroys and consumes all the powers of the
flesh, Jer. 23. 5.
and becomes the King of righteousness, ruling and dwelling in flesh.

Secondly, what is the power of the Devil, and by what power does he work? I
answer: This is not a power distinct from God, Rom 7. 9. etc.
as I have thought, that the Devil is a middle power between God and me, but
it is the power of my proud flesh, and the power of Gods holy Law, closing
together, the one fighting against the other, and so slew me, and held me under
bondage, as thus;

God bids the heart trust in him by inward whisperings, the heart not knowing
God, looks after the creature, and thinks it cannot live without money, lands,
help of men and creatures; This is the Devil that tempts. Well, the pure
spirit, or holy law within tells the heart, he must be stripped of all these, and
trust providence for subsistence; the heart while it has use and plenty of all
these, says, yes, I will trust God for every thing. Yea, but when riches
fail, friends frown, men withdraw help, and begin to speak evil, and to hate,
and the heart sees it must trust in God, or starve, and yet it cannot, he has
no power, slavish fear and unbelief is so storng in him, then it begins to
sinck; And it reasons thus,

I have no riches, 1 Cor. 4. 11.
no certain dwelling place, no way to get a subsistence, I am crossed in all,
Mat. 8. 20.
I have no cordial friend, no succor from men; Psalm. 41 9.
if any seem to succor me, it is for their own ends, and when they have got
what they can from me, they leave me, and turn enemies; so that the heart sees
he is left alone, and in this low estate, Psalm. 38. 2.
fear and distrust, Psalm. 69 2.
two strong devils buffets the poor creature, and squizes his spirit flat, for
he sees nothing fulfilled to him, he feels no power from God, and his spirit
droops. So that here is depth of misery in the hearts apprehension, it is
hedged in with sorrows on every side.

Let him look to men and creatures, and there is no help, all has forsaken
him, and stands aloof off; let him look within himself, and he sees nothing
but slavish fear, and unbelief* questioning the truth and power of God, how
can such things be? and so beating him off from quiet closing with God, but
laboring to make a breach between God and himself. Heb. 12 6.
Well; thy spirit is full of languishing, this is a very low ebb, but thou art
not forsaken of the father, though thy persuasion is much shaken; the reason of
all is this, The pure law of the spirit is scorching and burning up the
unbelief of thy flesh, to make thee know God, and to make thee bright in the
eyes of God and men hereafter. Now speak, if this be not true, you that have
waded in, Isa. 12. 6.
or through this fire, some are wading in this fire, few have waded through it,
all must be burned herein, more or less, before they lie down quietly in the
lap of providence.

Well, Col. 1. 13.
this is the power of darkness and bondage, under which the devil, or
troubles within, does buffet you. The power of my unrighteous flesh strives to
maintain the kingly power in me, and the righteous Law, or the pure spirit
strives to maintain his own righteous and kingly power in me, by tredding the
other under foot; If proud flesh stand, then the the King of glory in me must
be destroyed, but if he keep the field, and reign in me, then the head of my
troubles, which is the Serpent, must be bruised; And this is the enmity of
natures between God and me, this is the Devil; and the power of this Devil,
or enmity, does not work without the will, but according to the will of God,
in killing the disobedient creature; when the serpent in flesh kills, then the
creature, man, dies from God: but when the law comes and kills, then the
creature begins to live again to God.

The flesh and darkness within me, Rev. 12. 9.
is the Devil, that is, the father of lies, that never spoke truth. And the
power of the perfect law taking hold thereupon, threw me under sorrow, and
sealed up my misery, and this is utter darkness, for my soul lived below the
life and nature of God in sin and disobedience, and while that strong man kept
the house, I had peace, and I lived below the comforts and joys of God, in
sorrows and misery, under the sense of Gods wrath for that sin, and then my
sinful peace was taken from me: And this is Hell, yea, and extremity of the
power of darkness.

But this Devil is not a middle power, distinct from God, between God and the
creature, and so waits as a Jailer to do his Office when the Judge condemns the
sinner, as some say, and as I thought; but it is the power of proud flesh, and
the power of the pure spirit mixing together; not as friends, Genesis 3. 24.
but enemies, opposing each other, and so killing the weaker party, the
creature, and taking peace from him. And though God suffer the Devil to act,
and gives him a power sometimes over the creature, yet God does suffer it, not
to ruin his creature man, Ephesians 2 15.
but to ruin the Devil, to bruise that serpents head, and to reconcile the
creature to himself, and so to raise him up to enjoy the life of God, that is
dead under the power of the Devil.

This proud flesh, or Devil, is called the wicked one, in his several
degrees, in mankind, which is the serpent, which bends his bow, and makes
ready his arrows, that he may shoot privily at him that is upright in heart,
that is, at the appearance of God in the heart of man, in every degree and
measure of it.

This is that envious, unclean, and wicked man that gathers to himself, and
that scatters from Christ; for let a man, in whom any measure of this serpent
rules, preach, pray, bear rule, or do any thing, he gives not the honor to
God, but he gathers up the honor to himself, for he is full of selfe-seeking,
and selfe-praise, and this is the wicked one, whether he be little or big; And
God is angry with this wicked one every day: And this lordly power of the
serpent must be killed, before the manifestations of the fathers love favor
sweet to the creature.

This is the father of lies, Ioh. 8. 44.
this is the tempter, 2 These. 2. 4.
this is he that deceives the Nations; this proud flesh that would sit in Gods
Temple, Rev. 17. 5.
and be as God, Rev. 20. 7. 10.
is the mystery Babylon, the mother of all abominations, this is the first
mover to all enmity against God, for it will not own the Father, the King of
glory. But now it is the righteous Law that makes this appear to be enmity; for
light discovers darkness, and the spirit of fire discovers coldness. Now the
great mystery of God is this, he will remove this great stone or mountain that
lies between him and his creature; for he will swallow up his own dispensation
of wrath, as the creature calls it, which is the Law of holiness, proving the
creature a sinner, and so casting him under sorrow, which is sense of wrath,
and he will swallow up the enmity of our natures into love, Ephesians. 2. 15.
even into himself, and so to make of two, one, when this mixed murderer is
cast out of heaven.

And this devil, or murderer appears, sometimes within a man, in troubling and
filling the heart and flesh with sorrows and misery; and sometimes he appears
without: when the spirit of proud flesh in other men envies me, God may, and
many times gives way that that spirit of envy shall go forth and prosper, and
enjoy his will; for if the envy, hypocrisy, and cruelty that breaths in others
be acted upon me, it is not the will of that envious spirit for my ruin, but
the will of God is done, in suffering that spirit to act for its own ruin, and
my healing: And truly I have a great persuasion, that though God suffer this
unclean spirit to run up and down, and range in this Kingdom of England, yet
God will heal England in conclusion, and cast this devil or unclean spirit into
the lake of fire, and so consume him.

There is one Scripture that gives great light into this truth. Job 1. 12.
The devil, troubler, or spirit of darkness in other men did envy Job, (which
indeed is but the imagination of proud envious flesh, for this is Beelzebub that
devises mischief) and told God, that if he would lay his hand upon him, Job
would curse him to his face. Imagination thought (arising from envy) that
afflictions would be a means to make a breach between God and Job, as those
wicked men did imagine in Wisdom 2. 21. Well, God said Amen to the request of
that evil spirit, behold, says God to the devil, Job is in thy hand, even
under that very power of temptation and suffering as thou would have him to
be under, only touch not his life; so that here is a power limited to Satan, or
to the envy of flesh in other men against Job; but this power is not Satan's
power properly, distinct from God, but it is the very power of God, which the
God of wisdom has given and limited to Satan, whereby God will honor himself,
and shame the devil, and bruise his head by Jobs sufferings.

The spirit of envy imagines, that if Jobs Cattle and goods should be taken
away by robbery, it would vex him, and make him speak evil of God, therefore
desires that such a cross might befall Job; and God said Amen, I grant thee
thy desire, let that befall him.

The spirit of envy imagines, that if Jobs house was burned, and his children
killed, it would make him blaspheme God, and therefore desires that power; God
said Amen, I grant thee that power so to do to him.

The spirit of envy imagines another mischief, and would have Job filled with
diseases in his body, and would have his friends and kindred forsake him, and
to be a bitter cross to him; God said Amen, let it be so.

Now these evils are acted upon Job, as if the devil did it by his power,
distinct from God, but no, it is by Gods power, limited to the devil, at the
devils request: not so much to gratify the devil, as by this means to bruise
his head; for God makes use of Satan's malice, in desiring these miseries to
befall Job, to do two things, first to try Job, and to make him the more bright
and faithful to God, as he appeared afterward: And secondly to shame envy and
the devil by his own weapon; Luke 11. 22.
for such means as the devil did imagine would make Job to curse God, God uses
the same, and thereby made Job to worship him more experimentally.

The spirit of pride, covetousness, and envy desired to sit in Gods Temple
(Mankind) and not only in the whole bulk of Mankind, but in that part which
is nearest and dearest to God, even the Spouse of Christ, or elect City, that
thereby he might the more provoke God: Well, God said Amen, and grants him a
power to sit there, and to rule and tred the holy City under foot forty two
months, Dan. 7. 25.
or for a time, times, and a half time; and now the devil raigns not by a power
absolute of his own, but by a limited power, and a limited time too given him
from God.

And truly all this time Satan has made use of this power, and his malice has
appeared very violent, and not only the Saints, but God in the Saints
especially has suffered; for his wisdom, his love, his patience, his
faithfulness and truth has been tempted and tried to purpose: I, but the King
of righteousness is the same, he alters not, and therefore in conclusion, when
the righteous Law takes away this limited power which this devil and wicked one
desired and obtained, it will then appear it did him no good, but proves his
utter shame and ruin, and declares God to be the only one infinite being, to
the eternal glory of his own name.

And so in these days, we see and feel great troubles and temptations do
compass men round, and it appears to the eye of man, as if envy hypocrisy,
pride, and self-will ruled as it would himself, and as if there were no power
to restrain this flood of ungodliness: I, but dear friends, know that all this
power of temptation which you see in the hand of malice and hypocrisy, it is
not their own power, but Gods power, or the dispensation of visible wrath,
which God has put into the hand of that evil spirit for a time. It is not his
own absolutely, but it is a limited power and time; Dan. 8. 23.
and this speaks great comfort to the Saints, for God will bring good out of
all this; God, our God and Father, stands and looks on, and the end of all this
hurly-burly will bring everlasting glory to the Father, in and through his
Saints, and everlasting shame and ruin to the devil.

Therefore be not troubled you Saints of the most high, though you be hated,
reproached, and persecuted, for if you would see Satan's head bruised, you must
first suffer your heel to be bruised by his temptations; so that reason tells
you, that there is a necessity that the Devil should enjoy a limited time,
and power.

Well, God himself suffers most in these times; for though Satan get a power to
try and tempt the saints, and to trouble the world, yet the envy of the flesh
principally strikes at God; for pride fights against humility, malice fights
against love, falsehood fights against sincerity, ignorance fights against
knowledge, self-will in flesh, fights against the King of glory, the pure
spirit that dwells in flesh; So that God himself is the sufferer: But that
Satan, or father of lies shoots at; and the Father suffers it thus to be, and
limits him a power thus to fight against him, that in conclusion he may send
forth the brightness of his Law, and bruise Satan's head by his own weapons, and
Judge, and condemn him by the words of his own mouth, and works of his own
hands, Ier. 23. 36.
and swallow up that spirit of envy and darkness into himself, the spirit of
love, which is the power of God, yea God himself, and so takes him out of the
way that troubles his Saints, that they may rest and lie down sweetly in him,
and to have no troubler at all to trouble them, when this accuser is once cast
out of Heaven.

The Saints in all their afflictions look upon the hand of God that smites
them, Job 1. 21.
as Job did; but unbeleevers that live after the flesh, think it is the Devils
power, and not God:

CHAP. III.
NOw this adverse power, which men readily think is the Devils power, distinct
from Gods, as though God had no hand in it, appears to me, to be the very power
of God in an immediate dispensation of wrath upon the sinner; and that which we
call Devil, that terrifies, is but the declaration of the rigor of the
righteous law of God, laying hold upon the corruption that is in the creature,
which the sinner cannot look upon, and live; for if God look upon any creature
through the righteous law, which the creature, man, has gone astray from, he
cannot live. But when the law of love has swallowed that law of works that
required perfection from the creature, then the brightness and power of that
love shining upon the heart, and changing the man in to the same nature and
glory, makes him able to behold God, and live; yea, and to live joyfully too,
both in him, and before him; But let me not digress too far.

The adverse power spoken of, is the very dispensation of the wrath of God upon
sinners, and there is one scripture does countenance this; Genesis 2. 24.
which is this, So he drove out the man, and placed at the East of the garden
of Eden, Cherubins, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way
of the tree of life. By tree of life is meant God himself, in whom Adam dwelt;
And Adam himself, was that living garden in whom God delighted; But since Adam
began to delight in himself, he went out of God, and God set this flaming sword
to flash against Adam, that so he might come into God again, and taste, and
eat, and delight himself in that tree of life, till it was the good pleasure
of God to take him in again. And so all sinners stand without the spirit, till
God pull them into himself, in his own time and season; But that creature that
is beginning to look in, by desires, and inquirings, and precious delight
toward God, is in the way of entrance, and when the spirit of burning is made
manifest, he shall then enter in, and find rest.

Well, Adam is gone out of God, and this flaming sword is set against him, that
he shall not enter in again; but Adam sees not this mystery, because the love
of self had blinded his eyes; And Adam is hid from God among the trees and
leaves of self-aspiring principles that rise up in him, to which he gave
consent, to be a more knowing man then God had made him, 2 Pet. 2. 2.
and he could not see God through these, the love of self was so thick: This
teaches every one to wait upon the Father for pure teaching, and to covet
after no more knowledge, then what is freely given them.

Now the Father is beginning to work a great mystery, and that is, to pull
Adam out of selfish flesh again, and to plant him into the pure spirit, and so
to bring him into the most fruitful garden of Eden. But this God would not do
presently, but in length of time; and Adam neither could, nor should come back
again to deny self and flesh, and to acknowledge the Father his all in all,
till the Father was pleased to appoint a time when he would manifest himself
in Adam. And therefore for the present, God has set this flaming sword, which
turns every way, to keep the way of the tree of life; Adam must not come in, to
live in the pure spirit again, Zach. 3. 4.
till he be changed, and his filthy garments taken from him by the fathers own
hand, and in the fathers own time.

Now I conceive, and truly I find in my own experience, that this flaming
sword is the enmity of natures spoken of, which is set in our hearts since the
fall, being a mixture of opposite natures, and so a frighting, and killing the
creature with terror; So that let me go or come, think or do, or turn any way,
this enmity has met with me, terrifing and troubling of me; for I could
apprehend nothing from God but anger; And so long as I looked upon God as an
angry God, I could not look upon him and live, but was as a stranger to the
peace and rest of God, and I lay under bondage.

Now all afflictions, crosses, troubles, straits, that I met withal, and the
of death, or fear of dangers, or fears that some Devil, or spirit would take
hold upon me if I were alone in any dark room, or in the night, I thought it
was the Devil, some third power between God and me, that affrighted me; But
alas, now I see it was but the dispensation of Gods wrath, the shinings forth
of the righteous law upon me, which, as fire, scorched and burned the enmity of
my nature, and so became a torment to me, though I saw it not, and that flamed,
and flashed against me, which way so ever I went; So that this adverse power
that troubles the creature, is not a Devil distinct from God, but it is the
very power of Gods righteous law, or dispensation of his wrath, yea, the spirit
of burning, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15.
which appears very terrible, by reason of the enmity of nature that is
between God and the sinner, for there is no agreement between God and the
sinner, for sinners are at a distance from God in place and comfort, till there
be a oneness wrought between God and them, by the power of the anointing,
Christ. And then this Devil vanishes, the enmity dies, the flaming sword is
taken away, and then the Father appears in manifestations of love, peace, and
oneness, to the joy, life, liberty, and peace of the creature, which way soever
he goes. Then the creature looks not upon God as an angry God, but a God of
love to him, whatsoever befalls him. Let him meet with afflictions, crosses,
prison, frowns of friends, sickness, death, any thing, still the poor redeemed
soul can say, this is the good will of my loving Father, his will be done. Now
the bondage, the enmity, the flaming sword, and Devil is taken away; and the
creatures taste and eat daily of the tree of life, even live in God, and God in
them; and here is liberty. Now Adam is come into the garden again, and finds
rest in God, and there is none to keep him out of this enioyment any longer.

The Apostle Paul cleares this, Ephesians 2. 15
when he speaks what Jesus Christ the Anointing does for sinners, says, he
has abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of Commandments, and so
making peace; and that he might reconcile both Jews and Gentiles to God, in one
body, by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby.

So that now you see, for what reason God set the flaming sword in Adam, the
living garden; that this Enmity might appear, and work, till the time and
season of the Father came; That the Anointing, Christ, who is the wisdom and
power of the Father, did come and take it away, and reconcile him, and his
offending creature, so making peace by uniting them into one spirit of love;
throwing down all partition walls, taking away the dispensation of wrath, or
Devil, and murderer, and now shines in the bright beams of love in the soul.

Let God and man be made friends, and you never here of a Devil to trouble, or
affright, or kill any more; therefore this Devil, 2 Cor. 3. 6. etc.
or adverse power, is no other, but the dispensation of wrath, through the
strictness of a righteous Law, which the creature lies under, by reason of
disobedience; and when the Anointing has made God and the creature meet in
love each to other, the enmity dies, and the murdering Devil vanishes away,
and is cast into the lake of fire, Rev. 20. 15.
and so consumed, and shall never affright, or terrify the creature any more.

Indeed, while these enmities are in force, there is great flashings one
against the other, and sometimes there is troubles within a man, horror and
trembling, and secret burning; and sometimes frightings, and apparisions of
wrath without a man; but all these are but the effects of a righteous law,
occasioned through enmity of natures, but I say, when the Anointing has made a
oneness, so that God dwells, and rules in man, and man lives in God; then all
those frightings are taken away.

But is there no devil that tempted Christ? or that opposes God? yes, it is the
power of darkness, or spirit of enmity, that was the first fruit that sprang up
from mankind after he was made, and which does yet dwell and rule in
disobedient flesh; until Christ, the power of God, who is stronger, come and
cast him out.

For as those whisperings of flesh, that rise up in Adam, which was the serpent
that enticed him to disobey; did move Adam with a tickling desire to be more
wise and honorable then God at present had set him in, to which Adam gave
consent, and so eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, even his own
self and imagination.

The same whisperings of flesh appeared in the humane nature Jesus Christ: for
he was thereby enticed to dislike that condion his father had put him in; for
first he was moved to murmur against the father, as though his father were
careless of his son, in letting him fast forty days, Mat. 4. 3.
and forty nights; and so the flesh would have had Christ to have waited no
longer on his father, but to Command those stones to become bread. But Christ
rejected that inticement.

Then the flesh begins to move him to presume upon his fathers protection, that
is, to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple, upon this conceit,
that he was the son of God, this is an unreasonable attempt, even mere
confusion, as all the wisdom of the flesh is. But Christ rejects this likewise.

Then the flesh intices him to Convetousness, and vain glory, after the things
of the world; and told him, that if he would cease waiting upon the fathers
providence, and follow the imaginations of the flesh, all the glory of the
world should be his; for the imagination of the flesh thinks it can compass
any thing by its own wit and policy. But Christ rejects this likewise; and
because he was the son, he delighted to obey, and to wait upon his father, and
was content with his condition his father had put him in; so that here was
whisperings of unbelief, whisperings of pride, and whisperings of covetousness,
and vain glory, all which are the fruits of the flesh.

But Jesus Christ gave no consent thereunto, as Adam the first man did, but
still kept close to his father, and sinned not; so that here was the devil, the
motions, and imaginations of the flesh, the father of lies that tempted Adam,
and slew him; And here was the same devil that tempted Christ, for he did
partake of flesh, and was tempted in all things like unto us; But Christ slew
him, and cast him out of heaven, humane flesh, Ephesians. 1. 14.
and therefore this Anointing, is said to be the earnest of our Inheritance,
that as this power of God did dwell in Jesus, and trod the devil, the father
of lies, the fleshy imagination under his feet, so that he killed him that
killed Adam, and us in him; even so the same power in the fathers times and
seasons will bruise the same Serpents head in every son and daughter of Adam,
and tread them under his feet in them.

But till such time as Christ has finished this great mystery, Genesis 3. 24.
there is, and will be troublers in this flesh, our bodies; for the risings up
of a man's own concupiscence will trouble him, and the flaming sword, the
dispensations of the righteous law, laying hold thereupon, will affright and
terrify the enslaved creature, and raise mountains of misery against him; and
so from hence comes all those horrors within a man, and all those alterations,
and hurly burlies in the world, upon, men's estates, families, and persons, as
we see befell Job, which losses and miseries to Job, were the breakings forth
of a righteous law upon Job, tempered by the wisdom of God, not for Jobs hurt,
or the Devils good, but for Jobs liberty and peace with God, and for the
devils utter shame and destruction.

Well, in all your troubles, I could wish you could look upon the hand of God
that smites, and not upon the Devil at a distance from God, as I have done,
and I know you do; for when God is pleased to open your eyes, as to see that it
is he that smites, affrights, torments, shakes kingdoms, families, estates, and
persons, through the power of his righteous law, which all flesh have gone
astray from, and which the power of darkness, even the imagination of your
proud flesh still flashes against. I say, if the father please to let you see
this, then that which you call devil will appear to be in you, and his power
will appear to your sight, and you will see that by the power of the Anointing,
the law of love (and by no other power) you will and must be set free from the
devil in short time. For first, the Father does quicken and awake you, and then
he takes away the flaming sword, and causes the creature that was lost, to come
into him, and to taste, and eat of him, who is the tree of life, and so to wait
upon him, and live for ever.

The Apostle Paul says, it is the letter that kills, but the Spirit gives life;
that is, the strictness of a righteous Law being broken by the creature, it
kills the creature; for this is the flaming sword that turns every way upon the
thoughts, words, and actions of the sinner, presenting nothing but wrath,
misery, and death in the inward sight of the mind. But now the Spirit, the Law
of love, this quickens, and unites the Father and his creature again, and makes
them one: This Spirit does burn up, and cast away the flesh, and that enmity,
and it casts the dispensation of wrath out of Gods hand, and so removes that
enmity likewise.

And now God appears not in anger, as an enemy, and his Declarations are not in
terms of killing, and bruising, and making the creature groan under misery,
affrightings, and death: But he appears in manifestations of love, peace, and
fatherly oneness: Rev. 12. 10.
Now all the clouds and storms are blown over, and the love of the father
shines bright and hot upon the soul, making it fruitful in love, joy, and
peace, in humility, obedience, and delight in God, now the troubler, or devil
is cast out, and goes; and there is a oneness of life, peace, liberty and joy
between God and his creature. Well, this may be a burden to some, to hear me
thus speak, but to you that the son has given liberty to, I am confident it
will drop a precious favor into your spirit.

CHAP. IV.
A poor soul that lies under bondage, before the father sets him free, is
troubled in a twofold sense; both which are the fruits or effects of the
righteous law, 2 Cor. 5. 4.
which has first slain the creature, by taking advantage of disobedience, and
then holds him under the bondage of that death, till the law of love swallow up
the murderer, and set the creature free.

First, the poor enslaved creature is tossed with many troubles within his own
spirit, which no man sees but himself, such as these; sometimes he cannot
pray, then he is troubled; and when he does pray, he either misplaces his
words, or he has been too long, or too short, or some self-praysing thoughts
arise, and then he is troubled; he cannot understand, nor speak what is in his
heart, and when he finds himself able to speak, then memory fayles him, and
then he is troubled; when people do not regard him for his preaching and
praying then he is troubled; when others tell him that he must cease praying,
and preaching, and self-acting, and wait upon the Father for his pure teaching,
for time is coming that every one must be taught of God, and this troubles him
very much. Well, all these troubles, and such like, proceed from the shinings
forth of the righteous law upon the proud heart, and he cannot bear it, because
he seeks himself more then God; the unbelief of the heart lives by sense upon
the creature; the law of God tells the heart, he must trust God, and not man,
and though all sense fayl him from men and creatures, yet to wait upon God,
but this troubles him, he cannot wait, and if he do wait, he questions whether
he shall have such things he is bid to wait for; and the poor heart lies under
great tossings.

Again, in his course of trading in the world, if he ask sometimes too little,
or sometimes too much for his wares, then he is troubled, and do what he can,
his heart is troubled, because he thinks he might have done better; when
business goes cross to his mind, he is troubled; whether it be fair weather or
fowl, if it be not just to his mind, he is troubled.

Then appears pride, covetousness, frowardness, uncleaness springing up in his
heart, and these trouble him; if he cannot speak for God, when others speak
against him, as he thinks, then he is troubled; if he do speak of the things of
God, then his heart tells him he is an hypocrite, or self-lover, and then he is
trobled; so that there arises not a thought in his heart, but there is some
fretting, or trouble tied to it.

And what are all these, and such like, but even a legion of devils, or
troublers, that holds the creature under bondage, and torments him thus in hell
day and night. I call it a hell, for it is a condition of darkness, below the
life, comfort, and peace of God. All these are wrought in the soul by the
righteous Law; for the creature strives to be wise, and the Law proves him a
fool; he would fain be righteous, and the light of the Law shows him he is a
wicked hypocrite; he would fain have faith and holiness in him, and the Law
shows him he is an unbelieving sinner; he would fain enjoy the peace of God,
and yet enjoy himself too, the Law tells him, he must deny himself, and take up
his cross daily if he would enjoy God; he would fain be counted some body for
wisdom, faith, prayer, preaching, the Law tells him, all is as good as nothing,
because he goes forth in his own strength, and the power of the father is
absent.

And thus the Law is that flaming sword, which turns every way upon the sinner,
and scorches the poor imprisoned soul in every thought of his heart, Luke 4. 18.
burning up his pride and self-conceit; so that the righteous Law raigns like a
Tyrant in, Esa. 61. 1, 2.
and over the poor prisoner; and while the soul is thus tormented by the
dispensation of wrath, the envious spirit of darkness that rules in other men,
delights to see this poor creature thus under bondage, and so casts jeers,
slanders, reproaches, and hard usage upon him: Envy rejoices in others misery,
even as Love rejoices in the liberty and life of others. But poor soul, know
this, that God is burning up thy dross, and ere long will set thee at liberty,
and the fire of love that burns in thee, will break forth to thy comfort, and
then he will give thee power to rejoice over the Devil, Heb. 1 13.
and to set thy feet upon his neck as a conquered slave, even as he makes thee
his slave now.

Then secondly, This same imprisoned creature that lies under the Law, being as
yet not set free by the Son, meets with many troubles without, and these are
but dispensations of wrath, as the other was likewise, as sickness, frowns of
friends, hatred of men, losses of his estate by fire, water, being cheated by
false spirited men, death of his cattle, or many such like casualties, whereby
he becomes poor in the world, and meets with many straits, as hard language,
hungry belly, to be despised, imprisoned, and abundance of such provocations in
the world.

And it may be meets with fearful Apparisions in the night or day, that
terrifies him; as it was Jobs case, he was filled with terrors in the night;
sometimes these troubles lie within a man's spirit in griefs, and sadpressures,
and inward burnings of trouble and torment, which no man is sensible of but
himself, and sometimes it breaks forth in bitter words and speeches, through
oppression of the spirit, to the disturbance of others, and this is called
madness, or distraction, which grows upon a man, when the pure Law does cross
his carnal imagination, wilful will, pride, covetous; or lustful desires,
then does the distemper of his troubled spirit break out.

But when Christ comes and sets him free, Luke. 21. 17. etc.
then he comes to see, that whatsoever did befall him, must befall him, it was
the will of the father, for the burning up of his dross, and pride of flesh,
and shall be made to say, Father, thy will be done, and for ever, yea,
infinitely for ever be thy name praised, that thou have given me such a heart
to be content, and submit in love and meekness to thee, and to take every thing
in love from thee, this is thine own handiwork, it was not thus formerly, but
thou have drawn me through a nipping, Heb. 4. 3.
and pinching wilderness, into this land of Canaan, even to lie down in rest in
thine own bosom, praised be thy name.

Yea, but the poor troubled soul is offended at my words, and thinks, and
says, this cannot be, it is impossible that any man should have such a frame
of spirit. Alas poor man, I have been as thou art, but if thou can believe in
Gods love and power, from the testimony of another, thou will believe this for
a truth: But if thou cannot believe, John 6. 45.
but yet remain troubled, he that feels the sweetness of such a work of God,
knows it to be a truth; wait upon God as thy fellow servant does, for his pure
teaching, and thou will find him the same to thee as he is to another.

Paul writes of one that was in Christ before him; and so, though thou wade
through flames of fire, to embrace God in thine arms, thy comforts will be the
sweeter, thy experience the more, and thou will greatly rejoice, in that thou
have been in so hot a fire, when the father causes thee to lie down in his
bosom the liberty in this rest is now so sweet to thee.

And truly friends, let me tell you; that which has been often of late
whispered into my spirit, and I believe there is something in it; that this
wrath, bitterness, and discontent that appears generally in men's spirits in
England, one against another, upon the breakings forth of the truths of God,
does whisper in my spirit, that the Father has cast England into the fire,
Ier. 23. 5, 6.
and is purging the dross from the gold, that liberty is not far off, and that
the plentiful pouring out of the Anointing, even the spirit of love, truth,
and oneness is near at hand; and that England, Scotland, and Ireland, so set
at liberty from the bondage of the serpent within, and the dispensation of
wrath without, shall be the tenth part of the City Babylon that shall fall off
first, and bow down at the feet of the Anointing, Esa. 60. 14.
which is the wisdom and power of God, that rules in flesh, as Esaias prophesied,
but whether God will manifest so great a work in this kingdom, or no, at this
time, his will be done; but this I know, much may be said of the workings of
Gods power in this kind in particular men's experience, and as the father
enlarges his hand, this manifestation of his love will spread.

There is more hopes of a bitter storming spirit to be brought into God, Rev.
21 8.
as this kingdom is generally full of, then of a smooth, Rev. 22. 25.
close, fawning, hypocritical, self seeking, fearful spirit, that plays of
all sides, for self ends sake. God received persecuting and bitter spirited
Paul to mercy, when as he let hypocritical, selfseeking Simon Magus go by, as
it were not counting him worth the minding.

All that I shall say, is this; you Saints of God, that taste how sweet the
love of the father is, Act. 9. 1.
bear patiently with hot spirits, God does bear with them, for he suffers more
then you, he is called the great long sufferer; Esa. 61. 1.
and when Gods love begins to shine forth upon them, he can, and it may be will
make some of them to outstrip you in experience of his love, good will, and
power, and so fill them abundantly with the spirit of joy.

But some do object against what I have spoken, and say, are not those Angels
which fell, devils distinct from God, as man is distinct from God; Jud 6.
as Jude speaks, And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left
their own habitation, he has reserved in chains of darkness, unto the
Judgment of the great day.

To answer this: First I shall note; that as heaven is set before us in a
twofold glory; so are Angels.

As first, 1 Cor 3. 17.
every particular Saint is a true heaven, or place of glory; not only because
the Father dwells in him, but because he dwells in the Father likewise, as thus;
the Father delights in him, and manifests himself to this his son, and his son
by the clear sight, and feeling of this manifestation is filled with joy and
glory in his Father; so that here is a mutual fellowship of joy, and oneness
of love between them. And this is Gods Kingdom, even for flesh to be filled
with Gods glory, and indwelling presence in love; and this is heaven in a
lesser sense.

Secondly, the whole City Sion is true heaven, or a place of the fathers glory,
which is but the perfection of the former joy, for as the father dwells and
rules as a King of righteousness and love, in one Saint, so he dwells in all,
and all of them dwell in him; 1 Cor. 1. 31.
as he enjoyes them for his delight, so they enjoy him for their delight.

And as all, and every one of them sees, enjoyes, and glories in the Father, so
they see, enjoy and glory one in another, every one knowing, seeing, and
sweetly rejoicing in the unity, 1 Cor. 12. 31.
and oneness of each others spirit it being the spirit of the father, Ephesians. 4
6.
nay, the father himself, who is the spirit that fills all in all; and knits
them together into one body, treading down all oppressing powers of the flesh
for ever, under their feet; and this is heaven in the largest sense, which
every particular son and daughter of the father shall enjoy hereafter, though
they are now scattered abroad among the Sodomites of this unrighteous world,
that vexes their precious souls from day to day.

And as heaven, I say, is set before us in this twofold glory, so the Angels
are set before us in a twofold glory likewise.

For first, the particular sparks of glory, or heavenly principles in man,
which the father has set as lights, to make known himself in his Saints; as
love, humility, sincerity, content, and rest in God, and such like, these are
Angels, and Angels of glory too; because they are sparks of glory issued out of
the father, into earthen vessels, and makes them to become the salt of the
earth, and light of the world.

Then secondly, Men that are wholly taken up into God, are called Angels, such
as have all their senses spiritually exercised in the father, that can see,
hear, taste, smell, and handle the excellent and glorious father; and so Jesus
Christ being a man so taken up into the father, for he was a man fully
anointed, the Godhead dwelt bodily in him; Col. 2. 9.
he was called an Angel, the Arch-Angell, and Angel of his presence, for he was
the glorious spark, and light of the father.

And when men shall be, and are so taken up into God, they are called Angels,
and Angels of heaven too; because the father dwells, and glories in them, and
they live, dwell, and glory in the father, and these are the Angels, which the
father sends to do his will.

As first, the several measures of his spirit are sparks of his glory; as
love, joy, humility, sincerity, and peace in God, and such like; these are
particular Angels, which the father sends down into humane flesh, to keep it in
all his ways, that it may not desperately blasphem God, and so dash against
the rock; and such Angels as these every son and daughter of the father does
enjoy, more or less; and if it were not for these, temptations would presently
overcome them, but these are spiritual powers from God, that keep them upright
in all their ways, and which makes them differ from the world.

And then, for men that are wholly taken up into God, as Moses, and as Christ
was, they are ministers or Angels, which the father sends forth to speak, and
do his will before, and in the world; therefore let the world in these days
learn meekness, and wisdom, and lay aside their envy, lest in the day of
account they be found beating and killing such as the father sends in his name.
Ioh 5 43.


But now to answer to the objection: We are to note, that Angels in this latter
sense, which are men taken up into God, and made perfect, can never fall from
God, and so become Devils and enemies against God; for this is the work of
redemption, which is unchangable, and the father dwells and rules in them, and
has bruised the serpents head in them, never to revive again in them; and they
likewise live, and dwell in God, whose power treads all enemies under their
feet.

And they have the sparks of glory, or Angels of light within them; which are
the several measures of the fathers spirit poured into them, which remains
for ever; and they themselves are Angels of light, sent from the father, to do
his will here in this low condition of weak flesh.

But now Angels in the former sense, which are divine sparks of glory, planted
in humane nature, in its first creation, which was the habitation where they
were seated; these are fallen from their excellency, and are become Devils, or
evil Angels, or spiritual powers of darkness. I shall declare what I know by
Angels that fell; they were those glorious lights, and sparks of glory, shining
Angels of light, in their several measures and degrees, which God had placed
in the humane nature, Adam, before his fall. As his love of God, delight in
God, Peace and rest in God, humility before God, obedience and self denial
before God, and all such like; these all lived in God, for he was the Center
from which they came, and to which they reflected back again, they being all
alive within Adam, and Adam being alive within them.

But when Adam hearkened to the whispering of that a spiring selfishnesse, that
was the serpent, which twisted it self round about the tree, Adam, and every
glorious light that was in that humane creation; and when Adam (or indeed any
man, or woman) does give way to self, and eat of that fruit, that is, delight
in self, above the King of righteousness in man then those glorious Angels
left God their habitation, and took up their glory within the circle of humane
de^^ed flesh, and so become enmity against God.

For now the man's love is turned from living in the King of righteousness, to
live in corrupted flesh, Isa. 59. 14.
it is become a self love, and so envious against God; his delight and his joy
is become self delight, he glories in himself, which is his pride; his
obedience does live in himself, for he gives way to all the whisperings of the
flesh, and lusts within himself; but disobeys the command of righteousness
within him. And further, his sincerity is turned into hypocrisy, and his
imagination works strongly, how to please the flesh, in the motions of it, not
how to please the spirit of truth and holiness,

And now those glorious sparks which were Angels of light, while they lived in
God, and reflected upon him, are become Angels of darkness, or legions of
devils, murderers, or deceivers, according to their many degrees and measures,
while they live in unrighteous flesh, and reflect upon the disobedient
creature, to maintain and to honor the being of the flesh, before the
righteous God that governs in the flesh; thus they are fallen.

And these devils or deceivers (for indeed pride, covetousness, and the
imagination of proud flesh does deceive every man) they are reserved in chains
of darkness, etc.

These chains are the dispensations of Gods wrath through his righteous Law;
for upon every one, and upon all of these fallen Angels, the righteous sparks, or
breathings forth of the righteous Law, like a flame of fire, turning every way,
meets with them, Genesis 3. 24.
binds them, keeps them in, and restrains them within bonds: so that God has
these powers of self-seeking flesh at his command; they cannot appear, nor act
but by his leave.

Pride, self-love, envy, hypocrisy, subtilty, cruelty, cannot act, but by his
leave; and when he does suffer them to act, then his righteous Law is presently
made manifest, following their heels like fire, burning up the stubble.

For God never suffers these devils to appear, either within a man, or by some
violent way to break forth of men for the hurt one of another; but he makes use
thereof to ruin and destroy that power of darkness, even that poisonous power
of covetous flesh.

And they are called chains of darkness, in opposition to the Law of perfect
love and liberty; for while these Angels lived in God, they had no restraint,
for love God, and thou art at liberty, thy whole soul is free, and no bondage
lies upon thee.

But when thou love self and flesh, then all thy powers run self-ward, and
then the flaming sword, which is the righteous spirit of burning, does flame
upon thee, burns thee, and restrains thee, and holds thee under bondage: But
how long?

Till the Judgment of the great day, that is, till the power of Christ do make
it appear to the man's clear knowledge, that self and flesh is the devil and
serpent, Rev. 20. 15.
and by his power of righteousness, does not only judge and condemn that
serpent, but casts him into the lake of fire, and consumes him to nothing, as
if his power had never been; and so sets the creature free, according to the
mystery of God.

And here note, that the restoration, or salvation which is pointed at in the
letter of the Scripture, does lie in the restoring of the creature, Mankind,
from the power of these Angels of darkness; and Mankindes redemption lies in
the breaking of those chains of darkness asunder, and so taking him into the
life, liberty, and peace of the King of righteousness. As thus,

Whereas in this present poisoned estate of Mankind in which flesh glories it
self, as in self will, delight, and self-love, subtle imagination, and the
like, they do all work fleshward, and selfward; and the masculine powers that
rule the soul, appear to be envy, hypocrisy, pride, anger, self-seeking,
subtilty, and such like. And the spirit of truth, To. 1. 18.
who is the Father, by whom the creation, man, does live, move, and has his
being, does lie buried under that unrighteous fleshie power.

But now in the restored estate which the Father has begun to work, and which
his people wait for compleatness of. I say now, All the powers of the soul, as
his love, delight, and peace, etc. run Godward again, and is centured in the
Father again.

And those powers of the flesh, as pride, covetousness, rash anger, love of
self, and imagination working to advance all these, which are, as I said, the
Angels of darkness in man: These are now in this day of judgment condemned and
destroyed, trod under foot, and buried out of mind like a dead man, without
being; And the Lord alone is exalted now in this day of restoration which is
the day of his power.

This indeed is the mystery of all, King flesh and self is dis-throned, Genesis
3. 15.
and the King of righteousness in flesh has begun to take the Kingdom, and
does reign, and will reign, and his dominion shall spread, and endure for ever
and ever; for though he take the Kingdom by strength out of King flesh his
hand, Dan. 7. 26. etc.
yet none shall ever be able to take it out of his hand again, for of his
Kingdom there shall be no end.

And seeing people are not yet taken off from looking upon other men's
knowledge, I shall mention this one Scripture, which if people did feelingly
understand, the distemper of their spirits would presently be healed.

It is this, Light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then
light, because their deeds are evil.

The world is mankind, and every particular man and woman is a perfect
creation of himself, 1 John 2. 16.
a perfect created world; that if a particular branch of mankind desire to
know what the nature of other men and women are, let him not look abroad, but
into his own heart, and he shall see: so that I say, man is the world, a
perfect creation, from whose poisoned flesh proceeds the lust of the eye, the
lust of the flesh, and the pride of life; these are not of the Father.

Now light is come into this world; that is, 2 Cor. 5. 19. etc.
the spirit of right understanding has taken up his dwelling in this flesh;
Joh. 17. 25.
and from hence man is called a reasonable creature, which is a name given to
no other creature but man, because the spirit of reason appears, acting in him,
which if men did submit themselves unto, they would act righteousness
continually; and so man would become Lord of all other creatures in
righteousness.

I, But men love darkness rather then light; men here spoken of, are the evil
masculine powers of created man in his poisoned estate, as man pride, man
covetousness, man hypocrisy, man self-love, and King imagination, that rules
over all, and in all these; and this, or these, is the wicked man, spoken of in
scripture; these I say, are called men, because they rule over the created
flesh, which is the feminine part, and leads it captive in unrighteousness, and
will not suffer it to obey the King of righteousness, which is called
conscience likewise in the creation, man.

For I say, every particular man and woman is a perfect creation, or a world of
him, or her self: And those powers are the men that live and reign in that
poisoned, created world, for these will not submit to righteousness; and what
is the reason?

Why, because their deeds are evil: Indeed covetousness is an evil man, John
7. 7.
and pride and envy are evil men, and all the rest of their imaginary
companions in the soul, they are evil men, yea, the wicked man, and all their
actions are evil like themselves, and they will not submit themselves to
righteousness. That mighty man of truth, whose dwelling is in flesh likewise,
he dwells in heaven and hell, that is, he dwells in cleansed flesh his Saints,
where he is seen and known; he dwells in uncleansed flesh, the vile ones of the
earth, where he is unknown, and unseen by them; though he, as he is the
righteous Judge, does check and condemn them, yet they smother his smitings
within themselves, and will not submit; for which disobedience sake, their
spirit is filled with horror and bitterness, and they roar in hell. Speak thou
wretched man, if thou have not found terrible affrightings and torments within
thy self, when thou have refused to act the righteous motion of conscience
within, who indeed is the King of glory, though thou art ignorant of him, and
submittest thy self to King flesh in all the beastly actings of it.

Well, these masculine powers of the poisoned flesh stand it out against the
King of glory, till he cast them into the lake of fire, into his own spirit, by
which they are tried, and being found but chafe, and not able to endure, are
burned, and consumed to nothing in the flame.

No man or woman needs to be trobled at this, for let every man cleanse himself
of these wicked masculine powers that rule in him, and there will speedily be a
harmony of love in the great creation, even among all creatures.

Therefore let no man look without himself, and say, other men will not obey
this light that is come into mankind; but let him look into his own heart, and
he shall find that the powers of his heart are those very men of the world,
that will not submit to that light of reason that is come into it.

But it is said, 2 Chronicles. 32. 21.
that God sent his Angel, and cut off by him all the mighty men of valor in
the Assyrians army; therefore Angels are a mighty power between God and man,
and distinct from both.

Answer, Angels in this sense are powers sent by commission from God to do a
particular work. As first, Good Angels are sent, and these are inward
discoveries of God to, or within a soul, such as was sent to Jacob to awake
him; for these manifestations of the Fathers power within, do make the
creature, man, watchful, either to foresee and prevent a danger, or else to
support the drooping soul in trouble, through the hope or expectation of some
blessing, or deliverance, which was inwardly spoken to the heart, and this the
Father does in a twofold sense.

Sometimes speaking inwardly, as to Eliah, 1 King 19 6.
the Angel of the Lord touched him, and bid him arise, and eat, this was a
speaking to Eliahs heart, either by voice, vision, dream, or revelation.

And sometimes by the voice of a material man, standing before them, as the
Angel that brought the glad tidings to Sampson, the two Angels that came to
Abraham and Lot; these were material men, taken up into the spirit of the
Father, and sent by him to do such a work, and their vanishing away, as the
interpreation is, it is no other but their departure from Sampson, Abraham, and
Lot, when they had done the work they were sent about.

But now according to the Objection, such Angels as are sent to destroy, are
called evil Angels, according to the creatures capacity, because they are
ministers of such things as the creatures call evil, though in themselves, as
being sent from God, and in the execution of their commission, they are good;
but I say, they are called bad, because their work is of a different nature to
them that are called good Angels; Job 1. 10, 11.
Satan, that envious Angel did the will of God, in troubling Job, for the end
of that trouble was good to him, his last days being his best days.

And these evil Angels are threefold.

First, such as are sent into the soul, when the Justice of God goes forth upon
a man, and strikes him with blindness of mind, and hardness of heart, as he
smote Pharaoh; Rom 9. 17.
and these are strong powers of darkness, that holds the creature in chains of
bondage.

Secondly, when he sends the sword, pestilence, and famine, or the like, and
gives them commission to waste and to destroy a rebellious people, these are
Gods Angels, or mighty powers, to which he has given a commission to go forth,
and to perform such a work, and this you shall see in Scripture; that which was
called the destroying Angel in one verse, is called the pestilence in ths next
verse. 1 Chronicles. 21. 12, 13. etc.

Or thirdly, when wicked people are ruled by King envy, King covetousness, or
King pride, that unclean spirit that rules in the children of disobedience;
and when these have a liberty given to them, to go on and prosper without
restraint; now they are mighty powers, or Angels sent by God, either to waste
and destroy, or else to be a terrible warning to a sleepie people, to awake
them, as the King of Assyria was sent to do a work in that kind, Isa. 10.
that is, to whip the Nations, but to brighten Israel.

And when his work was done, then he himself was destroyed by another power or
Angel which God sent to take him off, for his cruel and unrighteous actings;
like that of Gideons Army, when Israel began to obey the Lord; then the Lord
sent an Angel, which was no other but a mighty spirit of fear and confusion of
mind among the Midianites, Isreal's enemies; which made them to destroy one
another, while Israel had the liberty to look on.

CHAP. V.
LEt the Powers, Governors, and Armies of the land learn to worship the Lord
in righteousness, lest while the Lord has made them Angels to destroy some,
and to warn others; the Lord do not give out a Commission to others, to
destroy and confound them, and so bring about his work by another power. For
Assure your selves, you Kingly, Parliamentarie, and Army power, and know this,
that all unrighteous powers and actings must be destroyed; the father is about
the work, Ier. 23. 5, 6.
and his hand will not slack; this work is, and will be going on more powerful
then ever, till it be finished, that all enemies to Christ be made his
footstool and he alone exalted, who is King of righteousness.

For now Jesus Christ is upon his rising from the dead, and will rule King of
righteousness in flesh: And though King-flesh in every man and woman has for
many years past denied him, and lifted up himself against him; yet now is the
time come that he will lift up himself, and tread the powers of the flesh under
his feet.

And friends, do not mistake the resurrection of Christ? Mat. 24. 27
you expect he shall come in one single person, as he did when he came to
suffer, and die, and thereby to answer the types of Moses law; let me tell you,
if you look for him under the notion of one single man after the flesh, to be
your Savior, you shall never, never taste salvation by him.

But know, that the mighty power that dwelt in that humane flesh, that was
called by the name (Jesus Christ) he was the man, the mighty man of strength;
the flesh was as the woman to the man, or the box that carried that precious
ointment in; and this man is sat down at the right hand of the father, that is,
he is the strength of the father, whereby he destroys King flesh, and he sits
in the highest heavens, that is, in those Saints that are taken up the highest
into the father, and lives in him, treading the curse under foot.

And as the body of his flesh in his Ascension, so called, went out of the
Apostles sight, in a cloud of the Skies, so shall the same mighty man rise up
out of the earth, that is, from under the earthy imaginations and lusts of the
sons of men; for mankind is the earth that contains him buried, and out of
this earth he is to arise, and appear in the clouds, that is, as he begins to
show himself in a man or a woman, the fleshy powers in those enslaved souls
will, and do rise up to darken the light of that sun as long as he can, till
he, the flesh, who is the wicked man, or the cursed thing that dwells within
(mankind) be taken away.

And therefore if you expect, Col. 1. 27.
or look for the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor 5. 16.
you must know, that the spirit within the flesh is the Jesus Christ, and you
must see, feel, and know from himself his own resurrection within you, if you
expect life and peace by him.

For he is the life of the world, that is, of every particular son and daughter
of the father, who are every one of them a perfect created world of themselves,
and need not to seek abroad after other creatures for teaching, for every one
has the light of the father within himself, which is the mighty man, Christ
Jesus.

And he is now rising and spreading himself in these his sons and daughters,
and so rising from one to many persons, John 1. 9.
till he enlighten the whole creation (mankind) in every branch of it, 1 Cor.
12. 13.
and cover this earth with knowledge, as the waters cover the seas.

And this is the lightning that shall spread from East to West; Luke 17. 21
this is the kingdom of heaven within you, dwelling and ruling in your flesh:
therefore learn to know Jesus Christ, as the father knows him; that is, not
after the flesh; but know, that the spirit within the flesh, is that mighty man
(Jesus Christ) and the flesh takes it name from that mighty man of truth that
dwells within it; Heb. 9. 14.
he within governs the flesh, he within laid down the flesh, when he was said
to die; he within is the wisdom and power of God, he within is to arise, not
at a distance from men, but will rise up in men, and manifest himself to be
the light and life of every man and woman that is saved by him.

For a meek spirit bears the name (Jesus) And a man filled with the power of
God, or a man taken up into God, to become one in spirit within; bears the
name (Christ) and therefore you are not saved by believing there was such a
man, that lived and died at Jerusalem, for though you believe there was such a
man, yet that is not saving faith to you, Ier. 23. 5.
till you feel the power of a meek spirit come into you, and reign King, and
tread all your envy, frowardness, Romans 8. 9
and bitterness of spirit under foot; and till you feel and see the power of
the righteous spirit come into you, and reign King, treading all
unrighteousness of the flesh whatsoever, under foot, making a conquered slave
of that wicked man in the flesh.

And so changing your vile bodies, Phil. 3. 21.
and making them like his glorious body; Mat. 26. 39
that is, making the bodies of your flesh subject to the spirit of the father
within it, as the body of the flesh of Jesus Christ was subject to the spirit,
his father, that dwelt within him in all things.

So that you do not look for a God now, as formerly you did, to be a place of
glory beyond the Sun, Moon and Stars, nor imagine a divine being you know not
where, but you see him ruling within you; and not only in you, but you see and
know him to be the spirit and power that dwells in every man and woman; yea, in
every creature, according to his orb, within the globe of the Creation.

So that now you see, and feel, and taste the sweetness of the spirit ruling
in your flesh, who is the Lord and King of glory in the whole creation, and you
have community with him who is the father of all things. Now you are
enlightened, now you are saved, and rises higher and higher into life and
peace, as this manifestation of the father increases, and spreads within you.

And this is it, 1 Cor 3. 16.
to be saved by Jesus Christ, for that mighty man of spirit has taken up his
habitation within your body, and your body is his body, and now his spirit is
your spirit, and so you are become one with him, and with the father; and this
is the faith of Christ, when your flesh is subject to the spirit of
righteousness, as the flesh of Christ was; and this is to believe in Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 13.
when the actings and breathings of your souls is within the center of the
same spirit, in which the man Jesus Christ lived, acted, and breathed.

If you live in the flesh, that is, if you be subject to the powers of the
flesh within you, then you believe in the flesh, and bring forth the fruit of
the flesh, which is self-conceit, covetousness, envy, pride, hypocrisy, and
the like.

But if you live in Christ, that is, in that mighty and spiritual man of
truth, Gal. 5. 22.
then you believe in him, and bring forth the fruit of the spirit, which is
love, joy peace, humility, obedience, sincerity, and the like: If Jesus Christ
that mighty King rule in you, he will check, and condemn every unrighteous
thought, as well as extravagant words, and loose actions, though no other man
see and know your secret wickedness but your selves; and he will speak peace,
and Justify you within, when your flesh in any things is subject to him,
though you are hated, slandered, and mightily oppressed by the injustice of
others.

But if King-flesh rule, then you go on in secret and open ways of
unrighteousness with greediness and delight, and have no checks within at all:
Now the strong man of sin keeps the house, your bodies, and every thing enjoyes
a seeming peace within you: But this is not the peace, nor the liberty, but a
fore runner of great torment in the day of Judgment; that is, when the Judge,
the King of righteousness shall appear to sit upon the throne within you,
judging and condemning this serpent, or man of sin within you, and so bruising
his head, that you who have been, and are pisoners thereunto, may live in the
light and peace of the father, and so set at liberty from bondage, and assure
your selves, you that glory in flesh, you shall not go scot-free, you shall be
cast into the everlasting burnings as well as others, and tried in that fire,
as gold in the furnace.

And this fire is the father himself, Heb. 12. 29.
into whom, when any creature falls, he burns up the dross in the creature,
which is the curse that came in through unrighteousness, which is all the
imaginary glory of the flesh, and so makes man to appear and stand bright
before him; you cannot burn away the dross, but the gold must suffer the heat
of the fire, the father cannot consume the serpent, the man of sin, out of my
body, but I that have been incorporated into that nature of the serpent, must
needs suffer pain; this dross and gold in man is so mixed together, that
nothing can separate them but the fiery orb, which is the father himself, that
tries all things.

And here likewise lies a great delusion within mankind; Ioh. 8. 42.
you call the father your God, and the word God is much in your mouths; but
here you deceive your selves, for you know not the father to be your God, nor
Lord, neither can you call him your God, till you see and feel by experience
that he rules and governs in you, and that your proud and coveteous flesh
stoopes, and is made subject to him.

When the spirit within you does command your flesh in rightousnesse, and will
not suffer frowardness, covetousness, pride, hypocrisy, and the like, to arise
and act, but presently checks and condemns, and shames you; you can then speak
in experience, that the father, who is the mighty governor, is your God, and
your Lord, for the powers of your poisoned flesh are made suctject to him.

But so long as King-flesh reigns, Ephesians. 2. 2.
and does act pride, envy, covetousness, hypocrisy, unrighteousness within
you; then he that you call God, is the devil, that cursed serpent, or poisoned
flesh, even the power of darkness is your God; and you cannot say the father is
your God, for if you do, you deceive your self, you are subject to the devil,
you are not subject to the father.

He that looks for a God without himself, Isa. 8. 20.
and worships God at a distance, he worships he knows not what, but is led
away, and deceived by the imaginations of his own heart, which is Beelzebub the
great Devil; but he that looks for a God within himself, and submits himself
to the spirit of righteousness that shines within; this man knows whom he
worships, for he is made subject to, and has community with that spirit that
made all flesh, that dwells in all flesh, and in every creature within the
globe.

And this is the law and the testimony, Ier. 23 6.
even the law of the spirit of righteousness within, and testimony of the
spirit within a man, when a man can say, I see, feel, and know that my flesh is
in part subject, and is daily subjecting to the great power that dwells in the
whole creation; what I hear another man speak or write, it is nothing to me
till I find the same experience within my self; this is the law and testimony
of Jesus, and if any man speak not according to this rule, it is because there
is no knowledge in him, not in the book of scriptures, which is another man's
testimony, and the testimony of others is known to be a truth by the testimony
of the same spirit within your self, and no other way whatsoever.

There is one scripture has been often laid before me by others, and I knew
not the meaning of it; if I went about to study or imagine the meaning, I was
lost presently, and trouble took hold upon me. Well, after I found the spirit
of contentedness to come with power, and made me quiet within, so that I said
within my self, let my father give me the knowledge of this, or any other
truth, or deny me the knowledge of it, his will be done; I can know nothing
till he teach me, therefore I will lie down before him, and wait with a quiet
spirit upon him; I say, I was no sooner brought into this waiting frame of
spirit, not only this, but diverse other truths was, and I can almost say, daily
is given into me from the father, to the abundant satisfaction of my soul.

The scripture is this: Mat. 8. 28.
Mat. 8. 28. where the two men that were possessed with devils, cried out to
Jesus, Art thou come to destroy us before the time?

I deny not the history; but that there were two men really filled and
tormented with devils, or distempers, which is the curse in mankind; and that
at the Command of Christ those troublers in them, went into the heard of swine,
and the swine ran into the sea, and perished there.

But now the matter in this history settles peace within my spirit, as it is
showed unto me; and that is this; By the two possessed, is pointed out to me,
First, the earth (mankind) by reason of his unrighteousness is filled with
thorns and briars, that is, with troublesome distempers of all sorts, which
are called devils, or serpent, or the curse of the earth, or the wicked man
that sowes tares in Gods vineyard (mankind) so that here is mankind, or flesh
full of troublers, or devils distempering the creation; for do but cross the
imagination of the flesh, and the man grows more or less distracted. This is
pointed at by one of the two that were possessed.

Secondly, the righteous law of God, even the spirit which is full of love,
righteousness and peace in it self, is enforced daily to be checking,
condemning, and burning up that power of darkness, or devils in the flesh; to
this end, that the flesh may be brought into a oneness with the father, and be
made subject to the spirit that made it, and that dwells in it, though the
imaginary powers of the flesh have trod down the spirit, and would not suffer
him to appear and reign for many years past: I, but now the fullness of time is
come for the spiritual appearance of Christ, and the spirit, who is the Lord
our righteousness, is beginning to tread proud and covetous flesh under his
feet, and will take the Kingdom, and reign himself in man, yea in every man,
for every man and woman, though they be as branches of the earth, yet they are
every one a perfect creation of themselves and the spirit of the father dwells
supremely in every man, as in the whole globe.

So that considering that mankind (through unrighteousnesss) has been
corrupted, and stands in need of a restoration before he can see the father
dwell supremly in him; and that the spirit must be the cleanser and purger of
this poisoned earth, for he is the everlasting fire that tries all things, and
that seperates the dross from the gold; and this spirit, or father, is pure
reason, which the unreasonableness of the flesh cannot stand before, but falls
presently; as chafe cannot endure the flames of fire.

It appears plain, that the righteous law, Isa. 8. 20.
the spirit, which though it be full of peace in it self; yet having so
powerful an enemy as the devil in flesh, that daily fights against him, he
cannot be at rest, but is at work continually, though it be a work wherein he
takes delight. As the fire never ceases burning, so long as there is fuel to
work upon: so that the spirit of burning may be said to be full of troubles, in
respect of the great and variety of his work, for he is to deal with every
man and woman in the creation of mankind, when I speak after the manner of
men; for while two parties fight to master one another, there is a declaration
of troubles on both sides, to the beholders; and yet the spirit is not full of
troubles, because he kills and destroys the devil with delight, and works the
restoration of mankind with abundance of love and cheerfulness. And this
spirit is pointed out to me, to be the other man possessed: For the scripture
is to me but the declaration of a historical truth, pointing out this higher
mystery.

And as the corrupt power in flesh delights to be acting, Ier. 31. 33.
and showing it self, so the holy Law, (which is not the letter of the
scriptures) but the spirit, which is the law of righteousness, delights to be
acting and showing himself, in destroying that filthy power, or devil.

And as it is a torment to a man to be crossed of his humor or will, so it is
here spoke after the manner of men: As to be a torment to the devil in
mankind, as indeed it is, to be quite destroyed; and as it were a torment to
the righteous Law, as it is not, but his delight to be taken off his work of
burning and consuming the devil.

For as it is the devils heaven to be acting unrighteousness, so it is the
heaven to the law of the spirit to be flaming against, and burning up the
devil.

Now the creature man looks upon these two as they fight one against the other
within his heart and flesh, as a murderer of him, for hereby his earthly peace
is killed, so that, Art thou come to destroy us before the time, is a voice
proceeding from the distempered man, but it does typically point out the voice
of this compound murderer in man; for when Christ, who is the mighty man of
truth dwells bodily in his own house, the flesh of mankind, then all fightings
within, and troublers in the flesh shall cease, and there shall be perfect
peace; but two enemies that seek the death one of the other, are both to be
parted, therefore the devil he would not be taken off vexing the flesh,
because he would be King in the flesh: And the spirit of righteousness would
not be taken off, till he has quite subdued the devil under his feet, and
made flesh subject to him, which shall and must be accomplished at the
restoration of all things.

And therefore there being much work to be done in mankind, as well as in
these two particular men; and the work of the devil will not cease, so long as
he has any power in flesh, and the work of the spirit will not cease, til this
serpents head be quite bruised, and the flesh of the whole creation (mankind)
be made subject to the spirit, the Lord that made it; therefore this voice, Art
thou come to destroy us before the time, declares, that Christ is the
Anointing, or power of the father, that shall end this quarrel, and that shall
establish perfect peace in every man as a branch, and in the whole creation it
self (mankind) when the time of the father is come, that the mystery of the
great governor, God, is finished.

So that this history of the two men possessed with devils, which Christ
Jesus made quiet, does declare the great work of the anointing in the latter
days, when he shall have finished his work, and deliver up the Kingdom to the
father, that is, he will establish love, and peace, and oneness, between
mankind and the spirit of righteousness that made it, and the same anointing
will destroy all this enmity that is between the flesh and spirit, by reason of
the curse that is in the flesh, which is to be burned up, that so peace may be
made.

By the swine in the History are pointed out to me, to be men that live upon
the earth, in the imaginary delights and glory of it, which is a life below
God; as the life of a swine, snudling up his food from among the filth of the
earth, is below the life of a man: And this swine runs down the hill, that is,
these earthly minded men run lower and lower from God, who is called Sions
hill; in hunting after covetousness, self-love, temporal glory, fleshy
imaginations, and thoughts.

These, I say, run downwards, further and further from the life of the spirit;
they do not run up the hill of self-denial, and love of righteousness, where
God dwells. Now Gods dwelling is not in any local place above the skies, as men
fancy, and say, God dwells above the heavens.

But he is said to dwell above, in respect of the fleshes wisdom and power; as
thus, Gods wisdom is above the wisdom of the flesh, Gods peace and life is
above the peace and life of the flesh; for covetousness, pride, lust, and envy
feeds below, and licks the dust of the earth under bondage, and distemper: But
the love, faith, humility, and righteousness of the spirit lives above, in
liberty, freedom, and perfect peace.

And God is said to live above the heavens, that is, the spirit that is the
life and peace of all things, which is reason, is incomprehensible, flesh
cannot comprehend the largeness of it; nay, the Saints themselves, which are
the heavens that live above, cannot contain him, nor find out the heigh,
depth, length, and breadth of that pure spirit; therefore he is said not only
to live above the earthy, and imaginary minded men, but above the heavens
likewise; spiritual men that live in the spirit, and whose flesh is subject to
the spirit, these are not able to reach the incomprehensiblenesse of him. And
so he is said to be above all, to live in the heavens, the Saints, yea, and to
live above the heavens in wisdom and power, yea, and to tread the earth under
his feet, for the wisdom of the earth or flesh is foolishness, not worthy the
name of wisdom, when it stands before the spirit.

The swine ran into the waters and perished there. By waters, are pointed out
to me the wisdom of poisoned flesh, which is branched forth into established
doctrines of the flesh, into forms, customs, and governments of the flesh,
which deceived men conform unto for fear, and shame of others. And so the
doctrine and practices of Rome, being altogether after the flesh, is called the
sea of Rome, and sometimes multitudes of people that are deceived by the flesh,
and follow after the wisdom and lust thereof, are called seas, or great waters,
for these indeed are the waters whereupon the Whore, the disloyal flesh sits,
and makes war against the spirit in them.

Now swinish men, that John calls the inhabitants of the earth, that live in the
flesh, Rev. 16. 3 4, etc.
not in the spirit of the father, they are drowned, and they perish in this
sea, into which they are run, that is, they live in this sea which the flesh
has made, glorying and delighting in that sea, and in those waters, as a fish
does in the material water, his proper element; they are separated from the
life of God, and are dead to him. But it is said, Suffer us to go into the
swine, etc.

The meaning given to me is this, that all the distempers that trouble the
creature, Rev. 12. 9, 10.
man, is hereby declared, that they shall be cast out of mankind (the pure
creation,) into the very body of the serpent, which is King flesh, a swinish
nature, a herd of swine; for all the branches of it are like so many filthy
swine snudling upon the earth, as covetousness snuddles upon the earth, pride
licks the dust of the earth, envy lives in the filth of the earth, hypocrisy
and self-conceit, with the imaginary glory of the flesh, do tumble, and dwell,
and live in the mire of the earth, that is, delight in nothing but the filth of
mankind, like so many swine as they are; they do not delight in God, they are
enmity against him.

And this corrupt power of darkness, and swinish nature shall run into the
sea, and confusion of his own invention, and imagination, and perish together,
while as mankind, by the power of the anointing shall sit down in peace in the
father, the Lord our righteousness.

And where it is said, Christ suffered them to go, it points out this, that
though King flesh rule with power in mankind, yet he is but suffered so to
do for a time by the King of righteousness: and this sufferance is for his
destruction, and man's deliverance from the bondage of the flesh; for the two
men were made quiet by Jesus Christ, while the swine perished in the sea; that
is, the creation, man, and the righteous Law, the spirit, sweetly embraces each
other, while the filthy powers, and wisdom of the flesh do perish in the sea of
his own invention, forms, customs, governments, and imaginary glory.

So that the Devil is not a third power between God and man, but he is the
curse in flesh; and the power of utter darkness is this, when the father
shines forth in man, and lets him see his curse, and so begins to condemn, and
burn up the curse; now the poor creature not knowing the mystery of the
father, dies presently under sorrow, beholding no way of comfort, but misery
on every side; for the spirit of brightness has so beset the power of
darkness within a man, that the poor heart sees there is no possibility of
peace and comfort, till one side be subdued, or a reconciliation be made. By
this means, which is a means, or work of the spirit within, not any outward
means of preaching, etc. the Father kills, and destroys the powers of
disobedient flesh, and at length made the created flesh to submit to him, and
live before him.

And for proof of this, I will appeal to the experience of any of you that have
been sensible of your bondage, through the combat that has been between flesh
and spirit in you, whether you have looked upon your troubles, as inflicted
upon you by the devil, and adverse power between God and you, or have not
rather beheld the anger of God upon you through the bright shining Law of
righteousness in you, shaming, condemning, and tormenting of you for
disobediences sake.

It may be the thought of the Law of God has not been in your mind, but the
sense of anger and wrath has lien upon your spirit; 1 Cor. 15. 56.
and whence comes that wrath, but from the shining of the Law of the spirit
within you? and wherefore through this Law? but because the principles of the
flesh in you seek to advance self above the spirit, or at least to be equal
with him.

And so long as the powers of such aspiring, self-seeking lusts, and sin rules
within you, so long will the power of the Law, in dispensations of wrath and
anger, Col. 1. 12.
in your apprehension, rule in you, and over you; so that this compound
murderer is of a mighty power, and may be well called a power of darkness,
for it holds you under darkness and death, and you live far below both the
comforts and life of God: Heb. 2. 15.
As soon as disobedient flesh appears against the Law of the spirit in you, the
spirit appears presently against the powers of the flesh in you, and so holds
you in fear of death all your life time.

For indeed your disobedient flesh, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
which rules powerfully in all the branches of it, Ephesians. 2. 2.
which you take pleasure in, as in pride, covetousness, uncleanness, envy,
self-conceipt, hypocrisy, in their several measures, till they rise up to a
number of a legion of devils: You think this is your liberty, to have your
filthy wills satisfied herein, and alas, this is your bondage, and it is that
Devil that was a liar from the beginning, that never gave true peace to his
children, though he promised much; he carries you away from God by his strong
delusions, to believe his lies.

And this power of darkeesse in you casts you under a more powerful bondage of
the Law of the spirit within you, yea, in utter darkness, wherein you stick
fast, as in mire and clay, or, as in a deep pit, and cannot get out, it throws
you under wrath, and makes God appear angry, which is the greatest darkness
the poor creature can lie under: What greater darkness can there be, then for
a man never to see nor feel the light, heat, nor warmth of the sun, but always
to live in some dungeon, where the sun never appears.

A meek and humble spirit fights against thy rashness, and self-conceit; and
secret envy, and grudging opposes the appearance of love; covetousness, and
bondage fights against freedom, and liberty of spirit; and chastity fights
against uncleanness; the Law of righteousness fights against unrighteousness
of the flesh.

So that if at any time thy heart begins to devise any unrighteousness within
thy self, the Law of the spirit of truth breaks forth in thee, and lets thee
see it, and condemns, and shames thee for it, and thy whole soul is filled with
distemper and horror; And if at any time the power of unclean flesh begins to
break forth in thee, the Law of chastity appears, and shows thee thy
filthiness, and condemns thee for it, but gives thee no strength for the
present against thy lust, so that the power of thy unclean flesh, lusting
after folly, is strong in thee; and the power of the law of chastity showing
thee that Abomination, is strong in thee likewise, which fills thee with
torment.

And if at any time unrighteous thoughts and purposes rise up in thee, or
unrighteous actions proceed out of thy hands, and thou delight therein; yet
when the law of the spirit of truth appears in thee, and shows thee thy
abominable practice, thy delight in the flesh dies, peace is taken from thee,
and thy spirit is filled with trouble. I could instance in every power of the
flesh in this kind.

And now presently thou concludest, That the devil, which thou think is a
third power, distinct between God and thee, comes and torments thee. But no:
for it is the very power of the spirit, which is pure reason, which governs the
whole globe in righteousness, that shows thee thy wickedness, and the light
thereof discovers thy darkness, and fills thee with shame and torment.

For if the spirit shine upon thy filthiness, and trouble thee, it is not
barely to trouble, but to burn up thy lusts, and to make thee bright, is the
fathers end; but while thou lie between these two powers, thy peace is gone,
all feeling of life is taken away, and thou lie under darkness, yea utter
darkness; for thou see no light of peace of any side.

If thou follow the powers of thy flesh, as thy uncleanness, unrighteousness,
envy, frowardness, pride, hypocrisy, and the like, thou hereby accknowledgest
that the flesh is God, for thou maintainest the being of that wicked man, as
though he were the only one being, that dwells in the globe; but if the father
of all things, which is reason, be the only one being, that gave being to
all, and that keeps all in peace; then certainly, while thou followest the way
of King flesh, 1 Cor. 12. 13.
thou walk unreasonably, for thou set up another King, which makes
division, which the creation knows not, and thou deniest the King of
righteousness, which unites the whole body of the creation into a oneness of
spirit.

That spirit that knits all creatures together in peace and sweet communion of
love and meekness, must needs be King: And this does reason, who is the
essential father: but that power that makes one creature a tyrant over
another; nay, divides the creature man within himself, and so pulls the
creation in pieces, breaking the bonds of peaceable love, and filling the
creature with torment, and distraction, must needs be a devil, or troubler,
and this does that curse, that is in the flesh, and therefore no King, but a
murderer, a deceiver, a devil, the serpent that must be killed, and the
wicked man, that must be taken out of the way.

Now such a condition of bondage does this compound power cast you under; you
are absent from the liberty, peace and life of heaven, and you lie tumbling in
hell and darkness, to be incorporated into the power of the wicked one, and to
act from his unclean principles, is the flesh and blood that shall never enter
heaven; never enjoy union and peace with the spirit of righteousness; for light
and darkness can never live together. This is the bond woman and her son,
that shall never be heir, nor live in the house with the free woman. And
whatsoever is of this nature, or under this bondage, less or more, does not
taste of heaven, which is perfect peace, for that which is bondage cannot be
said to be liberty.

But for your comfort, poor enslaved souls: Christ, the wisdom and power of
the Father is come to open the prison doors, Luke 4. 18.
to pull you up out of the earth of covetousness, Col. 1. 12.
and self imagination, under which you have been, and are buried, and will set
you even as a corn of wheat that lies buried under clods of earth, till the
warm, cherishing, meek, and loving spirit in the earth cause it to sprout,
and spring, and shoot out, and so bring forth fruitlike himself in great
abundance; therefore wait patiently, till you be able to sing Allaluia, and to
say, The Lord God omnipotent reigns, and assure your selves the vision will
not stay long, for when your flesh is made subject to the spirit, he will speak
peace to you, and in you.

Since unrighteousness was acted in human flesh against his maker, every son
and daughter of that disobedient flesh is like a man, upon whom two fierce
band-dogs has laid hold, tearing, and pulling to pieces: And these two are
first, the curse, or sin in flesh, which is called the serpent, the father of
lies, the wicked man, the devil.

The second is the appearance of the righteous law, dwelling in that flesh
likewise; as a seed buried under the weight of that cursed earth; and his
appearance is so terrible to the disobedient flesh, that it destroys at his
appearing all the joy and peace thereof, and is called the severity of the Law.

So that first the curse, or sin, this has fastened upon the man, and pulls him
from owning the spirit, and so makes created flesh to rebel against his maker.

And then the father (which the curse in the flesh has despised) maintains his
own prerogative in man, and destroys, and kills that rebellion, by reason
whereof the creature, man, is filled with Torment.

And this act of the spirit is called the declaration of wrath, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7.
or the Law, or the letter that kills; for indeed the disobedient man sees, and
feels nothing but wrath on every side.

For let the creature look within himself, he sees and feels no peace; for the
appearance of the spirit of righteousness is like the offended Law of a King,
that speaks death to the offender which way soever he turn himself; it flashes
like the flaming sword every way, and so takes peace from that particular earth.

And if he look abroad, the same declaration of wrath follows the eye of the
sinner, and flames out fire in every place, even as the father is pleased
visibly to appear in outward manifestations of justice, to the terrifying of
the disobedient, that he may know himself, and his works, that they have been
unrighteous.

As in losses, sad accidents, death of friends, or cattle, casualties by fire,
water, unseasonable weather, or the like, and so taking an outvvard peace from
the earth, that is, from diverse branches of disobedient earth, men and women,
making them to sit down in sorrow.

And poor sinners, when they feel, and see such inward and outward misery, they
cry out, Oh, this is the devil that troubles them! And so look upon the Devil
as a third powerful being, distinct between God and them, working their
misery.

Alas poor sinners, this is the devil indeed, a great troubler, Genesis 3. 24.
but not such a devil as you fancy; for this Devil, or murderer, that takes
away your peace is within you, it is your sin, and the curse of your flesh,
upon which, the fury of the King of righteousness has seized, and taken fast
hold; and now expect no peace in earth, that is, in your flesh, till there be
peace in heaven, that is, till your flesh be made subject to the spirit, and
the Father and you become one.

For truly let me tell you, and you shall find it true, That as the curse, or
disobedient flesh in you does rise up in rebellion against the spirit, by
scoffing, hating, self-loving, despising, expression of bitterness and
discontent against the way of the spirit, and so seeking to advance your
selves, or your fleshy lusting above the spirit.

Even so the Law of the spirit will appear, and the flashings of this flaming
sword will spread the more, to advance the spirit, even the King of glory, and
so will hedge in your way, and cross you at every turning: And truly, if you
see the fury of the Lord to appear more hot and fierce then formerly, then say,
and say truly, That the breakings out of sin and curse is more violent in these
days then formerly: And it must be so.

For now the bottomless pit is opened, that is, The curse, or serpent in
humane flesh is let loose, to act, and show it self in his own likeness, and
it makes himself manifest to be the power of darkness, the father of lies, the
enemies of the Father, and the Whore, the Beast, and mother of all abominations.

And the four evil Angels, that is, Subtilty, Hypocrisy, Envy, and Cruelty,
backed and strengthened with all the power of Hell, or Curse, are let loose,
that is, the strength of these are manifest, and act powerfully in these days;
and assure your selves that the dispensations of wrath do, and must increase to
the view of creatures more then formerly.

But these sad apparisions of inward and outward wrath will not last long, the
time shortens apace, and the work of the Father hastens apace; for
righteousness and peace has begun to take the Kingdom, and to reign, whose
dominion shall have no end.

When your eyes are opened, you shall see that it is the righteous Law, or rule
of truth that thwarts, and crosses the sinful and cursed principles that rule,
and that still would rule a King in your flesh.

And this Law works sometimes within, condemning a man within his own
conscience, without any outward means, but the light of the spirit within rises
up, and declares the darkness of the curse within the flesh; and sometimes it
condemns the man within himself through the sight or hearing of other men's
words and actions without, nay, the very actions of other creatures are made to
be whips to torment him.

Sometimes thou have had vain glorious imaginations rising up within thee,
puffing up thy mind with big thoughts of thy self, as if thou were some great
body for thy learning, riches, parts, prayers, fasting, preachings, to whom
every man must give respect.

Thou have thoughts of covetousness, of injustice, of uncleanesse, and
think thou may take thy pleasure herein, and if any discover thy
lewdness in these abominations, which thou see no evil in persently thou
have thoughts of revenge arises in thee, to make such and such know what they
do to cross thee in that thou say and do.

And thereupon pursues thy resolution to get a power, to put thy envious
thoughts (which thou think is zeal) into execution, but thou do not do it,
and why? because the opportunities of the earth will not give thee power: Well,
all this is the swelling up of the curse within thee, which thou think is
the spirit of holiness; a strong delusion.

But within a short time after, thy conscience (or rather the spirit) within,
begins to trouble thee, and fills thy face with shame, and thy heart with a king
distemper; because thou that art a professor of a meek and loving spirit, which
is true godliness, should have such exalting thoughts in thee against thy
fellow creature, and consent unto them.

Or it may be some others may cast out jeers against thy very thoughts, yet not
knowing thy heart, and thereby thy distempers multiply, and peace vanishes
from thy proud lifted up heart; and now thou concludest, that this is the
devil that first put ill thoughts into thee, and now troubles thee for them.

It is true, it is the devil indeed, but not such a devil as thou think
of; for first, the father of lies, thy unclean flesh, that was he that enticed
thee to envy; and now the righteous Law of the spirit within thee, shows thee
thy evil, and shames, and troubles thy mind, and throws thee under vexation
and sorrow of spirit, and kills all thy comforts, and dashes all thy
contentedness to pieces.

And no man knows of these inward sorrows, but thy own heart; this is the law
and the testimony, even the perfect rule of holiness that appears in thee, and
to thee, and hedges in the way of the flesh with thorns, and throws thee under
bondage; this is the murderer which thou call the devil; he is a murderer
indeed of the curse, though thou, who art dead under the curse, may be made
alive in the spirit, and live in the father of peace.

And sometimes the Law works without, and opens the mouths of others, to speak
against thy self-conceit, in preaching, praying, or carnal use of scriptures,
and against thy covetousness, and pride, that makes thee lift up thy self above
thy fellow creatures; and thou think this is the devil that tempts thee to
forsake God and goodness.

Alas friend, it is the righteous law that crosses thy fleshie hypocrisy, and
that sends these messengers as dispensers of wrath to thee, to make thee not to
look after the letter, but the spirit of the scriptures, to burn up thy
dross, to consume the curse out of thee, to refine thee, and make thee pure
gold; that is, to make thee live in, and after the spirit; and to pull thee out
of the flesh; In which, and after which thou live.

By what has been spoken. I question not but the father will let light shine
into the spirits of his servants, that they may see what the devil or
murderer is; which is the serpent, sin, or curse, dwelling within a man, or
the power of deceived flesh imbittered, and made a stinging Scorpion by the law
of righteousnesss. The sting of sin is death, ^ Cor. 15.
and the strength of sin is the Law.

Now there is none that can free the creature from this compound murderer, or
from these two band-dogs, Jer. 23. 5.
but (Jesus Christ) who is not a single man at a distance from you; Ioh. 8. 36.
but who is the wisdom and power of the father, who spirits the whole
creation, dwelling and ruling King of righteousness in your very flesh. And he
it is that comes and pulls off these fierce devouring powers, and heals the
creature that they were fastened upon, and sets him free.

And how does he do that? Why, first he destroys the curse that is in man,
and pulls away that selfishness that was in him, which made him to prefer the
flesh above the spirit, and so delivers the sinner from his envy,
covetousness, discontent, pride, hypocrisy; and makes him patient, humble,
content under Gods hand; makes him to love, to delight, and to glory only in
God, and so makes the creature to advance God above all, and to set the crown
of glory upon his head. And now that devouring band-dog sin, or curse, is
pulled off.

And then secondly, when sin or serpent is thus pulled off, and the creature
man is made one with the father, 1 Cor. 15. 56.
and reconciled in nature and spirit to him; then the other band-dog wrath, or
offended law, which was the strength of sin, in working the creatures misery,
has nothing left to fasten upon; But being a righteous law, now becomes the
creatures friend, since the creature by Christ is made one with the righteous
father; and thus Christ, who is the wisdom and power of God, has set the
sinner free; And if the son make us free, we are free indeed.

But what is to be understood by this power of God? Why, truly I conceive this;
by the power of God, is not a power without us only, as it was in the man
Christ Jesus, when he suffered death in his own single person, and thereby
conquered hell and death, and overcame the devil, and cast the accuser out of
heaven; that is, out of flesh, that the father might dwell bodily in flesh, and
tread the curse under man's feet.

But the same Anointing, 1 Ioh. 2. 20. etc.
or power in-dwelling, and ruling whithin us, and thus the power of love in
man, is the power of God in man; and this sets us free from envy; the power of
patience, and of a meek spirit in man, is the power of God in man, and sets us
free from discontent; the power of humility in us, is the power of God in us,
and sets us free from pride; the power of peace, joy, and sweet resting of
heart in God, is the power of God in us, which sets us free from sorrows, and
inward bondage of mind.

And thus the power, life, and peace of the father, Ier. 23. 5, 6.
ruling as God, a mighty governor in us, and being established in us, which
indeed is the Anointing spoken of, or the Lord our righteousness, Isaiah 60.
10, 11, etc.
that rules in us, is that power of God (or that Christ) that sets us free from
sin, and death; for this is Christ in you, which is the hope of glory, or the
earnest of the future inheritance.

And truly these, Col. 1. 27.
and such like powers of God within a man, are those Glorious Angels, in their
several measures, which the Father has sent to guard his children, and to
keep them in all their ways, that they dash not their foot against the rock,
even God himself.

For Love, Humility, Patience, Meekness, Joy, and a sweet resting of heart in
GOD, makes the creature submit cheerfully to God in every condition. Let a Son
of the Father meet with Losses, Straights, and Oppressious in the world, and
his heart presently answers, Thy will be done Father, thou know I want
necessaries, thou know what those necessaries for me are, my heart waits
upon thee, let times be peace or war, let weather be fair or fowl, still the
poor believing soul says, All this is good, because it is the will and
pleasure of my Father, who will have it to be thus.

And thus the power of the Spirit, who is the King of righteousness within
every man, treads down flesh, and sets the creature free from Hell, Death, and
Devil.

And the wisdom of the Father is in all this likewise, for he does this in
wisdom, to make himself known, and that his creature being delivered by such a
strong hand, may, out of a feeling experience, own him, and magnify his name.

Well, if you cast your eyes abroad among the sons and daughters of men, you
shall see very few that are saved, and very few in whom Christ dwells; And now
the son of man comes to save, he finds no faith in earth, he finds
righteousness ruling in no man, but King flesh ruling in every one.

But this is comfort to the earth, The son of righteousness is coming, and
has begun to heal the earth, he is treading down the powers of the flesh, and
he goes on mightily, conquering, and taking up sons and daughters out of their
imaginary earth, under which they have lien buried, to enjoy the Father, and to
live in the oneness of that spirit that made all things, so that ere long, the
sweet song that is sung in private, shall be sung publicly upon the house
tops: Rejoice, for the Lord God omnipotent raigns.

Yea, when this mighty power, Christ, is lifted up, he will draw all men after
him, that is, when he is exalted, and known to be the only spirit that dwells in
the creation, and that knits every creature into the one spirit, himself, then
is the time (which indeed is beginning in these days) that he will draw all
men after him.

So that every one shall see themselves in a loss, and shall enquire the way
to Sion, even to this spirit, the dwelling place of rest; they shall see that
books are nothing, men's words and teachings, studies, and imaginary thoughts
and conjectures are nothing, but the Lord alone, even this spirit, is all in
all, and shall be exalted, honored, and lifted up by all in this day of his
power.

And how is the spirit lifted up? Why truly, when the flesh is subject to the
spirit. And how is that? Why thus, First, to know that this spirit which is
called God, or Father, or Lord, is Reason: for though men esteem this word
Reason to be too mean a name to set forth the Father by, yet it is the highest
name that can be given him.

For it is Reason that made all things, and it is Reason that governs the whole
Creation, and if flesh were but subject thereunto, that is, to the spirit of
Reason within himself, it would never act unrighteousness; for if rash,
froward, and mad anger rise up in a man, and makes him walk according to the
hasty violence of that Devil, now he is said truly to be an unreasonable man,
or a man that is not subject to Reason. But if Reason be King in a man, then he
moderates the man both within and without, so that he may be truly said to be a
reasonable man, or a man subject to reason, and so a profitable man amongst his
fellow creatures.

For let reason rule the man, and he dares not trespass against his fellow
creature, but will do as he would be done unto: For Reason tells him, is thy
neighbor hungry, and naked to day, Mat. 25. 35.
do thou feed him, and cloth him, it may be thy case to morrow, and then he
will be ready to help thee.

When the Curse in flesh moves a man to oppress or deceive his neighbor, or
to take away his rights, and liberties, to beat, or abuse him in any kind,
reason moderates this wicked flesh, and speaks within, Would thou be dealt
so by thy self? Would thou have another to come and take away thy Goods, thy
Liberties, thy Life? No, said the flesh, that I would not: Then says Reason,
Do as thou would be done unto; and hereby the envious, and covetous, and
proud flesh is killed, and the man is made very Moderate. And this spirit of
Reason is not without a man, 1 Ioh. 2. 27.
but within every man, he needs not run after others, to tell him, or teach
him, for this spirit is his maker, he dwells in him, and if the flesh were
subject to him, he should find daily teaching thereform, though he were alone,
and saw the face of no man.

And truly let me tell you, That you cannot say the spirit is your God, till
you feel, and see by experience that the spirit does govern your flesh; for if
Envy be your Lord that rules your flesh, if Pride and Covetousness rule your
flesh, then is Envy, Covetousness, or Pride your God: If you fear men so
greatly, that you dare not do righteously for fear of angering men, then
slavish fear is your God: If rash anger govern your flesh, then is anger your
God: If Uncleanness rule in you, that is your God: Therefore deceive not your
selves, but let reason work within you, and examine, and see what your flesh is
subject to; for whatsoever does govern in you, that is your God: If the curse
in the flesh govern you, Romans 6. 16.
then the devil is your God, and you are servants to him, for the curse is the
devil: But if your flesh be subject to the spirit within it, which is Reason,
and which made the flesh, then is the Father your God, and you may lawfully
call him your God, for you know now what you speak, and that your words are
words of experience; but if you act contrary to reason, you act like a beast,
and not like a man, according to his creation; for by his creation he is made
Lord of all creatures, and therefore the spirit dwells supreamly in him; but
when he follows the way of the flesh, then he acts like a beast, below the
creation of a man, and so has lost the honor of his creation.

CHAP. VI.
THere be three Scriptures that were brought to me, and the light that shined
forth, gave much strength to my soul. I shall only mention them, and then
conclude.

The first is Rev. 9. 4 And it was commanded them, Rev. 9. 4.
that they should not hurt the green grass of the earth, neither any green
thing, neither any tree, but only those men that have not the seal of God upon
their foreheads; and these were not to be killed neither, but that they should
be tormented five months by those Locusts that came out of the smoke that rise
up out of the bottomless pit, that was now opened, or made manifest what it
is. By green grass, and trees that were not to be hurt, were showed to me to
be the tender sons and daughters that Christ has newly called out of the
earth, to grow up toward him: And likewise the tender plants of divine life,
that Christ had planted in that tender earth.

As love branching out into hungering and thirsting after righteousness; and
this tender green grass, nor the earth whereupon is grows, is not hurt; for in
the midest of any trouble whatsoever, the breathings of love after the father,
in hungering and thirsting after him, is still kept alive in the tender soul.

And why must not these be hurt? Why? because these have the seal of the spirit
upon them, as tender plants, as such as are dear unto him.

I, but pride, envy, covetousness, hypocrisy, and the earth upon which these,
and such like weeds grow, are to be tormented; and why? because they have not
the seal of the spirit upon their foreheads, and they are to be tormented five
months, before such time as these weeds be burned up, and that poisoned earth
become fruitful for good seed.

I, but these are called men, not sinful qualities that are to be tormented;
it is true, but a man is called according to his quality and manners; take a
proud, covetous, or envious man, and cross any of these wicked qualities, and
you torment the man.

For when envy reigns in a man, if it be crossed, the whole man is crossed; and if
pride, or self will reign in a man, and be crossed, the man is tormented; so
that the quality declares the man; and the man is declared what he is by his
quality.

And therefore in the second Scripture, Rev. 20. 15. It is said,

Whosoever was not written in the Lambs book of life, Rev. 20. 15.
was cast into the lake of fire.

By Lambs book of life, is showed to me to be his very divine nature and
spirit, wherein Love, Humility, Patience, Peace, and such like are written, and
these shall enter into life, and the men in whom this Spirit rules shall enter
into heaven, and live in the Father.

For these fruits of the Spirit prove a man to be a son of light, and every son
of light is known by these qualities that was engraven in the Lambs Nature, or
Spirit.

But whatsoever was not written in the Lambs book, as Envy, Pride,
Covetousness, Self-will, and the like, these shall be cast into the lake of
fire, the spirit of burning, to be consumed, and the men in whom these cursed
powers rule, shall be tormented, while that dross is in burning up, and vexed
day and night, and are restless, and cannot be quiet, but fretts, and are
troubled continually.

Therefore whatsoever is not written in the Lambs nature, shall never live in
rest in the father; but envy, pride, 1 Pet. 2. 22, etc.
covetousness, self-will, and the like, were not written in the Lambs book,
or Spirit, for he was full of love, and patience, etc. Therefore those shall
never live in the father, and never sit down in rest in the spirit; but the
spirit will still be burning them, as chafe in the fire, till they be consumed

Another thing observe, that whatsoever did appear to dwell in the Lamb, is,
nor shall never be tormented, as love, patience, humility, contentedness,
these are never tormented, 1 Cor. 13. 7.
though I have thought many times, that love, being crossed grows angry. But I
see by experience it is improper, for love cannot be angry, it bears all
things.

And as we see in our Lord Christ, in whom love, patience, humility,
contentedness, did dwell and rule; he was never tormented, nor troubled with
any fretting or disquiet fit. For truly I speak what I have and do find, it
is only the flesh and serpent that is troubled and tormented, and the more a
man is vexed and fretted, the more strength of flesh dwells and rules in him.
But when the spirit of the Lamb is sent into the heart, he swallows up that
froward power of the flesh, and saves the man from distemper, as I said before.

The third scripture I shall mention, is that old pusling scripture, that has
tormented many a soul, which is this.

Mat. 12. 31. He that sins against the holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven in
this world, nor in the world to come. By sin here, is showed to me, to be the
serpent, or the curse in the flesh; branching himself forth into pride,
covetousness, envy, uncleanness, self-will, hypocrisy, and all such like;
and this serpent dwells in the flesh of every son and daughter of Adam, since
the fall: except the man Christ Jesus; for though this serpent tempted him, and
strived to rule in him, as he overcame and ruled in the first Adam, Heb. 2. 14.
yet Christ trod him under foot, and cast him out of heaven: that is, out of
humane flesh, that part of the creation, Rev. 12. 10.
in whom the father dwelt bodily.

And by holy Ghost here, it is showed to me, to be the Anointing, or the Spirit
ruling in flesh, 1 Ioh. 4. 2, 3.
either in the flesh of Christ, or in the flesh of his Saints.

Now the serpent or curse, which is called the power of darkness; this is the
sin against the holy Ghost; for the father made the humane flesh to be his
house to dwell in; Luke 11. 22.
And this serpent took possession, and fights against the spirit, and will not
suffer him to appear in flesh at all.

Therefore says the father, this sin or curse shall never be pardoned; that
is, the father will never reconcile that wicked one to him; Genesis 3 15.
the father and the serpent will never become one, but will always be
fighting, till the serpents head be bruised; for this is that wicked one that
the father is angry with ever; he is not simply angry with his creature, but
with this sin or curse in the creature, with which the creature has made a
covenant, and become one with it, and so fights against his maker.

I, but the father will bruise this head of Rebellion, and consume this sin
in the fire, that so be may reconcile his creature to himself; but I say the
sin or curse shall never be reconciled; the father will ever be a consuming
fire to that, and will be ever taking peace from that earth that gives this
wicked one entertainment.

For the spirit will be still bruising the head of this sin, till he has
destroyed it, and redeemed his creature from the power and bondage of it; and
it is true, every man is guilty of this sin against the spirit; and though
the father will never make this sin one with himself, yet he will make his
creature man, one with him, when this curse is swallowed up of life.

And why will he not pardon this sin? because it was not written in the Lambs
book, or nature, but is that power of darkness that makes war against the
Lamb, and will not have the spirit to dwell in flesh, but would cast him out.
Therefore the spirit will cast him out, though he were a stronger power then he
is. And so for this time I will conclude.

FINIS.

