To all whom it may concern.
When Herennius was discarded by Augustus, out of his Army, for his gross
misdemeanors and dissolute and debaucht carriage: begging still Augustus's
favor to stay, if it might be, he used this deprecation: with what face shall
I return home? what shall I say to my father? Augustus answered, Tell thy
father, that I could not pleas thee.

WHereas Mr Shepherd (late Usher of Merchant-Taylors School) has caused a
scurrilous paper to be printed and scattered abroad, whereby he would
insinuate to the world, that he (with his companion) had suffered much wrong,
as domineered over, and insufferably abused both by words and actions of Mr D.
and Mr C. These are therefore to undeceiv those that desire not to be wilfully
abused by giving them to understand, that Mr Shepherd complaine's of the
wrong, when it is apparent to all that have heard both parties, that he is the
man that has only been abusive, and don the wrong: And this was manifestly
proved before the Company, before Mr Cranford, and others. Two things were
objected against him, and clearly proved, for which he was judged not a fit
man to have youth under his tuition.

I. His exorbitancie, in point of manners: viz. Excessive following the pot,
haunting Taverns and Alehouses; and that in School-time. II. His
insufficiency, in point of learning: Which appears in two instances under his
own hand
1. This, Prima Class is reddenda est rationem: Where, in five words, are no
less then two solecisins or falls latins: And this was written by his own hand,
upon deliberate thoughts; and publicly, beyond the bounds of modesty or
shame, defended by him against Mr Cranford, at a public examination of the
School, before the Company, without the least color of reason, or rule of
Grammar.

2. In a task given to the lower form against Easter last; where, in nine and
twenty lines, the very School-boyes observed forty faults: One whereof was,
that he gave them to form for a Verb Active, cono, conas, conat, etc. And for
a Verb Passive, conor, conaris, etc. -- But the whole, if any desire, may be
seen under his own hand.

3. In this sentence, facile est inventis addere, he taught his boys that
facile was an Adverb; and that before the Examiners of the School, at a public
examination.

4. Before Mr Cranford and others he refused to give an account of this verse
in Virgil. -- Nulla salus bello; pacem, te poscimus omnes.


Now how fit such a man may be either to govern children, in point of manners;
or to teach them, in point of learning (notwithstanding all his
mountebanck-like quacking, and falls suggestions) a slender judgment may easily
determine.

Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur. Nec mendacii utilitas est diuturna, nec
veritatis damnum diu nocet. RICHARDUS GUILIELMI.


