Mr. Cottons LETTER Lately Printed, EXAMINED AND ANSVVERED:

By Roger Williams of Providence In NEW ENGLAND.

LONDON, Imprinted in the year 1644.

To the Impartial READER.
THis Letter I acknowledge to have received from Mr. Cotton (whom for his
personal excellencies I truly honor and love.) Yet at such a time of my
distressed wanderings amongst the Barbarians, that being destitute of food, of
cloths, of time I reserved it (though hardly, amidst so many barbarous
distractions) and afterward prepared an Answer to be returned.

In the Interim, Mr Cottons reluctance in himself concerning the way of
persecution.
some Friends being much grieved, that one, publicly acknowledged to be godly
and dearly beloved, should yet be so exposed to the mercy of an howling
Wilderness in Frost and Snow, etc. M^. Cotton to take off the edg of Censure
from himself professed both in speech and writing, that He was no procurer of my
sorrows.

Some Letters then past between us, in which I proved and expressed, that if I
had perished in that sorrowful Winters flight; An unmercifull speech from a
merciful man.
only the blood of Jesus Christ could have washed him from the guilt of mine.

His final Answer was, had you perished, your blood had been on your own
head; it was your sin to procure it, and your sorrow to suffer it.

Here I confess I stopped, and ever since suppressed mine Answer; waiting if it
might please the Father of mercies, more to mollify and soften, and render
more humane and merciful, the ear and heart of that (otherwise) excellent and
worthy man.

It cannot now, be justly offensive, Gods wisdom in the season of publishing
this letter
that finding this Letter public (by whose procurement I know not) I also
present to the same public view, my formerly intended Answer.

I rejoice in the goodness and wisdom of him, who is the Father of lights and
mercies, Times of inquiry after Christ
in ordering the season both of mine own present opportunity of Answer: As
also, and especially of such Protestations and Resolutions of so many fearing
God, to seek what Worship and Worshippers are acceptable to him in Jesus
Christ.

Mire own ears were glad and late Witnesses of an heavenly Speech of one of
the most eminent of that high Assembly of Parliament; A golden speech of a
Parliament man.
viz. why should the Labors of any be suppressed if sober, though never so
different? We now profess to scek God, we desire to see light, etc.

I know there is a time when God will not be found, Times when seeking of God
comes t^o late.
though men seek him early Prove. 1.

There is a time when Prayer and Fasting comes too late, Jer. 14.

There is a seeking of the God of Israel with a stumbling block, according to
which God gives his Israel an answer, Ezekiel. 13.

Lastly, there is a Proud refusal of the mind of God, returned in Answer by
the Prophet Jer. 42.

Love bids me hope for bettes things: Gods promise assures us, that his people
returning from Captivity, Whole hearted seekers the only seekers of Christ
Jesus.
shall seek him and pray and find him, when they seek him with their whole
heart, Jer. 27. And Gods Angel comforts those against all fears, that seek
Jesus that was Crucified, Mark 16.

Thy soul so prosper (who ever thou art) Worthy Reader, as with thy whole
heart thou seek that true Lord Jesus, who is holiness it self, and
requires a Spiritual and holy Bride like to himself, the pure and spotless
Lamb. Christ Jesus whom he saves he teaches,
He alone as he is able to save thee to the utmost from thy sins and sorrows
by his Blood. So has he brought his Fathers Council, from his Bosom, and
every soul is bound (on pain of eternal Pains) to attend alone his Laws
and Ordinances, Commands and Statutes, Heb. 7. Acts 3.

That Lord Jesus, The true Lord Jesus studied hnmility and self-denial.
who purposely chose to descend of mean and inferior Parents, a Carpenter,
etc.

Who disdained not to enter this World in a Stable, amongst Beasts, as unworthy
the society of Men: Who past through this World with the esteem of a Mad man,
a Deceiver, a Conjurer, a Traitor against Caesar, and destitute of an house
wherein to rest his head: Who mad choice of his first and greatest Ambassadors
out of Fishermen Tentmakers, etc. and at last chose to depart on the stage of
a pianfull shameful Gibbet.

If him thou seek in these searching times, make him alone thy white and
souls beloved, Seekers of Christ are sure of a gracious answer, 2 Thessalonians: 1.
willing to follow and be like him in doing, in suffering: although thou find'st
him not in the restoration of his Ordinances, according to his first Pattern.

Yet shall thou see him, reign with him, eternally admire him, and enjoy him,
when he shortly comes in flaming fire to burn up millions of ignorant and
disobedient.

Your most Unworthy Countryman Roger Williams.

Mr. Cottons Letter Examined and Answered.
CHAP. I.
Mr. Cotton.

BELOVED In Christ.

Answer. Though I humbly desire to acknowledge my self unworthy to be beloved
and most of all unworthy of the name of Christ, A monstrous Paradox, that Gods
children should persecute Gods children, and that they that hope to live
eternally together with Christ Jesus in the heavens should not suffer each
other to live in this common air together, etc. I am informed it was the
Speech of an honorable Knight of the Parliament: What, Christ persecute Christ
in New England?
and to be beloved for his sake: yet since Mr. Cotton is pleased to use such an
affectionate compellation and testimonial expression, to one so afflicted and
persecuted by Himself and others (whom for their personal worth and
godliness I also honor and love.) I desire it may be seriously reviewed by
Himself and Them, and all men, whether the Lord Jesus be well pleased that
one, beloved in him, should (for no other cause, then shall presently appear)
be denied the common air to breath in, and a civil cohabitation upon the same
common earth; yea and also without mercy and humane compassion be exposed to
winter miseries in a howling Wilderness?

And I ask further, Mr. Cotton expecting more Light; must (according to his
way of persecution) persecute Christ Jesus if he bring it.
Whether (since Mr. Cotton elsewhere professes to expect far greater light
then yet shines) upon the same grounds and practice, if Christ Jesus in any of
his Servants shall be pleased to hold forth a further light, Christ Jesus
himself shall find the Mercy and Humanity of a civil and temporal life and
being with them?

Mr. Cotton. Though I have little hope (when I consider the uncircumcision of
mine own lips) that you will hearken to my voice, who have not hearkened to the
body of the whole Church of Christ with you, and the testimony and judgment of
so many Elders and Brethren of other Churches! Yet I trust my labor will be
accepted of the Lord, and who can tell but that he may bless it to you also,
if (by his help) I endeavor to show you the sandines of those grounds, out of
which you have banished your self from the fellowship of all the Churches in
these Countries.

Answ. First I acknowledge it an holy Character of an heavenly Spirit,
Will Worship varnished over with the glittering show of Humility.
to make ingenuous true acknowledgement of an uncircumcised lip: yet that
discerning Spirit, which God graciously vouchsafes to them that tremble at his
word, shall not only find that not only the will worships of men may be painted
and varnished over with the glittering show of humility, Spiritual pri^e may
swell, out of the sense of a man's Humility.
Coloss. 2. but also Gods dearest servants (eminent for humility and meeknes)
may yet be troubled with a swelling of spiritual pride out of the very sense
of their humility: It pleased God to give Paul himself preventing physic
against this distemper, in the midst of Gods gracious revelation to him.
Humility most unseasonable in setting up will worship, or persecuting others.
And what an humble argument does David use, when himself advised by Nathan,
went about an evil work out of an holy intention, to wit, a work of will
worship, in building the Temple unbidden? Behold I dwell in an house of cedars,
but the Ark of God in a tent, 2 Samuel 7. Humility is never in season to set up
superstition, or to persecute Gods children.

CHAP. II.
Secondly I observe his charge against me, for not harkening to a twofold voice
of Christ: first of the whole Church of Christ with me.

Unto which I answer, according to my conscience and persuasion. I was then
charged by Office with the feeding of that flock: and when in the apprehension
of some public evils, Public sins the cause of public Calamities, must be
faithfully discovered by spiritual watchmen.
the whole Country professed to humble it self and seek God, I endeavored (as
a faithful Watchman on the walls to sound the Trumpet and give the Alarm: and
upon a Fast day, in faithfullnes and uprightness (as then and still I am
persuaded) I discovered 11 public sins, for which I believed (and do) it
pleased God to inflict, and further to threaten public calamities. Most of
which (...) (if not all) that Church then seemed to assent unto: until
afterward in my troubles the greater part of that Church, was swayed and bowed
(whether for fear of persecution or otherwise) to say and practice what to my
knowledge, with signs and groans many of them mourned under.

I know the Church of Colosse must say to Archippus, Coloss* 4.
Take heed to thy Ministry, Faithfullnes to God and Man (though for present
Censured) will give rejoicing in day of Death and judgment
etc, which he may negligently and proudly refuse to hearken to: But let my
case be considered, and the word of the Lord examined, and the difference of my
case will shine forth, and my faithfullnes and uprightnes to God and the souls
of that people will witness for me, when my soul comes to Hezechiahs case on
his death bed, and in that great day approaching.

For my not harkening to the second voice, the testimony of so many Elders and
Brethren of other Churches (because I truly esteem and honor the persons of
which the New-English Churches are constituted.) The Popish argument from
Multitudes.
I will not answer the argument of numbers and multitudes against One, as we
use to answer the Popish universalitie, that God sometimes stirs up one Elijah
against 800. of Baals Priests, one Micaiah against 400. of Ahabs Prophets; one
Athanasius against many hundredth of Arrian Bishops; one John Hus against the
whole Council of Constance; Luther and the 2 Witnesses against many thousands
etc. David and the Princes and 30 thousand of Israel, a type of Gods best
servants reforming, yet not after the due Order.
Yet this I may truly say, that David himself and the Princes of Israel and 30
thousand Israel, carrying up the Arc, were not to be hearkened to nor followed
in their (as I may say) holy rejoycings and Triumphings, the due Order of the
Lord, yet being wanting to their holy intentions and affections, and the Lord
at last sending in a sad stop and breach of Vzzah, amongst them ( Perez Vzzah)
as he has ever yet done, and will do in all the Reformations that have been
hitherto made by his David's, which are not after the due Order. To which
purpose, it is maintained by the Papists themselves, An excellent confession of
^he Papists concerning Scripture.
and by their Councels that Scripture only must be heard: yea one Scripture in
the mouth of one simple Mechannick before the whole Council. By that only do I
desire to stand or fall in trial or judgment: For all flesh is grass, and
the beauty of flesh, (the most wisest, holiest, learned) is but the flower
or beauty of grass, only the word of Jehovah stands fast for ever.

CHAP. III.
Thirdly Mr. Cotton endeavors to discover the sandines of those grounds out
of which (as he says) I have banished my self* etc.

I answer, I question not his holy and loving intentions and affections, Good
intentions and affections in Gods people, accept with God, when their
indevours perish and burn like stubble, etc.
and that my grounds seem sandy to himself and others. Those intentions and
affections may be accepted (as his person) with the Lord, as David of his
desires to build the Lord a Temple, though on sandy grounds. Yet Mr. Cottons
endeavors to prove the firm rock of the truth of Jesus to be the weak and
uncertain sand of man's invention those shall perish and burn like hay or
stubble. The rockie strength of those grounds shall more appear in the Lords
season, and himself may yet confess so much, as since he came into New England
he has confessed the sandines of the grounds of many of his practices in which
he walked in Old England, Many grounds seemed sandy to Mr. Cotton in Old
England, which now he confesses to be rockie.
and the rockinesse of their grounds that witnessed against them and himself,
in those practices, though for that time their grounds seemed sandy to him.

When my self heretofore (through the mercy of the most high discovered to
himself and othereminent servants of God, my grounds against their using of the
Common Prayer; my grounds seemed sandy to them* which since in New England Mr.
Cotton has acknowledged rockie, Mr. Cotton formerly persuaded to practice
Common Prayer: but since has writt'n against it.
and has seen cause so to publish to the world in his Discourse to Mr. Ball,
against set Forms of Prayer.

But because the Reader may ask both Mr. Cotton and me, what were the grounds
of such a sentence of Banishment against me, which are here called sandy, I
shall relate in brief what those grounds were, some whereof he is pleased to
discuss in this Letter, and others of them not to mention.

After my public trial and answers at the general Court, one of the most
eminent Magistrates (whose name and speech may by others be remembered) stood up
and spoke:

Mr. Williams (said he) holds forth these 4. particulars; The 4 particular
Grounds of my Sentence of Banishment.


First, That we have not our Land by Pattent from the King, but that the
Natives are the true owners of it, and that we ought to repent of such a
receiving it by Pattent.

Secondly, That it is not lawful to call a wicked person to Swear, to Pray,
as being actions of Gods Worship.

Thirdly, That it is not lawful to hear any of the Ministers of the Parish
Assemblies in England.

Fourthly, That the Civil Magistrates power extends only to the Bodies and
Goods, and outward state of men, etc.

I acknowledge the particulars were rightly summed up, and I also hope, that,
as I then maintained the Rockie strength of them to my own and other
consciences satisfaction, so (through the Lords assistance) I shall be ready
for the same grounds, not only to be bound and banished, but to die also, in
New England, as for most holy Truths of God in Christ Jesus.

Yea but (says he) upon those grounds you banished your self from the
society of the Churches in these countries.

I answer, if Mr. Cotton mean my own voluntary withdrawing from those Churches
resolved to continue in those evils, and persecuting the witnesses of the Lord
prefenting light unto them, Christ Jesus speaks and suffers in his
witnesses.
I confess it was mine own voluntary act; yea, I hope the act of the Lord
Jesus sounding forth in me (a poor despised Rams horn) the blast which shall
in his own holy season cast down the strength and confidence of those
inventions of men in the worshipping of the true and living God. And lastly,
his act in inabling me to be faithful in any measure to suffer such great and
mighty trials for his names sake. But if by banishing my self he intend the
act of civil banishment from their common earth and air, The Dragons language
in a Lambs lip.
I then observe with grief the language of the Dragon in a lambs lip. Among
other expressions of the Dragon are not these common to the witnesses of the
Lord Jesus re^t and torn by his persecutions? Gods children persecuted are
charged by their enemies to be the authors of their own persecution.
Go now, say you are persecuted, you are persecuted for Christ suffer for your
conscience: No, it is your schism, heresy, obstinacy, the Divill has
deceived thee, thou have justly brought this upon thee, thou have banished thy
self, etc. Instances are abundant in so many books of Martyrs, and the
experience of all men, and therefore I spare to recite in so short a treatise.

Secondly, if he mean this civil act of banishing, why should he call a civil
sentence from the civil State, within a few weeks execution in so sharp a time
of New Englands cold. A National Church the silent Common weal, or or world,
silently confessed by Mr. Cotton to be all one.
Why should he call this a banishment from the Churches, except he silently
confess, that the frame or constitution of their Churches is but implicitly
National (which yet they profess against) for otherwise why was I not yet
permitted to live in the world, or Commonweal, except for this reason, that
the Common weal and Church is yet but one, and he that is banished from the
one, must necessarily be banished from the other also.

CHAP. IV.
Mr. Cotton. Let not any prejudice against my person, I beseech you, forestall
either your affection or judgment, as if I had hasted forward the sentence of
your civil banishment; for what was done by the Magistrates in that kind, was
neither done by my counsel nor consent.

Answ. Although I desire to hear the voice of God from a stranger, Persecuters
of men's bodies seldom or never do th^se men's souls good.
an equal, an inferior, yea an enemy; yet I observe how this excellent man
cannot but confess how hard it is for any man to do good to speak effectually
to the soul or conscience of any whose body he afflicts and persecutes, and
that only for their soul and conscience sake. An excellent observation of a
worthy Parliament man.
Hence excellent was the observation of a worthy Gentleman in the Parliament
against the Bishops, viz. That the Bishops were far from the practice of the
Lord Jesus, who together with his word preached to the souls of men, showed
their bodies so much mercy and loving kindness: whereas the Bishops on the
contrary persecute, etc.

Now to the ground from whence my prejudice might arise, he professes my
banishment proceeded not with his counsel or consent. Gods children are not so
free in persecuting Gods children, as persecutors, whose professed nature and
trade it is.
I answer, I doubt not but that what Mr. Cotton and others did in procuring my
sorrows, was not without some regret and reluctancie of conscience and
affection (as like it is that David could not procure Vriiahs death, nor Asa
imprison the Prophet with a quiet and free conscience.) Yet to the particular
that Mr. Cotton consented not, what need he being not one of the civil Court?
But that he councelled it (and so consented,) beside what other proof I might
produce, and what himself here under expresses, I shall produce a double and
unanswerable testimony.

First, M. Cotton by teaching persecution cannot but consent to it, etc.
he publicly taught, and teaches (except lately Christ Jesus has taught him
better) that body-killing, soule-killing, and State-killing doctrine of not
permitting, but persecuting all other consciences and ways of worship but his
own in the civil State, and so consequently in the whole world, if the power
or Empire thereof were in his hand.

Secondly, Mr. Cotton privately satisfied the consciences of some that
questioned, Whether persecution for conscience were lawful.
as at that sentence diverse worthy Gentlemen durst not concur with the rest
in such a course, so some that did consent, have solemnly testified, and with
tears, since to my self confessed, that they could not in their souls have
been brought to have consented to the sentence, had not Mr. Cotton in private
given them advice and counsel, proving it just and warrantable to their
consciences.

I desire to be as charitable as charity would have me, and therefore would
hope that either his memory faild him, or that else he meant that in the very
time of sentence passing he neither counseled nor consented (as he has since
said, that he withdrew himself and went out from the rest) probably out of
that reluctation which before I mentioned; and yet if so, I cannot reconcile
his own expression: for thus he goes on.

CHAP. V.
Mr. Cotton. Although I dare not deny the sentence passed to be righteous in
the eyes of God, who has said, that he that withholds the corn (which is
the staff of life) from the people, the multitude shall curse him, Prove. 11.
26. how much more shall they separate such from them, as do withold and
separate them from the ordinances* or the ordinances from them (which are in
Christ the bread of life.)

Answ. Pro. 11. 26.
I desire to inform the Reader why it pleases Mr. Cotton to produce this
Scripture. The Scripture produced by Mr. Cotton to prove my banishment lawful,
discussed.
One of our Disputes was concerning the true Ministry appointed by the Lord
Jesus. Another was concerning the fitness and qualification of such persons as
have right (according to the rules of the Gospel) to choose and enjoy such a
true Ministry of the Lord Jesus. Hence because I professed, and do, against
the office of any ministry but such as the Lord Jesus appoints, this
Scripture is produced against me.

Secondly, let this be observed for satisfaction to many, who enquire into the
cause of my sufferings, Mr. Cotton satisfies all men concerning the chief cause
of my banishment.
that it pleases Mr. Cotton only to produce this Scripture for justifying the
sentence as righteous in the eyes of God, implying what our chief difference
was, and consequently what it was for which I chiefly suffered, to wit,
concerning the true Ministry of Christ Jesus. But to the Scripture, let the
people curse such as hoord up corporal or spiritual corn; The word of the
Lord is the souls corn, yet must it be dispensed according to the word of the
Lord.
and let those be blessed that sell it: will it therefore follow, that either
the one or the other may lawfully be sold or bought but with the good will,
consent and authority of the true owner?

Does not even the common civil Market abhor and curse that man, who carries
to market and throws about good corn, against the owners mind and express
command, who yet is willing and desirous it should be sold plenteously, if
with his consent, according to his order, and to his honest and reasonable
advantage? This is the case of the true and false Ministry. To some parts the
Apostles were forbidden to preach, and from others to depart shaking off the
dust, etc.
Far be it from my souls thought to stop the sweet streams of the water of
life, from flowing to refresh the thirsty, or the bread of life from feeding
hungry souls: And yet I would not, and the Lord Jesus would not that one drop
or one crum, or grain should be unlawfully, disorderly, or prodigally disposed
of: for, from the scorners, contradicters, despisers, persecuters, etc. the
Apostles messengers of the Lord Jesus, were to turn and to shake off the dust
of their feet: yea, it pleased the Spirit of the Lord to forbid the Apostles to
preach at all to some places, at some times: so that the whole dispose of this
spiritual corn, for the persons selling, their qualifications, All the Lords
corn must be sold according to the Lords ordinance.
commissions or callings, the quantities and qualities of the corn, the price
for which, the persons to whom, the place where, and time when the great Lord
of the harvest must express his holy will and pleasure, which must humbly and
faithfully be attended on.

In which regard Mr. Cotton deals most partially: for would Mr. Cotton himself
have preached in Old, or will he in New England with submission but to some
few ceremonies, as the selling of this spiritual corn in a white Coat, a
Surplice? Did he not rather choose (which I mention to the Lords and Mr.
Cottons honor) to have shut up his sacks mouth, Mr. Cotton himself choosing
rather to sell no spiritual corn, then (...) to some ceremonies
to have been silenced (as they call it) and imprisoned, then to sell that
heavenly corn otherwise then as he was persuaded the Lord appointed? yea has
he not in New England refused to admit the children of godly parents to
baptism, or the parents themselves unto the fellowship of the Supper, until
they came into that order which he conceived was the Order of the Lords
appointing?

Again (to descend to humane courses) do not all civil men throughout the
world, In civil thing nothing lawful but what is according to law and order.
forbid all building, planting, merchandising, marrying, execution of Justice;
yea, all actions of peace or war, but by a true and right Commission, and in
a right Order? Is it not, in this present storm of Englands sorrows one of the
greatest Quaeries in all the Kingdom, who are the true Officers, In England now
not persons fit, but also truly authorized, are true officers.
true Commanders, true Justices, true Commissioners; which is the true Seal?
And doubtless as Truth is but One, so but the one sort is True, and ought to be
submitted to, and the contrary resisted; although it should be granted that the
Officers questioned and their actions were noble, excellent and beyond
exception.

I judge it not here seasonable to entertain the dispute of the true power and
call of Christ's Ministry: I shall only add a word to this Scripture, as it
is brought to prove a righteous sentence of Banishment on my self or any that
plead against a false office of Ministry. The curse of death in Israel of old,
is spiritual death, and spiritual cutting off in the Church of Christ, and
Christian Israel now.
It Is true in the National Church of Israel (the then only Church and Nation
of God) he that did ought presumptuously was to be accursed and to be put to
death, Deuteronomy 15. a figure of the spiritual putting to death an obstinate sinner
in the Church of Christ, who refusing to hear the voice of Christ, is to be
cut off from Christ and Christians, and to be esteemed as an Heathen, that is,
a Gentile or Publican Math. 18. Hence consequently the not selling, or the
withholding of Corn presumptuously was Death in Israel: But Mr. Cotton cannot
prove that every wilful withholding of Corn, Such as are excellently fitted
to sell the spiritual c^rne of the word of the Lord, and yet find not their
call to the ministry, are not to be put to death or banished.
in all or any State in the world, and that in time of plenty, is death: for as
for Banishment, we never hear of any such course in Israel. And secondly,
least of all can he prove, that in all civil States of the world, that man
that pleads against a false Ministry, or that being ^ble to preach Christ
and doubting of the true way of the M^^^strie since the Apostacy of Antichrist
dares not pr^ctise a Ministry. Or that many excellent and worthy Gentlemen,
Lawyers, Physicians and others (as well guifted in the knowledge of the
Scripture, and furnished with the gifts of tongues and utterance, as most that
profess the Ministry, and yet are not persuaded to sell spiritual corn; as
questioning their true Calling and Commission. I say, Mr. Cotton does not, nor
will he ever prove that these or any of these ought to be put to Death or
Banishment in every Land or Country. The selling or withholding of spiritual
corn, Spiritual offenses are only liable to a spiritual censure.
are both of a spiritual nature, and therefore must necessarily in a true
parallel bear relation to a spiritual curse. Paul wishing himself accursed
from Christ for his Country men's sake ( Romans 9.) he spoke not of any temporal
death or banishment. Yet nearer, being fitly qualified and truly called by
Christ to the Ministry, Paul not to be banished or killed by Nero for not
preaching the Gospel.
he cries out (1 Cor. 9.) We to me if I preach not the Gospel: yet did not
Paul intend, that therefore the Roman Nero, or any subordinate power under him
in Corinth, should have either banished or put Paul to death having committed
nothing against the civil State worthy of such a civil punishment: yea and
Mr. Cotton himself seems to question the sandines of such a ground to
warrant such proceedings, for thus he goes on.

CHAP. VI.
Mr. Cotton. And yet it may be they passed that sentence against you, not upon
that ground: but for ought I know, for your other corrupt Doctrines, which tend
to the disturbance both of civil and holy peace, as may appear by that
answer which was sent to the Brethren of the Church of Salem and your self.
M. Cotton himself ignorant of the cause of my sufferings.


I answer, it is no wonder that so many having bin demanded the cause of my
sufferings have answered, that they could not tell for what, since Mr. Cotton
himself knows not distinctly what cause to assign: but says, it may be they
passed not that sentence on that ground, etc. Oh, where was the waking care of
so excellent and worthy a man, to see his brother and beloved in Christ so
afflicted, he knows not distinctly for what.

He alleges a Scripture, to prove the Sentence righteous, and yet concludes
it may be it was not for that, but for other corrupt Doctrines which he names
not, nor any Scripture to prove them corrupt, or the sentence righteous for
that cause. O that it may please the Father of lights to awaken both himself
and other of my honored Countrymen, to see how though their hearts wake (in
respect of personal grace and life of Jesus) yet they sleep, insensible of
much concerning the purity of the Lords worship, or the sorrows of such whom
they style Brethren, and beloved in Christ, afflicted by them.

But though he name not these corrupt Doctrines, a little before I have, as
they were publicly summed up and charged upon me, and yet none of them tending
to the breach of holy or civil peace, Civil peace and civil Magistracy
blessed ordinances of God,
of which I have ever desired to be unfainedly tender, acknowledging the
Ordinance of Magistracy to be properly and adequatly fitted by God, to
preserve the civil State in civil peace and order: as he has also appointed
a spiritual Government and Governors in matters pertaining to his worship and
the consciences of men, both which Governments, Governors, Laws, Offenses,
Punishments, are Essentially distinct, and the confounding of them brings all
the world into Combustion. He adds:

CHAP. VII.
Mr. Cotton. And to speak freely what I think, were my soul in your souls
stead, I should think it a work of mercy of God to Banish me from the civil
society of such a Commonweal, where I could not enjoy holy fellowship with
any Church of God amongst them without sin: What should the daughter of Sion do
in Babel, why should she not hasten to flee from thence?

Ans. Love bids me hope that Mr. Cotton here intended me a Cordial, to revive
me in my sorrows: yet if the ingredients be examined, there will appear no
less, then Dishonor to the name of God, Danger to every civil State, a
miserable Comfort to my self, and contradiction within it self.

For the last first. A land cannot be Babel, and yet a Church of Christ.
If he call the Land Babel mystically (which he must needs do or else speak not
to the point, how can it be Babel, and yet the Church of Christ also?

Secondly, it is a dangerous Doctrine to affirm it a misery to live in that
State where a Christian cannot enjoy the fellowship of the public Churches of
God without sin. Do we not know many famous states wherein is known no Church
of Jesus Christ? Famous civil States where yet no sound of Jesus Christ.
Did not God command his people to pray for the peace of the material City of
Babel (Jer. 27.) and to seek the peace of it though no Church of God in Babel*
in the form and Order of it? Or did Sodom, Egypt, Babel, signify material
Sodom, Egypt, Babel, Rev. 11. 8. and 18. 4?

There was a true Church of Jesus Christ in material Babel, (1 Pet. 5. 13.) A
true church of Jesus Christ in material Babylon.
Was it then a mercy for all the inhabitants of Babel, to have been banished,
whom the Church of Jesus Christ durst not to have received to holy fellowship?
Or was it a mercy for any person to have been banished the City, and driven to
the miseries of a barbarous wilderness, him and his, if some bar had layn upon
his conscience, that he could not have enjoyed fellowship with the true Church
of Christ?

Thirdly, for my self, I acknowledge it a blessed gift of God to be enabled to
suffer, The mercy of a civil State distinct from mercies of a spiritual
nature.
and so to be banished for his Names sake: and yet I doubt not to affirm, that
Mr. Cotton himself would have counted it a mercy, if he might have practiced
in Old England what now he does in New, with the enjoyment of the civil peace,
safety and protection of the State.

Or should he dissent from the New English Churches, and join in worship with
some other (as some few years since he was upon the point to do in a
separation from the Churches there as legal) would he count it a mercy to be
plucked up by the roots, Old and New England for the Countries and civil
government incomparable.
him and his, and to endure the losses, distractions, miseries that do attend
such a condition. The truth is, both the mother and the Daughter Old and New
England, for the Countries and Governments are Lands and Governments
incomparable: And might it please God to persuade the mother to permit the
inhabitants of New England her daughter to enjoy their conscience to God, after
a particular Congregationall way, and to persuade the daughter to permit the
inhabitants of the mother Old England to walk there after their conscience of
a Parishionall way, (which yet neither mother nor daughter is persuaded to
permit.) I conceive Mr. Cotton himself, were he seated in Old England again,
would not count it a mercy to be banished from the civil state.

And therefore (lastly) as he casts dishonor upon the name of God, Mr. Cotton
not having felt the miseries of others, can be no equal judge of them.
to make him the Author of such cruel mercy, so had his soul been in my
souls case, exposed to the miseries* poverties, necessities, wants debts,
hardships of Sea and Land, in a banished condition; he would I presume, reach
forth a more merciful cordial to the afflicted. But he that is despised and
afflicted is like a lamp despised in the eyes of him that is at ease: Job.

CHAP. VIII.
Mr. Cotton. Yea but he speaks not these things to add affliction to the
afflicted, but if it were the holy will of God to move me to a serious sight of
my sin, and of the justice of Gods hand against it: Against your corrupt
Doctrines it pleased the Lord Jesus to fight against you with the sword of his
mouth, as himself speaks Rev. 2. in the mouths and testimonies of the
Churches and Brethren, against whom when you overheat your self in reasoning
and disputing, against the light of his truth, it pleased him to stop your
mouth by a sudden Disease, and to threaten to take breath from you: But you
instead of recoiling (as even Balaam offered to do in the like case) chose
rather to persist in the way, and protest against all the Churches and brethren
that stood in your way: and thus the good hand of Christ that should have
humbled you to see and turn from the error of your way, has rather hardened you
therein, and quickened you only to see failings (yea intolerable errors) in all
the Churches and brethren, rather then in your self.

Answer. In these lines, an humble and discerning spirit may epsy: First a
glorious justification and boasting of Himself and others concurring with him.
Secondly, an unrighteous and uncharitable censure of the afflicted.

To the first I say no more, The lanthor^e of Gods word must alone try who
fights with the sword of Gods mouth, the same word of God.
but let the light of the holy lantern of the word of God discover and try
with whom the sword of Gods mouth (that is the testimony of the holy Scripture,
for Christ, against Antichrist) abides. And whether my self and such poor
Witnesses of Jesus Christ in Old and New England, Low Countries, etc. desiring
in meeknes and patience to testify the truth of Jesus, against all false
callings of Ministers, Whether Mr. Cotton persecuting, or the answerer
persecuted, be likest to Balaam.
etc. Or Mr. Cotton (however in his person holy and beloved) swimming with the
stream of outward credit and profit, and smiting with the fist and sword of
persecution such as dare not join in worship with him; I say, whether of either
be the Witnesses of Christ Jesus, in whose mouth is the sword of his mouth, the
sword of the Spirit, the holy word of God, and whether is most like to Balaam?

To the sec^n^: his censure. It is true, it pleased God by excessiv^ labors on
the Lords days, The answerers profession concerning his sickness, which Mr.
Cotton upbraids to him.
and thrice a week at Salem, by labors day and night in my Field with my own
hands, for the maintenance of my charge; by travells also by day and night to
go and return from their Court (and not by overheating in dispute, diverse of
themselves confessing publicly my moderation) it pleased God to bring me near
unto death, in which time (notwithstanding the mediating testimony of two
skillfull in Physic) I was unmercifully driven from my chamber to a Winters
flight. During my sickness, I humbly appeal unto the Father of Spirits for
witness of the upright and constant diligent search my spirit made after him, in
the examination of all passages, both my private disquisitions with all the
chief of their Ministers, and public agitations of points controverted: and
what gracious fruit I reaped from that sickness, I hope my soul shall never
forget. However I mind not to number up a catalogue of the many censures upon
Gods servants in the time of Gods chastisements and visitations on them,
Scripture, history, experience can witness the censures upon Gods servants in
their afflictions.
both in Scripture, History and experience. Nor retort the many evils which it
pleased God to bring upon some chief procurers of my sorrows, nor upon the
whole State immediately after them, which many of their own have observed and
reported to me: but I commit my cause to him that judges Righteously, and yet
resolve to pray against their Evils, Psalm. 141.

CHAP. IX.
Mr. Cotton. In which course though you say you do not remember an hour,
wherein the countenance of the Lord was darkened to you; yet be not deceived, it
is no new thing with Satan to transform himself into an Angel of light, and
to cheer the soul with false peace, and with flashes of counterfeit
consolation: Sad and woeful is the memory of Mr. Smiths strong consolation on
his deathbed, which is set as a seal to his gross and damnable Arminianisme,
and Enthusiasme delivered in the confession of his Faith, prefixed to the
Story of his life and death. The countenance of God is upon his people when
they fear him, not when they presume of their own strength, and his
consolations are not found in the way of prefidence and error, but in the ways
of humility and truth.

Ans. To that part which concerns my self, the speech has reference either to
the matter of justification, or else matter of my affliction for Christ, of
both which I remember I have had discourse.

For the first I have expressed in some conference (as Mr. Cotton himself has
also related concerning some, A soul at peace with God may yet endure great
combats concerning sanctification.
with whom I am not worthy to be named) that after first manifestations of the
countenance of God, reconciled in the blood of his Son unto my soul, my
questions and trouble have not been concerning my reconciliation and peace with
God, but concerning sanctification and fellowship with the holiness of God, in
which respect I desire to cry (with Paul) in the bitterness of my spirit, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!

Secondly, it may have reference to some conference concerning affliction for
his Names sake, in which respect I desire to acknowledge the faithfullnes of
his word and promise, to be with his in 6 troubles and in 7, through fire and
water, making good 100 fold with persecution, Affliction for Christ sweet.
to such of his servants as suffer ought for his names sake: and I have said
and must say, and all Gods witnesses that have borne any pain or loss for
Jesus, must say, that fellowship with the Lord Jesus in his sufferings is
sweeter then all the fellowship with sinners, in all the profits, honors, and
pleasures of this present evil world. And yet 2 things I desire to speak to
all men and my self, Two cautions for any in persecution for conscience.
Let every man prove his work, Gal. 6. and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself, and not in another. Secondly, if any man love God, that soul knows
God, or rather is known of God (1 Cor. 8.) Self-love may burn the body, but
happy only he whose love alone to Christ constrains him to be like unto him,
and suffer with him.

To that which concerns Mr. Smith, Mr. Smith godly, and a light to Mr. Cotton
and others, though left to himself in some things.
although I knew him not, and have heard of many points, in which my conscience
tells me, it pleased the Lord to leave him to himself; yet I have also heard
by some (whose testimony Mr. Cotton will not easily refuse) that he was a man
fearing God: and I am sure Mr. Cotton has made some use of those principles
and arguments on which Mr. Smith and others went, concerning the constitution
of the Christian Church. The infinite compassions of God, Gods infinite
compassions toward those whose hearts are upright with him
which lay no sin to David's charge but the sin of Vritah, 1 King. 15. have
graciously comforted the souls of his on their deathbed, accepting and
crowning their uprightnes and faithfullnes, and passing by what otherwise is
grievous and offensive to him. And indeed from the due consideration of that
instance, it appears that no sin is comparably so grievous in Gods David's, The
opinion of putting Vri^ah to death, the vilest of all opinions.
as a treacherous slaughter of the faithful, whom we are forced to call
beloved in Christ: That opinion in Mr. Cotton or any, is the most grievous to
God or man, and not comparable to any that ever Mr. Smith could be charged
with. It is true, the countenance and consolations of God are found in the
ways of humility and truth, As the weights of the sanctuary were double, so
must there be double pondering in all the affairs of Gods worship.
and Satan transformeth him like to an Angel of light in a counterfeit of
both: In which respect I desire to work out salvation with fear and
trembling, and to do nothing in the affairs of God and his Worship, but (like
the weights of the Sanctuary) with double care, diligence and consideration,
above all the affairs of this vanishing life. And yet Christ's consolations are
so sweet, that the soul that tastes them in truth, in suffering for any truth
of his, will not easily part with them, though thousands are deceived and
deluded with counterfeits.

CHAP. X,
Mr. Cotton. Two stumbling blocks (I perceive) have turned you off from
Fellowship with us. First the want of fit matter of our Church. Secondly,
disrespect of the Separate Churches in England under affliction, our selves
practicing Separation in peace.

For the first, you acknowledge, as you say, with joy, that godly persons are
the visible members of these Churches, but yet you see not that godly persons
are matter fitted to constitute a Church, no more then Trees or Quarries are
fit matter proportioned to the building. This exception seems to me to imply
a contradiction to it self, for if the matter of the Churches be as you say
godly persons, they are not then as Trees unfeld, and Stones unhewen:
godliness cutteth men down from the former root and heweth them out of the
pit of corrupt nature, and fitteth them for fellowship with Christ, and with
his people.

You object, first, a necessity lying upon godly men before they can be fit
matter for Church fellowship, to see, bewail, repent, and come out of the
false churches, worship, ministry, government, according to Scriptures Isa. 62.
11. 2 Cor. 6. 17. and this is to be done not by a local removal or contrary
practice, but by a deliverance of the soul, understanding, will, judgment and
affection.

Ans. First we grant that it is not local removal from former pollution, nor
contrary practice, that fitteth us for fellowship with Christ, and his Church,
but thas it is necessary also that we repent of such former pollutions
wherewith we have been defiled and inthralled.

We grant further, that it is likewise necessary to Church Fellowship, we
should see and discern all such pollutions, as do so far inthrall us to
Antichrist as to separate us from Christ: But this we profess unto you, that
wherein we have reformed our practice, therein have we endeavored unfeignedly
to humble our souls for our former contrary walking: if any through hypocrisy
are wanting herein, the hidden hypocrisy of some will not prejudice the
sincerity and faithfulness of others, nor the Church estate of all.

Answ. That which requires Answer in this passage, is a charge of a seeming
contradiction, to wit, That persons may be godly, and yet not fitted for Church
estate, but remain as Trees and Quarries unfeld, etc. Contrary to which it is
affirmed, that godly persons cannot be so inthralled to Antichrist, as to
separate them from Christ.

For the clearing of which let the word of Truth be rightly divided, and a
right distinction of things applied, there will appear nothing contradictorie,
but clear and satisfactorie to each man's conscience.

First then I distinguish of a godly person thus: The state of godly persons in
gross sins.
In some acts of sin which a godly person may fall into, during those acts,
although before the all searching and tender eye of God, and also in the eyes
of such as are godly, such a person remains still godly, yet to the eye of
the world externally such a person seems ungodly, and a sinner. Thus Noah in
his Drunkenness; thus Abraham, Lot, Samson, Job, David, Peter, in their lying
whoredoms, cursings, Murder, denying and forswearing of Christ Jesus,
although they lost not their inward sap and root of life, Godly persons falling
into gross sins, are to express repentance before they can b^ admitted to the
church.
yet suffered they a decay and fall of leaf, and the show of bad and evil
Trees. In such a case Mr. Cotton will not deny that a godly person falling into
drunkenness wheredome deliberate murder, denying and forswearing of Christ, the
Church of Christ cannot receive such persons into Church Fellowship, before
their sight of humble bewailing and confessing of such evils* notwithstanding
that love may conceive there is a root of godliness within. Gods children long
asleep in respect of Gods worship, though alive in the grace of Christ.


Secondly Gods children ( Cant. 5.) notwithstanding a principle of spiriuall
life in their souls, yet are lul'd into a long continued sleep in the matters
of Gods worship: I sleep, though my heart waketh. The heart is awake in
spiritual life and grace, as concerning personal union to the Lord Jesus, and
conscionable endeavors to please him in what the heart is convinced: yet
asleep in respect of abundant ignorance and negligence, and consequently gross
abominations and pollutions of Worship, in which the choicest servants of God,
and most faithful Witnesses of many truths have lived in more or less, yea in
maine and fundamental points, ever since the Apostacy.

Not to instance in all, Mr. Cotton now professes to practice what thousands of
Gods people for many ages have not seen.
but in some particulars which Mr. Cotton has in new England reformed. I
earnestly beseech himself and all, well to ponder how far he himself now
professes to see, and practice, that which so many thousands of godly persons
of high note in all ages (since the Apostacy) saw not: As

First concerning the nature of a particular Church to consist only of holy and
godly persons.

Secondly, of a true Ministry called by that Church.

Thirdly, a true Worship free from Ceremonies, Common Prayer, etc.

Fourthly a true Government in the hands only of such Governors and Elders, as
are appointed by the Lord Jesus. Hence Gods people not seeing their Captivity
in these points, must first necessarily be enlightened and called out from such
Captivity, before they can be nextly fitted and prepared for the true Church,
Worship, Ministry etc.

CHAP. XI.
Secondly, The Jews of old in the type could not build the Altar and Temple in
Babel, but first they must come forth, and then build at Jerusalem.
this will be more clear if we consider Gods people and Church of old the
Jews, captivated in material Babel, they could not possibly build Gods Altar
and Temple at Jerusalem, until the yoke and bonds of their captivity were
broke, and they set free to return with the vessels of the Lords house, to set
up his worship in Jerusalem, as we see in the Books of Ezra, Nehemia, Daniel,
Haggai, etc. Hence in the Antitype, Gods people the spiritual and mystical
Jews cannot possibly erect the Altar of the Lords true worship, and build the
Temple of his true Church, Gods mystical Israel in the Antitype must also come
forth of Babel before they can build the Temple at Jerusalem.
without a true sight of their spiritual bondage in respect of Gods worship,
and a power and strength from Jesus Christ to bring them out, and carry them
through all difficulties in so mighty a work. And as the being of Gods people
in material Babell, and a necessity of their coming forth before they could
build the Temple, did not in the least deny them to be Gods people: no more now
does Gods people being in mystical Babel ( Rev. 18) nor the necessity of their
coming forth, hinder or deny the godliness of their persons, Luther and other
famous witnesses very gross concerning Gods worship, though eminent for
personal grace.
or spiritual life within them.

Thirdly, how many famous servants of God, and witnesses of Jesus lived and
died and were burnt for other truths of Jesus, not seeing the evil of their
Antichristian calling of Bishops, etc. How did famous Luther himself continue a
Monk, set forth the German Mass, acknowledge the Pope, and held other gross
abominations concerning Gods worship, notwithstanding the life of Christ Jesus
in him, and wrought in thousands by his means.

Fourthly, Mr. Cotton refuses godly persons except they be convinced of their
Church Covenant.
Mr Cotton must be requested to remember his own practice (as before) how does
he refuse to receive persons eminent for personal grace and godliness, to the
Lords Supper, and other privileges of Christians (according to the profession
of their Church Estate) until they be convinced of the necessity of making and
entering into a Church covenant with them, with a confession of farth, etc. and
if any cannot be persuaded of such a covenant and confession (notwithstanding
their godliness, yet) are they not admitted.

Lastly, how famous is that passage of that solemn question put to Mr. Cotton
and the rest of the new English Elders, Mr. Cotton and the English Elders
refuse to permit eminent Ministers and people of Old england to live in New
England (notwithstanding be confesses their godliness above his own) if they
join not in his Church Fellowship.
by diverse of the ministers of old England (eminent for personal godliness,
as Mr. Cotton acknowledges) viz. Whether they might be permitted in new
England to enjoy their consciences in a Church estate different from the New
English: unto which Mr. Cotton and the New English Elders return a plain
negative, in effect thus much, with the acknowledgment of their worth and
godliness above their own and their hopes of agreement; Yet in conclusion if
they agree not, (which they are not like to do) and submit to that way of
Church Fellowship and Worship which in New England is set up, they cannot only
not enjoy Church Fellowship together but not permit them to live and breath in
the same Air and Commonweal together, which was my case; although it pleased
Mr Cotton and others most incensed, to give my self a testimony of godliness,
etc. And this is the reason, why although I confess with joy the care of the
New English Churches, that no person be received to Fellowship with them, in
whom they cannot first discern true Regeneration, and the life of Jesus: yet I
said and still affirm, that godly and regenerate persons (according to all the
former instances and reasons) are not fitted to constitute the true Christian
Church, until it has pleased God to convince their souls of the evil of the
false Church, Godly persons living trees and living stones, yet need much
hewing and cutting to bring them from false to true worship.
Ministry, Worship, etc. And although I confess that godly persons are not
dead but living Trees, not dead, but living Stones, and need no new
Regeneration (and so in that respect need no felling nor digging out) yet need
they a mighty work of Gods Spirit to humble and ashame them, and to cause them
to loath themselves for their Abominations or stincks in Gods nostrils (as it
pleases Gods Spirit to speak of false Worships:) Hence Ezekiel. 43. 11. Gods
people are not fit for Gods House, until holy shame be wrought in them, for
what they have done. Hence God promises to cause them to loath themselves,
because they have broken him with their whorish hearts, Ezekiel. 6. 9. And hence
it is that I have known some precious godly hearts confess, The coming forth
of false worship a second kind (as it were) of regeneration to Gods people
that the plucking of their souls out from the Abominations of false worship,
has been a second kind of Regeneration. Hence was it that it pleased God to
say concerning his peoples return from their Material Captivity (a figure of
our Spiritual and mystical) that they should not say Jehovah lives, who
brought them from the land of Egypt (a type of first conversion as is
conceived) but Jehovah lives who brings them from the land of the North (a
type of Gods peoples return from spiritual bondage to confused and invented
Worships. Return from the land of the North.


CHAP. XII.
Now whereas Mr. Cotton adds, That godly persons are not so inthrall'd to
Antichrist as to separate them from Christ; else they could not be godly
persons.

I answer, this comes not near our Question, which is not concerning personal
godliness or grace of Christ but the godliness or Christianity of Worship. Hence
the Scripture holds forth Christ Jesus first personally, as that God Man, that
One Mediator between God and man, Christ considered two ways, first,
personally, and so Gods people can never be separated from him.
the Man Christ Jesus, whom all Gods people by Faith receive, and in receiving
become the Sons of God, John 1. 12. although they yet see not the particular
ways of his Worship. Thus was it with the Centurion the Woman of Canaan,
Cornelius, and most, at their first conversion.

Secondly, the Scripture holds forth Christ as Head of his Church* Secondly,
as head of his Church, and so he is often lost and absent from his Spouse.
formed into a Body of worshippers, in which respect the Church is called
Christ, 1 Cor 12. 12. and the description of Christ is admirably set forth in
10 several parts of a man's body, fitting and suiting to the visible
profession of Christ in the Church Cant. 5.

Now in the former respect Antichrist can never so inthral Gods people as to
separate them from Christ, that is, from the life and grace of Christ, although
he inthrall them into never so gross Abominations concerning Worship: for God
will not loose His in Egypt, Sodom, Babel, His Jewels are most precious to him
though in a Babilonish dunghill, and his Lilly sweet and lovely in the
Wilderness commixt with Briars. Gods people cannot serve a false Christ and the
true together.
Yet in the second respect, as Christ is taken for the church, I conceive that
Antichrist may separate Gods people from Christ, that is from Christ's true
visible Church and Worship. This Mr. Cotton himself will not deny if he
remember how little a while it is since the falsehood of a National,
Provincial, Diocesan and Parishionall Church, etc. and the truth of a
particular Congregation, consisting only of holy persons appeared unto him.

The Papists Question to the Protestant viz. The Church before Luther.
Where was your Church before Luther? is thus well answered to wit, That since
the Apostacy, Truth, and the holy city (according to the Prophecy Revel. 11
and 13.) have been trodden under foot, Revel. 13.
and the whole earth has wondered after the Beast: yet God has stirred up
Witnesses to Prophecy in Sackcloth against the Beast, during his 42 months
reign: yet those Witnesses have in their Times, more or less submitted to
Antichrist, and his Church, Worship Ministry, etc. and so consequently have
been ignorant of the true Christ, that is, Christ taken for the Church in the
true profession of that holy Way of Worship, which he himself at first
appointed.

CHAP. XIII.
Mr. Cotton. Secondly, we deny that it is necessary to Church fellowship (that
is so necessary that without it a Church cannot be) that the Members admitted
thereunto should all of them see, and expressly bewail all the Pollutions which
they have been defiled with in the former Church Fellowship. Ministry, Worship,
Government, etc. if they see and bewail so much of their former pollutions, as
did inthrall them to Antichrist, so as to separate them from Christ, and be
ready in preparation of heart, as they shall see more Light, so to hate more
and more every falfe way; we conceive it is as much as is necessarily required
to separate them from Antichrist, and to fellowship with Christ and his
Churches. The Church of Christ admitted many thousand Jews that believed on
the name of Christ, although they were still zealous of the Law, and saw not
the beggarly emptines of Moses his ceremonies, Acts 21 20. and the Apostle Paul
directs the Romans to receive such unto them as are weak in the faith, and
see not their liberty from the servile difference of Meats and Days, but
still lie under the bondage of the Law; yea he wishes them to receive such
upon this ground, because Christ has received them, Romans 14. to the sixth.

Say not there is not the like danger of lying under bondage to Moses as to
Antichrist, for even the bondage under Moses was such, as if continued in after
instruction and conviction, would separate them from Christ, Gal. 5. 2. and
bondage under Antichrist could do no more.

Ans. Here I desire 3. things may be observed:

First Mr. Cottons own confession of that twofold Church estate, Mr. Cotton
confessing the true and false constitution of the church.
worship* etc. the former false, or else why to be so bewailed and forsaken;
the second true, to be embraced and submitted to.

Secondly, his own confession of that which a little before he would make so
odious in me to hold, Mr. Cotton confessing to hold what he censureth in the
answerer.
viz. that Gods people may be so far inthralled to Antichrist, as to separate
them from Christ: for says he. If they see and bewail so much of their former
pollutions, as did inthrall them to Antichrist, so as to separate them from
Christ.

Thirdly* I observe how easily a soul may wander in his generals, Fallacy
in Mr. Cottons generals.
for thus he writes, Though they see not all the pollutions wherewith they have
been defiled in the former Church Fellowship. Again, if they see so much as did
inthrall them to Antichrist, A godly person remaining a member of a false
Church, is therein a member of a false Christ.
and separate them from Christ. And yet he expresses nothing of that all the
pollutions, nor what so much is as will separate them from Christ. Hence upon
that former distinction that Christ in visible Worship is Christ: I demand,
Whether if a godly person remain a member of a falsely constituted Church, and
so consequently (in that respect) of a false Christ, Separation from false
Christ absolutely necessary before there can be union to the true.
whether in visible worship he be not separate from the true Christ?

Secondly, I ask, Whether it be not absolutely necessary to his uniting with
the true Church, that is, with Christ in true Christian Worship, that he see
and bewail, and absolutely come out from that former false Church or Christ,
and his Ministry, Worship, etc. before he can be united to the true Israel, A
sequestration or separation of the soul from the world in the idolatrous and
invented worships of it before it can be presented to Christ Jesus, as a chaste
virgin into the chaste bed of his own most holy institutions.
must come forth of Egypt before they can sacrifice to God in the Wilderness.
The Jews come out of Babel before they build the Temple in Jerusalem: The
husband of a woman die, or she be legally divorced, before she can lawfully be
married to another; the graft cut off from one, before it can be ingrafted into
another stock: The Kingdom of Christ, (that is the Kingdom of the Saints,
Dan. 2. and 7.) is cut out of the mountain of the Roman Monarchy. Thus the
Corinthians 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. uniting with, Christ Jesus, they were washed
from their Idolatry, as well as other sins: Thus the Thessalonians turned from
their Idols before they could serve the living and true God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9. and
as in Paganism, so in Antichristianisme, which separates as certainly (though
more subtly) from Christ Jesu.

CHAP. XIV.
Yea but it is said, that Jews weak in Christian liberties, and zealous for
Moses Law they were to be received. Difference between Gods own holy
institutions to the Jews, and Satan's Paganish or Antichristian institution to
the Gentiles, as concerning the manner of coming forth of them.


I answer, 2 things must here carefully be minded:

First although bondage to Moses would separate from Christ, yet the difference
must be observed between those Ordinances of Moses which it pleased God
himself to ordain and appoint, as his then only Worship in the world, though
now in the coming of his Son, he was pleased to take away, yet with
solemnity; and on the other side the Institutions and Ordinances of
Antichrist, which the Devil himself invented, were from first to last never
to be received and submitted to one moment, nor with such solemnity to be laid
down, but to be abhorred and abominated for ever.

The National Church of the Jews, with all the shadowish typical Ordinances
of Kings, A comparison between the Jewish and Christian ordinances.
Priests, Prophets, Temple, Sacrifices were as a silver candlestick, on which
the light of the Knowledge of God and of the Lord Jesus in the type and shadow
was set up and shined. That Silver Candlestick it pleased the most holy and
only wise to take away, and in stead thereof to set up the Golden Candlesticks
of particular Churches ( Revel. 1.) by the hand of the Son of God himself: Now
the first was silver (the pure will and mind of God, but intended only for a
season:) the second of a more precious lasting nature, a Kindome not to be
shaken (that is abolished as the former) Heb. 12. 28.

Therefore Secondly, Moses ordinances at one time precious and holy, at another
time beggarly and deadly.
observe the difference of Time (which Mr. Cotton himself confesses) after
Instruction and Conviction (says he) Moses Law was deadly and would separate
from Christ, therefore, there was a time when they were not deadly, and did not
separate from Christ, to wit until Moses was honorably fallen asleep, and
lamented for (as I conceive) in the type and figure 30. days ( Deuteronomy. 34.)
Therefore at one season (not for Timo^hies weak conscience, but for the Jews
sake) Paul circumcised Timothy: at another time when the Jews had sufficient
instruction, and obstinately would be circumcised, and that necessarily to
salvation, Paul seasonably cries out, The first Christians communicated in the
Jewish Synagogues until the Jews contradicted and spoke evil, etc. then they
separated.
that if they were circumcised Christ should profit them nothing, Gal. 5. Hence
the Christians at Ephesus conversed with the Jewish Synagogue, until the Jews
contradicted and blasphemed, and then were speedily separate by Paul, Acts 19.
But to apply Paul observed a Vow, and the ceremonies of it, circumcised
Timothy, etc. may therefore a messenger of Christ now (as Paul) go to Mass,
pray to Saints, perform penance, keep christmas and other Popish Feasts and
Fasts, etc.

Again, is there such a time allowed to any man, uniting or adding himself to
the true Church now, to observe the unholy holy days of Feasting and Fasting
invented by Antichrist? yea and (as Paul did circumcision) to practice the
Popish Sacraments? A member of a true Church falling into any idelatrous
practice, not presently to be excommunicated.
I doubt not, but if any member of a true Church or assembly of Worshippers,
shall fall to any Paganish or Popish practice, he must be instructed and
convinced, before Excommunication: but the Question is, Whether still observing
and so practicing, a person may be received to the true Christian Church, as
the Jews were, although they yet practiced Moses ceremonies.

These things duly pondred (in the fear and presence of God) it will appear
how vain the allegation is, from that tender and honorable respect to Gods
Ordinances now vanishing from the Jews, Not one degree of sight of, or sorrow
for Antichristian abominations, yet a necessity of cutting off from the false,
before union to the true Church, Ministry, worship, etc.
and their weak consciences about the same, to prove the same tenderness to
Satan's inventions, and the consciences of men in the renouncing of Paganicall,
Turkish, Antichristian; yea and I add Judaical Worships now, when once the
time of their full vanishing was come.

To conclude, although I prescribe not such a measure of sight of, or sorrow
for Antichristian Abominations (I speak in respect of degrees, which it
pleases the Father of Lights to dispense variously to one more, to another
less) yet I believe it absolutely necessary to see and bewail so much as may
amount to cut off the soul from the false Church (whether National,
Parishional or any other fasly constituted Church) Ministry, Worship and
Government of it.

CHAP. XV.
Mr. Cotton. Ans. 3. To places of Scripture which you object, Isa. 52. 11. 2
Cor. 6. 17. Revel. 18. 4. We answer, two of them makes nothing to your
purpose: for that of Isaiah, and the other of the Revelation, speak of local
separation, which your self know we have made, and yet you say, you do not
apprehend that to be sufficient. As for that place of the Corinths, it only
requires coming out from Idolaters in the Fellowship of their Idolatry. No
marriages were they to make with them, no Feasts were they to hold with them in
the Idols Temple; no intimate familiarity were they to maintain with them,
nor any Fellowship were they to keep with them in the unfruitful works of
darkness, and this is all which that place requires. But what makes all this to
prove, that we may not receive such persons to Church fellowship, as your self
confess to be godly, and who do professedly renounce and bewail all known sin
and would renounce m^^e if they knew more, although it may be they do not see
the utmost skirts of all that pollution they have sometimes been defiled with;
as the Patriarchs saw not the pollution of their Poligamie: But that you may
plainly see this place is wrested beside the Apostles scope, when you argue
from it, that such persons are not fit matter for Church fellowship, as are
defiled with any remnants of Antichristian pollution, nor such Churches any
more to be accounted Churches* as do receive such amongst them. Consider I pray
you, were there not at that time in the Church of Corinth, such as partook with
the Idolaters in the Idols temple? And was not this the touching of an
unclean thing? And did this sin reject these members from Church fellowship
before convicton? Or did it evacuate their Church estate for not casting out
such members?

Ans. The Scriptures or writings of truth are those heavenly righteous scales,
wherein all our contraversies must be tried, and that blessed Star that leads
all those souls to Jesus that seek him. But says Mr. Cotton two of those
Scriptures alledgged by me ( Isa. 52. 11. Revel. 18. 4. which I brought to
prove a necessity of leaving the false, before a joining to the true Church,
they speak of local separation, which (says he) your self know we have made.

For that local and typical separation from Babylon, Mr. Cotton cannot make
both comings forth of Babel both in the Type and antitype to be local.
Isa. 52. I could not well have believed that Mr. Cotton or any would make that
coming forth of Babel in the antitype, Rev. 18 4. to be local and material
also. What civil State, Nation or Country in the world, in the antitype must
now be called Babel? certainly, if any, then Babel it self properly so called:
but there we find (as before) at true Church of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 5.

Secondly, If a local Babel, then also now a local Judea and Temple, etc.
Come out of Babel not material, but mystical.
if Babel be local now, whence Gods people are called, then must there be a
local Judea, a Land of Canaan also, into which they are called; and where
shall both that Babel and Canaan be found in all the commings forth that have
been made from the Church of Rome in these last times? But Mr. Cotton having
made a local departure from Old England in Europe, to New England in America,
can he satisfy his own soul, or the souls of other men, that he has obeyed
that voice, The Lord Jesus has broken down the difference of places and
persons.
come out of Babel my people, partake not of her sins, etc. Does he count the
very Land of England literally Babel, and so consequently Egypt and Sodom,
Revel. 11. 8. and the Land of new England Judea, Canaan? etc.

The Lord Jesus ( John 4.) clearly breaks down all difference of places, and
Acts 10 all difference of persons; and for my self, I acknowledge the Land of
England, the civil Laws, Government and people of England, 2 Chiefest causes
of Gods indignation against England.
not to be inferior to any under heaven. Only 2 things I shall humbly suggest
unto my dear Countrymen (whether more high and honorable at the helm of
Government, or more inferior, who labor and sail in this famous Ship of
Englands Common Wealth) as the greatest causes, These two particulars I should
be humbly ready to make proof of.
fourtaines and top roots of all the Indignation of the most High, against the
State and Country: First that the whole Nation and Generations of Men have
been forced (though unregenerate and unrepentant) to pretend and assume the
name of Christ Jesus, which only belongs, according to the Institution of the
Lord Jesus, to truly regenerate and repenting souls. Secondly, that all
others dissenting from them, whether Jews or Gentiles, their Countrymen
especially (for strangers have a Liberty) have not been permitted civil
cohabitation in this world with them, but have been distressea and persecuted
by them.

But to return, the sum of my Contraversie with Mr. Cotton is, The souls
captivity to false worship is not local, but a guilt, and not only so, but an
habit or disposition of spiritual sleep, whoredom, drunkenness, etc.
Whether or no that false Worshipping of the true God, be not only a spiritual
guilt liable to Gods sentence and plagues, but also an habit, frequently
compared in the Prophets, and Rev. 17. to a spirit and disposition of spiritual
drunkenness and whoredom, a soul sleep and a soul sickness: So that as by
the change of a chair, chamber or bed, a sick or sleepie man, whore or
drunkard are not changed, but they remain the same still, until that
disposition of sickness, sleepiness, drunkenness, whoredom be put off, and a
new habit of spiritual health, watchfullnes, sobriety, chastity be put on.

CHAP. XVI.
Now concerning that Scripture, 2 Cor. 6. Mr. Cotton here confesses it holds
forth 5. things: That the repenting Corinthians were called out in from the
unrepenting:

First, in the Fellowship of their Idolatry.

2. From making Marriages with them.

3. From Feasting in their Idols temples.

4. From intimate Familiarity with them.

5. From all Fellowship in the unfruitful works of dark^es. The benefits of
the repenting English, their coming forth from the impenitent English in those
former 5 particulars mentioned by Mr. Cotton.


Ans. If regenerate and truly repenting English thus come forth from the
unregenerate and unrepenting, how would the name of the Lord Jesus be
sanctified, the jealousy of the Lord pacified, their own souls cleansed,
judgments prevented, yea and one good means practiced toward the convincing
and saving of the souls of such, from whom in these particulars they depart,
and dare not have Fellowship with: especially when in all civil things they
walk unblameably, in quiet and helpful cohabitation, righteous and faithful
dealing, and cheerful submission to civil Laws, Orders, Levies, Customs,
etc.

Yea but Mr. Cotton demands, What makes all this to prove that godly persons
who professedly renounce all known sin, may not be received to Church
fellowship, although they see not the utmost skirts of their Pollution, as the
Patriarchs saw not the pollution of their Poligamie. The sins of Gods people
are some^i^^^ reputed to be of ignorance, when they are of negligence, and yet
ignorance excuses not wholly.


Ans. I repeat the former distinction of godly persons, who possibly may live
in ungodly practices (especially of false worship) and then according to Mr.
Cottons own interpretation of this place to the Corinthians, they come not
forth. And I add, if there be any voice of Christ in the mouths of his
Witnesses against these sins, they are not then of Ignorance, but of
Negligence, and spiritual hardness, against the ways of Gods fear, against
Isa. 63. etc.

Moreover, our question is not of the utmost skirts of Pollution, but the
substance of a true or false Bed of Worship Cant. 1. 16. in respect of coming
out of the false, before the entrance into the true. And yet I believe that Mr.
Cotton being to receive a person to Church fellowship, A case put to Mr. Cotton.
who formerly has been infamous for corporal Whoredom, he would not give his
consent to receive such an one, No cause of more shame frr whoredom against an
husbands bed, then against the bed of Gods worship.
without sound Repentance for the filthiness of her skirts ( Lament. 1.) not
only in actual whoredoms, but also in whorish Speeches, Gestures,
Appearances, Provocation. And why should there be a greater strictnes for the
skirts of common whoredom, then of spiritual and soul Whoredom, against the
chastity of Gods Worship? And therefore to that instance of the Fathers
Poligamie, I answer: First by observing what great sins godly persons may
possibly live and long continue in, notwithstanding godliness in the root.
Secondly I ask if any person, of whose godliness Mr. Cot. has had long
persuasion, should believe and maintain (as questionles the Fathers had
grounds satisfying their consciences for what they did:) that he ought to have
many Wives, and accordingly so practiced; The case of Poligamy, or many wives
of the Fathers.
I say, I ask whether Mr. Cotton would receive such a godly person to Church
fellowship? yea I ask, whether the Church of the Jews (had they seen this
evil) would have received such a Proselite from the Gentiles, and when it was
seen, whether any persons so practicing would have been suffered amongst them:
But lastly, what was this personal sin of these godly persons? was it any
matter of Gods worship, any joining with a false Church, Ministry, Worship,
Government, from whence they were to come, before they could constitute his
true Church, and enjoy his Worship, Ministry, Government, etc.

Mr. Cotton concludes this passage thus, The Church of Corinth had such as
partook with Idolaters in their Idols temple, and was not this (says he)
touching of an unclean thing, and did this reject these members from Church
fellowship before conviction; and did it evacuate their Church estate, for not
casting out of such members?

Ans. This was an unclean thing indeed, from which God calls his people in
this place, with glorious promises of receiving them: and Mr. Cotton confesses
that after conviction, any member obstinate in these unclean touches, ought to
be rejected, for, says he, did this sin reject these members from Church
fellowship before conviction?

And upon the same ground that one obstinate person ought to be rejected out of
Church estate, It lesseneth not a rebellion that it is in a multitude: hence a
City in Israel idolatrous was to be destroyed.
upon the same ground, if a greater company or Church were obstinate in such
unclean touches, and so consequently in a rebellion against Christ, ought
every sound Christian Church to reject them, and every sound member to withdraw
from them.

And hence further it is clear, that if such unclean touches obstinately
maintained (as Mr. Cotton confesses and practices) be a ground of rejection
of a person in the Church, Obstinacte that casts out, will keep out from
communion with the Lord Jesus in his Church.
questionless it is a ground of rejection when such persons are to join unto
the Church. And if obstinacy in the whole Church after conviction be a ground
for such a Churches rejection, questionless such a Church or number of persons
obstinate in such evils, cannot congregate nor become a true constituted
Church of Jesus Christ.

The greatest question here would be, The Church of Corinth, and every true
Church separate from Idols as a chaste virgin to Christ.
Whether the Corinthians in their first constitution were separate or no, from
such Idol Temples? and this Mr. Cotton neither does nor can deny; a Church
estate being a state of marriage unto Jesus Christ, and so Paul professedly
says, he had espoused them as a chaste virgin to Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 11.

CHAP. XVII.
Mr. Cotton proceeds to answer some other allegations which I produced from the
confession of sin made by John's Disciples, and the Proselite Gentiles before
they were admitted into Church fellowship, Mat. 3. 6. Acts 19. 18. Unto which
he returns a 3 fold answer: The first is grounded upon his apparent mistake
of my words in a grant of mine, viz. Such a confession and renunciation is not
absolutely necessary, if the substance of true repentance be discerned. Whence
(says he) according to your own confession, such persons as have the substance
of true Repentance may be a true Church.

I answer, it is clear in the progress of the whole contraversie, The
substance of true general repentance in all Gods children, though living in
many gross abominations of false worship, Ministry, etc.
that I ever intend by the substance of true Repentance, not that general
grace of Repentance, which all Gods people have (as Luther a Monk, and going
to, yea publishing the German Mass, and those famous Bishops burnt for Christ
in Qu. Mary's days) but that substance of Repentance for those false ways of
Worship, Church, Ministry, etc. in which Gods people have lived, although the
confessing and renouncing of them be not so particularly expressed, and with such
godly sorrow and indignation as some express, and may well become: And indeed
the whole scope of that caution was for Christian moderation, Not the same
measure and degrees of repentance in all.
and gentleness toward the several sorts of Gods people, professing particular
repentance for their spiritual captivity and bondage, during which captivity
also I readily acknowledge the substance of repentance, and of all the graces
of Christ in general.

In his second Answer Mr. Cotton says, Mr. Cotton.
I grant with the one hand, and take away with the other, for he denies it
necessary to the admission of members, that every one should be convinced of
the sinfullnes of every sipping of the Whores, cup, for (says he) every
sipping of a drunkards cup is not sinful. Some have drunk deep of the Whores
cup; and some but sipt, yet intoxicated.


Ans. First he does not rightly aledge my words, for a little before he
confesses, my words to be that Antichristian drunkenness and whoredom is to
be confessed of all such as have drunk of the Whores cup, or but sipt of it. In
which words I plainly distinguish between such as have drunk deeper of her cup,
as Papists, Popish Priests, etc. and such as in comparison have but sipt, as
Gods own people, who yet by such sipping have been so intoxicated, as to
practice spiritual whoredom against Christ in submitting to false Churches,
Ministry, Worship, etc.

Secondly, whereas he says every sipping of a drunkards cup is not sinful.

I answer: neither the least sipping, nor constant drinking out of the cup
which a drunkard uses to drink in, is sinful: but every drunken sip (which
is our question) is questionless sinful, and so consequently to be avoided by
the sober, whether the cup of corporal or spiritual drunkenness.

CHAP. XVIII.
Mr. Cotton. Mr. Cotton.
Yea but (says he) the 3000. Jews were admitted when they repented of their
murdering of Christ, although they never saw all the superstitious leavenings
wherewith the Pharisees had bewitched them: and so no doubt may godly persons
now, although they be not yet convinced of every passage of Antichristian
superstition, etc. and that upon this ground, that spiritual whoredom and
drunkenness is not so soon discerned as corporal.

I answer, it is not indeed so easily discerned, and yet not the less sinful,
but infinitely transcendent, as much as spiritual sobriety exceeds corporal,
and the bed of the most high God, exceeds the beds of men, who are but dust and
ashes.

Secondly, The first Christians the best pattern for all Christians now.
I answer the converted Jews although they saw not all the leavenings of the
Pharisees, yet they mourned for killing of Christ, and embraced him in his
Worship Ministry, Government, and were added to his Church: and O that the
least beams of light and sparkles of heat were in mine own, and others
souls, which were kindled by the holy Spirit of God in those famous converts
at the preaching of Peter, Acts 2. The true Christ now in his Worship,
Ministry, etc. being discerned and repentance for persecuting and killing of
him, The power of true repentance for killing of Christ.
being expressed, there necessarily follows a withdrawing from the Church,
Ministry and Worship of the false Christ, and submission unto the true: and
this is the sum and substance of our contraversie.

Concerning the confession of sins unto John, Mr. Cotton.
he grants the Disciples of John confessed their sins, the Publicans theirs, the
Soldiers theirs the people theirs, but says he, it appears not that they
confessed their Pharisaicall pollution.

And concerning the confession Acts 19. 18. he says it is not expressed that
they confessed all their deeds.

Ans. If both these confessed their notorious sins, (as Mr. Cotton expresses)
why not as well their notorious sins against God, their Idolatries,
Superstitious Worships, etc. Surely throughout the whole Scripture, the matters
of God, and his Worship are first and most tenderly handled; his people are
ever described by the title of his Worshippers, and his enemies by the title of
Worshippers of false gods, and worshipping the true after a false manner; and
to prove this were to bring forth a candle to the bright shining of the Sun at
noon day.

CHAP. XIX.
His third answer is: Mr. Cotton.
But to satisfy you more fully (and the Lord make you willing in true
meekness of Spirit to receive satisfaction) the body of the members do in
general profess, that the reason of their coming over to us was, that they
might be freed from the bondage of humane Inventions and Ordinances, as their
souls groaned under, for which al so they profess their hearty sorrow, so
far as through ignorance or infirmity they have bin defiled. Beside, in our
daily meetings, and specially in the times of our solemn Humiliations, we
generally all of us bewail all our former pollutions, wherewith we have
defiled our selves and the holy things of God, in our former adminstrations and
communions: but we rather choose to do it then talk of it; and we can but
wonder how you can so boldly and resolutely renounce all the Churches of God,
for neglect of that which you know not whether they have neglected or no, and
before you have admonished us of our sinfullnes in such neglect, if it be found
amongst us.

I answer (with humble desires to the Father of Lights, Answer.
for the true meeknes and wisdom of his Spirit) here is mention of humane
Inventions and Ordinances, and defiling themselves and holy things of God in
former Administrations, and Communions, How can a soul truly oppose
Antichrist, that endures not to have his name questioned.
and yet no mention what such Inventions and Ordinances, what such
Administrations and Communions were: We rather choose to do it (says he) then
to talk of it, which makes me call to mind, an expression of an eminent and
worthy person amongst them in a solemn conference, viz. What need we speak of
Antichrist, can we not enjoy our liberties without inveighing against
Antichrist? etc.

The truth is, I acknowledge their witness against Ceremonies and Bishops, but
that yet they see not the evil of a National Church (notwithstanding they
constitute only particular and independent) let their constant practice speak,
in still joining with such Churches and Ministers in the Ordinances of the Word
and Prayer, and their Persecuting of my self for my humble and faithful, Mr.
Cotton witnessing against a national Church, and yet holding f^^^owship with
it.
and constant admonishing of them, of such unclean walking between a particular
Church (which they only profess to be Christ's) and a National, which Mr.
Cotton professes to separate from.

But how could I possibly be ignorant, (as he seems to charge me) of their
state, when being from first to last in fellowship with them, an Officer
amongst them, had private and public agitations concerning their state and
condition, Impossible for the answerer to be ignorant of their Church estate,
as Mr. Cotton pretends.
with all or most of their Ministers, and at last suffered for such admonitions
to them, the misery of a Winters Banishment amongst the Barbarians: and yet
says he, You know not what we have done, neither have you admonished us of our
sinfullnes.

CHAP. XX.
Mr. Cotton. Mr. Cotton.
A third Scripture which I produced was Haggai 2. 13, 14, 15. desiring that the
place might be thoroughly weighed, and that the Lord might please to hold the
scales himself, the Prophet there telling the Church of the Jews, that if a
person unclean by a dead body touch holy things, those holy things become
unclean unto them; and so says he is this Nation, and so is every work of
their hands and that which they offer is unclean: whence I inferred, that even
Church Covenants made, and Ordinances practiced by persons polluted through
spiritual deadnes, and filthiness of Communion, such Covenants and Ordinances
become unclean unto them, and are profaned by them.

Mr. Cotton answers, Your purpose was to prove that Churches cannot be
constituted by such persons as are unclean by Antichristian pollutions, or if
they be so constituted they are not to be communicated with, but separated
from: But the Prophet acknowledges the whole Church of the Jews to be unclean,
and yet neither denies them to be a Church truly constituted, nor stirs up
himself or others to separate from them.

Ans. I acknowledge the true constitution of the Church of the Jews, and
affirm that this their true constitution was the reason why they were not to be
separated from: for being a National Church, The (...) of the Jews a
National Church truly constituted, therefore not to be separated from, Death
and captivity in the national church typed out spiritual death and captivity
in the particular.
ceremonial and typical their Excommunication was either putting to death in,
or captivity out of that ceremonial Canaan. Hence Salmanassars carrying the
^^. Tribes captive out of this Land is said to be the casting of them out of
Gods sight, 2 Kings 17. which was their Excommunication.

Accordingly in the particular Christian Churches, Christ Jesus cuts off by
spiritual death, which is Excommunication, or for want of due execution of
Justice by that Ordinance in his Kingdom, he sells the Church into spiritual
captivity, to confused (Babylonish) Lords, and Worships, and so drives them
out of his sight.

Now from the consequent of this place in Haggai mine argument stands good; and
Mr. Cotton here acknowledges it, that holy things may be all unclean to Gods
people, when they lie in their uncleannes, Ceremonial uncleanness in the
national Church typed out moral uncleanness in the particular.
as this people did. Those Scriptures, Levit. 16. and Numbers 19. which
discourse of typical and Ceremonial uncleanness, he acknowledges to type
out in the Gospel the Moral uncleannes either of dead works, Ephesians. 5. 11. or
dead persons, 2 Cor. 6. 14. or dead world, Gal. 6. 14. and in this place of
Haggai, he acknowledges that Gods people, Prince and people, were defiled by
worldlines, in which condition (says he) their oblations, their bodily
labors, were all unclean, and found neither acceptance nor blessing from the
Lord.

Therefore says he afterward: In the Church godly Christians themselves, while
they attend to the world more then to the things of God, are unclean in the
sight of God: therefore the Church cannot be constituted of such; or if it be
constitute of such, the people of God must separate from them. And lastly, he
says, the Church of Christ and members thereof must separate themselves from
their hypocrisy, and worldlynes, else they and their duties will be unclean in
the sight of God, notwithstanding their Church estate.

Ans. What have I more spoken then Mr. Cotton himself has uttered in this his
explication and application of this Scripture? As

First, that godly persons may become defiled and unclean by hypocrisy and
worldlines.

Secondly, while they lie in such a condition of uncleannes, all their
offerings, Mr. Cottons own confession concerning unclean worships even of godly
persons.
persons, labors are unclean in the sight of God, and have neither acceptance
nor blessing from him: but they and their duties are unclean in his sight
notwithstanding their Church estate.

Thirdly, the Church of Christ cannot be constituted of such godly persons,
when defiled with such worldliness.

Fourthly, the Church c^nsisting of such worldly persons (though otherwise
godly and Christian) the people of God must separate from them.

These are Mr. Cottons own express words which justify: Inferences from
Master Cottons grant.


First my former distinction of godly persons in their personal respect,
between God and themselves; and yet becoming ungodly in their outward
defilements.

Secondly, they justify my assertion of a necessity of cleansing from
Antichristian filthiness and communions with dead works, dead worships dead
persons in Gods worship, if the touches of the dead world, or immoderate love
of it do so defile, as Mr. Cotton here affirms.

Thirdly, if (as he says) the Church cannot be constituted of such godly
persons as are defiled by immoderate love of the world, much less can it be
constituted of godly persons defiled with the dead Inventions, Worships,
Communions of unregenerate and ungodly persons.

Fourthly he justifies a separation from such Churches, if so constituted, or
so constituting, because though worldlines be Adultery against God James 4.
yet not comparable to spiritual Adultery of a false bed of Worship, Ministry,
etc.

CHAP. XXI.
Mr. Cotton proceeds. The second stumbling block or offense which you have
taken at the way of these Churches, is that you conceive us to walk between
Christ and Antichrist. First in practicing separation here, and not repenting
of our preaching and Printing against it in our own Country. Secondly, in
reproaching your self at Salem, and others for separation. Thirdly in
particular, that my self have conceived and spoken, that separation is a way
that God has not prospered: yet say you the truth of the Churches way depends
not upon the countenance of men, or upon outward peace and liberty.

Unto this he answers, that they halt not, but walk in the midst of 2
extremes, the one of being defiled with the pollution of other Churches, the
other of renouncing the Churches for the remnant of Pollutions.

This moderation he (with ingenuous moderation) professes he sees no cause to
repent of, etc.

Ans. With the Lords gracious assistance we shall prove this middle walking to
be no less then halting, for which we shall show cause of repentance,
beseeching him that is a Prince and a Savior to give repentance unto his
Israel, Acts 5 3.

First Mr. Cotton himself confesses, that no National, Provincial,
Diocesan, or Parish Church (wherein some truly godly are not) are true Churches.
Secondly, he practices no Church estate, but such as is constituted only of
godly persons, nor admits any unregenerate or ungodly person. Thirdly, he
confesses a Church of Christ cannot be constituted of such godly persons, who
are in bondage to the inordinate love of the world. Fourthly, if a Church
consist of such, Gods people ought to separate from them.

Upon these his own confessions, Mr. Cotton extenuates and minceth the ^oot,
mass and substance of the matter of national churches, which he acknowledges
to be unregenerate, not yet born again, by naming only a remnant of pollutions.
I earnestly beseech Mr. Cotton and all that fear God to ponder how he can say
he walks with an even foot between 2 extremes, when according to his own
confession, National Churches, Parish Churches, yea a Church constituted of
godly persons given to inordinate love of the world are false and to be
separated from: and yet he will not have the Parish Church to be separated
from, for the remnant of pollution (I conceive he means ceremonies and
Bishops) notwithstanding that he also acknowledges, that the generality of
every Parish in England consists of unregenerate persons, and of thousands
inbondaged, not only to worldlines, but also ignorance, superstition, scoffing
swearing, cursing, whoredom drunkenness, theft, lying. What are 2. or 3. or
more of regenerate and godly persons in such communions, The estate of the
godly mingled with the ungodly in worships.
but as 2 or 3 Roses or Lillies in a wilderness? a few grains of good corn in
a heap of chafe? a few sheep among herds of Wolves or Swine, or (if more
civil) flocks of Goats? a little good dough swallowed up with a whole bushel
of leaven? or a little precious gold confounded and mingled with a whole heap
of dross? The Searcher of all Hearts knows I write not this to reproach any,
knowing that my self am by nature a child of wrath, and that the father of
mercies shows mercy to whom and when he will: The state of men must be
faithfully discovered unto them,
but for the Name of Christ Jesus, in loving faithfullnes to my Countrymens
souls, and defense of truth, I remember my worthy adversary of that state and
condition, from which his confessions say he must separate, his practice in
gathering of Churches seems to say he does separate; and yet he professes
there are but some remnants of pollution amongst them for which he dares not
separate.

CHAP. XXII.
Mr. Cotton. Secondly (says he) I know no man that reproacheth Salem for their
separation, nor do I believe that they do separate, howsoever if any do
reproach them for it, I think it a sin meet to be censured, but not with so
deep a censure as to Excommunicate all the Churches, or to separate from them
before it do appear that they do tolerate their members in such their
causeles reproachings: We confess the errors of men are to be contended
against, not with reproaches, but the Sword of the Spirit: but on the other
side, the saylings of the Churches are not forthwith to be healed by
separation. It is not chyrurgery but butcherie to heal every sore in a member
with no other but abscision from the body.

Ans. The Church of Salem was known to profes separation, and was generally and
publicly reproached (and I could mention a case wherein she was punished) for
it implicitly.

Mr. Cotton here confesses these 2 things, which (I leave to himself to
reconcile, Mr. Cotton seems to be both for and yet against separation.
with his former profession here and elsewhere against separation. First (says
he) if any reproach them for separation it is a sin meet to be censured.
Secondly, the Churches themselves may be separated from, who tolerate their
members in such causeles reproachings. In these later passages he seems (as in
other his confessions and practices mentioned) to be for it, sensible of shame,
disgrace or reproach to be cast on it.

I grant with him the failings of Churches are not forthwith to be healed by
separation, Mr. Cottons own confessions are sufficient answers to himself.
yet himself within a few lines confesses there is a lawful separation from
Churches, that do but tolerate their members in causeles reproaches.

I confess also that it is not chyrurgerie but butcherie, to heal every sore
with no other medicine but with abscision from the body: yet himself
confesses before, that even Churches of godly persons must be separated from,
for immoderate worldlines: Not for a sore of infirmity, but a leprosy or
gangrene of obstinacy ought a person to be cat off.
And again here he confesses they may be separated from, when they tolerate
their members in such their causeles reproachings. Beside, it is not every sore
of infirmity or ignorance, but an Ulcer or Gangrene of Obstinacy* for which I
maintained that a person ought to be cut off, or a Church separated from. But
if he call that butcherie conscienciously and peaceably to separate from a
spiritual communion of a Church or society* Mr. Cotton deeply guilty of
cruelty both against consciences and bodies in persecuting of them yet cries
out against the appearance of due severitie in the Church of Christ*
what shall it be called by the second Adam the Lord Jesus (who gives names to
all creatures and all actions) to cut off persons, them and theirs, branch and
root, from any civil being in their territories; and consequently from the
whole world (were their territories so large) because their consciences dare
not bow down to any worship* but what they believe the Lord Jesus appointed and
being also otherwise subject to the civil state and Laws thereof.

CHAP. XXIII.
Thirdly, whereas I urged a speech of his own, viz. that God had not prospered
the way of separation, and conceives that I understood him of outward
prosperity. He affirms the Puritans to have been worse used in England then
the Separatist, and thus writes: The meeting of the Separatists may be known to
the Officers in Court and winked at, when the Conventicles of the Puritans (as
they call them) shall be hunted out with all diligence, and pursued with more
violence then any Law can justify,

Ans. Doubtless the contraversie of God has bin great with this Land, Gods
controversy for persecution.
that either of both have been so violently pursued and persecuted: I believe
they are both the Witnesses of several truths of Jesus Christ, against an
impenitent and unchristian profession of the name of the Lord Jesus.

Now for their sufferings: The sufferings of the Separatists and Puritants in
England compared.
As the Puritans have not comparably suffered (as but seldom congregating in
separate assemblies from the common) so have not any of them suffered unto death
for the way of Non-conformitie to Ceremonies, etc. Indeed the worthy witness Mr.
Vdall was near unto death for his witness against Bishops and Ceremonies: Mr.
Vdal.
but Mr. Penry, Mr. Barrow, Mr. Penry, Mr, Barrow, Mr. Greenwood.
Mr. Greenwood followed the Lord Jesus with their Gibbets on their shoulders
and were hanged with him and for him in the way of separation: many more have
been condemned to die, banished and choked in prisons, I could produce upon
occasion.

Again, Few conscientious Separatists but first were Puritans.
I believe that there hardly has ever been a conscientious Seperatist, who was
not first a Puritan: for (as Mr. Can has unan^werably proved) the grounds and
principles of the Puritans against Bishops and Ceremonies, and prophanes of
people pro^essing Christ, The Non-conformists grounds enforce separation.
and the necessity of Christ's flock and discipline, must necessarily, if
truly followed, lead on to, and enforce a separation from such ways,
worships, and Worshippers, to seek out the true way of Gods worship according
to Christ Jesus.

But what should be the reason, (since the separatist witnesses against the
root of the Church constitution it self, that yet he should find (as Mr.
Cotton says) more favor then the Puritan or Nonconformist?

Doubtless the reasons are evident: Most of the separation of the lower sort of
people.
First most of Gods servants who out of sight of the ignorance, unbelief and
prophanes of the body of the National Church, have separated and durst not
have longer fellowship with it; I say most of them have been poor and low, The
poverty of Mr. Ainsworth.
and not such gainful customers to the Bishops, their Courts and Officers.

That worthy instrument of Christ's praise Mr. Ainsworth, during some time (and
some time of his great labors in Holland) lived upon 9. d. per week with roots
boiled, The Nonconformists have been a fair booty for the Bishops,
etc. Whereas on the other side such of Gods servants as have been
Nonconformists have had fair estates been great persons, have had rich livings
and benefices, of which the Bishops and theirs (like greedy Wolves) have made
the more desirable prey. The Separatists have been professed enemies, but the
Puritans in many things professed friends and subjects to the Bishops.


Secondly, it is a principle in nature to prefer a professed enemy, before a
pretended friend. Such as have separated, have been looked at by the Bishops and
theirs, as known and professed enemies: whereas the Puritans professed subjection,
and have submitted to the Bishops, their Courts, their Officers, their Common
Prayer and Worships, and yet (as the Bishops have well known) with no greater
affection, then the Israelites bare their Egyptian cruel Taskmasters.

He says, Mr. Cotton.
God has not prospered the way of Separation with peace amongst themselves*
and growth of Grace.

Ans. The want of peace may befall the truest Churches of the Lord Jesus at
Antioch, Corinth, Galatia, who were exercised with great distractions.
Secondly, it is a common character of a false Church, maintained by the Smiths
and Cutlers Shop, to enjoy a quiet calm and peaceable tranquillity, A false
church may enforce a present greater (though false grace) then the true Spouse
of Christ Jesus.
none daring for fear of civil punishment, to question, object, or differ
from the common road and custom. Thus sings that great Whore the
Antichristian Church, Revel. 18, I sit as a Queen, am no Widow, see no sorrow,
while Christ's dearest complains, she is forsaken, sits weeping as a Widow,
Lam. 1. Thirdly, Gods people in that way, have sometimes long enjoyed sweet
peace and soul contentment in England, Holland, New England, and other places,
and would not have exchanged a day of such an holy and peaceable harmony for
thousands in the Courts of Princes, seeing no other, Gods people have found
infinite sweetness and peace in some times of their holy communion.
and in sincerity seeking after the Lord Jesus. And yet I humbly conceive,
that as David with the Princes and 30 thousand Israelites, carrying the Ark on
the shoulders of the Oxen, leaped and danced with great rejoicing, until God
smote Vzzah for his Error and Disorder, and made a breach, and a teaching
Monument of Perez Vzzah, the breach of Vzzah: So in like manner all those
celebrations of the spiritual Arc or Ordinances, Breaches have been and must
be among all Gods people to make them celebrate the Lords holy ordinances
according to due order.
which yet I have know, although for the present accompanied with great
rejoicing and tryumphing; yet, as they have not been after the Due Order, so
have they all met with and still must a Pe^^^ Vzzah, breaches and Divisions,
until the Lord Jesus discover, direct and encourage his servants in his own
due holy Order and appointment. And for growth in Grace, notwithstanding that
amongst all sorts of Gods Witnesses, some false brethren creep in as cheaters
and spies, and Judasses, dishonouring the name of Christ Jesus, Many graceless
Iudasses amongst Gods people.
and betraying his Witnesses: yet Satan himself the accuser of the Saints,
cannot but confess that multitudes of Gods Witnesses (reproached with the
names of Brownists, and Anabaptists) have kept themselves from the error of the
wicked, and grow in grace and knowledge of the Lord Jesus, endeavoring to
cleanse themselves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, Multitudes of
gracions and holy persons that have professed Separation
and to finish holiness in the fear of God. I will not make odious and envious
comparisons, but desire that all that name the name of the Lord Jesus may
depart wholly and for ever from iniquity.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Lastly he adds, M. Cotton,
That such as erring through simplicity and tenderness* have grown in grace,
have grown also to discern their lawful liberty in the hearing of the Word
from English preachers.

Ans. I will not question the uprightnes of some, ^oure sorts of back-sliders
from Separation far from growth in grace.
who have gone back from many truths of God which they have professed: yet mine
own experience of 4 sorts who have back-sliden, I shall report, for a warning
to all into whose hands these may come to be like Antipas (Revel. 2.) a
faithful witness to the death, to any of the truths of the Lord Jesus, which
he shall please to be trust them with:

First I have known no small number of such torn to absolute Familisme, Some
backsliding turn to Familisme.
and under their pretenses of great raptures of Love deny all obedience to, or
seeking after the pure Ordinances and appointments of the Lord Jesus.

Secondly, Some to profaneness.
others have laid the raines upon the necks of their consciences, and like the
Dog lickt up their vomit of former loosnes and prophanes of lip and life; and
have been so far from growing in grace, that they have turned the grace of
God into wantonness.

Thirdly, Some to persecuting of others.
others backsliding have lost the beauty and shining of a t^nder conscience
toward God, and of a merciful compassion toward men, becoming most fierce
persecutors of their own formerly fellow witnesses, and of any other who have
differd in conscience from them.

Lastly, Some t^ languishing in sorrow and sadness, etc.
others although preserved from Familisme, prophanes and persecuting of others,
yet the leaf of their Christian course has withered, the later beauty and
savor of their holiness has not been like their former; and they have confessed
and do, their sin, their weakness, their bondage, and wish they were at liberty
in their former freedom: and some have gone with little peace, but sorrow to
their graves, confessing to my self and others, that God never prospered them
in soul or body, since they sold away his truth, which once they had bought
and made profession of it never to sell it.

CHAP. XXV.
Yea but (says he) they have grown to discern their lawful liberty, Mr.
Cotton.
to return to the hearing of the Word from English preachers.

Ans. Here I might engage my self in a contraversie, which neither this
Treatise will permit; Mr. Cans answer to Mr, Robinsons Liberty of hearing.
nor is there need, since it has pleased the Father of lights to stir up the
spirit of a faithful Witness of his truth in this particular, Mr. ^ann, to make
a large and faithful reply to a Book, Printed in Mr. Robinsons name, tending
to prove such a lawful Liberty.

For such excellent and worthy persons whom Mr. Cotton here intends by the name
of English preachers, I acknowledge my self unworthy to hold the candle to
them: Mr Cottons confession concerning the ministry.
yet I shall humbly present what Mr. Cotton himself professes in 3
particulars:

First concerning this title English preachers.

Secondly, hearing the Word from such English preachers.

Thirdly, the lawful calling of such to the Ministry or service, according to
Christ Jesus.

For the first he acknowledges, (...).
that the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel are Pastors, Teachers, Bishops,
Overseers, Elders, and that their proper work is to feed and govern, a truly
converted holy and godly people, gathered into a flock or Church estate, and
not properly preachers to convert, beget, make Disciples, Matthew. 28.
which the Apostles and Evangelists professedly were. Now then that man that
professes himself a Minister, (...).
and professes to feed a Flock or Church, with the Ordinances of Word and
Prayer, he must needs acknowledge that his proper work is not to preach for
conversion, Preachers and Pastor f^^re different,
which is most preposterous amongst a converted Christian people, fed up with
Ordinances in Church estate: So that according to Mr. Cottons confession
English preachers are, not Pastors, Teachers, Bishops, Elders, but preachers of
glad news (Evangelists) men sent to convert and gather Churches (Apostles)
ambassadors, trumpeters with Proclamation from the King of Kings, to convert,
subdue bring in rebellious unconverted, unbeleeving, unchristian souls to the
obedience and subjection of the Lord Jesus.

I readily confess that at the Pastors (or Shepherds) feeding of his flock,
Conversion in a Church accidental.
and the Prophets prohecying in the Church, an unbeleever coming in is
convinced, falls on his face and acknowledges God to be there: yet this is
accidental that any unbeleever should come in; Personal repentance ^^ought in
thousands be godly person^ in Popish ministries.
and the Pastors work is to feed his Flock, Acts 20. and prophecy is not for
unbeevers, but for them that believe to edefie, exhort and comfort the Church,
1 Cor. 34. ^. 22.

I also readily acknowledge that it has pleased God to work a person (...)
repentance in the hearts of thousands in Germany, England, Low Countries,
France, Scotland, Ireland, etc. Yea and who knows but in Italy, Spain, Rome,
not only by such men, who decline the name of Bishops, Priests Deacons (the
constituted Ministry of England hitherto) but also by such as have owned them,
as Luther remaining a Monk, and famous holy men remaining and burning Lord
Bishops. To preach mainly for conversion of that people, to whom a man stands
Shepherd as to a converted people and Flock of Christ, a dangerous disorder.
But all this has been under the notion of Ministers feeding their flocks, not
of preachers sent to convert the unconverted and unbeleeving.

This passage I present for 2 Reasons: First because so many excellent and
worthy persons mainly preach for conversion, as concieving (and that truly) the
body of the people of England to be in a natural and unregenerate estate: and
yet account they themselves fixed and constant Officers and Ministers to
particular Parishes or congregations unto whom they also administer the holy
things of God, though sometimes few, and sometimes none regenerate or newborn
have been found amongst them: which is a matter of high concernment touching
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Gods people must seek after a ministry sent
by Christ to convert.
and the souls of men. Secondly that in these great Earthquakes, wherein it
pleases God to shake foundations civil and spiritual, such a Ministry of
Christ Jesus may be sought after, whose proper work is preaching, for
converting and gathering of true penitents to the fellowship of the Son of God.

CHAP. XXVI.
The second thing which Mr. Cotton himself has professed concerning English
preachers is, Mr. Cotton.
that although the Word, yet not the Seals may be received from them: because
(says he) there is no communion in hearing, and the Word is to be preached to
All, but the seals he conceives (and that rightly) are profaned in being
dispensed to the ungodly, etc.

Ans. Mr. Cotton himself maintains, The communion or fellowship of the word
taught in a Church estate.
that the dispensing of the Word in a Church estate, is Christ's feeding of his
flock Cant. 1. 8. Christ's kissing of his Spouse or Wife, Cant. 1. 2. Christ's
embracing of his Spouse in the marriage bed, Cant. 1. 16. Christ's nursing of his
children at his wives breast, Cant. 4. and is there no communion between the
Shepherd and his Sheep? the Husband and his Wife in chaste kisses and embraces
and the Mother and her Child at the breast?

Beside he confesses, that that Fellowship in the Gospel, Phil. 1. 3. is a
fellowship or communion in the Apostles doctrine, community, breaking of
bread, and prayer, in which the first Church continued, Acts 2. 46. All which
overthrows that Doctrine of a lawful participation of the Word and Prayer in a
Church estate, where it is not lawful to communicate in the breaking of bread
or seals.

CHAP. XXVII.
Thirdly concerning the lawful Commission or calling of English preachers.

Mr. Cotton himself and others most eminent in New England have freely
confessed, Eminent Ministers so accounted in old England, profess themseves
private Christians in new England.
that notwithstanding their former profession of Ministry in Old England, yet
in New England (until they received a calling from a particular Church, that
they were but private Christians.

Secondly, that Christ Jesus has appointed no other calling to the Ministry,
but such as they practice in New England, and therefore consequently that all
other which is not from a particular Congregation of godly persons, is none of
Christ's.

As first a calling or commission received from the Bishops. False callings or
commissions for the Ministry.


Secondly from a Parish of natural and unregenerate persons.

Thirdly, from some few godly persons, yet remaining in Church fellowship after
the Parish way.

Lastly, the eminent gifts and abilities are but Qualifications fitting and
preparing for a call or Office according to 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. All which
premises duly considered, I humbly desire of the Father of Lights, that Mr.
Cotton, and all that fear God may try what will abide the fiery trial in this
particalar, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed in flaming fire, etc.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The close of his Lette^ is an Answer to a passage of mine, M. Cotton.
which he repeateth in an Objection thus: But this you fear is to condemn the
witnesses of Jesus (the Separate Churches in London, and elsewhere) and our
jealous God will visit us for such arrearages: yea the curse of the Angel to
Meros will fall upon us, because we come not forth to help Jehovah against the
mighty: we pray not for them, we come not at them (but at Parishes frequently)
yea we reproach and censure them.

To which he answers, that neither Christ nor his Apostles after him, nor
Prophets before him ever delivered that way. That they fear not the Angels
curse, because it is not to help Jehovah but Satan, to withdraw people from
the Parishes where they have found more presence of Christ, and evidence of his
Spirit then in separated Churches: That they pray not for them because they
cannot pray in faith for a blessing upon their Separation: and that it is
little comfort to hear of separated Churches, as being the inventions of men,
and blames them that being desirous of Reformation, they stumble not only at
the Inventions of men, but for their sakes at the Ordinances of the Lord,
because they separate not only from the Parishes, but from the Church at
Plimmouth, and of that whereof Mr. Lathrop was Pastor, who (as he says) not
only refuse all the Inventions of men, but choose to serve the Lord in his own
Ordinances. Only, lastly he professes his inward sorrow that my self help
erring, though zealous souls against the mighty Ordinances of the Lord, which
whosoever stumble at shall be broken, The garden of the churches of both old
and new Testament, planted with an hedge or wall of separation from the world.
because whosoever will not kiss the Son (that is, will not hear and
embrace the words of his mouth) shall perish in their way.

Ans. However Mr. Cotton believes and writes of this point, yet has he not
duly considered these following particulars:

First the faithful labors of many Witnesses of Jesus Christ, extant to the
world, abundantly proving, that the Church of the Jews under the Old Testament
in the type, and the Church of the Christians under the New Testament in the
Antitype, were both separate from the world; When Gods people neglect to
maintain that hedge or wall, God has turned his garden into a wilderness.
and that when they have opened a gap in the hedge or wall of Separation
between the Garden of the Church and the Wilderness of the world, God has ever
broke down the wall it self, removed the Candlestick, etc. and made his Garden
a Wilderness, as at this day. And that therefore if he will ever please to
restore his Garden and Paradise again, it must of necessity be walled in
peculiarly unto himself from the world, and that all that shall be saved out
of the world are to be transplanted out of the Wilderness of the world, The
Nonconformists grounds necessarily enforce a separation of the Church from the
unclean in clean and holy things.
and added unto his Church or Garden.

Secondly, that all the grounds and principles leading to oppose Bishops,
Ceremonies, Common Prayer, prostitution of the Ordinances of Christ to the
ungodly and to the true practice of Christ's own Ordinances, do necessarily (as
before I intimated, and Mr. Ca^^ has fully proved) conclude a separation of
holy from unholy, penitent from impenitent, godly from ungodly, etc. and that
to frame any other building upon such grounds and foundations, is no other then
to raise the form of a square house upon the Keele of a Ship, which will never
prove a soul saving true Arc or Church of Christ Jesus, according to the
Pattern.

Thirdly the multitudes of holy and faithful men and women, who since Q.
Mary's days have witnessed this truth by writing disputing and in suffering
loss of goods and friends, The great suffe^ing for this cause.
in impresonment, banishments, death, etc. I confess the Nonconformists have
suffered also: but they that have suffered for this cause, have far exceeded,
in not only witnessing to those grounds of the Non-conformists but to those
Truths also, the unavoidable conclusions of the Non-conformists principles.

Fourthly, what is that which Mr. Cotton and so many hundreths fearing God in
New England walk in but a way of separation? Mr. Cotton^ and others zealous
practice of separation in New England.
Of what matter do they profess to constitute their Churches, but of true
godly persons? In what form do they cast this matter, but by a voluntary
uniting, or adding of such godly persons, whom they carefully examine, and
cause to make a public confession of sin, and profession of their knowledge,
and grace in Christ? Nay when other English have attempted to set up a
Congregation after the Parishionall way, have they not been suppressed? Yea have
they not professedly and lately answered many worthy persons, whom they account
godly Ministers and people that they could not permit them to live in the same
Commonwealth together with them, if they set up any other Church and Worship
then what themselves practice? Mr. Cotton allowing liberty to frequent those
parishes in Old England: which parishes be himself persecutes in New England
Let their own souls, and the souls of others seriously ponder in the fear
of God, what should be the Reason why themselves so practicing, should
persecute others for not leaving open a gap of Liberty to escape persecution
and the Cross of Christ, by frequenting the Parishes in Old England, which
Parishes themselves persecute in New England, and will not permit them to
breath in the common air amongst them.

Fifthly in the Parishes (which Mr. Cotton holds but inventions of men) however
they would have liberty to frequent the Worship of the Word, A great mystery in
the escaping of the cross of Christ.
yet they separate from the Sacraments: and yet according to Mr. Cottons own
principles (as before) there is as true Communion in the Ministration of the
word in a Church estate as in the seals: What mystery should be in this, but
that here also the Cross or Gibbet of Christ may be avoided in a great
measure, if persons come to Church, etc

Lastly, however he says, he has not found such presence of Christ, and
evidence of his Spirit in such Churches, as in the Parishes: What should be the
reason of their great rejoycings and boastings of their own Separations in New
England, The New English Churches (...) by some to (...) purer then the first
establi^^ed by the Apostles.
insomuch that some of the most eminent amongst them have affirmed, That even
the Apostles Churches were not so pure? Surely if the same New English Churches
were in Old England, they could not meet without Persecution, which therefore in
Old England they avoid by frequenting the way of Church-worship (which in New
England they Persecute) the Parishes.

Upon these considerations how can Mr. Cotton be offended that I should help
(as he calls them) any zealous souls, not against the mighty Ordinances of the
Lord Jesus, but to seek after the Lord Jesus without halting? The reformation
desired now had been accounted Heresy in Ed. ^ his daye^
Yea why should Mr. Cotton, or any desirous to practice Reformation, kindle a
fire of Persecution against such zealous souls, especially considering that
themselves, had they so inveighed against Bishops, Common Prayer, etc. in
Edward the 6. his days had been accounted as great Heretics, in those
Reforming times as any now can be in these: yet would it have been then* and
since has it been great oppression and Tyranny to persecute their consciences,
and still will it be for them to persecute the consciences of others in Old or
New England.

How can I better end then Mr. Cotton does, by warning, that all that will not
kiss the Son (that is, hear and embrace the words of his mouth) shall perish
in their way, (...) unjust (...) wheresoever.
Psalm. 2. 12. And I desire Mr. Cotton and every soul to whom these lines may
come, seriously to consider, in this Contraversie, if the Lord Jesus were
himself in person in Old or New England, what Church, what Ministry, what
Worship, what Government he would set up, and what persecution he would
practice toward them that would not receive Him?

FINIS.

