A good and seasonable CAVEAT FOR CHRISTIANS.

Delivered in a Sermon at the Funeral of the Right Worshipful Sir Charles
Shirley, Knight and Baronet, in the Parish Church of Breedon, in
Leichestershire.

By John Wilson, Master of Arts, and Preacher of Gods word in the said Parish.

O Lord keep my soul. Psa. 25. 20. For what shall it profit a man if he win
the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what recompense or exchange shall
a man give for his soul? Mat. 16. 26. Imprimatur,

Jo. Downame.
7. October. 1646.


LONDON, Printed for Richard Harper, and are to be sold at his shop in
Smithfield. 1646.

TO The Right Worshipful Sir ROBERT SHIRLEY Knight Baronet, And to his
virtuous consort the Lady CATHARINE SHIRLEY, the Author wishes all happiness,
external, internal, and eternal.
Rt. Worcester.
HAd not the importunity of friends prevailed with me, I had never published
this Sermon preached at the solemnization of the funeral obsequies, of your
Noble brother, Sir Charles) for I was never so well conceited of the product of
my weak brain, as to deem it worthy public view.

If Moses the author of my Text, Exodus 4. 10.
professed that he was not eloquent, that he was slow of speech, and unapt for
so great employment as he was called to: I am sure I have ten thousand thousand
times more cause to disclaim eloquence and to acknowledge my own weakness,
and unworthiness; yet this is my comfort Innocentia melior eloquentia
Quintilian.
innocence is better then eloquence; a good cause better then a good orator.

This little Manual or Enchiridion I am sure will be censured, and I fear
more then practiced: Scrinia damagnis, me manus una capit. Mar. lib. 1. epig. 2.
one perhaps will quarrel with the style, another with the method, and others
with the matter, but let such know that I seek not the suffrages of their
praise or approbation, Candor in hoc ae^^o in^ermortua ^enc, Ovid ^e pont. lib.
(...). elig. ^. (...) non ego ^^entosae ^^lebis suf^^ragia ve^^or. Ho^^a. lib.
1. ep. 9. Lucian.
who like summer ^lyes breath corruption on the best provision: the malignity
of whose wit, can find fault with the best actions, not only of men, but of
God also, as Lucians Momus, who being called to judge of the excellency of
those master pieces the gods had made, (scil.) a man, a house and a horse,
found fault withal three, with the horse, that it had not horns for defense,
with the house, that it had not motion, and with the man, that he had not a
window to look into his breast: even so these malevolent censurers criticize
with a froward curiosity upon the best and purest volumnes, and often times
fill and blot them with their own Astericks and errata's. And where a candid
censure might of every thing make a good construction, and take all in a fair
sense, there will they through misconstruction or some idle conjecture, though
to the fullest period, add, a nonnulla desiderantur, that something is
wanting, or that it might have been better done otherwise. Insomuch that it is
even a task for divinity to please man, (...). Non (...) cun^ it is place^ vel
Jupi^ter ipse Nec mi^^tens pluv^^am, ^^retinens ^^pluviam.
not that this argues any weakness in God who is able to do all things, but a
perverseness in man's nature that will be content with nothing.

If therefore such find fault, it shall not trouble me; if any be contentious,
we have no such custom, nor the Church of God. 1 Corin. 11. 16.

The more ingenious, are more courteous, Unus Plato plus est quam Atheniensis
populus. (...), in vita ^lat.
together with whom, so your Worcester. continues your approbation of it, I shall
think my self happy in my labors; magnum ^oc ego ^luco, ^ood pla^^ui tibi,
qui tu^pi ^ecernis ^oncstum H^rat-Ser^^. lib. 2. (...). 6.
and acknowledge your favor herein, to be far transcending my merit; the
best of whose endeavors cannot deserve the influence of so noble a protector.

It is a good rule that in dedicating books, we should be sure that the thing
be worthy the person to whom it is dedicated. ^e exhortor moneoque libelle, ut
docto placeas Apolli^^^.


I will not say this is such, Mart. lib. 4. epig. 87. Da mihi ^te placidum,
ingenium vultu starque caditque tuo. Ovid fast. lib 1. ^mmensa subit cura ut
quae tibi dicantur te digna sint. ^lin. praef in Hi^^^at. (...) Vesp. imperat.
In hoc faci^unt slult quos gloria vexa^inanis.
because I am conscious to my self of much weakness and unworthiness: yet
you will the more magnify your own worth by receiving so small a mite into
your so noble patrociny.

I shall forbear much Apologizing, for your protection of this ensuing Sermon,
having had assurance thereof already from you, at your house in Staunton; my
humble suite is, that you will pardon my demerits, and at your best leisure
peruse it, and I trust that as God has endowed you with a great temporal
estate on earth, so you may by these my weak endeavors be excited to labor
for, and diligently seek after, an eternal inheritance in the kingdom of
heaven.

The motto anexed to your coat of arms is, A Eterna prapon^ caducis, and
indeed it is the s^mme of my exhortations, in the ensuing Sermon.

Be pleased therefore to ^emember what you in that motto profess. Prefer
heavenly above earthly things, set your affections on things above, and not on
things beneath; take heed to your selves, and keep your souls diligently. But
the volumne is so small, that I must make the preface suitable, lest the City
run out of the gates, as the Philosophers jeered the men of Myndum. (...).
^acrt. de ^it. Philos. ^ib. 6.


I shall therefore conclude with that of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians, 1 Ep.
3 chapter 12. and 13. ver. the Lord make you increase and abound in love one
toward another, and toward all men, to the end he may establish your hearts
unbl^mable, in holiness before God our father, even at the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ with all his Saints: which is and shall be the hearty and constant
prayer of

Your most humble servant, JOHN WILSON.

A good caveat for Christians.
Deuteronomy. chap. 4. part of the ninth verse. Only take heed to thy self, and
keep thy soul diligently.
THis is grave counsel, given by Moses the lawgiver; a man both religious and
learned, who, though his humility was such, that he pleaded want of eloquence,
slownesse of tongue, and imperfection of speech, Exodus 4. 10. yet his knowledge
was so great, and that not only in the learning of the Egyptians, but also in
spiritual matters, that we may most justly affirm of him that he was (...),
weighty in his sentences: Suav^^^^^ and Brevissima.
for proof whereof you need travail no farther then my text, which is both
short and sweet, and therefore I hope will be the more welcome to you, for it
fares with sentences as it does with coins. ^drewes princi^^^ conci^. (...).
In coins they that in smallest compass conteyn greatest values are most
esteemd; and in sentences, they that in fewest words comprize most matter, are
most praised, and indeed such is this of my text: it is both short and sweet.

It is short and therefore you will be without excuse, if you forget it; it is
sweet, and therefore he must needs be a distempered man that disrellishes it:
it is short and indeed so short that I may justly affirm with Basil that it
is (...), even a volumn in a sentence, consilium optimum in mole minima, one of
the excellentest exhortations in one of the least sentences, (...), as it were
Homers Iliads in a nut shell.

It is also sweet, and so sweet, that as Saint Paul said. ^^edibile ^^alicui
^ntam ig^aviam esse insua^, ut salutem suam negligat. De most. Oly
Covet earnestly the best gifts 1 Cor: 12. 31. So may I say covet or seek the
best counsel you can, and you cannot find better then this in my text: For
what counsel is like it? it is true you may have good counsel from your
physician for your bodily-health, and no one is so simple to refuse it, you may
have good counsel also from your lawyer concerning your estate, and I am sure
you much desire it; but this counsel from the Minister concerning the good of
your so^le much exceeds both the precedent counsels in regard of the excellency
of the soul, which far surpasses both body and estate.

It was good advice of Austin, keep the faith, res pretiosa est. It is a
precious thing, keep innocence, res pretiosaest, that is a precious thing
also. I add farther, yet not I, but Moses custodi animam, keep thy soul, res
pretiosa, nay res preciosissima est, it is the most precious jewel thou have,
if it be lost thou art lost, if it be lost all is lost, therefore Moses in the
text advises us to take heed to our selves and keep our souls diligently.

Division.
In which words be pleased to observe with me two parts:

First a preface, Secondly a precept; or (if you will) a direction, and a duty.

First the preface, or direction in these words, only take heed to thy self.

Secondly the precept or duty, in the words following. Keep thy soul
diligently.

He duae parts quasi duo luminaria, these two as the two great Lights in
Heaven Gen: 1. 16. may serve to direct us in all our ways.

Thus having, as Dido did with her Ox hide, (...).
cut the words in pieces, I have enclosed a pleasant and fruitful ground, out
of which I shall collect these two observations, on which (by the Almighties
assistance) I intend to build my ensuing discourse.

1. Obser. The first is this: It is the duty of Christians to be circumspect
and cautious in all their enterprises: or (if you will have it more plainly) in
the words of my text, To take heed to themselves in all their attempts.

2. Obser. The second this, Every one ought to have a care of his Soul, to
keep that diligently. Of these in their order briefly and plainly, and first
of the first.

It is the duty of Christians to be circumspect and cautious in all their
enterprises. This is that which the Apostle exhorts unto. Ephesians. 5. 15. See then
that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools but as wise, and according to this
is that advice of the Poet. Quicquid agis prudenter agas and respice finem,
what ever thou do take heed that thou do it wisely and praecogitate, or
anticipate to thy self what the end, the issue or the event thereof may be,
which duty of circumspection will appear to be most necessary, if we consider
the reasons following.

1. Reason. First we should be circumspect and wary in all our undertakings,
because rash and precipitated actions, seldom or never produce good effects,
this you may see verified in all manner of actions, whether natural, moral,
civil or spiritual.

First in natural actions, as in the motions of nature, which the Philosophers
hold are flow in the beginning, swifter in the middle, and swiftest of all in
the latter end, so that no violent action (being contrary to nature) can
continue long, nullum violentum perpetuum, no violent is permanent.

Secondly, moral actions, wherein consists the exercise of virtues, seldom or
never come to good perfection, unless advice and deliberation go before,
hence grew that Maxim, Deliberandum est diu, quod statuendum est semel, we
must deliberate or forethinke of that often, which we are to do but once.

Thirdly, Civil actions, whether concerning Church or Commonwealth, seldom
succeed well unless advice and deliberation praecede them, and indeed there
is no Orator in the Senate House, nor Lawyer in the Common Pleas, nor Preacher
in the Pulpit (if he have any modesty) which dare show himself in public,
except he be well furnished and provided beforehand.

Fourthly and lastly, Spiritual actions, which concern the worship of God,
never please God, unless they be undertaken with deliberation, due advice and
circumspection, unless we consider the matter which we do, the manner how we
do it, the means whereby we do it, and the end wherefore we do it, which is
(or at least ought to be) for the glory of God: according to that of St. Paul,
whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever else you do, let all be done to the
praise and glory of God. 1. Cor. 10. 31.

Thus you see that no manner of action can come to good perfection, except
advice and deliberation go before, which (if there were no other reason) is
enough to persuade every prudent man to take heed to himself; as Moses in my
text exhorts.

Rea. 2. But Secondly, we had need take heed to our selves, and be
circumspect in our ways, in regard of the many subtle and puissant enemies
wherewith we are daily surrounded. The greater our danger is, the greater
should our care be, and the more subtle our enemies are, the more circumspect
ought we to be, lest we be circumvented by their policy.

Now I beseech you consider what great danger we are in, (...) Homer Od. g'
and what resolute and cunning assailants we are besieged with. Our danger is
great, for in this our spiritual war-fare we are not in a fenced and
fortified Garrison, but in the open Field; nor is it a naked field, but a field
of war, I might say Acheldama, a field of blood, where you need not wait
for an enemy, for you shall find many, and those not weak but strong; able to
conquer Adam in Paradise, Noah the most righteous man in the world, David the
best king, Peter the best Apostle.

You must not expect that I should capitulate unto you all your enemies which
are against you, for as Nestor said of the mise^ies that they suffered at the
Seige of Troy, or as David speaks of Gods works, Psalm. 40. 5. they are more
then can be numbered, Non mihi si centum linguae sint oraque centum, If I had a
hundred mouths and tongues, Aen. 6.
I were not able to relate them all unto you; I shall therefore (as men do in
the suppression of Rebellion) show you the heads of the chief rebels of
mankind (as it were) on stakes, and leave the rest to your mature
consideration.

The first enemy whose cunning I would have you take notice of, is the Devil,
the grand General of all mischief, who with his Host of malevolent Spirits,
encamps himself against us, and endevors by all means to plunge us both soul
and body into everlasting torments in the bottomless pit, where is weeping and
wayling, and gn^shing of teeth for evermore.

Much might be said concerning the terriblenesse of this enemy, but because I
would hasten to other things, I shall refer you to St. Peter for information in
his first Epistle, fifth Chapter and eighth verse; your adversary the Devil
(says he) goes about daily like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour,
1. Pet. 5. 8. In which description you may find four properties in Satan,
which makes him a most terrible enemy. First his power, Secondly his malice,
Thirdly his subtilty, and Fourthly his sedulity or diligence to harm us;
Goliahs power made him seem so terrible, that Saul and all Israel were
dismayed when they heard of him 1. Sa. 17. 12. Doegs malice made him seem
terrible, 1. Sam. 22. 22. Achitophels policy made him seem terrible, 2. Sam
15. 31. and the enemies of Israel were accounted terrible in respect of their
swiftness to destroy. Esa. 5. 26.

Now if one of these make an enemy terrible, how terrible will that enemy be,
in whom all these four meet? if an enemy be malicious (as a Writer observes)
yet if he want power, he may peradventure consume himself with malice and
hurt no other; or if he have both power and malice, yet if he want cunning and
subtilty he may miss an opportunity to do hurt; or suppose he have power,
malice and subtilty, yet if he be slow and careless, there is the less
danger of him, but where malice is accompanied with power, and that guided with
craft, and all exercised with sedulitie and much diligence; who, having such an
enemy will be careless and take no heed to himself?

Now if you please to review that 1 Pet: 5. (...) Calumniator.
and the 8 verse. you shall find that all these, do in a high degree concur
in Satan; Deceptor.
your adversary the devil (says the Apostle) goes about daily like a roareing
lion seekeing whom he may devour: his name devil and that which he seeks to
devour, shows his malice; the lion whereunto he is resembled, demonstrates
his power and subtilty, the epithet roareing shows his terriblenesse, and
lastly his walkeing up and down shows his diligence and sedulity which he
uses to bring us to destruction.

Now beloved, if we had no other enemy but this, Yet the consideration of his
malice power and cunning, should cause as to walk circumspectly; and (as we
are exhorted in my text) to take heed to our selves.

The second enemy which I would have you take notice of is the world, Qui
quamvis su^^ vanis pollititationibus and promissis nos alli^iat, etc. Greg.
which though it inchaunt us with it is Circe's charms, and vain promises of
comfort to dote upon it, yet it is a great enemies to us, so great that David
(a man after Gods own heart) bewayles his abode in it: Psa: 120: 5. so great,
that Saint John disswades from the love of it 1 Ioh: 2. 15. so great that Saint
Paul desires to be translated out of it. I desire (says he) to be dissolved
and to be with Christ. The third enemy is the flesh and indeed this is
inimicorum p^ssimus, quia proximus, the worst because the most near adhering
to us; it is an enemy quem nec fugere, nec fugare possumus, circumferre ^um
necesse est, (...)
which we can neither fly from, nor cause it to fly from us, but must of
necessity carry it about us: this as the Trojan horse has in it many enemies,
such as are noysom Justs, and ungodly thoughts, which war ^^ainst us in their
several orders: there be thousands more enemies, which conspire against our
welfare, but the time will not permit me to pu^ down any more of them in this
list, Catera praetereo nec ^nim sermonibus istis ^mnia complecti ^^a^uo.
therefore I forbear any farther enumeration of them, and hasten to the third
reason why we should all take heed to our selves and walk circumspectly,
which is this: Because we must all answer for all our thoughts, Mantuan.
words and deeds. It is appointed for all men to dye, Eclog. 8.
and after death the judgment. He. 9. 27. so Re. 20. 12. I saw the dead small
and great stand before God, and the books were opened, and the dead were
judged out of those things which were written in the books according to their
works.

There be two things that deal impartially with all men, Pallida ^ors aequo
pulsat pede pauperum tabernas regumque turres.
Death, and the Judgment of the last day. That death deals impartially, you
see proved in that it strikes with the same foot as well at the palaces of
Princes, as at the cottages of poor men: it is true that there is a great deal
of difference between man and man, in three respects. First in respect of
natural endowments, some are wise, others fools, some beautiful, others
deformed, some of an affable and courteous disposition, others are sordid and
immorigerous; secondly, in respect of spiritual graces, some are spiritual,
sanctified with grace, others carnal, sold under sin, some are patient in the
greatest tribulation, and others querulous and murmurers in the least, some
there are whom nothing can make proud, or elevate them above their brethren,
and others there are, whom things worth nothing, transport in a sphere of pride
above their betters; thirdly, there is difference in respect of future
eternity, some there are who are vessels of wrath, and firebrands of Hell, to
whom it shall be said, Ite maledicti, go ye cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels: and others there are who are Children
of God and Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, to whom it shall be said, Venite
benedicti, come ye blessed Children of my Father receive the Kingdom prepared
for you.

Yet though it be true that there be such difference between man and man in
these respects, if we look upon death and the judgment that they have of the
righteous Judge at the last day, we shall find that they have no respect of
persons; as for death it does equalize the Peer of the Realm, Mors sceptra
ligonibus aequat.
and the Peasant of the Country the life of man is like a play or interlude.
You know before the play be begun, the Actors are fellows, Simile.
in the play there appears a great deal of difference, some are Kings, and
others Subjects, some Judges, others Prisoners, some rich, others beggars; and
after the play is ended, there is little or no difference between them: even so
is it with men, while we act our parts on the vast stage of the world, there
appears a great deal of difference between us, some live in the mountains of
riches, honors, and preferments, others in the valleys of mean and low
estates, yet when we have severally acted our parts, death will make us all
equal: Him that sits on the Throne, with him that lies in the field, him
that holds the Scepter, with him that holds the Plow, the rich with the beggar,
wise with foolish, by turning us all into the prime element, dust, whereof we
are composed; And as death deals impartially with all, so will the judgment
of the last day. There Qualem unusquisque habet conscientiam talem and habebit
Judicem, whatsoever conscience a man has, such a Judge shall he have either
excusing or accusing him, there no bribes shall corrupt justice, no entreaties
protract it, no opposition hinder the passage of it, but there every one shall
receive without partiallity according to what he has done in the flesh. O that
men would seriously revolve this in their minds, that so they might be caused
to walk circumspectly with God and man, and (as Moses in my Text exhorts) to
take heed to themselves, and keep their souls diligently.

Application.
It serves for exhortation; First to Magistrates, secondly, to Ministers,
thirdly, to the Common People, to be circumspect in their ways, and to take
heed to themselves in all their enterprises.

First, let Magistrates and men in eminent places, take heed to themselves in
all their undertakings, for they have as much, nay more cause to be circumspect
in their ways then others.

First they are bound to it by the former reasons, scil. their actions, as well
as the actions of other men, (if undertaken unadvisedly) produce miserable, and
prodigious effects. Again, they have the same enemies, the Devil, the world,
and the flesh endeavoring their overthrow, as well as the overthrow of others,
and finally they must die as well as others, Psalm. 82. v. 6. 7. and give an
account for their thoughts, words, and deeds, as well as others.

But secondly, they have more cause to take heed to themselves, and to be
circumspect in their ways then others, for these reasons.

First God has advanced them above others in dignity, and he therefore expects
that they should walk more warily then others: if God should find them guilty
of such enormities as others, he might justly cry out against them as Caesar
did against Brutus, and tu fili? What and thou my son? Have I honored thee so
much? And will thou be so careless of my honor, and of thy own salvation?

It should be with men as it is with the elements, Simile.
the higher they are, the purer they are, air is purer then water, and fire
then air, so the higher men are in office and wealth, the more circumspect
ought they to be in their ways: to whom much is given, of him much shall be
required, Luke 12. 48. good to this purpose is that of Gregory, Crescentibus
donis crescunt and rations donorum, the greater our gifts are, the greater
should our care be.

Again, men in eminent places ought to be more circumspect then others,
because the people commonly follow their examples, their good or evil life
does commonly cause much good, or evil amongst the people.

I remember a saying, which experience in all ages has proved to be true:
Qualis Rex, talis Grex, such as the King or chief Rulers are, such for the
most part will the people be; for their president is more followed then their
precept.

If the King be an Idolater, it lodges not in his breast alone, but like a
gangrene or spreading leprosy it passes over the whole body of the Common
wealth: If on the contrary, the King be a religious and sanctified person, the
people will at least in show appear so too: If Jeroboam the son of Nebat
become an Idolater, and an errector of strange Altars, he shall not go alone,
but all Israel will sin with him for company, 2 Ki. 10. 31. if Joshus devote
himself to serve the Lord, all the people will be ready to comply with him, 1
Josh. 16. Ahaz was an Idolater, so were the people, Hezekiah his son worshipped
God truly, so did the people, thus Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis:
the examples of eminent persons are as looking glasses, after which the Country
dress themselves; and therefore you may find that Jehosaphat speaking to such,
charges them even in the very words of my Text to take heed to themselves, 2
Cron. 19 c. 6. 7. v. and he said to the Judges take heed what you do, for you
judge not for man but for God, who is with you in your judgment, v. 6. again
v. 7. wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you take heed and do it.

Secondly, let Ministers take heed to themselves and be circumspect and wary
in all their courses: First let them take heed that they thrust not themselves
into the calling of the ministry, without due calling thereunto, let them not
intrude into Moses Chair or rashly lay hold on the Arc of Aaron, let them not
presume to execute the ministerial function, in preaching the Word, and
administration of the Sacrament, without Commission.

I beseech you do not uncharitably misconstrue my meaning, Sicut ad pertinet
qui vobis ecclesia ad vos p^tinet v^tris l^qui domibus Ber.
by concluding that I condemn Laymen, that are careful in teaching their
Families the fundamental grounds of Piety and true Religion, for it is their
duty so to do, and in so doing they are worthy of much honor. Bernard has an
apt saying to this purpose, as (says he) it is our duty to teach you in the
Church, so it is your duty to teach those that are under your tuition in your
houses: Vnusquis^ pater famlias est M^nister Chr^sti, and erg^ suos que dammod^
^^piscopale officium implere d^^bes. Aug in Psa. 5^
and Augustine says that every man in this case is a Minister, or (if you will
a Bishop) so he keep within his own Diocese, but for the public charge,
the Pulpit, let no over officious Nadab or Abihu approach into it there to offer
up the strange fire of their own preposterous Zeal, lest fire come down from
Heaven and consume them, as it did Nadab and Abihu, Levit, 10. 1. 2. be pleased
to look into the Chapter, and you shall in the first ver. find their arrogance
and presumption, in offering up strange fire unto God; and in the very next
verse, Gods just judgment on them for their most unjust presumption, in
sending down a miraculous fire to destroy them.

O then, as we love our own souls let us know our own charges, let every man
take heed and keep him to his own Trade or Vocation, Ne Suitor Vltra
crepidam, Let not the Cobbler mistake the Pulpit for his stall, and instead of
patching soles, take upon him the charge of souls. Let not the Tailor mistake
the Lords Table for his cutting board, let him not instead of a garment cut out
a Text, and with some stolen shreds of other men's works, patch up a Sermon;
God forbid that this should be suffered, for if it should, our Religion, our
Land, nay our souls are like to suffer ruin. I assure you beloved I speak
not this out of any pride of my self, who am the unworthiest of all the
Prophets, neither do I speak it in the contempt of the gifts of others, be
they never so mean, for I could wish with Moses, that all the Lords people
were Prophets, and that the Lord would ponre down his holy spirit upon them;
But (as a late writer says) we must give God leave to be the orderer of his
own Ordinances, and we that are called to the ministry, must take leave to
call upon men to keep them to their own callings; and I desire you to
forbear hearing such arrogant Nadabs, and insolent Abi^ues, for they are not
Pastores Pastors, sed impostores, but impostors; not Doctores Teachers, sed
Seductores but seducers; not Vigiles but Noctambulones, not guided by the
spirit, but scared with spirits, like the seven sons of Sceva, Act 19. 13.
14. 15. a vagabond Jew that without Commission, would needs cast out Devils
in the name of Jesus, but mark what befell them, Acts 19. the evil spirit
answered, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, sed qui vos? But who are you? And the
man in whom the evil spirit was, leapt upon them and overcame them. O that all
those who pretend the spirit of God, against the Ordinance of God, would
henceforward take heed to keep them to their own vocations, and not meddle
with the preaching of the word, more then as diligent hearers, and constant
practitioners; or with the administration of the Sacrament more then as pious
and well prepared Receivers, lest the evil spirit which they would seem to
cast out of others, enter into themselves, prevail against them, and overcome
them.

Secondly, when Ministers are lawfully called, let them take heed that they
mind not the fleece more then the flock, their own benefit more then the good
of their people, let them take heed that they desire not more to make a prey
of their flock, then to prey for it.

Let them take heed that they be not such as in their preaching aim more at
popular applause for themselves, then to win souls unto God; I mean such
whose preaching is more affectedly obscure then Delphian Oracles, or Egyptian
Hieroglyphics, that have mouths, nay words, yet speak not, at least not to
their Auditors understanding, that deal with their Auditors, as the Fox did
with the Storke, who inviting him to dinner, poured his liquor into so shallow
a platter that the Storke by reason of his long bill was unable to lap any of
it, so that he was only spectator while the Foxlapt up the liquor.

Such Ministers as these set their words in knots and borders, only to delight
the ears of the curious, not to ravish the heart of the sanctified; they
labor and study much to speak so as they may not be understood, who fill up
their Sermons with strange languages, some of whose English words (being
exceeding lofty) are as difficult to be understood by the greatest part of
their auditors, as Hebrew is* these would make good that curse upon their
auditors, to be of the number of those, that hearing, hear and understand not,
and seeing, see and perceive not, Isa. 6. 9. Acts 28. 26.

But stay, I would not have you think that I am Advocate for those that on the
contrary, as the other make their preaching as prophesying, so these in a bad
sense would make good that of the Apostle, of some that call preaching
foolishness, 1. Cor. 1. 21. 23. as if, because preaching must not be garish,
it must therefore be sordid.

I mean such, who rush unpreparedly into the Pulpit, perhaps three or four
times a week, with any undigested stuff, and there rend the sacred Scriptures
in pieces with their unsanctified lips, even as a clown does a capon, who
knows not how to carve it neately, neither know these how to divide and
dispense the word rightly; these take no heed to prepare themselves for so
weighty a work, but spend the whole week in rioting, chambering and
wantonness, and little or no part of their time in studying, and then mount
the Pulpit trusting to Enthusiasmes and Revelations, as if God were bound to
appear always in such glorious rays of wonders, whereby it comes to pass
that they vent such poor stuff in the Pulpit, that no wise or religious man
has so much patience as to hear it, much less so much folly, as to follow it.

I would such would hereafter take notice of the exhortation of St. Paul, to
the Pastors of the Church of Ephesus, take heed to your selves and to the
flock overwhich the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, Acts; and that to
Timothy, Take heed to thy self and to thy Doctrine. ^ Tim. 4. 16.

Thirdly, let all men in general be exhorted to take heed to themselves, and
be circumspect in all their actions, but more especially in those which
concern the worship of God. Let us instance in some particulars.

Art thou to come unto the Lord by Prayer? take heed that thou do it not
rashly without due preparation of thy heart, and praeconsideration of the
majesty of him to whom thou art to speak, the want whereof causes us to carry
our selves so irreverently as we do toward God: for so immorigerous are we
grown, that we will scarce vouchsafe to fall down and worship the Lord our
maker. We think our selves too great or too good to fall down and kneel
before him in Prayer: Ezra: 9: 5. 6. It was not so with Ezra, for he rent his
garment, and his mantle, and fell upon his knees and spread out his hands unto
the Lord, Ezra: 9: and David advises us to worship and fall down and kneel
before the Lord, our maker, Psalm: 95. 6. yea and the Lord himself expects it.
Is: 45. 23. I have sworn by my self that every knee shall bow to me: and this
is most certain that that Prayer which is made unto God without reverence and
due respect done to his glorious majesty is not acceptable with God. I will not
say, that all prayers that are made without bending the knee are unacceptable,
yet I could wish that men being but dust, should kneel as low as dust when they
are to speak to the high God.

It is reported of Augustus that one inviting him to dinner to homely
entertainment, far unfit for so royal a personage; he thus spoke to him
that invited him; nesciebam me tibi fuisse tam familiarem, I knew not that you
and I had been so familiar: may not the Lord say so to us, that without any
taking heed to prepare or sanctify our selves, petition for favors: take
heed therefore to your selves, and remember the advice of the wise man Eccles.
5. 2. be not rash with thy mouth, neither let thy heart be hasty to utter any
thing before God, for God is in Heaven, and thou art on Earth, therefore let
thy words be few; and indeed it very much concerns us thus to take heed that
we be not inconsiderate, rash or multiloquacious in our Prayer, for though it
be true that we may approach unto the throne of Grace, with confidence and
boldness, yet we must take heed that we come not with sauciness, for as God
is a God of mercy, so also is he a consuming fire.

Again, art thou to come unto the Temple of the Lord? take heed that thou
rush not in thither rashly or unadvisedly, as if thou were going unto a stage
play, but forethinke with thy self that thou art going, as it were, into the
immediate presence of Almighty God, who is a great and terrible God, that will
not be mocked by thee: as therefore when you are to meet an earthly king, and
to speak with him, you prepare your selves, and study a comportment and
expression that may best please him, so do when you are to meet God:
praecogitate with your selves what comportment you ought to use in his
presence; what zeal, To. 12. 11. cheerfulness, Psalm. 100. 1. sincerity,
Josh. 24. 14. and reverence, Heb. 12. 28. you should use in the service which
you perform to God.

Art thou to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? take heed that thou do
it not rashly or unadvisedly; it is the advice of the Apostle. Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup, 1
Cor. 1. 28. 19. and he gives a good reason for it in the next verse, for (says
he) he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords body.

What shall I say more? In a word, art thou a believer, and have embraced the
Faith of Christ? take heed thou undertake not any thing without due advice and
deliberation, lest that old proverb be verified by thee, qui ante non cavet
post dolebit, he that does not beware before, will be sorry after.

Now, lest what I have said be not enough to make us take heed to our selves
in all our undertakings, I beseech you look back into the former ages, and
consider what and how many miserable inconveniences and sad disasters have
happened to several people, only for want of good take heed; it was the want
of good take heed that cast the Angels out of Heaven: it was the want of good
take heed, that exiled Adam from Paradise, that brought the flood on the old
World: it was the want of good take heed that brought sire and brimstone on
Sodom and Gomorrah, that rent ten tribes from Rehoboams kingdom, 1 King 12.
it was the want of good take heed that shut the five foolish virgins out of
Heaven, Mat. 25. and it is the want of this good take heed, that shall bring a
general destruction on the wicked and ungodly, 1 These. 5. 3.

No more but this, consider I pray you, what is it that brings so many, some to
poverty, some to disgrace, some to sudden desperate and dangerous deaths? but
only the want of good take heed; that you may therefore escape all these
inconveniences, and thousands more which are most incident to the careless; I
beseech you remember the exhortation of Moses in my Text, Take heed to your
selves.

Quest. But then as the Soldiers said to John the Baptist, Master what shall
we do? So may you say to me, you have (we confess) proved that we should be
circumspect and take heed to our selves, but we would know the manner how we
should do it, or what it is that we should take heed to in our selves.

Ans. I answer, You must first take heed to your eyes, they are apt to range
after iniquity, and if they be not diligently watch't, they prove arch-traytors
to mankind: until Adam and Eve lusted with their eyes, sin and Satan entered
not into their hearts, Genesis 3. had not Herod looked or Herodias dancing, he
had not so rashly granted her John Baptists head Mar. 6. had not Potiphars wife
given her eyes liberty to behold Joseph, she had not lusted to defile her
marriage bed with him, King. 2. had not Sichem seen Dina Jacobs daughter, he
had never ravished her, Genesis 34. These evils proceed from licentious gazing on
such objects, and therefore (says the Prophet) turn away mine eyes lest they
behold vanity; it was the want of taking heed to the eyes, that made
Tarquinius Sextus to ravish Collatinus wife that made Queen Cleopatra to use
her brother Ptolomeus as her husband; that made Macareus to lie with his sister
Canaces, and Menephron to defile his own Mother.

And indeed it is God's great mercy that he has placed in the eyes, as well
the remedy as the malady, fletum and visum, the faculty of seeing, and the
sluice of tears, Vt qui delinquant videndo, poeniteant plorando, that they who
have offended by seeing, may repent by weeping; if therefore thou will escape
the punishment of weeping (I mean of eternal weeping in hell fire) take heed
to thine eyes: look not after a woman to lust after her, for then thou have
committed adultrie with her in thy heart, Mat. 5. In a word, make a Covenant
with thine eyes that they behold nor vanity.

Secondly, Take heed to your ears which most commonly are more open to Sirens
songs, then to heavenly ditties, to obscene communication then to the precepts
of God, and therefore Christ sets a double guard at this Port of hearing, and
both delivered in the terms of my Text; The first is in Mark 4. 24. where we
are bid to take heed what we hear: and the other in Luke 8. 18. where we are
bid to take heed how we hear, Psalm. 141. 3. he keeps both these sayings
well that hears the word of God diligently, and practices it in his life and
conversation constantly.

Thirdly, Take heed to your tongue, for this is often times an unruly member,
so unruly that (as one well observes) the port-c^^llis of the teeth, and the
counterscarfe of the lips are not sufficient to keep it in, unless with
David, we daily pray Psalm. 14. 3. Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, keep
thou the door of my lips.

Take heed to your understanding that it be not corrupted; this is the first
door the Devil knocks at, the first forge where sin is framed, the first
commander the Devil seeks to corrupt, for though he intend to sack the whole
city of our Souls, yet he makes his first assaults against this Port.

And therefore as the besieged fortify most where they fear most batteries or
assaults, so take we heed to look carefully to our understandings, that they
be not blinded with ignorance, nor ensnared with the subtlety of Atheism,
Heresy, Popery, Schism, or any thing else repugnant to God and his truth.

Take we heed to our understandings that they dive not too far into the
hidden mysteries of the word: There is enough revealed both for our faith and
our salvation, Mitte arcana Dei, meddle not with the secrets of God: Quod Deus
texit, quis revelabit, what God has hidden, let not the understanding pry into.

Consider we, that our understanding or intellectual part, is that which the
Devil, Heretics, Atheists, Papists, Schismatics, and many other pernicious
enemies, much labor to corrupt, and therefore let us take great heed to
preserve it.

Take heed to your will, which will be either the seat of sin, or sanctuary
of grace; if it be depraved it has a very malignant influence upon all our
actions, and therefore as besiegers of a Garrison labor most to possess
themselves of the chief Sconce or capitol, knowing, that thence they may
command the whole City, so the Devil besieging the City of our soul, labors
chiefly to captivate our will, because he knows that if that become subject to
his Laws, and embrace his Scepter, all the faculties of the whole man will be
tributaries to the same service.

Take heed therefore that your wills be not enslaved by Satan's policy, but
renewed by grace, and regulated by the rule of piety.

Lastly take heed to your consciences, there may be so much said for this,
that I shall say but little.

Solomon says that a good conscience is a continual feast, Prove. 15. 15. and
indeed so it is, if we be weak it is a staff to support us, if in want, a
comforter to relieve us, if in suites of Law, it is the best agent to plead
for us if falsely accused, it is the best witness to clear us, if wrongfully
condemned, it is a most upright Judge to vindicate us: There can no estate or
condition befall man, either so prosperous or averse, but that the comfort of a
good conscience will appear in it.

It comforts in prosperity and adversity, in sickness and in health, in life
and in death, and (which is best of all) it yeeldes transcendent comfort at the
day of judgment: For when among the wicked at the dreadful day of Jesus
Christ, there shall appear nothing but horrors, frights, and amazements, be
heard nothing but fearful shri^kes, ululations, cries, and howlings, for fear
of the sentence of malediction, that shall there be pronounced against them;
even then there shall be nothing but joy, exultation, and heavenly consolations
to them that have taken heed to preserve their consciences spotless, being
assured of the sentence of benediction which shall then be pronounced to them,
at which time their bodies being reunited to their souls, they shall be both
received into everlasting salvation which every one ought diligently to seek
after, which is set forth in the next part of my Text, the duty in these words,
keep thy soul diligently; whence we conclude this observation.

2 Obser. That every Christian should have a special care of his foul; and
keep that diligently. To this purpose we have both the Precept and President
of Gods Children in sacred writ. First for Precept, see St. Paul exhorting us
to give all diligence to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. and
Phil. 2 12. he bid us work out our salvation with fear and trembling, so
Moses in our Text, bid us take heed to our selves, and keep our souls
diligently.

As for president, look on St. Paul, and you shall find that he was so
careful of his souls salvation, that as the Nicene Fathers would not gratify
Arrius in the least compliance with him, so neither would he conform in any
thing to the Doctrine of Seducers: And if you read the life and death of the
Martyrs, you shall find that they were so careful of the salvation of their
souls, that they would not in the least semblance condescend to the Pagan
Persecutors, though they might thereby have come off with corporal safety.

But not to trouble you with multiplicity of examples, look but on one
president more, and that shall be David a man after God sown heart.

The Lord had wonderfully magnified his mercy toward him in many eminent
favors, first in respect of his estate, when he took him from following his
Fathers Ewes great with young, to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his
inheritance, Psalm. 78. 70. 71. when he translated him from a shepherds crook
to a scepter of gold, Psa. 70. 71. Again, the Lord did well for him otherwise
too, in respect of his strength; for he had as magnanimous a heart, as a Lion,
1. Sam. 17. 49. And when that proud Philistine Goliath came railing and defying
the God of Israel, notwithstanding his menacing terms, he encountered with
him, and slew him, and so took the reproach from Israel. Again, the Lord did
wonderful well for David, in respect of his beauty; for he was a man of a more
then ordinary pulchritude, as you may see prooved, 1. Sam. 16 12. the Text
there says, that he was ^uddy, and withal of a beautiful countenance, and
goodly to look on. Again, the Lord did wonderful well for him, in respect of
his issue, for he had a mavelous great issue. And I doubt not but David was
truly thankful to the Lord for all these ^nercies bestowed on him, in respect
of his body and his estate. But yet I am resolved that he minded more the
salvation of his soul, then he did all these things: and I gather this from
his own words in the 14. Psalm: he declares that he longs for the salvation
of God; and if you look on him in the Psalm, 25. v. 20. you shall find that
being surrounded with miseries, he has a special care of his Soul, and
desires the Lord to keep that safe, so Psalm. 86. 2. he prays the Lord to
preserve his Soul, and having received some special favor for his Soul you
may find him making a solemn invitation unto the righteous, to come and hear
what the Lord had done unto his Soul, Psalm. 66. 16. Come and hear all ye
that fear God, and I will declare unto you what he has done for my Soul;
thus you see God's children have at all times been so careful of their Souls,
that they would rather suffer death then do any thing that might hinder the
salvation of their Souls; such care ought we also to have of our Souls, We
should keep them diligently, and that for these Reasons.

1 Reason. First, because of the excellency of the Soul, which consists first
in the purity of it; Secondly, in the unity and singularity; and Thirdly in
the inequality that is between it and any thing else.

First, in the purity of it, which though it be shapelesse and immateriall,
yet would it make a man heavenly proud, to contemplate of how divine a nature,
excellency and quality the Soul is. In puritate est Deo simillima, Aug. li^
de anim^
in its purity it is as a God, and hereupon (says a writer) let me worship
the great God of the little God my Soul: and good to this purpose is that of
Seneca. Quid aliud est anima quam Deus hospitans in corpore humano? Senec.
(...) 8. ad (...).
what other thing is the Soul, but God lodging in the body? and Bernard,
standing in admiration of the excellency of his Soul, breaks out into these
words. How beautiful art thou O my Soul! thou art ennobled by the Image of
God stamped on thee, Quam (...) anima, (...) Bernar^ meditat^
adorned with his likeness, espoused to him by promise, redeemed with the
precious blood of Jesus Christ. Quid de te dicam? what shall I say of thee? tu
maximum es quod esse potest in parvo loco. Thou art the excellentest thing that
may be contained in so small a place as the body. Nobilitas tua omnibus
mundanis praeferenda, thy excellency exceedes all earthly treasures. According
to this is that of Augustine: as (says he) the Creator excells all the
Creatures, even so the Soul is far more excellent then any of them.

Secondly, consider the excellency of the Soul, ^icut Deus ^^nem (...) ita
(...) al as ex (...). Aug. (...) de Ani^^.
consisting in the unity and singularity of it. God has given unto one body
two eyes, two hands, and two feet, but he has given it but one Soul, he has
given two eyes to the end that if one be blind the other may see, two hands
to the end that if one be weak the other may work, ^eus dedit (...) corpori
(...) oculos (...) as ma^us (...) duos (...) uni^a (...) Ber. (...) Medit.
and two feeete to the end that if one be lame, the other may walk, but he
has given us but one Soul, which is a jewel invaluable, a jemme immatchable,
and a pearl inestimable.

Thirdly, consider the excellency of the Soul consisting in the inequality
that is between it and any thing else, what recompense or what exchange shall a
man give for his Soul, Mat. 16. 26. shall he give a thousand of Rams, or ten
thousand rivers of Oil, shall he give the fruit of his body for the sin of
his Soul, surely all these are not sufficient to redeem one Soul, Mica. 6.
7. nay ten thousand worlds were not sufficient ransom for one Soul, nothing
could do it but the precious blood of that immaculate Lamb Jesus Christ; this
St. Peter affirms 1. Pet. 1. 19. we are not bought with silver or with gold,
or with any corruptible thing, but with the blood of Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb
spotless and undefiled.

I beseech you consider then the excellency of your Soul; the body of man is a
glorious frame, yet it is not comparable to the Soul, for the body is but the
tabernacle, Anima naturaliter dominatur corpori, sicut Dominus servo. Aristo.
lib. 1. Politic.
the Soul is the mercy-seate, the body is but the hand maid, the Soul is the
mistress, the body is but the palace, the Soul is the queene-regent governing
in that Palace; the body is but the cabinet, the Soul is the precious jewel
lodging in it.

What is it that advances the calling of the Ministry above other callings but
only this, that it tends to the good of man's Soul? the study of the Lawyer
tends to the good of man's estate, the study of the Physician to the good of
man's body, but the study of the Minister tends to the good of man's Soul,
which is the better part. The Soul is optimum and primum, the better part,
there is nothing like it, there is nothing that may be compared unto it,
Solomon calls it a precious Soul, Prove. 6. and a greater, and wiser then
Solomon puts it in the balance of the sanctuary, and makes it weigh down the
whole world; What shall it profit a man (says our Savior Jesus Christ) to win
the whole world and lose his own Soul? Mat. 16. 26. And I pray see if he be
not a great loser that gains a world and loses his Soul? for suppose a man
were sure to live as long as Nestor, Proper. lib. 2. and Iuven. Sat.
who is reported to have lived three hundred years, and could have his health
all that time, and never be sick; suppose he had as much riches as Cressus, as
much beauty as Absalon, as much strength as Sampson. Supposes he had as much
worth in him, as the Romans ascribe to their Catoes, Curioes, Fabritioes; the
Greeks to their Socrates, Solon, Aristides, Homer, to Agamemnon, Os occulesque
Jovi pares.
affirming that he was like Jupiter in feature, Mars in valor, Pallas in
wisdom; suppose all eyes were upon him, all tongues spoke well of him;
suppose he had such a glorious fame, that men came as far to see him, as the
Queen of Sheba did to see Solomon, Navigat. Vertom. lib. 3.
gaze on him as the Egyptians did once on honored Joseph, the Arabians on
fair Vertomanus, suppose men praised him as much as Tully did Caesar, Oration.
pro Rege.
Plato did Socrates, let his ears be delighted with as much variety of music
as Alexander had from Timolaus, the Thebans from Amphion, the Mariners from
Orpheus; suppose men acted such plays before him as the Romans acted in their
Theaters and Amphitheater, let men show him such sports and pageants as the
Greeks had in their Olympian, Pythian, Istmian, Athenian and Corinthian games;
suppose he have houses like Nebuchadnezars Babel, Gardens like that of Adonis,
Orchards like those of the Hesperides; suppose he fared at home as deliciously,
as he in the Gospel, Luke 16. 19. 20. and when he went abroad be feasted with
more varieties then Esther entertained Ahasuerus, Esth. 7. Dido Aeneas, or
Cleopatra Mark Anthony; let him be attended with more men then Solomon; let him
solace himself among his lascivious concubines as Heliogabalus and
Sardanapalus; Justin. li. 1 Jo. in e^us vita.
let him hunt more then Leo the tenth; Shyrlics Relation.
hawke more then the Persian kings; Card and Dice more then the Thebans; and
suppose (if it be possible) that he enjoyed all these pleasures all the days
of his life here, yet if he lose his soul hereafter, he is most miserable, and
that sad catastrophe brings more torments, then all his former fruitions
brought him pleasures: consider this I beseech you, that your soul is more
excellent then any thing you can have, and therefore take heed to your selves,
and keep your souls diligently.

2 Rea. Secondly, we should look so carefully to our souls, in regard of the
necessity of the salvation of the soul; Certainly there are many things which
we pursue and seek after with eager, and uncestant labor and desire; which
are not absolutely necessary, such as are riches, honors, and preferments; I
may say of these, as our Savior said unto Martha, Luke 10. 41. 42. You are
troubled about many things, but there is but one thing necessary, and that is
to make your election sure, to labor diligently for the salvation of your
souls.

3 Rea. Thirdly, we should look carefully to our souls, in regard of the
difficulty of attaining to salvation; It is not so easy a matter as some
suppose it is, to get our souls into Heaven, Facilis descensus averni. Sed
revocare gradum superasque evadere ad auras, hic labor hoc opus est.
it is easy to fall into sin and so consequently into Hell, but it is a
difficult matter for that soul that has once been entangled in the snares of
sin, to become retrograde, and turn back again into the ways of
righteousness, it will be a hard matter for the covetous man whose heart has
been long imprisoned within the walls of covetousness, to forsake his
covetousness, and become bountiful; it will be hard for the ambitious man
whose heart has been only set upon honors, who has not feared the greatest
hazard, or omitted the least opportunity that might further him in attayning
thereof, to forsake his ambition and become humble. In a word it will be hard
for any one that once devoted himself to sin, to become the servant of God;
and therefore (as we are exhorted in my Text) we ought to take heed to our
selves, and keep our souls diligently in the ways of salvation, because that
having once wandered out of the right way, we cannot with facility return into
it again.

4 Rea. Fourthly we have great reason to keep our souls diligently, in regard
of the miserable and wretched condition of the lost soul. Certainly had I the
tongues of men and Angels, I could not relate unto you the woeful condition of
the lost soul; but this is that which aggravates their tortures, beyond
compare, that as they are ^aselesse, so also are they endless: other losses
may be recovered, but the lost soul that is cast into the bottomless pit of
perdition cannot be recovered.

A man may lose his estate, and may recover it with more then he had before, he
may lose his health and may recover it with more then he had, he may lose his
credit, and may recover it with more estimation, then he had before, but if
once he have lost his soul he must never look to recover that again; Poets
and Historians writ of some that have gone to Hell and returned again, Hom. Od.
(...) Virg. Aen. l. 6.
as of Ulysses that went thither to consult with Tiresias, Aeneas that went
thither to talk with his Father Anchises: Ovid. M^t. lib. 10.
Orpheus that fetched his Wife Euridice thence, Pythagoras also that going
thither reported at his return, that he saw Hesiod tied to a brazen pillar,
and Homer hanging on a Tree full of Snakes, for feigning such things on the
Dieties: Laert. de vita Philo. l. 8. in Pythag.
Admiranda canunt, sed non credenda Poetae; these be strange things, but they
are not true, for the Scripture assures us that there shall be no return from
Heaven or Hell: Tert. lib. de anima, cap. 29.
If any man be cast into Hell, though his eyes gush out with rivers of water,
yet there shall be no one to comfort him, no one to help him, no one to do so
much as cool his tongue with a drop of cold water. O that we had hearts to
consider this, that so we might take heed to our selves, and keep our souls
diligently.

5 Rea. Lastly we should look carefully to our souls, for if they be lost,
body and all is lost, and if they be safe, body and all will be safe, for where
the soul at death goes before, the body at the resurrection will follow after.
Good to this purpose is that of Chrysostom: if (says he) we neglect the
soul, the body cannot be saved, for the soul was not made for the body, but
the body for the soul; he therefore which neglects the soul, being the first
and chiefest part, and minds the body only, loses both, but he that seeks
after the salvation of the soul, though he neglect the body, yet by the souls
salvation, Si animam negligamus, nec corpus salvare paterimus, etc.
the body also shall be saved, which is most elegantly set down by Aristotle,
Lib. 7. metaphysic. ex sanitate animae fit sanitas in corpore, by the safety of
the soul, safety is wrought to the body. If you have but so much faith as a
grain of mustardseede to lay hold on Jesus Christ, Chrysostom. de recuperatione
lapsi.
as the Savior of your soul, your body shall be sure to be saved also, Romans
8. 32. he that spared not his own Son but gave him to death for us, shall he
not with him give us all things else that are necessary?

I might give you more reasons why we should seek so diligently after the
salvation of our souls; But I must not be totus in singulis: I therefore
proceed to Application, and the use which we shall make hereof is twofold.

First, it serves for confutation.

Secondly, for exhortation.

1 Use of consutation.
Have we such great cause to seek diligently after the salvation of our
souls? Sure then they are much to blame that care more for temporal things,
then they do for the salvation of their souls. Some prodigalls what cost do
they bestow upon Houses, Horses, Hawks, Dogs, and what cheap account do they
make of their souls: the House must be magnificently built and furnis^t, the
Horse must be pampered and kept fat and fair, (...) and all things must be
brave and gorgeous, but there is no care taken that there be (...) a beautiful
soul.

I have read of a spruce Roman, that riding through the streets of Rome on a
lean horse, was demanded by the Censor, why he being so spruce a man, rode on
so poor a horse. Unto whom he answered ego curo incipsum, servus vero equum. I
take care for my self, but my servant for my horse; In like manner I doubt
there are many that only take care for their bodies, but neglect seeking after
the salvation of their souls.

Some there be, that esteem more of agility of body then fervency of spirit:
others esteem more of strength of the body, then grace of the soul: others
there be, that esteem more of beauty of the body, then purity of the soul; and
if such as these have beauty, how do they mince and trip it up and down,
contemning and despising others? and yet God knows beauty is but a deceiving
vanity: favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain. Forma est mera deceptio
visus, beauty is a mere deceiving of our selves, a mere flout, a mere
scoff. For what face is there, be it never so beautiful in youth, but if it
live long it will be plowed with the furrows of old age? and if it live not to
old age, yet it is subject to deformity many other ways; and yet some are more
enamoured with this vanity, then they are with their souls.

The covetous man cares not what becomes of his soul, so he may have but
plenty of riches: these count wealth the summum bonum, the chief good, and
therefore seek only after it, and not after the salvation of their souls:
these are the seed of the Serpent, and indeed have the curse of the Serpent
sticking on them, to lick the dust; these covetous wretches deface the image
of God that was stamp't on them, by continual rubbing against the earth: these
like worms and no men crawle upon the ground, or like hogs they go rooting
downe-wards in the earth; and indeed they may well be compared to hogs, for as
hogs are always rooting downwards in the earth, and seldom or never look
upwards, till being ready to be killed they are laid flat on their backs, and
forced to it; so these covetous miscreants go grovelling downe-wards, and lie
scraping in the dunghill of this world, and never look upwards, or think of
heaven or salvation, till wrestling with the pangs of death they are thrown
flat on their backs, and then perhaps the Minister is sent for, the sacrament
and heavenly things desired; but if the Minister persuade them before this time
to be weaned from the world, and to seek diligently after the salvation of
their souls, they are ready to say as the devils to our savior, art thou come
to torment us before our time, they are loath to be saints too soon, and if
they must needs be weaned from the world, they would put it off till the last
day and hour of their death, when they can enjoy it no longer.

It is fabulized that the crab gave the Serpent his deaths wound, for his
crooked conditions, and seeing him stretch himself out strait, said, At
oportuit sic vixisse, you should have lived so. Let the covetous worldling that
seeks not after the salvation of his soul take heed that when he lies gasping
as it were in the suburbs of death, and begs for salvation, that God answer him
non at oportuit sic vixisse, but thou should so have lived, as that thou
might now have been sit for heaven.

But me thinks I hear this earth-worme say, ^^ject.
I doubt not but I shall go to heaven, for I am not such a notorious offender
as such and such are, I am no adulterer, no drunkard, no swearer, and the like.
I only affect this sin of coveteousnesse, and I hope that for all this, I may
be saved.

To this I answer, ^^sw.
yet not I, but the Apostle. Be not deceived, for neither idolater, nor
adulterer, nor drunkard, no nor the covetous person shall enter into the
Kingdom of heaven. Ephe. 5. 5.

Again the ambitious man cares not for his soul, so he may have honors here:
how many such be there, that spend all their time in seeking after honor, and
neglect many blessed opportunities offered to them for the salvation of their
souls?

The voluptuous person devotes himself wholly to pleasures, and with the
Epicure thus sings to himself, ede, bibe, lude, charum praesentibus exple
corpus deliciis post mortem nulla voluptas, eat, drink and be merry, let us
fill our selves with new wine, and crown our selves with rose buds, let us
take our pleasure while we live here, for there is no pleasure hereafter. And
indeed to them there shall be nothing but weeping and wailing and gnashing of
teeth.

I might much enlarge my self in marking out others that come under this
reproof, such as is the amorous wanton, that spends that time which he should
spend in seeking after the salvation of his soul, in courting some fair face,
some beauty of the times, and thinks of no other heaven, then the fruition of
his mistress favor, and counts her smile the only vision beatisicall, never
considering that death is courting that face as well as he, and oftentimes
proves the most successful, at least the most revengefull corrivall: taking
her from him, or him from her, and turning them into another world to embrace,
but what? eternal flames.

Such also is the profuse gallant, that spends his time in gaming, and not in
seeking after salvation, that sits down to eat and drink, and rises up to
play.

Such also are your fantastical women that spend their whole time in tricking
and ^rimming, tyring and dressing their bodies, and seek not after the
salvation of their Souls. ^^en.
Dum moliuntur dum comuntur annus est, the morning is gone before many of them
know it is come; at least by any serious holy duty which they have performed
therein: these will not have so much as a pin out of order in atyring their
bodies, but care not for beautifying their Souls with Grace; these spend their
time in looking glasses to see their bodies gorgiously attyred, but look not
into the looking glass of God's word, to be taught the way of saving their
Souls. In a word, these are very careful to enquire after the newest (French,
Italian or Spanish,) fashion, but take no pains to enquire after the way that
leads to salvation, they are better and constanter customers to new fashioning
taylers, then they are auditors to the best preaching Ministers, and will give
more to him that shall make them a new fashioned suite, then they will to him
that shall preach salvation to their souls.

I could enumerate many more, but it is high time to close this use.

2 Use.
Exhort. Secondly, have we such reasons to seek after the salvation of our
souls* Let us then be weaned from the world, and consider what danger they are
in, that only hunt after the pleasures, profits and honors of this world, and
neglect seeking after the salvation of their souls.

It is storied of Lysimachus, that he being much necessitated for want of
drink, parted with a whole kingdom for a drop of cold water, and afterward
repented in these words, O pro quant illo regnum perdidi? O for how little have
I lost a kingdom? even so will the covetous, the ambitious, and the voluptuous
man, the profuse gallant, the amorous wanton, and the fantastic woman; Repent
with O pro quantillo! O for how little pleasure, how little profit, how little
honors, how little pride and the like, have we lost the kingdom of heaven, the
eternal salvation of our precious Souls.

I beseech you therefore, settle not your affections on the things of this
life, but on things that are above. Remember the excellency of your creation.

Os homini sublime dedit Coelu^que tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad fidera tollerevultus.
God has given you a lofty countenance that you might not as beasts look
downwards, nor as worms crawle on the earth, nor as hogs be always
feedeing on the acornes of this world: but that you might look upwards and
seek after that Kingdom which he prepared for his servants. O then be not
slaves to the world when you may be Kings in Heaven: think on the excellency
of your souls. Remember the advice of Moses in my text, take heed to your
selves and keep your souls diligently.

And that you may the better perform this, consider these two motives.

1 Mot. First, consider the vanity of the things of this life. I might prove
that there is nothing but vanity, vicissitude and uncertainty in all those
earthly things which we delight in: but I will confine my self to the
examination of that trinity which worldlings most adore (to wit) honors,
riches, and pleasures.

First, how uncertain is honor? It is but the breath of the vulgar, which
being but wind, ^^onor est hono^^nte.
changes with the wind; did not the people even now salute our Sav^our with
Hosanna, blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord, and presently they
cry out against him to have him crucified, John 12. 13. was not Paul and
Barnabas honored by the Barbarians, as though they were their Paganish gods,
Jupiter and Mercury, Acts 14. 12. and in the same chapter ver. 19. we read
that they were stoned as malefactors, was not Christ counted a Prophet? Mark 6.
15. and presently a Devil, Jo. 7. 12. 20. how soon was Pharaoh and his pomp
drowned in the red Sea, Exo. 13. 28. Adonibezeck disgracefully mangled. Jud: 1.
6. Agag a king hewn in pieces 1 Samuel 15. 33. Nebuchadnezar turned out as a
beast: B^jazet carried up and down by conquering Tamberlain in an iron Cage; by
all which you see that it is not wisdom to place our delights in honors,
which are exceeding lubrick and subject to change.

Secondly, you shall find the like uncertainty in pleasures. Alas how short
lived are they, even the best of them perish as vapors, or as the untimely
fruit of a woman, they are dashed in a moment. Look on Adoniah feasting in
great jollitie, 1 Ki. 1. and you shall find that the news of Solomon proclaimed
king, and the noise of trumpets turned his joy into sorrow, his mirth into
mourning; the like you may see in Baltazar, who when he was feasting with his
Lords and Concubines, there appeared an inscription on the wall, which soon
turned his jollity into sadness, made his joints loose, and his knees smite
one against another, Dan. 5. 3. 4. 5. therefore it is no trusting to the
pleasures of this life.

Thirdly, you shall find the same uncertainty in riches; they often times take
the wings of Eagles, and fly away, when we think we have them surest; they skip
from man to man, like some fawning dog, or insinuating whore: for proof hereof
look on Job, who in the morning had 7000. sheep, 3000. Camels, 500. yoke of
Oxen, and 500 she Asses, and at night was bereft of all.

Quotidian experience proves that riches are uncertain, for how many be
there, Noblemen and Gentlemen, Merchants, Mariners and Tradesmen, Citizens and
Countrymen, who formerly were able to relieve others, and now want to support
themselves, who formerly had store of gold and silver, and now some of them are
(as great Bellisarius, who thrice rescued Rome was) forced to say, Date obolum
Bellisario, one single halfepenny to Bellisarius, so these who formerly lived
as Croesus are now as Colon: Fallen from a mountain of riches, into a valley
of poverty, some by carding, dicing and gaming, some by false servants, some by
extorting U^^reres, some by Hawks, Hounds, and Horses, and some by whoring,
being eaten up of their own lusts, as Acteon by his own dogs: Thus you see
that these things are uncertain in respect of themselves.

You may also see them uncertain in respect of our selves: for if we were
sure of them, yet we are not sure of our own selves; we are as subject to
change, as riches, honors, and preferments are, we change in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye.

The second motive to stir us up thus to seek after the salvation of our
souls, is, the consideration of the blessed condition of the soul that is
sav^d, instead of the corruptible dross of this life, they shall have
treasures incorruptible, glory unmatchable, solace inalterable, mirth
immeasurable, and perfect felicity unto all eternity. Eye has not seen,
neither has ear heard, neither can it enter into the heart of man, what
things God has prepared for those souls that shall be saved. Mar. 13. 35.

Now therefore, as when Monica (Austens mother) heard an excellent discourse of
the joys of heaven, said, Quid facio hic? What do I here on earth? so say I,
what do we here, planting our affections on the things of this life? let us
transplant our affections, and set them on things that are above. Some may
object thus:

Object. Is it not lawful to seek at all after the things of this life?

Ans. I answer, it is: you may, nay you are bound in conscience to provide for
those that are under your tuition, but you must not spend all your time herein,
and neglect seeking after the salvation of your souls, you may in a moderate
way seek after the things of this life, but you must not do it immoderately,
you may use the world, but it must be as if you used it not, you must so live
here as if your conversation were in Heaven, you may salute the world, but you
must take heed that you do not hug and embrace it.

To conclude, in a word, I beseech you do as our Savior exhorts you, Mat. 6.
33. seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all other
things shall be added to you: make sure of Jesus Christ to be the Savior of
your souls, and you shall be sure that God will give you all things else that
are necessary for you; which that you may do, I desire every one of you, to
remember and practice this exhortation of Moses in my Text, with which I began,
and now end. Only take heed to thy self and keep thy soul diligently.

I have done with my Text.

I know it will be expected that I should add some Laurel to this Hearse, by
^lazoning the great worth of the noble party deceased* and I am sure I might
without flattery speak much to his honor, for those who knew him best, knew
him to be of an affable and amiable carriage, courteous to the meanest,
exceeding charitable to the poorest, and most upright toward all, etc.

But I know that Funeral Sermons are not made as Panegyricks, or commendatory
Orations to proclaim the worth of the dead, but for instruction to the living;
and therefore I shall forbear to speak more now, but I shall (God willing)
write of him by way of Elegy; which shall be exposed to public view.

Si been quid dixi; mea non est gloria, Christi est
Sin male, scito hominem me quoque quisquis homo es.
FINIS.

