bookplate J.G. Hodgson.


THE HUMBLE REMONSTRANCE OF SR. Francis Willoughby KNIGHT: Therein setting
forth his faithful services, his many sufferings, and his earnest desires to
spend the rest of his days in the Service of the Parliament, against the
Rebels of Ireland.
Honorable,
I Have served in the Wars with honor and reputation 47. years, 25. whereof
I spent in the service of the States of the United Provinces, under the command
of the Lord General Vere: the rest being 22. years, I have spent in the
Kingdom of Ireland, where I have had many and honorable Commands: And first,
as Governor of the Cities of Cork and Lymerick, and a Counselors place of
that Province of Munster. After that, I was by the then Lord Deputy of that
Kingdom, commanded to take upon me the government of the Fort of Gallaway, and
to repair and finish the same, which was by me perfected in two years time,
and made one of the compleatest Forts in that Kingdom. I was also made Deputy
Governor of the County and Town of Gallaway, having both Martial and civil
government conferred upon me (under the broad Seal of that Kingdom) as also
made a Privy Counselor of that Kingdom, and being by accident in Dublin at
the beginning of that horrid Rebellion (and on that very day) I was by the then
Lords Justices (viz.) Sir William Parsons, and Sr John Burlace, commanded to
take into my charge and care the Castle of Dublin, that important piece, And by
their Commission made Governor thereof, with promise of twenty shillings per
diem, but I never received any thing in six years time; After that I was made
Major General of the Army, and a Colonel: All which places I have from time
to time discharged with all duty and faithfulfulnesse, And which is so
certified by men of honor, who were the chief Governors and Counsel of that
Kingdom in the time of my employments and service, and to whom my service was
best known; which Certificate of theirs is hereunto annexed; And I finding, to
my unspeakable grief, that some malicious persons have secretly wounded my
reputation to the most honorable, the Houses of Parliament, by which I have,
and do much suffer, I can but wish he or they had had more honesty, then to
possess the Parliament with such falsities and untruths (or had so much worth
in them) as to have accused me to my face, which if they had done, or would yet
do, I make no question, but am confident, that my innocence, shall not only
clear me, but also shame my Accusers; And so much I dare be bold to say, that
there lives not that man, that can justly accuse me of any the least crime
committed against the most Honorable, the Houses of Parliament of England, or
of any disservice ever done unto my Country in all my life, and doubt not of
making it good against any whatsoever, if thereto admitted.

I was one of the Commissioners employed 17. months ago from the Marquess of
Ormond and Council of Ireland for the rendering up of the City of Dublin, and
all other the Forts and Fortresses then under the command of the said
Marquess, into the hands of the Parliament of England; which journey my self,
and the rest of the Commissioners (viz.) Sr Gerrard Lowther, Lord chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, and Sr Paul Davis; Clerk of the Counsel cheerfully
undertook in the deep of winter, upon our own charges, out of our zeal to
do the Parliament service; which great and happy work, by the blessing of God
has well succeeded since, to the contentment of the Parliament, and to the
great comfort of all the distressed Protestants of Ireland, although as yet
nothing have been by the Parliament allowed us, or to any of us (for any thing
known to me) for our pains and charges in the negotiating of so happy a
work, notwithstanding others that came after us but with particular Letters,
have been bountifully rewarded by the Parliament.

The right honorable the Committee at Derby house were pleased within few
days after I came over, as aforesaid, to make choice of me to send over into
Ireland, with letters of credence to the Marquess of Ormond and Council, As
also with private Instructions of comfort to the distressed Protestants at
Dublin and elsewhere, assuring them of speedy succors to be sent unto them for
their relief, and Commissioners to follow, to treat with the Marquess of
Ormond; which journey I also most cheerfully undertook, and speedily
performed, finding at my landing the Army of the Rebels before the City of
Dublin, ready to swallow them up, but my unexpected arrival there, gave so
general a satisfaction to all the Protestants, that both Inhabitants and
soldiers with undaunted resolution wrought in the trenches, and watched night
and day for the safety of, and defense of that City, which otherwise had been
in great danger to have been lost; And when the Parliament Commissioners came
over, and I finding (contrary to my hope) that Treaty to prove fruitless for
that time, I desired leave of the Commissioners to come away with them, which
being by them granted unto me, I left all I had there, both fortunes and
Estate, and came over with them.

I have attended here 17. months at great charges, a Petitioner unto the most
Honorable the Houses of Parliament for some moneys taken from me out of
Gold-smiths-Hall by a misinformation, as also to know your Honors pleasures
concerning my places of Command, which I held in Ireland and had long enjoyed
by Commission from his Majesty and the Parliament, which was the Major Generals
place, the government of the Castle of Dublin, and an old standing Company of
Foot, which Company I have had this nineteen years, (as before recited) and was
armed at my own charge, And although the Parliament have been pleased a quarter
of year since (for the relief of the extreme necessity of my wife and
children) to order me seven hundred pounds, to be paid out of the moiety of
Gold-Smiths-Hall not engaged, (in course) which money, I humbly conceive, was in
lieu of that taken from me, which if it be so meant, is short of what I ought
to have 250. li. as by good certificate from the Wardens and Company of
Goldsmiths, ready to be produced, may appear; Yet such are the vast sums
that Goldsmiths-Hall is charged with already, that the Treasurers say, that in
a long time nothing can be expected from thence; which I having made known by
Petition to the Parliament, they have been pleased on the 17. of Febr. 1647. to
order interest to be paid every six months, till the money may come in course
to be received, And although this good work of theirs adds but little comfort
to my great and present pressing wants yet I am most humbly thankful to them
for it.

I have for the most part of the rebellion of Ireland served the Parliament
upon my own charge, having by just Accounts made up and signed by the chief
Governors and Counsel of that Kingdom of Ireland ready to be produced, above
twelve thousand pounds due unto me, which I shall humbly leave to the pleasure
of the Parliament to be considered of, in what measure they think fit.

At the entreaty of the Lords Justices, and Council (viz.) Sr. William
Parsons, and Sr. John Burlace, I kept my own Company five weeks upon my own
charge in time of want of money, they promising me payment as soon as Treasure
came from the Parliament of England, and for which I have their Order ready to
be produced; but I never received one penny of it, being a hundred and ten
pounds.

At the request of the same Lords Justices, and Counsel, in times of want; I
sent into the store, which Sr. Philip Percivall, Victual Master General
received (as is acknowledged under his hand) Beeves at half value, amounting
to an hundred and thirteeen pounds, and for which I have also an Order, but
never received any satisfaction for them, Which Order is ready to be produced.

The Fort of Gallaway being my Government, and I being commanded, as is before
recited, to recide in Dublin Castle, I left my son there with much of my
goods* which Fort being after besieged by the Rebels, my son sent unto me in a
Trunck an hundred forty nine pounds of mine, that I left there at my coming
away, the Ship in which it came, being put into Kinsale, the Lord of Inchequin
being in want of money for the Army under his Command, and conceiving there had
been some greater sum in the Trunck, caused the said Trunck to be broken up,
and finding no more money in it, took that out, and as his own Letter makes
mention, employed it to the use of the Army, for which no satisfaction has as
yet been made unto me, only one twenty pounds of it he paid, and no more.

And now having made known unto your Honor, my employments, and partly my
sufferings, both in Ireland, and here in England, I having served faithfully
against the Rebels of Ireland (as is well known) l^st one of my sons there in
that Service, spent and lost my whole Estate, to a great value, in that
Service, only what is yet remaining lies in the Rebels Quarters, from whence I
can draw no succor for the relief of me and mine at present, nor have not done
these six years, And against whom I desire to spend the rest of my days in
the service of the Parliament of England, not doubting, but as formerly, I
shall be found able to do my Country good and acceptable service, And
therefore my humble suit unto your Honor is, that when my Petition to this
purpose shall be presented to the most Honorable, the Houses of Parliament,
That you will please to vouchsafe me your favor and furtherance in the
justness of my cause, And in regard that in the late settlement of the Army in
the Province of Leinster, I find no man of Quality but enjoyes what Commands
he before held (yea some far better then ever they had before) And for that
there is not, nor cannot be any exceptions justly taken against me, That I may
be by the favors of the Parliament, continued in my Commands, which I have so
long had, and so faithfully served for, It being without all Example, That a
man of my quality and employments should be laid aside, no offense being justly
proved against me (employments honorable, Sir, is the chiefest thing I desire)
That as I have lived with honor, so I may dye, which granted unto me, I shall
leave my great and dearly earned Arreares (justly due unto me) to the pleasure
of the most Honorable, the Houses of Parliament, to be considered of, as in
their grave wisdoms they shall think fit.

But if the Parliament have otherwise resolved (as I hope they have not) and
will not continue me in my employments, or any part of them, Then I most humbly
beseech your Honor, to stand my friend, that I may be by you and them held
worthy of some part of my great and dearly earned Arreares, As also my truly
disbursed monyes for the advancement of their service in Ireland, whereby I may
be in some measure enabled for the future, to provide for my wife and children,
that we perish not, I having nothing left me in the world to subsist on, but
your noble favors, and that I have in Ireland, which lies in the Rebels
Quarters, as before mentioned. To recover which, I shall have no encouragement
to go thither, if not employed by the Parliament; To the furtherance of which,
I humbly implore your favor, and humbly desire your speedy Answer, I not being
able to subsist here any longer, nor well know whither to go.

That I have always carried my self like an honest man, this Certificate will
show to all men.
AT the request of Sir Francis Willoughby Knight, we do hereby certify, that
he has served long in the Kingdom of Ireland, and in eminent places and
commands, as Colonel, and Governor of the Fort of Gallaway, and from the
beginning of the rebellion there, he has been entrusted with the Castle of
Dublin, and Major General of the Army there; In all which employments he has
served industriously and faithfully against the Rebels, until the cessation,
which began in September, 1643. And as well before as since the cessation we
have well observed his carriage to be such, and so moderate, as we conceived to
be free from any ill affection to the Parliament of England, And to our
knowledge he is much impaired in his Estate by that service, having received
but little pay, And for the most part living upon his own stock, having to our
knowledge great arreares due unto him; All which we humbly certify whom it may
concern.

Sir William Parsons, then one of the Lords Justices of Ireland. Edward Lord
Brabason, a Privy Counselor of that Kingdom. Sir George Shirley Lo: chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, and a Privy Counselor. Sir Gerrard Lowther, Lord
chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and a Privy Counselor. Sir Adam Loftus,
Vice-treasurer, and Treasurer at wars, and a Privy Counselor. Sir Paul
Davis, Clarke of the Counsel, Sr. Philip Persivall, Sir Dudley Loftus, Sr.
Edward Povey, Sr. William Anderson, Sir Francis Slingsby, Mr. Bisse, Recorder
of the City of Dublin, Mr. Theodore Scout, Mr. Thomas Mawle.


That I was so well esteemed of by the Honorable Committee of Derby house, as
to be employed into Ireland, as aforesaid, this will show.
Whereas Sir Francis Willoughby Knight, is now dispatched hence with Letters,
and other directions to the City of Dublin, of great importance, which
requires all expedition, These are to require all Officers at Land, and all
Commanders of Ships at Sea, not only to permit and suffer him to pass in this
his journey, but also to be aiding and assisting unto him, in providing of him,
and his servants with post horses at the usual rates, and in taking up a Ship,
or other convenient Vessel for his speedy passage by Sea, whereof they are not
to fail, as they will answer the contrary,

Westminster the 19.th of October. 1647. The Lord Lisle. The Lord Wharton. Mr
William Perpoint. Sir Gregory Norton. Mr Densill Hollis. Sir Philip Stapleton.
Sir John Temple. Sir John Clotworthy. Mr Thomas Challenor.


FINIS.

