THE GADDING TRIBE REPROVED BY The Light of the Scriptures.

Wherein the true Protestants are encouraged to hold fast their Christian
Profession, maugre the Beast (i.e.) the Pope; or the Image of the Beast (i.e.)
the Quakers, and their Followers: To whom is given a mouth to speak great
things.

By George Willington, Schoolmaster in the City of Bristoll.

Rev. 19.20. And the beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet, that
wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the
mark of the beast, and them that worship his image. These both were cast alive
into the Lake of fire, burning with brimstone.

Luke 11.35. Take heed that the light which is in thee be not darkness.

Mat. 6.23. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is
that darkness?

Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday, to day, and for ever.

London, Printed by W. Hunt for the Author. 1655.

The gadding Tribe reproved by the light of the Scriptures.
A word from the Word, even that Word of Truth, to that Serpent-Generation
called Quakers.
Especially to that conniving Seducer John Audland, and the rest of his
Brethren in iniquity; who have of late set forth a malicious Pamphlet against
our godly Magistrates, and faithful Ministers: Entitled, The Innocent
delivered out of the snare; and the blind guide fallen into the pit.
Mat. 23. v. 24, 27, 28, 33.
YE blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel. Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye are like unto whited Sepulchers,
which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's
bones, and of all uncleanness: Even so, ye also outwardly appear righteous
unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. Ye serpents, ye
generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? Luke 16.15. ye
are they which justify your selves before men, but God knows your hearts:
for that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of
God. Acts 5.3. Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie against the Holy Ghost?
Act. 8.22, 23. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if
perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. For I perceive that
thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. Mat. 7.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. Judge not, that ye be not judged, for with what judgment ye judge, ye
shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast
out the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast
out the mote that is in thy brothers eye. Why boastest thou thy self in
mischief, O mighty man? The goodness of God endures continually. Thy tongue
devises mischiefs: like a sharp razor, working deceitfully. Thou love
evil more than good, and lying rather than to speak righteousness. Thou
love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue. God shall likewise
destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy
dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living. The righteous
shall see and fear, and shall laugh at him, Psalm. 52. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Act. 5. v. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Take heed to your selves (O ye Quakers) what ye
intend to do as touching these men [to wit, godly Magistrates, and faithful
Ministers] for before these days rose up Thendas boasting himself (as you now
do) to be some body, to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined
themselves, who was slain, and all, even as many as obeyed, or believed him,
were scattered, and brought to naught. After this man rose up Judas of Galilee,
in the days of the taxing, and drew away much people after him: he also
perished, and all, even as many as obeyed him, were dispersed. And now I say
unto you (Quakers) refrain from these men [to wit, the Ministers of Gods Word,
and also our godly Magistrates, to whom every soul must be subject, Romans
13.1.] and let them alone, [write not such bitter speeches against them] for if
this counsel, or this work [to wit, of the Ministry] be of God, ye cannot
overthrow it, [it will stand; stand? Yea stand, and flourish too, in spite of
your hearts, maugre your beards: therefore desist from your wicked purposes,
hatched in hell] lest happily ye be sound even to fight against God. It is hard
for thee to kick against the pricks, Act. 9.5. Thou may get a bloody Shin or
Heel for thy labor. If any man lust to be contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11.16.

When Elymas the Sorcerer withstood the Apostles, Paul and Barnabas; Paul
filled with the Holy Ghost, set his eyes on him, and said, [as I may say to
thee John Audland] O full of subtilty, and all mischief, thou child of the
devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the
right ways of the Lord? Acts 13.8, 9, 10.

And whereas thou wortest (as thou said) that late Pamphlet,
(aforementioned) in regard those men against whom thou have wrote, have
endeavored to render thee and thy crew odious to the world: I must be bold to
tell thee, that that late Pamphlet has rendered thee and thy Sect more odious,
by reason of the cursed speakings that are in it, which thy malicious spirit
has belched out against Gods Magistrates and Ministers: they are odious
speeches, I blush to name them. If you are men sent from God (as you pretend)
you must needs have the spirit of God: and if so, you would show forth the
virtues of the spirit; which are set down by Saint Paul, Gal. 5.22, 23. But the
fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no Law. Now what
does the Apostle add, v. 25, 26. If we live in the spirit, let us walk in the
spirit. Let us not be desirous of vaineglory, provoking one another, envying
one another.

Now by this spiritual touchstone is made manifest what spiritual Saints your
Sect are; for if the spirit were in you, you would bring forth the fruit of the
spirit, which the blessed Apostle calls in the singular number, fruit (not
fruits) which is very remarkable; for where there is one of these fruits in
reality, there they are all in some measure (though not always discernable) so
consequently, it appears that thou want the spirit, in regard thou want
love, as thy forementioned Pamphlet does declare. As I began with the words of
the ever blessed Jesus, so I shall conclude all I have to say directly to thee
John Audland, and to the rest of thy brethren in iniquity, with the words of
the same ever blessed Jesus, Mat. 12.33 to the end of v. 37.

Either make the tree good, and his fruit good: or else make the tree corrupt,
and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by his fruit. O generation of
Vipers, how can ye being evil speak good things? for out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks. A good man out of the good treasure of the heart
brings forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bring
forth evil things. But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall
speak they shall give account thereof at the day of judgment: [so shall John
Audland for his cursed speakings in his Pamphlet.] (Therefore judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come, who will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the heart; and then
shall every man have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4.5.) For by thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned.

I beseech all you that shall read or hear this little book, in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, upon consideration of the premises, to avoid and abandon (with
might and maine) the private meetings and conventicles, especially the books
and erroneous doctrines, and hellish Blasphemies, of this new upstart impious
generation, commonly called, and known by the name and title of Quakers, and
Shakers: whose manner and custom is, to fall a quaking and trembling with
their whole bodies: just after the manner of damned wretches at the last day,
to whom Christ shall say, go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
devil and his Angels.

Beware (says our blessed Savior) of false Prophets, which come to you in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves, ye shall know them by
their fruits: do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so
every good tree brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree brings evil
fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither a corrupt tree bring
forth good fruit *. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down,
and cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. Mat.
7.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Then if any man shall say unto you, lo, here is
Christ, or there, believe it not. For there shall arise false Christ's, and
false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it
were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. Behold I have told you
before. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, he is in the desert, go not
forth: behold he is in the secret chambers *, believe it not, Mat. 24.23, 24,
25, 26. Remember what the Holy Ghost says, Acts 8.9. There was a certain man
(in Samaria) called Simon, who before time in the same City used sorcery, and
bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that himself was some great one
[as these Quakers now do,] yet he was in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bond of iniquity, ver. 22, 23.

What Saint Paul said to the Galathians, who were turned aside to new Lights,
to new Teachers (such as the Quakers are) the same do I say to the giddy headed
people of the Church of England. O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you,
that ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been
evidently set forth crucified among you? This only would I learn of you,
received ye the spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith?
Are ye so foolish, having begun in the spirit, are ye now made perfect by the
flesh? Have ye suffered so many things in vain, if it be yet in vain? Gal. 3,
1, 2, 3, 4.

I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace
of Christ unto another Gospel, Which is not another, but there be some that do
trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. But though we or an
Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you than that which has been
preached, let him be accursed. As I said before, so say I now again, if any
man preach another Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be
accursed, Gal. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. The mystery of iniquity does already work, only
he who now lets, will let, until he be taken out of the way. And then shall
the wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his
mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming: Even him whose
coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying
wonders; and with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish:
because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved; and
for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a
lie: That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but take
pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 27, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Saint Paul taught the primitive Romans, (and in them us,) First, That it is
the imputed righteousness of Christ only that makes us just in the sight of
God, Romans 4.9, 17, 23. Chap. 3. from v. 19 to the end. Chap. 5. totum.

2. That our Election is of Gods free grace. Romans 9.12. Chap. 11.5, 6.

3. That we are justified only by faith in the sight of God without good works,
Romans 1.17. Chap. 3.20, 28. Chap. 4. most part. Chap. 5. totum.

4. That the holy Scriptures are of divine authority, Romans 3.2, 4. Romans 9.17.
Romans 11.32. compared with Gal. 3.21.

5. That no man since the fall of Adam, can perfectly fulfill the Law of God in
this life: and therefore can by no means merit except it be wrath, and
damnation, Romans 3.19, etc. Romans 7.10. and so on to the end. Romans 11.32. Romans
8.18. Romans 6.23. Romans 11.6. There is no salvation in any other [but Jesus
Christ] for there is no other name under heaven given among men whereby we must
be saved. Act. 4.12. No marvel then that the blessed Apostle and servant of
God Saint Paul, uses the sweet and comfortable name Jesus five hundred times
(if I am not mistaken) in his Epistles to the Churches; for it is that saves
his people from their sins, Mat. 1.21.

6. That he that has received a Ministry should wait on his Ministry, and
take heed to fulfill it, Romans 12.7. See Col. 4.17.

7. That every soul must be subject to the higher powers: and yield obedience
to every one of their Ordinances, though humane, if not contrary to Gods word;
for there we are to obey God rather than man, and be at his commands in point
of Gods worship, so far as belongs to the circumstances, how, and when, being
in things indifferent in their own nature, and that he also profess to
disclaim all opinion of holiness, worship, merit, and necessity, there must
we be subject, and all this for conscience sake: knowing that God is the Author
of Magistracy, and Magistracy is also good, even when the Magistrate is evil.
Romans 13. v. 1. to 8. Then he adds, Chap. 16.17, 18. Now I beseech you brethren,
* mark them which cause devisions, and offenses contrary to the doctrine which
ye have learned, and avoid them. [Then he adds the reason] For they that are
such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and by good words
and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

O that we would all embrace this wholesome counsel of the blessed Apostle,
even to mark, and so to mark, as to avoid all Papists, Arminians,
Antitrinitarians, Anti-scripturists, Anabaptists, Quakers, and all other Sects,
and Sectaries whatsoever, that cause divisions, and offenses contrary to this,
or any other doctrine, which the blessed Apostle taught the ancient Romans: and
that upon the reason of the counsel, ver. 18.

Make not the light within your rule to walk by, further than it agrees with
the light without, shining forth in the holy Scriptures. Follow your light
within, and your teacher within, what else? But so as not to neglect the light
without, shining forth in the holy Scriptures. For as the Scriptures are the
word of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. So it is a perfect rule of righteousness, containing
all our duty to God, to man, to our selves: all those things which are to be
done, or left undon, or to believed to salvation, Psalm. 19.7. The holy
Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation, through faith which is in
Jesus Christ. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproose, for correction, for instruction in righteousness,
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work,
2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.

Whilst the upstart Sect, the Quakers, do look principally after the light
within, we (says Saint Peter) have a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye
do well * that ye take heed, even as unto a light which shines in a dark
place until the dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts. Knowing this
first, that no Scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. Wherefore, I humbly beseech you
that ye be not soon shaken in mind, by this up-start generation of quaking
seducers, who have a form of godliness but deny the power thereof: from such
turn away. For of this sort are they which (forsaking the public assemblies)
creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sin, and led away
with diverse lusts: ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth. Now as Iannes and Iambres [those sorcerers spoken of, Exodus 7.11,
22.] withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth, men of corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the Faith, but they shall proceed no farther, for their
folly shall be made manifest unto all as theirs also was. But continue you in
the things which ye have learned, and have been assured of, knowing of whom ye
have learned them, Tim. 3.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering (for he is
faithful that promised) and let us consider one another to provoke unto love
and to good works. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is: but exhorting of one another, and so much the rather as ye
see the day approaching. Cast not away therefore your confidence which has
great recompense of reward. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have
done the will of God ye may receive the promise. For yet a little while and he
that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Now the just shall live by
faith. But if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we
are not of them who draw back unto perdition, but of them who believe to the
saving of the soul, Heb. 10.23, 24, 25, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.

Be ye henceforth no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. Embrace the counsel of the Apostle, 1
Ioh. 4.2. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits [to wit, those
who say they are sent by the spirit] whether they are of God: because many
false prophets are gone out into the world. But how shall we try them? To the
Law and to the Testimoney, if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. If there come any unto you, and
bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid Godspeed,
[that is, show him no countenance, by receiving him, hearing him, and the
like,] for he that bids him God-speed is partaker of his evil deeds, 2 Ep.
of Ioh. 10, 11. ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before,
beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked fall from your
own steadfastness, 2 Pet. 3.17. Little children (says Saint John) it is the
last time: and as ye have heard that Antichrist should come, even so now are
there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time. They went out
from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us they would no
doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made
manifest that they were not all of us. But ye have an unction from the holy
one, and shall know all things. Let that therefore abide in you which ye have
heard from the beginning: if that which you have heard from the beginning shall
remain in you, ye shall also continue in the Father and the Son. And this is
the promise that he has promised us, even eternal life. These things have I
written unto you, concerning them which seduce you, 1 Ioh. 2.18, 19, 20, 24,
25, 26. Now the spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrine of devils;
speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences seared with a hot iron, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.

Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the old
paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and you shall find rest for
your souls, Ier. 6.16. Therefore suffer not your selves to be led aside out of
the old way, after new lights, new ways, new notions, new doctrine, a new
Gospel, a new Church, for the good way is an old way; but stand stoutly, and
to the death in the cause and quarrel of the good old way, and contend, and
that earnestly, for that old faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. Which
faith is laid down in the sacred lines of the holy Scriptures, from the Alpha
of Genesis to the Omega of the Revelation: and is summed up in that almost
forgotten Creed, commonly called, the Apostles Creed, which may be truly called
the Summary, or Abridgement of the Gospel, for it is a short sum of all those
Gospell-truths which are absolutely necessary to salvation. This Creed is the
badge, or cognizance, by which the faithful are discerned from unbeleevers.
This is the Catholic faith, which except a man believe faithfully he cannot be
saved.

This short and perfect confession of this Catholic Creed, which was assigned
by the sentences of twelve Apostles, is so perfect a celestial Armor, that
all opinions of Heretics may by this alone, as with a sword, be cut in pieces.
As Tertullian learnedly says, Regula quidem fidei, un a omnino est, sola
immobilis and irreformabilis, credendi scilicet, in unicum Deum omnipotentem,
etc. Haec Lege fidei monente, caeterajam disciplinae and conversationis
admittunt novitatem correctionis, operante scilicet, and proficiente usque in
finem gratia dei.

The rule of faith is wholly one, unalterable, never to be mended, never to be
changed; to wit, I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc. This Law of Faith
remaining, in other things you may increase and grow.

The knowledge of these Articles is required of all; in the defense whereof we
should be ready to suffer the extremest things, even death it self, (if God
be pleased to call us thereunto) and which we should count the very Characters
of true Religion, the distinct knowledge whereof we should lay up as great
riches. Let us therefore be always ready after the example of Christ, to
witness a good confession, albeit it be even before Pontius Pilate, 1 Timothy
6.13.

Do any persuade you to forsake your Ministers, and to follow new lights? This
persuasion comes not of him that calls you, but of those who trouble you,
and would pervert the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 5 8. Chap. 1.7.

Whilst some men (yea, the most) do sell the truth, O do you buy it at any
rate, and sell it at no rate, according to the counsel of the wise man, Pro.
23.23. For I am persuaded the devil had never such a harvest of souls since
the Reformation as he has now by our innovators, they are the devils brokers,
the Popes Agents sent abroad throughout the whole Land to seduce, and to
disturb the Nation: be you (for Gods sake) not seduced by them, for errors in
the judgment are far more dangerous than errors in life, for sound doctrine
may reform a bad life, but a scandalous life cannot establish sound doctrine.
Continue you [therefore] in the faith, grounded and settled, and be not moved
away from the hope of the Gospel, Col. 1.23. Would any persuade you to forsake
the public Assembly of Gods Saints? Let your answer be, and your resolution
too, we will not forsake the house of our God: Neh. 10.39. Oh do you not (as
you tender the salvation of your souls) forsake the Temple, and truth of God,
to follow the bleating of Ieroboams calfe in Dan, or in Bethel, 1 Kin. 12. v.
25. to 31. As for these Quakers, they are at this day miserably misled, (God of
his infinite mercy open their eyes) for now the blind do lead the blind, and if
they go on, both will certainly fall into the ditch.

Oh therefore, I do humbly and earnestly beseech you, to have nothing to do
with this gadding Tribe, with this intoxicated, giddy headed, and brainsick
generation.

For your encouragement hereunto I beseech you seriously to consider what our
blessed Savior says, by way of commendation to the Church of Ephesus, Rev.
2.2. I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not
bear such as are evil: and have tried them which say they are Apostles (men
sent from God) and are not, and have found them liars. Mark; and can not
bear them; O that the same mind were in us of the Church of England! Consider
also what a discommendation and reproof our blessed Savior gives the Church
of Pergamos, Rev. 2.14. I have a few things against thee, because thou have
them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balaac to cast a stumbling
block before the children of Israel to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and to
commit fornication. So have thou also them that hold the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. So to the Church of Thyatira he gives a sharp
reproof for suffering false teachers to roost among them, [such as the Quakers
are,] Rev. 2.20. Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou
suffer * that woman Iezabel, which calls her self a prophetess to teach
and to seduce my servants, etc. And I am afraid that the Lord has a
controversy with the Church of England, for * suffering these Quakers, and
decivers, under the species of Religion, to teach and to seduce the people, not
only in their private meetings, and conventicles, but also in the Press by
scandalous and lying Pamphlets, which is the way to make our Magistrates and
Ministers to be in contempt of the people, and our adversaries the Papists do
rejoice at it: for the Pope had never such a hopeful success of reducing
Popery into this Land as he has now; God of his infinite mercy prevent it. And
Oh! that our faithful Magistrates, into whose hands God has entrusted power,
would be valiant for the truth upon the earth (as hitherto they have been) to
cut off false Prophets, Heretics, and perverse and incorrigible seducers and
blasphemers, for these are the pest of Church and State. Lev. 24.16. 2 Kings
23.20. Chap. 10.4, 5. 2 Chronicles. 15.8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. That judgment may
flow down as the rivers, Psalm. 99.4. And I am persuaded the work would be so
acceptable to God, that he would multiply his blessing, not only on the persons
of our Magistrates: but on their seed also, Pro. 29.4, 14. This note was the
swan-song of the sweet Psalmist of Israel, which the God of Israel, the rock of
Israel spoke to him, he that rules men must be just, ruling in the fear of
God, and he shall be as the light of the morning * when the sun rises, even a
morning * without clouds, as the tender grass springing out of the earth by
clear shining after rain, 2 Samuel 23.1, 3, 4. Deal courageously, and the Lord
shall be with the good, 2 Chronicles. 19.11. So shall the wicked fear, the godly
love, and all reverence you, but if not, you and your authority will be
contemned, and kicked against by every worm.

And O ye inhabitants, especially of the City of London and Bristoll, and all
other the Sons of the Church of England; both high and low, old and young, rich
and poor, male and female: O that my counsel might be acceptable unto you!
have not itching ears, forsake not your old teachers to follow new lights: for
the good way is an old way, Ier. 6.16. Use much prayer (especially morning and
evening) in your Family, and in your Closets, and beg earnestly of God, from a
faithful and penitent heart, to show you the right way, Ezra 8.21. Psalm.
119.36. Esa. 48.17. Psalm. 27.11. Gad not about to change your way, Ier. 2.36.
Rather consider that undeniable truth of him that is the way, the truth, and
the life, and therefore the fittest to teach the true way unto life, John 14.6.
See what he says Ioh. 10.1. and so on. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that
enters not in by the door [to wit, of a true and lawful Call] but climeth up
some other way, the same is a thief, and a robber, [and such are the Quakers,
and some others] but he that enters in by the door is the Shepherd of the
sheep: [and such are your ancient Divines, so much cried out against on all
hands.] To him the porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he
calls his own ship by name, and leads them forth. And when he puts forth
his own sheep, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him: and they know
his voice. And a * stranger will they not follow *, but will fly from him, (not
run after him, but run from him) for they know not the voice of strangers. O do
not you (as you tender your souls good) follow strange teachers, strange
lights, but keep close to your old teachers, and continue in the things which
you have learned, knowing of whom ye have learned them, 2 Timothy 3.14. The more
the men of this generation do cry down the Ministry of man, the more let us
prize them, and esteem them highly in love for their works sake, 1 These. 5.12,
13.

Keep close to the Scriptures, to the written word, even that engraffed word
which is able to save your souls, Iam. 1.21. make that your guide: and then
God will be your guide even unto death, Psa. 48.14. And after death he will
give you a Crown of never ceasing glory, Rev. 2.10. Let Gods Law be the light
for your feet, and the Lanthorn for your paths, Psalm. 119.105. Let us follow
after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify
another, Romans 14.19. Study those things exactly which most concern you, avoid
vain questions, and fruitless contemplations, and vain janglings, and
controversies: and labor especially to know Gods nature aright, and the
distinct manner of his worship, how you may serve him: study to know your own
particular offenses, and to know that that Jesus which was crucified at
Jerusalem above 1600 years ago is your Savior, and was crucified for your
sins: and that there is no way and means to be saved but by, in, and through
him [ Act. 4.12.] made ours only by faith, Ioh. 1.12.

And as you profess the truth, so practice the truth, that so you never defile
your holy profession by a scandalous conversation, Col. 2.6. And because these
are the last and perilous days, in which men shall have the show, but deny the
power of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. it lies you upon, to know in what things the
power of godliness does consist, that the full bent of your souls may be
placed on these things. It consists in righteousness, peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost, in humility, patience, goodness, meekness, and truth, in mercy,
mortification of the flesh, government of the affections, and of the tongue, in
heavenly mindedness, in self-denial, and contempt of the world, in the life
of a pilgrim, in long-suffering, and in gentleness, in sobriety and
temperance, in faith, and communion with God, in brotherly kindness, and
charity amongst men. I commend unto your reading and meditation the 13. of
Deuteronomy. Mat. 24. 2 Pet. 2. 2 Timothy 3. and the Epistle of Saint Jude, and in
general the whole Bible, Josh. 1.8. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9.

TO assert, or to confute the several Tenets of this gadding Tribe, is beyond
my purpose: in regard our Divines have done it so well already, both in the
Pulpit, and in the Press: yet notwithstanding I shall say something to those
principles of theirs which are called lower principles; which (as far as I
know) are not yet writ against by any. And this I shall do (as near as I can)
in the words of the Scripture, that so it may be the more convincing, and
undeniable, except of those who deny the Scriptures.

TO begin first with judging. If we ask them why they take upon them to judge?
Their answer is, The Saints shall judge the world, [1 Cor. 6.2.] For to prove
that the principle is theirs, I can bring five witnesses (besides my self) to
justify that two known and professed Quakers, with whom I discoursed, did
allege this in answer.

Confut. It is not said, the Saints do, but, the Saints shall judge the world:
and that is at the day of judgment; and this they shall do three ways:

1. By way of assent, in approving the sentence of Christ.

2. As they are members of Christ the judge [saith a modern Divine.]

3. By their example, which shall be alleged to condemn the wicked.

So by this Scripture they have no warrant for judging others.

That we ought not to judge, I have showed at the beginning; See Mat. 7.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 4.5. Romans 14.3, 10, 11, 12, 13. and many other; if we will
judge, let us judge our own selves: that we may not be judged of the Lord, 1
Cor. 11.31.

2. They are not true Ministers which are called by man's Ministry, or by a
mediate call from man.

Proof. That this is their Tenet all that ever heard them know, and their
books do generally declare it.

Confut. Luke 9.1. and 10.1. shows that Christ in the days of his flesh
ordained Apostles, and Disciples, and sent them to preach. Again, there is an
undeniable place, Act. 13.2, 3. There we read of Barnabas and Saul that they
were separated for the work of the Ministry. As the Church ministered to the
Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, separate me Barnabas and Saul for the
work whereunto I have called them. Mark the words, I have called them to the
work, there is the immediate call from God, but that is not enough, separate
me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. I have called
them immediately, you must call them mediately. And how was this done? Why v.
3. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent
them away. Mark what follows: So they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, etc.
So again very notably, Act. 14.23. When they had ordained them Elders in every
Church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom
they believed. So again, 1 Timothy 4.14. There says Saint Paul to his Son
Timothy; Neglect not the gist which is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. So Tit. 1.5. said
the same Apostle to Titus, For this cause I left thee in Creete, that thou
should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every
City, as I had appointed thee. See the charge again he gives his son Timothy,
2 Timothy 2.2. The things which thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the
same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. See
Acts 6.3, 4, 5, 6. I could allege many more; but these are sufficient to
convince any that do not set themselves on purpose to resist the Holy Ghost.
Besides, many worthy Divines have written very largely upon this subject, upon
another occasion, and against another generation of men. See to this effect a
book entitled, The Pulpit guarded, and another, The Pulpit guard relieved.

3. That we are to salute no man.

Proof. That this is their Tenet appears daily by their manners and carriage.

Confut. Mat. 5.47. Says our blessed Savior, If ye salute your brethren only,
what do ye more than others? Do not even the Publicans the same? Mat. 10.12.
When ye come into a house, salute it. 1 Samuel 25.14. We read, that David sent
one of his young men to salute Nabal. And in 1 Samuel 17.22. we find it was the
practice of David himself, (who was a man after Gods own heart,) -- David came
and saluted his brethren. Acts 21.19. We find it was Saint Paul's practice: he
saluted the Elders, and Disciples. And in the 16 of the Romans he gives command
for it almost throughout the whole Chapter.

Objection. Luke 10.4. Salute no man by the way.

Answer. This was a commandment given particularly to the Apostles, at, and
for that time only: compare this with Mat. 10.10, 11, 12. Besides, the Apostles
at that time were to wear no shoes, nor to carry a scrip, which the Quakers
do. If they leave off saluting, let them also leave off their shoes too, let
them conform to all, or to none. This Text of Scripture we see (being rightly
understood and compared) makes rather against, than with their unmannerlinesse.

4. That the Scriptures ought not be expounded: and that expounding of
Scripture is an adding to Scripture: and if we add, then God will add to us
all the plagues that are written therein.

Proof. That this is theirs, (although I could bring sufficient witness) I
need go no farther than their own writings to make it appear. It is so well
known they cannot deny it.

Confut. Neh. 8.8. We read of the Priests and Levites, that they read in the
Book, in the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused the people
to understand the reading. And Mark 4.34. we read of our blessed Savior, that
(before his crucifixion at Jerusalem) he expounded all things to his Disciples.
And (after his glorious Resurrection for our justification) we read of him,
that beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them out of
all the Scriptures the things concerning himself. Mat. 9.13. Says Christ, Go
ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Quoting
that place Hos. 6.6. I desire mercy and not sacrifice, he bids go and learn
what it means, see Chap. 12.7. So in Ioh 5.39. our ever blessed Savior gives
this in charge to his Disciples, Search the Scriptures. Search them, to wit,
for the spiritual sense and meaning of them, see Mat. 24.15. So in Acts 28.23.
we read of Saint Paul, that when many of the people were come to him, he
expounded and testified the kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus,
both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophets, from morning till
evening. Nay yet further, Acts 8.31. we read of a certain Eunuch who was in
his Chariot, returning home, and was reading in Esaias the Prophet, then the
spirit said unto Philip, go near, and join thy self to this Chariot, and
Philip ran thither to him, and heard him read the Prophet Esaias: and he said,
understandest thou what thou read? And he said, how can I except some guide
me? And he desired Philip that he would come up and sit with him, etc. Then we
see ver. 35. that Philip opened it unto him. Pray read the place at your
leisure. So Saint Peter also 2 Pet. 1.20. Seeing this first, that no prophecy
of the Scripture is of any private interpretation. In that Saint Peter does
say, the Scripture is not of any private interpretation, he does not mean,
that the Scriptures should not be expounded at all, [as some have seemed to
prove] for then he would have said peremptorily, the Scripture is of no
interpretation at all; but he says, the Scripture is of no private
interpretation: Implying, that no private person, of a private spirit, ought to
expound, or interpret the holy Scriptures; for they admit of no private
interpretation. [A good wipe for all those who leap from their shop boards into
the Pulpit to expound the Scripture unto the people; [see the answer to the
second Tenet.]

Here is enough (I hope) to convince any gainsayers of this truth, except such
unreasonable persons, (with whom I discoursed the other day) who said, let me
allege what I would, they would not believe me.

5. That it is not lawful to use the title of Master to any.

Proof. That this is theirs appears by their writings: and the proofs they
do bring for it are two, Mat. 23.12. Be ye not called Masters, for one is your
Master, even Christ. And again, Iam. 3.1. My Brethren, be not many Masters:
knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation.

Confut. The meaning is not that it is unlawful to be called Master: for
Christ himself was so called, and found no dislike with it, as appears John
20.16. and many others. But when the Ruler said unto him good Master, what
shall I do to inherit eternal life, Luke 18.18, 19. Jesus then said unto him,
why call thou me good? (because he looked upon him only as a man) but he did
not say unto him, why call thou me Master, but why call thou me good?
There is none good * but one, and that is God.

But the meaning is, be ye not called Masters of other men's faith, to tie them
to your humors: or do ye not seek for the title, to wit, in way of vain glory.

Object. 1 Cor. 7.23. ye are bought with a price, be ye not the servants of men.

Answer. The meaning is, let no man's humor be your guide in Religion, be bound
to no man's example in Religion, be tied to no man's will, lusts, likings, but be
free unto the service of Jesus Christ only, who has paid a dear price for us.
And that this is the meaning of the place will appear, if we compare this
verse with the five foregoing verses, 1 Cor. 7.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. compared.

And that it is lawful to call Master, does appear by these Scriptures.

Mal. 1.6. If I be a master, where is my fear? A son honors his father, and
a servant his master: if then I be a father, where is mine honor? And if I be
a master, where is my fear? says the Lord of Hosts. So Psalm. 132.2. as the
eyes of servants look unto the hands of their masters, and as the eyes of a
maid unto the hand of her mistress: so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God,
etc. Nay, Christ himself calls himself the Disciples master, Ioh. 13.13,
14. it is a notable place, ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye say well, [marke
that, ye say well] for so I am. If I then your Lord and Master have washed your
feet, ye also ought to wash one another. Romans 14.4. Who art thou that judge
another man's servant? To his own Master he stands or falls. Ephesians. 6.5, 6.
Servants, be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the flesh; and
so forward to the end of ver. 9. Masters, give unto your servants that which is
just and equal, Col. 4.1. I shall name one Scripture more, which alone of it
self is enough to overthrow the whole body of the Quakers, and to lay them
upon their backs: but I pray God it may bring them upon their knees, to beg
pardon of God for breaking the peace of the Church upon such a false ground, 1 Timothy 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their
own Masters worthy of all honor; that the name of God, and his doctrine be not
blasphemed.

And they that have believing Masters, let them not despise them, because they
are brethren, but rather do them service, because they are faithful and
beloved, partakers of the benefit. These things teach and exhort. Mark what
follows, ver 3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words,
even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according
to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and
strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings; evil surmisings,
perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth,
supposing that gain is godliness: from such withdraw thy self.

To which we may add two Tenets of theirs of a higher nature.

6. That Infant Baptism is no Ordinance of Christ, and therefore of no use in
the Church of God.

Proof. That this is theirs does appear by John Audlands lastbook, against M.
Farmer, and also in Richard Farnworths book, entitled the heart opened by
Christ.

Confut. 1. An express command I grant, is not to be found in the New
Testament for Infant Baptism, no, nor yet an express command against it.
Infants under the Law were circumcised at eight days old, Genesis 17. And this
Circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. even of
that righteousness of Christ made ours by faith: And in the room of
Circumcision under the Law is ordained Baptism (or washing with water) as a
seal of the same righteousness of faith: now if it had been the will of God,
that Infants should not have been sealed, or this righteousness of faith
sealed to them by Baptism under the Gospel, as well as by Circumcision under
the Law, he would have given an express command to the contrary, which neither
Christ, nor his Apostles have done, therefore Infants are to be baptized.

2. If Baptism should be denied to Infants under the Gospel, more than
Circumcision under the Law, this inference must of necessity follow, That the
Covenant of grace, now under the Gospel, would be of a far more narrow
extent, than the same Covenant or dispensation of grace was under the Law.

Ergo, Infants are to be baptized.

3. The Apostle Saint Paul says, That the blessing of Abraham comes on the
Gentiles, Gal. 3.14. Now a part of the blessing of Abraham (and a great one
too) was this, That his Infants, or male-children (for the female were
incapable of Circumcision) should be circumcised the eighth day, as a seal of
the Covenant, Genesis 17. or as a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11.
Now, how can the blessing of Abraham come on the Gentiles, if their Infants
under the Gospel should not have the seal of the Covenant by Baptism, as
well as Abraham's had under the Law by Circumcision? Since Baptism is commanded
to us under the Gospel, in the room of Circumcision, and does seal the same
Covenant.

Thus we have Scripture for Infant Baptism: but you that deny it have none.

7. That the Lords Supper is of no use in the Church of God, since the
resurrection of Christ.

Proof. That this is theirs, is evident by the writings of one Richard
Farnworth (who is a professed Quaker) in his book, entitled, The heart opened
by Christ. And he seems to prove it by 1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as ye eat
this bread, and drink this cup ye do show the Lords death till he come, that
is (says he) till he come from the dead.

Confut. This Scripture, 1 Cor. 11.26. does plainly show, that this Ordinance
of the Lords Supper is to be continued in the Church of Christ till the second
coming of Christ to judgment; for first, this Epistle was not wrote till after
both the Resurrection and also Ascension of Christ; and also the coming down
of the Holy Ghost: for it was written by Saint Paul, and Saint Paul was not
converted till after the coming down of the Holy Ghost, and therefore could
not write it till after he was converted; and it was a present duty in the
Church of Corinth when the Apostle wrote this Epistle, as appears ver. 20. to
the end of the Chapter; see Acts 2.46. and 20.7. So it is clear that this
Ordinance is to continue in the Church of Christ till the second coming of
Christ to judgment.

Reverence therefore, (dear Christians) the antiquity of this so high, and
heavenly a mystery; for it was ordained by our Savior Christ Jesus himself,
when the world was three thousand, nine hundred, fourscore, and five years
old, the four and twentieth day of March, and in the three and thirtieth year
of the Nativity of Jesus Christ our Lord, above sixteen hundred years ago; and
has been continued in the Church of Christ ever since, and must till his
second coming, as has been showed, 1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come.

It was never my purpose (Christian Reader) to have wrote a Treatise of this
Subject, till of late, firding none that have answered that Pamphlet set forth
by John Audland, full of malice and spleen against our Magistrates and
Ministers. When I see two Hebrews strive together, I cannot but say to him that
did the wrong, why smitest thou thy fellow? Exodus 2.13. Not out of any
pragmaticall disposition, or love to contention, as all that know me can
witness, and God the searcher of the heart is witness, but out of a heart
unfeignedly affecting the Peace of Sion.

Remember, I pray you, that of Saint Austine, there are some who defend their
opinious, not because it is true, but because it is their own; for so
self-love does draw men into errors.

I doubt not but I shall hear from some what Moses did from the Hebrew, who
made thee a judge over us? But Saint Jerome has taught me not to regard
subtle disputes, nor reproaches.

My conscience bears me witness, that I have in this matter dealt sincerely.
And if I should be smitten with the tongues and pens of any (yea, of many) yet
the reducing of a few that err, or satisfying of some that doubt, shall be a
sufficient comfort to me. It is an excellent speech of a worthy servant of
Christ, prayers are fitter for these times than controversies. I would to God
we were all effectually persuaded of the truth hereof, for so controversies
might be easily decided, opinions might be turned into unity, contention into
amity, and these lamentable digladiations which afflict the Church into the
precepts and practice of piety and charity, which blessing of peace the God of
peace grant unto his Church, in his own good time; and I beseech the God of
peace and truth, to bring into the way of truth all those poor souls that
have erred, and are deceived. Amen.

FINIS.

