THE YOVNG-MANS Second VVarning-peece: OR, A Miracle of Mercies.

Being a true Relation of the horrible suggestions, and tentations, wherewith
Satan assaulted me A. W. Stationer of London, whereby he prevailed so far, as
to force me to sin grossly, and to despair fearfully, in so much, that he
brought me near unto the making of my self away, many and sundry ways, from
the which the Lord in mercy delivered me.

And therefore as a testimony of my thankfulness to God, and love to my
brethren, and former sinful associats: I have thought good to publish in
print, both the manner and time of my conflict, and also of my delivery.

Perused and allowed of, by four godly, and learned Divines in this City.

The second Edition, Corrected by the Author.

Ephe. 6. 13. 16. Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may
be able to withstand in the evil day.

Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked.

LONDON. Printed for Anthony Wildegoose, and are to be sold at his house, in
Little-Woodstreete, in Bunting Alley. 1643.

THE YOVNG-MANS SECOND VVARNING-PIECE.
Being a true Relation of the horrible suggestions, and tentations, wherewith
Satan assaulted me, A. W. etc.
WE read in the Gospel of Saint Luke, that the rich man Luke 16. 27, 28
being in hell torments, he prayed Abraham to send Lazarus to his fathers
house, to warn his five Brethren, that they came not into that place of
torments.

In like manner, I having been in mine own apprehension, for a time, in the
same place of torments, and through the mercy of the Lord, being delivered from
thence; I have thought it meet to manifest as much charity as he, toward my
Brethren and associats, in warning them by my example, to beware of coming
into that place. And to this end, I have thought it meet to set forth in print,
a true and perfect Relation, how I have been assaulted; with the fearful
suggestions of Satan, as follows.

I having been guilty of the actual committing of some gross My falling into
sickness. Ephesians. 5. 3.
sins, even such as the Apostle says, are not to be so much as once named, as
becomes Saints; it pleased the Lord to visit me, with a fearful and
dangerous sickness, which occasioned me to call my sins to remembrance, and I
was much troubled in mind about them; but within a while, even within the space
of two, or three days, it pleased the Lord to give me some ease, both of mind
and body; at which time one William Parker coming to visit me, I desired him
to read some portion of holy Scripture unto me, which accordingly he did; and
then I desired him to read a singing Psalm unto me, which he likewise
condescended unto; and first we sung together the fifteenth Psalm, and
afterward the thirteenth, until we came to the last verse, which contains
these words: I will give thanks unto the Lord,
And praises to him sing,
Because he has heard my request,
And granted my wishing.


And even in that moment of time, as we were entering on the Satan's first
Temptation.
first part of this verse, Satan stood at my right hand, tempting me to
blaspheme the great, and fearful name of God, with the words of Jobs wife, to
curse God, etc. and this he forced so vehemently on my mind, that I had no
power to resist him; in so much, that I thought verily I had done it indeed,
and could not otherwise be persuaded, so that upon this occasion I was
distracted, and could have no rest night nor day, being verily persuaded, that
the Devil would fetch me away quick, and carry me into his own place of
torments: thus I continued a while crying out, I had committed such a sin, as
there was no hope of pardon for, and I was so out-ragious, that no one durst
stay with me in the Chamber; then by my Masters means, there came a Minister to
visit me, and by his instructions, I received a little rest of mind for a
while, but afterward the Tempter came more vehemently, and prevailed indeed.

So that hereupon then, I cannot say with the Apostle, I knew 2 Cor. 12. 2.
a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, taken up into the third heaven: But
I can say, I knew a man in Christ almost ten years The Trance.
ago, who was from his sick bed cast down into the second hell, in his own
apprehension, and there for a while most grievously tormented by the Devil,
and his hellish spirits; and this was very terrible unto me, especially
considering how those infernal spirits rejoiced at my coming thither, and
being amongst those spirits, me thought, they upbrayded me with this vain
saying, On earth a Saint, in hell a Devil; and then how ready they were to
execute their office to the full in tormenting me; also me thought, there were
the spirits of some of my sinful acquaintance there, ready to help to torment
my soul.

And here my brethren, behold and consider the craft and Note diligently.
subtilty of this cursed Hell-hound, Satan, who in all my life time before,
tempted and provoked me to sin most fearfully; which the Lord in his mercy was
pleased, in the time of this my sickness, to convince my conscience of; Satan
takes occasion, hence to suggest unto my Soul, this fearful apprehension, to
wit, that for my unworthy receiving of the Lords Supper, and my profanation of
his Sabbath and the like sins, I was tormented in Hell.

Whence we may see and behold, that Satan shapes his tentations Observe.
according to our several states, conditions and dispositions.

But to proceed, after that I had lain about three or four A Vision.
hours in the foresaid Trance, then me thought I was restored from thence, and
stood upon the Earth, and that all the Sky was on a light fire, and that
Christ Jesus came to Judge the Earth, and was set upon his Throne, and that I
was to appear before his Judgment seat. Immediately, then me thought I looked
upon my self, and was a most black deformed and ugly Creature, both by reason
I had been such a vile sinner, and for that I had been in the pit of Hell; and
Oh! me thought that if I were but like unto those Mr. Nathaniel Shute and Mr.
Mulline.
two godly Ministers, who were about their masters work, or like my master,
and my fellow prentice, or the like, then should I not be afraid to appear
before Jesus Christ; for I conceived them to be more free from sin then I was,
and that they might appear before the Judge without fear, but that could not I
do. In this trance when I had continued a while longer, I came to my self, and
then fell into a serious Consideration of those things, which were very
fearful and terrible to my Soul, not only for the present, but a long time
after: For though it pleased God to heal my body, and so raise me up from my
sick bed, yet was it his good pleasure to defer the healing of my soul a long
time after.

In which time, the Devil, who, as Father Latimer speaks of him, is the only
diligent Bishop in his Diocese, did bestir himself, and like a roaring Lion
went about seeking to devour me, tempting me to lay violent hands upon my
self: And this he did first by tempting me and provoking me to commit gross
sins, and then in suggesting unto me after this manner as follows.

Wherefore do thou not make thy self away? thou belongest not to Christ,
therefore it is thy best course to make thy self away quickly, for thou
committest great sins daily, and therefore the longer thou live the greater
sinner thou will be, and answerable to thy sins shall be thy torments in Hell
fire. And truly brethren, this foul Fiend did prevail so far with me hereby,
that I was diverse times very near the making away of my self; I lived such a
Melancholy discontented life, that indeed I was weary of living upon the earth,
and I thought that death would put an end unto all miseries here, and seeing I
must to hell at last, I had as good go sooner as later.

Whereupon, one day being very sore assaulted after this manner; Satan's second
temptation.
there standing a Ladder in the yard where I dwelt, I was tempted to get a Cord
to have hanged my self, but through Gods great mercy I was prevented.

Then he perceiving he could not prevail this way, he left off this tentation
for a season, and yet he left not off tempting me to the committing of gross
sins, and would never let me be at quiet except I were acting and committing
one sin or other to the terror and disquieting of my Soul, insomuch that I
lived a most miserable discontented life, so that sometimes, yea diverse times I
had not power to follow my Calling, but would often sit by the fire, or lie upon
my bed diverse days together, and neglect my business, though I had scarce
bread for my self and my wife.

Thus continuing for the space of six or seven years, after my forementioned
trance, without peace or rest, night or day, and playing many unadvised wilful
feats, rejecting the Counsel of my best friends; At the last the old Serpent
comes again, with his Satan's third temptation.
former Assault and Tentation, laboring to put me upon the work of sending
both my soul and body in a bloody Chariot speedily into Hell fire.

And to effect this he takes his opportunity on a day, I lying upon Satan's
fourth temptation.
my bed in a miserable discontented fit, and my wife going to market to buy
provision, and leaving me alone, I took a knife in my hand, and put it to my
throat, and did so much with it that blood came out and I felt it smart.

Whereupon it pleased the Eternal God, Creator and Preserver Gods merciful
deliverance.
of all mankind, to put this Meditation or Consideration into my mind, O
wretched man that thou art, art not thou able to abide one quarter of an hours
pain and smart, in cutting thine own throat, and will thou suffer the devil
so to beguile and cousen thee so much, as to persuade thee thou art able to
endure eternal torments, and so to plunge thy soul into everlasting misery?
Whereupon me thought I heard the voice of God from heaven, saying, O do not
make away thy self, do thou know what I have for thee to do?

And so My soul (to speak in the words of the Psalmist) is escaped Psalm. 124. 7.
as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler, the snare is broken and I was
delivered, blessed be the name of the Lord.

Howbeit the Tempter left me not yet, but after that the Lord Satan's fifth
temptation.
had delivered me from my former danger, Satan followed me and suggested unto
me, that it were best for me to leave my wife and children, and live in some
other place, and sometimes that it were best for me to drown my self, and very
near unto the doing of these and such like wicked and unnatural actions had
Satan sometimes brought me, but the Lord in mercy prevented him,

And in all this time give me leave also to tell you I had no heart Neglect not
holy duties.
to Prayer, for being such a wicked wretch as I apprehended my my self to be,
I was persuaded that my prayers and all other duties were abominable, so that I
did either omit them, or else I performed them untowardly; the truth is, I had
no heart to any goodness.

And thus brethren by reason of my yielding unto Satan's Yield not to Satan's
temptations.
tempting me first to the committing of sin, and then to despair and make away
my self, by reason of my sin, I endured a hell upon earth for the space of
above ten years, and then it pleased the Lord, out of his abundant mercy, to
deliver my soul, and that by this means,

I being at my work upon the 14. of November, 1643. my fellow Take notice of
the Lords mercy to me.
workman and I falling into discourse of good Ministers, he told me that that
evening I might hear a good Sermon at Bartholomew Lane, near the Exchange, so
we having no great haste of work, we concluded to go together to hear it: and
when we came thither we heard one Mr. Wills, whose Text was 1 Cor. 16. 22. If
any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema, Maran-atha: from
which Text he delivered such heavenly matter, concerning the excellent
condition of them that love Christ, and so laid open the fearful condition of
them that do not, with the properties and qualifications of true love to
Christ, that through the mercy of God, it wrought so upon my inner-man, that
since that time I bless God, I have been well in mind.

And now Brethren, I beseech you do not conceive of this Relation Brief
Exhortations.
as a fained or forged thing, for I profess unto you all, it is a most certain
truth; and therefore I beseech you believe it, and labor to make good use of
it: Oh learn by my example to beware of sin, lest God in justice, not only give
you over to be temporally tempted by Satan, as he formerly has done me, but
also to be eternally tormented by him, without all hope of recovery.

And you my Brethren of my Society, for to you especially do I intend my
Exhortation, I beseech you consider, that you have more means, by reason that
your Calling is oftener to have to do with good Books, then many other Callings
have; and yet alas Brethren, I fear we have been more profane and wicked, then
such as are of many other Callings. O beware of Intemperance and Excess, for
that we have been too guilty of; Oh labor to know God, and to live with God,
and keep close to him in frequenting holy duties, both in public and private;
and so turn unto God with all our hearts, and that speedily: And I beseech you
be thankful to God for me, and pray for me, that the Lord who has in mercy
begun a good work in me, would confirm it unto the day of Jesus Christ; which
he grant for Christ's sake, Amen.

NOw if any through ignorance may suffer themselves hereafter to be persuaded
either by their own corruptions, or Satan's temptations, that this former
Relation is but a fained thing, or some melancholy Fit only, or such like, I
would entreat them to take an opportunity to come to my house in
Little-Woodstreet in Bunting-Alley, and I will with the Lords help, give what
satisfaction I am able.



FINIS.

