An Appeal to all Englishmen, to judge between Bondage and Freedom, sent from
those that began to dig upon George Hill in Surrey; but now are carrying on,
that public work upon the little Heath in the Parish of COBHAM, near unto
GEORGE Hill, wherein it appears, that the work of digging upon the Commons, is
not only warranted by Scripture, but by the Law of the Commonwealth of
England likewise.
BEhold, behold, all Englishmen, The Land of England now is your free
Inheritance: all Kingly and Lordly entanglements are declared against, by our
Army and Parliament. The Norman power is beaten in the field, and his head is
cut off. And that oppressing Conquest that has reigned over you by King and
House of Lords, for about 600. years past, is now cast out, by the Armies
Swords, the Parliaments Acts and Laws, and the Commonwealths Engagement.

Therefore let not Sottish covetousness in the Gentrey, deny the poor or
younger Brethren, their just Freedom to build and plant Corn upon the common
wast Land: nor let slavish fear, possess the hearts of the poor, to stand in
awe of the Norman Yoke any longer, seeing it is broke. Come, those that are
free within, turn your Swords into Plough-shares, and Spears into
pruning-hookes, and take Plow and Spade, and break up the Common Land, build
you Houses, sow Corn, and take possession of your own Land, which you have
recovered out of the hands of the Nonman oppressor.

The common Land has lain unmanured all the days of his Kingly and Lordly
power over you, by reason whereof, both you and your Fathers, (many of you)
have been burdened with poverty, And that Land which would have been fruitful
with Corn, has brought forth nothing but heath, moss, furseys, and the
curse, according to the words of the Scriptures: A fruitful Land is made
barren, because of the unrighteousness of the People that ruled therein, and
would not suffer it to be planted, because they would keep the Poor under
bondage, to maintain their own Lordly Power, and conquering covetousness.

But what hinders you now? will you be slaves and beggars still, when you may
be Freemen? will you live in straits, and die in poverty, when you may live
comfortably? will you always make a profession of the words of Christ and
Scripture: the sum whereof is this. Do as you would be done unto, and live in
love? And now it is come to the point of fulfilling that righteous Law: will you
not rise up and act, I do not mean act by the sword, for that must be left? But
come, take Plow and Spade, build and plant, and make the wast Land fruitful,
that there may be no beggar nor idle person among us; for if the wast Land of
England were manured by her Children, it would become in a few years the
richest, the strongest, and flourishing Land in the World, and all Englishmen
would live in peace and comfort; And this freedom is hindered by such as yet
are full of the Norman base blood, who would be Free men themselves, but would
have all others bondmen and Servants, nay slaves to them.

The Law of the Scriptures gives you a full freedom to the Earth, and makes
Mankind free in all his Members: for God, or the creating spirit, is no
respector of persons.

The Ministers who preach up the Law of the Scriptures, plead for their
Freedom in the Earth, and say, The Labourer is worthy of his hire. But these
Ministers, are faulty in two things. First, They will set themselves to work,
in that they will run before they be sent, and then force the People by the
power of the Sword-Law, to give them wages, or Laborers hire. And they will
not take 12 d. a day as other Laborers have, but they will compel 100 l. or
more to be paid them yearly. Secondly, They lay claim to Heaven after they are
dead, and yet they require their Heaven in this World too, and grumble mightily
against the People that will not give them a large temporal maintenance. And
yet they tell the poor People, that they must be content with their Poverty,
and they shall have their Heaven hereafter. But why may not we have our Heaven
here, (that is, a comfortable livelihood in the Earth) And Heaven hereafter
too, as well as you, God is no respector of Persons?

Therefore say we, while we have bodies that must be fed and clothed, let us
have Earth to plant, to raise food and raiment by our labors, according to the
Law of our Creation, and let us live like men of your own Image and form.

But if you say, that this is only old Adams condition to look after the
Earth; but the new Adam Christ, looks after Heaven above, and minds not the
Earth. As one public Minister told us, why truly then we say, you make old
Adam who brings in the curse to be more rational and tender over our bodies;
then the second Adam Christ who brings in the blessing to all Nations.

But if it be old Adams condition to desire a Livelihood as we are men, and to
live free from straits: Then I would have all those Ministers to cast aside
their 100 l. or 200 l. a year, and go and beg their food and raiment of
others, and expect their Heaven hereafter, as they bid the poor men do.

But you covetous blind deceivers, know this, that as old Adam brings Mankind
into bondage and straits, so the second Adam brings Mankind into Freedom,
plenty and peace, here in this Earth while bodies are living upon earth:
therefore he is said to be the joy of all Nations here on Earth, and the
restorer of the whole Creation, that groans under bondage here on Earth.

Well Englishmen, The Law of the Scriptures, gives you a free and full Warrant
to plant the Earth, and to live comfortably and in love, doing as you would be
done by: And condemns that covetous Kingly and Lordly power of darkness in men,
that makes some men seek their freedom in the Earth, and to deny others that
freedom. And the Scriptures do establish this Law, to cast out Kingly and
Lordly self-willed and oppressing power, and to make every Nation in the World
a free Commonwealth. So that you have the Scriptures to protect you, in making
the Earth a common Treasury, for the comfortable Livelihood of your bodies,
while you live upon Earth.

Secondly, You have both what the Army and Parliament have done to protect you,
as it will appear by this graduall consideration.

First, King Charles was the successor of the Norman Conquest, and reigned as
a Conqueror over England, for his Power held the Land from us, and would
rather see us die in poverty, or hang us up, then suffer us to plant the
Commons for our livelihood. And Lords of Mannours hold claiming to their
Copy-holds, and to the Commons, under or from the King: so that Kings and
Lordly power, is the power of the Conquest over the people.

Secondly, Our Commonwealths Army have fought against the Norman Conquest, and
have cast him out, and keeps the field. By virtue of which victory, both the
Title of the King, and the Title of Lords of Manors to the Land as Conquerors
is lost. And the Land now is as free to others as to them; yea, according to
David's Law, to them that staid at home with the stuff, as to them that went
our to war: And by this victory, England is made a free Commonwealth. And
the common Land belongs to the younger Brother, as the Enclosures to the elder
Brother, without restraint.

Then Thirdly, The Parliament, since this victory, have made an Act or Law, to
make England a free Commonwealth. And by this Act they have set the People
free, from King and House of Lords that ruled as Conquerors over them, and have
abolished their self will and murdering Laws, with them that made them.

Likewise they have made another Act or Law, to cast out Kingly Power, wherein
they free the People from yielding obedience to the King, or to any that holds
claiming under the King: Now all Lords of Mannours, Tything Priests and
imptopriators, hold claiming or Title under the King, but by this Act of
Parliament we are freed from their Power.

Then lastly, The Parliament have made an Engagement, to maiutain this present
Commonwealths Government, comprised within those. Acts or Laws against King
and House of Lords. And calls upon all Officers, Tenants, and all sort of
People to subscribe to it, declaring that those that refuse to subscribe, shall
have no privilege in the Commonwealth of England, nor protection from the Law.

Now behold all Englishmen, that by virtue of these 2. Laws, and the
Engagement, the Tenants of Copyholds, are freed from obedience to their Lords
of Manors, and all poor People may build upon, and plant the Commons, and the
Lords of Mannours break the Laws of the Land and the Engagement, and still
uphold the Kingly and Lordly Norman Power, if they hinder them, or seek to beat
them of from planting the Commons.

Neither can the Lords of Manors compel their Tenants of Copy-holds, to come
to their Court-Barons, nor to be of their Juries, nor take an Oath to be true
to them, nor to pay fines, Heriots, quit-rent, nor any homage, as formerly,
while the King and Lords were in their power. And if the Tenants stand up to
maintain their Freedom, against their Lords oppressing power, the Tenants
forfeit nothing, but are protected by the Laws and Engagement of the Land.

And if so be, that any poor men build them houses, and sow Corn upon the
Commons, the Lords of Manors cannot compel their Tenants to beat them of: And
if the Tenants refuse to beat them off, they forfeit nothing, but are protected
by the Laws and Engagement of the Land. But if so be, that any fearful or
covetous Tenant, do obey their Court-Barons, and will be of their Jury, and
will still pay Fines, Heriots, quit-Rents, or any homage as formerly, or take
new Oaths, to be true to their Lords, or at the Command of their Lords, do beat
the poor men off from planting the Commons; then they have broke the
Engagement, and the Law of the Land, and both Lords and Tenants are conspiring
to uphold or bring in the Kingly and Lordly Power again, and declare themselves
enemies to the Army, and to the Parliament, and are traitors to the
Commonwealth of England. And if so be they are to have no protection of the
Laws, that refused to tak the Engagement, surely they have lost their
protection by breaking their Engagement, and stand liable to answer for this
their offense, to their great charge and trouble, if any will prosecute against
them. Therefore you English men, whether Tenants or laboring men, do not enter
into a new bond of slavery, now you are come to the point that you may be free,
if you will stand up for freedom; for the Army has purchased your freedom. The
Parliament has declared for your freedom, and all the Laws of the
Commonwealth are your protection, so that nothing is wanting on your part, but
courage and faithfulness, to put those Laws in execution, and to take
possession of your own Land, which the Norman Power took from you, and has
kept from you about 600. years, which you have now recovered out of his hand.
And if any say that the old Laws and Customs of the Land, are against the
Tenant and the poor, and entitle the Land only to the Lords of Mannours still,
I answer, all the old Laws are of no force, for they are abolished, when the
King and House of Lords were cast out. And if any say, I but the Parl: made an
Act to establish the old Laws, I answer, this was to prevent a sudden rising
upon the cutting off the Kings head; but afterward they made these 2. Laws,
to cast out Kingly Power, and to make England a Commonwealth. And they have
confirmed these 2. by the Engagement, which the People now generally do own and
subscribe: therefore by these Acts of freedom, they have abolished that Act
that held up bondage. Well, by these you may see your freedom, and we hope the
Gentry hereafter, will cheat the poor no longer of their Land, and we hope, the
Ministers hereafter will not tell the poor they have no right to the Land, for
now the Land of England, is and ought to be a common Treasury to all
Englishmen, as the several portions of the Land of Canaan, were the common
Livelihood to such and such a Tribe; both to elder and younger Brother, without
respect of persons. If you deny this, you deny the Scriptures. And now we shall
give you some few encouragements out of many, to move you to stand up for your
freedom in the Land, by acting with Plow and Spade upon the Commons.

1. By this means within a short time, there will be no beggar nor idle person
in England, which will be the glory of England, and the glory of that Gospel,
which England seems to profess in words. 2. The wast and common Land being
improve, will bring in plenty of all Commodities, and prevent famine, and pull
down the prizes of Corn, to 12 d. a Bushel, or less. 3. It will prove England
to be the first of Nations, or the tenth part of the City Babylon, And diverse
others that were not present when this went to the Press.
which falls off from the covetous beastly Government first; and that sets the
Crown of freedom upon Christ's head, to rule over the Nations of the world, and
to declare him to be the joy and blessing of all Nations. This should move all
Governors to strive, who shall be the first that shall cast down their
Crowns, Scepters, and Government at Christ's feet, and they that will not give
Christ his own glory, shall be shamed. 4. This Commonwealths freedom, will
unite the hearts of Englishmen together in love so that if a foreign enemy
endeavor to come in, we shall all with joint consent rise up to defend our
Inheritance, and shall be true one to another. Whereas now, the poor see, if
they fight, and should conquer the Enemy, yet either they or their Children are
like to be slaves still, for the Gentrey will have all. And this is the cause
why many run away and fail our Armies in the time of need. And so through the
Gentries hardness of heart against the poor: The Land may be left to a
foreign enemy for want of the poores love sticking to them; for say they, we
can as well live under a foreign enemy working for day wages, as under our own
brethren, with whom we ought to have equal freedom by the Law of righteousness.
5. This freedom in planting the common Land, will prevent robbing, stealling,
and murdering, and Prisons will not so mightily be filled with Prisoners; and
thereby we shall prevent that hart-breaking spectacle of seeing so many hanged
every Sessions as there are. And surely this imprisoning and hanging of men is
the Norman power still, and cannot stand with the freedom of the Commonwealth,
nor warranted by the Engagement; for by the Laws and Engagement of the
Commonwealth, none ought to be hanged, nor put to death for other punishments
may be found out And those that do hang or put to death their fellow
Englishmen, under color of Laws, do break the Laws and the Engagement by so
doing, and casts themselves from under the protection of the Commonwealth, and
are traitors to Englands freedom, and upholders of the Kingly murdering power.
6. This freedom in the common earth, is the poorers right by the Law of
Creation and equity of the Scriptures, for the earth was not made for a few,
but for whole Mankind, for God is no respector of Persons. Now these few
Considerations, we offer to all England, and we appeal to the judgment of all
rational and righteous men; whether this we speak, be not that substantial
Truth brought forth into action, which Ministers have preached up, and all
religious men have made profession of; for certainly, God who is the King of
righteousness, is not a God of words only, but of deeds; for it is the badge
of hypocrisy, for a man to say, and not to do. Therefore we leave this with
you all, having peace in our hearts, by declaring faith fully to you, this
light that is in us, and which we do not only speak and write, but which we
do easily act and practice. Likewise we write it, as a Letter of
congratulation, and encouragement to our dear fellow Englishmen, that have
begun to dig upon the Commons, thereby taking possession of their freedom in
Willinborow in Northamptonshire: And at CoxHall in Kent. waiting to see the
chains of flavish fear to break and fall off from the hearts of others in other
Countries, till at last the whole Land is filled with the knowledge and
righteousness of the restoring power, which is Christ himself, Abraham's seed,
who will spread himself til he become the joy of all Nations.

Jerard Winstanley. Richard Maidley. Thomas James. John Dickins. John Palmer.
John South, Elder. Nathaniel Helcomb. Thomas Edcer. Henry Barton. John South.
Jacob Heard. Thomas Barnat. Anthony Wren. John Hayman. William Hitchcock. Henry
Hancocke. John Batty. Thomas Star. Thomas Adams. John Coulton. Thomas South.
Robert Saycar. Daniel Freland. Robert Draper. Robert Coster.





March. 26. 1650.

