THE KINGS MAJESTY'S DESIRES To His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX. PRESENTED To
His Excellency at the Head Quarters near READING.

Together with the Resolution of His Excellency concerning the said Desires,
and the great satisfaction His MAJESTY received thereby. Likewise, a Message
sent from his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, to the Honorable House of Commons,
concerning the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

Printed for the use and satifaction of the whole Kingdom.

London, Printed for R. Williamson, July 13. 1647.

The Kings MAJESTY'S DESIRES, To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.
Sir,
HAving obtained such a fit opportunity, to express my willingness in a
satisfactory way, to all your Desires, I shall here impartially communicate the
most remarkablest Occurrents, which has (lately) ebbed and flowed, within the
Kingdon^es great Stream, who^e appearance in this instance of time, seems to
be the Worlds chiefest Object. But by reason of breviation, and the desire of a
sudden dispatch, of some of these papers to the Army, I must of (necessity) be
take my self to my limited bounds, and in the first place present unto you the
Desires of the Kings Majesty to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, viz.

Upon Friday last, July 2. His Majesty sent a Message to the General,
intimating his earnest desires concerning his Highness the Duke of York, and
the rest of his Children at London, declaring, 1. His earnest desire to see His
Princely issue. 2. That they might be speedily sent down unto Him. 3. That it
would bring great contentment to His Majesty. And 4. That His Majesty desired
His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, speedily to send to the Parliament, to
acquaint them therewith.

Whereupon his Excellency immediately dispatched a Letter to the House of
Commons, a Copy whereof follows:

Mr. Speaker,
I Was sent unto the King on Friday last, to desire the Parliament to give way
to him to see his Children; And that they might for that purpose be sent to
him, If I may be bold humbly to offer my opinion, I think the allowance of such
a thing may be without the least prejudice to the Kingdom, and yet gain more
upon his Maj. then denying it; and if it be in the prayers of every good man,
that his heart may be gained, the performance of such civilities to him is very
suitable to those desires, and will hear well with all men, who (if they can
imagine it to be their own case) cannot but be sorry, if his Maj. natural
affection to His Children, in so small a thing should not be complied with; and
if any question should be concerning the assurance of their return, I shall
engage for their return within what time the Parliament shall limit.

Upon this occasion, give me leave, I beseech you, to take notice of some
reports spread abroad, as if my self, and the Officers of the Army were upon
some under hand contract, or bargain with the King; and from thence occasion is
taken to slander our integrities, and endeavor a misunderstanding betwixt the
Parliament and their Army, the fidelity of which to the Parliament and Kingdom,
and their affection to it, are the great objects of many men's Envies, because
they see nothing so likely to settle Right and Freedom with Truth and Peace to
Us and Posterity, and to hinder their Designs against the same, as an harmony
or good accord between the Parl. and Army, which is the joy of good men, and it
shall be our study to preserve against all Designs and Designers to the
contrary. To prevent therefore all misunderstandings of that kind, I thought
with all clearness to declare unto you, That we have done nothing, nor shall
do any thing, which we desire to hide from you or the world or shall not avow
to the faces of our greatest Adversaries. Our Desires concerning a just
consideration or settlement of the Kings Rights (his Majesty first giving his
concurrence to settle and secure the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom) we
have already publicly declared in our Representation and Remonstrance. Since
the first of those Papers sent unto the Parl. there have been several Officers
of the Army upon several occasions sent to his Majesty, the first to present to
him a Copy of the Representation, and after that some others to tender him a
Copy of the Remonstrance; upon both which, the Officers sent were appointed to
clear the sense and intention of any thing in either Paper, whereupon his Maj.
might make any question. Since then, there have also been some Officers at
several times sent to his Majesty about His remove from Hatfield, to dissuade
(if possibly) from Windsor, or any place so near London, to some place of
further distance, answerable to what we had desired of the Parliament.

In all which addresses to his Majesty, We care not who knows what has bin
said, or done; for as We have nothing to bergain for or ask, either from His
Majesty or the Parl. for advantage to our selves, or any particular party or
interest of our own, so in all those addresses to his Majesty, we have utterly
disclaimed and disavowed any such thing, But the only intent and effect of
those our addresses has been, to desire his Maj. free concurrence with the
Parliament, for establishing and securing the common Rights and Liberties, and
settling the Peace of the Kingdom; and to assure him, that (the Public being
so provided for, wi^h such his Maj. concurrence) it is fully agreeable
principles, and should be desirous and endeavor, That (with and in such settling
of the Public) the Rights of his Majesty's Royal Family should be also
provided for, so as a lasting peace might be settled in this Nation. And that as
we had publicly declared for the same in general terms, so (if things came
to a way of settlement we should not be wanting (in our sphaeras) to one that
general desire, in any particulars of natural or civil right to his Maj.
Person or Family, which might not prejudice, or again endanger the Public:
and in the mean time, that his Majesty should find all personal civilities and
respects from us, with all reasonable freedom that might stand with safety, and
with the trust or charge lying upon us concerning his person.

You have here the utmost fum of what has passed from us to his Majesty; and
we could wish all men did rightly understand (without misrepresentation) every
particular wherein (as we know nothing not agreeable to Reason, Justice,
Honesty or Conscience, so we thought our selves concerned the rather to say and
do, as we have toward his Majesty since he came within our quarters, because
of those common prejudices suggested against us, as if we were utter Enemies to
Monarchy, and all civil Order of Government.

And for that particular of the Duke of Richmond, and the two Chaplains lately
permitted to attend his Majesty, it was not done without much reluctance,
because therein we doubted we might be misunderstood by the Kingdoms best
friends.

But upon his Majesty's continuing importunity for it (as a thing very nearly
concerning his inward and outward conrentment; and conceiving those persons
su^^ (as we hoped) would not do ill Offices to prejudice the Peace of the
kingdom, we did give away to it, and the persons (before they came had notice
of the permition: And as we then thought so we still do think that to allow
him some such (...) any of persons least dangerous, whom former accquaintance
make him take pleasure in, and the allowance of some such Chaplains of his own,
are things both reasonable and just; and the debarring of that liberty in the
latter) We doubt will but make him more prejudiced against other Ministers.

In general We humble conceive, that to avoid al harshnesses and afford all
kind usage to his Majesty's Person in things consisting with the Peace and
Safety of the Kingdom is the most christian Honorable and prudent way, We
think that tendor equitable and moderate dealing both toward his Majesty, his
Royal Family, and his late party, [so far as may stand with safety to the
Kingdom and secureity to our common Rights and Liberties] is the most hopeful
course to take away the seeds of war, or future Fends amongst us for
posterity, and to precure a lasting Peace and Agreement in this now distracted
Nation,

Thus have I given you the utmost sum of what has passed betwixt the Kings
most excellent Majesty, and his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, concerning his
Majesty's Desires touching the coming down of His Children, being very
importinant to see them, and it is hoped it will not be denied, by reason that
the General has engaged for their safe return. Here is a gallant Court, and
his Majesty very cheerful, being attended with many brave gallants. The Duke
of Rich mond behaveth himself with much civility, and in great favor with the
King.

Thus for the pres^ur, I remain

Yours to serve you, Robert Williamson.
Cawsam, July 11. 1647.
FINIS.

