A TRUE RELATION Of a late Victory obtained by Major General BROWN His Forces
about CLIFTON within three miles of Abington, against a Party of Wallingford.
Wherein the Governor of Wallingford was taken prisoner, with 60 Horse and
more, diverse other Prisoners: One Major, six Captains, diverse Lieutenants,
Cornets, Ensigns, some in present command, others Reformadoes, etc. The
particulars whereof being sent in a letter from Doctor WILSON to a friend here
in London, and now printed and published.

Published according to Order.



LONDON; Printed by Matthew. Simmons for Henry Overton in Pope's Head Alley. 1646.

A true Relation of a late Victory, obtained by Major General Brown his
Forces, Against a party of Wallingford, etc.
SIR,
I Readily embrace this opportunity to salute you, wherein, as you will receive
the grateful acknowledgement of fore-passed favors, together with the tender
of my constant respects to so deserving a friend; you will also perceive that
we move in Abington, according to the straitness of our orb, and meditate now
and then some good turns to our neighbors. I could look back, and tell you,
that in frosty weather we made bold to fetch two hundred loads of wood from
Bayly-wood, within sight of Oxford; and that there is not a day passes,
wherein our commanded parties fetch not in provision from the enemies mouths,
and fill our Gaols, besides, out of pity, that they may crowd one another warm
this late frost. In fine, Oxford is pleased to connive at our continual
alarms, and suffer us to view their walls daily, within Musket Shot; if they
see half a dozen honest Troopers face them, it is held a point of policy to
suspect a plot, an ambuscado; and truly, well they may, if it be true, that the
burnt child dreads the fire. Now your Wallingford sparks being not long since
encouraged by the surprizall of three or four close by Redding, harbored some
better thoughts of their valor, as indeed not being so often cowed as the
other. But Major General Brown gives them all by degrees a taste of his
vigilancie; for this very morning he ordered Major Blundel to send a party of
forty horse to march up to Clifton and Dorchester, thereby to secure our
Markets, who in the afternoon about two of the clock, were to go up to Benson
and Cromish, and so to give an alarm to Wallingford Castle, and if possible,
draw out their horse, who, if they should issue forth, these forty horse were
to retreat. Major Blundel himself was commanded to take an hundred more, and
at an appointed hour to cross over at Chisleton bridge, and so to come upon
the rear of the enemy. The plot took, for Captain Roe, who commanded the first
forty, drew out the enemy from Wallingford, and retreated in good order, till
beyond Dorchester, receiving now and then some slight charges, but at last
appeared a greater body, and that of select men, no worse then all Officers and
Reformades, being of the Kings own lifeguard. Truly, then the retreat of ours
proved an absolute flight, the enemy doubling our number. Captain Roe, with
thirty more of his Company, were taken prisoners, being pursued eagerly as far
as Clifton, within three miles of Abington. These prisoners were conveying to
Wallingford, when they were met by Major Blundel very oportunely (who observed
his orders most punctually) so as that immediately each prisoner seises upon
his keeper. Major Blundel, now with the whole party, charges up to the body of
the enemy, who were not far before expecting none of us in their return home.
There with ease we noos'd them, amongst us took threescore horse and more, and
fifty prisoners, whereof the Governor at present, of Wallingford was one,
Lievt. Col. Lowre, by name, and not long since knighted: one Major, six
Captains, diverse Lievtenants, Cornets, Ensigns, some in present commands,
others Reformades, to the number of twenty, the rest are not yet discovered,
only by their horses and habites cannot be guessed ordinary soldiers. Lievt.
Colonel Wilford, who commanded this party of theirs, was slain upon the
place, with three more of theirs, and one of ours. Lievt. Col. Lowre protested,
he came forth of the Castle of purpose to hinder their pursuit of us too far,
as suspecting something, but was not able to forbear the pursuit, till he was
entrapt himself with his whole party. I shall trouble you no further; but
hoping you will requite us with some of your more considerable Intelligence
from London. I rest

21. January, 1645. Yours to command, E. WILSON.

FINIS.

