A Winding Sheet FOR Traitors: With a Discovery of their great and dangerous
Conspiracies; the horrid Perfidiousness and Treachery of diverse Usurping
Tyrants; their J^das-like Actings in several Counties; their Judgments, and
Sel^-Exec^tions; their s^ddain Death; the Names of such who have both hanged
and drowned themselves; And the Lamentation and Confession of Mr. Scot, and
diverse others of the wicked and cruel Judges, who most barbarously and
inhumanely murdered our late gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES.



London, Printed for J. Thomas, 1660.

THE Traitors Confession: Or, Strange News from the Tower of London.
JUstice having taken place within these British Isles, and a discovery made
of the grand Traitors, who struck even at the Root both of King, Parliament,
Laws, and Privileges, their Confederacy in sin being their only security;
give me leave in this following Narration, to present the Reader with a
Catalogue of some of the Grandees, that could not be matched in any place but
where they now are, viz. in the Tower of London, where the Marquess of Argyle,
the Earl of Antrim, Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, Sir Henry Vane, Col. Axtel, Mr.
Thomas Scot, who was sent prisoner out of Flanders, and Col. Hacker, one of the
Gentlemen forsooth, that carried a Partizan, was on the Scaffold, and commanded
the Guards when our late gracious Sovereign was most inhumanely and barbarously
murdered; for which bloody act and wicked Treason, he, with the rest, are now
honored with an imprisonment in the Tower, where they may justly condole and
lament their bypast Enormities; and thus center with each other, in their
direful Lachrymae: Oh! That the blood of that innocent Prince were washed from
our Souls: Oh! the horror and guilt of Conscience: Let us surrender that
which we cannot keep: Let us east off our vile and polluted Vizards, and appear
in our Natural Colors, every one confessing his Villainies, which we can no
longer conceal: Let us turn Converts, and as we have always been Dissemblers,
so now out of our natural disposition of dissimulation acknowledge his Majesty
to be our Right and lawful Sovereign, (for we cannot help it) that we were the
unjust and bloody Murderers of his most Royal Father; that in all our Actions
we sought our own profit, and not the public good; that our endeavors tended
to the advance of our own private Interest and Estates, and not the benefit of
the Trust imposed upon Us; That we were plunderers both of Church and State,
never thinking that the day of Account would come; That we made Religion and
the glory of God the Cloak for all our Villainy, Rapines and Murders; That we
did intend if our Designs had been fixed firm, to have made our selves
perpetual Dictators and State-Robbers.

But since their hopes are frustrate, and that seemingly here is pointed out
such an enrolled Confession; be pleased, in the next place, to take a Review of
the just Confession of some of the unjust Judges, in these words:

Our King we murdered, yet the Work's not done,
For then on Holland, Capel, Hambelton
Our pause we laid, by Us was Derby's loss,
As by the Scotch Kirk that noble Earl Montross:
We Gerrard killed, and valiant Brown-Bushel,
Sir Alexander Carry, and Mr. Vowel,
Aston, Stacy, and Hewet, who does lie
A martyred Saint, with noble Slingsby:
Besides, to aggravate our sins above
The thoughts of Man, we murdered Mr. Love;
With many more, we took no pity,
Drawn hanged and quartered in fair London's City.
There Is none of us but do deserve to dye,
Who for these cruel Evils new in prison lie,
Where we had better be, our lives to save,
Then (as deserved) the Gallow Tree to have.
Our Brother Barkstead, once a man of power,
Is fled whilst we have taken London's Tower.
Like Hector bold, we did presume to kill
Our King, though it be sore against our will
To answer that pretended good Old Cause,
By which we robbed poor England of just Laws
Which would condemn us all, had we our due
To be drawn hanged and then quartered too.
These were the King-killing Basilisks, and weeping Crocodiles, who not only
murdered their lawful Prince, but banished His Royal Consort the Queen, and
caused the Offspring and Royal Issue for many years to suffer Exilement: Nay
more, they destroyed and imprisoned all the Kings Friends, and made it Treason
for to name the King, or once to mention him. Nay more then that, they unjustly
seized on all his Majesty's Lands, and gave or sold them one to another,
felling his Timber, destroying his Deer, demolishing his Castles and stately
Palaces, poling and oppressing his Subjects, and what not. But they are now
like to deliver up their unjust gotten Lands and Goods to the right Owners. The
ancient Palace of Old-Court is to be delivered up by Mr. Edwards, which he
purchased for a small sum. And Gaffer Obey must now forsake his Manor of
Ampthill, and his Manor of Mill-brook, and betake himself to the old Road. The
like must Goodman Whaley, for his two Manors of West-Walton, and Trington;
Lightly come, lightly go, he purchased them at a very easy rate.

These are the arbitrary Youths that lived upon the sweat of other men's brows;
and these are the Canicals that for many years joined with the bloody Tyrant
and Usurper; witness his insatiable proceedings against the Western Gentlemen,
who upon their Rising for the King in the year 1655. he not only proceeds
against Col. Penruddock, and diverse other Gentlemen, by capital punishment; but
he decimates all the Cavaliers or Gentlemen of the late Kings party, that had
been in Arms for him, all over England; that is, he enjoins them to pay yearly
the tenth part of their whole Revenue, notwithstanding their former
Compositions made for their Estates, and their Pardons sued out as the
Parliament had enjoined. And this Decimation was put in execution by the Major
Generals of every County: In which Government, Cromwell much resembled the Turk;
himself like the Grand Signior, ruling by sole Command, had his standing Army
(as a Guard for his Person) answerable to the Janissaries; and his Major
Generals representing the Bashaws in their several Provinces.

These are the State-Juglers, that could at pleasure impose new Oaths, and set
up their Dag^n or Westminsterian Engagement, in opposition to his Majesty's
Regal Government, and so deceitfully to glory and triumph in their pretended
Providence and Successes, ever since that fatal blow given to our late
gracious Lord and Sovereign: But mark the apparent Demonstrations of Gods
evident and eminent wrath and indignation against the Subscribers of the said
Engagement, and Accomplices with the late Juntoe, viz. One Mr. Bray a
Presbyterian Minister, for the gaining of an Augmentation to his Living at
Michaels in Lancashire, took the Engagement, turned a great Zealot for the
Independent Faction, and immediately after, an O^der coming for pulling down of
the late Kings Arms in Churches, he was so not therein, that he would needs (as
he did) pull them down himself, and sent the boards on which the Kings Arms
were painted, home to his house, intending to have made a door of them, to one
o^ the Rooms of his House; but it pleased the Lord presently to strike him with
a sudden and violent sickness, whereof he presently dyed, and those boards
were made his Coffin to bury him in.

One Brown a Scottish-man, with other of his Contrymen, having betrayed his
Majesty in several weighty businesses of great importance; and being extremely
oppressed with horror and guilt, fell mad, and so dyed desperately: but Brown,
the grand Impostor, going to Fern Island in the North Seas, within a League or
two of the Holy-Island, wrapped himself in a White Sheet, and tumbled himself
down from the Top of a Rock into the Main Ocean. Such was the horrid perfidy of
the Treachery Scot, that in stead of the expected Safety of his Majesty's
Person, J^das-like for Money, (though a far greater Sum) sold and delivered
their Sovereign LORD and KING, into the hands of his English Rebels, who by
this means had under God a power to re-settle the Kingdoms peace: But they were
blinded to their own destruction; and having taken the Lords Anointed in their
pits, they now used him as they listed, carried him whither they pleased, and
indeed treated him no otherwise then as their prisoner; for with a strong Guard
of Horse and Foot in the month of February, 1646. the depth of Winter, they
removed him from Newca^^le to Holmby.

Long had not his Sacred Majesty continued there, but He was by a part of the
Army under one Joyce a Tailor, violently taken from thence, and brought to his
Honor of Hampton Court, where for a while he began to reassume his Pristine
Majesty, being admitted to see and to be seen; but Cromwell fearing the
frequency of so great resort might spoil his grand Plot and Traiterous Designs,
with much Serpentine Craft and Devilish Subtilty, persuaded and insinuated into
his Majesty's heart doubts and suspicions of mischief intended against him; the
only way for preventing whereof, he affirmed to be the withdrawing his Person
from thence, to a place of more strength and security, and to that purpose
nominated the Isle of Wight, to which place his Majesty led by the Innocence of
his spotless Conscience, was decoyed, and at his arrival found himself
overreached; for he was immediately secured by Col Hammond, who then was
Governor in the said Island, and kept a long time prisoner there in the Castle
of Carisbrook; to the unspeakable grief of his Majesty, and all true Subjects.

One Sir Thomas Martin Knight of Cambridgeshire, an Engager and great Complier
with the Times, having been a Hunting in Holmby-Park, and the Deer being fallen,
stuck and opened, and he desired (together with the other Gentlemen) to wash
his hands in the Deers blood; No (said he) I had rather wash my hands in the
blood of the young King of Scots: Immediately after this, riding home the same
day at evening, his Horse very suddenly and violently threw him, in which fall,
he pitched on his Head, mo^tally break his Skill and Shoulder, of which wounds
he ve^^ shortly after died.

Doctor Dorislaus, the Westminsterians Junctoes-first-Ambassadosent from them
into Holland, and therefore no doubt a great Engager and desperate Complier in
all things with them, as in the Kings Death; this Dorislaus being arrived in
Holland, was immediately and suddenly assaulted and slain as he sat at Dinner
in his own house.

Mr. Thomas Hoyle, formerly looked upon as a very pious and strictly Religious
Gentleman, an Alderman of York and Member of Parliament; but having taken the
Engagement, even against his Conscience, turned a great Complyer with them at
Westminster: Not long after, it pleased the Lord so to leave him to himself,
that on the very same day 12 month that King Charles was Beheaded; yea as near
as possibly could ^e judged about the very same hour of that day, this
Gentleman hanged himself at his own house in Westminster, and was found dead by
his Wife when she came home, who had been abroad that morning.

Mr. Shereman a Citizen and Silkman in Pater-N^ster-Row in London, who had
formerly been looked upon as a Godly and Religious man, had been a Tryer and an
Elder in the Presbyterian-Church-Government, a very good friend to Mr. Love,
then his Pastor; but afterward he turning with the Times, took the
Engagement, and that in form of an Oath, whereupon he was made a
Common-Council-man, turned a desperate enemy and hater of the said Mr. Love,
who shortly after being in the Shop with his W^fe, as well as ever in his li^e,
yet in the Evening standing at his Counter in his Shop, and his Wife close by
him, he suddenly fell down dead by her, and spoke one word.

Unto this I shall only add this Q^^ry, viz. Whether those persons that are
living, that took upon themselves the Name, Style, and Title of The Parliament
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, (though bp their Writs by which they sat,
they were but the fragments of the Parliament o^ England only) Beheaded their
Lawful Protestant King, Banished his Posterity, overturning our ancient
Government it ^el^, consisting of King, Lords, and Commons, which constitution
continued many hundreds of years, and was the best and fittest for the^e
Nations that could be, and brought the Nation into such a Labyrinth and
Confusion, by endea^ ouring to set up a Vtopian Commonwealth, a mere
Ne^-N^t^ing? Whether the orersons may not justly fear They may all down Q^^^k
into He^^, or fall into the some Exemplary T^rrors, Judgments, and
Self-Executions with Others, i^ they repent not for their Abominations.

FINIS.

