Christenings make not CHRISTIANS, OR A Briese Discourse concerning that name
Heathen, commonly given to the INDIANS.

As also concerning that great point of their CONVERSION.

a bare-chested woman with headdress, bow and arrow, standing in the country,
under a bright moon

Published according to Order.

London, Printed by Jane Coe, for I. H. 1645.

A Brief Discourse concerning that name HEATHEN Commonly given to the Indians.
As also concerning that great point of their conversion.
I Shall first be humbly bold to inquire into the name Heathen, which the
English give them, and the Dutch approve and practice in their name Heydenen,
signifying Heathen or Nations.

How often have I heard both the English and Dutch (not only the civil, but the
most ded bauched and profane) say, These Heathen Dogs, better kill a thousand
of them then that we Christians should be endangered or troubled with them;
Better they were all cut off, and then we shall be no more troubled with them:
They have spilt our Christian blood, the best way to make riddance of them, cut
them all off, and so make way for Christians.

I shall therefore humbly entreat my countrymen of all sorts to consider, that
although men have used to apply this word Heathen to the Indians that go naked,
and have not heard of that One-God, yet this word Heathen is most improperly,
sinfully, and unchristianly so used in this sense. The word Heathen signifies
no more then Nations or Gentiles; so do our Translations from the Hebrew (...)
and the Greek (...), in the old and New Testament promiscuously render these
words Gentiles, Nations, Heathens.

Why Nations? Because the Jews being the only People and Nation of God,
esteemed (and that rightly) all other People, not only those that went naked,
but the famous BABYLONIANS, CALDEANS, MEDES, and PERSIANS, GREEKS and ROMANS,
their stately Cities and Citizens, inferior to themselves, and not partakers
of their glorious privileges, but Ethnicke, Gentiles, Heathen, or the Nations
of the world.

Now then we must enquire who are the People of God, his holy nation, since the
coming of the Lord Jesus, and the rejection of his first typical holy Nation
the Jews.

It is confessed by all, that the CHRISTIANS the followers of Jesus, are now the
only People of God, his holy nation, etc. (...), 1. Pet. 2.9.

Who are then the nations, heathen, or gentiles, in opposition to this People
of God? I answer, All People, ci^ilized as well as uncivilized, even the most
famous States. Cities, and the Kingdoms of the World: For all must come within
that distinction 1. Cor. 5. within or without.

Within the People of God, his Church at CORINTH: Without the City of CORINTH
worshipping Idols, and so consequently all other People HEATHENS, or NATIONS,
opposed to the People of GOD, the true Jews: And therefore now the natural
Jews themselves, not being of this People, are Heathens Nations or Gentiles.
Yea, this will by many hands be yielded, but what say you to the Christian
world? What say you to Christ endome? I answer, what do you think Peter or
John, or Paul, or any of the first Messengers of the Lord Jesus; Yea if the
Lord Jesus himself were here, (as he will be shortly) and were to make answer,
what would they, what would he say to a CHRISTIAN WORLD? TO CHRISTENDOM? And
otherwise then what He would speak, that is indeed what he has spoken, and
wili shortly speak, must no man speak that names himself a Christian.

Herdious in his Map of lus CHRISTIAN WORLD takes in all Asia, Europe, a vaste
part of Africa, and a great part also of America, so far as the Popes
Christnings have reached to.

This is the CHRISSION WORLD, or Christendom, in which respect men stand upon
their terms of high opposition between the CHRISTIAN and the TVRKE, (the
Christian shore, and the Turkish shore) between the CHRISTIANS of this
Christian WORLD, and the JEVV, and the CHRISTIAN and the HEATHEN, that is the
naked American.

But since Without is turned to be Within, the WORLD turned CHRISTIAN, and
athe^ttle stock of JESUS CHRIST has msorvelllously increased in such
wonderful conversions, let me be bold to ask what is Christ? What are the
Christians? The Hebrew (...), and the Greek (...) will tell us that Christ was
and in the Anointed of God, whom the Prophets and Kings and priests of Israel
in their anointings did presigure and type out; whence his followers are called
(...) christians, that is Anointed also: So that indeed to be a christian
implies two things, first, to be afollower of that anointed one in all his
Offices; secondly, to partake of his anointings, for the Anointing of the Lord
Jesus (like to the anointings of AARON, to which none might make the like on
pain of death) descend to the skirt of his garments.

To come nearer to this Christion world, (where the world becomes christian
holy, anointed, Gods People etc.) what says John? What says the Angel? Yea,
What says Jesus Christ and his Father (from whom the Revelation came Revel
1.1.?) What say they unto the Beast and his Worshippers Revel. 13.

If that beast be not the Turk, north Roman Emperor (as the grosest
interpretbut either the general councels, or the catholic church of Rome, or
the Popes or Pacy (as the most refined interpret) why then all the world,
Revel. 13. (...) wonders after the Beast, worships the Beast, follows the
Beast, and boasts of the Beast, that there is none like him, and all People,
Tongues, and Nations, come underthe power of this Beast, and no man shall buy
nor sell, nor live, who has not the mark of the Beast in his Forehead, or in
his hand, or the number of his name.

If this world or earth then be not intended of the whole terrestrial Globe,
Europe, Asia, Africa and America, (which sense and experience denies) but of
the Roman earth, or world, and the People, Languages, and Nations, of the Roman
Monarchy, transferred from the Roman Emperor to the Roman Popes, and the
Popish Kingdoms, branches of that ROMAN-ROOT, (as all history and consent of
time make evident.)

Then we know by this time what the Lord Jesus would say of the Christian world
and of the Christian: Indeed what he says Revel. 14. If any man worship the
Beast or his picture, he shall drink etc. even the dread fullest cup that the
whole Book of God ever held forth to sinners.

Grant this, say some of Popish Countries, that notwithstanding they make up
Christendom, or Christian world, yet submitting to that Beast, they are the
earth or world and must drink of that most dreadful cup: But now for those
nations that have withdrawn their necks from that boastly yoke, and protesting
against him, are not Papists, but Protestants, shall we, may we think of them,
that they, or any of them may also be called (in true Scripture sense)
Heathens, that is Nations or Gentiles, in opposition to the People of God,
which is the only holy Nation.

I answer, that all Nations now called Protestants, were at first part of that
whole Earth, or main (ANTICHRISTIAN) Continent, that wondered after, worshipped
the Beast, etc. This must then with holy fear and trembling (because it
concerns the KINGDOM of GOD, and salvation) be attended to, Whether such a
departure from the Beast, and coming out from ANTICHRISTIAN abominations, from
his marks in a false conversion, and a false constitution, or framing of
NATIONAL CHVRCHES in false MINISTERIES, and ministrations of BAPTISM, Supper
of the Lord, Admonitions, Excommunications as amounts to a true perfect Island,
cut off from that Earth which wonderd after and worshipped the Beast: or
whether, not being so cut off, they remain not Peninsula or necks of land,
contiguous and joined still unco his Christendom? If now the bodies of
Protestant Nations remain in an unre-Pentant, unregenerate, natural estate,
and so consequently far from hearing the admonitions of the Lord Jesus, Math.
18. I say they must sadly consider and know (least their profession of the name
of Jesus prove at last but an aggravation of condemnation) that Christ Jesus
has said, they are but as Heathens and Publcanes, verse. 17. How might I
therefore humbly beseech my counry men to consider what deep cause they have
to search their conversions from that Beast and his Pisture? And whether having
no more of Christ then the name, (beside the invented ways of worship, derived
from, or drawn after Romes pattern) their hearts and conversations will not
evince, them unconverted and unchristian Christians, and not yet, knowing what
in is to come by true Regeneration within, to the true spiritual Jew from
without amongst the Nations, that is Heathens or Gentiles.

How deeply and eternally this concerns each soul to search intol yea, and
much more deeply such is profess to be Guides, Leaders, and Builders of the
HOUSE of GOD.

First, as they look to Forms and Frame of Buildings, or Churches.

Secondly, as they attend to Means and Instruments, etc.

Thirdly, as they would lay sure Foundations; and lasting Groundsells.

Fourthly, as they account the cost and charge such buildings will amount unto.

Fifthly, so they may not forget the true spiritual matter and mateaials, of
which a true House, City, Kingdom, or Nation of of God, now in the new
Testament are to be composed or gathered.

Now Secondly, for the hopes of CONVERSION, and turning the People of America
unto God: There is no respect of Persons with him, for we are all the work of
his hands; from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, his name
shall be great among the nations from the East and and from the West etc. If we
respect their fins, they are far short of European sinners: They neither abuse
such corporal mercies for they have them not; nor sin they against the Gospel
light, (which shines not amongst them) as the men of Europe do: And yet if they
were greater sinners then they are, or greater sinners then the Europeans, they
are not the further from the great Ocean of mercy in that respect.

Lastly, they are intelligent, many very ingenuous, plaine-hearted,
inquisitive, and (as I said before) prepared with many convictions etc.

Now secondly, for the Catholics conversion, although I believe I may safely
hope that God has his in Rome, in Spain, yet if Antichrist be their false
head (as most true it is) the body, faith, baptism, hope (opposite to the
true, Ephesians. 4.) are all false also; yea consequently their preachings,
conversions, salvations (leaving secret things to God) must all be of the same
false nature like wise.

If the reports (yea some of their own Historians) be true, what monstrous and
most inhumane conversions have they made; baptizing thousinds, yea ten
thousands of the poor Natives, sometimes by wiles and subtle devices,
sometimes by force compelling them to submit to that which they understood not,
neither before nor after such their monstrous Christning of them. Thirdly, for
our New England parts, I can speak it uprightly and confidently, I know it to
have been easy for my self, long ere this, to have brought many thousands of
these Natives, yea the whole country, to a far greater Antichristian conversion
then ever was yet heard of in America. I have reported something in the Chapter
of their Religion, how readily I could have brought the whole Country to have
observed one day in seven; I add to have received a Baptism (or washing)
though it were in Rivers (as the first Christians and the Lord Jesus himself
did) to have come to a stated Church meeting, maintained priests and forms of
prayer, and a whole form of Antichristian worship in life and death. Let none
wonder at this, for plansible perswations in the mouths of those whom natural
men esteem and love: for the power of prevailing forces and armies has done
this in all the Nations (as men speak) of Christendom. Yea what lamentable
experience have we of the Turnings and Turnings of the body of this Land in
point of Religion in few years?

When England was all Popish under Henry the seventh, how easy is conversion
wrought to half Papist halfe-Protestant under Henry the eighth?

From halfe-Protestanisme halfe-Popery under Henry the eight, to absolute
Protestanisme under Edward the sixth: from absoluer Protestation under Edward
the sixth to absalute popery under Quegne Mary, and from absolute Popery under
Queen Mary, (just like the Weather-cocke, with the breath of every Prince) to
absolute Protestanisme under Queen Elizabeth etc.

For all this, yet some may ask, why has there been such a price in my hand
not improved? why have I not brought them to such a conversion as I speak of?
I answer, woe be to me, if I call light darkness, or darkness light; sweet
bitter, or bitter sweer; woe be to me if I call that conversion unto God, which
is indeed subversion of the souls of Millions in Christendom, from one false
worship to another, and the profanation of the holy name of God, his holy Son
and blessed Ordinances America (as Europe and all nations) lies dead i^ sin and
trespasses: It is not a suite of crimson Satin will make a dead man live, take
off and change his crimson into white he is dead still, off with that, and
shift him into cloth of gold, end from that to cloth of diamonds, he is but a
dead man still: For it is not a form, nor the change of one form into
another, a finer, and a siner, and yet more fine, that makes a man a convert I
mean such a convert as is acceptable to God in Jesus Christ, according to the
visible Rule of his last will and Testament. I speak not of Hypocrites, (which
may but glister, and be no solid gold as Simon Magus, Judas etc.) But of a true
external conversion; I say then, woe be to me if intending to catch men (as
the Lord Jesus said to Peter) I should pretend conversion) and the bringing of
men as mystical fish, into a Church Estate, that is a converted estate, and so
build them up with Ordinances as a converted Christian People, and yet
afterward still pretend to catch them by an after conversion. I question not
but that it has pleased God in his infinite pity and patience, to suffer this
among us, yea and to codvert thousands, whom all men, yea and the persons (in
their personal estates converted) have esteemed themselves good converts
before.

But I question whether this has been so frequent in these late years, when
the times of ignorance (which God pleases to pass by) are over, and now a
greater light concerning the Church, Ministry, and conversion, is arisen. I
question whether if such rare talents, which God has betrusted many of his
precious Worthies with, were laid out (as they shall be in the Lords most holy
season) according to the first pattern; I say, I question whether or no, where
there has been one (in his personal estate converted) there have not been,
and I hope in the Lords time shall be, thousands truly converted from
Antichristian Idols (both in person and worship) to serve the living and true
God.

And lastly, it is out of question to me, that I may not pretend a false
conversion, and false state of worship, to the true Lord Jesus.

If any noble Berean shall make inquiry what is that true conversion I intend;
I answer first negatively.

First, it is not a conversion of a People from one false worship to another,
as Nebuchadnezzer compeld all Nations under his Monarchy.

Secondly, it is not to a mixture of the manner or worship of the true God, the
God of Israel, with false gods and their worships, as the People were converted
by the King of Assyria, 2, Kin. 17. in which worship for many Generations did
these Samaritans continue, having a form of many wholesome truths amongst them,
concerning God, and the Messtah, Ioh. 4.

Thirdly, it is not from the true to a false, as IEREBOAM turned the ten Tribes
to then ruin and dispersion unto this day, 1. Kin. 12.

Fourthly, it must not be a conversion to some external submission to Gods
Ordinances upon earthly respects, as JACOBS sons converted the Sichemites, Genesis
34.

Fifthly it must not be, (it is not possible it should be in truth) a conversion
of People to the worship of the Lord Jesus, by force of Arms and swords of
steel: So indeed did Nebuchadnezzer deal with all the world, Dan. 3. so does
his Antitype and successor the Beast deal with all the earth, Rev. 13. etc.

But so did never the Lord Jesus bring any unto his most pure worship, for he
abhorres (as all men, yea the very Indians do) an unwilling Spouse, and to
enter into a forced bed: The will in worship, if true, is like a free Vote, nec
cogit, nec cognitur: IVSVS CHRIST compells by the mighty persuasions of his
M^ssengers to come in, but other wise with earthly weapons he never did compel
nor can be compelled.

The not discerning of this truth has let out the blood of thousands in civil
combustions in all ages; and made the whore drunk, and the Earth drunk with
the blood of the Sam^s, and witnesses of Jesus.

And it is yet like to be the destruction and and diss^lution of (that which is
called) the Christian world, unless the God of peace and p^^y lo^ke down upon
it, and satisfy the souls o^ men, that he has not so required. I should be
far yet from unsecuring the peace of a City, of a Land, (which I confess ought
to be maintained by civil weapons, and which I have so much cause to be
earnest with God for;) Nor would I leave a gap open to any mutinous hand or
tongue, nor wish a weapon left in the hand of any known to be mutinous and
peace-breakers.

I know (lastly) the consciences of many are otherwise persuaded, both from
Isreal's state of old, and other Allegations; yet I shall be humbly bold to say,
I am able to present such considerations to the eyes of all who love the P^^ce
of truth and Peace, that shall discover the weak^ness^ of all such allega^ions,
and answer all objections, that have been, or can be made in this point. So
much negatively.

Secondly, affirmatively: I answer ingenera^^, A true Conversion (w^^^ ^r of
Americans, or Europeans) must be such as those Conversions were of the first
patt^rn, either of the Jews or the Heathens, That Role is the golden Mece-wand
in the hand of the Angel or M^ssenger, rev. 11.1. beside which all other are
leaden and crooked

In particular: First, it must b^ by the free proclaiming or preaching of
R^penance and forgiveness of sins, Luke 24. by such M^ssengers ^s can prove
their lawful sending and Commission from the Lord Jesus, to make Disciples o^^
of all nations: and so to b^ptize or w^sh them (...) into the name or
profession of the oly Trinity, Mat, 28.19 Romans 10.14 15.

Secondly, such a conversion (so far as man's Judgment can reach which is
fallible, (as was the judgment of the first Messengers, as in Sim^^ Magus,
etc.) as is a turning of the whole man from the power of Satan unto God, act.
26. Such a change, as if an old man become a new Babe Ioh. 3. vea, as amounts
to Gods new creation in the soul, Ephesians. 2.10.

Thirdly, Visibly it is a turning from Idols not only of conversation but of
worship, (whether P^g^^, Turkish, Jewish, or ANTICHRISTIAN) to the Living and
true God in the ways of his holy worship, appointed by his Son, 1. These. 1.9.

I know Objections use to be made against this, but the g^d^n Rule, if well
attended to, will discover all crooked swervings and aberrations.

If any now say unto me, Why then if this b^ C^nversion, and you have such a
Key of Language, and such a door of opportunity, in the knowledge of the
Couotry and the inhabitants, why proceed you not to produce in America some
patterns of such conversions as you speak of?

I answer, first, it must be a great deal of practice, and mighty pains and
hardship undergone by my self, or any that would proceed to such a further
degree of the Language, as to be able in propriety of speech to open matters of
salvation to them.

In matters of Earth men will help to spell out each other, but in matters of
Heaven (to which the soul is naturally so averse) how far are the Ears of men
hedged up from listening to an improper Language?

Secondly my desires and endeavors are constant (by the help of God) to
attain a propriety of Language.

Thirdly, I confess to the honor of my worthy Countrymen in the Bay of
Massachuset, and elsewhere, that I received not long since expressions of their
holy desires and proffers of assistance in the work, by the hand of my worthy
friend Colonel Humphreys, during (...) abode there.

Yet fourthly, I answer, if a man were as affectionate and zealous as David to
build an house for God, and as wise and holy to advise and encourage as Nathan,
attempt this work with u^ a Word, a Warrant and Comimission, for matter, and
manner, from GOD himself, they must afterward hear a voice (though accepting
good desires, yet reproving want of Commission) Did I ever speak a word says
the Lord? etc. 2. Sam. 7.7.

The truth is, having not been without (through the mercy of God) abundant and
constant thoughts about a true Commission for such an Embassy and Ministry. I
must ingenuously confess the restless unsatisfiednesse of my soul in diverse
main partionlars: As first, whether (since the Law must go forth from Zion, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem) I say whether Gods great business between
Christ Jesus the holy Son of God and Antichrist the man of sin and Son of
perdition, must not be first over, and Zion and Jerusalem be rebuilt and
re-established, before the Law and word of life be sent forth to the rest of
the Nations of the World, who have not heard of Christ: The Prophets are deep
concerning this.

Secondly, since there can be no preaching (according to the last Will and
Testament of Christ Jesus) without a true sending Romans 14.15 Where the power
and authority of sending and giving that Commission Math. 28. etc. I say where
that power now lies?

It is here unseasonable to number up all that lay claim to this Power, with
their grounds for their pretenses, either those of the Romish sort, or those of
the Reforming or Re-building sort, and the mighty controversies which are this
day in all parts about it: in due place (happily) I may present such sad Queries
to consideration, that may occasion some to cry with DANIEL (concer- IERVSALEMS
desolation Dan. 9.) Under the whole Heaven has not been done, as has been
done to JERUSALEM: and with JEREMY in the same respect, Lam. 2.12. Have you no
respect all you that pass by, behold and see if there were ever sorrow like to
my sorrow, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce wrath.

That may make us ashamed for all that we have done, Ezekiel. 43. and loath our
selves, for that (in whorish worships) we have broken him with our whorish
hearts Ezekiel. 9. To fall dead at the feet of JESUS, Rev. 1. as JOHN did, and to
weep much as he Rev. 5. that so the LAMB may please to open unto us that
WONDERFVLL BOOK and the seven SEALED MYSTERIES thereof.

Your unworthy Countryman ROGER WILLIAMS.

FINIS.

