A PARAENETICK OR HUMBLE ADDRESS TO THE PARLIAMENT AND ASSEMBLY FOR (NOT
LOOSE, BUT) CHRISTIAN LIBERTY.

Perused and allowed according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by Matthew Simmons for Henry Overton in Popes-Head-Alley. 1644.

A PARAENETICK, OR HUMBLE ADDRESS to the PARLIAMENT and ASSEMBLY for (not
loose, but) CHRISTIAN LIBERTY.
THERE have been many Nails and Goades sharpened in this Argument, by Masters
of the Assemblies, if there were but a steady hand to drive them home, and
fasten them. The LORD fasten them by his Spirit, in the hearts of all whom they
concern, of all before whom now lies an opportunity of killing and making
alive, that ye do not now put out that only Coal that is left to us, (after
all our sufferings and privations) our Christian Liberty.

How have we promised our selves (not in the least diffiding the
Reasonableness of such an Expectation) that though we did eat the bread of
affliction, and drink the water of adversity, yet our eyes should see our
Teachers, and they should no more be thrust into Corners? And if this hope
fail us, we are of all men most miserable. Had we not better, if we had
looked at our selves only, and not at the common Cause, while we had
something, to have betaken our selves into some remote Island; then after the
loss of all to have it set on the score of a mercy and kindness to us, to be
quietly dismiss thither? Wherein we should find it (for we already feel the
workings of it) no small aggravation of our Affliction, the Consideration of
those from whose faces we flee. If it were an Enemy, (dear Friends and
Brethren) if it were the Bishops doings, we should not marvel, we could
better bear it; but what, you, our Brethren, our Companions once in the same
iron yoke and furnace of af^^iction, (the dearest Remembrance that can be) that
(...) ^her i^ Corner^, that ^^ve sat and wept together by (...) Sio^; and
(...) our H^p^^ up with* W^^^^^es, bemoaning our selves (...) to ou^ another;
and are the same men still both for Religion to ward God, and affection toward
you! O^^^ it not in G^^^, publish it not in Askelon, ^^st (...) P^^^^^^ (...),
and the (...) of t^^ (...) triumph. Let not Malignants hear of i^, Papists and
Atheists, Neutrall Protestants, and hollow he^^^d Professors: and oh that the
th^usand yeare^, were be^un that the Devil were shut up too, (who ^ather is
let loose now) that there be not joy in, hell for the divisions of the
Brethren! But seems it not reasonable to you (that which seems so reasonable
to Christ) that we who have suffered with you, should reign with you, and that
Comfort being restored to Jerusalem, all her ^n ^^^ers should have a share in
it? Or are we those vasialls alone that now in this year of Ju^ilee, must
whether we will or no, have our ears boared, when all other liberties are
vindicated? Is it for that we have no T^^ullus to plead our Cause, or for that
we are few and peaceable, and you may use us how you lift? Sure it is not in
you to make so ill an use of our good Principles? However, be it known to you,
our R^deemer is strong, and thou^h he be gone a long journey, yet he will come
upon those (...) ^^^ants, that (secure through his delay) fall a beating in
stead of feeding their fellow servants; He will come in an hour wh^^ they are
not awa^^, and look not for him; as he did before your eyes upon the
domineering generation of the Prelacy. The more you opp^^^le us, the more we
shall grow. Refrain from us theref^re, and let us alone; for if this Counsel,
or this work be of men, it will (...) to naught, but if it he of God, ye
cannot overthr^w it, lest happily (...) and (...), ^^ters against God. Stand
therefore to Gods arbitrament. If we build upon the true foundation, with bay
and stubble, the day shall declare it; for it shall be revealed by fire, and
our work shall he burnt, though we shall be saved.

Prejudice not your selves further (Brethren) or your way: For God has said;
Esaias 11.9.
There shall be no destroying beast in all his holy Mountain. The Beasts of
prey come from Mount Seir, not from Mount Sion. Esut was rough, hairy, and
lordly: J^^^b was smooth, plain, and pleasant. Is it a form agreeable to you,
to be as that Image in Nebuch adnezz^rs Vision, That was dreadful and
terrible, having great iron teeth, devouring and breaking in pieces, and
stamping the residue with the feet? Or will you not rather ride on and prosper,
because of truth, and righteousness, and meekness? So should you carry the
hearts and votes of all men along with you, but those that (...) lost. And we
trusted we had seen a hopeful beginning, that we might have improved to a
greater Expectation; when (besides former express encouragements ministered to
us by pregnant passages of great note and observation with us in certain
Declarations or Ordinances of Parliament, which except need be, we are loath to
repeat) God had lately put it into the heart of the Parliament, to consider the
just and merciful accommodation of tender Consciences. Which makes us the more
amazed and astonished at the sudden prejudice we seem to have received in
their affections, and the varied, yea, contrary aspect both of Parliament and
Assembly upon us, who are no other then we were before, and have continued in
your several and respective service and assistance, with the same
faithfulness since as ever: Wherein God has been very merciful unto us,
(whether it be acknowledged to us or no, it must be acknowledged by us to him)
that has made us faithful, and not one Instance can be given of the contrary:
Jer. 14.19.
And we looked for peace, and there is no good, and for the time of heating, and
behold trouble; Yet we are neither so profane nor desperate, as (with Esut)
to sell our Birthright for a mess of portage, nor our hopes in your Justice
and Clemency, for the quiet enjoyment of it, for a thing of naught. We hope
this seeming remission and intermission of these Counsels of peace in behalf
of us, shall but make them rebound the higher, and run the stronger. And
therefore we cease not to pray for you, (most just Senators) that God would
hide repentance from your eyes; that the Lord that stirred up Cyrus, Darius,
and Artaxerxes, and hodg'd them in by his powerful Spirit would keep this in
the thought and purpose of your heart, till you have brought it to perfection.
Truly there is a dreadful opportunity before you of gladding the hearts of
thousands, your kindness unto whom Christ will put upon his own account; a
dreadful opportunity, I say, if either omitted, or not proportionably
improved. Let it never be said, ye did run well, who did hinder you? nay, who
can hinder you, or who shall harm you if you be followers of that that is good?
There is nothing (under Christ) wanting to make us live quietly by one another,
though of several judgments, whilst we agree in fundamentals, but your word
to bid us do so.

Is it not time for the Lords Harbingers and Trumpeters, to sound the allarm to
the great and dreadful day of the Lord, and to apply your selves now to turn
the hearts of fathers to the children, and of the children to the fathers, lest
the Lord come and smite the earth with a c^^se? Nay, has he not sorely
smitten us, for not only the neglect, but the contempt of this prescription by
a contrary practicing, even setting the Fathers, the nursing-fathers of the
Church (those that should be so) against their children? And indeed excuse us,
if when we consider how fair we were for a good issue of these common
troubles of late, when God gave us those many Occasions, and those solemn
Opportunities of praise and thanksgiving, when some can say (if ever) they
found their hearts then drawn forth in earnest supplications and triumphant
expectations of a smooth success; and instead thereof, what an unusual
return we had from the hand of God, contrary to the tenor of his former
proceedings, beating back our hopes upon (...) and when we compare this with
former the like passages of providence in the like juncture of times; (as that
ill success that interrupted the Petition ready to be presented at the
Common Counsel against us) and also compare these with some Scriptures, and
Scripture examples, How God has made Jerusalem a burdensome s^^te, etc. Zech.
12. and how he has formerly rebuked kings for his peoples sakes, saying, Touch
not mine anointed, etc. and how he brought Artaxerxes and his Realm under wrath
for that cause, Ezra 7. and consider how righteous this is, that if the
children fall out the father should make the third; excuse us, I say, if we can
give no better account of these things but the Lords jealousy over his peoples
liberties.

Wherefore, if pity will not move you, let equity at least constrain you: 1
These. 4.6.
Let no man go beyond or defraud his brother, says the Apostle. Have you taken
of us a price? deny us not our commodity; Christ bought our liberties for us
with his blood, we have bought them over again at your hands with our own
blood, shed not for our selves only, but for you also. We have set you down, as
it were, where you would be; We have dislodged the Canaanites before you, we
are necessitated to pass on further; it were but your duty to march on before
us, and give us quiet possession with you. We have fought, and adventured
purse and person upon this expectation of Liberty, (not of another Religion,
but) of this way of walking in your Religion; as of the Liberty of the Religion
it self, which we eyed in the first place; If nothing less was in your hearts,
why did you not tell us so? Nay, why has the Assembly born us in hand with
such hopes and intimations? Why have such Considerations been tendered to us,
intimating; nay, almost assuring us, an after-liberty upon condition of a
present modesty in that juncture of time only. For what else is the tenor of
the 5th Consideration, published Dec. 23.1643. in these words, That it is not
to be doubted, but the Counsels of the Assembly, and the care of the Parliament
will be, not only to reform and set up Religion throughout the Nation, but
will concur to preserve what ever shall appear to be the RIGHTS of
particular CONGREGATIONS, according to the Word, and to hear with such, whose
Consciences cannot in all things conform to the public Rule, so far as the
Word of God would have them born withal, which is all that we desire. What did
you do with those terms, The Rights of particular Congregations? and these
contradistinguished to the general Reformation and setting up of Religion
through the Kingdom, if you did not speak to our sense? But (you will say)
it is cautioned, What ever shall appear according to the Word. To whom mean you
it should appear? To your selves? What promise were this? To preserve what
ever appears to you, is not grace, but debt; and if this was your meaning, you
might have said more properly, When ever these Rights should appear to you; and
if by [according to the Word] you meant only, in your own interpretation,
that is not thank-worthy: what bait is held out to us therein, but a miserable
collusion? But the latter part of the Consideration is more express, which
promise a bearing with those whose Consciences cannot in all things (...) to
the public Rule. And what though it follow, (...) as the Word of God would
have them born withal? for that implies a concession, that the Word would have
them born withal; otherwise why do you bob our mouths with these Apples of
liberty and toleration, and condescend to terms of the measure there ^f, if no
such thing in any degree be due unto us, or warrantable by the Word? Why then
do you give place to us so much, (...) for an (...) and if a toleration duly
bounded be divine, then how have you endeavored it; or why do you not
endeavor that (...) What (...) or title of toleration have you yet brought
^^^th, (...) do you given us hopes of in your proceedings hitherto? What things
more terrible, and more void and exclusive of all bearing, and forbearing can
you meditate yet, then Fines, Prisons, (...) prohibiting the exercise of our
Way and our Ministry, but upon hard conditions; which things we have too much
cause to fear and expect, as not exceeding the rate and proportion of some
present conclusions, and more menacing agitations. Judge now whether the
performance of this Consideration be not yet wholly in a^^ere to us.

And to mind you of some other passages; What do you in that earnest
entreating Ministers and People ( Consid. 6.) to forbear for a convenient
time, the joining themselves into Church-societies, until they see whether the
right Rule will not be commended to them in (...) orderly way? I say, what do
you in this, but set us as liberty afterward? And why do you there bespeak us
as freemen, if you made account (and it be in your power) to make us bondmen,
or use us so? And further, why does the Assembly (in the 7th Consideration)
glance with that congratulatory respect upon the liberty, to serve God
according to his Word, which we enjoy in this time, more then has been at any
time in England since the beginning of the Reformation, if it be not a just
liberty* and if it be just, why does it begin to be contracted? at least some
part of that liberty we have enjoyed? viz. preaching without ordination, till
we can have it according to our consciences? And lastly, do you not cherish as
great a hope in us, as all that we have ask^d, or shall ask, comes to, in the
last Consideration; where you pawn your own hopes to cherish ours, that we
shall never come to suffer for doing what shall appear to be our duty, though
not co-incident with the public Rule given us; where you must mean what shall
apeare [to us] to be our duty; for we cannot fear we shall ever suffer by you
for what appears [to you] to be our duty. And how can you be comforters of us
in ou^ sufferings, as you are in the sequel of that Consideration, if they be
not sufferings for righteousness sake? and if they be, how miserable men are
you, to be the authors of them? Or do you count it no suffering for all the
Ministers of this Way to be deprived of their livelihoods and opportunities to
se^ve God with their gifts, and their flocks depending on them bereft of their
food Pardon this repetition, it is not done to reproach or upbraid you, but
timely to warn and remember you.

These were not over forward expressions only dropping casually from some more
remiss and neutrall spirits undertaking for you without your warrant (which
you might judge it credulity in us to reckon upon, and injury to challenge you
by) but serious deliberations and conclusions of your own ministered to us by
some in the name of you all, not whispered in the ear, but published to the
world, and to be understood in the proper, plain, and natural sense of the
words and phrases commonly, holding forth to us a bait of timely and seasonable
liberty. Now your intention herein was either fained, merely to make us sleep
away our opportunity upon the knees of vain promises and hopes, till your cords
were twisted, and your bonds upon us; and so all these passages are but (...),
empty forms, and shapes, words filled with wind, condensed by a sleighty
contexture, into a very promising and specious appearance only, which is not to
speak the truth in Christ, but to be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Him: Or your intention was real, as indeed purposing to gratify and
accommodate us after the Rule agreed upon for the Kingdom; and so there was
reality in your words, which is that alone that honest men will offer, and wise
men consider; and if so, this design was either good or evil: If evil, then
it might not be undertaken for the greatest good that could come thereof; and
why do you not retract and repent publicly of giving such hopes in your
Considerations? But if it were good and just, why is it not pursued? Whether
these do call upon you audibly, being your own words, promises, engagements,
let all indifferent men judge; but surely our lives spent for you cry aloud for
love and mercy to be showed us from you; Thou shall not muz^^le the mouth of
the Ox that treads out the (...). He that planteth a Vineyard, shall eat of
the fruit thereof. Does God take care for Oxen? would he not have us die in an
Oxes debt? and is it meet and congruous his children (whom he can maintain
without being beholding to the world) should hire out themselves for nothing
more then the common, when they fam would, but cannot live upon it? God forbid
all our privilege should be, that we shall be last eaten, that when you have
done with the more dangerous enemy, you should turn your hand upon us; shall
this foul blot of ingratitude lie upon you^ Will you so bury all your fame and
glorious achievements in so horrid a pit? Will you so disappoint the
expectation of meek souls, who hope for this, as an additionall recompense
(next to the liberties of the Kingdom, and of the Protestant Religion) for the
lives of Brethren, Husbands, Friends lost in the public service and defense?
How inaccessible soever such cries may be to your ears now through the
multitude of your businesses and tumultuousnesse of your thoughts for present;
yet sure there will be a dead of the night, when the least noise will be heard;
I had rather say, there will be a morning, when your eyes will be opened, and
it will not repent you, the kindness you have showed, and the violence you
have forborne to tender consciences. Good, my brethren, is your sleep too sweet
unto you, and your beds too soft, and your consciences at too much case, that
you desire to create more trouble unto your selves, and to bring the neglected
votes of the dead (sacred among all) upon you, who laid down their lives upon
no other condition, then Liberty, first of the Kingdom, then of the Conscience
in the Protestant Religion, that they nor you might be enslaved in either;
would it not shame you, the cry of the widows and orphans of such persons. Do
you take away my liberty, restore my husband who died to purchase it for you?
would it not scare you, should the Ghosts of those persons that have died in
this Cause (those many hundred souls, that while they lived, were laden with
the reproach of their consciences, but sufficiently vindicated the worthiness
of their spirits by their doings and ^^^e^ings so freely, so cheerfully
undertaken:) I say, should they come to your bed-sides and cry, Give us our
lives again; we laid them down for your liberty, perform the like for us; or
bear the guilt of ingratitude, and injustice? O should they but tell you the
lamentable Stories of their warfare, what affections of dearest Relations they
conflicted withal, and were feign to despise and overruled with an high hand
in their first engagements, even tearing themselves from wives and children,
almost contrary to the Apostles Rule, and far exceeding the highest
dispensation for the most absolute service of prayer and fasting: And what
hardship they endured of hunger and cold, and watchings, and weariness: What
wounds they have sustained, what streams of blood they have lost, what agonies
they have been in, and how they have borne down with a high hand all starting
doubts and fears, lest they should not sow a considerable advantage unto
themselves in those adventures, and whether or no they should indeed water a
crop of ingenuous (nay Christian) liberty to you and themselves, or their
posterity at least with their blood: Should they tell you, how they have
undertaken to their own misgiving hearts and cautelous spirits, that their
labor should not be in vain, that they should not lose their lives for
naught, they did not serve such Masters: No, they were confident another
Pharaoh must arise, before Joseph should be forgotten: Should they but tell
you, how their Faith did put in bail to their Reason, and how this comforted
them in all their anguish, and it made their farewell out of this life sweet;
and it was the last prospect or Landscape of this Island that they saw, they beheld
it as the habitation of righteousness, the faithful City. Should they tell
you, how ambitious they were of wounds, how prodigal of their blood, how
desirous to dye, that by their death they might make a feast of liberty to
their Brethren in this particular. And should they from thence fall to this
Expostulation; Shall we dye for you, and must not our friends live with you,
who are of the same religion with you? Did you send us out to be cut off, and
to make a hand of us? Did you slay part of us in the field with the sword of
the Enemy, that you might the easier suppress the residue at home? Do you
count us no better then to be swords-meat, and to stop the mouths of Canons? O
Earth, cover thou not our blood, the Lord behold it and require it. Should such
a din fill your ears sleeping and waking, what fruit would you have of your
violent proceedings? Should you effect your purpose, suppress our Way, and
cast forth our person out of this good Land, could you put the price of our
blood into the treasury? Would you have any list to roast what (...) b^^ning?
Would not your stomachs nauseate and turn again at the raw and bloody cruelty
of the game? Take up, Oh take up betimes, ^n^r you not that it will be
bitterness in the lat^^ end* Are we not your fellow servants and Brethren? Did
not the same hand make us, that made you? And is there not one Father of us
both? One Lord, on^ ^aith, one Baptism, one Religion? Are you the only
rightful Inhabitants of this good Country? And is there not a curse denounced
against those that lay house (...) and land to land, that they may dwell done?
Do you stand (...) no more need of us, o^ have we been reprieved till now,
only as the C^^^^tes to help you to master the Lions, and the wild Beasts,
that they prevail not against you:

Brethren, I would to God there were no Divisions among us; I wi^^ it u^^er the
Imperial law of Heaven, and my hearts desire and prayer for ^^gland is, that
they were of one heart, and one way: ^^n i^ that upon any Scripture-ground to
be expected here (at least till those H^l y^^ daye^ come) while we know but in
part? Must we never be of one heart, till we be of one way? Then belike those
Exhortations ^^^^e, and ^e^e, and Christian forbearance of one another; and not
to j^^^, but to keep the imitie of the Spirit, are not visions which the
Apostles saw for these days. The time is not yet, as the J^^^ said, Hag. 2.
But the Lord may answer us as he answered them: Is it time f^^ you, (...) to
dwell in your s^iled houses, etc? So is it time for Q^^^^ (...) qu^^ l^^^^
i^^^lat Sa^a^z^ Cataph^actas, quod de ^edere concordae (...) and (...)
cumvaliant; Elegantis sime Lutherus (...) qua^tie ^^nt, (...), quasi^ ni ^am un
ve^sae sabruae m^nitantes, inhientque (...) deveraturi v^vilapi^^s in vero
Templo col^ocati? Praesertim cum and (...) v^t^. Templo tam ar^^fi^ose, non
tant um sin^ deformi Cicatrice vulner is, sed (...) ^^noguclat v^s^rentur, ut
impon^^ent ^^ulo spectatoris, quod a non^^^ (...) and facta: (...) quasi tota
males in tantam nagnitudinem, ex (...), ^^^gere^. Says our Stoughto^ in his
Faelicitasultina sae en^^^^ ag^a^
you to agree and make your common engagement against any of the Lambs of
Christ, the ground of a renewed friendship? Is it a time for Papists, Atheists,
loose and carnal Protestants and Malignants to agree, laying aside their
particular interests, opinions, and differences? Is it a time for French, and
Spaniards, and Danes, and Walloones, and Irish Rebels to agree and make a
confederacy with our homeborne Vipers against the truth? And is it not a time
for us to agree for the truth? Is it a time for godly able men, that have in a
great part renounced the hidden things of Antichristian darkness, to agree with
ignorant superstitious Ceremony-mongers, (that are devoted still to a
Common-Prayer-Booke, and petition for a Captain to lead them back into Egypt)
and with the meanest and unworthiest spirits, (that will but serve the time,
and acknowledge their soveraigntie) as good Christians and able Ministers, to
make their party stronger? And is it not a time to agree with those that
denying themselves, and the world, profess to seek the truth in love. Is all
truth among one sort of men? Has not Christ rendered his members all in a
mutual need of one another? Which close Conjunction and Cementing is made
only by love. Men may be of the same judgment, yet sit very loose from one
another. Heads touch like 2 Globes but in p^ncto. Hearts join in plano and
make an in corporation of each into other.
Is your way the fullness of him that fills all in all? Can your
refuse-Brethren in Conference and Communication of spiritual gifts, add
nothing to you? Is there not most, oft-times, in things that are most despised?

Would Christ have such desperate Experiments practiced upon his members, to
kill them, if you cannot cure them of their lesser errors; to fine them,
prison them, banish them, which to some persons and estates, is little more
mercy then to knock them on the head? Does not nature teach to bear with a
blain or blemish, rather then to destroy the body? Is Christ so put to it,
quite out of hope? May they not be gained hereafter? Are their opinions
damnable, either in themselves, or proper consequences? Are they not further
engaged to persist in their ways good or bad, by suffering for such things so
deeply, and is not the bridge of retractation drawn up thereby?

Consider these things, and take heed what you do unto these men; the Lord
has made Jerusalem a burdensome stone, that shall crush all that attempt to
remove her. If our Way be of God, you cannot overthrow it; You may show your
selves fighters against God, and get the reward of such, and that is all. Take
heed of walking contrary unto God, of casting shame on those, on whom he has
reflected such eminent honor, both in the Army and otherwise: For I ask you,
By whom has God more delivered us hitherto? Who have showed themselves more
valiant in fight^? who have oftener put to flight the A^mies of the Aliens in
the North, and els-where, but those men that in the end shall be put to flight
themselves, if some may have their will? The sword of the Lord, and despised
Gideon, has saved this Nation: Saul has slain his thousand^, and David his
ten thousands. Let no man envy. God will be acknowledged in his Instruments, as
well as in his Attributes. Take heed of resisting the Holy Ghost; for that
mighty works have been done by th^se men, you cannot deny: their power in
prayer, their shining doctrine, their exemplary burning conversation, though
we will not paint the blemishes of any of them. But manum de tabula, I have
offered my candle; it is in the Lord to proportion the success: To some it may
be a word in season: to others perhaps it will be (...) snare an^ a stone of
stumbling.

T^ndem vin^et veritas, Truth shall overcome I verily believe and expect. The
little Stone ^ut out of the Mountain without hands, shall irresistibly grow,
and fill the whole earth: and every plant that the Heavenly Father has not
planted, shall he pulled up. Men may root out themselves by persecution, as the
Prelates have done; but they shall never root up the truth.

Christian friends and Brethren, if the truth be on your side, confide to your
Cause; cease from force and violence, that you reflect not disparagement upon
it.

I would end, as I began, in the spirit of love and meekness; Consider your
calling Brethren, that you are called unto peace; and take our Lord Jesus
Christ for an example, who though he was Lord of all, yet became a servant unto
all. He was further above his Disciples in knowledge and understanding, then
the wisest among us above the simplest Infant; yet he disdained them not,
provoked them not, upbraided them not, punished them not, taught them as they
were able to bear; after his resurrection comes to them always with this
salutation, Peace be unto you; and since his ascension, every Epistle brings
commendations of grace and peace. Consider of what a spirit ye are, and ought
to show, a Dove-like spirit, and oh that the voice of this Turtle were heard in
our Land!

Were not the nature of my discourse indifferent and general, I might say
somewhat, which might not only induce liberty, (as for every way not
scandalous) but also beget a good opinion of the Congregation all way in
special. I will say but this; The Congregation ^ll way characterized.
The members of this society grow up freely unto i^; act freely in it to
mutual comfort and edification; they meddle with their own things, and are not
busy with others, without authority from Christ: They are ready to advise,
and be advised upon every lawful call and needful occasion: They count not
themselves perfect, but stand ready to receive further light, yea, though from
the meanest of the Brethren: They aspire to be punctual, yet they allow many
grains to other Churches, so they have the substance: They are no otherwise
Independent, but as they depend more upon Christ; and less upon men: Though
their first and immediate regards be to their own, yet they count themselves
debtors to all the Churches and members of Christ: They will d^e what good they
can to rectify the mistakes of others that are not of them, but know no remedy
but patience, if the truth fall not upon all men's apprehensions: They say not
more might not be done or devised to reclaim men from errors, but they say
they have Commission for no more then they practice, and they dare not say a
Confederacy with any means, with which the Lord has not said a Confederacy by
his Institution: They boast not in their Way, as approving it self to flesh
and blood, but as a way of faith, justified only of the Children of Wisdom,
that have learnt to put off their own understanding and fleshly dependence in
the things of God, and to lay the weight of all on Christ, who has given his
Word for it. Lastly, They will communicate in all Ordinances with any true
Church of Christ, that walks up to their light, and shows a readiness to receive
whatsoever more shall be showed them.

Now take this Way, and compare it with any other, wisely, spiritually and
impartially, according to that Joh. 7.18.
Rule given by our Savior; and we will stand to the issue and arbitrament of
it. Let that Way which rases the foundation of man's glory, and wholly applies
it self to the glory of Christ the Founder, banging absolutely on him for a
Word, either express or else by consequence, to every thing, and a blessing on
every thing they undertake or do, resolving all into his care of them, and
presence among them; be acknowledged, countenanced, and practiced among us, as
the Way and truth of God, having no unrighteousness in it.

And let that Way which neglecting or denying Christ's sufficiency of rule and
direction, and the pr^mise of his grace and protection, apply themselves to
man, to supply them with precepts, and support them with the fleshly arm of
numbers and multitudes, of power and authority, be discarded as the way of man.

And if we after all our casting and contriving, cannot come to you, see (if
you would not be wanting to this Accord which you have so much in your mouths)
if you can come to us; which no question, but all that are godly could most
heartily do, as some of you have expressed in terms upon serious consideration
of our Way, (for what is there to offend you, but a further degree of purity
aimed at in the body, the worship being alike in both?) and others in terms
aequivalent, as that they believe it will not cease till it come to this Way,
which they grant was the Primitive way, and is the purest, and the Presbyterian
way is but a step thereto, and will rest here as its center, and end in this as
its perfection. For our parts, we have waited mannerly all this while, and we
are heartily grieved, that the particulars of difference between us remain yet
so many, nay, that there are any, and especially so important, that we cannot
yield to you therein. For as he said well, Amicus Plato, Amicus Aristoteles,
sed magis amica veritas.

Page 3. l. ult. hedged r. wedged.

FINIS.

