Our eyes may here a Double Beauty find;
His Face this shows, his Book presents his mind,
Which a few Downey minutes have improved
To such vast sums of worth, as makes him loved:
And as this Shadow now appears. His,
That likewise is Heavens Effigies.
J.S.
W.M. fecit.
portrait

PLANTAGENETS TRAGICAL STORY: OR, THE DEATH OF King EDWARD the Fourth: WITH
The unnatural Voyage of Richard the Third, through the Red Sea of his Nephews
innocent blood, to his usurped Crown.

METAPHRASED BY T.W. Gent.

Prosperum Scelus virtus vocatur. Sen. LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Richard
Tomlins at the Sun and Bible near Pit-corner. 1649.

TO The truly heroic EDWARD BENLOWES. Esquire.
SIR,
COuld now my Phancies Engineer give fire
To the pleasing Trains of my select desire!
I down would those unhallowed Altars turn
Which to your Muses high devotion burn
No thankful Incense; She triumphs over Sense,
Vested in gold, bought on the brains expense.
Most precious mind! who whilst unsalted heads
Quite useless are for Camp, or Arts, or Beads,
Nor ought will court but vice, and ignorance,
Whose souls lie putrifi'd in graves of Sense;
While such on Riots dream; I you admire,
Whom soul-entrancing Calentures inspire,
Melting your brain in spritely Raptures, when
Infectious is the breath of Mushrom men.
Teach, Sir, those mole-ey'd Glowworms how to scan
Blessed measures of the most accomplished Man.
T. W.

TO The Reader.
Reader,
I Love good company in my solitude, and have been sometimes taken up (with
unraveling Times Bottom) amongst our English Chronographs, which I find
checquered with such vanety of Actions, and events, as I cannot but admire His
pencill, who draws his lines in the dark. Our Muses Ephemeris was properly
calculated for the Meridian of those times, and can have but small influence
upon these, being so many degrees distant from their Horizon. If She should be
found guilty of any too light Airs, to grate upon a serious ear; non a pueris
illico etc. may a little excuse; something there will be quod tempus amputet. I
wish I may meet with no better genius, then the eyes, and hands of Candor,
which will both fairly try, and freely pardon.

Thine T.W.

TO The Reader of the ensuing Poem, composed by his ingenious friend Captain
T. W.
REader; This Author tells thee he has found
A Gentile sport that is neither Hawk nor hound,
Nor Gleeke nor Maw. Here thou may quickly see
A better Record of Gentility,
Then a long Roll, where a short five-pound fee
Has scratcht one out a long-tail'd Pedigree
From Adam downward: The only, Record stood
Not washed away with old Deucalion's flood.
He knows no game but study-tables: there
He spends his time: and needs no gamster fear
Who walks in scarlet. This Historian Rhyme
Is but the offall of his Second time;
His very Recreation: What would say,
Might thou the works see of his serious day?
The world is not at leisure now to read
The Choice employments of his studious head.
This is no wanton Pastoral to relate
How much the Poets minds degenerate;
For some such Antic baubles thou may find
Whose Poems but betray their frothy mind,
And only serve to let the Reader know
How much the foolish Ape is sunk below
A man: that modesty cannot control
Him; but he must spue out his wanton soul.
Poor low-borne worms! that make it their design
Of life to learn to dress their bodies fine,
And throw their feet into such figures, as
May tune the differing fashions of that face
That Is made the Devils jailer for to keep
Their souls close prisoners in a sinful sleep
To the great Assize. These female Apes will write
(Sometimes) the dreams of their lascivious night, more time
In The morning till their wantons dress,
Nor so much can they spare to make their Rhyme
(Except by chance one night they get to bed
Before the Wine has seized their sottish head.)
But being written and read ore and ore
Before the Antic whom it does adore,
Abroad it comes, with the French fashioned face
Of the Composer: (And a truer glass
For the whole sensual beast there could not be
To show his putrid minds deformity.)
A laurel must his pictured carcass twine,
It Is but the Bush, to show the house of wine,
In which he wholly dwells. It Is cut in Brass,
To show the metal of the Poets face,
That studies sin, and blusheth not to tell
The world, how deep his soul's engaged to hell.
This must be dedicated unto one
To whom he is debtor for a Virgin Zone.
Reader! this Author's one that does inherit
(Without a forfeit yet) that noble spirit
That is man's Birthright; One that in the least
Is not inclining yet unto a Beast.
One thing more let me tell thee (friend!) that he
Nere used to vomit out his poetry,
He Is no such heretic as holds none can
Be Poet till he leave to be a man.
This Madrigall's no catch. Here Is not a line
But is more essence of the Brain then wine.
Read all, In The whole Context thou shall not meet
A verse but the Author could command his feet,
When it was made, as well as thou do now.
By this time you are inquisitive to know
Who is this noble Author. He is one
That is a man in his Perfection.
Man in his All; He Is one that needs not be
Beholden to a piece of poetry.
To Beg's Acquaintance with the world, his fame
Cannot be heightened by his Printed name,
A soldier and a Scholar. One that can
Show thee what it is to be a Gentleman.
I. C. Art. Mag.

TO The happy Author of these Poems.
NOr time has wrinckled with his aged plow
The smoothness yet of your unforrow'd brow;
Nor Ages winter snow'd upon your hairs
The hoary flakes of youth consuming cares;
Nor is the year confounded in your Pains
To feel December in your April veins;
Nor has Dame nature planted on thy chinne
Agrove for Muses yet to winter in,
Whose vernall shadows might delight the Graces
To dance their measures in their courtly paces:
Scarce nineteen springs had fortified thy limbs
When Mars thee called from Muses sweet-tun'd hymns
Amidst thundering of drums to lead his train,
Till the angry Sisters thy release did gain
The trees forsake their Orpheus whilst he plays,
Sweetly attracted by thy choicer lays,
The stones will dance no more, but mortals be
Persuaded to become like Niobe
By thy Tragedick quill, whose power is
Able to act a Metumorphosis.
I. S. Lincolns-Innt. Gent.

PLANTAGENETS Tragical Story.
The first book.
ON Mount Parnassus whilst I sit to sing
Of various accents, from the Thespian spring,
Mixed consort flows, the streams which by me slide,
In silver waves their echoing notes divide:
The laureate troops in circling rings sit down,
Presenting to this History a Crown.
Then cease delicious numbers to distill
The sowr-sweet dainties of the Paphian hill,
Nor blow in fond Poetic rage, that fire
Which does so wantonly loose breasts inspire;
Nor Fetch Niles Crocodiles dung to blanch the skin
Of art-fair Madam, and her usher in:
My wild Geography never strayed so far
To bring Molucea flints to deck her ear.
Dear Muse, disdain to squander out a toy
With Erycina, or the winged Boy;
Nor sportive infantine delights recall,
But tune Love-sonnets to a Madrigall.
Now must we dive unto the Tartarean cell,
Where gnawing Envy, and dire Treason dwell;
Where conscience dreads in Soule-betraying weed
The black attempts ambitious Statesmen breed;
Where Plottings, Turmoyls, Tempests, horrid Fear
Keep Ren-dez-vous in Albions Hemispheare,
As through each part they furiously do thunder,
Candying the Isles ghastly face in cie wonder;
Where times black margent quotes such sad amazes,
As makes Heavens self pale with astonished gazes,
Thick clouds which lowr'd upon fourth Edwards head,
The flaming ardours of his virtues spread;
The many Rebellions in the beginnig of his reign, and sometime before.
A restless race (who ending still begun
New broyss) gave place to this illustrious Sun;
To show the odds 'twixt Heavens etheriall light,
And gloomy fogs of Hells Cimmerian night.
The people (like the Polypus) doffeth hue
To every object choosing always new;
Princes are rocks, to which this beast is tied,
Fettered with links of duty to abide;
Let this care for him in their breasts be found,
To give him color, and still keep him bound.
A furious brood of Fancy more then mad,
Camelion-like with every color clad;
Whose senseless sense (by brainsick humors led)
Lies deep enchanted on Ambitions bed. Simile.

Thus Neptunes subjects in the winter grow
Cold in Alleg'ance, wonted duties show
But chill respects, by the Tyrant Frost detained,
(The General of winters forces) chained
In ycie shackles; easily made a prey
To this encroaching Monster, till the day
Farre-coasting Phoebus takes a nearer view
Of this Usurper, forced with the crew
Of's darts, and arrows for to quit the field,
And to the Element its freedom yield.
The winters Bassa (mad to see this Rout)
Calls from all Quarters his cold Troops about,
In thunder-bearing dialect to devour
The waters Prince by his united power;
Winged with shril trupet winds, flanked with keen puffs
They justle so with mutual counterpuffs,
Splitting themselves along the liquid plain,
With dreadful terror to the groaning main.
The winds, waves, Whales, Sharkes, Dolphins, all retreat
Whilst (clashing) their congealed armours break.
The drunken Steel (which was at Wakefield roused)
Often reeled from field to field, and never housed;
Then thundering Mars (the Females horrid dread)
Did light this Islands Taper from his bed
To Herford, Towton, Exham, Barnet grounds
Were rank with noble blood: How many swounds
Had fainting England in few years! To look
On blushing pages of her Crimson book,
Might rage an earth quake in a British heart,
Reading the Rubricks of his Countries smart.
Some stirring Spirits, if not often won,
And scowr'd by Favor, rust by Faction: Simile.

^o Child-bigge wives and the green-sicknes maid
Their natural Course restrained) are longing said
To seed on chalk, and coals; This loves a slash
Cut in the Brawn of her vexed husbands flesh;
The other pines at Feasts, and leaving all
Their wholesome cates, she junkets on a wall,
They (phansy-sick of such a strange disease)
Have feav'rish palats, still unapt to plase.
The Ship with wrack when tempest-waves did threat
And restles-pity-wanting Storms had beat,
(The Abysses jaws wide gaping to devour)
Arrived at last to her long wished for Shore.
Cloud-masked Titan now with splendour cheares
The winter Solstice of the peoples tears;
Fierceness relented, and stern Mars grew mild,
Sweet Flora laughed, and Ceres was with child
Of plenty; Ianus barred his Temple, gage,
And Justice marched in her roab of State;
Ruins rose up before this peaceful Starr,
And Venus doves did build in Mars his Carr.
Famed Edward, envies praise, whose wel-spread art
By Keys of gentleness unlocked hearts,
Stifles small factions by his wiser scorn,
Which forced them to dye so soon as born:
He joys to see an Olive branch presage
That civil bloods late deluge shall assuage.
(Galled with wars yoke which did their shoulders vex)
He lays sost Poultesse to his peoples necks;
That peace and plenty might espouse again,
Kissing each other through his happy reign;
Imperial virtue guildeth with her flashes
Anoble temper on the coursest ashes,
It sparkles bravely in a Subjects eye,
But beams (Sun-like) incha c'd in Majesty,
Diffusing light, and life to lesser fires,
Each feels the warmth, and silently admires:
So to the lower Levells Zephyr comes, Simile,

Puffing perfumes of rich Arabian gumms
From Spicy mountains, pleasingly to cheer
The desert-scorched-tyring Traveller.
Thus Bliss distilled the nectar of her breast,
And lulled our Albion in a smiling rest; The blessings of Peace.

No damned Assasinate awakes her sleep,
Hearts joined with hands a mutual friendship keep,
The Soldier leaves his winter-blasted bed
For softer plumes, which crown his easy head:
The rich caparison'd courser dreads no foes,
But chaseth Foxes, or the lightfoot Does,
Makes emulous starts for wagers on the plains,
Thus he more honor, more attendance gains.
Canons are charged with Musk, and marches turn
To rev'ling Masks, for iron Tyssue's worn;
In stead of Gunpowder, there now is got
Powder of Cypress; Pistolets for shot.
The Trumpet's made to sound a dance, and calls
Away the storming siege from stony walls:
With musled mouth the thundering Saker rests,
And the Grenades nothing break but jests.
Now Love is Champion, who endures no arms
But strict embraces, kisses for alarms,
So plundring, by the eye, the heart away,
Does by beleagred Simprings win the day.
Blunt foyles atone sharp pointed Rapiers now;
The pole-axe turns a coulter for the plough,
To wrinkle-brow the Gleab; In comfort sing
The feathered Choristers to the flowery Spring.
Peace (breeding teeth apace) brings plenty too,
Whilst golden-bearded ears the Syckle woo
To ravish their Virginity, whose tops
Do bend to fill the Swains barne-filling hopes:
The full-stiffe-udder'd Cow comes down the vale
Twice every day to fill the milkmaids pale;
See Merchants Scours (swift gliding with the wind)
Plough over the tradefull billows for to find
An Ophyr coast, with opulency fraught,
The rarities from either Pole are brought
To frame a delicate, to win the grace
O'th Empress Albion, whose moist arms embrace
The Oceans dowre: Each forain Shore presents
The British Queen with choicest Ornaments.
Thus by Love Tokens Ganges wooes our Them,
Jndus to Severne would espouse her name.
As if that GOD by thee (before accursed)
Would show the World how 'twas created first.
What though the sweatings of Arabian gumms
Embalme nigh Air with delications sums
Of rich perfumes; if in those weeping groves
Millions of Serpents haunt, and poison those
(Inflecting torments upon every sense)
Which glean that fragrant Balm, and Frankincense?
Let the Eastern Chinese think he grasps within
The royal circuit of his vast paquin
The quintessenced Good of all abode,
As dreaming that beyond his countries road
The World's a barren Fen, and naught can be
Worth his vain labor in discovery:
And yet how often amongst them do they see,
Huge balls of fire down bandied from the sky,
To make such fearefulll ravage, as to choke
Houses, and send up villages in smoke?
Sometimes their Fountain veins (being broached) run
Hurry'ing their Streams to inundation.
But, England! Could these Salvages repent,
Thy blessings (sure) would make them all recant.
Natures own self so doteth on thy love,
Thinks thee the Diamond in the ring of Jove,
Richly fed, coolly fanned, so nobly streamed,
Wisely awed, bravely manned, so sweetly beamed;
Thy pregnant soil wrought over with curious cost,
With flowers embroid'red, and with woods embost,
With bushes purl'd, with streams of silver laced,
Buttoned with Hills, with plaited valleys graced,
Speaks thee a Tempe, or (as termed by some)
A second Edon, or Elysium.
Alluding to the late unhappy wars in England.
O, be thy tender Bosom never wreathed
By salvage arms! why's not the Sword still sheathed
Most barbarous, civil (most uncivil!) wars
Make Britain bleed in most unnat'rall jarrs.
Brave Gallants! Scorn that Romes enchanted palm
Should suck the sweatings of our sacred balm,
Religions oil, by Europe once admired
More then those Gumms from Gileads vales expired,
Or for to have your bleeding entrails spelled
B' Ignatius Wizards, whose strong charms upheld
Saint Peter's rival in a colder sweat
Then e're the Goths, or Vandalls could beget.
Pluto, chain up this new pestif'rous Train,
Let lowest Cells their blasphemies contain,
Which now seem loosed from the Peruvian Stage
To act their Butch'ries on the Crimson page
Of British story, Slucing forth our blood
By the gushing torrent of a eivill flood.
These in the world have more confusion wrought,
Then the old Tohu, Bobu could have brought.
Medina, did we escape thy Crescent thus,
That our own bow should be portentuous?
What strange Salmoneus or Prometheus taught
Cyclopean Artists for to imitate
The forge of Jove, within his shops of wonder,
By brasen-lunged, and fire-breathing thunder?
What metal dev'lls, Angels of death are here,
Like fiery Bulls of Colchos? Charon fear
The o'recharg'd Canoo; lank Ghosts by shoals do thus
Float to the crowded shades of Erebus.
The fierce-fire-foaming Steeds of Diomede
Feed on the remnants of Deucalions seed:
Does Typhon, and Echidna still survive
To bring forth monsters? do'nt Medea live
To charm this frightfull proginy, and to fill
New Constellations by her sacred skill?
Whence is it our mines of iron spawned such tools
For blood-drunk hands to hunt out guiltles souls?
What Vulcan's here, that gives new life to steel?
What Fury? what Erinnys makes a Hell
In Albions fields, carving men's bodies out
To feast Megera; whilst the dear-bought shot
Is paid by endless souls, which trembling fly
From off the Lip into Eternity?
Unhappy Island! whom Astrea shuns,
Late made a prey unto thy hostile sons,
Whilst they (like greedy Caniballs) devour
Their mothers Offspring in a dismal hour
Making her Lap, the Voider. Ha'nt we seen
Some petty Cyclops late in Arms to have been,
Which little skill what GOD, Religion mean,
Unless by this to swear, and that blaspheme;
Oaths are their only Sacraments, their swords
Their deity, and voucher of their words;
The table for an Altar stands, the dishes
They do account in stead of Sacrifices.
Their march is swelled with pride, and when in Arms,
They Are even Barbarians, frighting with their harms
The quivering peasants into sad belief,
That they pass Attila the Scythian Chief,
Knowing no difference in their lustful suit
Twixt marr'ed, virgin, and the prostitute;
Playing their gold with full hands, though it be
Men's blood exhausted for their Luxury.
Lions which open their thunder-scaring jaws,
Bulls goaring through the entrails of the laws;
Dogs worry one another, Vipers hiss,
Men in their looks death-bearing Basilisks,
Rearing their Trophies in the tear-swoln eyes
Of Widows, and in Orphans Heav'n-pierc'd cries,
Naught without Peace is holy. Unkind Fate,
Opening Pandora's box within our State;
Hope only stays, which we (fast closed) preserve
As the best Sear-cloth for a feeble nerve.
Some gracious Dolphin now but yield his back
To save Telemachus from final wrack;
Then we ( Vlysses-like) will not pourtray
Him only on our gates, but every way
The ardours of Triumphing hearts shall raise
A never dying Pyramid to his praise:
We Will imp his fame upon an aerie wing,
Beyond Boots, and his Teem to sing;
Nor that enough, but mounting higher yet,
Shall Soar, till't be in the First mover Set.
So, trembling Rome shall quit her Crowns for fear
This second Hanniball is coming near;
Which (after many an Age) from British Coast
May fully avenge old Carthage angry Ghost.
But sure, scared Muse, this Ghost has frighted thee
To lose thy Subject in an Ecstasy!
My Theame's unvealed now; Muse, smooth thy brows,
And spend no longer on thy stock of woes;
The Sun shall guild our Sphere, and Arms shall cease,
And we will Triumph in a Hymn for Peace.
No more dead corpse shall lard our soil again,
Nor Wars make Mummy of the flesh of men;
Discords shall not hayle down blows, nor leaden showers
Fright from embraces in our frolic bowrs;
England contemplate this, to ease thy grief;
In field of bloody gules, a sword in chief
No longer's borne, to charge with civil scars
Her argent died in crimson Massacres:
Where mutual fury swelling breasts invade,
Thrilled by a Cozen-sword, or Brother-blade;
Where Son with Father jousts; most horrid fuells
Does from one belly send up cursed duells.
Edward now heard his smiling Fortune call,
Come, climb my wheel, and bee'nt afraid to sall.
His Sword which Northward went, returned home
From scourging rudest Swains of Calydon,
Now brandisht is upon a French design;
Rather to taste the Gallick blood, then wine;
And make their Flowr-de-luces stand in awe
Of being torn by the English Lions pawe:
Whilst that dissembling Jews the eleventh
Jews tries his wits
On idle toys, at which brave Honor spits.
The eager hearted Subject, vent'ring stands
Attentive, listening when the Prince commands;
Feeling within his breast a vigorous heat,
Causing his healthful Pulses for to beat
A Call to this employment; tedious grown
To hear of others acts and not his own.
Proud valor leads the vanguard, in this strife
Each would be foremost in the loss of life.
Thus have I seen with Steel, Simile.
and Fury armed
A gallant squadron, who their breasts had warmed
With a full shout, to sing the Dirge of Foes,
And scarce can stay till they have leave for blows.
Brave Spirits! It were an Enemies pride to die
Under your shining Steel, 'twere Victory;
If I must fall, give me the bravest hand
To broach my breast, in all the Roman Band,
So the same glorious Nard persumes his blade,
Sweetens my ashes in the lower shade.
But what their boasting Fancy thought so sure,
Sly-pilfting Death robbed in that instant hour.
Vast joys are dangerous, throned in blisses prime,
Fourth Edward finds the weights of his set time
Not far from ground, and deaths sharp pangs invade
His throbbing heart through every vein conveyed;
She had before but some short Sallies made,
Some Skirmish did his Fort of clay invade;
But now lays downright siege, until it must
(Shaken with Fevers batt'ry) fall to dust.
Thus all his warlike preparations turn
Into the peaceful ashes of his Urne.
It Is safe to walk, as if we trod on ye,
Upon the slippery worlds prosperities;
And always handling them like Crystal glass,
Fearing they will break in the luster of their rays.
So may you view the white-swell'd sails advancing
From Eastern Inds, Simile.
o'th'Stately Vessel dancing
On Thetis lap secure; eye-pleasing Calms
Echo in consort with Melodious Shalmes;
The eare-art racted Dolphin nimbly hyes,
The sporting Porpuse meets him, Proteus flies
Over Neptunes watery Bulworks, gently greeting
The Merchants pride, on English narrowes fleeting:
The srollick Master spreads his Flagge abroad
In Triumph for the now seen English road;
The Seamen now prepare their several Catches
To satisfy with joy the blubberd Watches
Of longing wives: The goblets swell with pride
To pour a health unto each others Bride,
But whilst they brag their loadstar shines most fair,
Their cheated Hopes make Shipwreck on despair:
Proud Neptune swells with rage, who smiled before,
Haunted with Aeolus Furies from the shore;
From Gulphs to mountains the mazed ship is hurt'd
From thence again down to the deeps is worr'd;
They cut the sails, unlade, but all in vain,
To stay the infolence of the boiling Main;
The pale complaining mariner kneeling lifts
His hands, his eyes, employes his latest shifes,
Still beating on his breast with crossed arms,
In doleful sound strikes drearie deaths Alarms;
With his salt tears brines the Seas saltness more,
His sighs, with winds, force all her bowels roar,
Till wrathful Neptunes uncontrolled lawer,
Rushes the ship on Syll's devouring jaws.
Fallen Heaven's Hell doubled: To be swallowed up,
Ingeminates the woe, in the Cape of Hope.
The Courtiers throbs move Edward to desire
The borr'wing still of more life-quickning fire,
Wishing sometimes his tender Sons unborne,
Then from the breasts of his protection torn
In their soft-blooming spring; Virtue in the bud
May soon be blasted ere it spread abroad,
Ere sharper fighted reason can discry
The Traiterous nets, with maskes of policy.
Most fitly suits with a severer frown
The glittering ardours of a sacred Crown.
A cradled Scepter speaks the Kingdoms sin,
Hence mischiefs rock the Realm, Harpies within
Do prey upon the Crowned babe, unmeet
To chase such ravenous Vulturs from his feet.
The mountebank of State will now inspire
His limbeck full of that ethereall fire
Prometheus filch'd from Jove, resolved thereby
Some rare extractions Chemical! to try,
More gainful then that purse-corroding Stone,
Wooed often by sundry, wedded yet by none.
Pyrenees on the Alps these Giants heap,
And cause mount Pelion upon Ossa leap,
To mount the height of Scepters: Envy stands
Gnawing her chain by all the Nobles hands.
Ambition breeds strange Tympanies; the law
Goes under bail, fees them who keep't in awe.
Poor martyred Client! I Am distract to see
That great men's sins are so revenged on thee,
Thy goods, thy life, thy soul is punished,
When thy seduced Leaders are misled.
So some have heard Getulian lions roar
Over guiltless Lambs, Simile.
which (silent) stand before
The King of beasts, and dare not quech, lest then
They should be made repasture for his den.
A Crown is envies Butt; each Pearle's an eye.
Like those of Argus, the Cow-keeping-spie)
Whose rays (like Titans beams) around the world,
From Center, to Circumference are whirld.
That (borne in nature) Heavens so just decree
Read in the illustr'ous brow of Majesty;
That ( Atlas like) all great supporting birth,
Speaks Kings no less then mighty Gods on earth.
A vaunt then from this Cradle ye who curse
The just Astrea, Princely Babies nurse;
Hence Belknap, hence Two corrupt Justices in the reign of Rich. the 2.
Trisilian, come not near
To stisle Justice in the Princes ear;
Stand off bold Green, and Bushey, who by stealth
Dare gain a Patent for the peoples wealth,
And farm no less then Kingdoms to beguile
The needy widow, and the Orphan spoil:
Hence The ^wo evil: counselors of Edward the 2.
Spencer, Gaviston, no room for you
To lead your Sovereign by a wanton Clue:
Fortune, usurp no more such lofty stages
For vicious Scenes, lest thou in future ages
Be termed a Goddess most unjust, and blind,
To let Sin lead, and virtue lagge behind.
Keep off all Catholic Locusts from the Court,
Which (like Torpedo) mak't your only sport
With pleasing Charms t'intice, secure, beguile
The sleeping senses of the Crocodile,
Whilst sly Ichneumon (the Italian rat)
Eats throw the bowels both of Church, and State.
Avaunt, lascivious Gallant, perfumed Sir,
Of lust, and of thy self, Idolater:
Thou compound of all Nations, Fashions, sins,
Chief Lord of Anticks, Prince of conjurings;
Strange moulds of nature, which confounds to tell
Whether with Birds, or Beasts, or Men to dwell:
No deity's acknowledged but the Face
Of thy she Saint, nor no external grace
That marts not in her Cheek; From Venus eye
He does Astronomize. Loves winged Boy!
Great Emperor of wreathed Arms! Go beck
Some scorching Beldame for the neighing neck
Of such luxurious Stallions. Where Is the scars
Of honor shown, fresh bleeding from the wars,
For Kingdoms Fame? Perchance your musky skin
Is bramble-scratched with your Ladies pin.
Raise not against Princes ears your lustful charms,
Impetuous shadows, whom no spirit warms:
What Metamorphosis more wondered at
Then for to see a King by you turned gnat!
Whose mouth-spear goars fond blood, whose Tru^pet-wing
Sounds an Alarm to each trivial thing;
As if wise Solomon should tune a jigge,
Or mighty Hercules go whip a gigge.
Such Comets, so malignant to a Nation,
Are matter of our Edwards Reformation;
Who (dying now) his wisdom does prepare
To guard his Kingdom with a Trench of care:
Such Oracles bequeathing (as its Fence)
Gained to himself by gray experience:
So, to the Seamen, Simile.
does a Pilot lend
His clew of reason, how their course to bend;
When by the Lee shore, when to launch toth' deep,
When to cast Anchor, and the vessel keep
From eating Silts, rocks, gulphs, and when to sail
With a full gale, and when the top-faile veil.
The pensive Lords, encircling round his bed,
He draws the curtains which impaled his head,
Which from his restless pillow his displaced,
And thus began (having them all embraced.)
" My Lords, Right trusty, and beloved Allies,
"Behold the fainting Couch where Honor lies;
"What cause, Ambition, for thee to be proud
"Whose life's a Pilgrim to a silly Shroud!
"Vainglory builds us Palaces of wind
"Upon quicksilver founded, where we find
"Like Sodoms fruits the Palms, and Laurels grow,
"Which into ashes turn when we them woo
"For solid touch. 'Twas wisest Solons breath:
" No man commenceth happy until death.
"How truly may my meanest Subjects sing,
"In Birth, in Air, in Death we match the King!
"And after death who can distinction find
"'Twixt blended skulls of Swains, with Princes joined?
"O, how our balls are tossed of quickened clay
"Into a thousand hazards! Every day
"Presents new Scenes to short spectators eyes,
"Like Masquers vizards, Comic Tragedies.
"I have the dawning, and the setting seen
"Of some prodigious Comets, which have been
"In The Firmament of States; which fiercely hurled
"Firebrands, with blood commixt, about the world,
"Whose proudest Items, to this total Sum
"Only amounts, a dark three-cubit room!
"I some of you have raised; as now you are great
"From me, to Mine be henceforth greatefull; yet
"If otherwise, plagues shall revenge the blot
"Of Perjury; If Honors Spring's damm'd up,
"The borrowed streams so on must with ebbing dry
"That flow your Channells now with dignity.
"The Ancients limm'd the Graces hand in hand,
"Showing, no gift should unrequited stand:
"Far be it from a noble soul, to let
"The thankful tribute of a benefit
"Expect a Jail deliv'ry, to enlarge
"The ingenuous freedom of good natures charge.
"Death cancells my receipts; I leave my son
"A King more by your love, then by his throne.
"But what availes it, should ye love the King,
"If amongst each other privy hatreds spring?
"The greatest Ill, or Blessing of this Land,
"Does in your discord, or your concord stand.
"Your civil jarres, have caused uncivil rents,
"Close not my reign with such bad Presidents.
"How many bloody sweats, and deadly blows
"Have rise about the colors in the Rose?
"Giving no reason why those thousands bled,
"But that this Rose was White, and that was Red:
"Like as you see some Parents fondly love
"The Male children, Simile.
whenas the Females prove
"The Mothers Idols; this 'cause't has his nose,
"The other that, because she does suppose
"It has her gate, and speech; One house thus rears
"Altar, against Altar, whilst the Father swears
"That he her little Deity will not spare,
"Unless the grudging mother incense bear
"To his. Let Callets scold, and Pages draw,
"Who cannot spell the sense of Honors law
"For one misplaced Comma, thinking better
"Might have been left out one Essential letter:
"They Are Valors Schismatics, which thus have vexed
"With their base Comments such a noble Text.
"Wash deep in Lethe. Come, let us all ascend
"The hill of Pardons (joining hand in hand)
"Lest worser Factions, by the postern gate,
"Usurp the lofty Stories of the State.
"Love seems to me that beauteous chain of gold,
"Which does the world in Courteous fetters hold;
"How much more strictly that your hearts it ties,
"The more 'twill fasten your Felicities.
"Be tender how you cloud a morning Star,
"Whose beams may long enrich your Hemisphear,
"If no Cometick furious gleams withstand
"Its blessed influence on this happy land.
" Rome speak thy fainting fits under the hands
"Of Cesars Legions, meeting Pompeyes Bands
"Enraged with blood: Let Latium here define
"The deadly feud of the Guelph, and Gibelline.
"Expiring France had blood scarce left to write
"Of Orleance Gall, and the Burgundian Spite.
"The Grecian bears by his discording force
"The desolate foot-prints of the Ottoman horse.
"And where is that British heart, which has not bled
"By the prickly Roses in our English bed?
"Ah! factious Ambition is a field
"Where the Combatants are mad, and fury yield
"Them Arms, the prize but Smoke, the full carreer
"On glassy ice, whose utmost bounds appear
"Steep Precipices! But deaths fatal cords
"Pinion the license of my halting words!
"I faint, my Lords Farewell!
He more would say
When the Angel came to fetch his soul away:
Then rucking to his pillow, with fixed eyes
(Which failed his sight) gazed on their rufull cries.
The Peers joined hands in love, begged life's reprief;
The Air echoed out (with Sympathy) their grief.
Have you beheld bright Phoebus Chariot whirled
By fiery Steeds, to cheer the drooping world;
The proud-topd Cedars with Shrub humble pile
Are blessed by the influence of his radiant Smile;
The Coloworts, and the Lettice thrive as well
As the amorous Lilly, or the Daffodell;
Each stalk (whilst forth he stalks) to kiss his feet,
Is proud with Pomp, and prodigal with sweet;
All parts with Verdour does his beauty crown
From his ascending, to his going down:
But whilst all do at upon his wished abode,
Behold him gotten to the Hesperian road;
Now Hesper (ush'ring Luna) bids night shroud
Sols frontlet, with an ore-spread sable cloud:
The crest-faln F^owrs hang their dejected tops
Down heavy, pickled in their, dew-faln drops:
Heaven's hanged with Blacks, as if it meant t'inter
All Sublunarials in Sols sepulcher.
So sets Plantagenet, who shined bright here,
When our blessed Albion was his Hemisphere;
Fig'ring his virtues on each Subjectsbrest,
As Iris bears Sols image on her crest.
He Is set, and hushes all in blackest night,
When ( Persian-like) they most adored his light:
Was not the Fatal Spinster something thrifty,
To cut his thread, and make the knot at Fifty?
When as the rare-spread Snow scarce showed it fall
Upon his almost grizled Capitol?
Why might not it, with time, have whit'ned there?
Too soon, ah; thawed it in each Subjects tear!
Whose drops distilling from alembick eyes,
Did in their Crystal mirrours Sympathize.
Thou Coward Death, why met'st him not in field,
Who made thy proudest Trophies there to yield?
(Casting his Gantlet down) did there outbrave
Thee, then no Conq'rer, but a yielding slave;
Whilst gallant feats did breed courageous strife,
To try in doubtful jarres a careless life:
In those extremes thy ambushments were vain,
His seething blood parboyl'd his flesh unslain;
When He, in amidst of ruins, there defied
Hail-show'rs of iron, trampling on thy pride,
As if he were immortal, or could cause
Lives to spring up as plentiful as Bays;
Then far from him thou sneak'dst, and did admire;
Swearing, he had no earth, but all was fire.
Tymanthes, veil thy cunning here, t'impart
Plantagenet to the life, by thy weak Art:
His Wisdom, Valor, Counsel did so flame,
That, who the Concrete speaks prophanes his name.
As Statesman, view him first, and now conceit
You see the Legates of each foreign State,
Postilions flying with their winged speed,
Their packets opened, Secretaries read,
This King, in the amidst, whole nights untired kept
To rock the cradle, whilst his Subjects slept.
If as a Soldier, from the Arms of's Nurse
Behold him thrown into the forge of Mars;
Suppose you saw the ranged Battles placed,
A thorny wood of Pikes, with Shot enchac'd,
And echoing Drums, with fired Vollies thunder,
And dying groans which rend the Air in sunder;
Then think you see this Prince, in Front, inspire
Each Troop with his super-heroick fire.
Caesar for warlike lessons might crowd in,
(Wrapped like Alcides in the impiercive skin
Of high resolve) his tedious travells stand
Like dwarfs, and pygmies at his high Command.
The Veni-vici, which was Cesars word,
But offall was to the stomach of his sword.
Count all the honors that Gustavus got,
The bold Hungarian, or the Epirot;
He them out-poizes with his Sterling soul,
Though three such more should tugge the other scole.
Now were my Muse in travel of such lines
As Ovid minted, or those lofty Twins,
Homer, and Virgill; and could soar as high
As the Empyreum of their Poetry,
To weave for Edwards brows, now crowned with stars,
A glorious Chaplet of Hexameters,
With slow-paced Spondies, and quick Dactylls wove,
Where curious Art, with quaint invention strove;
Should I pluck sprigs of Laurel from the brows
Of all the Heroes, which their storehouse shows,
And plant them here, to feel no month but May,
Screening his Tomb with a whole Grove of Bay;
Or here present you with a Captain bold,
Backing a Steed, caparison'd with gold,
His back apparel'd in a glittering Coat
Of Lightning, bearing Thunder in his throat;
Where myriads of armed men reeruit
His Legions, at the Stamping of his foot,
Till music of the Drums, and Clarions meet
To woo them to Battalia at his feet:
And then an Eagles ventrous pinion take,
Circling the world through every Clime, and make
Known to the Artick, and Antartick Pole,
The influence of his diviner soul;
Then say it is Edward; alas! I should but strive,
As foolish Actors in their plots contrive;
Presenting on the Stage for to be seen,
A goodly fellow, in a Lions skin,
Saying it is mighty Hercules, and dub
His sinewy shoulders with a massy club,
When all deride this goodly show at length,
As but a Pygmey to Alcides strength.
If that be true the Pythagorean holds,
The supposed transmigration of souls,
Think those of Hector, and Achilles brake
Forth from the relics of their dust, and spoke
His highborn name; all gallant souls in him,
Of bypast Heroes, held their Sanhedrim.
Now, now the Grecian, and the Trojan Prince
Repent their duel for that foolish wench,
Wishing that they had let their Standards fall,
To serve in pay so brave a General:
Homer, and Virgil, shall not excuse their fate,
(Although their Muse did supererogate)
Which shall confine them unto Purgatory,
Till they revive on earth to sing his Story.
Now to sum up his Princely Courtesies;
Conceive a thousand potent enemies,
Not humbled low at his Triumphant feet,
But freely by him at his table set,
Nay, in the same Caroch, nay guess you are led
To see them smiling on the self same bed.
In short, he was the best accomplished Lord
That ever gained a Diadem by the sword,
If that a life so precious might have been
Kept from corruption by his subjects brine;
He had been ranked amongst the royal founders
Of Britains glory, in a wreath of wonders.
One might in's Physiognomy have read
A pleasing combat fought 'twixt love, and dread.
Here Is both the costly-furred Ermine Stole.
And humble haircloth of a gentle soul.
So like to Mars he was, in Arms, and love,
Bellona 'nd Venus for his person strove;
His love did banish, and Tourney with his eye,
As quick, as lightning through the squad tons fly.
Writers agree, this was his chiefest blot,
He rather drunk, then sipp^^ of pleasures pot
His roling eye often strayed from being led
By chaste, sweet lures to his more lawful bed.
Charity' instructs me that he would have mended
His other faults, had not quick death prevented;
God (where the deed, cannot it self be sent)
Accepts the Proxy of a true Intent.
Thus let him sleep, until the pow^rfull found
Of the great Tar-ran-tar-ra shall broach the ground,
And dust (long crumbled from the sides of men)
Shall find its scatt'red sands, and rally, then
May Englands Kings, awake their drowsy eyes
Out of their sear-cloth shrouds, and gently rise,
To see the Three in One this Knight install
With Heavens bright Garter, and the golden Ball.
Now would I take my work out of the Looms,
Did not the piteous Fate of Edwards sons
Add a fresh storm unto my blubberd Muse,
And more sad Tides to my drenched quill infuse;
Which lagging homewards, with a heavy cheer,
From the Entombed Fathers Sepulcher,
Meets horrid Richard Duke of Gloucester, Brother to Edw. the 4. and after him
usurping the Crown, by the name of Rich. the 3.
Glosters spectrum by the way
With Tyrrels cursed Ghost! who, bid me stay,
Whom, when I name, my Muse does seek a shroud
To hide her visage in a sable cloud.
Yet will we chain these hellish Fiends in Rhymes,
That whilst their names are read in after times,
They both, on earth may in such torments live,
As Stygian Furies underneath it give.
Let Ignominy henceforth feise upon
Their Persons, and with terror dragge them down
Into despair, commanding Hope to fly
For ever, ever, to Eternity!
Men, turned to Monsters, I shall bring to view;
Such uncouth Births, as Africa never knew:
Eye-pois'ning Troops of Basilisks, brought over
From Lybian deserts, toth' Egyptian shore
By foggy Auster, with a counter blast,
Are hither sent, our Island to infest.
Infernal Hags here furnish bloody feasts,
Wolvish Lycaon, Lestrigon are guests;
Carrousing cups of royal blood, brimfull,
Quaffing gore up in fierce Medusa's skull!
The Throne is hers'd in black, and does appear
Now, for th Kings, soon, for the Princes beer!
Erinnys with swarth pinions broods the seat
Imperial; of the walls dire slaughters sweat:
Death, bows his Sith over the Nobles heads,
And with as Tragic paces proudly treads,
As when he (in Commission) fought for pay
Under Mezentius, or Caligula.
Dare (thou false Duke) so soon betray thy trust,
And blend thy faith with thy dead Brothers dust!
Unnat'rall Tyrant! should our land now see
A Juncto of accursed Saul's, like thee,
The blood of us, their Vassalls, would not last
A draught, and all our flesh scarce break their fast.
When thou, at Bosworth, shall the earnest feel,
Which vengeance will power down from Henry Earl of Richmond that stew K. Rich.
at the battle of Bosworth and after obtained the Crown by the name of Houry
the 7.
Richmonds steel;
The pety sinks of People, then shall throw
Thy Fame into the common Sewer; so
To wreck thy Memory, in as deep a Shame
As e're was suff'red from so high born name.
Reproach thy shround, Hate shall thy Herald be,
And blood thy Balm, thy Grave black Obliquy.
To My truly Honored Friend Mr D. W.
SIr, I present you here with the offspring of a country Muse, and in a plain
dress suitable. It is more then two years since the birth of this Poem, which I
bred up for no other air but my Chamber window, had not the strivings of some
Friends wrested my will out of my hands: It now venters abroad to give you a
visit in your privacy; it is not waggish, but serious. Be pleased to lodge it
in a warm room, with a Skreen from the cold blasts of the Sons of Censure.
The best argument I can plead for a kind reception, is that it comes from

Sir Your faithful Servant T. W.

PLANTAGENETS Tragical Story.
The second book.
NO sooner had the welcome Messenger
Landed his news at the port of Richards ear;
But he commands obedient tears to wet
The glad-sad tidings of the sable sheet;
Drops trickled down, as striving in a race
To stide the soonest off the Croc'diles face.
The weather's foul, when moystned marbles drop.
From flinty Richards tears, expect a crop
Of Mischieses. "Fly! he cries, o Fury, fly!
"Most ugly and ill-boding Mercury!
"Let that Planet, which in thy birth did shine,
"For c're be plucked from the wheel of Time!
"Brother! This Orphan word is all that is left
"To me, by cruel Fate yet unbereft!
"O Heavens, (if any Heavens at all there be)
"Serve all your Starry eyes this shame to see
"Done to a Son of yours! An idl'effect
"Has your all-whirling course! Let Swains erect
"Fair Altars then unto your powers in Chief,
"Which smile, or else are senseless at our grief!
"Go strike some Hermit, Death! perhaps for that
"Thou shall be cursed of nothing but his Cat;
"Or feed thy Glutton blade, thou foretopt Sire!
"On those extracted out of baser mire,
"And from impurer Clay; thou meagre Clown!
"How dare thou be a Rival to the Crown?
"For all our wealthy Sums of peace reposed,
"And lodged in him, do think that we will be nosed
"With dust? For life, whose active oil was spent
"In The public Lamp, do think we will be content
"Only, with brine-steep'd eyes to speak him dead?
"Or for the flourishing Laurells on his head,
"With sullen Cypress? sure, such vast arrears
"Life owed, for actions which out-pac'd his years,
"As it (to save so long a times expense)
"Has now co^spir'd with death to take him hence.
"I'se send my soul up in a cloud of sighs,
"From this imprisoned Chaos where it lies
"Unto my Brothers Ghost to sacrifice.
Thus far he roared in Ela, till this note,
Muzled below a Gammut in his throat;
" Brother! Thy drowsy ashes I Will arrest,
"And try if thou can break the marble chest
"Where I Will intomb thy dust; hoping to see
"My rubs shall all be spurned away like thee:
"I Will Crimson-dye the ground, and taste no wine
"Pressed from the grape, but of the Orphans brine;
"And be the Leader to so bold a Fray,
"The Giants onset was but cudgel play;
"I Will hamstring all the Sons of Men below,
"And make, the world but upon crutches go.
Reader! These words (when once thou know all)
Thou Wilt swear true Copy of the Original;
And though my Muse should her quotations miss
In other Texts, yet that she is true in this.
What Gloucester was, I Will not forestall your eye,
To give you here his brief Epitomy,
Since 'twill advantage much (if so you please,)
To gain his Character by just degrees;
Which to a wrinckle will describe the same,
Without Hic Leo est, upon the Frame.
Richard (who now had told the world he grieved)
Glad most of all that he was so believed,
(Beginning Night to make a heavy stay,
Upon the eyelids of the drowsy Day)
Gives now Command for all to seek repose,
Since they so long had broyl'd their brains in woes,
And thinks it time for him to still his cries,
(Wiping those moistened Hypocrites, his eyes)
When straight a Post (arriving thither late)
Did strongly beat a Call of the Palace gate;
Who (with a look, that seemed for to be
Ingendered 'twikt scorn, and fecrecie)
Did tell the surly Porter that he came
From his Duke Henry's Grace of Hen: Stafford, Duke of Buckingham.
Buckingham:
His Masters name bespake the easy sense
Of Glosters ear, now rowz'd for audience,
"Stout Stafford greets you well, and lets you know
"In this new World he is pressed to follow you;
"Taking such part, as bold atchivments must,
"Where danger only is the Feoff in trust
"For Honors Legacy: Disband your fears;
"He can recruit you with a Thousand Spears,
Now Lovell, Cat'sby, Ratcliffe enters in,
Whom sympathy of humors long did pin
Upon his sleeve: He of whom Poets tell,
That was designed to be Judge in Hell,
Needed but in Commission, such a Three,
To hold the devils Gaole-delivery.
This traiterous Juncto now thus closely set,
Gloucester begins to broach, what he had kept
Under more keys, locked in his breasts abyss,
Then Horace dame the strong Falernian juice.
"My faithful souls! were you not known to be
"Under the like aspects of Fate with me,
"Never should my wound this day have taken air,
"Lest I a Gangrene, or a Fever fear,
"But rather (fast bound up) for to endure
"Till time might bring a balsome for the cure.
"A budding thought, yet never my breast did bear,
"Unless your bosoms did the blossoms wear,
"Which makes me think this secret you will interre,
"Making your hearts the only Sepulcher.
"How often have you, and I repined to see O
"The Kingdom swayed by such a milksop? He
"More fit to Tilt, and Tourny with a Less,
"Or (whilst she spots Vermilion) hold the glass;
"That beauteous Jane Shore the beloved Concubine of Edward the 4.
Shar, where he so often arrived,
"Could with her Oar, both Law and Justice guide,
"The Judge is deaf-unto the Pleaders cry,
"Be it enacted from her very eye.
"So many nets, as gestures to ensnare
"Affections, and with pleasing smiles to dare
"All men to serve, her eye-beames could defray
"A power not only for to press, but pay.
"All Honors, Offices did stream from hence,
"She blessed or blasted with her influence.
"Ask me not why? He Is but a Fool will prate,
"Thinking on Reason to inoculate
"The graffs of fancy; who to take pretends
"Cloud-climbing heights of Princes favors, stands
"On equal monture with them, since their pleasure
"Is the only Jacob staff by which they measure.
"Shall Harlots Fillets bind on Princes Crowns,
"And Statute Law phylacterize their Gowns?
"Cease Students then, on many prints to look,
"For Shoars fair face was made your stature book
"Brave sport, my friends, to see a King thus led,
"To sport men out of thousands in his bed,
"Some gallant Trophies did his reign repleat,
"But all the Laurel's maystned with our sweat;
"The quill was dipped in the Standish of my wounds,
"That wrote the Indentures of his purchase derowns;
"I clipped great Rich: Nevill, or Make-King, Earl of Warwick, greatly beloved
of the commons in those days.
Warwicks high-aspiring wings,
"Who thought it less to be, then set up Kings.
"Now let your thoughts resent well our affairs,
"On which depends our hopes, and of our Heirs:
"For to enstall us with the peoples love,
"Some of the Serpent needs; as well's the Dove;
"First 'twill do well to cast some oil in the fire
"Of that fast rooted, unappeased ire,
"Long bred between us of Plantagenets line,
"And the Queens upstart Lordlings of her Kin;
"Thus having tutored well our passions, so
"That whilst each part shall challengeout his Foe,
"We Will lay the capstone where we mean to build,
"And rear our Trophies in the blood that is spilled.
"Then shall no rubb once boldly dare to peep,
"When we are disposed the Alley for the sweep:
"Like as Mower, when he barbs the meads,
"(If any surly Bents perk up their heads)
"Fodders his sith (as he along does pass)
"In the soft entrails of the withring grass.
"I bind you fast by Styx, conceal our ends;
"Hearts are the Midwives at the birth of friends:
"And thus (we having jointed close before
"The several rifts, and chinks of every door)
"No glim'ring spark of light shall steal an eye,
"To light a candle at discovery.
"Who so will draw a Map of our design,
"Must perry wigge our Plottings over fine
"With some false hair, that Lynceus may not spy
"Our callow projects with a naked eye;
"Lest (like unfeath'red Owls) we be a scorn
"Unto the world, as soon's the day is born.
Ludlow (now famed for the young Princes court
At the death of's Sire) hither did resort
The Queens two sons, which noble Gray begat,
(As first Incumbent) ere Plantagenet
Had the Advowson, who did hold from thence
Alliance (by Smock-tenure) of the Prince:
The valiant Scales, Anthony Woodvile Lord Rivers, Brother to the Queen
Woodvile, who steered the Barge
Of Englands hopes, and kept the royal charge.
Each blood, as nearest to the Queen, did stand
To latch a smile, next by the Princes hand.
Gloucester (snatching the foretop of the time)
Lodges the guests of his contrived design
At Hastings envious brow, which he resents
Hanging out open signs of discontents
Against the Queens advancement of her race,
Whose graves, revenge so dug in his face,
That by the very Index of his look,
You might peruse his heart without the book.
Who of man's little World takes best survey,
Much Ter-del-fugo, and Incognita
Will still remain, to a judicious eye
Unnat'raliz'd, until discovery.
Richard so froward was, you would think h'ad been
A breeding teeth; had not his gumms been seen
Armed from his birth-lay a although Nature was
Herein no Bungler, but a Prophetess:
Sin's like a Monster, Arist.
which is seldom borne
But by some swelling, or excess of form.
(His passion now unto a phrensy boiled)
Himself of all suspect he thus assoil'd.
"Can such a thing (My Lords) as this be true,
"Our royal Faulcon should be kept in Mew,
"Sequestered from out duty, and our care,
"Having (as we deserve) so joint a share?
"Shall we extracted from the loins of Kings,
"Be overtopped by such Mushrnme things?
" Woodvile, and Scales shall not King't, whilst in my veins
"A drop of true Plantagenet remains;
"Whose highway Trefoile (save the Kings dispose)
"Was far unmeet to posie with his Rose.
"I Have read of Serpents which in winter lie
"As dead, curled up in their chill livery,
"But when the Sun lies warm-upon their heads,
"They cast out poison from their mossy beds.
Thus Envies flints, joined to ambitious steels,
Begat seditious sparks, which Stafford feels
Alone, till Hastings kindled, who had bin
Made by Fourth Edward his high Chamberlin:
Two haughty Peers, often clashing inter se,
Yet in eodem tertio did agree;
Saying 'twas time now for the Prince to stand,
Changing his Wothers Knee, for's Fathers Hand,
And lean upon those ancient props, which stood
As Staddits, when the rest were underwood
And could not heathfull be until he let
Out Greyes gross blood, from pure Plautageuet,
To stop some dangerous fever, which often reigns
From such unnatural conflicts in the reins.
His Fathers blood had been so long a broach
It now tan dregs, and shortly must approach
Unto a tilt, should they neglect their best
Endeavors for to give't its pristine taste.
The Prince is now a double Orphan left,
As well of Father, as of friends bereft,
Weaned from those teats, where he should suck advice,
Bitter'd with false reproach and calumnies;
Some Knights of the Post (to still the people noise)
Dubbed by Hell, did offer to depose
A Plot; How easily Power can make desence
(Having such Verbs fitted for every Tense!)
Whither it was blind Fates enforcing law
These guiltless Lords under the Vulturs pawt
Did bring; and that all-turning wheel,
Which by a cursed experience makes us feel,
No State has footing in this mortal strife,
On th'ycie down hills of a slippy life;
But so it was, the Prince of them deprived,
And they of life, when they at Pomfrei di'd:
Thus glorious Sun-allied Stars (of late)
Are joustled headlong from the brow of State,
Whilst basest dust, (winde-wafted with the time)
Advance it self, and to a Mercour climb.
Should death make choice but of an innocents face
('Twould never affright us) for his Looking glass:
It needs must angelize a face to see
How they become their dress of mifery.
Blaz'ning the Coat of Suffering, which does yield
A patient Rampant, in a smiling Field;
Where death is vanquished, whilst they give him terms
To come to composition in their Arms.
Now, now, begins the springtyde of a tear,
Where eyes the best of Rhetoricians are.
You admirable teare-eternizers,
Come and adopt our subject, make it yours!
O, come, and give a grief-bung'd soul a vent,
Teaching our woeful numbers to lament!
Our infant Prince (scarce yet to th'navell born)
Casting his bleeding eye on so forborne
A state of things (crying) shrinks in again
His head, as loath of such a troublous reign.
If cruel nature needs must thrust him forth,
Though scarce to see, yet to be seen on earth;
(In stead of dandling Byoes) I espy
The cradle thrown b'a roaring Lullaby.
Unnatural tempests, by ambition driven,
Beat through the crannies of his neat-to heaven
Sacred dormitory; Satyrs dance round,
Hell runs at Batly-brick over facred ground.
Gloucester thus (closely digging of his Mine
To blow up all his brother Edwards line,
And conj'ring Hell, exactly how to set
His snares, (made by the Masks of Nimrods net)
We'll leave upon his march to th'royall City,
To view an Object may deserve your pity,
The Mother Queen, who never had wiped her eyes,
Or once enjoyed a Sabbath from her sighs,
Since flinty Fate carved out so sowt a cross
As loving wives taste in a husbands loss.
No quiet Shore she finds, no harbor near,
(Tossed on sorrows surges here, and there)
And (weighing anchor in so dark a night)
She of Cape-comfort wholly lost the sight.
Sols fairest Grandchild Light, now roused his head
From's Eastern pillow (then newly wak'ned
By's hasty Sire) and quickly getting up,
He sets his fresh Cerulean casements open;
Through which the Sun does throw a morning smile
Into her lap, so thinking to beguile
With his rays Maydenhead her grief-sieg'd eyes,
To give up all her tears in hostages.
Her maids of Honor (with disheveled tresses)
Are some employed to sort out mourning dresses,
Others, make Civet water for her hands,
Which in a golden basin trembling stands,
Afraid to touch their Snow, till first it be
Washed it self from all impuritie:
She sometimes shows her self unto her glass,
T'instruct her eyes what weather's in her face,
(For it is agreed that Female Almanac
Can show the Signs in beauties Zodiac:
When (fastening to his feet his light-wing'd plumes)
God Mercury with heavy tidings comes,
Making no stay, until arrived at
(Arresting with his rod) the palace gate;
And (brought within the ear-reach of the Queen)
Gives her a blunt account of what had been
At Pomfret: how those noble Lords allied
Unto her Highness self were double died
With paper Treason, forged by Richards power,
And daily looking for their latest hour,
Being so Planet-stricken with the frown
Of the two Dukes, it is thought they will never own
Themselves: and further adds for truth, that they
Were marching thither armed in brave array,
The Rhet'rick was, the Prince should meet the crown,
But (ended brief) the Grammar was her own.
She heard him out, like as a prisoner
(Standing with trembling fear at the dreadful bar)
Does hear his gibbet-sentence; every word
Of all this woeful Climax was a sword,
And (grinding in her breast a heart-deep groan)
She backward falls in a frightfull swoun,
The roses shrink under their beds of snow,
And dare not on her cheeks be seen to grow:
How often did her Ladies screiches pray
The fainting powers of her soul to stay!
Calling on her deceased husbands name,
And often repeating it again, again;
They first perceive the Lilly, and the Rose
To make faint combats in her lips, and nose;
As if sh' had only this desired of death,
To speak his name but with her latest breath.
At length (when she her Twins of light unsealed)
In accents like to these her self revealed.
"Who so will draw a Map of Misery,
"Need fancy no more wretched Plot then I;
"Whose speechless wound (to all the standers by)
"May ransom Pain from an Hyperboly:
"Great griefs within no certain limits fall,
"But who once names me, he speaks all.
"Good fortune is not always bound to pay
"Homage to greatness, or to pave the way
"Of Queens with Flowr-de-luces; now I see
"The safest Tenure's not in Capite;
"Our golden couches are as often torn
"With strong Convulsions, and our pallets worn
"With shaking Fevers, as the beds of straw;
"There Is all to one alike impartial law.
"You pleasant Milkmaids (which each morning pass
"Over the Virgin dew, and pearled grass)
"Can sweetly sing by day, and soundly sleep
"At night, having the privilege to keep
"Your wise affections for a homely bed,
"'It Is you that know contentment when you wed;
"When I (not having liberty to choose,
"Nor leave a royal Suter to refuse)
"Am now compelled a Sacrifice to prove
"To the politic ends of my unhappy love.
"When * Gray the title of a Lady lent
"(Distant alike from Envy, Sir John Gray the Queens first husband stain in the
battle of St Albons in defense of the house of Lancaster.
and Contempt)
"Security, and sweetness seemed to dwell
"Together with me in my humble Cell:
"What my bed wanted toward stately pride,
"Was by the soundness of my sleep supplied.
"Alas my tender Orphans! shall you be
"So timely taught the trade of misery!
"With hopes, and wishes is my heart repleat,
"The hunger of the wretched, and their meat.
And here breaks off; saying, she will not tarry,
Bidding them all pack up for Sanctuary.
Conceive a Country harras'd with an host
Of soldiers, Simile.
landing on a peaceful Coast,
Where deafning Drums, and Trumpets fright the Shore,
And neighing horses through the welkin roar:
The swadled suckling (spying death at's back)
Nusles his head within his mothers neck;
And spotless Virgins to their lusts must pay
The shameful Tribute of their blooming May;
There may you see the breathless Villager
Lugging his Barns to some good town that is near,
The mother screiching, whilst bedabbled Lambs
(Bleating) pursue their bowells-yerning Dams.
Ha'ye seen the Front'ers of some fertile Tract
Exposed thus to the Victors slaughter sack,
All in distracted hurries to convey
Their goods from bloody hands, with hunt the prey;
Each house swept clean, before the night comes on,
The Countries ransacked, to enrich the Town?
Then may you phansy (in a turn of the hand)
How the Queens servants all divided stand
Twixt heaviness, rumble, have of such as carry
Her Trunks, chests, fardells into Sanctuary.
One strips the Liv'ry of its golden Fleece,
Another snatcheth down the pride of Greece,
The Arras hangings from the ghastly walls,
(Now set about with naught but spiders cauls)
Mean while, she in a gold-seil'd Cabinet
Her choysest, orient, pricefull Jewels shut,
Which (bearing in her arm) away she hies
With little York, which was her dearest prize. Simile.

So will a fearful Partridge (close pursued
By some quick bird of prey) make have to shroud
It self in some thick covert: tossed ships fly
The Oceans rage, and in safe harbor lie.
But even hither seemed there for to peep
A ray of Comfort started out of sleep,
I mean the Doctor Rotheram, Archbishop of York, and Keeper of the Scale.
Chanc'lor, who was known
to be
As high in virtue, as nobility.
(Her back bowed under care, and sorrows wallet)
He finds her couchant on an humble pallet;
Her down-cast head unto her knees she lent,
(Curled altogether up in discontent)
Making with her pearl-pointed fingers fair
Most piteous havoc in her golden hair:
Her hair, which careless hung about her ears,
And only served her for to dry her tears:
Her tears, which from her red-swoln eyes did flow
Faster then rivers from their fountains go:
Her breast did heave, as if her heart strings strained,
Each part did show the sorrows it sustained;
Only her tongue (her troubles were so many)
Found want of words how for to utter any;
But by her face, and gesture was expressed
The lively Image of a soul distressed.
O Pomfret, Pomfret, was lay next her heart,
Which like a gnawing Vulture seemed to dart
A thorn through every vein: Light griefs can speak,
When greater with astonished silence break,
The heart in twain: small brooks run prattling by,
When rivers glide with peaceful Majesty.
She (like a widow Turtle, having lost
Her ma^e, her Joy, by God, and Nature crossed)
Under her wings brooding her young unfledge,
In mournful lays she sings a doleful dirge.
Count but the leaves that fall, who ever sees
Novembers Foosts unperriwigge the trees,
Or the thick drops upon the stronging ears
Of yellow Ceres, (ere her looks she shears)
Score up the daisies Maia's bosom wears,
Then give the sum, and number up her tears,
Which (she so largely spending) seemed to dry
Her whilome beauties to Anatomy.
Scarce could the lumpish Prelat here refrain
To pay his brooks of tributarie brine
Unto her sorrows Sea, and tune his eyes
To her distractions, keeping Time with sighs;
So far Affection did command in Chief
By loving Sympathies to espouse her grief:
Until his Reason did forbid the Bands,
And thus he spoke (whilst still they joined hands.)
"Why (Madam) should I see those twin-stars lowr
"On the Cheeks coral in a needless shower,
"Through moystned casements of those crystal Shops,
"As if retailing out your eyes by drops?
"'It Is Fortunes Music, she enjoyes a feast
"To hear thick sobs harsh tuned in your breast;
"Believe me (Lady) it is the noblest part
"Of your Revenge, to slight not feel the smart.
"Heaven gives you crosses (like sharp sauce) to whet
"For some choice banquet your dull appetite,
"The darker now your cloud-benighted brow,
"Your Paradise will sweeter Prospects show:
"Doff, doff that sullen Muffler! Could I find
"A thought were black enough to be unkind
"In all my soul to you, I Would purge my breast,
"To void the Traitor from amongst the rest.
"Each subjects shoulder bears your Graces cross,
"This Isle an Orphan by your husbands loss:
"If thousands of such useless lives as mine
"For deaths too stern Arrest, could have put in
"Sufficient Bail, you had this moment seen
"Your self a glorious, and a happy Queen:
"But our unhallowed Votes (when at the best)
"Smell less of incense, then of Interest.
"If Englands crown shall shine on other brow
"Then of your Princely son, we the morrow
"Will take Yorks Duke, and (in his fathers stead)
"We Will power the ruling oil upon his head.
"How e're it be (Madam) suspend your ruth
"Till Time's deliv'red of her daughter Truth.
And so they part (anch'ring their hands together)
Whilst She replies, My Lord, you are welcome hither.
Thus courteous trunks of trees I Have often seen
Upon the the margent of a Stream, Simile.
to lean
Forward with proffered boughs, with pity moved
To reach the Sinker from the swelling flood:
When Hercules met Theseus face to face,
Or Nisus did Euryalus embrace,
But hatred was, to see this woeful Queen,
(Which long in sorrows lowest shades had been)
Embrace this Star of Comfort; but it is gone
With him, before She knew She was alone:
Like as a dying Tapers sickly beams, Simile.

(Concealing in a Socket all its streams
Of light) now gives a glim'ring flash, or two,
Then all in darkness: so her comforts do.
( Sol having drawn the Conrtains of the Night,)
To what her ears had heard, her eyes did plight
Their faith, looking (yet but early season)
Saw many Boats fraught full of Glosters Treason,
Whose guilty Oars did pollute the Stream,
And wound the curled breast of silver Them,
As if (by the Earth, and air before) they meant
T'infest with poison every Element.
Now was a Legate from grim Pluto sent
(Attended with a sooty Regiment)
To Richards Court; who (when arrived) did tell
That never was a place so like to Hell,
Desired his speed in's enterprise begun,
And proffered all the powers of Acheron,
Gloucester employeth Hastings (for his parts)
To get him quarters in the peoples hearts,
(He being so il-tun'd an Instrument,
The Music of his soul could find no vent.)
He humbly prays them for to take advice,
Listening to prudence not to prejudice;
That so (all murm'rings hushed, and laid asleep)
(Fast ti'd in knots of duty) they might keep
The approaching festival in garb of State
The Dukes were marching for to celebrate;
And something more he puts into their Creed,
Of which himself more doubted, then believed.
The discontented devil conjured down,
The Duke approches, with the King to Town;
Who plays so well that day the Subjects part,
As if h'ad shifted both his face, and heart,
And well might set his Pillars up, to be
A Non plus ultra to hypocrisy;
He throws his hat off at the Peoples ring,
And gladly echoes to God save the King,
Which proves that true, which I before did doubt,
The Traitor speaks, when his heart is out.
This very act did seem to set him up
With so full stock in Reputations Shop,
As he obtained his Grace for to Commence
Chief Lord Protector to the Orphan Prince;
And now his credit's good to run a score
In horrid murders, not accounted for.
Who but some Sat'rick Iuv'nall, dares provoke
Crimes in a Diadem dressed, or Tyrian cloak?
There is a Bird by the Ancients called the Just,
Because she hides her Excrements in the dust:
A good example (great men) for to shroud
Your ill deportments under a dark Cloud
Of close concealment, rather then that you
Expose your Vices to a Public view;
It Is you, whose mountainous Aspect out-vies
The humble Valleys, whose high-towring eyes
Can see the callow Politics in their nest,
(Which yet are Vulgar wonders when they are dressed)
Be mountains of Perfume, whose fragrant brow
No snare-intrapping Nimrod ever knew;
Be Phar's, whilst we these Zanclian straights survay,
And with your friendly light direct our way.
Thus far was Richards Canvas well employed
With prosperous gales, and even so over-cloy'd
With Fortunes smiles, as should an Atheist see,
He Would argue from't against the Deity:
His saylsnow swelled with hopes of Englands throan
He rows in blood, the Boat-swains wait upon
His fortune, boasting 'bove Columbus Train
(Inning their golden Harvest over the Main;)
Knowing in black designs, to snatch the Oar
Of Considence, is half way to the Shore.
There never wants (when States are deadly sick)
Some needy Quack, or faithless Emperick,
To try his mad Receipts; whilst nature fight,
He sees the groaning issue with delight.
Now Gloster's fit to drink his Judas cup,
But one Ingredient lacks to make it up;
The Lion yet has got but half his prey,
One tender lamb the mother hides away,
As knowing well, who to his savage Den
Does once set footing, never returns again.
He therefore (ere he means to Storm the Crown)
First plants his Batt'ries, for to thunder down
The Queens retreat, whose priviledg'd defense
By sacred right, (entrenched with inocence)
Was held impregnable: the faithful Peers
(Most loyal to her self) for Engineers
He calls out, the Chancelour's the chief
Over these; then draws out a Relief
(If these should be repulsed) of harder temper,
Who for to scale the walls dare climb the adventur,
And 'spite of Heaven to' atchieve an Action,
Which the old Giants would have thought presumption:
The man designed for to command over them
Must be the marble-hearted Buckingham.
The Chancellours fast love to Edwards line
Was over-witted by this smooth design;
As strangers (riding in a road unknown)
Follow the beaten Track to such a Town; Simile.

So he (unskilled in the Knack of Policy)
Steers by the Pole-sttar of the Company:
So some corrupted Villian, Simile.
(who has sold
His soul, his Country, and his Faith for gold)
Leads his commanded Files to blood, which spilt
Stains Swords with gore, but not their hearts with guilt.
Unhappy Lord! Thy like I scarce can read,
Whose Faith was good, and yet corrupt in's Creed.
The Queen (long starved from joys) does now begin
To surfeit on a welcome dish come in,
I mean the Bishop (flanked with other Lords)
For to bespeak her Grace in these like words.
That she, and York march out, and not to tarry,
But quit the hold they kept in Sanctuary;
Fair Quarter then at Glosters hands her Grace
Might well expect, if not, he^'d Storm the place.
Seduced Paper-Worm! Had thou read Men,
As long as por'd on Books, false Richard then
Could never (pretending for to open thine eyes)
Have led thee by the nose to play his prize.
This message struck the ears of the wondering Queen
With such heart-cleaving sounds as is it had been
Some silent midnight knell, alarming souls
To high to lips, when once grim Death controuls
Delay; as if that he (she senseless stood)
'Twixt soul, and body had the Banes forbod;
Courted at last unto her self (though long)
She this Reply contracted to her Tongue.
"Who in a storm weighs Anchor, seems to court
"His shipwreck, and deserves to miss the Port.
"Say, Nature, say! If when the Bird new springs,
"There be a heat more cher'shing then the wings
"Of its own mother: I shall dread some harms,
"Till they are both impall'd within my arms;
"Had I my Child within these walls alone,
"I Would think him more secure then on a Throne;
"The Duke is ill at ease, and now in Bed,
"Rather amended, then recovered,
"And often I have heard Physicians speak,
"Relapses threaten danger to the weak:
"If nature (routed at the first) does yield,
"At the second Charge of force must quit the field.
"Afflict not nature in a widows cry,
"To steal poor Orphans from her Treasury!
"Madam (he straight replies) on you must fall
"This blame, it is you that are unnatural,
"In choosing for to be so much a mother
"Unto the one, that you despise the other.
"Although he cannot in your arms miscarry,
"Yet it is not meet he should keep Sanctuary;
"How harshly does it sound in the peoples lips!
"It cannot but the rising Sun eclipse,
"As if the Turkish bow-string were a sport
"Would grow in fashion now in Englands court.
"He has not sin enough to understand
"This place, (which only shields from Justice hand
"If you be so resolved to abide here still,
"(Rather then overcome a Woman's will)
"Their joint consent is to enfranchize him,
"Who has no will to ask, nor yet a Crime
"To need it; such great love his Uncle bears,
"Lest you convey him hence through causlss fears
"Ah (quoth the Queen) how fond is Gloucester grown
"Of late, to be so tender of my son!
"A riddle, how that wretch can prompt his good,
"Whose hands now reeketh with his Kindreds blood.
"Some say no grass could ever yet take root
"Where once the Ottoman horse but set his foot:
"'It Is here as true; where ever Gloucester wend,
"Rapes, blood, and death his ghastly steps attend,
"My son deserves no Sanctuary you say,
"And it is no Breach to take him hence away,
"A goodly gloss! where Thieves may find defense
"Too narrow's made to shelter innocence.
"But little Ned does lack a playfellow;
"Can Englands Court no merry waggs allow
"To stroke his humor? Fie! Avaunt for shame!
"A deep Conclusion, but a trifling Theme:
"Can it be thought a Prince so young in years
"Will play with none, but such as are his Peers?
"But the child asks it not; who told him so?
"Move him, and try, or if he answer no,
"If I but claim this Privilege for me,
"My goods, as well's my Person shall be free;
"My horse from hence may not be taken away,
"As is it then no breach of Sanctuary
"To take my Child? Nay, is he not my Ward?
"And our just laws do make me of his guard,
"As learned council say? h'as no demeanor
"Held by Knights service, but in Soccage tenure:
"The Law commits him to my custody,
"I ask it for him, since it makes not me
"A Guardian for his goods without the care
"Of's Person: By natures law mothers are
"To keep their Children; by the law of man
"The Infant's feoft upon his Guardian,
"And Gods law gives this place protection,
"And may not all these privilege my son?
"No Jury need b'impannell'd on the cause
"Of these my fears, if you peruse the laws:
"Gold crowns are brave-ambition-tempting tools,
"Most men bewitching, if not Saints, or Fools.
"I wonder much (my Lord) what heat of lust
"In you to Glosters service, makes your Trust
"A Bawd to these employments; and even tied
"To Pimp it thus to Richards wanton pride,
"Forgetting Edwards favors ere he have
"Scarce taken Livery, 'nd seisin of his grave!
"I say no more, but he that dares profane
"This places sacred rites, and honored name,
"God send him need protection here to crave,
"And then deny him that which he would have.
He thinks it now but vain to reinforce
His routed Arguments; bids take her course,
He meant to draw off his Artillery,
No more to attempt a female Battery;
But offers up his Faith in hostage to her
To gain consent in what he meant to woe her:
"If she would freight the Vessel of his care
"But with a prize so rich, he would not fear
"To put in Bond against a Wrack, and free
"Her thoughts from cheating dreams of Pyracy;
"If still her negatives should cloy his suit,
"He Would wave his errant, and for e're be mute.
Hereat the Queen such swelling sighs disgorge
As if that Vulcan knocked on the forge
Of her breast, with such astonishing blows
As the Sicilian hears in Etna's Throws;
Rivers of tears came springing from her heart,
Ascending to her head did there impart
A doleful moisture, whose high floods did rise
To flow the swelling channells of her eyes.
But She (not knowing longer to secure
Her tender Child from force of Richards power)
At length bestows him on their zealous prayer,
So to oblige (if not command) their care;
Because he is trusted, to be trusty binds
A noble nature; jealousy enclines
To be dishonest; Faith affords a Spell
Tocharm a Skellum, or an Infidel.
She (taking little York by the lilly hand)
Does seem to move, then (musing in a stand)
Fear, hope contest, her color comes, and goes,
Sometimes the Lilly fallies then the Rose;
She forward steps, revokes it with a start,
Armies of fears besiege her jealous heart:
Fancy presents her now with Crookbacks face,
That loathsome Viper, which had stung her race
To death; here snatching up her Son
(Impris'ned in her arms) she seeks to run
To hide herself: as when a Kite does hover
Over a brood of Chickens the Hen does cover
Them in the hollow of her wing. Anon,
The Spectre which appeared is conjured down
By loyal Circles in the Chanc'lours look,
As no bad Comment of his heart the Book.
Thus thredding of the Beads (she lingering stays)
Of hope and fear on wyers of delays: Simile

So Iordans sweetest stream is loath to leave
His flowery Banks, to shut his crystal wave
In the salt Seas noisome, pestiferous jail,
But (as he creeps along) still craveth bail,
Loyt'ring in crook'd Meanders, ere he take
His loathsome journey to the Asphaltick-lake.
"Here is my babe (my Lords) you so desire, Queen.

"I lend him to your Trusts, and shall require
"Him at your hands (be witness heaven! to this)
"If any thing fall out that is amiss.
" Edward conjures you all (whose Ghoast is come,
"Now speaking to you from Elysium)
"By that great God, whose name you all profess,
"And by your Honors, and your happiness,
"To take the care of his poor Orphans left
"Void of all Friendship, (if of you hereft:)
"Assure me this, so shall you 'swage my Pain,
"Denied, I Will never live to ask again:
"I question not your power, less your will
"But that you may the humble suit fulfill
"Of a distressed widow; In your breasts
"I lay up all my wordly hope, that rests
"Of fortunes spoils; Faith I shall look to find
"'Among Scythes, and Tartars, if you prove unkind;
"Though Sorrows swelling surges should combine
"To waft me to my grave through seas of brine,
"Yet your unhappy children once may feel
"(Though you now sit of the top of Fortunes wheel)
"Such misery as mine; let fortune frown,
"She plucketh up, as fast as she has sown.
"To say no more (my Lords) but have a care
"(If I too much) lest you too little fear.
No further could she speak, but weeps the rest,
Tears Waiters are, when Sorrow makes a Feast;
She cries, to think she is so unwise to cry,
As if too jealous of their loyalty.
Then (clasping of the Duke within her arms)
Her melting bosom new affection warmes:
"Mine own sweet Babe! Queen.
who I well thought should be
"A stay unto this saplesse, withering Tree,
"Which (like a clog) I Am forced to bear about
"To keep my eager soul from getting out:
"Whose life I have by such hard labor spun
"Out of my-bowells, that it seems to run
"Equal with mine! To rip thee from my side
"Is death to think, ten Thousand to abide;
"But thou art now no longer mine, but his
"That gave me thee; let this unhappy kiss
"Be the sad seal of a more sad Farewell
"Then wit can paint, or words have power to tell.
"Carry my Love along unto thy Brother,
"O, that 'twere lawful now to be a mother!
"Relations are but Crimes, nature's enchain'd
"By force unnatural, and is arraigned
"By Tyranny, that if the Lion say
"Our feet, are wings, we shall be made his prey.
"Weep not, dear Heart! Let never tears surprise
"The dove-like glances of thy smiling eyes;
"Thy spotless soul yet never sin did bear
"That needs to be rinsed in a tear:
"Let it suffice that I am thus forlorn,
"And have Thee; by my cares so often born.
"Why hang'st thou thus about my neck? O grief!
"And melt'st my soul to pity for relief!
Then (lips so close contracted) you would guess
That they had shifted souls at every Kiss,
And would have spoke, but words in tears were drowned
Departurs painful instant gave a wound
At which her lifeblood seemed to issue out,
And giddy passions whirled her brains about;
(Like as those women, when they celebrate
In Venus Temple, fair Adonis fate.)
She (foll'wing still) pursued him with her eyes,
When clouded, breathed these accents on her knees:
"I seem like wounded Telephus to stand,
"When bleeding under great Achilles hand,
"Whose healing lance (they say) received the power
"(As to inflict the wound) to work the cure.
"No sear-cloath of man's help can ease my sore,
"To Tent it, does but make my pains the more:
"No Poultess found, no Salve to cure my grief,
"Though I should plunder (for to find relief)
"Great Paracelsus closet. Alas! my ill
"Surmounteth that curer of Physics skill.
"To give me rest, what dressing can avail
"But by the Omnipotent hand, which did assail
"Me first? great god! since thou have given the wound
"Lord, be my Surgeon too, since none is found!
Now Richards talons having seaz'd his prey,
He quickly trussed it up, and hy'd away.
First shall the Carpet Knight (that sents of Musk)
(Drawing no Rap'er but his Ladies Busk)
Kill armed squadrons with her looking glass;
And Ajax swound with magic of a face:
First the adventurous Seaman shall not fail
To the Molucca's in a skiffe to sail,
Or cross the line in John Tredescants boat,
Which he amongst Lambeth miracles does quote;
First shall our wooden Castles find a way
By North unto rich China, or Cathay;
That fretum Davis may no longer bound
Our Maps (benumbed in the frozen Sound)
Before Edwards tender plants (he left behind)
Can spread under a Planet so unkind
As Gloucester, who is chief ascendant now,
Slaying and swaying with imperious brow.
Now have we lodged the Princes in the Tower,
Waiting, till Time shall strike their latest hour.
And here my tender Muse could think it best
Rather to sit, and weep, then speak the rest:
'Twould be a task more pleasing to my quill,
To crown the Princes, then their blood to spill;
Could I perform (as well as it was meant)
Fourth Edwards dying Will, and Testament,
My verse should dance a Galiard, and revoke
(Brave Brandon like) the sturdy staves of oak,
And in those royal Jousts should tell you
Most lances splinter'd; after that should go
And harness out the doves for Venus coach,
And then (perhaps) set generous wines abroach.
I next (to please your stomachs) would prepare
Cost-craving Viands, and to strike your ear,
A consort of such heavenly music bring
As if Apollo perched upon each string:
And (lest some sense might go unravished)
Your eyes on hansome Ladies had been fed,
Where, at such banquets, men (too often unwise)
Do pine their hearts in feasting of their eyes;
And (on a gallant Courser) last of all
Have ush'red Valiant The Kings Champion.
Dimmock to the Hall,
Whose Gantlet should have given a brave to Fate,
Proving all quarrels illegitimate.
Fain would my Muse lay sadder thoughts aside,
And longer in this Temperate Clime abide;
(Such Subjects suting her complexion best
As are least Sanguine, and which blush the least)
But in their journey Travelers must on,
And next I come to Richards torrid Zone,
Whose heat indeed was so intolerable,
That for the Princes 'twas not habitable.
Should elder Kings now rise out of their graves,
'Twould puzle them to find the English laws,
Unless old Records should direct them best,
Not copies (blurred) in a disloyal breast.
Those, which had most in stake, were standers by,
And sat in counsel but through courtesy,
Some of whose names were nocht in Neroes tally,
As those black victims which he meant to rally
On Deaths recruit. Goodness was Antic grown,
In that age, no virtue was in fashion. Simile.

It Is said, when flowery Sicily was divorced
From Italy, (by Neptunes arms accross'd)
Some loving palms retained a Sympathy,
And (bowing each to other) did defy
The spiteful Element. Some few I see
Still courting virtue in her poverty,
Though she was clothed in rags, and in disgrace,
Loved her, not for her dowry but her face.
In blustering storms some chose their grapes to gather,
Making their sweetest Hay in foulest weather,
With breath of Honor, and with silver Oars
(Such as were used by Cleopatra's row'rs)
Plie Richards gally with a sweating hand,
In a blind mist to bring him safe to land.
From Jove's all-piercing eye could mortals shroud
Their sooty sins, (wrapped in a darker cloud)
Mankind would perish in a bloody swound,
And only monsters live, to walk the round,
And first it is Hastings turn to quit the stage,
He doffs his head, et exit in a rage;
( Stafford shall live a while, to set a crown
On Richards head, and after lose his own,
To hatch the Serpents eggs, and nothing gain
But hisses, and their poison for his pain.)
He had a priest to shreive him in the Tower,
And all the world forgave at's dying hour,
Though with himself; and Gloucester, I scarce see
How he could die in perfect charity,
For hear him thus lamenting of his fate.
(Repent repentance! when thou come so late)
"This load weighs not so heavy, as the hand
"That lays it on; nor shamefully to stand
"A victime to the sword, but for to see
"That I a Sacrifice am made by thee,
"Who, for to raise the Outworks of thy crown,
"Slighted the Brest-work of my Faith: to drown
"Where I expected Palms, and all my suits
"Blasted like Sodoms most accursed fruits;
"To tread on Thorns, when men of my deserts
"Are Crowned with roses; Heavens, how it smarts!
"Is this to build the seat of Tyranny,
"To pull those stayers down he climbed by?
"Loathing the fight of our guilt-striking faces,
"As Debtors do of Bailiffs, to whose Graces
"They owe the payment of those borrowed sums
"Of favors lent unto such bankrupt sons.
"Had I served God, with so sincere Religion,
"As I have tend'red to his damned Ambition,
"I never at his hands should need to have cried
"Mercy! O mercy! and been thus denied.
"O, could my-brine-steep'd prayers now prevail
"To cut off from my Children this Intail
"Of wickedness! It Is Grace must sue a Fine
"To cut off sins Reversion from my line!
"Though Gloucester seems to cut down every Tree
"That clouds the ambitious prospect of his eye,
"One sturdy Oak may yet remain unslain,
"Of which (at length) he may his gallows claim.
"Well, this Revenge I Will take, I Will on before
"In Domes-dayes book to write so dire a score,
"When Richards conscience shall read the tally,
"The Stygian flames shall lighten through the sally
"Of an infernal blush. Beware the shelf
"Statesmen! where I (unhappy) split my self.
Who lends (Hastings!) to a Tyrant, shall
Lose both his Interest, and Principal;
Their Maxim is, they may the charges save
Of paying wages to desert, a Grave
Is full discharge, and seems to cancel all
Claims, and demands that were, or ever shall;
It Is a cheap trick, to quarrel such from hence
Whose over merit was their worst offense.
But ah! my understanding's stricken blind
T'record a passage, that now comes in mind;
At the same time the Lords at Pomfret died
(So Fate had taught her rolling wheels to slide)
Ensnared by Hastings, the same day, and hour
Was he himself cut shorter in the Tower;
But thou, my Muse! dare not with feeble wings
Soar to the height of Gods eternal things,
(Forgetting that thy plumes cannot raise thee high't
Then the ground) but always learn to admire
His mystic Secrets, which none know but they
That have shook off the luggage of their clay.
Gloucester (knowing such crowns are hedged with thorn,
As are upon usurping foreheads worn)
Takes Stafford for a glove, whose Eloquence
Might break the hedge, or pluck them from the fence:
(Like as the Ape made use of Pusses foot
To scrape the embers for the roasted nut)
He Is now in labor, and the Gossyps come
Wondering to see such struglings in the womb
Of his design; the throws are violent,
And one in have is for a midwise sent,
('It Was strange to hear that Richard waited him,
When few believed he was so near his Time)
This part was Staffords, who did here great sted
By's skill, to bring Ambition ^^e a bed.
False Buckingham (whose tongue's the only part
In him I can commend) had learned the art
To broach what ever he had barrel'd up,
(Not like to some, which have more bung, then tap)
Opening the golden floudgates of his throat
He charmed the people with a pleasing note,
And (mounted on a high Tribunal) spoke,
(Fitter't had been a Gibbet, or a Stake)
Stroaking the vulgar beast in lushions style,
As made it stand wide gaping all the while
(Like as (they say) the Egyptian Crocodile,
When Trochilus picks his teeth:) there is a Time
"He says, when Heaven does to States design
"To carve out Happiness, they must expect
"Never to cut so well, if they neglect:
"Coy Virgins, which refuse to pluck their May,
"May sighting sit, but long enough may stay.
"The Blessing to this Isle (so long was meant)
"God (by the Duke of Gloucester) now has sent;
"A Prince so fit for rule, that should we slight,
"The tender is too good for such despite.
"'It Is he will do in Kingdoms what the brain
"Of pregnant Archimedes never could sain,
"In scattering all the brutish fogs, which rest
"I'ch' brackish fens of man's ungoverned breast,
"Through Justice, (which, if once of this berest,
"The largest Kingdom, is the greatest Theft.)
"If that this worlds great All be subt'ly framed
"Into a Harp (as by Synesius named)
"He Will wind the strings, and move the fingers so,
"That sweet-life breathing Airs thence shall flow;
"Composing well that Musick-book of white,
"And blacker notes, and tune them to delight;
"Being in Libra always known to sit,
"Ordering affairs as the day, and night
"(When Sol runs round the girdle of the year)
"Do in the yernall Equinox appear.
To make it short; his Word-robe was you see
Set out which flowers of Embroidery,
Save that this general sault it did contain,
Each colour's counterseit, and hone in grain,
Like to a writhel'd Carrion I have seen
(In stead of fifty, write her down fifteen)
Wearing her bought complexion in a box,
And every morn her closet-sace unlocks,
Plants cherries in her cheeks, her eye she chears,
And with her pencill cancells thirty years;
Opening her lustful windows, which are shown
Nigh to the navell over with Lillies sown,
(Clad in the ruins of a Brokers shop)
Her musky mouth she practices to open
To a just size; by magic of her glass
She learneth how to set Spells in her face
So long, till (with her poysned past) she get
Some witless gallant for to take the bait;
And nothing can his lovesick heat assuage
(Burning far hotter then the Dog Days rage)
But day and night God Hymen does invoke
Till they are coupled in the wedding yoke:
But thinking (in the morn) to kiss his bride,
He finds an ugly Proserpine by's side,
Smelling all over like a Surgeons box
Of salves, and unguents, if she escape the --
Then let me dye, if any vice can say
It more deserves the great Anathema
Of all mankind, then this, which seeks t'entrap
By nearest unto virtue keeping Shop,
The silly Bird when she the fowler spies
Approaching her with blear, and running eyes,
Rolling in's crafty hands a pair of beads,
From this same holy man she nothing dreads,
Till at the length full tremblingly she stands
A prey to the blood, and rapine in his hands,
In all Heavens court there is never a deity
But deeply suffers by Hypocrisy.
Having wound up the bottom of his speech,
The Duke stood listening, seeming to beseech
A Plaudit from the 'maz'd circumstants, who
Were speechless, like pale Images of dough,
And could not all raise such a Stock of breath
As made up a reply; as if that death
Had by the fatal Sisters then been sent
To seize upon their clayey Tenement:
So fat from hugging of such thoughts as these,
Their loyal hearts were all Antipodes.
Taking their silence for a joint consent
H' interprets counter what the people meant,
Saluting Gloucester King; (which welcome peal
Was only by his servants rung, through zeal
Unto their Lords commands) but could not hire
A voice in Consort with Rebellions quire.
^uck.
"Though 'twould perplex your Highness to account
"How high the Audit of your virtues mount
"(Esteeeming more (as often I Have heard you say)
"Well to deserve, then for to wear the Bay:)
"Yet they which sue to Heavens high-bribeless hall
"Find not the Ramparts so impregnable,
"As not to yield unto the Battery
"Of the humble Crowd, with importunity:
"Yield mighty Prince! That we at length may see
"Our sweat wiped of b'a blissful Jubilee;
"Make (Sir) this day the leader of that year!
"We Will dress it in a golden character.
"Fancy but now how some old Anchorite, Simile.

(Whose Cat's his Comrade, and a mile outright
Is India, who does adore his Lar
Amongst smoke, and cobwebs, and his choicest fare
Cabadges, and Turnips) would stand to hear
His wondering self saluted Emperor;
So Richard feigned himself, seemed not to know,
Though Stafford paced, but as he would have him go. Richard

"I crave (my Lord) you would not disturb my ease
"(Since of the world I Have lately begged the peace)
"With motions like to these, and only tend
"To further quarrels which may yet depend.
"How has old time already mocked at them
"Whose doting humors seemed to court a name,
"Seeking Chimeraes, or a happiness
"Whose chiefest blessing is forgetfulness?
"Here vain Semiramis does cause my laughter,
"Who knocked the mountains till they gigg'd her feature
No-wiser Phaspho preached so long to birds
"(Teaching them well to lisp in humane words)
"That Crows, and Parrats after might adore
"Him as a God, that was an Ass before:
"Let Romes Caligula set up the figure
"Of's head upon the trunk of Inpiter,
("Whose pride to such a blasphemy was lead,
"To quarter with his God his brains and head)
"A higher peg yet did those Heroes strain
"Whose merits could triumphall arches gain,
"Columns of brass, or Porph'ry Canopies,
"Hanged all about with prowess, victories;
"Yet Obelisks shall not stand without a stilt,
"And Pyramids upon the ground are spilt,
"When all their stones shall into grave-stones turn,
"Who Is then a King, when all the world's an um
"What Is Honor, but a Beldams midnight theme,
"Or else some nodding nurses idle dream?
"Ratles for children, like their making pyes
"Of clay, and dirt, and laughed at by the wise.
"A shadow right, which while I seek to flee,
"See with what speed, see how it follows me!
"You make me blush to hear such worth in me,
"When men I know of rich ability,
"Who can more wisdom for the gleanings leave
"Then ye from my whole Vintage can receive.
"Choose some young sprightly Gallant, which may wet
"In blood his Laurels, stew them in his sweat,
"Whose life is lightning, 's word a thunderclap,
"That (though the ancient Giants kept the gap)
"His Trophies should break through; whose skin of steel
"Dares stand a leaden Shower, and not feel
"Dull sleep at night; whose high atcheivements may
"Make Fortune charge under his conqu'red pay.
"Alas, my withered arm, and wrinkled skin
"Speaks me not for Crowns, but for a Coffin,
"The worms already 'gin to cramp my feet,
"No robe's in season but a winding sheet:
"'It Is time for me to take me to my Cell,
"My Brother George Duke of Clarence Brothes to Edw. the 4 drowned in a But of
Malmsey by the secret contrivance of the Duke of Gloucester at was thought
Clarence Choast does seem to spell
"Strange Magic now unto my rowzed fears,
"The But (me thinks) does cry in Malmsey tears.
"I Will only hang to the earth by the slender root
"Of nature, that when death shall pluck my foot
"I may be sooner loosned; then I Will strive
"Some devout souls to get (that are alive,)
"(Whose word goes further the^ my bond in heaven)
"To put up prayers for me each day seav'n,
"So (these acquainted better there then I)
"Their votes shall do my soul a courtesy.
"My Liege! (speaks Buckingham) we have of late
"Felt many dangerous fevers in our State,
"And by most cunning Letches it is said
"We cannot do well, until we change our bed.
"The Banes 'twixt Englands scepter, and your hand
"Are now out asked; see how we thronging stand
"Now (with a mighty humme) to vouch it so,
"And drown with louder found your pow'rfulne,
Still did Third Richard (seemingly) deny
To take the Ensigns up of royalty;
Perhaps he might a little Maid-state use,
She feignes her coy, whose servant hotly woes:
Else (pedlar-like) refused to open his stall
Until the market's full; as best of all
To vent deceitful wares, when people buy
Not out-of Judgment, but for company.
Some herds of silly souls at last consent
To pay their suffrages, as a quit Rent
Due to the example of the greater Peers;
It Is an ill Tenure for to hold by the Ears:
They morgage Man, and are but Beasts at most,
That make over Reason unto Feoff's in Trust.
A few well-centred souls did keep their Tense,
Not wildly stagg'ring to the Circumference;
But ('twixt the fixed Poles of Faith, and Love)
They found the Axle-tree on which to move:
Some others (tossed with Storms of discontent)
Whose giddy brains turned round the Government,
(Whilst they dispute of the Scepter, Cross, and Ball)
Made their Alleg'ance merely Scepticall.
Thus (modest soul! full fore against his will)
They Gloucester so with arguments compel
To take the royal Purple: Brave design!
Hell, keep no pattern often for after Time!
To grant thy friends requests, 'twas Courtesy;
Promote the public good, 'twas Piety;
Here thy Ambition may sit crowned too,
Three strokes so wisely driven with one blow!
Thus touch one string of the Lyre, Simile.
and 'twill rebound
Through all the quire, and multiply the sound.
Now pulpits ring, (whence those shrill Trumpets are
That often alarm Consciences to war:)
A Sorbon Doctor fills a vial up
Of Stygian puddle, and commends the cup
To an Assembly, only met to hear
A Preacher, not the devils Barrister.
He names his Text (which when he first unlocks,
'Twas like the opening of Pandora's box)
That spurious slips should take but slender root: Sapien. ^

From whence this Doctrine quickly started up
(Wrapped in a hidden mystery of State)
Clarence, and Edward's illegitimate,
Got on the Duchess in Adultery,
'Twas the right door they past, but not they Key.
Then (more) he pleads against Edward's sons an Act
Of Bastardy, made by a Pre-contract
With Dame Elizabeth Lucy; who confessed
The King to her had so much love expressed
She bore away her belly full; beside
A firm engagement to be made his bride;
(The truth o'nt was, the over credulous Maid
Did take the earnest fore the Bargain made.)
Then he proceeds to Use, as much forlorn,
And unto Yorks old Duke applies the horn.
Was ever Text so mis'rably undone,
With Doctrine false, and Application?
Sure such Divinity first came from Hell;
Teach Truth to lie, and Law for to rebel?
Was it not strange Gloucester would sit to hear
These words, and not suspend the Minister?
How would you wonder then, if I should tell
He first contrived what the Priest should spell?
Ungracious son! which with so foul a shame
Blush not to brand thy Parents sacred name;
Although it is easy for to cure the wound,
Yet on their credits may a scar be found.
Reader! what yet the have seen, was but a Type
Of higher Phrensy, which even now is ripe.
Crookbuck well knows (in the Vessel of a Throan)
A wary Merchant will admit but one
Adventurer to share: and now the Port
Of Edward shrinks, to widen Richards Court;
Nay, some were sent, whose lesson was to con
The language of a Nod, and motion
Of either eye, the dialect of's Hands,
T'observe the Grammar of his Fingers ends:
This seemed to loosen so the Princes joints
That he scarce ever after tied his points,
As thinking with himself, expensive care
A falling house is needless to repair.
But one day he (as willing for to hear
Some news of the other world) whisp'red the ear
Of one of his Attendants, "You now see
"Us in a state beneath our quality;
"You know both who I am, and how that I
"In former times could bless a Courtesy
"With a warm beam of Favor: say, what Stars
"Are chief Ascendants now in these affairs?
"Tell us, how looks the Horizon? Is it clear?
"Speak, to what end my Uncle keeps us here?
"What boot would I now give (to ease my mind)
"Twixt a free Plowboy, and a Prince confined!
"Here Is naught to our inquiring eyes appears
"But the bare Sceleton of walls, and Bars.
"Is this the pleasure to be left a King!
"Have Crowns such thorns! do Scepters use to sting!
"This is a Prentice-Princedome; royalty
"Has scarce the name of specious slavery;
"Nay, yonder boys, (that I see playing by)
"Do seem to me to King it more then I.
"What have we done? who can relate the fact?
"We Are Princes born, that was our fathers act;
"And have there ever such a Law been seen
"That we should die for our Original sin?
"My Crown will never sit well without a sweat
"Upon his head, yet I Will bequeath him that,
"And feed upon his basket that does give
"Orphans a pension, and their wants relieve;
"We will to him for help our selves apply
"That feeds the hungry Ravens, when they cry:
"Our Birthrights take, the blessing leave unto us
"Of sweetest life, and do'nt of that undo us.
The Ravens flocking so to Richards Court,
Were thought by many wisemen to import
Some sudden funeral; which shall ensue
Ere Cynthia shuts her golden horns in Mue.
Where Is the lame Fire-God? Is the lease expired
Of his Sicilian forge, and ca'nt be hired
To lend us a swift Thunderbolt, in season
To crush the head of high-aspiring Treason,
Of such ill-boding Comets as do muffle
The world in flames, and Kingdoms in a scuffle?
His sword (which late at Pomfret brake the fast)
Feeds to a surfeit, having got a taste,
And (having eat of many a courser dish)
To close his Stomach he begins to wish
His two young Nephews, and for them does call
(As sweet meats) to be served in last of all
Warm blood's a Cordial, and he ca'nt digest
Until he takes a draught of this at last.
His ripe design has now act ain'd full age;
And taken forth out of its pupillage;
He only lacks a Tenant for to farm
The Princes blood; but amongst all the swarm
Of villanized men, not one's content
To take the Loase, and pay so high a rent;
Until Raviliac Tyrrell dared to seal
The damned Indentures, through a cursed zeal
For to be known Hells masterpiece to be,
The Devils None such for iniquity.
Richard does likewise for himself contract
To throw in so much gold shall poize the act.
I Have often heard, there is a time will call
That the best thrift when men are prodigal,
But he that ca'nt in Promises be rich
I Will swear him Bankrupt, in the backhouse ditch.
Hell has no wares to fell, but instantly
Earth yields a Chapman will as gladly buy.
(As loath to see) now the condoling Sun
(The horrid murder which was acted soon)
Had closed his eyelids in the crystal streams,
Losing his light, as if he wept his beams;
(Muffled in cloaks of clouds) he leaves the day
In widowhood, lest otherwise he may
Be Accessory thought unto the sin
Which the approaching night did usher in.
When Sleep (the Plowmans friend, and ease of Kings)
Had dropped a silence from her drowsy wings
Upon the restless motions of the day,
Which (with his leaden mace arrested) lay
With senses all entomb d; these Princely Boys,
Sporting a while with pretty harmless Toys,
As put-pin, draw-gloves, in his hair this ties
Fast Knots, whilst that looks Babies in his eyes,
At Handy Dandy, Hide-seek, Love me best,
Till sleep came in, and stole them both to rest.
Where (sweetly snugging) (like two tender vines)
They wreathed embraces into closest twines;
Love, waited on by all the choycest Graces,
Seemed to fly round about their Angel-faces,
They strictly met with so espoused a lip
As if they seemed each others soul to sip.
A sight like this might ravish cruelty,
And melt the heart of Tygres into pity.
Tyrrell (the stain of all that ever wore
The name of Christian) comes to the Tower,
Let me not scare thee Reader, whilst I bend
My pencill (briefly) to describe the fiend.
A wreath of Snakes (in stead of hair) did crawl
About his head, and down his shoulders fall;
A Basilisk did look through either eye,
(...) face annealed by the flames that fly
from Hells sulphrious womb; about his neck
^ chain of Curses hang, and at his back
^aiteth Repentance (ready to depart)
With tear-swoln eyes, and Vultures at her heart:
^n his hands he holds a Commission
Written in blood by the Prince of Acheron,
and to his side a Faulch'on girded have
Was seven ties dipped in the Stygian wave;
Upon his girdle he a Bottell wears
Once filled with widows, and poor Orphans tears,
But with the coldness of his heart alone
^s there congealed into a marble stone.
His soul is called in the Leopards spotted pelt,
His bowels Iron, and unapt to melt;
Terror, and Shame does lead him by the hand.
He does of the Lieutenant straight demand
The Keys; old Sir Robert Brakenbury Lieutenant of the Tower
Brakenbury must
Be for a night coustrain'd to quit his Trust.
His soul (proving too chaste for such a suit)
Disdained to be the Devils prostitute,
But (when the Tyrant wooed him) made defense,
And still took Sanctuary at Conscience,
Wished him to try the mettle of his hand
Upon the Touchstone of some brave command,
Saying that man deserves not to be seen
A Traitor, only fears to act a sin.
Tyrrell (all whose desire was to see
Two more such Villains in the world as He)
Dighton, and Forest finds (whose names condemn
Them to the deserts from the sight of men:)
These Three (Hell could not out of all her store
(Were but their pattern lost show three such more)
Ent'red the Chamber where the Princes slept,
And with blood-dropping feet these Ruff'ans stepped
Unto the Bed, (the guilty Tapers wink,
The sweating Floor does underneath them sink)
But stricken with the rays reflections,
That lightened from such sweet complexions,
These Marbles moistened, tears in Ambush lay
So close as if conspiring to betray
Their hearts to Pity: but (lest any sense
Might open a door to let in Conscience)
They strengthened so their guards that never a part
Could be surprised by relenting smart.
Throwing themselves upon the youths, they press
Their tender limbs, quick-strugling for redress,
Stuffing their throats with pillowes, so to choke
Their woeful cries, whose accent might provoke
An iron Soul to melt, whose very sight
Might strain a tear from Get, or Troglodite. Simile.

But as a Rock in the Ocean stands (unmoved)
Against Heavens Thunder, and the raging flood
Beneath: no more these salvage Lestrigons,
Constrained to pity with their cries, or groans,
Would ought desist, until their souls were fled,
Leaving the dead-stiffe limbs upon the bed.
Their bodies found a homely Sepulcher,
Which at the Stayers foot they did interre,
Under a heap of Stone, which well we may
Call Genesis 31.47. A heap of witness.
Iegar Sahadutha unto this day
Thus were the Princes (like the two twin-starres
Which gilded with their rays our British spheres)
By the untimely hand of ruthlesse Fate
Massacred even at the Temple gate
Of Honor, whose succeeding ages sum
Might bud with Trophies, and with wonders bloom
Simile.
Like as we see a hopeful Provis-Rose
(Which for to dress some pleasant garden growe^)
Of the same Scarlet make a Tomb at night,
Which was a Cradle in the morning light.
There is one Knot yet in the History
The Reader may expect I should untie;
Whether Buckingham were at all allied
To this Heav'n-scaling, horrid Regicide:
But since my Muse has taken him in her Round,
And some disloyal Pranks already found,
(Giving no good account of his Commission)
She justly may attach him on suspicion.
Some rare Apelles here my pencill take,
(If such a Piece be possible to make)
And shadow out the griefe-slain Pourtraiture
Of Edwards Queen, when she this news did hear:
Since no such art inspires my Muses breast,
I Will draw the Curtain, which shall hide the rest.
FINIS.

