Jus Regium Coronae: OR, The KING's Supreme Power in Dispensing with Penal
Statutes: More particularly as it relates to the two Test-Acts of the Twenty
Fifth, and Thirtieth of His Late Majesty, King Charles the Second, Argued by
Reason, And Confirmed by the Common, and Statute Laws of this Kingdom.

In Two Parts.

Auctore Jo. Wilsonio. J.C.

Sir Edw. Coke, 1 Inst. 64. Imperij Majestas, Tutelae Salus.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are sold at his Printinghouse on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1688.

TO THE HONORABLE SOCIETY OF Lincoln's Inn.
IT is my Honor (Gentlemen) that I served a double Apprentiship within your
Walls; and however I have for many years discontinu'd, it is not possible, that
any Man bred in a Society of so much Learning and Air, should have altogether
forgotten, what he once imbibed.

The Loyalty of your House, (excepting some single Person here and there) was
in the worst of times exemplary; Nor were Ye last, in bringing the King back
again to His: And because the Dispensing Power best secures Him in it, and the
Kingdom under it, unto whom more justly could I make a Proof of it, than to
that Honorable Body, from whom I received it?

Such (Gentlemen) is the Discourse I herewith present Ye; and in that, being
now, no longer mine, but Yours, as none are more able, be also as pleased to
defend it: Or so kind (at least) to say this of Your old Acquaintance: That he
spoke his Thoughts; That he believed them true; And on that account, would not
willingly quit them, till he be better informed.

Gentlemen, Your most Humble Servant, John Wilson.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
SECTION. I. I. THat the rigor of Penal Laws were insupportable, without some
Supreme Power, above those Laws, to temper that rigor, and dispense with them,
as they become inconvenient. -- Especially, when all Human Actions are subject
to Corruption, and what might fit one time, may be the bane of another.
Examples of it, in the Lacedemonian Ephori. -- The Roman Decemviri. --
Dictator. -- Triumvirat. SECT. II. II. THat this Power cannot lie in any Select
part of the People, or in the whole: Therefore, it must be in the Sovereign
Prince, or Absolute Monarch: And such, the Kings of England have ever been, and
now, are. -- Examples of it, before, and since the Conquest. -- Further proved
from Common Law, and Statute Law. -- The King is sole Legislator; and
Interpreter of those Laws. -- That it appears not to have been ever the intent
of God, that the People should have any share in the Government, but rather the
contrary. That the Supreme Power was not derived from the People; or given in
Trust, by them; but radically in the Prince, as reserved to Him, from the first
Origin of Power, and before any positive, or written Law; at what time, Men
were governed by a Natural Equity. SECT. III. III. THat without this Supreme
Power, the King were in a worse condition than the Subject. 1. Any Restriction
on the means of Livelihood of a Subject is void. A Fortiore on any necessary
part of the Government. 2. A Subject, on some Accidents may break a Law, yet
not offend the Law. A fortiore the King, when the Kingdom is in danger, of
which Himself is the sole Judge, whither actual, or expectant. 3. A Subject,
shall justify a particular wrong, for a public Good. A fortiore the King, for
a common Benefit: 4. Where the Subject is enabled to the greater, he is of
consequence enabled to the less. A fortiore the King -- He may pardon the
highest Offenses; much more prevent any lesser matter, from becoming an Offense.
SECT. IV. IV. THat no Government can be entire, that is defective, in any
necessary part: And therefore all Governments, besides the power of the Sword,
have ever pretended to this Supreme Power as a Sine quo non. -- Both Powers
discust. -- That even our most prudently designed Constitutions, have turned to
hurt; proved, from a Series of our own Histories. -- That every of the late
Usurped Powers (as we call'em) frequently made use of this Supreme Power of
Dispensing, etc. -- An Answer to that common Objection, That the King is sworn.
SECT. V. V. THe Case of the Test, 25 Car. 2d. stated, and that His Majesty's
granting Commissions, to certain Persons, not qualified according to the said
Act; and yet retaining them in His Service, is warrantable by the Law of
Reason, and the Laws of the Land. -- By the Law of Reason. 1. Whither we take
the Argument, Ab Honesto, Ab utili, or a Tuto. 2. The King is bound to defend,
according to the best of His skill: Who shall be Judge of that skill, Himself,
or the People? 3. What damage to the whole, that the King makes use of some
part, without excluding the rest? Or if it were a damage, it is but Damnum sine
injuria. -- By the Laws of the Land. 1. As the King is bound to defend, the
Subject is bound to obey: And this Service of the Subject, is due to the King
by the Law of Nature, which cannot be taken away, no, not by Act of Parliament.
2. A further proof, That the King is sole Judge of the danger of the Kingdom,
and how, and when it is to be prevented, etc. 3. The Law requires nothing to be
done, but it permits the way, and means of doing it; else, it were Imperfect,
Lame, and Unjust. -- The King is to defend, shall He not choose His Soldiers?
4. A mixed Argument of Law, and Reason, from the time when the King granted
those Commissions. -- The Test examined: When made -- By whom carried on -- To
what end. -- There was Bellum flagrans at the time when those Commissions were
given out. -- And that His Majesty's yet retaining those Officers, falls under
the same Reason, and Law.

SECT. VI. VI. THat the Statute has created a disability in the Person, and
other Objections answered. 1. Object. Grounded on the Disabilities created by
the respective Statutes of 31 El. c. 6. against Simony. -- The Vendee of an
Office, contrary to the 5 Ed. 6. c. 16. -- And the not taking the Oath of
Supremacy, according to the 5 El. c. 1. severally answered, and proved, not to
be under the same Reason. 2. Object. That the King had other hands -- A Loyal
City. -- A trusty Militia. Answ. But is the King bound to make use of them in
extraordinary Cases? -- The King is Solus Rex, and semper Rex. -- He may charge
the Subject, etc. -- And Ordain, without Parliament, with Instances of both. 3.
Object. Grounded on the vacating the Judgment for the King, in the Case of
Ship-Mony, by the House of Lords in Parliament 1640. Answered, And the King
vindicated; by truly stating the Case, between His Majesty and that Parliament.
-- Their evil treating Him, before the Commons Murdered Him. -- That He was
Virtually, though not Formally, under a Force -- And that, Authority without
Power, is merely imaginary.
SECT. VII. VII. THe Sum of the whole further asserted, and confirmed from
several Statutes, and other Authorities of the Common Law. 1. That there are
several things so incident in Power, to the King, that it is not in the power
of a Parliament to take them away. 2. That both Kings, and Parliaments, have
been ever tender, of having them encroacht on, as may appear by the Savings, in
several Acts of Parliament. 3 That the power of Dispensing, or granting Non
Obstantes, to Penal Statutes, is one of those Incidents, and that, inseparable.
4. That Statutes derogatory to the Prerogative, have some of them, been held
for void; others, revoked by the King solely. 5. Examples of Personal
Disabilities, some Created by Parliament; others, by Ecclesiastical Canons,
dispenst with by the King; others, void in themselves. 6. The King cannot
divest Himself, or restrain His Successor, of any regal Right, that is
Essentially, in the Crown.

Jus Regium Coronae, etc.
The First Part.
In which (among other things) the Statute 25 Car. 2. is discussed: and proved,
that the King may dispense with it.
I Have taken upon me an Argument, the King's Supreme Power in Dispensing with
Penal Laws, etc. Wherein nevertheless (If all Knowledge be but Remembrance, and
the mind of Man knows all things, and only demands to have her own Notions
excited, and awaked) I hold my self the more excusable, in as much as I broach
no new Opinion, but only call to remembrance what unbias'd Men know well
enough, if they would but recollect; and therefore without further Apology, I
shall keep my self to the Method I proposed in the Contents, and begin with the
first.

SECT. I. That the rigor of Penal Laws were insupportable, without some Supreme
Power above those Laws, to temper that rigor, and dispense with them, as they
shall become inconvenient, etc.
HAd the World continued, as when God said of it, And behold all things were
very good! Or at least in the condition, of which the Apostle speaks, who
having no Law, were a Law to themselves, there had been no use of Laws; Mankind
had followed the dictates of Nature, and done to every one as they would have
been done to themselves: But when that great Impress began to be obliterated,
and Man took no other measures, than what his own Will, or private Interest
(how repugnant soever to the welfare of the whole) prompted, Princes (the
common Fathers of their Countries) as well to obviate the Distemper, as to keep
peace among their Children, first bethought them of Laws, and gave them; That
such as would not do what they ought to do, for the love of Virtue, might yet
be deterred from doing what they ought not to do, for fear of the Punishment.

These Laws therefore (like ancient Statues) were drawn bigger than the Life,
that they might be seen at distance, and perform the Office of a Pharos, in
giving notice of a dangerous Shore: Esto, and Sunto, was their best Language,
and that too under the greatest severity, and largest comprehension, that no
one might presume to think himself exempted. And now, since it is not in Man
that he be impeccable, but that even the most cautious, some time or other fall
foul of those Laws, and much more they, that never heed their steps, What would
become of every Man, if the rigor of Law should be let loose upon him?
Whosoever but stumbles on it, is in danger of brusing, and on whom soever it
falls, it crusheth him to pieces: In short, The wringing of the Nose causes
Blood (says Augur) and if every man's actions shall be stretched, as far as
they may be strein'd, who knows what bloody construction may be made of them?
To go no further than our own Penal Statutes, some obsolete, others by process
of time become apparently impossible, or inconvenient to be performed; What
work have they in former times, made among the People? Have they not been such
Thorns in their sides, or rather Snares, to vex and entangle them, that Pluet
super eos laqueos, might but too truly be said of them? And is any man so
secure at present, that he is sure, there is nothing can reach him? Has he so
washed his Hands in Innocence, that he but thinks, he could say, In nullo
erratum est? I am apt to believe all men have offended more or less, and
consequently, cannot be without some apprehensions of danger: Even Oxen boggle
at a Slaughterhouse; And Man, of all creatures is most uneasy with a Sword
over his Head: How necessary then is it, that there be some Supreme Power above
those Laws, to temper their Rigor, and dispense with them, as they shall become
inconvenient: where, by dispensing, I mean the Relaxation of a Law, whereby
that is permitted to be done, which otherwise, the Law had prohibited.

Nor would I be so taken, as if I carried the least Eye, against any Law that
concerns Property; No; I confine my self to such Laws as respect Government,
and which by reason of unforeseen accidents that may happen, or the necessity
of State that require it, are in their own nature dispensible, for as much as
(Acts of Parliament being but Leges temporis, and made for the present
occasion) it may so happen, that what was meant for the preservation of the
Government, may by a Vicissitude of time turn to the destruction of it. The
clearest Waters will gather a Sediment, and the freshest Streams run down into
the Salt Sea of corruption; And therefore if Princes shall not by Industry and
Policy, keep head against the inclination of Time, all Institutions be they
never so pure, will corrupt, and degenerate.

The Lacedemonian Ephori, were at first, so many Assistants to their Kings, but
what by the corruption of Time, and Manners, and the want of a Cheque on them,
overtop'd the Monarchy.

In like manner the Decemviri of Rome, primarily intended for the better
administration of Justice, in making a supply, to such Laws as they wanted, and
rectifying, and amending such as were faulty; proved a Remedy, worse than the
Disease, and ended in Tyranny.

Add to this, That their so often successful Officer of Dictator, or Populi
Magister, (for there lay no Appeal from him to the People) was never chosen for
above six Months at one time; nor then either, but upon some imminent danger,
and to avoid the confusion of several Commands; Yet that so cautelously
designed preservative of their Liberty, became at last, its destruction, in
Julius.

And lastly, The Triumvirat of Augustus, Antonius, and Lepidus, promised fair,
for settling the Commonwealth, but proscribed it into Confusion. So Morally
impossible it is, that any condition, or State of Men, or Constitutions of
their making, be the same in all Times, or suit with all occasions; and
therefore, Remedies ought to be provided, as fast as Time breeds mischief. The
first Man being in Perfection, abided not; and what may be expected of his
Posterity, all Ages have found; Damnosa quid non imminuit dies?
Aetas parentum pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem Vitiosiorem.


Of absolute necessity then it seems, That there be some Supreme Power to
rectify the mischiefs of Time and Chance, and by rectifying the rigor of
Temporary Laws, or dispensing with their inconvenience, render them, and their
burden the easier; And where this Power lies, shall be the Subject of the next
Section.

SECT. II. That this Power cannot lie in any Select part of the People, or in
the whole: Therefore, it must be in every Sovereign Prince, or Absolute
Monarch; And such the Kings of England ever have been, and now are, etc.
IN any Select part of the People it cannot lie, because no part can be
greater, or have more Power than the whole; and in the whole, it cannot, for
they are subject to the Law themselves, as more particularly made, to curb
their Exorbitancies, and keep that so much talked of Liberty, from running into
Licentiousness: It remains then, that it lie in the Prince, i.e. A Sovereign
Prince, or Absolute Monarch, who if he offend against those Laws, is
unaccountable to them, Bract. l. 1. c. 8, 1. Inst. 1. b.
as having no Superior in his Dominions but God: And if this yet requires a
further Explanation, To have Merum Imperium, an entire Empire, Sir J. Davys. 61.
and all the Liberties of an Empire in His Kingdom, is to be an Absolute
Monarch: But such the Kings of England ever had, and now have: Therefore the
Kings of England are Absolute Monarchs.

Such was Edgar, Anno Dom. 964. 4 Inst. 359.
who wrote himself Anglorum Imperator, and Dominus; and called his Kingdom, an
Empire. -- In the Laws of Edward the Confessor, Leg. Ed. c 17.
the King is styled, Vicarius Dei in regno suo. -- The 16 R. 2. cap. 5.
declares, The Crown of England has been free in all Times, and in no Earthly
Subjection, but immediately to God. -- Edward IV. is called Supremus Dominus
noster Rex, etc. Which excludes all coordinate Authority. -- The 24 H. 8. cap.
12. further declares, That by sundry old Antique Histories, and Chronicles, it
is declared, and expressed, That this Realm of England, is an Empire, and has
been so accepted in the World. -- And the 28. of the same King, cap. 2. That
the Kings of England, are Lawful Kings, and Emperors of England, and Ireland:
which are no introductive, but declaratory Statutes; For they say not, what the
King, and his Kingdom shall be, but affirm, what they anciently have been, and
now are. -- Lastly, The 25 H. 8. c. 21. -- The 1 El. c. 1. -- and 1 Jac. 1. c.
1. agree in the same, and That the Crown of this Kingdom is an Imperial Crown.
-- In short, all Offenses are said to be against the Peace of our Sovereign
Lord the King, His Crown, and Dignity: And High Treason, contra Ligeanciae
debitum. -- The Laws of England are called the King's Laws. -- The Parliament,
His Parliament; 22 E. 3.3.
and therein also, the King is sole Judge, the rest but Advisers. -- The Power
of Calling, Proroguing, and Dissolving them, is the King's. -- Their ancient
way of Address, was by Petition to Him. -- And the later Oaths of Supremacy,
and Allegiance, acknowledge the King, The Supreme Authority in the Kingdom; And
if this be not to be an Absolute Monarch, what is? It is enough to me, that I
have shown the Apex potestatis, and where ever that lies, there lies the
Government, and puts it out of question, whether this Supreme Power lie in the
King, or the People.

But to proceed; I said before, it could not lie in the People, and (I
conceive) made it out, that it must be in the King; however, to make it yet
more clear, we'll put both on the Balance, and let most weight carry it.

The People, take them in Sensu Composito, and what are they but an unwieldy
Lump of every thing, and nothing? And in Sensu diviso, a kind of Sheep without
a Shepherd; Every one of them, has a frisk by himself: One is for this Law,
another for that, a third against both, a fourth against all, and so to the
last, as the Worm bites; Quot homines tot Sententiae, ever was, and ever will
be: whereas the King, besides that he has but one mind, and that, directed to
the good of the Community, the Law presumes, He can do no wrong, as being best
able to judge of those Laws, of which Himself, is both Maker, and Interpreter:
Both Houses may Vote, and Resolve as they please; In the Royal Sanction only,
lies the Legislation, and that Vis plastica, that gives the Embrion Life, and
quickens it into Laws: The King makes Laws, with the Consent of the Lords, and
Commons, not the Lords and Commons, with the Consent of the King; which shows,
that the Legislative Power is solely in the King; For the Approbation, or
Publishing of Laws in a Senate, proves not, Bodin. de Repub. Lib. 1. cap. 8.
the Majesty of the State, to be in the Senate: And being so, it necessarily
follows, that He be also the Interpreter: And so Bracton, Ejus est
Interpretari, cujus est condere: And to the same purpose Dyer: Where the words
of the Law are ambiguous, Dyer. f. 37
We must submit to the Declaration of the Lawgiver The King, who by the Advice
of His Learned Counsel, may (without calling a Parliament) expound the Law,
where it is doubtful, as his Predecessors have done in like Cases. -- And Sir
Edward Coke gives the Reason, 1 Inst. f. 73 and 99.
when he says, The King is, Caput Reipublicae and Legis. -- And in another
place; 2 Inst. f. 268
presumed to carry all the Laws (In scrinio pectoris sui) in his own Breast:
And what he means by those Expressions, unless it be, That as the Laws are the
Kings Laws, His also is the Interpretation of them, and the Supreme Power of
Dispensing with them, a wiser Man than my self may be to learn; which, from a
Person (especially in his later days) no Friend to Prerogative, I lay the more
weight on, in as much as one Affirmative of his, cannot but carry more force
with every sober Man, than all those Negatives, he has so often jumbled against
it.

Add to this, The People have nothing, but what they receved themselves; Or if
ever they had, they would do well to show it (for Possession, though by
Disseisin, is good against all men, but him that has the Right) or otherwise,
they cannot be said to have given any Regality, which was never in them: For,
as all Government was Originally from God, it seems also, that it was never his
intention that the People should have any share in it. When there were but two
Persons, as at first, God placed the Government in one, and said to the Woman,
^en. 3.16.
Thou shall be under the power of the Man, and he shall rule over thee. -- And
to prevent Confusion amongst their Posterity, established a Successive
Monarchy, in his Speech to Cain (though a Bad, and his Brother Abel a Righteous
Person) and that only by the right of Primogeniture; ^^d. 4.7.
His desire shall be to thee, and thou shall rule over him. -- And from thence
it Succeeded in Jacob's Family, for almost 2000 years: ^^d. 49.3.
Reuben, Thou art my Firstborn, the Excellence of Dignity and Power; ((...))
Honor and Authority, i.e. the Supremacy of both; Or as the Vulgar Latin, Prior
in donis, Major in Imperio: And when he, with Simeon and Levi, were for several
Crimes disinherited by their Father, and the Primogeniture fallen to Judah, to
him it is said, Thy Brethren shall Honor thee, Thy Father's Children shall bow
down to thee: And ( ver. 10.) the Scepter entailed to him.

Thus far in the World, and the People had no Sovereignty in them, and if they
cannot show when or how they got it since, it remains, that it lie radically in
the Prince, as innate, and inherent in his Person, and not derived from the
People, or given in Trust by them, but reserved, from the first Origin of Power.

Nor need I run from Home, to prove it such among our selves: For whence is it,
that all Lands are mediately, or immediately held of the King, 1 Inst. f. 1. f.
65. f. 85.
as Lord Paramount; but that they came first from the Crown? 12 H. 7.17.
Or that at the beginning all Administration of Justice was in one Hand, i.e.
the Crown? But that it was innate in it: 7 Coke 13.
All Dominion was derived from it, and what has not been granted from it,
remains in it. There were Kings, Ibid. 12 H. 7.
before any Positive or written Laws, and Men were then Governed, by a Natural
Equity: And what more consonant to it, than that a Sovereign Prince should not
be defective in any thing requisite to the support of that Sovereignty? When
without it, He were but as a common Person: Nay, how truly might it be said (in
another sense) Ecce homo factus est sicut unus e nobis! Yet such must the King
be, if he cannot temper the rigor, or dispense with the inconvenience of a
Penal Statute: And there being a natural Equity also, that some such Supreme
Power be, for the common convenience of all Men, which, for as much as it
cannot lie in the People, it follows, that it be in the King, as innate in Him,
and a Branch of His Prerogative, which was, before Laws were, and is now become
a part of the Law of the Realm: 2 Inst. 496. Stan. pl. c. 162. Cow. Tit. Prerog.
And this, Cowel defines to be, That especial Power, Pre-eminence, or
Privelege, that the King has in any kind, over and above other persons, and
above the Ordinary Course of the Common Law, in the Right of His Crown: Nor
without Reason, Lib. 2. f. 55.
for (as Bracton) Dominus Rex est supra omnes qui ad Coronam pertinent: And in
another place, Rex non habet parem in regno: Lib. 4. S 1. bid. S. 5.
And again, Nec Superiorem nisi Deum: Our Lord the King (says he) is above all
His Subjects: E. 3.19.
He has no Equal in his Realm; Nor Superior but God.

Now if Acts of Mercy, and Goodness draw nighest God, how necessary is it that
were they lost every where else, they should be found in a King? A chescun Roy
(says the Book) apent per reason de son Office, E. 3. f. 2.9.
a fair Justice, and Grace: It belongs to every King by reason of his Office,
to do Justice, and show Mercy. And what is Mercy, but a rebating the edge of
the Law? -- Quibus tamen and qualiter miserendum est, ^ract. l. 2.
doceant eum merita, vel immerita personarum. But unto whom, and to what degree
he shall be merciful, let the good or ill desert of the Persons direct him:
Which fully proves, that the King is sole Judge of this Mercy. When the King
Pardons, He makes a total Remission of the Offense, but when He Dispenses, He
only prevents a matter (not otherwise evil, but as prohibited) from becoming an
Offense. A Branch of an Act, 11 R. 2. c. 3. That no one against whom any
Judgment, Inst. 42.
or Forfeiture was given, should sue for Pardon or Grace, was made void. -- And
it was an Article against Cardinal Woolsey, Ibid. 93. Art. 37.
That he had forbidden to sue for the Kings Favor, or Pardon: which (amongst
other things) is there said, to be contrary to the King's High Honor,
Prerogative, Crown, Estate, and Dignity Regal: Nor without Reason; for as a
King's being tender of his People, is not the least part of His Glory; so the
intercepting those Beams, gathers a Cloud between Him, and His People, and in a
manner robs Him of the advantage of being kind to Himself.

To close this; I have proved it of absolute Necessity for the common
convenience of all Men, that there be some Supreme Power, to temper the rigor
of Temporary Laws, and dispense with their inconvenience; And as fully proved,
where this Power lies. -- That the Kings of England have anciently been, and
now are, Absolute Monarchs: That the King's Prerogative is a part of the Law of
the Land: -- And that to Him only belongs Mercy, as well as Justice. In the
next place we'll consider it more particularly, as it relates to the King's
Power of Dispensing.

SECT. III. That without this Supreme Power the King were in a worse Condition
than the Subject, etc.
THe Word King, 4 Inst. 352.
is Nomen Politicum, and imports that Politic Capacity, which never dies, but
extends to all his Successors, as well Kings, as Queens of England; Now if this
Supreme Power (as before, and shall be further shown in its proper place) be
Innate, and Inherent in the Person of the King, and not derived from the
People, the same Reason that has in all times supported the Liberty of the
Subject, makes stronger for this Power, without which, that Liberty had never
been, at best, indesensible: For neither can any Man grant, what he has not,
nor defend, without the means of doing it: The Subject has received; But how?
Ex Gratia: And can Favor be said to destroy an ancient Right, which runs in
Succession? Trees, and Plants, give us Fruit, and Flowers, but the productive
Virtue, still remains in the Root: The Liberty of the Subject, is a precious
thing; But to talk of Liberty, yet deny the Prae-existence of a Prerogative,
which first gave, and has ever since supported that Liberty, what were it but
to reimagin, That House on the Sand? The same Causes, must, and will, have the
same Effects.

Nor is this all; The King has common justice on his side: Cap. 29.
No Freeman (says Magna Charta) shall be Disseiss'd of his Freehold, or
Liberties; Which Sir Edward Coke thus glosses: Liberty (says he) is that
Freedom which Subjects have: And if any Statute be made contrary to Magna
Charta, it shall be holden for none. I leave this last, to the Learned; But if
a Subject shall not be Disseiss'd of his Liberties, and the King alone, be
restrained in His Prerogative, what also were it, but to put Him in a worse
Condition than the Subject? To examine this, but de similibus, ad similia, were
Argument enough, but when the heavy Scale, turns all for the King, 't were the
height of Injustice, to deny Him His Weight. For instance,

1. Any restriction upon a Subject, 2 H. 5.5.
from the Lawful Exercise of his Trade, is void; though the Party himself, gave
a Bond not to Exercise it. Gravesend Barge Case. 10 Jac. C. Ban.
-- Or that the Restriction, be but Temporary. -- Or Exclude any one, and leave
it not Free to all. -- Nay further, 21 E. 4.79. 11 Cok. 53. and 85.
a Man shall not be Distrein'd (though for a just Duty) by any Instrument
necessary to his Trade; As the Anvil, from a Smith. 14 H. 8. 2 Inst. 565. Deuteronomy.
24.6.
-- Books from a Scholar. -- The Millstone from a Millar; as accordant to the
Law of God; For it is a taking his Life to pledge, in taking away his Lawful
means of livelihood: And this Mr. Latch calls A Fundamental Law, Post Office
Case.
and the contrary, A breach of the innate Liberty of a Freeborn People. And
shall a Subject claim an innate Liberty, and it be yet doubted of the Kings
innate Prerogative, which the Law calls Libertas Regia: Bract. l. 1.
-- Privilegium Regis: Britt. f. 27. Reg. f. 61.
-- Droit le Roy: -- Jus Regium Coronae; And of which he is no more
Deprivaable, than of his Crown, or Life? Has God Entrusted the King with the
Good of the Community, and shall he be retrenched in the common Exercise of it?
The Men of this Age might be too wise for Paradoxes; a King without Power, is
the same, as a King without Subjects.

2. A Subject may (upon some accidents) break a Law, yet not offend the Law; as
in case of Necessity, or for the avoiding a greater inconvenience, Plowd.
18.19. 2 Inst. 168.
etc. Such, and the like, being exempted by the Law of Reason, when the words
of the Law, are expressly against it: On which ground, though the killing a Man be
Felony, 3 Inst. 56.
yet for the inevitable necessity of saving his own life a man may kill
another: 5 Coke 91.
-- Or a Thief, attempting to Rob him on the Road: -- Or in his Dwelling House:
-- Or breaking it by Night; and no Felony. 9 Coke 68.
-- In like manner an Officer, if a Felon resist, or fly from him, so that he
cannot otherwise Arrest him, 15 H. 7.2.
may kill him: -- And the breaking of Prison, is Felony; but not if the Prison
be on Fire. And now if Laws, may in case of a private Man, be suspended by
necessity, how much more, when the Kingdom is in danger, of which the Law,
makes the King sole Judge, Vid. Their Arguments by themselves, in Quarto.
whither actual, or expectant? As was resolved by all the Judges (even Hutton
and Crook concurring in that Point) in the Case of Ship-Mony.

3. A Subject shall justify a particular Wrong, for a Public Good: And rather
than the Commonwealth shall suffer, the Law will turn some prejudice to
particular Persons. Every Man's House is his Castle, Dyer. 34.
yet a Sheriff (if refused entrance) may break it to apprehend a Felon: --
Trespass, is an offense against the Property of another, and always presumed,
to be done Vi and armis; yet justifiable for a common benefit; as to make
Bulwarks in another man's Ground, Dyer. 60. 3 Inst. 84.
or dig Saltpeter in his Outhouses, for the defense of the Kingdom: 11 Coke
82. Dyer 36. 8 E. 4.18. 21 E. 4.28.
-- To pull down Houses in a public Fire: -- To turn the Plow, on the Head-land
of another, in favor of Husbandry: -- And dry Nets on his Land, for the
maintenance of Fishing; and all this, because private prejudice, is repaird by
public Utility. -- Nay Mr. Prynn, justifies his Lords, Power of Parliament.
Part. 4. p. 22.
and Commons, for laying Taxes on the People, for the public Good, though in
truth, it was but to support a Rebellion. And shall the King that has the
largest Stake in this public Good, want so necessary a part of the Government,
as not to be able to dispense with an inconvenient Statute, especially, when
the not doing it may endanger that Good, which is the end of all Laws? If a
Subject may justify (as before) a fortiore may the King, in the present Case:
For, all positive Laws, being subordinate to the safety of the People, against
which, even the Law of Property carries no force, it is but just, and
reasonable, that they give place to the Law of Nature, for common Defense.

4. Where the Subject is enabled to the Greater, he is of consequence enabled
to the Lesser. 8 Coke 70.
A Man has power to make Leases, provided they exceed not three Lives, or
twenty one years: he may Lease for Ninety nine years; if three Lives live so
long; for it is a lesser Estate: a fortiore, where the King is enabled to the
Greater, shall He not also be enabled to the Lesser? He can Pardon, what
hinders but he may prevent? Witchcraft, and Heresy, are Offenses against the
first Table, yet the King may Pardon both: how much more then, Dispense with
any thing, no Offense against the second Table? Nor shall I believe but the
Commons of that Parliament that brought in this, and the later Test, were of
Opinion, that His Majesty might dispense with them, till I am better enform'd,
what was the meaning of that Address of theirs to the King, Jan. 20. 1680.
wherein they say, It was their Opinion, That the Prosecuting Protestant
Dissenters, upon Penal Laws, is at this time, grievous to the Subject, and
dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom: And what meant they be not Prosecuting,
but that they might, nay ought, to be dispensed with? 'Twas their Opinion in
one Case, it is the King's in another; And shall not the Lord be (at least) as
his Servant? But to go on with the Argument.

High Treason is the most heinous of all others (Crimen laesae Majestatis) and
yet the King may Pardon it, 3 Inst. 211.
or any part of the Execution; or all, saving part. -- The Sentence for Felony
is Hanging; yet the King may alter it to Beheading: As the Lord H. 32 H. 8 --
Edward Duke of S. 5 E. 6. -- The Earl of C. 7 Car. 1. and others Attainted of
Felony, yet Beheaded. -- The Judgment against a Woman for Treason, is Burning;
yet the Countess of S. -- Anne of B. and others in H. VIII's time. -- And the
Lady J. G. 1 Mary, Attainted of High Treason, were Beheaded.

And is not the Body more than Raiment? Shall the King have the Power of Life
and Death, and yet be restrained in a matter of indifferency? Shall every Man
be Lord and Judge in his own Family, and the King alone be curbed in His, the
Kingdom? Shall he always see with other men's Eyes, hear by other men's Ears, and
He that is to set Copy's to others, have His hand held, for fear of blotting?
Let them that are of that Opinion, make it their own Case: If preservation is
to be preferred before Benefit, it necessarily follows, That there be some
Ultimate Judge of the Means.

SECT. IV. That no Government can be entire, that is defective in any necessary
part; and therefore all Governments, besides the Power of the Sword, have ever
pretended to this Supreme Power, as a sine qua non, etc.
BY an entire Government, I intend such a Government as carries in its self all
things necessary for the Defense of its self, and all its parts; without which,
it were defective, and consequently, as no Government, because it could neither
encounter dangers from Abroad, nor obviate, unexpected Emergencies at Home: Now
if the power of judging the means of doing this, be of absolute necessity to
all Governments, and that it will be hard to find any Age so innocent, wherein
some Law or other, has not been brought in (not to say obtruded) by Interest,
or Faction, it seems of as absolute necessity, that every Government carry also
in its self, The power of dispensing with Laws, which, however at their first
making, might be proper enough, yet upon other Reason of Affairs, may prove
inconvenient, or be thought, may become so, and therefore fit to be dispensed
with: For Prevention is as necessary as Defense, and wise Men meet Dangers half
way; and the not doing it (what Demosthenes told his Athenians) like
Country-Fellows at Cudgels, that never ward a Blow till struck.

To examine it a little: That there can be no Society without Government, needs
no proof; and that there can be no Government that answers not the end of
Government, which is Common Safety, needs as little; for without it, what were
Peace, but a mere Notion? A kind of Truce, or Cessation, no laying down of
Arms. To support this therefore, all Governments have not only pretended to the
Power of the Sword, but as a Consequent of that, to this other of Dispensing. I
shall but touch the former, because I take it for granted, as an inseparable
incident to the Sovereign Power; for the Power of the Sword, being for the
Defense, and Protection of the People, is subservient to the Government, and
must needs belong to him, with whom God has entrusted the Government, as a
necessary requisite, without which, He cannot perform that Trust: For what were
it but a thing in Name, if it had nothing to work on, or how could it subsist,
without a Command over the People? Or be more called Government, than a
Cripple, or a Paralitique, an entire Man; inasmuch as the one, wants his Limbs,
the other, the use of them? And what shall we talk of a power of Commanding,
without a power of exacting Obedience to those Commands? All Government were
precarious without it, and men would Obey, but as themselves listed. Nor is it
more possible there could be Order without it; and where that is wanting, there
must be Confusion: Una Eurusque Notusque ruunt -- And what was the Effect of
it? -- Ad litora fluctus. In a word, Brambles grow at both ends, but the
cross-encounter of the Sap, withers the middle: How necessary then is it, that
there be some Ultimate Judge, whose Dictates be Conclusive? for to admit them
Disputable, were to suppose a possibility of Erring; the least apprehension of
which, begets Disputing; that, Sidings; those Factions; and they, every thing:
By these steps, crep up the Parliament of 1640. and therefore, made it one of
their De quibus non disserendum: That Egg, not crushed in the Shell, might have
broken into a Serpent, and spoild all. -- What shall I add? Moses, no sooner
named a God to his People, than he brings Him in speaking, Let there be Light,
and it was so: He gave them no time to think; as (perhaps) doubting, they might
have disputed, if not the thing, His Power over them.

In like manner, for the Power of Dispensing with Penal Laws, which is but a
Concomitant of the former. -- It is God alone that can comprehend all things at
once; past, present, and to come, are the same with Him, and, I Am, bears no
distinction of Tenses: Whereas Man, concluding only from the more probable of
the Premises, how is it possible for him to foresee all the intercurrencies,
and perplexities of Time, and Chance; at best, so sufficiently, as to be secure
against them? The best Gamester cannot prevent all Blots, and the most expert
Marks-man may sometimes carry over, as well as not reach home: And therefore,
because in the making of Laws, it is as impossible, as in Philosophy, to find
(the Maximum quod sit, or Minimum quod non) That indivisible Point of
Proportion, or sufficiency, just so much as will do, and no more; as impossible
(I say) as to make a Shoe shall fit every Foot, any Rule so general, as shall
admit no exception, or Law so absolute, but that in some Case or other, there
is no Provision made; or shall not fail in some particular; or by Corruption of
Time, not corrupt with it; It is of absolute necessity, that the Government,
whatever it be, have the Supreme Power, of keeping all Temporary Laws, and
provisional Remedies, to their first intention, or dispense with them, as they
prove inconvenient, and therefore fit to be dispensed with, till they shall be
better Abrogated. I instanced erewhile, in the days of Old; but as I come
nearer to my Matter, I Will come nearer Home; And let him that Reads me without
prejudice, consult our own Histories, and he will find, that even our best
Constitutions, how prudently soever at first intended, have by the same
Corruption of Time, and Manners, not only failed in their end, but on the
contrary, turned to hurt.

I said before, That at the beginning, all Administration of Justice was in one
Hand, i.e. The Crown, etc. But as People increased, this Administration, was
divided into Counties, and the King appointed His Deputy, in every County to be
Conservator of the Peace at Home, and defend it from Enemies from abroad; who
was called, The Ealderman, Earl, or Shyreeve, i. e. Praepositus Comitatus (for
so the Saxon) and is our now Sheriff; But this answered not the intention: For
the Office being at that time granted in Fee, with a Turn, County Court, and
a third penny of the County, to support the Dignity, they became so obnoxious
to the Crown, that they led their Counties as they pleased themselves, and not
often, against it: to lessen this growing Authority, as our Kings afterward
granted Lands, they also granted Court-Leets, and Court-Barons, to the
respective Lords of those Seigniories, or Manors; And what effect had that
Royal Munificence? But that it so put them in the Head, of how much more Power
was wanting, that in the 17th. of King John (with Swords in their hands) they
complain to Him, of an infringment of their Liberties (the first time, if I
take it right, that any such Liberty was ever talked of; For that of the Men of
Kent, to William the Conqueror, was a formal Stipulation with a Conqueror, to
whom as yet, they owed no Natural Ligeance) and extort a Charter from Him, at
Running-Mead, which laid the Foundation of the Barons Wars.

However, this was expediated for the present; and now the erecting of
Borroughs, and Corporations (so many distinct Liberties in a County, and Exempt
from either of them) might, one would have thought, been a prudent Expedient of
lessening both, and at first, it struck well toward it; for as the one got
ground, the other lost it, but it lasted not always, without running into worse.

Henry III. and his Father before Him, had been long turmoil'd with those
Barons Wars, and having at last, after a threescore years Rebellion (more by
Factions amongst themselves, than any strength of his own) got the better of
them, began to consider that those Seditious Barons (for as yet the Commons
were not any Constituent part of a Parliament) had brought Subjects to be more
than they should be, and Kings less than they were, and therefore (in the 52.
of his Reign) calls a Parliament, and brought in the Commons, to
counter-ballance them: And Edward l. (his Son) by calling some few of His
Barons to Parliament by Writ (and that, pro hac vice tantum) insensibly
lessened their number, and freed the Crown from the Wardship of His Barons.

And yet even this, answered not the Expectation; for as those few that
remained became the more conspicuous, so the Staddles being not left too thick,
the Underwoods, got up the easier: The Commons fell into a Foreign Trade, that
Trade brought home Moneys; those Moneys gave them footing in the Estates of the
Nobility, The device of common Recoveries (in Edward III's time) secured those
Estates, All together, gave them Reputation, and now who knew, but another
Rebellion, might make them, Lords also?

And now, Privilege, is set up against Prerogative, nor could they long want
some Discontent among the Lords, to give it Countenance: The Crown was become
necessitous, and indulged their Demands; and what was the effect of it? They
take upon them to be Judges of the Right to the Crown, and accordingly, give up
Richard II. to the undue pretenses of Henry IV. and though they assisted
Richard Duke of York, and his Son, afterward King Edward IV. to the recovery
of their Right, against Henry VI. yet they set up Richard III. against their
lawful King, Edward V. However Henry VII. deeming them of more use to Him than
a topping Nobility, first clipped the later's Wings, by the Statute against
Retainers, and then, lessened their Grandeur, by increasing their number: Since
which, the Kings his Successors, having added more, and not the least share of
Abbey-Lands, fallen to the Commons, what have all these prudent intentions
proved, but a running from one extreme to another? And of what advantage this
last has been, let the Rebellion 1640. Witness.

There is one thing more, which I had almost forgotten: Gylds, Fraternities,
and Corporations, excellently (without question) designed at first, for the
Advancement of Trade, by carrying it on with a common Stock; Regulating the
Abuse of Manufactures; keeping their Members in Obedience to the King, and the
like: But have not they also, fallen from the first intention? Is Trade in
general, advanced by it; Or has it not been made use of as a double Key, to
Let-in some few, and Lock-out the greater number? Are Manufactures either
improved, or rectified; Or has not the knack of making them slighter, crept in
its room? And instead of Obedience to the King, have they not been the common
Sourse, and Fomenters of Sedition? If this (and what I have offered before) be
true, it proves my Assertion; and if it be not, what means all this Lowing, and
Bellowing of the Herd? The first intention of Physic, was for Prevention, and
Remedy, yet it often so happens, that it joins with the Disease, and both work
together, to the destruction of the Body. And therefore upon this matter, it
seems to be of absolute necessity, that there be this Supreme Power; and that
it be exerted in counter-working the injuries of Time, and Chance, by making
provision for Contingencies, in the due application of occasional Remedies,
without which, there would be a failer in Government. Now if this Power were
tied up to such (Dogmata adamantina) unalterable Decrees, that in no case
whatever they were to be varied from, where were the use of it? The contrary
has been the practice of all Ages, and therefore I shall not labor the Point at
present, till I come to show what the Kings of England (and that de jure) have
done in like cases; of which, in its proper place.

However yet, before I leave it here, and because also, I am wholly at home, it
may not be amiss to examine whether the late Usurped Powers, did not look upon
this Power of Dispensing, so absolutely necessary to the carrying on their Arms
against their Leige-Lord and Sovereign The King, that (to say nothing of the
Divine Law) they not only dispensed with Statue-Law, but even the Common Law
too, which, where it made not against themselves, they held indispensible?

I shall begin with the Parliament I so lately mentioned, where Colonel Nath.
Fienns (afterward, one of their Commissioners for the Seal) tells them, That
it is against the Law, and Light of Nature, for a Man to Swear never to consent
to alter a thing, His 2d. Speech to the House. p. 13.
which in its own Nature alterable, and may prove inconvenient, and fit to be
altered: And that both Houses were of the same Opinion, may be seen in this,
that they acted accordingly: For by the Name, of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, they Ordained, and again made non Obstantes to those Ordinances. As
9th. October 1643. -- 23th. May 47. -- 22th. and 24th. April '48. -- 24th. July
'48. -- and 16th. December '48. Repealed their own Ordinance of 29th. August
'45. which is contra Consuetudinem Parliamenti. Then again, as they grew
higher, They Abolished Episcopacy, Any Letters Patents from the Crown, made, or
to be made, or any other Authority whatsoever, any Law, Statute, Usage, or
Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. 9th. October '46. -- Sold Bishops Lands
with a like Clause 23th. September '47. -- And Abrogated the Feast of the
Nativity, and all other Festivals called Holy Days, any Law, Statute,
Constitution, or Canon, to the contrary notwithstanding, 3d. June '47.

Then, when they had killed, and taken Possession, and Enacted themselves, the
Supreme Authority of the Nation (I speak now, of the Commons, for I find no
concurrence of the Lords, after the 9th. Jan. '48.) they made non Obstantes to
their own Acts: As the 8th. and 19th. June '49. -- Took away Tithes
appropriate. 8th. June, '49. -- Recontinu'd Pleas in Durham. 19th. June, '49.
-- Sold Fee-farm Rents. 27th. July, '50. -- Set up Marrying by Justices. 20th.
Aug. '53. and several the like, and every of them, with this or the like
clause; Any Law, Statute, Custom, Usage, Act, Ordinance, (and in the matter of
the Purchasers of Sir John Stawel's Estate) or Judgment, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And Lastly, When they had played the Game into Oliver's hand, was his
Instrument of Government set to any other Measures? His Ordinances of the 26th.
December. '53. -- 20th. March 53. -- 16th. May, '54. -- 2d. and 9th. June, '54.
and several others, carry the same, or like Clauses: In all which, did they not
more than imply, That the Power of Dispensing, was inseparably incident to the
Supreme Authority, in whose hand soever it were?

Object. But may some say, we know what they were; they had no Right; nor could
better be expected from them: But now we have a Gracious King, Sworn to defend
the Laws, etc.

Answ. Very well. But then why do we doubt him in that defense? The Law says,
He can do no wrong; and shall we presume he will do it? But does there nothing
more lie under the Word Sworn? For fear there should, I give it this further
Answer: That when the Promise is not annexed to the Authority (as in the case of
a Sovereign Prince) but a voluntary condescension, that he will ordinarily
govern by such a Rule, his Estate is not thereby made conditional; and though he
be obliged in Honor to the performance, yet the Authority ceases not, if he
fail in it; for the People still owing him an absolute Subjection, that Prior
Subjection cannot be dissolved, or lessened, by any Subsequent Act of Grace.
The King is to all Intents and Purposes, 7 co. Calvin's Case.
King, before Coronation; and consequently, without that Oath which he makes at
his Coronation. Nor does he promise more at that time, than he was Morally
pre-oblig'd to do; it being no other, than a Free, Royal Promise, to discharge
that Duty honorably, which the Laws of God, and Nature had required of him
without that Promise.

To bring the case home: Did those Lords and Commons make, and vary Laws,
according to the present condition of their Affairs? Had they the patience of
untying any Knot, their Sword was capable of cutting? Shall Men that had not
the least face of Right, make, and unmake, break, and dispense with so many
known Laws, to support a Rebellion? And shall it be doubted, whither a rightful
King may pass by one single Law, for the preventing, or suppressing another?
Shall it be confessed, Their Nobles broke the Band of Government; their Prophets,
Prophesied falsely; their Priestlings, Sanctified those Ordinances; and a
foolish People, loved to have it so? And yet be said, The King is out of his
way, when yet he keeps within his own Circle, and does no more than what the
Law of Reason, the Law of the Land, as well as his Prerogative, warrant him the
doing? The Matter of this first Test falls properly in: I Will examine it a
little, and leave every unbia'st Man to his own Judgment; wherein nevertheless,
though it may be beyond my skill to make the deaf Adder hear, I hope I shall
offer some reason yet, why he should not hiss.

SECT. V. The Case of the Test ( 25 Car. 2d.) stated: And that his Majesty's
granting Commissions, to certain Persons, not qualified according to that Act;
and retaining them in his Service, is warrantable by the Law of Reason, and the
Laws of this Land, etc.
THe Case upon this Matter will fall to be thus. His late Majesty King Charles
the 2d, in the 25th. of his Reign, passes an Act of Parliament, whereby all
Persons, not taking the Oaths of Supremacy, and Allegiance, etc. and
Subscribing the Declaration, therein specified, after the manner, and according
to the time, by the said Act limited (which for brevity, Men call the Test)
shall be ipso facto disabled, to hold any Office, Civil, or Military, within
the Kingdom of England, etc. and the said Office void, etc. Notwithstanding
which, I conceive, and doubt not but to prove, That his Majesty's granting
Commissions to such, or such Persons, not qualified according to the said Act,
is no more than what is warrantable, by the Law of Reason, and the Laws of this
Land.

I shall begin with the Law of Reason; and whither we take the Argument, Ab
Honesto, ab utili, Or, a tuto: I conceive, every one of them makes for me. For,

1. What Honor is it to be King of a People that He cannot command? What
Profit, to have useless Persons, that take up room, but bring no Honey to the
Hive? Or what safety, when instead of an Enemy from abroad, He cannot say, He
is secure at home? How must that Prince have behaved himself, where His People
fear him, not for him? What assistance can He expect from them, and have no
reputation with them? Or what common safety to the whole, when neither dare
trust one another? And what must the consequence of this be with the people?
The People, who take nothing by a true Light, but as it is foisted on them,
through false Optics: Veresimile, is the same with them, as Verum, and if it
but look like it, it is the same, as if it were so: It naturally follows, That
(Conflata magna Invidia, seu been, Tacitus.
seu male gesta premunt) having gotten a malicious Opinion by the end, let the
Prince do well or ill, they will be sure to traduce him: Whereas the Staves of
Beauty, and Bands, go together, but where there are Jealousies, and Divisions,
there can be no Honor, Profit, or Safety to Prince, or People.

The Form of Government is that, which actuates, and disposes every part, and
Member, to the common good of the whole; and as those Parts, give Strength and
Ornament to that whole, so they receive from it again, Strength and Protection
in their several Stations: Whereas, if this mutual Interchange of Concord, and
support be broken, it cannot be, but the whole must fall in pieces, for want of
that common Ligament, that kept it together: From whence I infer, That as to
restrain his Majesty from making use of any part of his Subjects, for the
common defense of the whole, is a breach of that mutual Interchange; so the
granting those Commissions, being a support of it, were for the Honor, Profit,
and Safety of the King and Kingdom, and consequently (as far as they have any
force) warrantable.

2. The King is bound to defend his Subjects, according to the best of his
skill; and that, because Subjection, and Protection, are Relatives: And who
now, shall be Judge of that skill, Himself, or the People? Who shall order a
Battle, the General, or the Army? Who Prescribe, the Physician, or the Patient?
Or judge of the Helm, the Pilot, or the Ships-Crew? And is it not stronger on
the King's side? Sovereignty is a Commission granted by God to the Prince, who
is the Soul that informs, and actuates, that incompacted Body, the People; and
whose Office it is to command: It is by the same Authority entrusted to him,
for the good of the Community; and shall he stand accountable to God, for the
discharge of that Trust, and yet be restrained by them, in the common exercise
of it? Nay, is it not a disappointment of that Trust, by disabling the
performance of it, in the Interdiction of the means? Or suppose he could
transfer that Trust, were it not a discharge of the power of executing it? And
then, where lay the necessity of Obeying? For, Empire, and Obedience, being
Correlatives, where the Right of commanding ceases, the Duty of Obeying, ceases
with it, and the Government is no longer from God, but the People. And here
also, the granting those Commissions, being but a just Assertion of that power,
entrusted as aforesaid, are also warrantable by the Law of Reason, and
consequently, well granted.

3. What damage is it to the whole, that the King makes use of any part,
without excluding the rest, who are equally obliged, to serve him with the
rest; in as much, as what concerns the whole, ought to be defended by the
whole; and where the danger is general, the defense ought to be as general? Or
if it were a damage, it were but Damnum sine injuria, because the Law of Nature
(as I shall come to show presently) wills it. Of what use is a Diamond in the
Rock? Arms in an Arcenal, without Hands to manage them? Or Books in his Study,
that dares not take them down, for fear of misplacing? One half of the World
lives by credit with the other half: No Commerce or Traffic could be kept up
without it; And even Princes themselves, are secured at home, by their
Reputation abroad. And does not this Reputation lie in Strength, i.e. the power
of commanding their Subjects? And if any part of that strength be taken off, is
it not a lessening the strength of the whole? Or can that whole be said to be
safe, when any part lies unguarded? I cannot tell what the Men of the next Age
may be, but experience has taught those past, That the Tortoise, is secure
within its Shell, but if any part lies out, all the rest are in danger. And
inevitably the same, must the Condition of that Prince be, who shall be thus
wanting.

Whereas on the contrary, that of Dido to Aeneas, Tros, Tyrjusque mihi nullo
discrimine -- brings all to rights again: For the King is abridg'd in none of
his Subjects: The Kingdom has its whole strength: And every Man, becomes
another Arrow to the Bundle. Here is no danger of Obstructions, for the
Circulation is clear: No Quarrel among the Children, for they are all alike to
the Father: And no fear of a Discontented Party, when every one falls in to the
support of that whole, whereof he reckons himself a part. In a Word, though the
Garment be of diverse Colors, there is no Rent, or Seam in it: No Wound to
fester, or bleed inwards: No jarring string to break the Harmony, or excuse for
standing idle in the Marketplace, when they may come in if they please. And
therefore, these Commissions being of no damage, but on the contrary, a further
Security to the Kingdom, I conceive them further also warrantable by the Law of
Reason, and consequently (as far as that goes) well granted.

Nor are they less warrantable by the Laws of this Kingdom. For if the Kings of
England, by common usage, which is common Law, have without Parliament (nay
during the time of their Sitting, but without taking the least notice of them)
by their own inherent power, grounded on the necessary reason of defense,
commanded their Subjects to their aid; and if several Acts of Parliament, have
declared, That the Subject owes the King a natural Obedience, and Alligeance,
and are thereby bound to serve Him; then His Majesty's now granting these
Commissions, is also warranted by the Laws of the Land. And that it has been so
done, and declared, I am coming to show.

1. That the King is to defend, and the Subject to obey, Judge Hutton's
Argument against the King, in the ^ase of Ship-Mony.
needs no proof: An Act of Parliament, that he should not do it, or have no aid
from them, were void in its self, because it would be against natural Reason,
says Judge Hutton. And Judge Crook, who also gave his Judgment against the
King, in the same Case, confesses, That when the good and safety of the Kingdom
is in danger, Judge Crcok's Argument in the same Case.
the King may command all his Subjects to provide and furnish Ships at Sea,
with Men, Munition, etc. at their own Charges: And this (says he) I hold to be
agreeable to Law and Reason. -- Edw. the 3d, in the 10th, 11th, and 12th. of
his Reign (a Parliament then sitting) sent out his Writs for Aids, without
taking any notice of them, or the least complaint on their side, that the King
had stretched his Authority. -- The two Chief Justices, and Lord Chief Baron (in
the same case) said, It was the constant practice in the Reigns of Edw. 1. --
Edw. 2d. -- Edw. 3d. Annals of Chapter I. Fol. 599.
And so agreeable to the Common Law of Kingdoms, That the King might compel the
doing it, in case of refusal. -- No Age, Order, or Person exempted: Ibid. An.
f. 517.
So Rich. 2d. commanded all Men between 16. and 60. to be in readiness. --
Writs to Archbishop of Canterbury -- York. -- Abbots, etc. That they, and all
their Clergy, 1 H. 4.
should Manus adjutrices apponere. -- The like (of the same King) to several
Counties of England, to array all the Lords (and omnes homines defensibiles)
and all such as were able to bear Arms; and those that were impotent, and could
not go, to contribute. -- The like in Hen 6th. -- Hen. 7th. -- and Hen. 8 's
time. -- And to the Cinque Ports, 48 H. 3.
That they come Day and Night to the King, when any danger is. -- For (as Judge
Jones, Ibid. An f. 591. Br. Ten. 44.73. Fitz. N. B. 28. 7 Cok in Calv.
with whom also agrees our Statute Law) The King has an interest in the Person
of His Subjects pro bono publico -- Or as need requires. -- And may dispose of
their Bodies for the defense of the Kingdom. Stat. 2 H. 4. c. 24. 9 H. 3. c 20.
11 H. 7. c. 1. and 18. 24 H. 8. c. 12. 3 Ed. 6. c. 2.
-- Command them to go with Him (or without Him in His Service) as well
without, as within the Realm. And the reason of all this is, because they are
bound by their Alligeance to serve Him, and this Alligeance due, by the Law of
Nature. In short, every Subject, is by reason of his Natural Alligeance bound
to serve the King, when required by the King: But no Act of Parliament can
discharge the Subject from this Natural Alligeance: Therefore every Subject is
bound to serve the King, when so required. To which if it be said, a
disability, is no absolute discharge. I answer, where lies the difference, as
to the main, whither a parcel of Thieves kill a Man's Servants, or bind them
so, that they cannot defend their Master?

2. The King is sole Judge of the danger of the Kingdom, and how, and when, it
is to be prevented, or avoided: Which also was acknowledged by Hutton, and
Crook, in the Case before; and Mr. St. John's in his Argument against the King,
Ibid. An. f. 483.
says thus, The Sheriff has the Posse Comitatus, and therefore it follows, that
the Posse Regni is in Himself. And shall the King have the Power of the
Kingdom, and be thought not to know how to use it? Or if He does, where lies
the Quarrel? Ought not the Judge of the danger to direct the means for avoiding
it? Surely yes: It is not the Tenant by Castle-guard, but the Lord, that gives
warning, of the Enemy; and the Reason is given by Sir Edward Coke, lest the
defense come too late.

The King by His Commission, says, Such or such a Person is fit for His
Service; no averment lies against it: The King in a Ne exeat Regno, affirms, 1
Eliz. f. 105.
That I. S. will go beyond Sea: It is not traversable. -- What a Judge does as
in his Office, Dyer. 163. 7 H. 7.40.
shall not be assigned for Error. And shall any thing be wanting in the
Fountain, that issues in the Stream? Shall the Delegate have more power than
him that Delegates him? If no averment, or traverse, shall be against the Act
of a Judge, how much less then, where the King is absolute Judge? Suppose there
were but Vulgaris Opinio in the case: Even common Fame is a sufficient ground
for prevention; for, Lord Bacon.
Fames are no less the preludes of Seditions to come, than the Relics of
Seditions past; and will the People never believe a Treason, unless the Prince
be killed? The King has secret Intelligence, we know not, and must He make no
preparation, without He reveal it? And if He should, how long would it be a
Secret?

3. The Law requires nothing to be done, but it permits the way, and means, how
it may be done; else the Law were Imperfect, Lame, and Unjust: Imperfect, for
want of Provision; Lame, for want of Power; and Unjust, in requiring an
Impossibility: A kind of sending forth a Messenger, (as Solomon) and cutting
off the Feet; whereupon it is a Maxim in our Law, That when the Law gives a Man
any thing, 1 Inst. 153. 11 Coke 52.
it implies also of that, without which the thing it self could not be. As, a
Man takes Ground of another, the Law implies, he shall have a way to it. 9 E.
4.35.
-- Or has a Pipe running through another Man's Ground, he may enter to mend
it, 8 Coke 146. 9 Coke 11. 1 Inst. 161.
as cause requires. -- So, may the Lord, to distrein. -- He in Reversion, to
view what waste; and the like; for to take away the means, were to destroy the
end. In like manner here: The Law says, The Interest, and Sovereignty of
defending, is the King's; and shall it not also allow Him the means of doing
it? -- The King has the absolute Power of Peace, 19 E. 4.6. 13 Car. 2. c. 6.
and War. -- The Supreme Government of all Forces by Sea and Land: And shall He
be fore-judg'd the choosing His Soldiers? 'Twas the short (pro Repub. honesta)
Saying of Galba, Tacitus.
when He refused a Donative to some Mutinous Legions (Legi a se Militem, non
emi) That he used to choose his Soldiers, not to give Money for 'em: As well
knowing, that the next demand had been the Empire; as indeed, it fell true in
him; for what was that Power of the Sword, when he was not secure, of not
having it turned upon himself? Or of what better use to any Prince, with a
Pad-lock on the Scabbard? The Scots have a pat Word for it; A Feckless
Tree-Sword.

4. Lastly, there remains yet another Argument, that carrys in it, both Law,
and Reason; there was a necessity upon His Majesty at the time when he granted
those Commissions: A Necessity, of preventing a Necessity: And who knows not,
but Necessity is the Law of time, and action, and regulates the Law of the
place? As that of David's eating the Shewbread; and our casting over Goods in
a Storm. And who also is so great a stranger at home, that has not (at least)
heard of those preparatory Libels, and Scandalous Declarations (for some time
before) nightly scattered, and daily communicated to Friends? What was the
meaning of those hollow Blasts? Were they ever the Forerunners of Fair Weather?
Or not of the contrary? 'Twas a shrewd Argument all was not well, or not like
to continue well.

But before I go further, I must be forced to look back, the way (in this case)
to make haste, being to stand a while and consider.

1. The time when this first Test (for I shall not speak to the other, till my
second part) was made. 2. By whom carried on. 3. To what end.
As to the First: It was in the Year 1673, at what time the Fears and
Jealousies of 1640 (like China-Earth laid in by the Grandfather) had fermented
into a better condition of being wrought: The old Chase was foiled, but not so
absolutely lost, to the despair of a Retrieve; they had their Fathers
Platform; most of the Materials would serve again, and who knew, but they
might improve upon it? If they failed, 'twas but what others had done before
'em; and if it hit, there was a full amends for all: So readily do Drowning Men
catch at Twigs, and ( Epimetheus like) keep Hope in the bottom of the Box, when
it had been better, to have forborne the opening it.

Then as to the Carriers of it on: What were they but two or three
First-Rate-Discontents, who being outwitted in their point, gave themselves up
to that peaceable resignation, of taking no notice of it, till they had
contrived a Revenge? The Word was, The King hated them, or loved them not,
which (to such Men) was all one; nor could they believe, his Heir presumptive
(as they called him) should be much fonder; and therefore, a Bill of Exclusion
must secure all: And however the House of Lords (to their Eternal Honor) threw
it out, yet was it never set on foot again among the Commons? or that, weakly?
Let it perish as it lies, nor will I rub the Nap too hard, for fear of
discovering the Thread.

And Lastly for the end of it: The Title ('it is true) calls it an Act for
preventing dangers, that may arise from Popish Recusants. But what says every
Man that wears not a Bibb, and who, if he belies not his Conscience, cannot but
confess, That the main drift, and end of it was to keep His now Majesty from
the Crown, by undermining Him in His Dependencies first, that they might the
better afterward attack Him in His Person? It was against their Interest, that
He should come to be King, and therefore, 'twas but necessary, that they rid
Him of His Friends, till (as the Gaderens by our Savior) they could get Him
out of the Country. And can the King be safe, while such a Law is in being? It
may be much doubted: For when the Word of a King, that he will not alter
Religion, as it is now established by Law, is of no credit, without farther
Security, what must the meaning of it be, but that they that are for having
this Act stand, either dare not trust Him, or could be well content, that it
had taken effect? Or if it be only a point of Honor in the case, I would fain
know, whither Herod's, nevertheless for his Oaths sake, were any excuse for
cutting off the Baptist's Head? I should think not; inasmuch as the keeping
such an Oath, did but add to the Crime, and he might have better asked God
forgiveness, for the making, than the breaking it. Where an Oath obliges not,
less does Honor.

Object. But may some say, should not all Laws that concern Religion, be like
those of the Medes and Persians, immutable?

Answ. We Will suppose it for once: But then what are become of all our own
Statutes of that kind, before Edw. the 6th? Or if we measure it by the
inconvenience, what effect had that of the Medes and Persians, in the case of
Daniel, but that it exposed an Innocent to the Lions, and made Darius rather
shuffle with his Authority, than disoblige a Faction, which he might have
crushed with a Breath, as he did afterward?

But to go on: Was there no danger from any other sort of Recusants? Was there
no Oxford business? No Rye-House? Was this, and the late King, to have been
Murdered in Masquerade only? Yes, yes, (I hear 'em say) There was a Plot, and a
Plot with a Witness! But 'twas a Popish Plot: Had not the King been killed in
St. James's Park, if Pickering had not ramm'd the Silver Bullet, into a
Consecrated skrew'd Gun, before the Powder, and at another time, the Flint been
loose? Did not Oats, and Parteners Swear it? And did not the Rulers believe
him, and the People, in him? And therefore, if neither Test, nor Exclusion
would do, was not Venient Romani sufficient ground for an Association? Oh Hoe!
Been habet, nil plus interroge -- Your Servant, Sir. -- But was there no
Republican Plot in the bottom? was not the truth of the one, slur'd on the
World, under the disguise of to other? Such (I must confess) as suffered on the
account of the Popish Plot, denied it to their last; -- They were all (but one)
Papists. -- But, see the Ingenuity of the Godly! Not one of them, but confessed
theirs, with this tender distinction only, that they were guilty of the
Conspiracy, but not of the Treason. -- Habeat jam Roma pudorem! When would the
others have done as much?

And after all this (to take in Hutton, and Crooke's distinction) was not,
Hannihal ad portas? Was there no Bellum flagrans? No actual War, at the time
when His Majesty granted those Commissions? What was the then Rebellion in the
West? and that other, at the same time in Scotland? Clouds, no bigger than a
Hand at first, but had they not like to have overspread both Kingdoms? When
Richard the 3d heard that Henry the 7th. was Landed with 7000 Men, he slighted
it; but when it was told him they were but 300, he put Foot in Stirrup, as too
truly presaging, the Kingdom had invited him in. And what should the King have
done in this case, thrown Himself upon those that would have Excluded Him, or
trust them of whom He had had former assurance?

In short, it remains that I speak to His. Majestys yet continuing them in His
Service: And truly (I conceive) the same Reason, and Law, will hold for both.
For Insurrections, and Rebellions, Lord Bacon.
being not written on Ice, that when the Body relenteth, the Impression should
wear away, how can the King (who is Judge of the Expectant, as well as present
danger) deem Himself secure, while the Serpent, yet threatens with its Tail?
God has signally prosper'd His Majestys Arms; but are His Enemies so much as
willing, to be reclaimed? They are beaten down that rose up against Him, but is
He sure, they shall rise no more? The Winds are laid ('it is true) but has the
Sea yet left rouling? Or if it has, what means this Unda vulgi? These new
Murmurs, and Caballings of the People? Fire purges away Smoke and Ashes, as
unapt Matter to inflame; and Living Bodies Purge, and Expel, what they cannot
Convert, and Assimulate into Food and Nourishment. And shall Kings only take
into their Bosom what they can neither convert, nor alter? The Argument were
everlasting, but I leave it; and from what I have said before, thus conclude
this Section, That His Majesty, in the granting Commissions, to Persons not
qualified according to the said Act, having done nothing, but what is
warrantable by the Law of Reason, and the Laws of this Land, That the said
Commissions are well granted, notwithstanding the said Act. And the same also,
for the yet retaining them in His Service.

SECT. VI. That the Statute has created a Disability in the Person, and other
Objections, answered.
TO judge ones self, is the way not to be judged; and to foresee known
Objections, is the way to prevent them from others; wherein nevertheless, not
to give them their proper Answers, were but to lend a Candle to another, and
leave my self in the dark.

I. Object. 1. The Statute has created an incapacity in the Person, not
qualified, etc. by making him ipso facto disabled, to hold any Office, etc. and
the Office void. -- As the 31st El. c. 6. That makes every corrupt
Presentation, Collation, etc. and every Admission, Institution, etc. thereupon,
void: And the person so corruptly taking, or procuring, a disabled Person to
have, or enjoy the same. -- In like manner, the 5 Ed. 6. c. 16. That makes the
buying and selling Offices void, and the Buyer, a disabled Person to have, and
occupy the same. -- And the 3 El. c. 1. That every Member of Parliament, not
taking the Oath of Supremacy, before he enter the House, shall be deemed, as if
he had been never elected, and returned: Which also is a part of the Test, And
how will the present Cases differ, from the Disability in the present Case?

Answ. For answer to which, I take a difference between Mala in Se, such things
as were merely evil in themselves at Common Law, before any Statute, and
therefore indispensible; and Mala prohibita, such as were not simply evil in
themselves, but might have been lawfully done before they came to be prohibited
by some Statute, and so, may be dispenst with: 11 H. 7. f. 11.
As in the present Case, That every Man not taking the Oaths, etc. by the said
Act required, shall be disabled, to hold any Office, etc. which implies, that
he was capable before that Prohibition, for, all Exceptions prove the Rule.
That the King may pardon Treason, Murder, etc. is no Question, but that He
might dispense with the practice of them, was never thought of, for such a
permission, would be contrary to Original Justice, Moral Honesty, Common
Equity, Humanity, etc. not to be presumed in a private Man, much less in a
Prince, as being a breach of that Trust, God has reposed in Him: Whereas Mala
prohibita, being otherwise indifferent in themselves, and only evil in respect
of the Prohibition, when that Reason cease, or becomes inconvenient, the Law
also so far cease, as that the King, whose interest is the common good of the
whole, may, nay ought to dispense with it.

The six Articles in Henry the 8th's time, on which, so many promiscuously
suffered, 31 H. 8. c. 14
did the King do well or ill, in not dispensing with that Statute? If He did
well, why is it laid as a charge on Him? and if He did ill, it must be
acknowledged, that He had the power of doing otherwise, in dispensing with it:
For a Man cannot be said, to have done evil, but where it was in his power to
have prevented that evil, and he did not. But to come to the particular
Instances of Simony, etc.

Simony, it is vox Ecclesiastica, and though it first became Malum prohibitum, by
the Canon Law, whereof the Judges of the Common Law could take no notice before
the Statute; yet, that it was Malum in Se, long before either Common, or Canon
Law, appears by the judgment of St. Peter against Simon Magus, Acts 8.20.
who thought the Gift of the Holy Ghost might be obtained by Money: And though
Presentation, and the right of Patronage, be Temporal Matters, yet they are
called Spiritual, in respect of the thing, to which the Presentment is made,
which is Spiritual; and consequently, every corrupt Presentation, is a
dishonor to God, against the good of the Church, and an injury to the
Commonwealth; and withal, so much the more odious, in that it is always
accompanied with Perjury; for the Presentee, at the time of his Institution,
takes an Oath, That he has made no Simoniacal Contract, Payment, or Promise,
directly, or indirectly, by himself, or any other, for the obtaining the same,
etc. And therefore (nor without just reason) has the Statute provided so
severely against it, in creating an indispensible disability in the person so
offending.

Then for the buying of Offices: Not to put the Question what it was before the
Statute, or how punishable; yet this I may venture to say, That (besides that,
it is a bar to industry and Merit, and makes it as impossible for deprest
virtue to rise, as to draw a Cable through the Eye of a Needle) it opens a way to
the perverting of Justice, or at least, begets an Obstruction in the
Administration; for it is not to be expected, but that he that buys the Devil,
will again try, how the Market goes with him. -- Jure potest, emerat ille
prius. And therefore, to keep the Eyes of the Wise open, and the Actions of the
Just, from being Perverted, it was as necessary in this matter, as the former,
that the Statute should create such an Indispensible Disability.

However admitting (not granting) it to be no evil in its self, it receives
this further Answer, That the Vendee, being disabled by the Contract to take,
the Office can never be legally vested in him, after such disability accrewed,
and consequently, the King cannot remove it; which is not the present case, as
I shall come to show presently.

Lastly, for what concerns the not taking the Oath of Supremacy; no Man (I
presume) will say, that it was an offense before the Statute; for though the
not acknowledging the King to be Supreme in His Dominions, was an offense at
Common Law, and before any Statute, because every Man being bound to the King,
by reason of the Protection he received from Him, the Law of Nature obliged him
to acknowledge it, and return it in service (whence the Kingdom was called,)
The King's Ligeance -- The King, 27 E. 3 c. 1. 10.11. R 2. c. 1. 25 H. 8. c. 3.
and 34, 35. c. 1.
Liege-Lord. -- And the People, His Liege-men) Yet the not testifying, and
declaring it by the formality of an Oath, could not be said to be an Offense,
before there was some express Law to exact such an Oath; for, Ubi nulla Lex,
ibi nullum peccatum. But now that the Statute has required an Oath, and that no
Member, etc. not having first taken it, enter the House, under the Penalty of
being deemed, as if he had been never elected, and returned; as on the one hand
(and if nothing intervene) it is become necessary, to preserve that Election,
etc. So on the other, it is but a Penal Law, and consequently, the King before
any such Member shall come to sit in the House, may grant him Dispensation for
not taking the said Oath, and thereby prevent any disability from accrewing,
which once accrewed, could not have been removed.

Now the difference between these Cases, and that of an Officer, etc. upon this
Statute, lies here.

The First, was Malum in Se, and so indispensible.

The Second, Carries an impossibility; for the Office being void by the
Contract, a Subsequent Dispensation, can have nothing to work upon.

But the Last, and that of an Officer, etc. will very well agree; for if either
of them, by his own neglect, or refusal, shall have incapacited himself, before
he shall have obtained, the King's Dispensation, the disability is fixed,
beyond the possibility of removing it; but the Dispensation coming before the
Disability accrewed, it is prevented.

And how reasonable it is that the King have this full power in Him will
further appear, by bringing the Matter to a more familiar English. Says the
Statute you shall do every thing hereby required, or hold no Office. -- Says
the Person not so doing, I was born to obey, and serve the King; but the
Circumstances are hard upon me: The Statute is in the disjunctive; I Will take
the easier part of it, and quit my employ. -- But says the King, he is my
Subject, and I have use of his Service, which is due to me by the Law of
Nature: Shall the King here, suffer an inroad upon the Law of Nature, which is
indispensible, or make use of His Royal Authority, in dispensing with this
Statute, when without that Dispensation, that Service were lost? I conceive He
may: For the Statute its self, shall have some reasonable entendment to the
Maker thereof. And shall any Man believe, it was the King's intention, when He
past this Act, to exclude Himself from the power of judging, what were
convenient, or inconvenient for the Government? And of what use were that
judgment, if he saw an inconvenience, and could not step over it? I do not say,
the King may absolutely discharge the said Oaths; but if for Reasons best known
to Himself, He think fit to dispense with them, what is that to us, who have no
Authority to examine it? Take away Knowledge to discern, Judgment to weigh, and
Resolution to determine, and what will ye make of a Prince? His Majesty foresaw
a Storm coming, lay close for it, and wrought it through with Resolution: A Hand
or two, might be enough at Helm, but it required many, to work the Ship: And
whom in such a case, would a Skipper choose? Such as had stuck to him in former
Storms, or such as had been for throwing him overboard, in a Calm? They might
have been as handy perhaps, or better qualified, but the Ship was in danger,
and what talk we of Formalities?

2. Object. But the King had other hands: A Loyal City, a trusty Militia, etc.

Answ. But is he bound to make use of them in extraordinary Cases? Has not that
City grown too fast? May the King yet March through London without leave? Or take
up Monys upon his Revenue, without License? I begin now, to be of opinion, he
may, and withal hope, it shall long continue so. Then for the Militia: To give
them their due, they were generally up, on the late Western occasion; but of no
great use; what good did their numbers against William the Conquerour's formed
Army? Or what is the reason the Crown of England, has so often followed the
Fortune of a single Battle? But that it has been fought, by an Uncommanded
Multitude, who knowing nothing, but their own Inclinations, believe God is
departed from the beaten side, and consequently deem it a sin to tempt
Providence with a Second. I will not say, but they may be made more
serviceable; however, till that be, what hurt if the King make use of such as
are? In short, as the Subject has his Liberty, by the same Laws also, has the
King his, i. e. His Prerogative: Nay, to imagine the contrary, were a
Condradiction in Terminis: And what better were that Prerogative, if
restrained, in the legal use, than a Long-wing'd Hawk, but tied to Fist? Shall
a Man do nothing without consulting his Wife? Or must the King call a
Parliament upon every Emergency? I think not: For, Omnis Rex Angliae, est solus
Rex, Stam. pl. cor. 99.
and semper Rex, and there are many things he may do of himself, without
Parliament.

The power of Peace, and War, is, 9 E. 4.4.
and was the King's, at Common Law; and our later Acts of Parliament, are but
declaratory of that Ancient Law. -- He may charge the Subject for defense of
the Kingdom, without Parliament: 13 E. 4.14.
And the same did Queen Eliz. in 1588. -- Grant a Toll, upon the erection of a
new Fair -- Market -- Bridge -- Ferry -- Grant Pontage -- Murage -- Paveage,
Rolls Abridg. 2d. part. 171.
etc. As there are many ancient Instances of it, in the 3d. 7th. and 32d. of
Edw. the 1st. It may be said ('it is true) the Subject here, has a Quid, pro Quo;
but what Quid pro Quo is it, That the King grants to one, or more Subjects, to
have more privilege, than others? -- That he Erects Cities -- Corporations --
Gylds? -- Founds Bishoprics -- Colleges -- Hospitals? Grants Privilege to
make Bylaws -- Hold Courts -- send Burgesses to Parliament? (no Positive Law,
that I remember, stints the number to two: Wales, for the most part, send but
one, and London four.) Is not all this by His Royal Charter? And what is it
that enables Him to that, but His Prerogative, which is the antientest part of
the Law of the Land, and consequently, the most Principal?

Nor is this all: The King by His Writ may Ordain alone. 9 E. 3.16.
A Writ of Cessavit was brought against the Tenants of Northumberland: They
Petition the King, and show, that they had been so harrast, by Incursions of
the Scots, that they could not pay their Rents: The King by His Writ, Ordained
a stay of Suit. -- The King (before the convenience of Colleges) grants to the
Scholars of Oxford, 49 E. 3.18.
That they should have the choice of Inns there: This is my Freehold, says the
Towns-Man, and the King cannot do it: But it is the King's Patent said the
Judges, and in favor of Learning, and therefore, a good Ordinance. Much more
to which purpose, may be had in the Case of Ship-Mony, where (because the
Arguments are hard to be got by themselves) they may be found in the Annals of
King Charles the First.

3. Object. But was not the Judgment for the King in that Case, afterward
vacated in Parliament?

Answ. That it was so, de facto, is true: But that the Arguments of Sir Robert
Holborn, and Mr. St. John's (who argued it against the King) and of the Judges,
Hutton, and Crook (who had first underwritten for the King, and afterward
gave their Opinions, against what they had so underwritten) were by that
Parliament held for Law, is also as true: And therefore if I have taken any of
their Concessions, to prove my point for the King (as -- Eas est and ab host
doceri) I know not, why it may not be the same Law now. And for the rest of the
Judges, (that gave their Opinions for the King, according to what they had
first underwritten) they were accounted, Men Eminent in their time; and if the
Lord Chief Justice Finch (a Gentleman, in whom Art, and Nature concurred, to
make him Eloquent, and a long experience, dexterous; and who had been speaker
of the Parliament of 3d. Car. 1. at what time the Petition of Right past) may
be credited, Those first Opinions, were so delivered to His Majesty, that no
one Judge, knew the Opinion of the rest, or the reason, that induced His
Majesty to demand it.

And now that I am upon this Matter, it is but a Justice due to that King's
Memory, that I open the History of it.

The Cards had long shuffling for some plausible Trump, whereby to engage the
People into a Rebellion: None more luckily turned up, wherein their Properties,
seemed to be concerned, than this of Mr. Hambden, where the Case lay thus.

The Dutch in the 9th. Car. 1. 1634. had set up the Northern Herring-fishing,
on our Sea: Grotius had put out, three or four sheets of Paper, which he calls,
Mare Liberum: Mr. Seldom learnedly encountered him, and as fully answered it,
in his Mare Clausum; by showing, That before the Romans had ever to do in
Britain; during their time; and ever since, the Dominion of the Narrow Seas was
the Ancient, undoubted Right of the Crown of England: Pens were too weak to
decide the Matter: Mr. Noy, finds Precedents of Naval-aids, by sole Authority
of the King: Some few of the Commons except against it, as being out of
Parliament, and against the Petition of Right: The first Writ is directed to
the Major, etc. of London, to equip seven Ships of War, by a day certain,
sufficiently provided (at their own Charges) of all things necessary, for 26
Weeks: From thence, Writs are sent into the inland Counties: Most pay their
proportion, which in the whole amounted to but 20000 per Men's. through England:
Mr. Hambden (of the County of Bucks, and whose share, was but 20 s.) makes
default: The King ( an. Reg. 12.) Writes to the Judges, and demands their
Opinion in Writing, Whither, when the good, or safety of the Kingdom in general
is concerned, the King may not by Writ under the Great Seal, command all His
Subjects of this Kingdom, to furnish a certain number of Ships, and Men, for
such time, as the King shall think fit, and by Law compel the doing it, in case
of refusal? And whither in such a case, He is not the sole Judge, both of the
danger of the Kingdom, and when, and how, the same is to be prevented, and
avoided? To this, every one of the 12 Judges did subscribe in the Affirmative:
Thereupon, process is issued out of the Exchequer against Hambden: He demurs
upon the Legality of the Writ: It is argued by all the Judges: The Majority of
them, give their Opinions for the Writs; on which the Barons gave Judgment;
which Judgment was in the 16th. of the said King, 27 Feb. 1640.
vacated in Parliament.

But (with due honor to all other Parliaments) what Parliament was it? It was
begun in that House of Commons, that afterward Murdered that King: And though the
Vacatur was per Considerationem, and Judicium, Dominorum Spiritualium and
Temporalium in Curia Parliamenti, etc. Yet as to the Lords Spiritual, this may
be said, That a leading Man among them, then was, and from the time the Seal
had been taken from him, had been also, a Discontent, nor was it hard to
persuade Persons interested, that the Clergy were not liable to Secular Charges
(whereas, aid in War -- building of Bridges -- and raising Forts, is that
Trinoda necessitas, that binds the Clergy as well as the Laity.) And what got
they by it, but that as it opened a Gap, to several Acts, that past afterward,
so the King being lessened in His Authority, was unable to defend them from a
worse Vacatur, which was put upon themselves, 17 Car. 1. c. 22.
within one full year after it? And for the Lords Temporal, (such, or most of
them, I mean, as followed not His Majesty to Oxford) they joined with those
Commons in making Ordinances, to raise Moneys, and Arms, for the carrying on of
that Rebellion which afterward (inaudito Regibus exemplo) brought Him to the
Block; and their Privilege of Peerage, with Him. In short, the matter is
beyond excuse; if they would not have had the Clock gone, they might have
chosen, not to have wound it up, or taken off the Weights: For though that
Vacatur of the House of Lords upon the Judgment in the Exchequer, was confirmed
by an Act of Parliament, what was gotten by that 20 s. which cost the Kingdom
more Treasure, than it was at any one time worth, to have been sold, and more
Blood, than would have Conquered another?

Nor was it more than necessary, to have said so much touching that Parliament,
with whom the King was virtually, though not formally under a Force: For as
preparatory to what ensued, they first got an Act of Parliament, that they
should not be Dissolved, or Prorogued, but by Act of Parliament: And having
gotten this Footing, in the same Runn, they procured others, for taking off,
The several Courts of the Star Chamber -- Presidencies of Wales, See the Acts
of the 17. Car. 1.
and the North -- Duchy of Lancaster -- Exchequer of the Palatinate of Chester
-- High Commission -- And now to throw a Personal disrepute upon His Majesty,
they bring in that Bill against Ship-mony, as having prenecessitated Him not to
deny any thing -- And having in the same heat, got the Stannaries, and the
Statute 1 E. 2. de Militibus, taken off, and the Bishops out of the House of
Lords, the very next Act that past, was the impressing Soldiers for Ireland --
And what did they do with them? See the King's Answer to their Irish Papers.
But (having driven the King from Whitehall, by Tumults) fought Him at
Edgehill, with those individual Forces. Thus, inch by inch, fell that goodly
Oak of the British Forest; His Roots, and Binders were cut off, and what wonder
if His own weight brought Him down? Or that the People were so intent, on
gathering the Sticks, that they wanted leisure, to heed what was done?

And now to close this Section: If Authority without Power, be but what Lucan
says of Pompey -- Magni nominis umbra (as without further proof, was verified
in him,) That Government certainly, must be an imaginary nothing, or at best,
but painted wings, that has not the power of preserving its self, as the
Emergency, or Exigence of Affairs requires: Nor is it ever likely to be long
lived, where it wants the Resolution, to make it self obeyed. It is said of
Saul, that he feared the people: 1 Samuel 15.24.
But it lost him the Kingdom. And how probably can it be otherwise, when the
People, shall be more at Liberty, than the Sovereign? Shall they stop at
nothing for Subverting the Government, and is it reasonable, the King be
abridg'd, for the saving it? What hurt is it that Caesar, have the things that
are Caesar's, especially, when the profit, and advantage is the Peoples? The
contrary (I am sure) has ever embroiled us, and he that goes no further, than
our own Histories, will find, That the more our Kings have been bound, the more
have they shaken off those Fetters; and the more it has been endeavored, to
restrain their Rights, the more have they ever, exerted their Authority.

In a word, we have the Interest of a King for our Defense, and the Word of a
King for our Security: and if an Act of Parliament cannot bar the King of any
thing that is due to Him of Common right, how much better were it, to believe
Him to be what we would have Him, and make him so; than by disputing the
dividing Mathematical points, and engaging our selves in impracticable Notions,
catch at Shadows, and lose the Substance? The Camel (in the Fable) might have
kept his Ears, if he could have been contented without Horns.

SECT. VII. The Sum of the whole further asserted, and confirmed, from several
Statutes, and other Authorities of the Common Law, etc.
I Have already proved the necessity of this Supreme Power -- That it is
innate, and inherent in the Person of an absolute Monarch. -- What that is. --
That the Kings of England are such. -- And spoken at large, to their power of
Dispensing. -- It remains now, that for a close of the whole, I further show,

I. That there are diverse things so incident in power to the King, that it is
not in the power of a Parliament to take them away.

II. That both Kings and Parliaments have been ever tender of having them
encroach't on, as may appear by the Savings, in several Statutes.

III. That the Power of Dispensing, and granting Non Obstantes to Penal
Statutes, is one of those Incidents, and that inseparable.

IV. That Statutes derogatory to the Prerogative, have some of them been held
for void, others recalled, by the King alone.

V. Examples of Personal Disabilities, some, created by Parliament: others, by
Ecclesiastical Canons, dispenst with by the King; others, void of themselves.

VI. The King cannot divest Himself, or restrain His Successor, of any regal
Right, that is essentially in the Crown. These are my Materials for covering
the House; I shall proceed to finish it.

1. And that there are many things so incident in power, to the King, that it
is not in the power of a Parliament to take them away, Judge Hutton (of whom
before) agrees it, with the rest of the Judges, and Instances in the Case of
Henry the 7th; Annal Char. 1. f. 592.593.
and that a Parliament could not dispose the Right of the Crown. -- The Power
of making Wars, and Leagues (which also was agreed by Judge Crook) -- The
Power of Coin, and its value. -- The sole Power of Calling, Ibid. 582.
Proroguing, and Dissolving Parliaments. -- And that no Law can be made without
His consent. -- And many other Monarchical Powers, and Prerogatives, which
(says he) to be taken away, were against Natural Reason; and further calls
them, Incidents so inseparable, that a Parliament cannot take them away. -- For
(in another place) they belong to His Crown, as Head, and Protector. -- And
again (both of them) An Act of Parliament, That the King should have no aid of
His Subjects, would not bind, because it would be against Natural Reason: Which
was but a Confirmation of what Judge Crawley, and others the Judges, had
delivered in the same Case. -- And further (says the said Judge Crawley) you
cannot have a King without Regal Rights, no not by Act of Parliament: And what
are these Regal Rights, but the Kings Prerogative, which contains in its self
Matter of Prescription, Plowd. 332.
and is consequently, as inseparable Incident?

2. Both Kings, and Parliaments, have been ever tender, of having them
encroacht on, as may appear by the Savings, in several Acts of Parliament. The
St. Praerogativa Regis, 3 E. 1.
closes thus, The King would not, that at any other time, His Concessions
thereby made, should turn in prejudice, to Him, or His Crown; but that such
Rights, as appertain to Him, should be saved in all points. -- So; the King
will not draw any Aid, 25 E. 3. c. 5.
or Prize into Custom, but by the common Assent of all the Realm: Saving the
ancient Aids, and Prizes, due and accustomed -- So; no Imposition shall be set
upon Wool, 11 R. 2. c. 9.
Leather, etc. other than as granted by Parliament; and if any be, to be
nulled: Saving to the King His ancient Right. -- So; 1 H. 4. c. 6.
the King is content to be concluded, by the Wise Men of His Realm, touching
the Estate of Him, and His Realm: Saving always His Liberty, i.e. His
Prerogative. Now what is the meaning of those Savings? But that those
Parliaments considering, there might in after time, some new Accidents happen,
which could not be then foreseen, they bethought themselves of no better way of
securing against them, than by leaving 'em, to the King's Discretion: And
therefore, when it is said, The King will not do, but so, or so, what other can
it be, but that the King will not ordinarily do otherwise? And that it was not
the Parliaments intent, but that in Cases extraordinary, He should make use of
His ancient Right. And what antienter Right, than the Service of the Subject,
for defense of the Kingdom? Nor is it to be thought, but when the Law assigns
the King the defense of the Kingdom, it presumes Him also, the power, to raise
the means for the doing it: Or else, it were but the charge of a defense,
without the power, and means: And if the King could not do this out of
Parliament, then were the Parliament the sole Judge, and not the King, which
also were contradictory to the free Majestic Power of a Monarch.

And if this be not enough, there is yet another Statute, that makes it clear:
For when it says, no Man shall be compelled out of his Shire, 1 E. 3. c. 5.
but when necessity requires, and then, shall be done as in times past: How is
that? If the King before that Statute could not have don't, that (But) had been
to no purpose; and if the King before that, could have don it (as I have shown
what was the constant practice, of His Father's, and Grand-father's times) it
is a plain Confession of that Right, and a modest entreaty, that He will not
ordinarily make use of that discretionary power, but as Necessity requires.

Other while again we have it by Implication, where such Savings have been
omitted. As when the Petition of Right was in agitation, 3 Car. 1.
the Commons, to take off all doubt of encroaching on the King's Rights, made
this Protestation, That it was not their intention thereby, to bind the King,
from His ancient Right; which the King also, on His passing that Bill, takes
particular notice of; however it comes to be left out in the last Edition of
the Statutes at large; as that Clause, saving the King's Regality, in the
Statute 2 R. 2. St. 2. c. 4. for Confirmation of Liberties, is omitted in all
of them. Nor was this Protestation made without Reason; for it had been long
before declared, 42 E. 3. 4 Inst. 14. and 357.
that they could not consent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the
disinherison, of the King, or His Crown, to which they were Sworn. -- It was,
18 E. 3. c. 4.
and is, a part of the Judges Oath. -- And of the Coronation Oath, That He
shall keep all the Honors, and Dignities of the Crown, Cowel. Tit. Oath.
in all manner whole, without minishment; and the Rights of the Crown hurt,
decayed, or lost, to His Power, shall call again into the ancient Estate: From
which it is undeniable, but that the King has ancient Rights; and being so, it
necessarily follows, That they cannot be taken away, till proved to be
forfeited: And if forfeited, who shall sit in Judgment on it, when the King
having no Peer in His Realm, 3 E. 3.19.
cannot be judged Himself; nor by His own Authority; and other, there is none
in His Realm.

3. The Power of Dispensing, or granting Non Obstantes to Penal Statutes, is
one of those ancient Rights. Sir Robert Holburn (of whom also before) confesses
it. The King (says he) may dispense with Penal Laws, and make them as none:
Ibid Ann. 552.
For there is a necessity that this Power should be in some Body: No Law says
the King, shall not do it; and Acts of Parliament, are but Leges temporis. Book
of Law. 82.
-- The King (says Sir Henry Finch) has an absolute power over all; for by a
Non Obstante, he may dispense with a Statute Law, though the Statute say, such
Dispensation shall be merely void. -- And Judge Barkely, to the same purpose: A
Penal Law is made, and a Clause in it, Ibid. Ann. 57^
that the King shall not dispense with it: A Non Obstante may be made to that
Non Obstante, for it takes away a necessary Power out of the Kings Hands --
whose Person, Ibid. Ann. 59^
and Royal Prerogative cannot be restrained (says Judge Jones) no, not by Act
of Parliament. -- And if there yet remained a doubt, Sir Edw. Coke will pass
for Authority (when speaking of some Statutes, that had restrained the King's
Power of granting Pardons) his words are these; 3 Inst. 236.
But it has been conceived (which we will not question) That the King may
Dispense with these Laws by a Non Obstante, be it general, or special. Now in
as much as this power is not in the People, or derived from them, it follows
(as before) that it be Original, Innate, and inherent in the Person of the
King, Inter jura summae Majestatis, and consequently, inseparable.

4. Statutes derogatory to the Prerogative, have, some of them been held for
void; others, recalled. An Act of Parliament (says Sir J. Banks) extends not
to take away any, Ibid. Ann. 569.
thing that belongs to the Crown of Common Right; for it is (Lexterrae) the Law
of the Land. The Liberties of the Subject, are by process of time, become of
Common Right, an Act of Parliament against which, 8 Coke 118.
were void: And can the Kings Prerogative, from which those Liberties were at
first derived, be of less right? Of less force in Law? When it is said, Rot.
Parl. 17. ^. 3. N. 13.
An Act of Parliament contrary to the Fundamental Laws, and Prerogative of the
King, shall lose the Name of a Statute. -- It binds not the King (says Judge
Vernon) and if it does not bind, ^^id. Ann. 581.
what is it but void? And his Reason is, because it is Derogatory to the
Prerogative. -- For (as Judge Jones) The Power of the King is a Special
Prerogative, ^^id. Ann. 592.
and if good at Common Law, takes away the Statute, Ibid. Ann. 598.
pro bono publico. -- And (the Lord Chief Baron Davenport) it would be Felo de
se, and so void, because it would destroy the Jus Regale.

And that the King may revoke such a Derogatory Statute, (...) prerog. 180.
we have the Authority of Sergeant Roll. And that it is no new thing, there
are several Instances. -- King John by Charter (which, says Gascoign^, is no
Statute, (...) E. 4.19
nor was it ever taken for such, but where it concurs with Magna Charta)
grants, That ( Nullum Scutagium, vel Auxilium, etc.) No Tenant by Knights
Service, shall be compelled to make a Voyage, to War against the French, or
Scots; or aid be taken, without common consent; but to make his Eldest Son a
Knight: Marry his Eldest Daughter: And redeem his Person. But when was this
granted? Was it not at Running-Mead, An. Reg. 17.
at what time there were Banners displayed, and the Barons and Commonalty in
open Rebellion against him? An odd Modus tenendi Parliamentum. And shall it be
said, an enforced Act, from a distressed King, shall bind the Crown? Or, shall
the Subject only plead Duritiam, and Minas? It is somewhat yet, that it has had
no Confirmation, in so many Parliaments since; and what difference (in
substance) whither the Candle be put out, or go out of its self, but that it
leaves a Stench behind it? -- However, the next is in point.

Some things derogatory to the Crown had been enacted, in Edw. the 3d's time:
As, 15 E. 3.
As, that no Peer should be questioned, but in Parliament. -- No Great Officer
removed, but in Parliament. -- No Clergyman, come before Temporal Judges, etc.
The King the same year, on better advice, revokes, and Nulls them: as contrary
to the Laws of the Realm; drawn from Him against His Will; and prejudicial, to
the Prerogative of His Crown. 4 Inst. 52
But (says Sir Edw. Coke) the Printed Book supposes, there was another
Parliament, in the said 15. E. 3. Whereas in Truth, the Parliament that
repealed them, was in Quind. Pas. 17. E. 3. In answer to which, it shall be
enough to me, that he owns, these Acts were made, the said 15. E. 3. as in Fact
they were, and that the Parliament of that year, made no Repeal of them, which
also is as true; and I hold with him: But with this; That it was a single Act
of the King's, and out of Parliament; for the King, the same 15th. year
considering, how in a manner, He had disrobed Himself of His Authority, by His
Writ, or Royal Mandate, to the respective Sheriffs (which carries not the Style
of an Act of Parliament, or any the other the Acts of His time) Wills, and
Commands them, that for the Reasons aforesaid, they proclaim those Acts, Null:
As may be seen in the Printed Statutes (in a particular Writ, to the Sheriff of
Lincoln) and a wonder it is, this also, had not been left out among the rest.
But now to come up with him: The Contrivers of these Acts (for it appears by
them, that the Grandees only, not the Commons, were concerned in them) saw the
King had asserted His Prerogative, and wanted not Resolution of going through
with it; and knowing, themselves were to be the same Persons in the next
Parliament, thought it high-time, to comply with the present; and since the
King would not come down to them, to come up to Him, and by making it their own
Act, stifle such a signal precedent for the Prerogative: And therefore, in the
17th. of the said King (which Sir Edw. Coke mentions) those Acts were repealed
in Parliament, and further declared, That they should lose the Name of
Statutes, as being contrary to the Laws, and Prerogative. Which (with all due
Submission) I leave to every Man's Examination; yet withal think, that he that
reported Calvin's Case, might have forborne this, or done it more Heartily. --
But the Parliament of the 15th. of His Father, took better Measures; there had
been Ordinances in the 5th. Edw. 2d. That the King could not make War, without
the assent of His Barons: The Parliament saw the King resolved to have them
off, and they generously prevented Him, by a Repeal of their own, as
prejudicial, Rot. Parl. 15. E. 2. M. 31.
to the Royal Power of a King.

5. Examples of Personal Disabilities, some created by Parliament: Others, by
Ecclesiastical Canons, dispenst with by the King: Others, void in themselves:
Wherein also, I do but further confirm, what I have before laid down, and from
the practice of past times, make a reasonable Interpretation of the present.
The St. 4 H. 4. c. 31. says no Welsh-man shall be Justice, or other Officer, in
any part of Wales: Yet the King may dispense with it. -- So the 8 R. 2. c. 2.
says, no Man of Law shall be Justice of Assize, 12 Coke 18.
or Jail-deliver in his own Country, i. e. in the County where he was Born, or
does Inhabit (for so the 33. H. 8. c. 24. explains it.) under the Penalty of an
100 l. And yet the King's dispensing with it, has been, and is every days
practice. -- And if it were not for the King's License, for Importing, and
Exporting, several Commodities, prohibited by Statute, Informers, and their
Auxiliaries, (Knights of the Post) might live well enough, without the Sweat of
their Consciences But admitting these may not come up (as I see not where they
fall short) The 13. H. 6. c. 8. is in point. No Sheriff (says that Statute)
shall continue in his Office above one year, under the Penalty of 200 l. and
every Patent to that purpose, to be void, notwithstanding the Clause of Non
Obstante: And the person, for ever after disabled, to bear the Office of
Sheriff. And yet Edw. the 4th, made a Sheriff for life, cum clausula Non
Obstante to that Statute, and adjudged good, 2 H. 7.6.
by all the Justices. -- Nor seems the Case of the Lord De la Ware, to be
altogether wide of the matter. William West, Nephew, and Heir, of Tho. Lord De
la Ware, had been disabled by Act of Parliament, 3 E. 6.
to claim any Lands, Dignities, etc. from his said Uncle, for his natural Life
only: 8 Eliz.
Thomas dies: The Queen restores William: And by new Creation, to the same
Title, calls him to Parliament, where he had place as puny Baron, and dies: 11
Coke 1.
Now the Case, as it is reported by Sir Ed. Coke, relates only to this, whither
the new Lord De la Ware, should take his place to the ancient Barony, by Writ,
or according to his Father's Creation, by Patent? and resolved, he should have
it according to the ancient Barony, which at the time of the new Creation, was
only Suspended. But I make this other use of it, That an Act of Parliament in
one King's Reign, barred not the Successor, of the Service of that Subject,
because it was due, by a Title paramount the disability, viz. The Law of
Nature: Here was a manifest disability, created by Parliament, in the Person of
William, and the intent of the Act was, he should not serve in Parliament, as
Lord De la Ware: The Queen finds she had use of his Service, as Lord De la
Ware, and by new Creation, enables him to perform it: So then, whither he sat
in Parliament by virtue of the old Dignity, or new Creation, it matters not: He
sat in Parliament: The disability was removed, and the Queen had his Service.

And besides this, there are other Matters, contrary to the usage of the Realm,
and Ecclesiastical Canons, in force among our selves, that have been dispenst
with by our Kings, and that, out of Parliament. The Clergy, by that usage, and
their own Canons, are disabled to bear Secular Offices, 2 Inst. 121.
and the doing otherwise, has been complained of in Parliament (45 E. 3.) yet
our Kings have frequently dispenst with them in it, and made them Chancellors,
Treasurers, etc. both before, and since the Reformation; and he scandals the
Authority of both, that will allow neither. -- On the other hand, Cromwell in
Henry 8th's time, was Mere Laicus, yet the King made him His Vicegerent in
Ecclesiasticis, however otherwise incapacitated, by the same usage, and Canons.

And that there have been several Personal Disabilities, created by Parliament,
yet void in themselves, we have the several Examples of Edw. the 4th. (who in
the Blood of His Father Richard Duke of York) was disabled from claiming the
Crown. -- Henry the 6th, to reassume it. -- Henry the 7th. attainted by
Parliament. -- Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth respectively Excluded by the
same Authority. -- And yet, the accession of the Crown, cleared those
Disabilities, without a Repeal; and what better could there have been dreamed,
from the late Bill of Exclusion?

6. Lastly, (and to close all) The King cannot divest Himself, or restrain His
Successor, of any regal Right, that is essentially in the Crown, i.e. really
annexed to His Person, as King: Because it would be in prejudice of the Crown,
in making Him less King, than He ought to be. Nor are any of the King's Grants,
or Concessions, to be understood otherwise, than Salvo Jure Coronae: For by the
same Reason, that any one part may be separated, may also more; and so from one
thing to another, even all at last, and very well if it holds a Dukedom of
Venice. Whereas, Quae Jurisdictionis, Bract. l. 2. c. 24.
and Pacis sunt, ad nullum pertinent, nisi ad Coronam, and dignitatem Regiam,
nec a Corona Seperari possunt, cum faciant ipsam Coronam. Such things (says
he) as concern the Supreme Authority, and Peace of the Kingdom, belong to none,
but the Crown, and Royal Dignity, nor can they be separated from the Crown, in
as much as they are the very things that make it a Crown. This Bracton, was a
Judge in Hen. the 2d's time, during the heat of the Barons Wars; and what he
means by those Words, but that the Crown were nothing without that Supreme
Authority, and the power of executing it, were worth his explaining, that would
draw any other sense from them: And if he shall not, it is but reasonable that
he confess, That the Crown is, and ought to be preserved entire; and as it will
not admit of any false Metal to embase it, will less endure any Clogs to
encumber it. I speak not of Popular, or Consular States, or what may have been
practiced in them: Or Elective Kingdoms, where tho One may bear the Title, and
Honor of a Prince, He has not Merum Imperium, the Supreme Power of an Absolute
Regality, but is Himself subject to that Power, which is transcendent to His,
and appertains to the State. But of the King of England, over whom the States
have no power, in as much as all Power, and Authority is derived from Him -- de
Lumine Lumen; but (as before) Salvo Jure Coronae: For the Royal Dignity is
indivisible, and every Subject owes Him Liege Homage, De vita, membro and
terreno honor, for Life, Member, and Earthly Honor; nor can any Earthly Power
discharge him of it.

William the Conqueror created Hugh Lupus (his Nephew) Hereditary Earl of
Chester, and gave him the County in Fee, Ita Libere ad gladium, 4 Inst. 211.
ut ipse Rex tenebat Angliam, ad Coronam: To hold it as free by his Sword, as
Himself-held England, by his Crown; Yet this exempted him not from remaining a
Subject. -- So, a Grant to the Abbot of St. Bartholomew, 14 H. 7.11.
to be as free in his Lands, as the King in His Crown: Yet he was still a
Subject, and shall pay a fine. -- But these (may be said) were the single Acts
of a King, and out of Parliament: We'll see now, what a Parliament could do.
Richard the 2d. by His Letters Patents created Robert de Vere (Earl of Lincoln,
and Marquess of Dublin) to be Duke of Ireland, and grants to him for life,
Totam terram, and Dominium Hiberniae -- Portus Maris, etc. The whole Land and
Dominion of Ireland -- The Sea Ports -- The Patronage of all Bishoprics -- To
appoint a Chancellor, Treasurer, etc. and all other Regalities within that
Kingdom, as fully, as Himself, or any of His Progenitors, ever had them: And
these Letters Patents, 9 R. 2.
were authorized by Parliament, Assensu Praelatorum, Ducum, Procerum, and
Communitatis Angliae in Parliamento: 4 Inst. 357.
But what became of it? They were Inseparable Regalities, and it fell to
nothing. -- So 4 years after, the King by the same Authority, gave the Title of
Duke of Acquitaine, to His Uncle John of Gaunt; and that also, came to nothing:
For that was one of the Titles, and Styles of the Crown, and could not be
granted. All which may be resolved into this, That a Kingdom without full
Regalities, is but the burden of a Nightmare; Men think they have something,
when in Truth it is nothing, but an unweildy weight.

And as the Crown it self is entire, so also ought the Descent to be as entire.
The same Rich. the 2d, devised certain Treasure to His Successors, upon
condition to observe all the Acts, etc. at a Parliament held the 21. of His
Reign: 4 Inst. 42.
and it was held unjust, and unlawful, because it restrained the Liberty of the
Kings His Successors. -- And on the same ground is it, that the King cannot
grant a judicial Office, 1 R. 3.4.
so as it shall not be void, against His Successor. -- Nor privilege of
Sanctuary for Treason, 1 H. 7.26.
to bind His Successor. -- And the Cessavit before mentioned, was good during
the King's Life, but not against His Successor: Nor was it so much the Death of
the King that vacated them, as that the power of granting them, being an
inseparable Incident of the Crown, that also descended to the Successor,
together with the Crown.

To bring this home, King Charles the 2d. made this Act: He had the Entierty of
the Crown in Him, and might have as well dispenst with it, as Queen Eliz. did
with Hers, of the 1st. of Her Reign, for the Common Prayer in the English
Tongue. And if the same Crown, be now descended to His Majesty, why may not He
rather dispense with this Statute, as being an Act of His Brother's, not His
own? Or if otherwise, how is it the Crown of England? Suppose King Charles 2d.
had given up His Crown (as once in His Reign, there wanted very little of the
asking it) would it have bound this King? I conceive not. Daniel 's Hist. of
Engl. f. 120. Ibid. 138.
Rich. 1st. resigned it to the Emperor. -- King John (what in him lay)
subjected it. -- Hen. the 3d granted to Monfort, and his Accomplices, all His
Regal Power, Ibid. 177.
and absolved His Subjects of their Obedience (ac si in nullo nobis tenerentur)
if He infringed the Charter, then made them. -- Rich. 2d. gave it up. -- And
Ed. 6. did what He could, to have turned it out of the right Channel. -- But
what became of all? The first, and the third, broke through it in their own time,
and the right Heirs of the others, found it no bar to them, and all the
Regalities of the Crown, came back with it, as being impossible, it could
subsist without them.

In short, the same weight, requires the same Shoulders: Nor will it be said of
Monarchy, as of the Sea, what it loses in one place, it gains in another: No,
That only can wrestle a Fall with Time, that keeps it self entire, in all its
parts: For the first diminution, is but a step to dissolution; as may be seen
in Buildings, take off any considerable Pillar, and the Fabric leans: There may
('it is true) be a kind of Majesty, yet remaining in mighty Ruins; but Men
rarely come near them, for fear of being involved in them. In a word, we have a
memorable instance of this in our late Murdered Sovereign, King Char. I. He had
made more Concessions, than might have been thought possible to have been asked
(but that nothing was impossible for the Men of that time to attempt) but when
they came to touch that Quick of His Regalities, He chose rather, to trust
Providence with His Kingdoms, than save His Life, and them, with the acceptance
of an embas'd Crown, or stain His Memory, with a Precedent so inglorious. Nor
can I quit the Argument with a greater authority.

And therefore to conclude this first part, and for the Reasons aforesaid, I
conceive, His Majesty may well dispense with Penal Statutes; and more
particularly, with this Statute.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHat has been the common wont to the Reader, suits better with this Matter, to
give it here; and that is, The occasion of what I have Written, which lies thus.

His Majesty through the greatest of Difficulties, and the repeated, but
fruitless Attempts of an Exclusion, had by the Death of His late Royal Brother
King Charles the Second, come at last, to the Crown; nor was it scarce on His
Head, when a double Rebellion, did more than threaten it: Upon this, The King
(sole Judge of the danger of the Kingdom, and in what manner to avoid it) being
little other than necessitated, either to trust those few He had tried, or
those many others, that had been for Excluding Him, grants Commissions to
certain Persons, not qualified according to the said Statute 25th. Car. 2d.
With a Non Obstante to that Statute: This begat some Popular Disputes, touching
the King's Dispensing Power; and those, a Desire in me, of satisfying my own
Judgment; and being confirmed my self, I thought it my Duty to strengthen
others.

In short, It was Written about Easter, 1686, and has but lately come to my
Hands again; by which means, I wanted the advantage of rivetting it, with that
Solemn Judgment in point (in B. R.) in the Case of Godwin, verse. Sir Edw.
Hales, upon this Statute, which was not till the Trinity Term following:
However, finding That, so great a Foundation, for a further Superstructure, I
went on with the Argument, upon that other Test. Act, 30. Car. 2d. as it
severally respects a Peer of the Realm, and a Member of the House of Commons;
and finished it with this, That the King might lawfully dispense with that
Statute also: But this being out of my Hands, and having little to recover it
by, but some imperfect Notes, I thought fit to Publish this First Part for the
present, with assurance nevertheless, of that Second Part to follow it: though
neither of them had been further thought on, but that the same Dust, being
raised anew, it was but Charity, to keep it from blinding the People.

FINIS.

