The power of the Committee of the County of Somerset, etc. Or Captain
Humphrey Wills his letter to the said Committee concerning their proceedings in
the Committee and there sending Capt Humphrey Wills, with a Guard to
VVaymouth, in the County of Dorset, there to be kept close Prisoner, in the
black Rod Goal, without expressing the cause of their so sending him to Prison.
Acts 25.27. It s^^m^ to me un^^^sonable to send a Prisoner, and not with all
to signify the crimes laid against him.
Contrary to the Scripture, Magna Carta, and the Petition of Right.
July 18: 1646 GENTLEMEN,
IT IS No Petition for liberty, no indeed: I am so far from such a thought,
that I deem my self much obliged, and therefore give you all thanks for the
honor you have don me, in judging me not only worthy of banishment, but also
of close imprisonment, for a good and an honest cause. Alas, it is but men have
condemned me, and amongst all the Children of men, only the Committee of
Somerset; and what is that? I hope it can prove no slander; or if it do among
some few, it is not worth the caring for, having the Al-knowing God, my
Conscience, and I am sure all the honest-hearted of the County to witness for
me, that I not only am, but have been, and I hope ever shall continue
faithful to the State, and truly honest to my Country. Then let the Devil do
his worst, and all his cursed Instruments, I cannot, I will not, nay I know not
how to fear.

If any of you do (though the now great and over-topping Pine do not) think me
worthy of my Sword again, as truly I suppose, Gent. some of you do, at least
as deserving, as the Marshall, which so uncivilly and rudely deprived me of it
I shall look on it as a favor and endeavor when it lies in me to appear
grateful, what? It may so fall out, we shall not be always Committee men,
neither I hope will poor England long stand in need of such, but through the
good endeavors of the Parliament, Gods blessing continuing (as hitherto it
has) upon them: I hope we shall once more live under, and be steered by the
ancient and fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. Gent. being honest, I cannot
but use down right dealing, and therefore may very well be termed a Clubman;
you may, if you please, smile at the homelynesse of the Title, but I Will assure
you, do but consider a while, and you may easily find, they are not so odious
as another sort of people in the Land are come, come though you despise us, and
trample us as dung under your feet, yet if you would look off your (own too
much admired) selves, you might apprehend that the Club (I mean of Somerset)
has done good and faithful service: First, in opposing Gorings Army, whereby
they could impresse no more men, nor he nor any of the Kings Garrisons raise
more monyes for the maintenance of the Soldiers, no nor scarce (but where they
were too strong for us) could they get provision or quarter for their men: next
in opposing Wills and Dorsetshire in which two Counties (it is well known) there
was a combination (and a strong one too) of a knot of desperate Cavaliers for
the seducing of the Clubmen from their first intentions (which was only an
Association to stand together in defense of their good) and bringing them in
wholly, yea at the Western parts, to have sided with the Kings party, for
proof of this, remember Catull. Hill, from whence they verily thought, to have
drawn 10000. men, to have fallen upon Major General Massies quarters at
Sturmister-Newton, in complying with the Parliaments Forces, as soon as ever
they appeared. viz. at Knoll-Hill, where the ever famous General Sir Thomas
Fairfax, came up (with near a thousand Horse) amongst them, demanding nothing,
which we did not readily and cheerfully yield unto.

And here with your leave) I will speak (because you have thought I deserve no
better then a Prison) two or 3. words concerning my self. The Country was
pleased at this place to voice me so serviceable, that they did verily believe
them selves to be forty thousand pounds the better for my endeavors and that
there was not any man in the whole County, who had engaged himself more ^r run
greater hazards in opposing the Cavaliers, Commissioners, as well as others, in
all their designs, then my self, and that had I not been very active, the
subtle pated Cavalier had undone them all, by drawing them (who were even as
sheep going to the slaughter) into an engagment against the Parliament, and so
contrary to their intentions, to have become enemies to those whom they did
most of all honor, and rejoice exceedinly to see. I speak not this to vaunt
my self: and yet I suppose in some cases (and this of mine is one of them) a
man may relate truths of himself, to vindicate himself from the traducements
of enemies without the danger of being looked on as Thrasonicall. But I presume
you think there is too much of this: therefore I Will turn to another subject.

What shall I say? All my desire is, that you would be charitably conceited of
the honest Club: And that I may the sooner gain upon you, will you favor us
so much as to remember, Bristoll, Dunster Castle Bainton, and many other places
in the West, and Major General Massies lying in the West so long, with only
one Brigade of horse, so near the enemies whole Army which had bin impossible
to be made good in security, had not the club stood soundly and come in roundly
unto him upon all occasions. Though he be as gallant a man, and as daring as
the world has any, yet I have hard him diverse time confess, that had not the
Country bin honest to him, he would never have advertured at such a rate: His
reasons were (and his sufficiency that way is sufficiently known) that the
Country where he then quartered, being full of narrow, and hedged lanes, his
horse (though as he could wish) was not considerable for the facing of such an
Army, had not the Country men bin faithful in giving him ce^tain intelligence
of every the least motion of the Enemy. And Gentlemen, you must consider as
their faithfulness to him was a great encouragement, so it must needs to the
adverse party, prove a great disheartning. This being undoubtedly so, me thinks
you should look upon the Club of Somersetshire, as friends and not at such a
distance, much less with such a cruel eye as now you do, I may very well
say. cruel: because no County that I can understand, has had such a hard
measure afforded it by their Committee as we that deserve best have had from
you. Take it not amiss Gentlemen, that I say so, or if you do, I care not; for
I am sure, I do you no wrong, your fame being flown London high already; yea
for this particular, if I say heaven high, I say but truth: therefore it is high
time to look about, for you cannot avoid the giving an account of your
Stewardship now which thing once done, I am (yet) so much your friend, that I
do but wish you all according to your merit: And then truly (I am persuaded)
there is scarce a man that knows you, will once look on you with an invious
or a commiserating eye. I confess I know little, yet this I know, you had many
friends in the Country once, but if they be now taken off from that affection,
you may impute it not only to your severe, but so your unequal carriage. What
I speak i will maintain, though I make a forfeiture of my self, as well as of
my liberty.

Why do such known Enemies, Arch Malignants, and gross opposers of the
Parliament, live at home free and untouched (as if they were as innocent as the
best) when others which were never active, but are men of honest conversation
having the whole Countries testimony for their fair demeanure, must have no
favor at all shown them, but be sequestered, Imprisoned, and in an instant all
they have is grubbed up and taken away which it may be cost them many years
sweat of him and his Family to gather together. Now if there be any Justice or
equal dealing in such courses as these, I appeal to any man's conscience, a
Committee man excepted. And as for your rigor, who knows not, if a Country
man reported rich be once seized on, what a hard thing it is for such a one to
escape your lime twigges, as if the only business of the peace in a reduced
County were to spoil the poor Subject, of that little which the wasting War
has spared, shall I to this complain of the difficulty that such a man has in
obtaining leave to have but his friends admitted with him especially if it be
once known that they can come to speak something for his advantage. Well,
but suppose he has gained their admittance, (which is,) (I can tell you on
every days savor) what a fair Carriage, and ketching kind of language do you
then use to discountedance that man, who but offers to have courage for the
truth, in justification of his Neighbor, or it may be a Brother, that is at
Stakes, Oh how unquiet and disturbed do you then appear to witnesses of that
nature how do you swell and bluster out, especially upon such a man is is able
to speak sense and truth both together, as if you would blast him for being
honest. Then begins nothing but, what are you, who sent for you, Is this any
business of yours; What made you hear. But if the man will not be daunted for
this, then, who knows this fellow here, where does he dwell, Hah, speak man.
And if this fail too then did he never take up Arms against the Parliament.
How stands he affected? Sirrah, you are a peremtory Jack, but we will take a
course with you well enough, ere you go, have you taken the Oath yet, reach
hither the Book, come you hither Sirrah, will you take it.

A Gallant way Gentlemen I profess, and very commendable to fright a man off
from an honest duty but every man I conceive will not be so baffooned as to
fall off, or to decline their friends for such juggling as this, what way have
you then? you have (to your eternal praise be it spoken) a trick (if you meet
with a Stubborn Gamster) that never failed at a dead lift, and that is to
Command him absent. Good Mr. Sanders, do not you remember this, truly if you do
not, I do. Now Gentl. if this be not harshnesse, I know not what to call so,
or if these courses be not able to dissaffect even a well affected people, I
understand not a provocation: I profess unto you the more I think or consider
them the more vile and odious they appear to me, and so I am persuaded they do
to all honest men that know what government is, and believe that liberty is a
reallity.

Neither do I know with what example to parallel it, except with that of
Tyberius, who had a custom and a cruel one, that when ever he caused any to be
put to death, he would forbid all their friends and kindred to weep, and to
pay the tribute due either to their relation or their merit. And what is the
difference now between your selves, and this sweet natured Emperor? all that I
see in it is, that he forbad to weep for a dead friend, and you to speak or
plead for a living. But what say you, Gentlmen, is it not enough of this? If you
think we will here, because it has bin something a hard Chapter, turn down a
leaf, and breath a while. The next shall be why I was committed, and we ^e
talk a little of the civil carriage to me as soon as I was your prisoner.

And here in the first place I must tell you (God can witness for me) when I
took my last journey to you and that voluntarily and freely out of the care I
had of the public good, (as it well appears to be no otherwise, when it was
only to inform you of matters of dangerous consequence) I thought I should
have bin looked upon with the eyes of such affection and love as a man that had
performed a rate piece of service, and not have found such a contrary and
cruel entertainment, as I encountered a screwing, (and nothing else but
screwing) and wresting my honest meaning, (with a design to ruin me) into a
contrary sense. Alas Gentlemen, what was the fault, if any that made me worthy
of a punishment of this high extremity; Did I any thing more, then advertise
you, that there were like to be great tumults and uproares in the Country
unless you did pay the Soldiers better, especially those of the Garrison,
w^ereby they might be enabled to pay for their quarter; And to make you the
fitter to apprehend the danger I told you the Club-men had risen twice already
below Bridgwater, and beaten the Soldiers out of their quarters and that they
were fairly drawing onward to the same posture about Poulden Hi^l and other
parts Eastward. Upon this you brak forth into a rage upon me and told me I was
the incendiary in the business. But you know my answer was, that if it did
appear so, I desired no favor, but punishment to the uttermost. And very well
I might stand upon mine integrity in this particular: for I can prove I have
labored to beat down and repel such thoughts or motions in the Country with
more bitter reproofs then was fit for me to use, and that, when they have (as
sometimes they would) come to me to entreat me to appear amongst them or march
with them; I have reproved them so sharply for it, that they have oftentimes
gone away much enraged at me. Therefore if I have no wrong, there is no man in
the world ever suffered wrongfully. But what was the conclusion of my
discourse? was it not with a request, that seeing you were now the only
Justiciaries we had, it did behove you having so fair a warning to endeavor
with al^ the possible care that might be to prevent murder and bloodshed in our
Country, which in all probability, without some better courses taken were
inevitably like to happen amongst us. And what was there in all this, that
could merit your hate, nay rather that did not deserve from you thanks, and a
courteous acceptance? But you say there was a letter sent in, that did inform
you that I one day met with some Soldiers, and among other discourse, told
them, that in case I going to the Committee for money for them should happen to
be committed, I did hope they would help to fetch me off. But this was but a
sequestrators report, and as for that sort of Cattle, I have heard some of your
selves say, that you did not think you had three honest of them in the whole
pack, of which small number, you thought one or two lived in the Parish where
I did. And yet though you know this, let but one of these (though the veriest
knave of all) come and swear any thing against a man, though never so honest
and known to be so, his Oath must carry it, though 20 creditable men, that are
Parliament proof come to prove and maintain the contrary, such a sad and
miserable condition are we poor Country men in.

But now Gentlemen, let me ask you one question. Why did you, whiles I was
talking with you (and at a great distance, as you had been honorable indeed)
snarle at me, and grinne upon me so, s^atching up pen and ink, and ketching at
my words, as if you would have extracted something out of me in spite of my
teeth, that should undo me? B^t if you will not tell me why, I give God the
praise he has discovered it to me, and has given me the courage to tell you
of it to your faces. The height of your malice, and cause of my imprisonment
has its rise from certain words, I should let fall concerning Col. Strods:
and this some of your own troop confessed, as they carried me to prison, that I
should (forsooth say) in Ilchester, that I was of the opinion, that Strood was
an honest man, and a good Commonwealths man, and that if he stood to be Knight
of the shire, he should not only have my voice, but 500 more of my procuring.
This, this was it. Master Pine, that made you so fierce, that sent me to
Waymouth: and so much for your committing me.

But now after the dreadful sentence was pronounced, which (thanks be to God)
was not like to that of the Medes and Persians, how was your demeanor then?
Why, truly so like that of Gentlmen, that I may question whether there were a
one amongst you, or no. To prove this: first No Bail would be taken, though I
offered 10000. l. deep. Next my friends were forbid to speak with me, and by
your Marshall threatened with imprisonment, if they came where I was. Then, as
if I had bin an open or absolute Enemy to the Parliament, a good sword, and
because it was so, taken from me. I must not write to any, no not to my wife,
not so much as to acquaint her with my condition, or to send for my
accommodations. I must be banished my Country. As if all this were not enough,
I must have a Letter sent along with me to the Governor of Weymouth to clap me
up close prisoner under the ^lacke Rod, which is a Goyle in the Town, where a
company of miserable wretches and poor creatures lie, that the very sent of
the place, together with the hot season of the year is able to stifle or poison
a man. This is a truth, you cannot be ignorant of, and remembered, me thinks
should set colors in your faces, if you be not beyond a blush. Had you handled
that Philip White whom I took near Bruton the last Winter, at this rate, it
might have sounded so^^thing to your praise, but to take such great care of
securing and wedging me fast, and to let him go upon such easy terms, such a
plundering desperate bloody rogue as he was, is a piece of Justice very
agreeable to all the rest.

Therefore seeing the Counties affairs are so preposterously and unworthily
managed by you, methinks you do ill, yea aggravate the ill of your lives, by
laboring to justify, your unjust courses the way you so commonly do, for when
something by you is done, which strikes wonder and terror to the hearts of the
hearers by reason of the unreasonablenesse, and barbarousenesse thereof, when
any take upon them (as (...) sometime have done) to question you for it, what is
your answer, but. T^is could not be by you avoided, The Ordinance of Parliament
will have it so, you confess it hard dealing, but you dare not budge an inch
from that Rule. And what is this I pray, but to cast an aspe^^tion on the
Parliament of England, which the whole Kingdom has ever cause to bless God
for, and honor. And thus much I will say being persuaded so i^ my very soul,
that you have acted such a distance from their comm^n^, and intentions, that
when they have once the notice of it, they will be so far from justifying you,
that you will be looked on as a Generation worthy of nothing else but contempt
and punishmen. And now Gentlemen my paper is almost spent, and I am stated with
this matter, I conceive my discourse has bin something troublesome, but there
is no remedy, I (...) prefer the discharge of a good Conscience before your
friendship, ^^d will, yea though I were sure to rivette my self aldayes of my
life is a Dungeon. But I know, and this I am sure of, you are all in a Chain,
for your Father (...) so, and you can do no more then my God does permit you,
and that is my comfort. In that judge of right, and reliever of the oppressed
is my only trust, therefore I now dare your worst, knowing assuredly, that the
word will so order and bring about things by his providence, that my sufferings
will tend as surely to your shame and infa^y, as to his Glory and my good, so
deferring a second part for a London Tune, I now leave you to your meditations.

July 6. 1646. from the Black-Rodde in Weymouth. Humphrey Wills.

For the Committee of Somerset sitting at ILCHESTER.
FINIS.

