AN EXACT NARRATIVE OF THE Affection, Services, Sufferings, and Expenses OF
Capt. REEVE WILIIAMS, Both at SEA and LAND, For the advantage of the public
interest of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND; From the beginning of the late War
to this present: Humbly tendered unto the consideration of His EXCELLENCY the
LORD GENERAL CROMWELL, And all other persons of Honor and Ingenuity, whom it
may or shall concern.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1653.

MY LORD,
THat which enduced me to present your EXCELLENCY with this short Narrative of
my Services, Sufferings, and Disbursements for this Nation, proceeds neither
from the vanity to magnify my own actions (being hardly worth the mentioning
before your Excellency) Nor from any pressing necessity of your pity; or a
present desire to be re-imbursed, though I do very much need both your
compassion and assistance: but the same principles of Reason, Honor, and
Justice, (that obliged my primitive engagement with the first for this Nation
in general, for defense of its Laws and Liberties) calling upon me to make
some sure provision, that after my long and faithful service, travells and
endeavors for the public Weal, I my self might not lie under a causeless
calumny, does necessitate this my humble application to your Excellency, to the
end that (my cause being fully known) I might not be rendered incapable of an
owning from your Excellency, and all good men that have acted though in a
higher station) on the same account.

I have only hinted herein at what I have suffered in that kind, without
recrimination, and am really as free from discontent thereby, as those who in
reward of their endeavors have received greater encouragement; and if your
Excellency shall daigne to consider the ensuing Narrative; and upon due
consideration thereof upon principles of reason, in your own judgment
conclude me a lover of my Country, I shall esteem my self no loser, by all
those hazards, services, and expenses I have undergone, upon the account of the
Public, it having heitherto (through mercy) been always by me a conclusive
satisfaction, that the dispensation of Divine Providence, had or did hand them
out to me as a sufficient patrimony.

My Lord, The assurance that I have of your Excellencies love to Justice, and
enlarged affections frequently evidenced to such as have been faithful,
together with the inward peace I partake as having done all things singly, with
Zeal, fervor, and faithfulness, has created in me an exceeding confidence
that neither my person can any way want encouragement, nor my cause
consideration, while my self and it remain under the protection of your
Excellency; to whom I in all humility make my appeal, as depending on your
justice (thereto encouraged by former favors) I shall with the greatest
assurance depend; being with all thankfulness devoted

My Lord, Your Excellencies affectionate and most obedient Servant, Reeve
Williams.

The Affection, Services, Sufferings, and Expenses of C. Reeve Williams for the
preservation of the English interest, on behalf of the Parl. and Army from the
beginning of the War to this present. Tendered unto the serious consideration
of his Excellency The LORD GENERAL, etc.
BEing convinced in his understanding of the justness of the Parliaments cause
in opposition to the King and his adherents, and desiring to manifest his
affection thereunto. In Anno 1641. he at his own charge fitted a Ship at Dover
to be employed in the service of the State against the Irish; but when he had
expended a very great part of his estate therein, Impressed was denied him, and
he being a stranger in those parts, and not able to bear the whole charge) was
forced to return with the said Ship to Wales, there to Winter, and remain
until Providence should offer an opportunity of his being serviceable to the
State, which fell according to his expectation; for immediately after the Battle
at Edgehill, the late King sent one Col: Donell to Swansey to seize upon the
said Ship, and in her to import Arms and Ammunition from France; but Capt:
Williams having notice thereof, took his opportunity and set sail with the
said Ship to Plymouth immediately; for which he was proclaimed a Traitor to the
King. But being safely arrived, and having supplied the Town with some
provisions, he took a Commission from the Earl of Stamford then General of
the West of England; and hearing the County of Pembroke was much straightened, and
in apparent danger of being lost to the enemy, the well-affected being almost
quite dismayed, having very few friends, many irreconcilable enemies, and no
one Ship of force belonging to the Parliament in their Harbor to support them,
he set sail to Milford haven: At whose arrival, the Parliaments friends were
much encouraged to defend themselves against the enemy, who were preparing to
come against them; and the enemy no less discouraged and deferred. From thence
he steered to Ireland, to Admiral Swanley, to whom he discovered the necessity
of the Parliaments friends in Pembrokeshire, with the advantage that might
accrue to the Parl. interest, if he would with any of his Ships of War but
appear to countenance and encourage them. Whereupon Admiral Swanley being
seriously affected therewith, sent Vice Admiral Smith with Capt. Williams to
Milford, where arriving they found two men of War of the Kings riding in the
Harbor, and threatening fire and sword to the Country, if they did not
relinquish the Parl. interest, and adhere to the Kings; both which were taken,
viz. the Fellowship by Captain Smith, and the Heart Frigot by Capt: Williams,
after 24. hours fight, to the great hazard of his own Ship.

Soon after he reduced the Town of Tinby to the obedience of the Parl. and
obliged them to receive a Garrison from Maj: Gen: Laughorne, although the town
at that time had only Capt: Wyat and Capt: Gibs and their relations that were
in the said Town, friends to the Parl.

All which services, expenses and hazards were by him performed upon the single
score of Affection, he having received no assurance of pay or satisfaction from
the Par. that might or did in any measure induce him thereto.

Neither rested he there; but with his Prize taken as aforesaid, sailed to the
Downs, where appearing to the Admiral and his service by Vice Admiral Smith
to him manifested, the same was represented to the Parliament, to whose
Officers he had delivered his Prize at Chattam, with all her stores and tackle
unimbezel'd, for which he received a public owning from the Parliament, and
was with his Ship entertained in the public service; and in a short time was
isntrumental in the bringing in many rich Prizes, which were disposed for the
service of the Parl.

The next year having with the Parl. Commission put to Sea for his own
account, he was taken by three of the French Kings Men of War and carried into
Breast, where his Ship was sold, and he himself after many hardships and
hazards escaped with life to England, by which he was damnified in his estate,
as is proved in the Admiralty, above 6000. l. all which losses and hazards he
sustained for no other cause but his constant adherence to, and advancement of
the interest of Parl. from whom as a reward and encouragement he received a
promise of reparation.

Being disabled in his estate as aforesaid, he resolved nevertheless to engage
again according to his ability: In order to which, with the assistance of some
friends, he built a Frigot with 32. Oars, with which he re-took the Scout
Frigot formerly lost, sunk the Frigot called The Cavalier of Bristoll, that
infested the Western coast, especially Weymouth; also a Frigot of S. Mallows,
which continually supplied the Kings party with Arms and Ammunition.

After which, and several other services done for the Public, he returned to
London; where residing some small time, and finding the power of the enemy at
Sea increasing, he again cast himself upon Providence, and with three Ships,
viz. the Mermaid, the Warspite, and the Increase, fitted, victualled, and
manned upon his own account he set out to Sea; and being outward bound in
Bolloign Road, he took the Charles Frigot belonging to Sir Nicholas Crispe,
which had long infested the Coast of Kent, and done much mischief to the
Parliaments friends; which Frigot was also added to his Squadron, and a
Commission obtained for her; soon after, ranging in the Channel he took the
Princes DoggerBoat, a vessel of eight Gunns, laden with provisions for
Pendennis fort, and a packquet directed to Sir Nicholas Crispe; which being
transmitted to the State, he steered toward the Coast of Ireland, as well to
prevent supplies consigned to the Irish from other Nations, as to make his
purchase upon them. Where arriving, on the South West part of Munster at Barnet
Shillock, he immediately landed some men, and forcing the Irish to retire to the
mountains, he seized upon a Magazine of the enemies, consisting of a good
quantity of Powder, Match, Beer, Aqua vitae, Salt Salmon, etc. all which he
carried on board without any loss, notwithstanding the opposition of 120.
Musketeers lodged in an adjacent thicket, that endeavored to prevent the
same, the said Ambuscado being forced to retreat to a Village, from whence they
were beaten also, and the Village Plundered, Burnt and destroyed, together with
the Magazine thereunto belonging; after which, he retired to his Ship without
the loss of any one man, so great was the mercy of God in his preservation.

From hence he sailed into the Bay of the Bantery, having a design on the Town
of Dingle de Couch, but understanding it had been newly sacked by Admiral
Moulton, he went to Anchor in the sound of the Blasketts, where hareing that a
Flemish Ship was that day gone into the said Town of Dingle, he presently sent
the Warspite and the Increase, to attempt the bringing her out, which was
accordingly performed with much gallantry by Captain Southwood, and Captain
Falconer in despite of 500. small shot that lined the banks, and endeavored
(but in vain) to Impede them.

With this prize (being the first taken upon that Coast) he steered to Kinsale;
where arriving, the Lord Broghill, then Commander in chief of the Parliament
Forces in Munster, being in great necessity, used some arguments to induce him
to sell part of the prize there for ready money, and to supply him therewith,
by which the Soldiers would be releeved, and he being thereby enabled to take
the field, the interest of Parl. would be greatly advanced, (with which he
complied) as not holding his own interest any way compatible, when the public
was in balance, as an evidence whereof he sold all or the greatest part of the
best goods for ready money, supplied him therewith, and received Bills charged
upon the Parliament, upon which account there remains to this day unsatisfied
3331.

The forementioned services and evidences of his Faith and affection so much to
the knowledge of the Parliament, by representations from several places, so
far prevailed, that a Commission was sent him from the Committee of the
Admiralty, to be Commander in chief of the aforesaid Squadron, and all such
other Ships as he could set out, or procure to join with him, which Ships were
to follow his directions; whereupon hearing that the enemy was fortifying in
the Isle of Cape Clear, which being known to the Lord Inchequeen also (who was
newly arrived there) and perceiving the evil consequence thereof, sent Cap:
Williams a Commission to land thereon, with desire if possible to force the
enemy out, and to secure the same for the service of the Parl. which he
accordingly effected without the loss of one man; the enemy being forced to
surrender upon quarter and promise of Transport to the maine Land, leaving all
their Arms, Ammunition and Spoil behind them, which booty being most in
Cattle and valued at 250. l. was equally divided amongst the Mariners, Captain
Williams disbursing the money, and retaining the Cattle there for the better
support of the place.

Having reduced the said Island as aforesaid, and took an exact view thereof,
and finding the same (although of a small value) in respect of it self, yet
very considerable to the State, as lying convenient to secure or prejudice the
Southern and Western trade, he first put in 35. able Seamen to secure the
Castle, who remained therein until he had procured it to be engarrisoned with
a Lieutenant and 46. Soldiers of the Lord Inchequeens Army, which were
maintained at his own charge; soon after, he repaired the Castle, and furnished
it with suitable provisions of all sorts, to his great expense, not doubting
but when upon examination it should appear what prejudice the Parliament would
have sustained, had the enemy possessed the same, he should have received
answerable satisfaction for his said services and expenses.

The Island being settled, he again put to Sea, and took the Ship Cat of
Rotterdam, laden with Salt and Tobacco, of which he made a man of War, and
added her to his Squadron, but ranging to and fro upon the Irish coast for
security of that Channel, all the Parliaments Ships being called off, the
winter growing on, and having by stresse of weather lost the Charles and
Increase Frigots, he with the Mermaid and Warspite returned for England,
leaving the Cat on that Coast, who soon after took in the River of Limbrick a
considerable prize, but he himself in England, they carried her into Kinsale,
and imbezel'd most of the goods, so that little advantage accrewed thereby; In
which services successively, there is due to him for victualling, 620l. from
the State, as may appear by Bills signed by the Commissioners of the Navy.

But the best services many times receive the least recompense or respect, as
may appear by the subsequent part of this Narrative: for Capt: Williams his
necessitated residence in England to procure from the Parl. the performance of
their engagements to him, their non-payment of the 333. l. due upon the Lo:
Broghills Bills, nor the 620. l. due for victualling, as aforesaid, the charge
of his Garrison in Cape Clear, his family and friends in England ruined by the
Enemy, together with the visible necessity lay upon him to supply the said
Garrison with men, in lieu of those of the Lord Inchequeens, which were to
march to their Regiment at Cork, reduced him to so great a necessity (against
which he could see no visible possibility of obtaining relief from the Parl.
or Com. of Safety in one case or other) that he which but few months before
was able and resolved to set forth to Sea, in the public service with four
men of War, a Gally, and two Brigandines, was hereby so disenabled, that he
was forced to sell a Considerable part thereof, only reserving to himself the
Mermaid and the two Brigandines entire; which having effected, and knowing the
time nigh expiring, wherein the Lord Inchequeens men were to return to their
Regiment, and seeing little likelihood of gaining any thing from the Parliament
or Com, of safety, that might conduce to the seasonable and effectual
settlement of the said Garrison and Isle, by reason of the daily increase of
new troubles; he was forced at his own charge to send his Brother, Captain
John Williams into Wales to raise and transport 30. men to engarrison the said
Island, and to furnish them with all necessary supplies that might enable them
to secure the same, which work he suddenly effected, and arrived there in due
time; the Lord Inchequeens men being called off, and the charge thereof
committed to him, immediately whereupon the Lord Inchequeen Revolted from his
obedience to the Parliament.

By which means, to the forementioned troubles a new one was added, and that
of a much greater concernment; for by this revolt of the Lord Inchequeen's the
said Island of Cape Clear, was in danger to be lost, as to the Parliamen.
Whereupon waving all other concernments, he addressed himself to the then
Committee of Safety, and laid before them the consideration of the place, with
all the advantages, that by the security thereof would accrue to the public,
but could obtain nothing but a single Order to enable him to take care
thereof, and a promise of necessary supply, although to this day he never
received any.

But being engaged to improve his utmost abilities, to preserve the said
Island, and finding no possibility of obtaining any recruit either of Men,
Provisions, Arms, Ammunition or Clothes; his own estate being nigh ruined, and
the Island no way able to resist the power of the Enemy; he immediately
dispatched complementall letters to the Lord Inchequeen to amuse and divert him
from designing or attempting any thing against the same.

Immediately whereupon, (having first obtained a letter from the Committee of
the Admiralty, to Captain Crowder Admiral of the Irish Seas, that he should
contribute his utmost assistance in securing the said Island) and having also
with some difficulty obtained an Order from the Committee of the Navy for the
payment of 400l. in course from Sir Henry Vane then Treasurer, as satisfaction
for the victualling of his two Ships, the Helena and Mermaid; but no ready
money being to be had thereon he was necessitated to take up 200l. upon
Bottomry, for which he paid 350l. as principal, and adventure for 8. months
100l. upon specialty in London, and 150l. in Bristoll, so great was his charge
in victualling, and procuring 60. Seamen besides Soldiers, by him taken up to
be employed in the said service.

Being by the extraordinary appearance of God enabled to pass through all
these difficulties, and out at Sea in the Mermayd, a dangerous combination was
set on foot by some ill-affected persons, officers in the said Ships, who
designed to carry the Ships to Illford Sluice, where the revolted Ships then lay;
but the same was through mercy discovered and prevented, and the offenders
seized and secured in the Parliament Garrison at Tenby in Wales. From whence,
as soon as a supply could be got, to answer the number of the forementioned
Conspirators, he set sail for Ireland, and in few days arrived before the
harbor of Kinsale, where coming to an Anchor without command, he writ another
letter to the Lord Inchequeen, therein intimating, that according to his former
letters he was come upon the coast of Ireland, with only one Ship; with which
he was Commissioned to take upon the Irish by the Parliament, which service he
was necessitated for 6. months to undertake as well to repair his fortunes
ruined by the Irish, as to recover a cosiderable sum of money due to him for
former service; and therefore desired his Lordship to take no notice of him for
that time, but command the delivery of a Brigantine by him built and remaining
in harbor, and that he might have provision for his money, for which favor he
should remain (setting aside the aforesaid necessity) his Lordships most
faithful and obedient servant, etc. With which Letter the Lord Inchequeen was
so fully satisfied, that he not only ordered the Governor of Kinsalle, but
all the other English Garrisons, to let Capt: Williams have what he desired for
his money; and his Brigantine was sent out accordingly, with which he
immediately set sail to Cape Clear, where arriving, his Brother and Officers
came aboard him, to whom he gave suitable instructions how to manage their
business, competent supplies to enable them thereto, and exchange of Soldiers
for fear of deficiencie or combination, together with an assurance of not
only frequent Visits, but Supplies, as necessity should require.

Having thus secured the Island, he sailed toward the River of Limbrick, where
he took a small Prize, which in his returning to Cape Clear was lost by foul
weather. Soon after he met with a Dutch ship laden with Merchants goods, and
bound for Limbrick, which he resolved to secure in Bristol, but Providence
ordered it otherwise, as by the sequel may appear; and that dispen fation
which he thought to be of a destructive tendencie, proved the only means of
the preservation of the said Island. For,

Sailing along the Coast, the wind being at N. N. West, betwixt Kinsale and the
River of Cork, in the fair way, the Tide being very low, and his Prize ahead
some few Ships length, she struck her Rudder against a Rock, but went over
without any considerable detriment: but Cap: Williams sailing speedily after,
before ever they could by weasle, Gunne, or other signal give notice, his Ship
drawing more water, struck so violently, that 7. foot of one side of her Keele
was broke off; and had she not been a very strong Ship, she had sunk down
right, but with much labor the Pump kept her swimming: however he was forced
to stand for Kinsale, where coming to an Anchor as formerly, without Command,
and not suffering any boat to come aboard him, for fear of discovering his
necessity; he writ again to my Lord Inchequeen, and in four days obtained an
Order to come into Port, to enjoy security there, with liberty to put his prize
to sale, and assurance that he should be free to dispose of himself and
affairs at his own discretion, etc. whereupon he went into Port, haled his
Ship ashore to be mended and exposed to sale, the said prize.

While this was on foot, Captain Pen came with the Nonsuch Frigot into Kingsale
with the Lord Inchequeens eldest Son, to whom he went privately and acquainted
him how affairs stood with him, together with the reason of his being there,
and by him to enform the Admiral of his design, with the knowledge whereof he
could not trust any of his own party.

But Capt: Williams his condition, not being publicly known, some Gentlemen
carried from Ireland to Milford, reported at Tinby in Wales, that he was
revolted with the Lord Inchequeen, whereupon a ketch by him taken formerly from
a Wexford man, was seized on for the use of the State, but his Brother together
with Colonel Horton and Col: Jones, making an address unto the Admiral, who
knew Capt Williams integrity, caused her to be returned; in whose custody she
remained several months, till afterward upon a scandalous Petition fraught
with sundry false suggestions presented to the Generals, she was ordered and
delivered to a Dover man, that owned her some years before; whereby he was
damnified nigh 300l.

But though it was his unhappiness to suffer causelessly, his ensuing actions
manifested that his affection was not resident with his body in Kinsale, for he
had no sooner repaired his Ship, but he prepared to put to Sea, in which
juncture of time, Prince Rupert with the Revolted Fleet came thither; who by an
Order in favor of the Limbrick Merchants, notwithstanding Inchequeens
engagement to the contrary) caused his Goods to be seized; but afterward by
the procurement of the Lo: Inchequeen, they were again freed; but with so
much regret on the part of the Princes Adherents, that he went not only in
great danger of his life, but was left without all visible possibility (without
an extraordinary providence) either to get his Ship to England, or secure the
Island of Cape Clear. Whereupon to escape their malice, and connivance to get
his Ship into their Fleet, he designed her for a Voyage to the West Indies with
Passengers, which with much difficulty was effected, a Kinsman of his being
trusted therewith; who at his return was by him ordered to touch at Cape
Clear. That design being accomplished, he then cast about how to secure the
said Island until the arrival of the English Army, which he expected in the
Spring, and the return of the said Ship. In order to which end, (after he had
sold the remains of his goods, and performed such formalities to the Prince and
Lo: Inchequeen as his condition enforced) he betook himself to the Island,
where he remained, until he received intimation of the loss of his Ship and
goods, to the value of 3000.l. and the arrival of the so long hoped and
expected Army from England, under the command of the now Lo: General Comwell;
to whom as soon as conveniencie was afforded him, he made a tender of his
service, (some months before manifested by Letter to the Lord Broghill) which
was received with evident testimonies of good will, and his services and
affection acknowledged, with promise of future favors; but the General being
by public affairs withdrawn from that service, some persons to whom the
management of affairs were (as to the securing of Cape Clear) committed, who
(as belceved) were parties to the former false representation of his revolt;
although they were now convinced of their error, yet apprehending they had
justly prejudiced him against them, instead of salving the breach, withheld the
relief intended for the Island, so that he was not only a third time ruined
in his Estate, but also the said Island and Garrison endangered to be lost to
the Enemy, who took encouragement by his necessitated absence to attempt the
besieging thereof, as by the following particulars will be undenyably evident.

First, by some underhand suggestions they endeavored to dispossess him of
the Command of the said Island, which being by the confident assertions of Sir
Hardres Waller, and a perfect narrative of his services and suffering, tendered
to, and considered by the Lord General, cleared and removed, he had his
Commission signed and delivered with Order that direction should be given to
Col: Fayer Governor of Cork, to settle an establishment for the said Castle
and Island, but notwithstanding all endeavors, that was for night three weeks
obstructed, in which time Providence dispersed the enemy by means of a
discontent that arose among themselves.

At length with much importunity, he obtained two files of Musketeers, and an
Officer, as a Recruit on the States pay, which were continued only one month in
the Garrison, and then sent for away, unless Capt: Williams would maintain
them at his own charge; neither were they content with this, but by some
underhand working with the Commissioners for the Revenue, procured the Island
to be offered at a Rent to who would give most: to color which proceedings, a
letter they showed C: Williams, as pretended to be sent from the Lord Deputy
Ireton, although it be evident by the purport thereof, if any such letter were
sent by the Lo: Deputy; it was occasioned by some letter first writ to him,
desiring his direction therein, otherwise he would never have returned in
answer; amongst several other things, that unless they could prove Capt:
Williams a Delinquent, it was but reason he should keep the Island, paying a
Rent, etc. whereupon he seeing the design of his enemies was to take all
possible occasions to eject him, he saw reason and necessity to countermine
them, to which end he submitted to a Rent, without Capitulation, whereupon 30l.
per an. was imposed, and he enjoined at his charge, to keep Guard in the
Castle, which contract being ratified, he returned to the Island.

But the enemy perceiving how he was slighted, and that he was no way likely to
receive any assistance or relief from the adjacent Garrisons, of which it is
supposed they had intimation before hand, (as by the sequel if compared will
appear probable) immediately united as one man, contributing out of every
family, upon an expedition for re-taking the said Island, as a place most
considerable for their refuge under the conduct of Cornelius O Driscoll, who
was a person in quarter, but was made Colonel for that defigne, who with the
assistance of Osolivan Bear, who furnished Arms, Boats, Ordnance, and the
like, and fifty of the most bloody Rogues in that part of the Country, having
levied their forces, they settled at Crook Haven, some four Leagues from Cape
Clear, there expecting an opportunity of transport and landing: for prevention
whereof, Captain Williams designed his brother Captain John, to go to Sea with
a Boat manned with ten Musketeers, to see if he could fall into their quarters,
and seize, burn or sink their Boats, provided for their Transport, which
failing, upon his return he was pursued with three of the enemies Boats, with
whom he was forced to engage, and with whom he continued a desperate fight,
many of the enemies being slain, and their Boats forced to retire; after
which, Captain John Williams being by Gods providence preserved, with all his
men, who received several wounds, but none mortal, returned safe to the
Island.

Soon after he received information that the enemy had appointed a Rendevouze
at a place on the maine, two Leagues from the Island, whereupon he a second
time sent out his Brother Captain John Williams, with a small Skiffe manned,
to the end he might fall in among them, to spoil their Boats, but the weather
proving turbulent, he took only three, which by reason of the foulness of the
weather, being disenabled to bring them to Cape Gleere, he carried and secured
at the next English Garrison; from whence he had four Leagues to Row to Cape
Clear in foul weather, against the wind in a dark foggy night; but
necessities overcoming all difficulties, to Sea he put, and being with much
hazard got almost home, he fell among the enemies Boats, who were viewing a
place where they intended to attempt Landing, but being discovered by the
enemy, a Controversy arose between them whether it was an English Boat, or one
of their own Company; during which dispute he made a shift to get a small Rock
between him and them, by which means he escaped, and got himself and most of
his men safe on shore, and to the Castle.

But having no considerable strength, could no way further impede their
design, or prevent their landing, but was constrained to endure a siege by
600. men, who immediately made their approaches within Pistol shot of the
Castle, where they raised a Battery, planted their Ordnance, and sent a summons
to surrender the Castle upon good terms, but he denying to treat or surrender,
they fell to battering the Castle, and spending small shot upon all places
where they thought to annoy him, although to small purpose, whereupon in a dark
night they attempted a storm, but were repulsed, with the loss of 19. of
their stoutest men, which were left dead under the walls, without any loss
received by him in the said Castle.

The enemy seeing no probability of obtaining the Castle, only continued their
siege five or six days, till they had carried away all his cattle, and stock
in the Island, to the value of 800. l. as it was by Oath proved by order of the
Commissioners of the Revenue. After which they marched away, and returned to
their several homes, and were received into quarter upon promise to pay
contribution; his losses and sufferings being not deemed considerable to be put
in the balance, that he should merit repair from that enemy.

For return of which favor, within a short time after that very enemy fell
into Rebellion again, and committed many outrages. Whereupon the Lo: Broghill
fell into their quarters, to whom the Commissioners of the Revenue writ a
Letter, desiring him out of what prey he might or should take, to repair Capt:
Williams; but although he took all their Cattle, Capt: Williams could reap no
benefit thereby, in respect a precedent Order was pretended to be made by the
Commissioners; whereby it was directed that all prey should be sold, and two
thirds of the provenue paid into the Treasury, and the other to the party
engaged in the action. In this manner, contrary to all former presidents, (it
being usual to repair the English upon the Baronies that prejudiced them) he
was left without possibility of relief for his damage sustained by that Enemy.

And therefore the premises being duly weighed, and a serious consideration
had both of his services and sufferings, it is very much hoped, That both your
Excellency, and all persons of worth and authority, will be pleased to cast a
favorable eye and respect toward him, and speedily and effectually provide
for his full reparation, and just satisfaction of whatsoever shall be made
appear to have been disbursed by him, or wherein soever he has been damnified
in service of the public. To give light wherein, be pleased to examine the
following account.

1. By his being employed in the taking, fortifying, and securing the same, he
has lost his Sea-imployment; in which if he had continued, would have yielded
him a considerable Revenue. 2. The loss of his own Ship, worth -- 3000. l. --
0 -- 0 3. The loss of the Increase and Charges Frigots, with a Brigandine
employed in defense of the said Island, together with a Ketch del. by order of
the Genesis to the value of 500. l. 4. For Victualling due to him -- 1033. l. 5.
There is expended by him in taking, fortifying, maintaining and defending the
said Castle and Island, as by an exact account will appear, -- 3000. l. 6. For
damage sustained by the Siege, and loss of his cattle -- 800. l.
By all which it may appear, if duly examined, that by the preservation of
that Isle and Garrison, he is damnified above 8000. l.

Besides the loss of his employment at Sea, which if improved, might have
rendered him capable of a more then ordinary relation; over and above the
probable estate that he might justly have accumulated to himself in his
ordinary command as Captain.

But the forementioned losses and accidents arising thereupon, did reduce him
to great necessity, his charge being certain and great, his debts contracted
upon him for support of the Garrison, and other his relations numerous, and no
visible possibility left him of repaying the one, or supplying the other.

Whereupon seeing his endeavors at Land, suited not to his desires, he resolved
as his last refuge to try his own proper element, the Sea; to which purpose he
built him a small Frigot, which being manned and fitted, he accordingly set
Sail, and had suddenly an opportunity of relieving two Newfound Land ships,
the one of Poole the other of Weymouth, the same being taken by the French,
both which were restored to their proper owners. To conclude, after several
skirmishes, losses, hardships and hazards, God was pleased as a return of his
prayers, and reward of his industry and patience, to give him an opportunity to
take upon the French, whereby he has been enabled to pay a considerable part
of his debts, and maintain his relations during the time of his Petitioning
the Parliament to take his Case, Sufferings, Expenses and Services into
consideration; to the end the said Island of Cape Clear, never worth in times
of peace above 100. l. per an. having been by him reduced so many years since,
and maintained at his charge, might in consideration of his said Services and
Arreares be settled upon him and his Heirs, he engaging to plant it with
English, who shall preserve the same without any charge to the State, and to
receive debentures for his disbursements. In return of which favor, if he had
or could obtain, (although his Arreares due for the keeping thereof, would
according to the usual valuation have purchased a much better estate) it would
create an exceeding obligation in point of gratitude upon him, and futurely
devote him, his abilities, life and estate, faithfully to be employed and
improved for advancement of the public interest.

But God which is the wise disposer of all things, has so ordered affairs,
that his endeavors have been hitherto fruitless; only he is kept up by a
principle of dependence, nay confidence, that though one Generation be passed
away, that might have been isntrumental in repayring not only his breach,
but the breaches of the Nation, yet that the time is at hand, wherein every man
that has with Faith, Affection and Fervor laid out himself and estate, for
defense of the public, shall be answerably repaired, according to their
services and sufferings; In assurance whereof, he has (principles of reason
and necessity inducing) taken the boldness to draw up and present unto serious
consideration this Narrative; In hope that when an opportunity shall be
offered, he amongst many others may be remembered and repaired by the payment of
his disbursements and arrears, or settlement of the said Island of Cape Clear
upon him and his heirs, as desired for satisfaction thereof.

CONCLUSION.
My Lord,
THis Narrative of my little peregrinations and services for this Nation, (yet
not without many dangers and crosses to my self) together with the hard measure
I have hither to found where I had hopes of better, being prepared for the true
information of all such as either ingeniously desire the same, or whose worth
and authority may justly expect to be satisfied therein. I have presumed (yet
in all humility) to address, more especially to your Excellency, in regard I
found both in your self and your honored son the Lord Deputy Ireton, so
clear a judgment of my actions in Ireland, so free from distorting things to
the worst; so sensible of what a Soldier (without suspicion to his faith) might
do when surrounded with difficulties, as was sometimes my case with the Lo:
Inchequeen. Thus as I must ever honor the memory of so large a worth and so
clear a goodness, so when occasion shall make me happy, I shall thankefully
testify to the uttermost of my abilities; And as I was blessed there, with this
favor from you, which (had not others envied) had eased me of this
publication, and unwelcome speaking of my self; so must I with all
thankfulness acknowledge, that in all my late long attendance upon the Parl,
to have my services and sufferings taken into consideration, I have found none
more ready and forward then your Excellency. And now my Lord, my hopes upon
the late Parliament ending with its dissolution, there is not any in this world
so capable of ministering relief to my languishing condition; nor (as I have
good cause to believe) so inclinable to do me right as your Excellency, and
therefore if where I have found the greatest virtue and readiness to help, I
press with more importunity then well becomes me: Let my necessity somewhat
excuse; and bear it I beseech you, as the greatest goodness has ever been
accustomed; and be pleased to favor me yet so far forth as to put my humble
desires herein expressed into some speedy way of trial, as to the justness of
them, and when they shall so appear, into as speedy a course for their
attainment. To which end, a Petition to the Council of State is in readiness,
that by your Excellencies favorable protection, both my self and Family may
be supported and encouraged; and be preserved from that calamity, misery, and
reproach, which malicious and ill affected persons wish unto us for our
constant affection to this Commonwealth, and faithful adherence to your
Excellency, for whose fruition of all temporal and eternal happiness shall
ever pray,

Your Excellencies most humble Servant, REEVE WILLIAMS.


