PROPOSALS FOR A Million-Fund AND A True Expedient For Advancing the WOOLLEN
MANUFACTURE.

Humbly Offered to the Consideration of the Honorable House of Commons.

By JOHN WILLIAMS, Mercht. And Trader in WOOL.

LONDON: Printed by George Latkin, Jun. at the Half Moon in New-Street, without
Bishopsgate, 1697.

PROPOSALS FOR A Million Fund, etc.
AN Additional Duty, Equivolent to the Charge of Dying, being put upon all
Cloth, Searges, Bays, Stufs, Stockens, and all other Goods made of Wool, that
shall be Exported White and Vn-dyed (except those that shall be Exported
Whitened which are perfectly Manufactured, and ought to pay but Half Duty) will
amount to double the Duty which the King receives out of all the Product of
England, for Goods Exported, and will Promote Trade, Encourage Navigation, and
Advantage the Subject in general; Ease them of a Considerable Tax which they
must otherwise bear, whereas no Subject of England Loses a Penny, but Gains by
this.

Reasons for, and Objections against this Duty, and their Anwer.

Reasons for it.
I. THE King will receive great Sums for the Duty of Goods that must be
Exported White and Vndyed, notwithstanding this Duty, because all Dyed Goods
are Prohibited in some Places abroad.

II. The King will Receive great Sums more for duties of Dye-Stufs (which are
very high) because this duty will occasion the Dying of Great Quantities.

III. Merchants, Seamen, Salters, Dyers, Packers, Tillet-makers, and others,
will have a far greater Trade, and will be enabled the better to pay other
Taxes.

IV. It will much Improve Land, by sowing of Wadd and Wild, two chief sorts of
Dye-Stufs that grow in England, worth now at least Fifteen Pounds per Tun.

Great Objections against this Duty.
That our Neighbors have a Law, That none of our Manufactury shall be brought
into their Dominions Dyed, and these Goods are so much beaten down already,
that the Spinners work hard to earn Four Pence a day, and a Weaver works night
and day to get Five Shillings per Week, and one or two of his Children must
help him to Spole and Wind his Quills for him, or else he cannot get so much;
and this Five Shilings is all he has to pay his Rent, and Maintain, it may be,
Seven or Eight Persons; and Fullers scarce get 2 d. per piece by some of these
Goods, for that they are not half Dressed; therefore if this be Imposed, we
cannot dye our Goods in England, and they will not bear the duty to be sent
abroad, so that we knock the Trade on the head by a Law; and these poor Workers
will be Starved, for they are at this time Petitioning the Parliament from all
parts, for help against decay of Trade, and these Goods will not bear such a
Duty; neither can it be Imposed unless you will Ruin the Nation, for the
Woollen Manufactury is the Staf of our Land, and a very Tender Regard must be
had to it, for we must not burden nor clog Trade, which is now in a Balance
between us and our Neighbors, and the Scale is ready to turn against us; and
as many more Truths and Falcities, Delusions and Lies as cunning Men can invent
to get Money, by betraying their Countries Interest, etc.

Answered.
It is the Wisdom of our Neighbors, finding the great Advantage arising by
Dying our Manufacture, to make a Law that no Dyed Goods shall be Imported into
their Dominions.

It must necessarily then follow, that it is our Wisdom, if we permit our
Neighbors to have all the Profitable use of the Manufacturing of our Goods, to
make them pay a Duty for it, equivolent to the charge of Dying (if we can
without hindering our Trade) And we can do it, unless they Countermine us one of
these Three ways, 1. They must bring People to wear no Clothes. Or, 2. They
must wear some other sort of Clothes. Or, 3. They must find another way to
procure the same sorts of Goods as Cheap as from England, after this Duty is
Imposed.


If I defend our Nation, and carry these Three Points, you will allow, That
England is able to put a Pole Tax upon the whole World.

1. The Duty will not arise to above One Shilling upon a Suit, and People will
not go Naked, though their Clothes cost a little dearer.

2. We find Men so wedded to Custom, that you have a hard matter to beat them
out of their old way, in doing any work, though you had a new way never so much
easier; be sure then they will have the same Clothes they use to wear, if they
cost One Shilling dearer, they will not change their Habits for twice the value.

3. They must find a way to procure these same sorts of Goods as Cheap
elsewhere as from England, after this Duty is Imposed.

Answ. Here it happens very luckily, for the greatest part of these Goods are
the very Cheapest that are made in all parts of England, and yet take up the
greatest quantity of Wool, and are such as England does in a most special
manner exceed all the World in, as Yorkshire Cloth, Colchester Bays, Exeter
Searges, viz. Long and Short Else, Half Quarters, Ten Hundred Yards, and
Ranters Norwich Cheynes, etc. For,

1. By long Experience, and continual Practice, we have got such a Slight and
Skill to make these Goods, as well as all other, that no Nation can out do us.

2. We have greater Plenty of Wool than any other, and therefore it is Cheaper
here than in other Countries, which plainly appears, if we consider that Men
adventure their Lives and Estates to Transport our Wool to other Nations, then
it is evident that they are Encouraged by Price, or they would not do it.

3. When they give such Encouragement to bring them our Wool, and these Goods
take up such great Quantities of Wool, our Neighbors will never set about
making these Goods that are so Cheap. Now let us look back and we shall find,

First, That these are the Cheapest sorts of Goods.

Secondly, That we have the greatest slight and skill in making them.

Thirdly, That we have Wool Cheapest. And,

Fourthly, Nothing's got by all our Art and Skill.

Sure then our Neighbors cannot find a way to buy these Goods cheaper than
from us, after this Duty is put upon them; neither can any other Country out
do us.

But to go through with the Answer to the latter part of the Objection, That
the Trade is just at a Balance, and the scale ready to turn against us; this
is the reason we are forced to beat down our poor Workmen, that they can scarce
Live, and it is as much as we can do to maintain our Trade; we are under sold in
the Streights, etc.

Answ. The Trade comes to a Balance and many times turns against us, but our
own Manufacture are in both scales, which comes to pass by this means.

The duties of our Dye Stufs are very high, so that our Neighbors dye our
Goods cheaper than we do, therefore they are carried to other Countries and
Dyed, and then sent to the Streights, where our Merchants are under sold by our
own Goods: We may thank our Hambrough Merchants and others for this: Against
whom have the poor Makers Petitioned many time? but against the Hambrough
Company, whom they did set forth, in their Petitions, to be Ruiners and
Destroyers of their Trade.

Now if this Duty be Imposed, our Merchants will be able to Trade again with
our own Goods, for they are no other then our own in other men's hands, that can
stand in competition with us; it will then necessarily follow, that to set our
Merchants even with Foreigners in their Trade, you must impose this duty on
Whites, or take of half the duty of Dye-stufs, (which is a thing not fit to be
named) for we cannot Trade unless we betray our Nation, as some do, who send
out our Goods to be Manufactured else where; and what difference is there
between this and the sending abroad our Wool? It is Spun, Weaved, and one
third Dressed; but Spinners and Weavers are slaves to Foreigners, and neither
King nor Subject get any thing by these Goods, which are two thirds of the
Nations Manufactury, and tends only to our shame and dishonor: To whom shall
the Trade go from us? when it requires all the Goods which can be made in the
whole World; as for instance the last year it swallowed up all the Wool in the
Nation.

This is not a Burthening but an Easing of the Trade: Why should not we be able
to Sell our own Goods in the Streights as Cheap as our Neighbors?

We may observe from the scarcity of Wool last year, the great advantage which
has accrued to Trade by the act of burying in Woollen; there are near Ten
thousand Parishes in England and Wales, and if you Compute one to dye a week
out of a Parish, one with another, and allow four pounds of Ruf Wool, before
it is Manufactured, in a Burying Suit, it is Forty Thousand Pounds of Wool buried
every week, which is about One Thousand Tun a year buried, and is a great
advancement to Trade.

It would be a good answer to the Petitions of the Poor Tradesmen, if we find
out another Expedient like to this, and lay a small Tax of Two Shilings the
year to be paid at Sixpence per Quarter by all those that wear any other then
Flannel Shirts, and if the People should all come to this, and avoid the Tax,
we may compute it thus, allow five-hundred People in a Parish, and these have
two Shirts each every year, and two pound of Ruf Wool must be allowed to make
a Shirt, which shall scarce be above one when made, so that here is four pound
of Wool consumed more then now by five hundred in every Parish, which will be
a Tun in a year, and ten thousand Parishes is Ten thousand Tun, which will be
consumed in one year, but if you will allow but Two hundred and fifty in a
Parish, then it is Five Thousand Tun; here you see what a Great Consumption this
will make of the Woollen Manufacture; this will advance Trade and make goods
dearer, and then shall be a quiker Trade and greater price, and quite contrary
to the Hambrough Companies Notion, who would bring Goods for cheapeness, like
dirt, to advance Trade: Thus I have cast my two Mites into your Treasury, where
I leave it to have that use made of it which your Wisdom shall direct: And
Humbly Pray, if this pass into an Act, that as it will be of Mighty Advantage
to the Dyers, so if this House think fit, for the Encouragement of all other
Persons that study the Promotion of Trade and the Welfare of the English
Nation, a Clause may be Inserted, That the Dyers pay the Proposer One Farthing
a Piece for all Goods charged by this Act, which shall be Dyed during his Life,
which can be but for a little while, he being in the Fiftieth Year of his Age.

FINIS.

