Ens fictum Shakerlaei: OR THE ANNIHILATION of Mr. Jeremie Shakerley, his
in-artificiall Anatomy of Urania Practica. Wherein his falacies or ignorance,
are demonstratively detected, his malice in its groundless colors displayed,
and the Authors of the said Urania Practica justly vindicated from his unjust
Aspersions. By Vin. Wing, and Will. Leybourn, Philomathematicis.

Scientia non habet inimicum, nisi ignorantem. LONDON, Printed by Robert
Leybourn, 1649.

Philomathematicis omnibus vere ingenuis, praesertim Astronomicae facultatis
studiosis, necnon ejusdem laborisque pristini nostri Fautoribus semper
honorandis.
VRaniam istam (quae sub nostro nomine (heu) indigno sed vestro patrocinio
libero jamjudum libere prodiit) coelum summo verticis cacumine prius pulsantem,
ad communem fere omnium mensuram horis subsecivis (dum per occupationes
liceret) faeliciter cohibuimus: quam quidem postquam ita depressam, and infimo
captui manum porrigentem (quod intentionis nostrae fuit ipsum culmen) diuturnis
Vigiliis explicate; enucleatimque exposuimus Zoilorum quorundam pennae quam
acriter acuminatae, mordaces Sciolorum linguae, Mathematicastrorum manus
pedesque malevoli (porcorum instar) Margaritas praetiosissimas calcarunt,
lacerarunt, violarunt. Inter quos Shakerlaeus homuncio inprimis pertinax
coelestem illam ill otis ut aiunt manibus public, sed tamen pessime (ut
lectoribus statim innotescet) attractavit: qui etiamsi praejudicio obcoecatus
supra omnes mortales (...) Gloriosus, coram videretur, dum conatus nostros
alioqui satis gratos, (absit verbo (...)) chartis ejus indignis, accrbissimo
fell impressis inanes reddere conatur, futuramque prolem Progymnasm. Astron.
(de quibus in Urania Practica mentionem fecimus) sublimioribus ingeniis magis
adaequatam, and jam fere limatam (nemine obstetricante) obstrueret; nos tamen
ipsi (cum nemo alius manum forsitan admovere, and serram contentionis
reciprocare velit) alata ejus sophismata, Ventosasque fallacias duabus aut
tribus paginis refutare facile possumus, and just debemus: ita (ut I carius
alter) alis Platonicis non belle instructus in irrequietum aliquem Oceani
Chimaeroplastici Euripum praeceps decidet. Vt itaque in manus nostras Uraniae
Anatomia incidit, ad hoc opus merito accingimus, calamum in manum assumpsimus,
quo Uraniae veritatem and nosmet ipsos tueremur: quod quidem tam abunde
fecimus, ut totam ejus Anatomiam resecavimus, atque ipsum Shakerlaeum
Anatomicum minime artificiosum aequo Lectori and praejudicio haud praeoccupato
patefecimus, qui etsi errores praeli, nimis frequentes, facili manu
corrigendos, non public refutandos, passim forsan inveniet; tamen nihil
ponderis (etsi humanum est) cujus conscii sumus, vir melancholicus reprehendere
possit. Sed ne nim is improba praesatione vestra studia moremur, humilime
orandi est is (Lectores candidi) ut utriusque partis (quia opposita oppositis
magis elucescunt) argumentationes aequa judicii vestri trutina perpenderetis,
and non dubitamus, quin sacram Uraniam eo magis, magisque indies amplectemini:
and contra prosternatura invidorum tormenta, satis validum praesidium vosmet
profitemini: quibus suffragiis nos suffulti, and promissa nostra maturius
praestare, and vestrae expectationi liberius respondere (Deo opt. max. volente)
decrevimus

Vale. Boni publici studiosissimi V-W-L.

To the judicious Readers.
THe World, that (...) which from our Master Aristotle has received the Title
of (...), cannot challenge a freedom from contrariety and contradiction; the
Ancients observed the Heavens had their Anomalies and Obliquities, the glorious
Planets their passions of Retrogradation and Obscuration, the Elements their
Mutations, yea this Earth whereon we live, move, and have our being (one would
think the most stable creature) his motions, and herein fair Kingdoms after
some revolutions, their periods, and non plus nltra? Semblably the cleerest and
most evident truths have suffered martyrdom in the furnace of dispute, and
though naked, have not a Mandamus to be embraced. Those Communia effata in
Metaphysics are guilty of opposition. We know not then how the foundation,
Arithmetic and Geometry, in that stately Pyramid in the Mathematics can be
privileged from a creeping hole, which may admit of Aliens, false ingredients,
at least opposers, from which our Antagonist would seem (but it must be by a
more potent and skillful hand) to deliver. The young Gentleman is not so simply
elemented, but he has heard of Parallogismes in Euclid, and a naeve in his
dignities, read of irrationals (a doubt whether numbers or no) in Arithmetic,
and for all M. Shakerley, room enough for descent: well, therefore, may
Astronomy situated on the vertex, and Optics too, (for here we must needs
shake hands with him (which consists in medio) be gradually diminished in their
stabilities, and decurtated in their certainties, yet by the way note, that
Madam Urania would hardly entertain those for her servants which are so towering
in their airy imaginations, and want a foundation to the sublime Aedifices of
their own futile conceits whereof the devasted servant stands doubly guilty, by
taking his knowledge too much upon the public faith, and has need of an Army
for his protection, being guilty of so much treachery to so royal a Mistress,
as we shall presently attest.

But our Antagonist now being too much conscious of bloodshed, would willingly
turn over a new leaf, and to lessen his cruelty like an Impostor turn the other
end of the glass, and would make a universal diminution (to magnify
himself) of that which a man with one eye would easily confess to be
consentaneous to truth and demonstration; and then like another Oedipus or
Dedalus, would lead us in with both hands into his aenigmaticall labyrinths,
and thinks none can have the assistance of the third but himself.

But, lest we should lose our selves too, we will track him in his progress,
and great gate to his small City, and find how (like a cunning Sophister) he
seems to insinuate by interweaving Sophistry with more specious argumentations:
to this purpose, those who have the advantage of precedent knowledge and their
own, from them greater performances are expected, the Authors of Urania
Practica enjoy that, etc. ergo, greater: ye, to tell the vulgar of the Rotation
of the Sun about his own Axis, and the Mountains and Seas in the Moon, etc.
Sir, Plutarch is no new writer, though you are pleased to take it at the second
hand. Oh! these are useful inventions and tickle his fancy, and what can we
despair of? marry of any profitable or pertinent invention from you since you
are out of your wits, and herein, O, wonderful Heavens and Stars! how has the
subtle Anatomist triumphed over the Authors of Urania Practica? How has the
miracle of men, to his own perpetual disgrace, by the perverting of his
teachers, especially the learned Kepler, scarce triumphed over his palpable
folly?

The Gentleman, it seems, is popular, and a great enemy to antiquity, and
dis-relisheth the sovereignty of his Ancestors, against whom he fortifies
himself with Scripture, which as light to an ill favored Picture makes it
become more odious to its beholders: For our own parts, we are not so much
affected with novelty that we can despise the honest labors of so noble
Worthies.

Now, we have done with him, we must repair to our judicious and friendly
Readers, whom we desire that they would be pleased heartily to interpret our
honest meaning and endeavors for the propagating of these commodious and
pleasant Sciences for the glory of the Creator, and that nothing might obstruct
our real intentions and further labors, we have set pen to paper, and have
sufficiently (although briefly) illustrated his mistakes and mis-constructions
of us and his Authors, and by consequence vindicated our selves from the venom
of his pen.

Rumpatur, quisquis rumpitur invidia. V-W-L.

Amicissimo suo Vincentio Wing.
QVis tamen ille vapor foedavit nubibus atris
Solemn pallentem: fulmina nescit iners?
Non superos timuit? non maxima lumina mundi?
Infaelix decidet, cum redit orb jubar.
Te non con Vincent hosts (praenobilis Ala,)
Et si Theoninis morsibus arma gerunt.
Ingeniosa manus rumpet sucosque dolosque
Haeresews Cynicae dexteritate tua.
Ergo superstes eris (car pit te Zoile pulvis),
Non male defixus tu super astra nites.
Sydera te servent, irrupto foedere, Mundi
Cardine: libantes litibus astra parent.
Amoris and Gratulationis ergo F. R. B. Mathemat. Joan. Cantabrig.
To his Friend Master Vincent Wing.
Do Vipers gnaw their passage through the Press
To come in print? that youth, would do no less.
Some Fury-piper got him over a Hearse:
I vow his name will hardly Shaker
stand in Verse.
Call him Anatomist? a Cutter sure.
There Is none but madmen, these times, can endure.
But stay spectator think he did indent,
lie
Not show his skill, but an experiment.
As you may further view. His Teacher here
Will plainly make it to the World appear.
Detect his Errors then, whilst we thy fame
Do stamp in verse, that none out-fly thy name.
By your Friend and Countriman. W. Billingsley.
THE ANNIHILATION of M. Jeremy Shakerley, his in-artificiall Anatomy of Urania
Practica.
. I.
BEfore we come in point of Art to prove what we before promised, and to see
whether our Antagonist have proved himself to be verus filius Artis, it will
not be impertinent to take notice of his specious words, high arrogancy, and
large promises: That whatsoever he has writ is undoubtedly true, and of
learned Readers will be so approved, etc. But we, doubt not, to make the
contrary appear, and to manifest to the world, that his aim has been
principally to delude them who understand not these Sciences, and we could wish
his promised Astronomia Britannica, be not as desective as his Anatomia Vraniae.

. II.
WE shall not meddle with that Peccadillo he mentions in the Foreign Account,
in regard it is not worth the labor, neither shall we, till an on, dispute the
inequality of the Aequinoctiall points (which is generally granted by the best
Astronomers) but briefly come to the next thing he carps at, Chap. 4. which is
touching the Tables of the Sun and Moons motions, wherein he says he can say
little, because his Authors have said nothing, they only affording Epochaes for
some years, without any sufficient rules whereby to perpetuate them. To this we
answer, it was not our intentions to make the same perpetual, but to continue
them for some years for the making the Ephemeris more useful, which may fitly
be done notwithstanding the inequality of the Aequinoctiall points, which are
there considered: and yet M. Shakerley to make an Error where none is, would
perpetuate them contrary to the precept there set down, and besides, though we
did admit of such an inequality, yet to what purpose had it bin to set down any
particular Tables to attein it (to make the thing more difficult) since it is
far better for speed in calculating, and altogether as exact to unite it with
the Suns mean motion: But such is his rashness, and misguided zeal to Urania,
that he would even disrobe her of her comely furniture.

His next objection is against the Table of the Suns Aequation, affirming we
have followed the Theorie of Longomontanus, or some equivalent thereunto (but
it seems he is not certain of it) only a little (though almost insensibly)
increasing the Suns Excentricity, but for what reasons themselves do not show,
nor can he conjecture. No, we think M. Shakerley does not know indeed, neither
shall we at this time give him our reasons, and so make him understand what he
is not capable of, but if he shall desire it in a more civil way, we shall be
ready to give him sufficient satisfaction; in the mean time, if he will take a
little pains, and have a little patience, we dare undertake he shall soon be
able to make his own demonstration.

. III.
IN the Table of the Moons Aequation he would make the Reader believe we have
followed Argol, a man very laborious in Calculations, but one (says he) who
has given no reasons for his doings: But this is not true, for there is a
sensible variation, amounting sometimes to 7 or 8 minutes, nay many times more,
as they who list to try shall find; but because his error may be apparent,
and his insufficiency appear, we have added the following operation from
Argols Tables.

being Perig. distant from the 30 degrees
s d Centrum Lunae 2 00 00 00 Argumentum medium 6 00 00 00 Aeqnatio centri add.
9 39 00 Scrup. proport. 19 30 Argumentum verum 6 09 39 00 Excessus 34 36 Pars
pro scrup. prop. 11 15 Aequatio absoluta add. 1 05 27

But according to Urania Practica, 00 56 00 differing from Argoll 9 27, whereas
according to his judgment it should be equal.

Lastly, he says, that in the Latitude of the Moon we have merely followed
Lansberge, and so from the fragments of broken Authors have patcht up the
Tables of the Luminaries motions, attiring the divine Urania in a
partie-coloured vesture: But this is as false as the other, and though in the
latter we come near to Lansberge, (which makes him conjecture we had it from
him) yet the Table is de novo of our Calculation, and the Theorie it self,
whereon its grounded, which is consentaneous to the former.

In the beginning of Chap. 5. we find him guilty of another error, in
imagining by the quality of the Table of the Moons Aequation, that we have
followed a Theorie aequivalent to that of Copernicus, viz. A double Epicycle,
the circumference of the one, carrying the center of the other; But we deny
this to be true, for should we grant it, it would follow that the Aequation of
the Center, or second Epicycle should be swifter in the former semicircle, and
slowest in the latter, and so the two inaequalities digested into one Table,
would be sensibly disconsonant to that which we have composed, being grounded
upon a different Hypothesis, as we would here have exemplified, had it been
pertinent to answer every groundless contradiction.

. 4.
SHak. Chap. 6. We now come to the Touchstone of our Authors judgment, and
will (by Gods help) lay open those many Absurdities which would follow, should
we admit of our Authors Tables. This speculation is not ordinary, nor obvious
to every young Practitioner, yea the intricacies thereof have entangled many
sounder Artists, then either Mr. Wing, Mr. Leyburn, or my self, few of those
many Authors, which to this day have appeared, have had a full knowledge
thereof, excepting Kepler, the late Bullialdus, etc. Lo! here our Antagonist
musters up Miracles, and would make the Reader believe his knowledge far
surmounts the judgment and learning of almost all others, surely were either
Ptolomie, Copernicus, Lansberge, Longomontanus, Tycho, Reinholde, Argoll, or
Eichstade present, they would never suffer themselves to be thus grossly
scandalized with every simple Idiot, that understands not reason, nor the
ground of their demonstrations; and although none of these Authors, nor any
other that we know of, have followed the Diagram of Hyparchus; he inferrs, yet
are not we so idle as to think, they have not had a full knowledge thereof as
well as himself, could they thereby have made their Tables consentaneous to
truth and observation, and if they could, had they not as much reason to credit
their own (which they have made ample and excellent demonstration of) as to be
guided by his fancy. We knew the same long since and have fitted those (longed
for) new Tables in Progym. Astron. thereto, which (by Gods blessing) is in a
good step to perfection. Of the other we would here have made demonstration,
but in regard of the tediousness thereof, we cannot possibly bring it within
our intended limits, and therefore shall refer the Reader to Ptol. lib. 5. Cap.
14, 15, and 16. Almagesti, Copernic. Lib. 4. Cap. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, and 23,
de Revolut: Pitiscus Lib. 4. Probl. 14 and Lib. 5. Prob. 12, and 13. de Probl.
Astron. Lansberge, Lib. 1, 2, and 3, Vranometriae: where they may be satisfied
of the verity of our Hypothesis, and may find (having respect to our
suppositions) that the Tables we have inserted are exactly consentanious to
demonstration, and more rational then he yet apprehends, else without doubt
never would so many expert Mathematicians in all ages with joint consent have
followed this and rejected that of his beloved Hyparchus. Certainly all the
Learned would account that man a mere fool that should examine the Tables of
Ptolomie by the Hypothesis of Copernicus, or the Tables of Copernicus by the
Theorie of Kepler, or that should compare equal lines by different Scales to
produce an equality, and e converso, and now we leave it to the judgment of the
Learned, whether this man has not exceedingly showed his folly in the
self-same kind, by comparing our numbers with the Diagram of Hyparchus. But we
speak not against the Demonstration thereof, though it be of above 1780 years
antiquity, but against his silly and improper application of it, as we have
here mentioned, and more fully may appear by the following Synopsis.

According to Copernicus. Apog. Perig.
Semidiameter of the 15 50 Horizontall Parallax of the 3 00 Semiangle of the
Cone 12 50 Horizontall Parallax of 62 21 Semidiam of the Shadow 47 52 Semiangle
of the Cone 14 29 Differing from the former 1 39 According to Lansberge. Apog
Perig.
Semidiameter of the 16 47 Horizontall Parallax of the 2 18 Semiangle of the
Cone 14 29 Horizontall Parallax of the 63 39 Semidiameter of the shadow 46 19
Semiangle of the Cone 17 20 Differing from the former 2 51 But according to
Eichstade, Longomontanus, Argoll, and Urania Practica, as follows. Apog.
Apog. Ap. Per.
Semidiameter of the 15 0 15 00 Horizontall Parallax of the 3 0 3 00 Semiangle
of the Cone 12 0 12 00 Horizontall Parallax of the 59 9 62 39 Semidiameter of
the Shadow 43 0 47 00 Semiangle of the cone 16 9 15 39 Differing from the
former 4 9 3 3

Having thus examimed these great Masters of Astronomy, we find their Tables
will not agree to the Diagram of Hyparchus, no more then Urania Practica does,
and therefore let us not from thence conclude rashly (with Master Shakerley)
their Tables are false, erroneous, and uncertain, before we be well ascertained
of the ground and verity thereof.

. V.
SHak. I further obscrve from the Tables of our Authors; First, That the
quantity of the Suns semidiameter, page 120. cannot agree to that Hypothesis,
from which the Aequations page 59. seem to be derived, for if the excentritie
be taken 3577, to the Radius 100000, we shall have the Suns greatest distance
from the earth 103577. etc. By your favor (Sir) you are (again) mistaken in
supposing we have taken the whole excentricity 3577. which had we done, we
should willingly have acknowledged an offense, and undergone your censure, but
we have followed the proportion of bi-sected excentricitie (though different
from the Hypothesis of Kepler) and that his error herein may be apparent, we
will here compare our numbers with his own Diagram. Page 25. and use his own
manner of operation thus.

1. As Radius B. E. 1000000 to the Tangent of the Angle, BEA 15 -- 0 -- 4363.
so BE 1017890 to B A 4441.

2. As E D 982110. to CD (equal to B A (4441. So the Radius E D 1000000 to the
Tangent of the Angle, DEC 4522. whose Arch is 15. 31. (and not 16. 7. as he
says) which if the true Semidiameter of the Sun according to our Hypothesis,

mathematical diagram

from which our Tables never differ more, which was the reason we followed
Argoll and Eichstade therein without further calculation, and now Master
Shakerley, me thinks, you cannot have the impudence to own that Paper-kite so
coursely decked in your feathers, which flies abroad, as unseemly as an Owl at
noon day.

Next he affirms, That the Semidiameters of the Moon are not consonant to the
observations which have been made by Artists, especially in Eclipses of the
Sun, and for an example instances the Observation of Clavius at Rome, Anno
1567. April 9. and to the time of this Observation he forms a Caculation from
our Tables, but yet he mentions not the moment of the obscurations, though
Clavius there tells him it was circa meridiem about noone, which, it seems, he
is loath to make known, yet he cannot deny but that (according to our Tables)
the Eclipse was centrall there at the very moment of Observation, to which few
Tables that have yet appeared, do better agree; but for the other Eclipse of
the Sun, which Clavius a little (before in the same page) speaks of, which was
in the year 1560 at Conimbrica in Lusitania about noon he meddles not with,
because he knows it speaks much to the praise of our Tables (as does the
other) though much against his will.

. VI.
BUt not to trifle away ink (as he has done) to no purpose, we shall come to
the substance of his 7 Chapter, concerning the Aequation of natural days,
wherein he says, we have followed Tycho, (and here he speaks true by chance)
which (says he) is not consentanious to demonstration, though we may boldly
conjecture he cannot tell, but we have no reason to be guided by his fancy,
yet what he delivers there, he (it is true) borrows it from Bullialdus, fol. 8.
Tab. Philo. where he admits of a second aequation, Ab inaequalitate diurnarum
Terrae revolutionum circa axem, from the inequality of the daily revolotions of
the Earth about her Axis, which peradventure others may admit of, but what of
this? are we bound to follow him in every respect? has not Eichstade, Argoll,
and others since Tycho, allowed and approved of the former? And under favor,
Sir, if you be a legitimate Son of Art, you cannot be ignorant of what the
Ancients have delivered to posterity, how they have observed the aequation of
days, even to this present age; compounding therewith an aequation for the
motion of the Sun, without any reason or demonstration, which the
Mathematicians of our time (not without good reason) have rejected as we have
done, and if we should admit of a secondarie aequation, yet Eam ex passionibus
obliquitatis arcuum Eclipticae cum Aequatore desumendam, Sicut (si res optime
trutinetur) parvam quandam posse consurgere ex Aequinoctiorum inaequalitate
praecessionis: And this is all we can admit of, it being sufficient for the
exactness of demonstration.

. VII.
CHap. 8. He comes to examine the distance of the Celestial bodies from the
earth, wherein his malice and ignorance as much appears as before, but before
we come to examine his mistakes here, let us look back to the 24 page where are
these words, Hence would likewise follow, that the Suns distance from the earth
is not only infinite, but, if we may so say, a degree beyond infiniteness, and
yet with much confidence they can proceed to determine the distance of the Sun
from the earth in miles, whereas it appears by their Tables, no such distance
is ever possibly to be defined, and their very distances there set down, are
not only disconsonant to the truth, but also to their own erroneous assumptions.

What we have there said concerning the intervals and distances of the Sun,
Earth and other Planets, we are able to make the truth thereof demonstratively
appear, as we shall exemplify, and shall here, by the verity of our
calculation, sufficiently prove him a mere Botcher, and by the way advise him
to turn to the 3 Book of Lansbergs Vranometria, de errantium and in errantium
Stellarum dimentione, and then, if he be not too much biased to his own
opinion, we dare undertake he shall soon be able, by those simple Elements to
make his own demonstration, if he will have but reason to hang his dimensions
upon their proper and true Hypothesis, and then he shall find what we have
said, cum rei veritate ad amussim consentire, to be no less then truth. Now
that the judicious may see his failings and unparalleld mistakes, we shall show
him, as we promised, how to find the true distance of the Sun from the earth
according to our Tables, which for brevity sake take thus.

In the following Scheme, A denotes the center of the earth, B C B the
circumference thereof, A B its Semidiameter, D the place of the Sun in the
Horizon, B D the line of the Suns appearance from the superficies of the Earth
B, therefore A D is the distance of the Sun from (A) the center of the earth,
and the angle A D B is the Horizontall parallax of the Sun, therefore in the
rectangle Triangle A B D is given (1) the side A B, the Semidiameter of the
earth 1 part, (2) the angle opposite A D B 30, hence is found the side A D: For,

As Radius A B, 10,00000 to the co-tang. of ADB 3 13,05915 So the side AB 1
Semidi. 0,00000 to the side AD 1146 sere 3,05915

mathematical diagram

And this is the true distance of the Sun from the earth in Semidiameters
according to our Tables, which is not infinite, nor a degree beyond
infiniteness, as he surmises, and therefore from our Hypothesis the distance
of the Sun from the earth (in German miles) is 985560, and this gives the
horizontall parallax of the Sun 3 as before, and not 12 as he imagines: and
herein we desire not to be our own judges, but shall refer it to the censure of
profounder Artists then either Mr. Shakerley or our selves; but (that noble
Mecaenas, and restaurator of Astronomy) Tycho Brahe, whom we followed therein
(as appears page 174 and following,) he observed by his large and curious
Instruments, his distance from the earth to be near 4 Semidiameters greater,
viz. 1150 Semidiameters: Now he that shall multiply this number by 860 shall
have in the product 989000 German miles which is the true number we have set
down; so likewise in Saturn, 10571 multiplied by 860 gives 9091060: in Jupiter
3990 multiplied by 860 gives 3431400, and in Mars (likewise 1745 multiplied by
860, gives 1500700.

Hence it appears how unjustly he has charged us with that he can no way make
good, but we could wish (because he pretends to these Sciences) he could find
some hole to creep out at, which we cannot yet epsy.

Concerning his three Queries (or demands) we shall here forbear to make any
tedious repetition, in regard one of us intends ere long to publish something of
that nature wherein we shall fully discuss that matter; in the interim, we can
but laugh at his folly, in demanding the Observations of others from us, which
he understands not himself. But leaving him herein, we next come to his
Bug-bear-bundle, or brief summary of nonsense.

. VIII.
SHakerley, First, I say, that by our Authors Rule; the Suns altitude cannot be
gathered universally; for though the example page 99 be truly rought; yet if we
turn to the sixth book for a Precept we shall find none, but only a few
concise Tables, calculated for some Latitudes, which are too narrow and
insussicient for him whose intentious are for generality and exactness.
Although the precept to find the Suns altitude were casually omitted in the 6
Book, yet that defect may very well be supplied by help of those Tables there
inserted, which are sufficient for this Kingdom and the Regions conterminate;
and besides, what is he that is but a mere Tyro in these Arts that cannot
perceive how to work it, having so plain and perspicuous an example as that is,
Page 99. but to supply that defect, and to amplify that there promised, we
have added the following Example,

mathematical diagram

Let the time proposed be the 2 of July 1649, at four of the clock in the
afternoon, the Suns declination being 22 degrees. Northwards, at which time the
Suns Altitude above the Horizon is to be enquired: Therefore in the Diagram
annexed, let the outward Circle thereof represent the Meridian of London, O P
the Latitude thereof 51d 32, whose complement is Z P 38d 28, H O the Horizon, E
Q the Aequinoctiall, D K the Suns parallel of Declination Northward, and Z S C
N the Azimuth that the Sun is in at the time of the question. In which Diagram
(by the intersection of three great Circles) we have limited the oblique angled
Triangle Z S P, in which we have given: First, The side Z P 38d 28 the
complement of the Latitude, Secondly, the side S P 68d, the Suns distance from
the Pole, or the complement of his Declination. Thirdly, the angle Z P S 60d,
the time from noon 4 hours. And it is required to find the side Z S, the
complement of the Suns altitude above the Horizon H C O.

As the Radius 90d 10,0000000 to the cosine of Z P S 30d 9,6989700 So the
Tangent of Z P 38d 28, 9,9000865 to the Tangent of P R 21d 40 9,5990565

Which being subtracted from the whole side S P, there remains the Arch S R
46d 20 As the cosine of P R 68d 20 9,9681781 to the cosine of Z P 51d 32
9,8937452 So the cosine of R S 43d 40 9,8391396 19,7328848 to the cosine of Z
S 35d 34 9,7647067

Which 35d 34 is the altitude of the Sun above the Horizon.

. IX.
SHakerley, The tedious calculation of the Moons parallax in her Circle of
altitude detracts from the praise of the Book, and might have been with far
more ease, and by the only help of the Logarithmes supplied thus: As the
Radius, to the Sine of the horizontall parallax; so the cosine of the
Luminaries altitude, to the sine of the parallax in that altitude. This way is
no less demonstrative, and far more easy then the other which our Authors have
used, page 99. Here we find him still plunging himself into more gross
absurdities then before, for he would here make the Reader believe the
calculation of the Moons parallax in altitude detracts from the praise of the
Book, and might be performed with far more ease and no less demonstration,
which is altogether false, and contrary to the pure rules of Art, as we shall
here demonstrate. In the example of ours, page 100, the altitude of the
Luminaries is 37d 4755 and the parallax of the Moon in the Horizon 1d 2 4 from
whence we there gather, her parallax in the Circle of altitude 49 35, and this
exactly agrees with all Authors of any account whose works are extant: but if
we work according to Mr. Shakerleys prescriptions we shall find another
number, viz. 49 3, differing from the truth no less then 32, which in a
business of this nature is very considerable; but that he may plainly see his
error and arrogancy, and the truth of our calculation, we will take a little
pains to inform his judgment by the demonstrative example here following.

mathematical diagram A represents the center of the earth,

B the place of observation,

A G L the true Horizon,

B H the apparent Horizon,

F the place of the in her own Orb,

L F her altitude, 37d 47 55,

A H B Her Parallax in the Horizon 62 4,

A F B her Parallax required.



In the Rectangled Triangle B C F we are first to enquire the side B C thus.

D A F 52d 12 5 sine C F 79018 Sine of the complement C A 61288 Sine of
greatest parallax A H B 624 subst. 1805 Rests B C 59483

Then in the rectangled Triangle B CF, say, As B C 59483, to C F 79018, so B C
Radius 100000, to C F 132840, which is the Tangent of the Angle C B F, 53d 1
41, from which detracting the Angle D A F, 52d 12 5, it leaves the Angle
required, A F B 49 35, which is the true Parallax of the Moon in her circle of
altitude, differing from Mr. Shakerley's computation 32, as before.

Again, suppose her altitude be 45d, and her Parallax in the Horizon 62, her
Parallax in that altitude will be found to be 44 24. For in the former Diagram
suppose, B C is 45d 70711 Comp. C A 45d 70711 Horizon. Parallax AHB 62 1803 B C
68908

As BC 68908, to C F 70711, So Radius BC 100000, to C F 102617, the Tangent of
the Angle C B F 45d 44 24, from which taking the Angle DAF 45d, there remains
the Angle AFB 44 24, whercas according to Mr. Shakerley's rule it is but 43 50,
differing from the truth 34, and now if the young Gentleman can tell us how
this can be performed with more brevity and exactly, we shall willigly give him
the better of it: But, alas, it cannot be, for Mr. Shakerley steers by a false
Chart, yea, his proposition being so disconsonant both to Demonstration and
true Calculation, that (to use his own words) no Physical salve being
reasonably applied, is sufficient to counterpoise these differences.

. X.
TO the third and fourth Sections of his Muster-roll we shall answer with
brevity, in regard they are not worth the view of an Artist. To the first
whereof (being the third in order) we say, and dare affirm by the pure Rules of
undoubted Art, that the Suns excentricity cannot cause an alteration of above 3
or 4 in the table of the hourly motion of the Moon from the Sun, and what
error this can produce in the use thereof let himself judge: and so the
difference being insensible gave us good cause to omit it, as Copernicus,
Maginus, Purbachius, Lansberge, Argoll, and diverse others have done before us,
being loath to trouble themselves with such nicities and needless trifles.

In the next, where he says The Suns horizontall parallax is not always 3, but
if this be his parallax in his mean distance, the Apogaean parallax is 2 53,
the Perigaeon parallax 3 7, according to our Authors Excentricity. And here,
indeed, he speaks truer then he supposed, Ex falsa sequitur verum, for henever
dreamt of a bisected Excentricity, but we shall examine whether it be so
according to the Excentricity which he sets down, therefore in the Diagram of
the 5 reason thus.

1 As the Radius 100000, to the Tangent of the angle E 3, ( viz. 87,) So EB
103577 to AB 90.

2 As ED 94423 to DC 90 (being equal to AB,) So ED the Radius to the Tangent
of the Angle at E 95, whose arch 3 13 should (according to the proportion he
sets down) be his Perigaeon Parallax, differing from his own judgment 6,
whereas it should be equal.

. XI.
WE are now arrived at the fifth and last Section of his Summary, where he is
doubtful Whether in our Tables we have used any reduction of the Moon from her
Orb to the Ecliptique, and contra, which he might have observed page 62, and
page 87. and therefore might have saved this labor as well as all the rest,
for what he says here, we knew long since, and have taught how to obtein it:
but we do not well conceive his meaning, where he says, the middle of the
Eclipse is not the greatest obscuration, etc. Surely this (indeed) is strange
music in the ears of Urania, and is not suitable to her excellency, for the
proving whereof we desire the Reader to peruse Ptol, Lib. 6. Cap, 4. etc.
Copernicus Lib. 4. Cap. 21, and 30. Purbachus Prop. 15. Tab. Eclip. Reinhold in
Theor. Geo. Purbach. Stofl. Prop. 9, and 10. Eichstad. Cap. 2, 3, 4, and 5,
Paed. Astron. contin. Lansberg a fol. 56. ad fol. 70. Precept. call. motuum. But
if he be not satisfied with these, we doubt not, but the learned Kepler and the
expert Bullialdus will do it, for, we hope, he will have so much modesty as to
credit them though it be against himself, and therefore shall advise him to
turn to Precept 146. Tab. Rudolph. or to page 864. Epit. Astron. Cop. where
Kepler tells him, Quod medium Eclipsis est maxima obscuration that the middle of
the Eclipse is the greatest obscuration, and that is, Quando centrum Lunae est
vel junctum centro umbrae, vel in perpendiculari illa, ex centro umbrae in viam
Lunae: when the center of the Moon is either joined to the center of the
shadow, or is in the perpendicular which comes from the center of the shadow,
and falls upon the way of the Moon; the same says Bullialdus, Lib. 5. fol.
214. Astron. Philol. yet are we not ignorant of that he seems to stumble at,
page 865 Epit. Astron. where Kepler most excellently shows in what respects the
places of the true Conjunction and greatest obscuration differ: Differunt enim
in arcu minimo (as his own Author there tells him) duploreductionis Lunae loci
ad Eclipticam, cujus area Luna in obscuratione maxima semper est vicinior nodo,
quam centrum umbrae: and hereunto assents Bullialdus, Lib. 4. Cap. 7. De
Reduct. Temp. where he also admits of a reduction of time from the true
Opposition or Conjunction with the Sun to the greatest obscuration: one cause
whereof is the difference of the place of the Moon in her Orb from her place
in the Ecliptique, which always differ, unless the Moon be in the Nodes or
Quarters: the other is caused by the inclination of the way of the Moon to the
Zodiac, when she is in the shadow of the earth, and this is all these Authors
intend, and this we approve of, but (by Mr. Shakerleys favor) not of that he
speaks of. And in case we should not observe this nice reduction he cavils at,
what error could it breed? Nay, did the learned Copernicus; Reinholdus, Noble
Tycho, Eichstade, Lansberge, or Longomontanus, ever so much as observe it?
although as able and skillful as our Antagonist, seeing reasons may be given
pro and con, as we could instance, but we doubt not but the judicious are
already satisfied of the verity of our calculations, and also observe the
fallacies of his erroneous affertions.

Thus have we diligently examined this learned (or rather wrangling) Discourse
wherein we find him so unadvisedly rash that we can but admire at his folly,
especially that such a man as he, who professes himself to be an Artist,
should so contumeliously and inconsiderately strive to confute others, before
he has any ground for his so doing, and so plunge himself into most infinite
errors and gross absurdities, even such as may be discerned by every
judicious Spectator, if he wink not on purpose; but we shall leave him as we
found him even brim-full of malice; his aim being (as every one may perceive)
purposely to smother those tender buds which begin to appear in the fields of
Urania.

FINIS.
Domino Jeremiae Shakerlaeo, in Mathematicis studioso.
CHare tum Colende vir, (...) illud (quod pro magis seria negotia subfuratus
sum) tuam (quam vocas) brevitatem compendiosius respondere libere compulit;
quid dixti? brevitatem; certo certius ultra veritatis limits multis parasangis
extensam: illud etenim, quod de literis ad me missis (quibus a me responsis
Anatomiam tuam coecum forsitan (proh amentia!) suspenderes) susurras, pro
Commento splendidissimo (cujusmodi (defectum an redundantiam tui ingenioli
culpem, compertum vix habeo) tota tua controversia nimis conscia facile a nobis
refutatur) aequo Lectori invalebit. Itaque (ut omnia uno verbo expediam) dum
veritatem sanctissime solertissimeque propugnare velut luxuriasti (heu!)
quantum tristi discrimine violasti. Plura charitas mea (ne tecum hyperephaneus
videar) proferre vetat literas quas tibi consulta nudius septimus miseram,
antequam provectior fuit dies, responsione dedignareris, orandus es, interim
siat pro coronide, ut sit tibi men's sanae in corpore sano. Votum profecto
perpetuum.

Ab aedibus meis North-Luffenhamiae in Rutlandia 24 Junii 1649 Aetatis nostrae
30 labente. Tui Uraniaeque amicissimi Vin. Wing, seu de Ala Mathematica.

depiction of a star


