Furor-Poeticus (i.e.) Propheticus.

A Poetick-Phrensie.

Some, (probably) will call it so: Thus named, therefore, let it go.

It is the result of a private-musing, occasioned by a public report in the
Country, of the Parliaments restoration by General GEORGE MONCKE, in February
1659. and meditated soon after the said General's arrival in LONDON,

In dorso Pagi, recubans sub tegmine Fagi: By G.W. Esquire;

This Author's well, and sober, yet,
Although he fell into this Fit;
But, if more Wit than Grace he had,
Oppressions would have made him mad.
Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis.

Times changed be, and so are we.

London, Printed by James Cottrel. 1660.

To the Reader.
Ingenuous Reader,
THough this Poem has somewhat a mad Title, thou shall find me neither Mad
man, nor Phanatick: For, these Musings were in soberness meditated (upon the
first News of General GEORGE MONCK's arrival at LONDON, when he came last out
of SCOTLAND, and the Rumors raised thereupon) and were mused to no worse
purpose, than that, by rationally pre-conjecturing the most probable events, I
might not be surprised by them, but settle my heart (whatsoever should succeed)
in a constant waiting upon GOD, and in a contented peaceableness, by
considering divine providence had the ordering of all things; and that the
intentions and actions of men were no infallible grounds of hopes or fears. And
I expressed my conceptions in the following words and mode, that my Extempore
Notions might both remain, a fixed Object for my self (and others, if they
pleased so to use them) when occasion required; and to rouse up courage when it
began to droop by mis-apprehensions.

Though they appear in an extravagant dress, and are only sudden raptures, not
designed discourses, political, philosophical, or divine, they are wholesome
fruits of the season, and, being well digested, will hint many notions
pertinent to our present condition: For, in these raptures, whatsoever shall be
thought of them, I have infallibly informed upon what terms, you, either with
your KING, or without him, shall have a lasting peace, and settled Government,
if ever you have it in this world; and (mark this)

That, which henceforth, the common Lot, will be
In Weal, or Woe, shall be foreshown in me:
For, whether to the right or left it run,
Judgment shall at GOD's House be first begun.
I have warrantably made them assume an unusual boldness (which may make them
seem to many more bold than welcome) the better to make way into their
presence, who either entertain themselves and their Associates in composing and
hearing those base and scurrilous Pamphlets (now innumerable) which tend to
disturbance of the common peace, and are sure presages of their destruction who
take pleasure in them; or else to awake them who are so busied in their own
vain projects, that they have no leisure to heed any thing conducing to the
public honor and safety, or to their own.

As soon as I came last to London, I communicated them to some of my
acquaintance, who conceiving them useful, undertook their publication, which I
left to their discretion; but heard of no proceed therein for many weeks, nor
any reason of that delay. If they found any just cause to change their
resolution, they are to be excused, and so am I, if it come too late, or out of
that season which might have made it more effectual. Yet, thy time, nor thy
expense, will be lost, whenever it comes to thy hands: For, that which I
chiefly intended, will be at all times, and generally considerable, till we be
utterly destroyed, or our public and private calamities redressed; yea, and
then also, to some purposes.

If thou find any thing therein, whereupon I have often heretofore insisted,
consider, that there is the same occasion, and that a Nail cannot be driven
into knotty wood at one or two strokes. Take it heartily for thine own sake,
though not for mine; yet for my sake it may deserve thy acceptance: for, if
thou love GOD and thy Countries welfare; I am

Thy wel-wishing, and truly loving friend G. W.

Furor-poeticus, (i.e.) Propheticus. A Poetick-Phrensie.
AFit, that some will call poetick-madness,
Has now surprised me, in sober-sadness;
Which, how it seized me, shall be here declared,
If any think it worthy of regard:
Nay, heard it shall be, since it is begot,
Whether regarded, or regarded not:
For, good to them, is equally intended,
Who, shall be therewith, pleased or offended,
If, quite insensible, they are not grown
Both of the public welfare, and their own;
And, if well taken, this despised-bable,
will hint some Notions not unprofitable.
From thence, where many did of wrongs complain,
(And, where, to right them, some few strove in vain)
I was retired, as far as I could go,
From hearing, what Knaves, Fools, and madmen do;
Expecting no such influence from heaven
As now appears, till nights and days were even:
About which time (though why I do not know)
I looked for something, like what is happened now;
But, Rumor, which is fluttering every whither,
Has of a quicker change brought tidings hither:
Whereon, a greater change will soon ensue,
If probable conjectures may be true.
The Wind is strangely turned; but, none yet knows
For whose avail, or to whose harm it blows:
Because, to guess who is a foe or friend,
Or, what, men by their words or deeds intend,
It Is now so hard, that none can escape deceit
Save he, who keeps his own heart upright,
And he (even then) may suffer naytheless,
Who walks in the paths of righteousness.
I hear the news; and I have heard it too,
With as much joyful hope as most men do
Who know the World, and how much doubt and fear
May rise from every thing they see and hear;
When there is little Justice, Truth, or Order,
The preservation of their peace to further;
And where they are so puzz'led in the dark,
That they rejoice in any glim'ring spark.
A Star, is now shot hither from the North;
But, what events the same will usher forth
I cannot tell; nor (though the Morning's bright)
What clouds may overshadow us ere night;
And, therefore, I must wait a while, to heed
With what Aspects those Planets will proceed
Which regulate our Clime, before I can
Conclude on any thing designed by man.
The greatest Planet, that appears in heaven
Has no more influence than one in seven;
And, from malevolence, we are not free
While Mars and Saturn in conjunction be,
Although to comfort us, we may receive
Fair promisings, from all the other five;
Except that he who placed them in their Orbs
Their Constellations qualifies and curbs;
And, they are lying Prophets, who shall dare
In his name, any sequel to declare,
As absolute, and not conditional,
Relating merely to to things temporal:
For, that could only, but a means become,
To make men desperate, or to presume.
He, that, our grand Aenigma's must unriddle
Is in the Zenith now, even in the middle
Of that place, where our fatal Gordian-knot,
(If my conjectures greatly fail me not)
Must be unti'd, or cut; and if so fast
And so ensnarl'd it be, that, at the last
The Sword must once again the same unknit,
Woe be to them who shall occasion it.
Over LONDON, now that Luminary shines,
Which, I foretold in my last published lines,
Should be the Mountain whence that wind would blow
Which of our greatest weal, or greatest woe,
Should instrumental be; and I expect
Accordingly, ere long time, an effect.
We often see miracles, (I must confess)
But, I would fain see truth and righteousness
Ascend the Throne; that, we at length might feast
Upon that Peace, whereof we had a taste;
And, on those mercies which in little time
GOD would vouchsafe, if we reli'd on him,
And wilfully pursued not still that course
Which to destroy our hopes, may him enforce;
And which, by long neglect of good endeavor,
Are now in hazard to be lost for ever.
He, many Patrons and Deliv'rers gave us,
From Foreign and Domestic foes to save us:
Of whom, some, by their self-will and Ambition,
Wrought both our sorrow, and their own perdition.
Some of them, we disabled; some despised:
We flattered some, and some we Idolized,
Until to such a height we pust them had,
That to our servants, slaves our selves we made;
Yet cease not at this hour to do the same,
Though still, it brings more sorrow, and more shame;
And will, to be delivered from one curse
Thereby incurred, run headlong to a worse.
Mark, (though you slight me) what we daily do;
And brand me, if it shortly prove not so,
Unless we tack and wheel about to that
Which may prevent it, ere it be too late.
GOD, still, in his long suffering does persever,
And, us, from our distractions to deliver
Renews his mercy still, when we (almost)
Our hopes of reparation have quite lost.
Yea, though he finds us willing to return
To our late Bondage; to distrust and scorn
The Doom pronounced for this Common weal
When we did in the field to him appeal:
Although he sees us prone in every trial
To make of our just Cause a base denial;
To bid to his assist ances defiance;
With his, and our known foes to have compliance;
From our professions to apostatize,
And to requite him with hypocrisies
For all his favors; he is still to us
The same he was, though we continue thus;
And, though he from our sins himself withdraws,
Still owneth both our Principles and Cause.
He has now raised, beyond our expectation,
A likely means of timely reparation,
And, by his providence, a man begot
To perfect it, if we corrupt him not,
Nor he decline from what he has professed
In order to the public Interest;
Which I suspect not, if he be so strong
As to resist the batt'ries of the Tongue,
And use those Antidotes that may prevent
The poys'ning that is infused by Complement.
At this time, to be GOD's Probationer
In his great Work, as others lately were,
He takes his turn; and peradventure, may
Attain a Power as absolute as they;
That, what by them was wilfully neglected,
(And by a less Power cannot be effected)
May now be done. LORD! make him wise and strong,
To do what to his duty does belong;
And mindful, that, his chiefest Obligations
Are, to be true to Thee, and to these Nations.
St George for England, we were wont to say;
And, to that Name, assigned a solemn day
We knew not why: But, if what is now begun
Shall with sincerity be carried on,
It did, perhaps, by way of Allegory,
Presage what will produce an Actual Story;
That shall in future times, deserve much better
Men's credit morally, than in the Letter
That Fable did: For, we may hope (unless
Good probabilities have ill success)
A Champion of this Name shall free us from
That Dragon which infests all Christendom,
And, set a Bar to their malignant-pow'r,
Who threaten this Republike to devour.
If so it happen, it will more endear
This Name of George, than Dick, or Oliver;
Yea, more than all their Names, who lately lost
That honor, which they purchased at our cost,
And left us in those hazards, from whence, none
Now can deliver us, but, GOD alone
By his own Arm, or else by an advance
Of one designed for our deliverance,
And qualified by his especial grace,
To be a Guardian Angel for this place.
Instead of that imaginary Saint,
Which on our Inns, and Tavern-signs we paint,
And, whom our Grandees, in blew Ribbands wore,
As badge of their chief honor heretofore;
(And in his room, of whom about next Spring,
Another Party seemed in hope to sing
John for the King) GOD, has perhaps, prepared
That Hero for our Tutelary Gnard;
Whom Fame reports arrived with an intent
To re-invest the baffled Parliament
With her lost Power: which, if it so ensue,
Will make some bid their old St George adieu:
His Legend, will be very little prized,
Except, as now, it is Mythologiz'd:
And, this GEORGE will henceforward, by this Nation
Be thought more worthy of Canonization
Than either He, or any one of those
On whose new Saintships, we did trust repose,
Till many did our confidence contemn,
And few, at last, trust either us, or them.
This GEORGE for England, probably intends
The public weal without sinister ends,
And is One meaning that which he professes;
One, whom nor gifts, nor flattering Addresses
Shall tempt from an heroic Resolution,
Or, draw to an ignoble prosecution;
One, whom the Strumpet, who bewitcheth Kings,
Nor those enchanting Songs the Siren sings,
Shall so seduce, as they seduced were,
Who, by the Dragons tail were from their Sphere
Unhors'd of late: But, one who shall proceed,
Till from his Fangs these Nations he has freed,
Despising those Allurements, whereby they
Who would divert him, hope to stop his way:
For, if his heart be right, he will suspect
Those Baits laid to corrupt his Intellect,
Or blind his eyes; that, from what is well begun
Into their Pitfals he may stumble on.
He will consider, that, they who profess
Much love (and fawn with most obsequiousness)
Are either some of those, or such as they
Who did the same to them the other day,
Whom now most barbarously they revile;
And may abuse him worse within a while.
And, he will see, that he must be more wary
Than they were, who, not long since, did miscarry,
By playing like a Moath about the flame,
Till thereby quite consumed they became.
I hope, that as I have expressed him here,
He is resolved: If not, I wish he were;
That I might live to see, before I die,
One man, whose Deeds made not his words a lie.
A Monk professed, an Instrument became
Of Reformation: Why not one by Name?
If love of honesty with him prevail,
The hopes of honest men he will not fail:
If love of honor, or of safety move him,
Those Interests, will for our Cause improve him.
It is a much more honorable thing,
To save a People, than to make a King,
And safer too; if he that makes him one
Shall be his Liege-man whom he does enthrone:
For, Kings are of their Makers so afraid,
That, seldom are such benefits repaid
With less than ruin; specially, if he
A man beloved of the People be:
But, much more hazardous will be his Case,
If he be likewise of the Royal Race.
This General, has been a Royalist,
Engaged against the public Interest,
And, therefore, some suspicious are become
He may, at last, his first Cause reassume:
But, that is improbable: For hitherto
He nothing seems to neglect, or do,
Save what he should; If there be neither ought
Done or omitted, more than yet, is brought
Unto my ears; and his professions are
Sufficient to abate the Peoples fear;
Yet, with that modesty consist, whose want
Made others, lately so exorbitant,
That, many did suspect their gaudy sign
Was hung forth but to vent unwholesome wine.
He may appear to those who cannot see,
Whereto he shall necessitated be
To deviate sometimes; yet, naitheless
No whit infringe essential righteousness;
As when he is compelled to raise a Blind
To frustrate what is by his Foes designed,
And hoped for, by letting them enjoy
Those hopes a while, which may themselves destroy;
Or, that he may discov'ries make, thereby,
Whom to suspect, and on whom to rely.
That, he was once a Captain for the King,
Does him with me, in no suspicion bring,
If he retain but so much gen'rousness
As honorable Swordmen do profess:
For, there are many persons whom I know,
True to him then, and faithful to us now:
And touching him, this is considerable,
That he made no revolt dishonorable
To his Profession: nor his aid withdrew
Fro him, to whom he thought his service due;
Or left him till that Obligation ended
By his decease, on whose life it depended:
No, nor did afterward desert his Cause,
Till having leisure to peruse the Laws
And Customs of this Nation, he perceived,
Crowns were not always by descent received;
Nor justly could be worn by any here,
Till by the People they elected were
Upon conditions; whereto they were both
By Law obliged, and engaged by Oath:
Which having weighed; and that by GOD's permission
The Power was in another man's possession
Without dispute; mere conscienciousness
(Not Levity) induced him to profess
And Act, as he has done. This, I take leave
Till he shall contradict it, to conceive;
And, of my hopes concerning him, expect
To see ere long, a suitable effect;
Whereof, if I unhappily shall miss,
My damage will be ten times less than his;
Since really, he thereby forfeits more
His honor, than he did in show before:
And, if at this time, to his moral trust,
And his Engagements he shall prove unjust,
(Which may be possible) no further, then,
Thenceforward, in the words or deeds of men
Will I confide, beyond what I know true;
Whether of honesty, they make a show,
Or of Religion: But conclude that we
On whomsoere we trust, may cheated be;
And think, (as I did heretofore suppose)
None but false friends, and reconciled foes
Should overthrow our Cause. My hopes of him
Are better yet: (Oh GOD! continue them.)
No cause to me appears of suspect,
Save such as I may reasonably reject.
Yet, since he is but a man; and lest I seem
To under-prize, or overvalue him;
Yea, since the heart's unknown; and I now am
Of him informed, but by a common fame,
At such a distance too, as cannot give me
Assurance that Report will not deceive me,
I Will keep him on the Balance, till I hear
How he proceeds and shall persevere:
For Lucifer did fall; yea, and he fell
Whom some thought lately, more than parallel
To Moses, Josuah, and many more,
Renowned for their virtues heretofore:
And, since he possibly, by Adulations,
May be exposed to the like temptations;
I will not, though he bravely has begun,
A Garland make him, till the field is won.
But, if I live to hear he shall persever
In prosecuting of his best endeavor
To that effect for which GOD seems to raise him,
Whatere event shall follow, I will praise him
In such a Mode, as cannot justly be
By others blamed, or shame to him or me;
Which none can do, though his deserts were greater,
Who does not praise a man to make him better.
Faithful performances have been so rare,
That this Republike barbarous would appear,
If, what he merits be not duly weighed
And well rewarded, when her debts are paid.
Yet, lest he may be (if deferred till then)
As ill repaid as other faithful men,
Let them reward him now, (and whilst they may;)
For, here will be new changes every day.
But, though he do his duty; nor his Power
Or Virtue will avail us, till of our
Known duties, our regard be somewhat more
Than it appears to have been heretofore.
No good success, though he continue true,
If we be false, can possibly ensue.
No Nation can from servitude be saved,
Which, when it may be free, will be enslaved.
They easily, and justly are betrayed,
Where Traiters are for treason better paid
Than faithful men, who freely did oppose,
With life and livelihood, their Countries Foes.
Who can be safe, where it is hardly known
Either what Laws, or Cause, or Power to own,
Or to disown? Where, merited or not,
Knaves, Fools, and Wise men have the self-fame Lot?
And honest men, deserving best, (and first)
A worse than they, who have deserved worst?
Yea, where some suffer, till they cannot fear
Worse mischiefs, than they feel already there,
Although he should deceive their expectations,
Who, now, preserves the peace of these three Nations,
Expose us to the fury of the Dragon,
And with his horse, draw hither Charles his Wagon.
Some, are of this, in hope, and some afraid;
But chiefly they who have been largely paid
For little work; and some for doing none,
Or, that, which had been better left undone.
Some, who were paid with little, for great cost,
Which then may be in hazard to be lost:
Some likewise, whom their Conscience has accused
For having wilfully their power abused.
But, be it as GOD pleases it shall be,
It no whit startles, or affrighteth me:
For, though this George should act that which will further
His ends, who is the Sovereign of the Order
Of George on horseback, guiltless I have bin
Of what may make me dread his coming in;
Because, I acted nothing with intent
To Innovate the former Government,
Or to uphold this Power save that, whereto
Conscience and Duty did oblige me to.
For, when the late Intestine war begun,
I did not by a self-inducement run
To make a Breach; but, (called by that Power
Which was by Law entrusted, both with our
And his Prerogatives who then did reign)
Came armed, as well his Interest to maintain,
As to preserve our own: Which may appear
By that Impress my Cornet then did bear.
Pro Rege, Lege, Grege, was the WORD
Which manifested why I drew my Sword;
And if the Power I ought to have obeyed
Misled me, let the fault on that be laid.
What is it to me, since I am innocent,
If they proceeded further than I went?
The Powers that rule, my lawful warrant be,
And ought not to be questioned by me.
If they had ill intents, in what was done,
What blame have I deserved, who had none?
Or, who can blame them justly, if perforce
The Consequents have happened to be worse
Then their Design? as I believe (and shall
Believe) it was, in some, though not in all.
If for the sins of Nations and of Kings
GOD casts out Governors, and Judgments brings
Upon a People; What man can resist
His hand, or mend the matter, till he list?
Who does not stand obliged to maintain
The Power that GOD sets up, whilst it must reign,
Although it shall oppress him, and were sent
To be, for his defaults, a punishment?
And, who so little reason understands,
That when without advancing of his hands
He, by another act, (through GOD's permission,
May of his long-lost Freedom gain fruition)
Will not accept it, when it may be had,
Although they who were fools, will be so mad
To venture their own lives, those to betray
That would not be as very slaves as they?
When GOD enthrals a Nation, it is a crime
To break their chains and cords before his time;
And when he sets open the prison door,
They do offend as much, or rather more,
By adding to ungrateful disrespects
Of GOD's free grace, unnatural neglects:
If therefore, when our sins we had confessed,
GOD, them removes from us who then oppressed;
And when we slip into our former course,
Brings back again those Tyrants, or else worse,
Why should I murmur to behold him just?
Or, (if I do repent, and in him trust)
Fear, I shall him inexorable find,
Whom I offend not, but against my mind?
When frailty, and the torrents of the times,
Have hurried me into the vulgar crimes?
This I have well considered: And, though they
Who, wilfully have gone out of the way,
And, with corrupt minds, do again begin
To tread the paths which they have erred in;
(Not yet repenting) find, that evil-tidings
(Because they have not settled their abidings
Beneath the shade of GOD- Almighties wings)
Are, in these times of trouble, dreadful things;
He arms my heart against them; and the more
They shake the Earth, and make the Waters roar,
The more I slight them. Yea, although, beside
Those dangers, which have others terrified,
My ruin threatening, there, at present stand
Steep mountains, and a Desert on each hand;
Deep seas before me, and an host behind
Which does appear malignantly inclined;
Yet, all these cannot from my hopes remove me,
Because, I see GOD in a cloud above me.
My chief well-being, totally consists
With that wind, which blows when, and where it lists,
And, 'twill not mar my prime contentment, whether
We shall have Parliaments, Kings, both, or neither;
Whether or no, the old Lords, or the new;
All the secluded Members, none, or few,
Shall to this Parliament admitted be,
Or to the next, and all men then be free
To choose, or to be chose: Whether this Sect,
Or that; the supreme Power will best respect.
So Justice henceforth over us may reign,
And Truth may her due freedom still retain,
I shall be pleased, and my endeavor bend
To suffer, what I know not how to mend.
Whatever GOD permits, his will be done:
For, he is not a careless looker on,
But, active in disposing to his ends,
What, man, to his vain purposes intends:
And, our designs will frustrate be for ever,
Unless, with him concurrence we endeavor.
The peoples voice is GOD's, the Proverb says;
And is so, many times, but, not always.
Their Voice is, that the best means to prevent
Our threatened ruin, is a Parliament
(Next under GOD) that must be truly free.
This, I believe, but, gained how shall that be,
Or when procured? If, none we free must call,
But, when there is a freedom left to all
To choose, or to be chose; Some other way
We must be saved before we see that day,
Else we shall be destroyed. Must we give Thieves
(Who live but by their pardons and Reprieves)
Power, to dispose as they shall please to do
Of our Estates, and think it reason too?
To sober men appears it to be just,
With murderers to put our Lives in trust?
To any wise men, will it prudence seem,
With blood and vast sums, in the hands of those,
From whom we won them, (being still our Foes?)
Consent to take what freedom they will give us,
Who are the men who did, and would inslave us?
And, cauterized consciences permit
In judgment, on our consciences to sit?
Free Parliaments, can we call such as those?
Or, think the Members of it freely chose,
When they who much less worthy men do seem
In others eyes, than in their own esteem,
(And they, who have more wealth and power, than grace,
Wit, or sincerity with shameless face,
By bribes, threats, fawnings, or corrupted friends,
Procure their own Elections for self ends?
And when the Electors likewise cheated are
Of their free choice, by weakness, hopes, or fear?
Call you that free, which was at first begot
In bondage? Which, at full enjoys not
A freedom yet? and, was to come and go,
When others pleased were to have it so?
Can that be free, or freemen make of us,
Which is begot and constituted thus?
To which a Coney-burrough, or a village,
Not able with rents, labor, trade, and tillage,
The Charges of one Burgess to maintain,
Is as well priviledg'd, to send in twain
Unto a Parliament, as any Shire
Which does two hundred times their burdens bear?
And may corrupted be to make a choice
Which will destroy three Nations, with one voice?
But, if a Parliament thus chosen, be
By Custom lawful, and reputed free;
We must be as we are, till resolution
Be taken up, to mend that Constitution.
For though this Age to GOD allows not
His choice, out of our chosen ones, by lot,
(As when Matthias, after man's election,
Was chose, when chusers had less imperfection:)
And though this Lottery was thrown aside,
Because it bounded Avarice and Pride;
And pleased not them whose aim was to retain,
Or to acquire pre-eminence and gain;
Yea, though it has, without good reason why,
Been waved by Clergy and by Laity;
By Lot, not only the first vacant place
To an Apostleship supplied was,
But, also, Saul thereby Election had
Before he by the people King was made:
Moreover, Achans crime when close concealed
From humane knowledge, was by Lot revealed.
Then, that Expedient, why should we explode,
And, in things doubtful, shun the Test of GOD?
His providence will order all we do,
Whether, thereby we pleased are or no;
And his concurrence in our choice by Lot
Is just and needful, though we like it not.
For, of his Kingdom, we have often confessed,
These Isles are part: Our noblest Interest
Depends upon his Title and protection;
They are now much endangered by defection
From him, and by self-trust: That wicked one,
Who has in other Lands usurped his Throne,
(And here in former Ages) does intend
To re-inslave us; he has to that end
Made up his Breaches; is (with false pretense
Of doing right to wronged innocence)
Now aiming to invade us, with a Power,
In probability, too strong for our;
And, to resist, we have not many more
Of chosen-ones, than made up heretofore,
That little number, whereby (though so few)
A mighty Army, Gideon overthrew,
Through GOD's assistance, who compelled their foes
To make him way, by their self-overthrows,
Because, he credit gave to his direction,
Who sent him helpers by divine election;
And shall we, in so visible a danger,
Make him, that is most concerned, to us a stranger?
All, this premised, why should we refuse
To let GOD choose among us when we choose?
Or, thereupon distrustful grow, that we
Shall in so doing, prosper worse than he?
GOD, by despised helpers, often enables:
By Instruments that most esteem but bables;
By Lamps concealed in weak earthen pots,
And things much more to be despised than Lots.
But, what expedient likelier can be found
To fix that which is always running round?
Or, make a choice with which men pleased may be,
Who, in so many matters disagree,
Than (having chose as well as they can do)
To let GOD add perfection thereunto?
Since, when he lists, he can; and ever will
Make all we act, effect his pleasure, still?
This makes me, having acted what may seem
Enjoined by reason, leave the rest to him.
This makes me patiently to wait and heed
Men's counteractings, with what will succeed;
And, wait the more content, because I see,
That, sometimes things contemned useful be
In that which he at this time has in hand,
If his intents, I rightly understand.
For my part, I will there no chuser be
Of any, where GOD may not choose with me;
And, I their free choice also would refuse
If (singly) Shire or Borough me should choose
Without a Lot. But little need I fear
My being put to such a trial here;
For, one unfitting to be called unto
That trust, most think me; and if not, I do:
For, whose end can I serve, that am well known
This Principle, and such as this to own?
Or, who can hope I will to them be just,
Who trust to none but him, whom they distrust?
Let them who of themselves have high esteem
Pursue that course which best to them shall seem,
Set up what Power, and make what Laws they please,
I shall have comfort, though but little ease;
And if instead of right, I still have wrong,
My time of suffering, will not now be long.
To whatsoever Power, GOD, me subjects,
I will obey it with all due respects
Till he removes it; (as I still have done,
Even then, when I was censured to have gone
Beside my Rule.) When Anarchy takes place
By reason, to preserve the common peace,
I Will use all good and likely means I may;
Sing, whilst it lasts; when it fails, pray;
That, though from me my Foes the outworks win,
I may secure the Fortresses within,
And, in the mean space, neither be perplexed,
Or scared, to think, who will enslave me next:
For, he that trusts to an internal aid,
Of no external Power need be afraid.
The troubles of this life will soon be past;
The bliss that follows, will for ever last:
And, I have seen the Authors of our troubles
So often blown up, and puffed away like Bubbles,
That much I am ashamed to think how poor
My courage was to fear them heretofore.
I know what Changes are now menaced,
Yet, I Will attend them without servile dread.
Let all those do the like, who have took part
In this Republics Cause with single heart;
For, though, if he who does our Peace prolong,
Should follow those, who heretofore went wrong,
To make them prosperous in their undertakings,
Who may be marked out by their oursed speakings,
(Their malice, slanders, and scurrilities,
Their great delight and confidence in Lies.)
They must endure the sharpest blast that blew
Within this Climate, since the world they knew;
GOD, will vouchsafe them his assisting grace
To bear it stoutly when it comes to pass,
And, put a signal difference, between
Those that have honest, and unfaithful been.
A storm, is brewing, whereunto, perchance,
The late North wind, has given an advance;
For, I perceive, (although from Camps or Courts
There be where now I am, but few reports)
Some Actings have produced an effect
Much differing from what I did expect,
And working on the common peoples passions
According to their various inclinations;
So that he must be wiser than Apollo,
Who shall inform us, what events will follow.
Some rail, some rave, some scoff, and some do jeer,
Some ring, some sing, some hope, and some do fear,
Some of them do insult, some others whine;
But, all these whirlwinds shake no corn of mine:
To my old Principles, I still am true,
And will be, whatsoever Change ensue:
Because, I am assured the Cause we had
Was very good, though we our selves are bad;
And, that, if after all our pains and cost
We lose it, by our wickedness it is lost.
And, for my part, my portion has been such,
That, if I lose all, I cannot lose much;
Nor by my Foes be much worse dealt withal
Than I have been by those whom Friends we call.
The World can me of nothing disinvest,
Save that, which heretofore my cares increast;
And, though she somewhat more oppress me may,
She shall not take my happiness away,
Nor mar my hopes with all her scorns and brags,
Although, she wears, and tears, my flesh to rags.
I can be but abused, and ground between
Two Millstones, as I hitherto have been.
The favors of the World, to men upright,
Makes them the more obnoxious to despite.
If she, to place of Power and Trust commends
Well-minded men, it is but for her own ends:
For, when her purposes to pass are brought
By them, who, her preferments never sought,
(And, others for her service sitter seem)
The first she slights, with barbarous disesteem,
And them exposes to disgraceful scorns,
Because, no longer they can serve her turns.
Therefore, though worse I speed than heretofore,
My peace thereby shall be disturbed no more,
Than if I heard a drivelling fool did swear,
His Babble, and Bell'd-cap, I should not wear.
As well mine, I confess, as others crimes,
Have multiplied the troubles of these times;
And, therefore, I must undergo my share,
In what our National demerits are.
But, they can never force me to despair,
Because, I have a Mediators prayer;
And, such a gracious GOD to trust unto,
As neither looks for more than men can do,
Nor does severely mark what is done amiss
Through frailty, and without maliciousness.
And, though, a real unsuccesseful zeal
To do my duty to this Commonweal
Has lost me some friends, and foes made me many,
I, am not a malicious foe to any;
Nor were my sufferings, since these wars begun,
For any knavery, but, for having none:
And, therefore, I shall thrive, when honest men
May have a thriving time; but, not till then:
And such a time (though by what is pre-declar'd,
It may a very long time be deferred)
May, very possibly, soon come to pass,
If he, that shall have power, has also grace
To use it prudently, when he receives it
To that intent, for which GOD chiefly gives it;
And shall vouchsafe a more indulgent ear
To them, whose words, by deeds confirmed were,
Than to the Complements of seeming friends,
Who fawn upon him for sinister ends.
To fortify that hope, a little more,
I have, (beside what is expressed before)
Considered this, that, understanding men,
Although they make some uses, now and then,
Of Parasites, to them, no trust will give,
Till they may be induced to believe
That, Crows, which flock about a new-yean'd Lamb,
(To pick his eyes out) to protect him came;
That, they have often observed, it is their guise,
To worship all new Stars, when first they rise;
Hosanna unto him, this day to cry,
Whom they will next day seek to crucify;
Set up a Man of clouts, to be their King,
Yea, honor as a Godhead any thing,
Whereby their present Lust may be enjoyed,
Though thereby, they at last may be destroyed;
And, when by their own faults they are distressed,
Curse their best friends, and those whom they have blessed.
But, this man's fortitude, I hope is such,
That, their Bolts will not thereon batter much;
For, GOD confers the Power on him bestown,
Even for this Peoples sake, not for his own;
And, if their trust in him, he should betray
By whom he is, that which he is this day,
His loss will be as great (perhaps much more)
As their, who have, betrayed it heretofore.
Whether to this, or to that Interest,
He will decline, it is coming to the Test:
For, he now stands on that fo^ed Y,
Wherein, a right way, and a wrong does lie;
And, he shall hear a voice behind him, say,
GEORGE, that is the left, and this the right hand way:
This, leads to honor here, and future bliss;
That way, the next way to destruction is:
That way, the greatest number does pursue;
Yet, this the safest, although trod by few.
Now, whether this, or that way he incline,
The danger will be rather his, than mine.
Whatever shall succeed, which more or less
Obstructs the enjoyment of our outward-peace,
Me, 'twill not make much merrier, or much sadder,
Than rattling of three blew beans in a bladder;
So, GOD gives patience till the storm be past,
And Truth and righteousness prevail at last.
What, MONCK perhaps will do, or leave undone,
May mar some Trifles, I have doated on;
But, that, whereon my best hopes fixed be
Does lie secured betwixt GOD, and me.
That, which conduces to my noblest ends,
No more on his, than his on mine depends;
And, GOD, I know, will constantly proceed
In prosecuting what he has decreed
Concerning this Republic, whatsoever
He, we, or any other shall endeavor:
And, when their falsehood, malice, and dospight,
Insultings, and vain hopes, are at the height,
(Who, now, against this Commonwealth conspire
To bring on such a Change as they desire)
They shall but to and fro, like drunkards reel,
Do, and undo, and run round in a wheel,
Till they have made that, not to be endured,
Whereby, they dream distempers may be cured;
And, GOD shall fo^l their wisdom in that hour;
So break their snares, and weaken so, their power,
That, what they did suppose would have o'rthrown
His purposes, will quite destroy their own.
This I believe, who oft-times have foreseen
Contingent things, that have unlikely been:
And, though for this, I may be flouted more
Than for the like expressions heretofore,
And more in hazard; I am not afeard
To let them any where, be seen or heard,
Nor will be discontent with him who shall
Conceive of me, as Festus did of Paul;
For, I expect not, that Grapes can be born
Upon a Thistle, or Figs on a Thorn.
And though the Scorners ask to what intent
I have composed this Ribble-rabblement,
(As they will call it) I, will tell them why,
In meekness, that they may as well as I
Be thereby profited; and (if their pride,
Obstruct it not) lay prejudice aside.
At first relation of the foresaid News,
I stepped aside, to counsel with my Muse,
That, as I often do, I might thereby
My heart against assailings fortify:
For, (my infirmities, I Will not dissemble)
My flesh as prone is to look pale and tremble
As other men's, if I neglect the cures
That must be took for such distemperatures
As are begot, by sudden informations
Of accidents beyond our expectations.
To which end, if I did not often retire
To seek by musings, what, GOD, will inspire,
And thus preserve them in my slighted Rimes,
I could not bear the burdens which these times
Impose on me, or mine, and upon those
Who first made head against our common foes
By their encouragement, who had the power,
Which might have saved those whom they did de^
And have as well brought scorn and outward sha^
On those who acted with them, without blame,
As on themselves; and, when GOD did restore
Their Power twice lost, still acted, as before.
In that, and such like Cases, not in vain,
I thus distill out from the heart and brain,
The spirits of those many mus'd-on matters
Which there I find, to make some cordial waters.
For, though they, who confide in men and horse,
Deride them, as mere whimsies of no force;
They make me merry, when my heart was sad,
They keep me sober, when men think me mad;
And, by my musings also, now and then,
The like effects are wrought on other men;
For, they assist us to consider so,
Those things, which men may; those, which GOD will do;
What, we our selves must act; what, leave undone;
What, may in reason, follow thereupon;
What madness 'twere to overcharge with sorrow
The present day, with dreading more to morrow;
Or, mar our sleep, by being discontented
At what may not be, or not be prevented,
That, I take up what likely hopes I may
My present fears or doubtings to allay;
And fix my confidence on him, by whom,
I am assured help at last will come:
And he still sends in, (when I know not where
To find supply for things that needful are)
So much, as may support me to persever
In what I am obliged to endeavor.
I, am as sensible, as most men are,
Of all those Dangers, which do now appear;
And, till with GOD, I had conversed a while,
GEORGE MONCK with all his Forces in this Isle,
And all that He and Mountague can do
At Sea and Land, with help of LONDON too,
Could put me in no hope they should prevent
The perils which appeared imminent:
But, now, though all their Forces they should bend
Against that Cause, which we hope they befriend,
And, all the strength both Spain and France can bring,
Were joined to impose on us a King
Without Conditions, I should not repent
My Principles, or fear the consequent.
Because, if by his coming, he shall heal
Our wounds, and breaches, we are safe and well;
And if he come in vengeance, we shall taste
A bitter Cup, and, he the dregs, at last.
For, having as Appendants to that Power
Sins unrepented, and as great as our,
Which daily will increase, when they come in,
SIN, shall do execution upon sin:
Profaneness, joining hands with superstition,
And, Sanctity dissembled, with Ambition;
They shall so plague each other, that, if ten
Of honest and true-hearted English men
Be left in every thousand, and, together
Knit in true Charity fast to each other,
They shall be a RESERVE, to make this Nation
More prosperous in another Generation,
I, would have said, before this year be gone,
If, I, had now seen Justice better done;
Or, any probability perceived,
That, what I should declare, would be believed.
But, peradventure, it is a day too late,
This day, on any terms to promise that,
Which yet, expected is, by some of them,
Who, have the means neglected, and the time.
For, Charles those great advantages has won
By what has been omitted, and miss-done,
(Which, I long since foresaw) that, though his Power
MONCK shall employ for us; nor his, nor our,
Nor both united; nor a Parliament,
Established with full and free consent,
Of all the People; (if by penitence,
GOD, reconciled be unto that Prince)
Can at this present, make the scale so even,
(Unless our peace be likewise made in heaven)
But, that there will be ten for one, at least,
To weigh him out his claimed Interest,
And, force us those conditions to receive,
Which he himself shall pleased be to give.
For, our great Wars, confusions, and dissenting,
Will frustrate so, endeavors of preventing
Our fears, and settling true peace, in that way,
Whereby, we for a settlement assay;
That he, by whom, lost hopes revived became,
May accidentally, without just blame,
Through breach of trust, make way to bring him in,
Who, hitherto has most opposed bin.
For, that, which cures, where one distemper lies,
Kills, where are complicated maladies;
Or, else, at least, produces an effect
Much differing, from what we did expect.
If still both Parties be the same they were,
They rather shall increase confusions here
Than qualify them: and, for ought that, yet,
To me appears likely to beget
A better hope: naught, Reason offers us,
But this; GOD, grant it prove no worse than thus.
If, he be qualified, as now some say
He is; and as (for ought I know) he may,
That will be then effected, which few thought
Could have here whilst they lived to pass been brought.
And, if to GOD, he reconciled be,
Why, not to men? Or, wherefore not to me,
Who, never was for self-respects to him
An Adversary, or, a friend to them
Who were his Enemies, for being so,
But, as he was, or seemed to be, a Foe
To GOD and Justice? If, he be not such,
Why should I doubt his favor? Or, fear much
His wrath? For, doubtless, if he be upright,
He, then, in honest men will take delight;
Yea, peradventure, may have need of one
To do such services as I have done,
Without regarding greatly what men shall
Be pleased, or displeased there withal;
And, if he be a Tyrant, I know why
He, will have greater cause to fear, than I.
If, her, who with her Cup of fornications
Has long made drunk the Kings of many Nations,
He has not pledged in secret; nor, so long
Drunk her enchantments, that they are too strong
To be expelled, there may be perfect cures
For all mere natural distemp'ratures,
Whereby, he from Impostures may depart,
To own what GOD has written in his heart.
And, then, it will be evidently seen
Which way, he might a glorious King have been,
Who, now is none; and what the Parliament,
Which promised to make him such, then meant;
For, he that governs men, must righteous be,
And, there is no such glorious King as he.
When King and People are confined by Laws,
Neither the Princes, nor the Peoples Cause
Can be infringed; and questionless, if he
Inclined to such a condescension be;
This would, when both sides thereunto submit,
Good will to men, and peace on earth, beget;
And, both GOD's Justice, and his Mercy too
It would illustrate, if it might be so.
For, GOD's Long-suff'ring does abide for ever;
And, Judgments, very seldom times, or never,
Are past by such an absolute Decree,
As, by Repentance not reversed to be;
Nor does he look, that, man's Repentance should
Proportion with his Deviations hold,
Since his Free Grace, a standing help supplies,
To make amends for those deficiencies.
Manasses, guilty of sins most abhorred,
Was cast out of his Kingdom, and restored;
Yea, and this Parliament, whose Crimes are more
Ten times, than his, were twice shut out of door;
Yet, now in grace again (God grant they may
Take heed of falling the third time away,)
For, GOD, will then perhaps, the second time,
(As he did of the rest) make proof of him.
What he will do, is known to him alone,
Because, he only knows, what will be done
By them, to whom Conditions are declared
With threatenings, and a promised reward,
As they shall be neglected, or fulfilled;
Or, men are either well, or evill-will'd:
For, they, the Devil's, not GOD's, Prophets are,
Who, absolutely, either peace, or war,
(Or shame, or honor, poverty, or wealth,
Or life, or death, or sicknesses, or health)
Shall promise unto them, who have transgressed
Without conditions tacit, or expressed;
And they are Fools abused by ill suggestions,
Who tempt men, by demanding of such questions.
Yet, GOD, sometimes indulgently complies
With us, even in our curiosities;
And, other while, unsought for, gives hints,
To prove us by conditional events.
Among some other things, made signs to me,
When, here a settled Government should be,
My Britains Genius has long since recorded
A signal previous one, which is thus worded:
Brit. Genius, Page 100. A King, shall willingly himself un-king,
And, thereby, grow far greater than before, etc.
This, in the meaning, might have twice, ere this
Fulfilled have been; and once, in Terminis,
If Pride, self-will, and frowardness of mind,
Had not, by false lights, made true Reason blind.
And, if that he, whom it will most concern,
Shall now, GOD's visitation-time discern,
(Not letting opportunities depart,
By suffering vain hopes to obdure his heart)
When GOD shall on his soul begin to strike,
A call to penitence, Manasseth-like,
But, meekly comes, and lays revenge aside,
All self-will, animosities, and pride;
It shall have such effects the self-same hour,
On these three Nations, by a secret power,
As, will so change them too, that, ere the Sun
Is at his next height, and through Cancer run,
It will amaze the World; their Foes confound;
Make some believe, all things are wheeling round;
Or, think, that Revolution drawing near
Which must conclude the great Platonick-year;
And, good, to many Realms, 'twill pre-divine
Betwixt the Tropicks on both sides the Line.
This, doubless, will by no man be withstood
Who seeks his own weal in the common good,
And, does not either strive to have possession
Of other men's concernments, by oppression,
Or, is displeased with every Government,
Save that, which his own wisdom shall invent.
If this, may be vouchsafed, or, any thing
Which might appear to have a modelling
By GOD's, and Natures Laws; I am so far,
From Jonah's frowardness, when, GOD, did spare
Great Niniveh, that, though it quite dissented,
From all that I have aimed at, or hinted,
(Here, or elsewhere) I, therein should rejoice,
And praise Almighty GOD, with heart and voice,
That, though he both did threaten to destroy,
He lets both parties, at the last enjoy
More grace than they deserve; and turns to them,
In mercy, though they turn not, yet, to him:
For, my endeavors wholly were bestown,
To have GOD's mind fulfilled, not mine own;
And, whether he in mercy or in wrath
To give us Kings again, determined has;
If he, shall bring one hither, I Will receive him
With such obedience as I ought to give him;
And, praise GOD for his Justice, though his hand
Shall smite me first of any in this Land.
But, I shall not believe he has Commission
To reign here, by GOD's grace, or his permission,
Until he gets admittance by the Assents
Of these three Nations in their Parliaments;
Or, by re-conquest: Nor, will I desist
From still adhering to that Interest
Which we possess, and, on Appeals from heaven,
Was by GOD's Doom, unto this People given:
But, I Will assert it, while life shall endure,
Or, till for sin, GOD, takes the forfeiture
Of what he gave; and absolutely shall
Translate it; or, on terms conditional:
Or, till I see our diff'rences decided,
And, how the Power now claimed shall be divided.
Mean while, I neither to be saved from
His wrath, or, to find grace in time to come,
Will have with him compliance; lest I wrong
That Power to which my services belong:
Nor, will I, whilst this lasts, one deed assay
Which tends to removing it away.
Nay, notwithstanding it should me oppress,
And, ill requite me for my faithfulness,
I would not tell in secret, how it should
Supplanted be, although, perhaps, I could:
Except, in telling Charles, his Resignation,
Will be the best means of that supplantation:
For, though the Cause, I fought for, were unjust,
I am a Traitor if I break my trust.
Yea, though thereof, I be well satisfied,
If I shall turn unto the other side
Before that trust, I, totally resign,
With all that Power, which by that trust was mine,
Or, make my self a starting hole, whereby
I may be false, with shows of Loyalty.
The Royal Power, I loyally obeyed;
And, though it did oppress, was so afraid
Of innovating; that a Reformation
Thereof I wished, not an extirpation.
But, when by other men, through GOD's permis,
It was removed; to that, did yield submission,
Which then succeeded; and so would have done,
Had twenty been admitted one by one,
In whom I saw the sovereign power reside,
And, with most visibility abide:
For, every private person it behooves,
Till that whole Orb, wherein he is fixed, moves,
To keep his place, not medd'ling any way
To overthrow the Power he should obey.
Let that MONCK, whom I see but through a cloud,
(And may two faces hide beneath one hood,)
Consider this; and take heed, lest he may
By fair appearances be led astray,
And make his Power to over-balance that
Which must be weighed out, by their free debate
To whom it appertains: for, they alone,
Must, now, until their own set time is gone,
Determine that which in suspense does stand;
And, if the Power then slip into his hand,
(As possibly it will) he then may do
What GOD and his own conscience prompts him to.
Mean while, it will behove him to be wary;
For, if an equal hand he shall not carry,
As their Affairs now stand, 'twill treason be,
Even in the most superlative degree;
And, shall be, doubtless, in the final swinge
Rewarded with superlative revenge,
Whether the Power, from whom his Power he had
Were perfect, or, some way imperfect made,
Either by their own faults, or other men's;
For, his defects have no excuse from thence:
Because, a servants trust, must be maintained,
How ever their Masterships, his Masters gained.
Let him consider well, that, he is bound
To them in that state, wherein them he found
When they entrusted him; till their own Acts,
Or, providence, invalid those Contracts;
Or, totally annihilates the Band
By which they mutually obliged stand;
And, that, if they, through what he shall miss-do,
Be either forced, misled, or frighted to
Those condescentions, which may quite destroy
That Power, by which he did his Power enjoy,
His Faith is broke; unless, he do his best,
To re-impow'r them; or, make good, at least,
That End, for which GOD and the people gave
To them, and him, the Power which now they have.
And, this, (if there befall an oversight)
Must be endeavored with all his might;
For, every promise, vow, and undertaking,
Repugning this, is made null in the making;
And, all the blood which is in this Cause shed,
Will down be showered, in vengeance on his head,
Who shall to wrong the Common right endeavor,
And in that prosecution still persever.
This is the Judgment, which this day, my Musings,
Dictate (as I think, by divine infusings)
To some good purposes, if we repent
That Course, which yet obstructeth GOD's intent.
And, when that mad distemper is allayed
Which frustrates all that can be writ or said.
These Principles, by musing, I assay
To keep up, in my self; and, as I may,
To build in others, thereby, to increase
Their faithfulness, and settle common-peace.
These Principles, so long as that Power lasts
Which is in being, though it daily wastes,
Is much contemned; (and without likelihood
Of ought effecting for the public good)
Compels me conscientiously to wave
All self-respects; and all those which I have
To them, whose welfare is to me more dear
Than mine own life, and all things mortal are,
Rather, than I those duties would neglect,
Which, I think, may the common-peace effect,
(Though duties nor exacted, nor regarded,
But, often, with in juries, and spights rewarded.)
Yea, still, though most my purposes deride,
And, make me scorned of Fools on either side;
I, take up all occasions to re-mind them
Of needful Cautions which they cast behind them,
As now I do, and heretofore have done:
Sometimes, foretelling, what would fall thereon,
And, then, remembering them as I saw need,
How, that which was foretold them, did succeed;
That, them (if possible) reduce I may
Before it be too late, into that way,
Wherein they may be safe; for, they have bin
Long out, and likely, never to come in,
Till GOD, by what he seems about to do,
(Or, some such way) shall force them thereunto.
For, it is not that course which has practiced bin,
Our putting this man out, and that man in;
Our punishing, of some for miss-conceiving
Their duties; nor, our giving, or forgiving,
According as our ends, it may effect,
Or, as we favor, or, else dis-respect;
Nor our Prudentials, though they did excel
The plots and counsels of Achitophel,
That will procure our safety; or, succeed
Much better, at this present, than his did.
No sure Conclusions, can be grounded on
That, which this General has lately done,
Although, to make his passage hither smooth,
He Lambert foiled, as Lambert foiled Booth;
For, men, and humane actions, whatsoever
They promise, or portend, so trustless are,
That, none can yet know, whether of the Three
Shall to himself, or us, most prosperous be;
Though, for the present, there is in the One
Hope of much good, and in the other none.
It Is not discov'ring of each others shame,
(And of those dunghils, out of which they came)
By suffering scurrilous base Pamphleteers
To fill the streets, with slanders, lies, and jeers,
Till there is hardly left us time and room
Of useful Truths, informed to become.
Nor preaching Swordmen, nor the fighting Priests,
Are they, who must support our Interests.
Nor they, who make our public plagues the more
By shutting private mercies out of door:
For doubtless they, who, find not time, to hear
A man oppressed, once in twice four year,
Though urged with frequent importunities,
Will make GOD's ears as deaf unto their cries.
It Is not our Fellowship with pious friends,
Made instrumental for mere carnal ends:
It Is not our eagerness to miss-apply
The grace of GOD, and cloud it with a Lie,
Which will endear, and make us acceptable
To him, who to deliver us is able.
Nor is it our formal Offerings, or our zeal
To GOD, and safety of this Commonweal
Pretended, by our weeding from his Corn
Those, whom he does command to be forborne
Till harvest-time, (lest, as we daily do,
Among the Tares, we pluck up good wheat, too)
That, will be our protection from the smart
And sting of Conscience, when GOD tries the heart;
Nor from those ou'ward plagues, which many run
To meet, in hope, by that course, them to shun.
It Is neither our, nor the designs of those
Who, to this Commonwealth are open foes,
That help, or harm us: For, none can contrive
Worse mischieves, than both Parties do derive
From their own projects; (as it would appear
If, they of their successes heedful were.)
Nor will it be our having of a King
Or no King good or bad, that peace will bring
To either side, till they shall better heed
How mis-advisedly they do proceed.
Nor is it a packed, peec'd, or, new Parliament,
Elected by a general assent,
That will repair us, though it might be had:
But, some things, whereof small account is made,
As we shall shortly find, when we have tried
What, by exper'ence will be verified.
Some will desire to know them: would they could
As heartily desire it, as they should,
And mend what is amiss, when they do know it,
As easily as I can truly show it.
It is, that Mercy, and that righteousness,
Which, hypocritically we profess,
When we do shut our doors, our eyes, and ears,
Against the sad Petitions, cries, and tears
Of men oppressed, and cast away that Bread
To dogs and swine, that Children should have fed.
It Is self-denial, and not that alone
Which ought by all men to be undergone,
But also that in chief, which by a Vote
Was once pretended, and ever since forgot.
It is a conscientious reparation
Of this Republics Faith, whose violation
Makes all unprosp'rous which we take in hand;
And, which has brought a Curse upon this Land
That will not be removed, till we have paid
Those Vows, which have been shamelesly delayed.
It Is want of meekness upon either side,
And Charity, which (making men divide,
And subdivide) does day by day, increase
Those Discords, which destroy the common peace;
For, nor men's wrath, nor their Phanatick zeal,
Compleats GOD's will, or cures the Commonweal,
Or edifies his Church: But, Righteousness,
And Truth professed, with sincere soberness.
It Is these things, that must cure our Grand disease,
And, if we perish, it is through want of these.
These, are the sins, (as often heretofore
I have affirmed, and say it now once more)
Which have destroyed, and totally laid waste
Great Monarchies, and States in Ages past.
Yet, to these Crimes, this Age has added many,
Beside hypocrisy, the worst of any.
Yea, they have crowned them with impenitencies
For sins committed under fair pretenses;
With perseverance in them, whilst GOD's hand
Is stretched forth in anger over this Land.
And, it is Penitence for these Transgressions,
As also, for our manifold omissions,
That must prevent the plagues now coming on.
GOD, grant, it may be timely, thought upon;
And, this, therewith, in season minded too;
That, we in conscience, are obliged to do
As much as possibly we shall be able
To seek preventing of that miserable
And sad condition, whereto they are brought,
Who, for the common Interest, have fought
By their injoynments, (who then managed
The Power, which their obedience watranted)
And, thereto, not alone contributed
Their Livelihoods. but, in their service shed
Their precious blood, with hazard of their lives,
And ruin to their children, and their wives;
Whom, if we slightly leave indempnifi'd,
Will raise the loudest CRY that ever cried;
Make all men say, (who have their Cause well scanned)
That honest men by knaves have been trapann'd;
Fulfill, what, in my OPOBALSAMVM,
I, fifteen years now past, foretold should come;
And in some other Premonitions too,
(Though heeded not) nigh forty years ago.
Yea, and, bring Vengeance, even on those who shall
Suppose, it them concerns not at all;
For, most, one way or other, guilty be,
And from the punishment, few shall be free.
What pinch was that? Oh gracious GOD! where art?
Stay by me: For, a sudden twinge at heart,
So gripeth it, with an injected fear,
As if some dreadful thing, were drawing near.
Waves, after waves, begin (methinks) to roll,
And, are come up, almost, even to my soul.
Yet, why my soul, art thou cast down in me?
What is it, that can thus disquiet thee?
Still, trust in GOD; thy self to him resign:
For, thou art his, and he is truly thine.
Although the Waters roar, the waves mount high,
And we are far from shore, yet, GOD is nigh;
Although the ship sinks, he can, if he please,
Make us, with safety, walk upon the Seas;
And, if we down into the Deeps must go,
There, we shall find him, and enjoy him too.
Take courage then, my heart, firm credit give,
To what he promises, and thou shall live.
This pang is wholly past, and all my fear
Is now, for them, who, senceless do appear
Of their own hazards; who are without dread
Of that destruction which hangs over their head;
And, who have help and peace expected from
Those hills, from whence, their welfare cannot come;
As, they would soon find, if they heedful were
What winds breathe from them, and what fruits they bear.
How long! how long! shall GOD unto this place
Make dis-respected offers of his Grace?
How often, since great failings first begun,
Has he provoked almost every one,
Apart, or jointly? Ceasing not to prove
By Judgments and by mercies interwove,
How difficultly, either Grace or Nature
Can work upon a self-corrupted Creature?
By all things which may any way relate
To soul or body, credit or estate
We have been called upon, one way or other;
By sweet, and sharp things, and both mixed togeth
By what to our chief joy, and sorrow tends;
By servants, neighbors, kindred, and by friends;
By sicknesses, and health; by scorns, and jeers;
By shame, and honor, and by hopes, and sears:
By other men's examples, GOD, forewarns;
Sometimes, by our own sufferings, wisdom learns;
One while by wise men, and true Prophets reaches,
Sometimes, by Wisards, fools, and children preach
Then, last of all, when no effect these take,
By things (as now) like Bal'ams Ass, does speak:
And, that, which all this, probably presages,
Is (without swift repentance) Bal'ams wages;
Which will be surely paid, when they who may
Prevent it yet, shall give their power away:
Unless that Mercy, which no ending has,
Shall once again, put off the day of wrath;
(Now-near approaching) when, in few, or none,
There shall be any hope it maybe done.
So, for a while, my mad fit now is over.
Would other mad men might as soon recover:
And, be as sober in their Intervalls,
As I have hope to be, whatere befalls.
Thus, once again, although that heretofore,
In this mode, I resolved to write no more,
(As, justly, otherwhile, the Parliament
Revokes their Orders, when impertinent
To Common safety) I, have boldness took,
For like respects, my purpose to revoke.
And, though, as our Cause now at hazard lies,
Most men will judge me far more bold than wise,
To own these Musings. I so dreadless am,
That, to attest them, I subscribe this Name
At Hambledon, Feb. 19. 1659. George Wither.

An Advertisement.
IT is the great mercy of GOD that the Author of this Furor-poeticus, (all
things considered) fell not into Furorem Bethlemeticum, long since: (for beside
three Addresses in Manuscript, presented to the two Protectors, and many
hundreds of other Poems, Papers, and Petitions printed and written, published,
and privately preferred, during almost 18 years solicitation for public and
private justice and mercy) it will be partly demonstrated what experience he
the said Author had of these Latter times, to all those who shall have patience
to peruse those few Poems, preparatories, and Epistolary discourses, only,
which have been divulged within the compass of the last year, (or, not long
before) and which may be had with the Printer hereof, or, at Mrs Stamps, who
sells Books in Westminster Hall, and at other Booksellers, being these in
particular.

1. A Narrative of the series of his Grievances, with a preparatory to his
Petitions, and the said Narrative, intended to each Individual Member of
Parliament. 2. The Sinners Confession, or the product of a private humiliation.
3. The Poem entitled Salt upon Salt. 4. Epistolium-Vagum-prosa-metricum, or an
Epistle at Random in Prose and Meter. 5. A Cordial Confection, to strengthen
their hearts, whose courage begins to fail by the Armies late dissolving of the
Parliament, etc.
To the last mentioned Epistolary Discourse, written to Mr R. Hamon, Merchant,
I will here add this Postscript, upon the occasion therein expressed.
A Postscript to Mr R. Hamon, Merchant.
SIR,
THat Letter, which to you I lately sent,
On second Rupture of this Parliament,
I am informed, by some, this censure had,
That, doubtless, when I wrote it, I was mad:
(As I, perhaps, might have been long ago,
Had, I their wit, whom troubles makes so.)
They know not what it aims at, I hear say;
But, were they not more mad than I, they may:
For, from the whole Contents, they may collect
What, of their hopes, will be the sad effect;
And, draw forth also from it, this Conclusion,
That, they, and I, and all are in confusion;
That, neither Army, Parliament, or King,
Nor any other sub-celestial thing,
Can have a self-sufficiency to cure
Our present Ruptures, and distemperature,
As we are now distempered; till a Power
Therewith concur, transcending their, and our:
Till Righteousness with Mercy is enthroned;
Till selfness, and self ends are more disowned:
Till every single person shall apart
Reform his Will, his Actions, Words, and Heart;
Or, so endeavors it, that one by one,
We, may do that, which yet by none is done,
Until to Numbers, Unites do increase,
And make at last, those Numbers numberless.
Such Ends, as these, I aimed at; and perchance,
If they, had more Wit, and less Ignorance,
Who censured me, their prudence had discerned
My purpose, or more soberness had learned.
Or, peradventure, they had understood,
That, should I then have written in a mood
More absolute, of things concerning those
Who were of differing Judgments, friends, and, foes,
It might have added fuel, to increase
Those flamings, which did then infringe our peace;
And wholly have made void that honest end
Which, I did in simplicity intend.
For, had I magisterially expressed
What I disliked, or owned, or judged best
To be resolved on; I should have appeared
A Party, and by neither side been heard
Without suspect, that I would have acquired,
Not what was best, but, what I most desired.
Much, therefore, positively to declare
I purposed not; but, somewhat to prepare
All Parties, without frowardness of heart
To weigh those things, which jointly, or apart,
Would most concern them; and, then, make that use,
Which an Atonement soonest might produce.
I, somewhat further, might Apologize;
But, this, on my behalf, may well suffice,
Who, more for others sakes, than for mine own,
These words and Lines, have thus together thrown.
FINIS.

