THE MUSES CABINET, Stored with variety of POEMS, Both pleasant and profitable.
By W. W.

LONDON, Printed for F. Coals in the Old Bailey. 1655.

To the truly and excellent well accomplished Gentleman, Mr. William Holgate.
BE pleased Sir these lines for to peruse,
The weak inventions of a Rustic Muse.
Which although small and worthless, yet does show
The love and service I unto you owe.
Augustus Caesar was to Poets kind,
Nor was Mecenas any thing behind:
Do thou like them, but patronage my pen,
Renowned shall thy name continue, when
Each griple wordlings fame shall rot and die,
Wanting true worth to raise their memory,
Such mighty power in a Muse does ly.
If the three Sisters lengthen out my days,
The thrice three Sisters shall chant forth thy praise.
Yours in all service, William Winstanley.
To the Reader.
IN this scribbling age, wherein to do as the most do, is to do as the worst
do, I have adventured my boat in the Sea of the world, not fearing the censure
of malicious Critics: I make no doubt but this poor work of mine will have
many detractors, who (like Aesobs dog) will do nothing themselves, yet carp at
the endeavors of other men, such if I have, it shall be my glory, that I have
written something worthy their envy, nor must I expect to be free from their
censures, since both Homer and Virgil, the flower of Greek and Latin Poets,
had their detractors, Homer his Zoilus and Virgil his Bavinus, few that ere
could say like Ovid,

No foul-mouthed detractor ere has bit
With fangs of envy any work I writ,
Many ignorant Readers I expect to have, who to be esteemed wise will carp at
what they cannot mend.

To these low witted ones, that would seem high, Ne suitor ultra crepidam, say
I.

Others (like Scaliger) seek fame to themselves, by detracting from others, and
like flesh-flies delight altogether in sore places, these will do what they can
to disparage my Poems.

But as for these my resolutions be,
A rush for them that care a straw for me.
To the Judicious Readers I shall willingly submit, desiring them to bear with
my imperfections, and where they find any faults, to remember what Ovid said
unto his friend, who having found fault with the meanness of some of his
Verses, replied, that face seems fairest that has some moles: but least (like
the Citizens of Mindum) I should make my porch too big for my house. I will
conclude my Epistle as learned Mr. Owen begins his pigams.

Thou that read'st these, if thou commend'st them al,
Thou'st too much milk, if none, thou'st too much gall.
Thine as I find thee, Will. Winstanley

To the Autthr.
SIr, though I am not an Astrologer,
Yet I without the stars may thus infer,
Thy work will pass, though in these worst of times,
When arts contemned are, and scurrile lines
Pass and applauded be; thou need'st not fear,
Thy lines shall serve to wrap up Grocers ware:
Nor yet to light Tobacco with; no, this
Has scarce a line, but there a sentence is;
Proceed thou on then, as thou have begun,
And add to what already thou have done:
For this thy work posterity will thank thee.
And with our famous English Bards will rank thee.
Jo. Vaughan.
THE Muses Cabinet, STORED With variety of POEMS, both pleasant and profitable.
The Authors Preface to the following Poems.
REader! What thou may think of this, or me,
I know not, nor yet care; though Poesy
Be grown into contempt, and ignorance
Their tongues against the Muses do advance:
Though some (to bring the Art into disgrace)
Say, none do it profess, but only base
And sordid fellows; yet I Would have them know it,
David the Lords Anointed was a Poet,
And Solomon his Son, the wisest man
That ever lived since the world began,
Was likewise one of that Society,
As his excellent Song of Songs does verify.
Augustus Caesar, Emperor of Rome,
A Poet was, as Histories have shown,
And royal James, of blessed memory,
Professor was of sacred Poesy.
Though some do say, we do not reprehend
The peoples vice, but teach them to offend,
In laying open to the common view
The acting of such sins they never knew:
Yet sure I think they rather may reap profit,
Showing the sin, we show the danger of it.
For, though sometimes we filthy sins do name,
We nere excite men to commit the same,
But every one of us, with one assent,
Unto the sin have joined the punishment.
If we of Helens rape do speak, we show,
How it at length caused Iliums overthrow;
That none may such a life as Paris lead,
For fear that they like unto Paris speed.
Though some with open mouths do make loud cries,
That all our Works are nothing else then lies;
Yet did not passion sure their reason blind,
They would an error in their judgment find,
Since we affirm nothing for to be true,
We write not what is done, but what men should do
Affirming nothing, how can we deceive?
We bind no man our reports to believe,
But for a good invention do desire,
The sacred Muses would in us inspire,
That under feigned relations men may see
Both what they are, and what they ought to be:
More truths are thus presented to men's eyes,
Then in many seeming true Histories.
These frivolous aspersions some do cast
On sacred Poesy, with envious blast:
But Reader, I from thee expect far better,
Which if I find, I shall remain thy Debtor.
W. W.
On Misery after Joy.
FOrepast delights no present comfort gives;
He who was one time happy, and now lives
In penury, no woes are like to his:
It adds to griefs the thoughts of passed bliss:
No object of more greater woe can be,
Then to behold a King in misery:
For as joy after sorrow sweetest is,
So sorrow is most bitter after bliss:
This made the wise Themistocles deny,
Being poor, to learn the Art of Memory,
Knowing remembrance of his former state
His present miseries would aggravate.
To have been happy, it is such a curse,
I think the world cannot afford a worse:
When Fortune brings a man to th'top of all,
Then throws him down, the greater is his fall.
Deposed Dionysius did say,
They only happy were, and none but they,
That nere were blessed, it is no happy state
That has unto it an appointed date.
O let me rather never happy be,
Then in my old age taste of misery.
Ovidii Nasonis Amorumliber primus, Aelegia 15.
Envy why say thou I spend ill my time,
And sai'st my Verses are an idle rhyme?
And that, unlike the line from whence I came,
Wats I pursue not for to purchase fame:
And that I study not the tedious laws,
Nor prostitute my voice in each man's cause:
Thy scope is; mortal, but eternal mine,
Which through the world shall ever chant my rhyme.
Homer will live while I Would and Tenedos
Does stand, and whilst to th'Sea does flow Simois:
So will Ascreus whilst grapes by vines are borne,
Or men with crooked sickles reap down Corn.
Callimathus, though but low in invention,
Yet after-ages shall his Verses mention.
High Sophocles proud vein shall last for ever,
With Sun and Moon Aratus shall endure.
Whilst slaves do cheat, fathers hoard, bauds be whorish,
And wantons flatter, shall Menander flourish:
Rude Ennius, and Ploutus, both shall live,
Each age of them a fresh applause shall give.
Of Varroes name what age shall not be told?
Of Jasons Argos, and the fleece of gold?
Then shall Lueretius lofty lines expire,
When earth and Seas shall burn in flames of fire.
Titirus and Aeneas shall be read,
Whilst Rome of all the conquered world is head.
Whilst Cupids fires be out, and his bow broke,
Thy Verses, dear Tibullus, shall be spoke.
Our Gallus shall be known from East to West,
So shall Licoris whom he loved best.
The flint and iron both may weate away,
Verse is immortal and shall nere decay.
Let Kings give place to it, and Kingly shows,
The banks ore which gold-bearing Tagus flows,
Then let base wits vile things admire, and dread,
Bright Phoebus to the Muses springs me lead:
The quivering Myrtle wind about my head,
And of sad lovers i will be often read.
Envy bites not the dead, but those that live;
For after death all men their right receive:
Then though in funeral fire death take away
My bones, my better part shall nere decay.
An Elegy and Epitaph by way of Acrostick upon that religious and virtuous
Gentlewoman, Mrs. Anne Gibs, late wife to Mr. Samuel Gibs of Newman Hall in
Effex.
AWake Melpomene, thou mournful Muse,
Such cause of sorrow never had thou yet,
Here is a task, which if men should refuse,
The senseless creatures would it not forget.
Who loves virtue, now his pen will use.
Know it is to virtues memory a debt.
Her virtues live, though she in grave does lie,
Your doleful tunes sweet Muses now apply.
Never hereafter look for such a one,
For peerless beauty, and rare gifts of mind:
Nature despaireth now, her pattern's gone;
Weeds grow in each place, flowers are hard to find.
She was a Phoenix, and therefore but one,
True to her Mate, and to her Neighbors kind:
Esther for beauty, for devoutness Hannah,
For virtue Ruth, for chastity Susanna.
Goodness within her breast inhabited,
Her prayers were always at Gods throne attenders,
Eschewing what he in his Word forbid,
And what he bids, that she as well remembers.
No unclean thought within her breast lay hid,
Mary to God, and Martha to his Members.
Contemplative Divine, in words discreet,
Secret in alms, in conversttion sweet.
Injurious Death, how dare thou be so bold,
To kill that life that did so many cherish?
How shall dross do, if thus thou usest gold?
How shall weeds do, if thus the flowers perish?
Should such rare beauty lie in dirty mould?
Cruel hatd-hearted Death, thou art too currish:
Impartial Atropos to none favor gives,
Amiable Anne deceases, Audrey lives.
Boast not fair Ladies then, although you do
In Natures choicest ornaments excel:
All Is one to Death, the wench of blackest hue,
As she whose beauty few can parallel.
Here was a Flower who far excelled you,
Yet by Deaths sith this fragrant Flower fell:
Death is a Pursuivant with Eagles wings,
That knocks at poor men's doors, and gates of Kings.
Sleep blessed soul within thy sacred urn,
Whilst we with tears thy absence do deplore
Thou singest Hallelujahs whilst we mourn,
Praising the Name of God for evermore:
No man does know how soon may be his turn,
To tread the steps which thou have trod before,
Death is always attendant upon men,
Gertain he will come, but uncertain when.
Epitaph.
Ask thou Reader who it is lies here?
No common corpse, then list and thou shall hear.
Goodness, rare meekness, Zeal, pure chastity,
Interred together in this ground do lie:
Behold her acts whilst here she made abode,
She lived beloved of men, di'd loved of God.
A Prisoners complaint.
I Late used to resort unto the Brook,
To ceach the fish with either net or hook,
Whereas these Creatures did learn unto me,
From danger neither land nor water's free:
For whilst on fowls, fishes, and beasts we feed,
Earth, air, and water shall be ransacked,
The gluttonous belly for to satisfy.
Thus to preserve one creatures life, how many Creatures die.
I late used to walk abroad in the fields,
To take the pleasure Spring and Summer yields.
Whereas the flowers did denote to me
Of our short life the mutabilitie.
One day in pomp, next day in the dirt they lie.
This day we live, to morrow we may die,
For this our life's so short, and full of sorrow,
None can assure himself to day, he shall live till to morrow.
I once used to rise early in the morn
To hunt the Fox, that enemy to Corn.
And chase the timorous Hare, and by that way
I had both pleasure, and sometimes a prey.
But of those joys I now am quite bereft.
And unto me (alas) is nothing lest
But the remembrance only; poor relief.
To think of joys that now are past, to ease my present grief.
Walden Bacchanalls.
PLatoes great year returned is (we see,
Things done long since again now acted be:
The Bacchanalian Feasts once celebrated
In famous Greece, to Walden are translated;
And Venus Feasts here likewise hallowed are.
Mars being dead, that bloody God of war,
Venus he unto Bacchus does assign,
So these two do in mutual friendship join.
Walden they chose to be their randevou
Or meeting place, Vulcan chanced to hear how.
Venus with Bacchus was to meet, so he
To Walden comes amain, but Venus she,
And Bacchus with some others so agreed,
They Vulcan foxt, and sent him home with speed.
Venus being rid of Vulcan, does invite
The Gods unto a dancing fit that night,
Silenus house they chose, their repaires
The joviall Crew, with mirth to banish cares.
Phoehus himself left guiding of the Sun,
And came at night to see what sports were done:
But least the world should be without a day,
He in the morning did depart away;
Diana (thaugh entreated) would not come,
Whereat Venus enraged, commands her son
The little Cupid for to bend his bow,
And make her and her followers to know
His skill in archery, Venus request
Cupid fulfills, Dian comes with the rest;
O Love thou have a powerful deity,
To make a Lais of Penelope!
Being thus assembled, Bacchus with bowls of Molly
Filled them so long until their wits were jolly;
That some to dance and leap about began,
Whilst Pluto sat smoking Necotian,
Momus carpt at their doings, whilst the crowd
Of drunken Fiddlers sung and scraped alowd:
Some thought themselves to be a hawking sure,
For they their buzards did begin to lure;
Others to show themselves more active fools,
Would undertake to leap over three stools,
But in performance when as one begins,
He stumbles at the first, and breaks his shins.
A second tryes his skill, and does no less.
A third, a fourth, a fifth had like success.
For Bacchus whimses did posesse their heads,
And they had got the cramp on either legs;
Well, having leaped as much as they would do,
To drawing Dun out of the mire they go,
But presently they left that sport again,
And then they fell into a drinking vain:
A health says one unto my loves bright eye,
Which staright was pledged by all the Company.
He that drunk last another health prefers,
A rule observed by Bacchus followers.
Whilst thus full bowls to one another pass,
Bacchus and Venus in a Corner was;
Billing each other like two Turtle Doves.
For now they first enjoyed each others loves:
Yet though they got into a secret place,
Janus soon spied them with his double face:
He tells Mercury, Mercury straight goes
To Aetnaes forge, and does the same disclose
To limping Vulcan, Vulcan thereat storms,
And swears he will pay the whoremaster for's horns:
He snatcheth up his hammer, presently
To Walden comes, and Bacchus soon does spy,
He flings it at him, hits him on the crown,
Who like unto a log straight tumbles down.
Hercules was thereat exceeding wroth,
And took a Jug filled full of barley broth,
Flung it at Vulcans head, but mist the same,
And hit his foot, which ever since is lame:
Jove fearing mischief might thereby arise,
Commanded Morpheus to close up their eyes,
Which he performs, and left them snorting there
Til Sol enlightened had our hemisphere.
To Almanacke-mongers.
YOu that to knowledge such pretenders be,
As to unfold each secret mystery
In natures works, that by your art do know
How many miles Sol in a day does go,
The rising, and the setting of the Stars,
What causes peace, debate or civil wars,
Whence roaring thunders, and whence lightnings grow,
The cause of whirle winds, earth quakes, rain, hail, snow:
Eclipses, Comets, and prodigious-things,
The cause you say o'th rise or fall of Kings.
You that these things do know, resolve good brothers,
Who lay last with your wives, your selves or others?
When will our English people grow more wise,
Then to believe your loud enchanting lies?
As that of your black Monday, so it was styled,
Which many of your Credits has nigh spoiled,
That now because you would in credit grow,
You use ambiguous sentences, as though
The Delphian Oracle were used again,
As thus, it will be fair weather, if not rain.
The states of Venice shall not suffer much
This year, unless the Turk his confines touch.
And if they hit one truth among many a lie,
It shall be termed such a ones prophecy.
And in the next years book these words he brings,
Last year I did foretell such and such things.
And yet the blockhead people would not be
So mad to believe such an ass as he.
Then next foretell by your mysterious art,
Will men this year prove true, or false in heart?
Will women leave to scold? will knaves leave whoring?
Will schoolboyes on their books be always poring?
Will old men leave their prating? Children crying?
Or men of your profession leave your lying?
If this you cannot tell, I must divine
Your credit now begins to decline,
A farewell to Tobaccs.
FArewell thou Indian smoke, Barbarian vapor,
Enemy unto life, foe to waste paper.
Thou do diseases in the body breed,
And like a Vultur on the purse does feed.
Changing sweet breath's into a stinking loathing,
And with 3. pipes turns two pence into nothing;
Grim Pluto first invented it, I think,
To poison all the world with hellish stink:
And though by many it has been defended,
It makes men rotten ere their life's half ended.
Base heathenish weed! how common is it grown,
That but a few years past was scarcely known!
When for to see one take it was a riddle,
As strange as a Baboone to tune a fiddle.
Were it confined only to gentlemen,
It credit were to take Tobacco then.
But Bedlams, Tinkers, Cobblers, Water-bearers,
Your common drunkards, and most common swearers.
Are them that use it most, which makes me muse
That men of quality the same should use.
Things common commonly are most neglected,
Saving Tobacco, which is most respected.
If man's flesh be like hogs, as it is said,
Then sure by smoking thus it is Bacon made.
Then farewell smoke, good for such things as these,
Against lice, sore, heads, scabs, mange, or French disease.
The description of a Mistress,
WHat thought can think, what heart indite,
What tongue can tell, what pen can write.
What verse contain, what words declare,
What numbers measure out the rare
And superexcllent parts of she,
That does command the heart of me?
Her hair like thrids of gold does show,
Her forehead whiter then the snow,
Which on the Scithian mountains lies.
Like to two stars appear her eyes,
Her cheeks for pleasure and delight
Seem as the red Rose, and the white
Together met, there to confer
Which should most homage do to her.
Her ears like Labyrinths seem to me,
Her lips as red as Rubies be,
Her teeth like Pearl, her breath like spice
Which comes from the Suns uprise,
Sweeter then Aromatic gum,
Or Drugs that from Arabia come.
Her heavenly voice when I do hear,
It makes me wish each sense an ear:
Her words so full of harmony,
What she affirms, none can deny.
Her neck more white then Swans that swim
Upon Menanders Crystal brim.
Arms long and slender, singers small,
Fit for the Lute or Virginal.
Soft paps, smooth belly, Ivory thighs,
Betwixt which lies Loves Paradise:
The Muses theme, a place more famed
Then that which is the Milkey named:
O blessed he may have the hap
To search what treasures are in that:
Briefly each part is so transcending,
Nature needs no art in mending.
But that which spoils and marres all this,
Her heart more hard then marble is.
To one who enquired the Name of her whom I loved.
Would you desire to know the name of her
My heart does fancy? veiw her Charecter:
She is a Virgin of unspotted fame,
Art never did feign, nor yet did Nature frame
A fairer then she is; her life a line,
Which who so reads will make him a Divine:
Chaster then Dian, fairer then Cupids mother,
It were impiety to think her other
Then what she is; for tell me, can there be
An adding to perfection? furely he
Who does but veiw her, lawfully may swear,
No beauty living may with her compare.
Then to her heavenly outward form is joined
Wit, judgment, learning, and a virtuous mind,
For can we think Nature would be so base
To make the jewel worser then the case?
As if Protogenes should so much dote
To paint fair Venus in old Bancis Coat;
No Nature, we do by experience see,
Gives inward gifts like as the outward be.
Then false is their position who do write
Where beauty raigns virtue is banished quite,
For certainly those Nymphs whose beauties blaze,
Do deck the world like Sols resplendent rays;
With constant flower of divine chastity,
Their beauties garland do so dignifie:
That Cupid he though deemed a god of power,
With all his flames can never scorch their flower.
And though Lucretia's fate bids us take heed
To wish her face, least like to her we speed,
Yet sure I think, and think I think aright,
Beauty was not alone given to delight.
The wanton eye, but as a note or sign,
Fair outsides inwardly are most divine,
Men do not Marble put to uses foul,
Nor God give beauty with an impure soul;
It seldom is we see together joined,
A fair complexion, and a vicious mind.
Briefly her beauty does as far surpass
Our common beauties, as the flowers do grass,
As gold does steel, or polished Ivory,
Rough bones or pearls, the stones that o'th ground lie,
When these perfections you in one do see,
Then know assuredly the same is she.
A Sonnet.
A Pelles like, when Nature did thee make,
She viewed the beauties of the Earth each one,
And from them all the best of all did take,
That thou should not excelled be by none;
And for to make thee super-excellent,
She joined in one what many beauties lent.
And thus with Venus beauty she endowed thee,
And Pallas-like she wisdom to thee gave,
The learning of Cornelia she allowed thee;
That thou no lack of any thing should have:
Then since with such great gifts she did thee bless,
O do not stain them with hard-heartednesse.
Some (though but few) as beautiful there be,
Others (and those not many) are as wise;
Others may be as learned, but in thee,
All Natures jewels in one Casket lies:
That who so viewes thy looks a Lover makes him,
Either thy virtues or thy beauty takes him.
Another:
SInce that you will not change your cruel heart,
O that time would your heavenly beauty stain,
Then from my soul this love of mine would part,
And then I my lost freedom should regaine.
For when the object of my soul is gone,
'Twill vanish, having naught to work upon
Then should my Muse rehearse no more thy praise,
In which she only now does take delight,
Striving thy name unto the heavens to raise,
Extolling thee to be a Goddess bright:
But what she formerly has said, unsay,
Whith coy disdain thy cruelty repay.
But since thou do thy beauty still retain,
Which a servant in Cupids Court does prove me
I may weep, wail, sit, sigh, grieve and complain,
Yet notwithstanding cannot cease to love thee
Then either change thy unrelenting heart,
Or cease to be so fair as thou art.
On her absence.
IS not this grove the place which used to be
Made happy by my Mistress company?
Yes certainly, this was her residence,
But now she has left it, and is gone from hence.
Here is the shrine, the Saint away is gone,
Here is the place, but Goddess there is none.
Then farewell grove, henceforth I will not yield
More reverence to thee then another field.
Delphos, thou shall no longer honored be,
Then god Apollo does remain in thee.
To his much respected Gosin Mr. T.N.
SIr, If you would renowned live for ever,
And be enrolled in the books of fame, endeavor
To have no Poet to your enemy,
But let desert find liberality.
It Is in a Poets power to make your name
For ever live within the books of Fame.
No Mausolean monument can give
Such lasting fame, nor make your name to live,
As can sweet Poesy, whose art divine
Will make your name like stars in splendour shine.
Who ever was more famed for chastity,
Then was Ulysses wife Penelope?
Yet had not Homer in his verses shown her,
These days of ours had not so much as known her.
Virgil Aeneas lasting fame did give,
And made Mecoenas name for ever live.
Such mighty power in a Muse does lie,
It makes men live to all posterity,
And if that Poets true presages give,
You by my book eternally shall live.
On Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia.
When I that learned work of his peruse,
And read the lines indicted by his Muse,
It makes me think, so sweet of love he sings,
His pens were quills plucked off from Cupids wings.
Epitaph on Mr. John Tailor the Water Poet.
HEre lies the Water Poet, honest John,
Who rowed on the streams of Helteon,
Where having many Rocks and dangers past,
He at the Haven of Heaven arrived at last.
To Mr. Sheppard on his most excellent Epigrams.
SHeppard thou have
Martial orepast,
Ausonius conquered:
Thou Harrington
Have overcome,
And Owen stricken dead.
These in their time
For wits the prime
Of Poets counted were:
But if to thee
Compared they be,
We see they nothing are.
Then fit thee down,
Whilst we do crown
Thy head with wreaths of Bays:
The Muses nine
Do all combine
To warble forth thy praise.
For my Picture,
THis Effigies to your view represents
My bodies outward form and lineaments,
But should you view the same hereafter, 'twill
Quite changed be, though this remain so still:
How vain is wretched man then, since we see.
Our shadows are more permanent then we.
On Money.
MAn makes money, money makes a man,
This is the worlds use e're since it began:
Had man not been, money it had not been,
And without money none will thee esteem.
The younger Brother.
VVWho with a serious eye does overlook
The sacred records in Gods holy Book,
Shall find (comparing one place with another)
The blessings most times on the youngest brother;
Cain the first man that e're was born rejected,
And righteous Abel in Gods eyes accepted.
Shem, Noah's youngest son, from whom did spring
So many a godly Patriark and good King,
Was blessed both by God, and Noah, when as
Canaan cursed in himself and offspring was,
Isaac, in whom all Nations of the Earth
Was blessed in our Savior Christ his birth;
Though Ismael were the elder, as we read,
Isaac was blessed in the promised seed.
Esau was hated, Jacob blessed was
E're they out of their mothers womb did pass;
On Joseph's head old Jacobs blessing passes,
And Ephraim was preferred before Manasses.
Although King David were the younger brother,
Yet he preferred was before the other.
And wisdoms favorite, wise Solomon,
Preferred was before Prince Absalon:
But what the reasons are why these were so,
No man can tell, it is only God does know.
Necessary Precepts.
1. FIrst worship God, let prayer be the key
That shuts in the night, and opes the day,
Think not an hour or two too much to spend
In holy duties, expect not a good end
Of any thing thou undertakest to do.
Unless by prayer thou have Gods blessing too.
2. Be not thou puffed up with pride, for know
Thou art but dust, and unto dust must go,
Then let not riches, honor, and high birth
Swell thy vain thoughts, they are sprung from the earth.
The Peacock vaunts when he displayes his tail,
But looking on his feet his pride does quail:
If we our feet of earth considered,
Tail vanities would soon be banished.
3. Know thou a man who sin does entertain?
Hate not his person, but his sins refrain;
Reprove him mildely, mildness does recure
Him often whom sharpness does the more obdure,
Let him perceive thy reprehension tends
Unto his good, and not for thy own ends,
If after many admonitions he
Continue wilful, shun his company,
For fear least seeking of his soul to win,
Unto licentiousness he draw thee in.
4. The loathsome sin of drunkenness detest,
Which does transform a man into a beast,
Empties the purse of Coin, the soul of grace,
Deformes (with vicious Heraldry) the face,
Breeds diseases, and abbreviates life,
Causes contention, author of all strife.
Lord give me grace for to eschew this sin,
Wherein so many now do wallow in.
5. Honor thy Parents, reverence to them do,
Nature commands thee, and Religion too.
6. Do not thou pine, because ungodly men
Thrive in the world, grow rich and wealthy, when
Many a righteous man can hardly get
Clothes for to hide his shame, or bread to eat:
But thinks upon their ends, the one sinkes down
To hell, the other does obtain a Crown.
7. Has God with earthly goods enriched thee?
Bestow them on the poor as liberally,
Relieve the fatherless, the hungry fill,
And cloth the naked, know he does as ill,
Who spares when Christ does in his members want it,
As he who spends to swear, and drink, and flaunt it.
8. Art thou grown poor and know not how to live?
Despair not, God will means unto thee give;
Behold the Lillies of the valley, they
Spin not, nor toil, with gentle winds do play.
Yet Solomon in all his royalties
Was not arrayed like to one of these:
If God the fading Lillies does respect,
Think not that he his creatures will neglect.
9. Amongst dishonest men honest to be,
Deserves praise in the highest degree;
But yet I do advise thee come not where
Dishonest men or women living are:
To get such praise by living honestly,
Thou have no foe like to bad company.
10. Has God with sorrows thee encompassed?
Do cares and fears mightly possess thy head?
Has he by sickness taken away thy health?
Do outward losses much impair thy wealth?
Consider crosses unto thee are given,
To make thee loath the world, and wish for heaven
Should God here give unto his servants bliss,
They would desire no other heaven but this:
But finding here no rest, they wish with Paul
To be with Christ, which is the best of all
11. Unto each idle tell-tale give no ear,
Nor yet report again all thou do hear,
Let the least part of what thou hear be
The most thou do believe, those that to thee
Of other men's affairs so much do prate,
Behind thy back will lies of thee relate;
Setting those men at strife that lived in peace,
For where tale-bearers want, there mischiefs cease.
12. Swear not, save called by a lawful commission,
But swear not falsely upon no condition;
Who falsely swears by Gods most holy name,
Deserves a double punishment for the same:
It Is a deep sin, yea damned impiety,
To call God to be witness to a lie.
13. See from no man thou any thing purloyn,
It Is death by humane laws, and eke divine.
14. The company of wicked men forsake;
Least for a wicked person men thee take;
For it is a saying birds that are of a Feather,
Will the most part accompany together.
15. Lie not on no condition, for the same
Worse then a slanderous tongue will spoil thy fame,
He who no conscience of a lie does make,
None will believe him when he truth does speak:
And the old proverb is as true as brief,
A Liar is far worser then a Thief.
16. Be not too credulous what others say,
Least thou for thy credulity do pay;
Yet for to give them no cause of distrust,
Seem not to doubt although perhaps thou do.
17. Avoid those brutish sins, those damned crimes,
Those wicked acts (too frequent in these times)
Of lust and whoredom, God himself will be
The judge of those that act Adultery:
Besides it shortens life, making thy name
To foes a laughter, to thy friends a shame;
Then let these reasons move thee to desist,
And take advice from th'Epigrammatist,
Fast much, pray often, fly women as the fire,
Think not on earthly things, but think on higher:
If these work not, this medicine does excel,
The fire of marriage will lusts fire expel.
18.
Set thy last end always before thy eye,
Thou know not how, where, nor when thou shall die;
Then let not the thoughts of thy last end be
The last end of thy thoughts, least suddenly
Death cut thee off; that man cannot live ill,
That is for his last end prepared still.
Then in thy life provide so for thy end,
That when death comes, to bid him welcome friend.
19. Give not thy mind unto excess of meat,
Eat only for to live, not live to eat,
If here on earth thou Dives life do lead,
To Dives thou must go when thou art dead.
20. Accustom not thy self in sin, for know
Custom in time will unto Nature grow,
Sins that at first distasteful be to thee,
By frequent acting will delightful be:
And it is as hard to leave what we delight,
As for to wash an Ethiopian white.
21. Do not thou with an overcurious eye
Into the secrets of the Almighty pry:
But let thy greatest knowledge, and thy pride
Be for to know Christ Jesus crucified.
22. Avoid all sins, but those especially,
Which to thy fancy most delightful be.
Who will not wanton with a beautiful
Fair Virgin, will contemn a homely trull:
So he that leaves the sins which most he loved
Will not with slight temptations (sure) be moved
23. Has God by sickness thee afflicted sore?
Think it is to draw thee unto him the more,
Said David Gods anointed, had I not
Been chastened. I thy precepts had forgot.
Afflictions are (though in their Nature evil)
Rods to restraine's from running to the Devil.
24. Disclose not that which does concern thee nearly
Though to a friend that thou affectest dearly,
He Is wise that in his breast close secrets smothers,
Whilst there they are thy own, if told another:
Besides it brings thee in slaverie,
Not daring to make him thine enemy,
For fear his malice cause him to reveal
What former friendship bound him to conceal.
25. If Satan tempts thee to commit a sin,
Think with thy self whose presence thou art in;
It was the counsel of a heathen man,
Unto his friend, ere that he ought began,
To think, grave Cato, or such one one as he
Did ready stand, his actions to otesee,
And not to act any thing that he would
Ashamed be they should the same behold.
If heathen men conceited were the sight
Of such grave men as Cato would affright
A man from acting sin, how then dare we,
Who know that God does all our actions see?
Nothing is hid from him as Scripture mentions,
He knows our secretest thoughts and hearts intentions.
26 Frequent the Church, miss not a Sunday there,
Attentive be Gods sacred word to hear,
Six days thou have to labor in, but thou
The seventh unto his service must allow:
And pity it is that man should ever live,
That one in seven unto him will not give.
27. Let not a secret place, nor the night be
To sin any encouragement to thee.
For be assured though from man's sight
Sin acted be, 'twill come at last to light.
Love not for lucre, marry not for money,
Wed not for wealth, he who does love the honey,
Must fear the sting, parents they are most free
To those children who least deserving be:
Where best parts are no need wealth to bestow,
When fat sows must be greased to make them go,
29. Write no such lines that others they may be
The worse by reading them, it is for thee
Enough thine own iniquity to bear,
Too much in others sins to have a share;
Then neither write nor yet read none of them:
A lame hand better is then a lewd pen.
30. Do no such actions as thou should fear
That any one should see it, neither dare
To speak that word thou blushest to have shown,
Nor think that thought thou would not have known,
But let thy deeds, words, thoughts be good, and then
Thou need'st not fear to have them known to men.
31. Rather let thy memory die, and thy name
Then by ill acts to eternize the same.
Though some with Herostratus temples burn
To purchase fame, rather within thy urne
Unmention'd by then for to eternize
Thy name lie, committing of villainies:
What profit have thou though thy name aspire,
If thou thy self lie'st frying in hell fire?
32. Despair not, though thy sins be great, for greater
Is God in mercy, therefore grant Creator,
That we of mercy presume not too far,
So in like manner we may not despair:
The Saint thief saved was even at deaths gate,
To learne's repentance never is too late,
But least that we should too presumptuous be,
We never read of none so saved but he.
Lord if through frailty I great sins commit,
Let me hope for mercy, not despair of it.
Yet let me not presume to act a sin,
Because the art merciful in pardoning.
33. Defer not thy repentance until thy
Old age, least death seize on the suddenly:
Parents their Children follow to the grave
As oftentimes as Children followed have
Their Parents: as many lambs skins are sold
In the market as of Sheep that are old.
And who the skulls in Charnell houses see,
Shall find as many small as great ones be.
Defer not then, but suddenly repent,
Least death thy purpose thereunto prevent.
An Elegy on my dear Wife, who deceased in January 1652.
MUses that on Pernassus Hill do make
Abode, assist this work I undertake,
Rightly do unto her, whose virtues shone
Transcendent bright in this our Horizon:
How glorious is she then of life bereaven?
A Star on earth, but now a Saint in Heaven.
Why strive I then for to describe her worth?
In vain is art to set perfection forth:
No I may sooner tell the drops o'th Ocean;
Surcease the Tides, or stop the Planets motion,
Then to pourtray her virtues to the life,
As here she lived on Earth, a maid and wife;
N'ere did the worlds bright eye (Hyperion) see
Less faults in any then he did in she:
E're since Christ's time, so clear her virtues shone:
Youths beauty, ages wisdom joined in one.
Mirror of women in these worst of time,
As full of goodness as the world of crimes,
Religious, zealous, virtuous, wise, discreet,
Too good to live on earth, for Heaven more meet,
Her foul is now at rest, whilst she does sing
An Halelujah unto Heavens great King.
What virtues ere were faign'd or known to be
In any one, comprised were in she,
No idle tell-tale for to cause debate,
Such kind of Creatures she did always hate.
Truth was her aim, lying she did abhor it,
And truths great God rewarded has her for it.
Nor were these virtues locked up in her breast,
Like to rich jewels in an iron chest,
Enclosed fast, but evermore in action:
Your standing water turns to putrefaction.
More might be said, but when that all is done,
All words are like a Candle to the Sun;
Respecting her rare exceellent parts, who in
The morning of her age did thus begin,
How glorious had her life been then, had she
Attained those years that ancient men do seel
Why weep we then, why do our eyes run over,
In vain to mourn for what we cannot recover?
Nor think her time on earth to be but small,
Seeing she lived and di'd beloved of all.
Those that unto this age do once attain,
An honor 'bove Methusalls age do gain,
Not length of days, but days well spent are best,
Live so thy life that death may give thee rest.
Expect not the more honor for gray hairs,
Years crown our head, but goodness crowns our years.
Epitaph.
REader! within this ground enterr'd does lie
Venus beauty, Dianas chastity.
Cornelias learning, and Philoeleas swettness,
Pondoras wisdom, and fair Grissels meeknes.
Briefly whatever other items were,
Sum'd up in one lie in this Sepulcher.
True love.
GReat was the love and friendship that between
Damon and Pithias passed, scarce ere seen
Or ever known before, or since, that as
One to die for another, but more was
The love that God to us Sinners did bear,
For when (by sin) his enemies we were,
Yet he so loved us, as that he gave,
His Son a ransom our poor Souls to save.
That whosoever do in him believe,
Shall Not perish, but eternal life receive;
O love unspeakable! O bounty endless!
Love unexpressible, and matchless kindness!
It Is seldom seen one to dye for another,
But for one's enemy transcends all other.
To my Wife.
NOw twice has Phoebus run his annual race
and twice 12 times fair Cynthia changed her face,
Twice Hiems Frosts has nipt both flowers and trees,
Clothing old Tellus in a gown of Freeze;
Twice has the husbandman received his gain
From grassy Meadows, and from Ceres grain:
Twice has the Earth been dew'd with Apr. showrs,
Twice Lady Flora decked the Fields with flowers,
Since we in Hymen's rites together joined,
During which time though fortune proves unkind,
And God has laid his hand of visitation
Heavy upon us, and that much vexation
We have endured, yet let us not repine,
Content (although with little) is a Mine
More worth then gold, a quiet peaceful life
Is better far then much with care and strife:
Thus let us rest secure, since we do lie
Too low for envy, and for scorn too high.
On Friends.
FRiends, like to leaves that on the trees do
In Summers prosperous state much love will grow,
But art thou in adversity? then they
Like leaves from trees in Autumn fall away: show;
He happy is that has a friend indeed,
But he more happy that no friend does need.
On Eternity.
THe greatest happiness of heavenly bliss
Is that, because the same Eternal is:
So to the damned it is the greatest woe,
Because their miseries no end shall know:
The Conclusion.
LIber are our Liberi, we do give
Life unto them, and they make us to live.
Epigrams.
To the Reader.
REader, if thou applaud'st all is here writ,
Thou show'st store of good will, but not of wit,
But if thou do dislike all here is penned,
Yet cease to carp, unless thou can it mend.
An old Lecher.
MEmbrino stradling goes in great distress,
As if he had the Fr -- yet confess
He will it not, not can I think the same,
Since he in France at any time nere came.
Then since he never came whereas they grew,
Let all men be appeased, the tale's untrue.
For how should he be troubled with French sores,
Who never used any but English whores?
Epigram.
ONe Hogg, for goods feloniously taken,
Was tried before a Judge, Sir Francis Bacon.
And doubting much it would go hard with him,
He told the Judge they two were near a akin,
For Hogg and Bacon are all one, therefore
For kindred sake to pity him the more:
Nay stay replied the Judge, you are mistaken,
Hogg must be hanged before it can be Bacon.
Natures impartiality.
NAtures impartiality has dealt her store,
Riches she gives to fools, makes wise men poor;
The lack of beauty is with strength supplied,
And beauty given is where strength's denied.
Learning she does bestow where honor's scant,
And honor gives to those who learning want.
Impartially she deals thus with all,
Some hope to rise, and others fear to fall.
The change of the World.
In The golden age, as ancient histories speak,
Men desired rather to be good then great;
But ever since this iron age has stood,
Men desire rather to be great then good.
On Rembombo.
REmbombo having spent all his estate,
Went to the wars to prove more fortunate.
Being returned he speaks such warlike words,
No Dictionary half the like affords:
He talks of flankers, gabions, and scalados,
Of curtneys, parapets and palizados,
Retreats and triumphs and of camisadoes,
Of sallies, half moons, and of ambuscadoes,
I to requite the fustian terms he uses,
Reply with words belonging to the Muses.
As Spondes, Dactiles and Hexameters,
Stops, comma's, accents, types, tropes, and Pentameters,
Madrigalls, Epicediums, elegies,
Satyrs, Iambicks, and Apostrophes,
Acrosticks, Palinodies, Anagrams:
Eglogues, Aquiuoques, and Epigrams,
Thus talking and being understood by neither,
We part as wise as when we came together,
On Achilles.
SOme say Achilles was impenetrable,
All but the heel, yet Cupid wounded him:
Can Cupids darts wound where no others can,
Or was he wounded by him in the heel?
On the Pope.
WHy does the Pope brag, boast, and make great vaunts
Of the divisions amongst Protestants?
It Is true they too too much divided be,
Yet all of them to hate him do agree.
Times worse and worse.
TO think on these times how they are grown bad,
Would if one did consider it, make one mad,
But to think how every day they do grow badder,
'Twould make a tame man mad, a mad man madder.
A learned wife.
ONe said he had a wife which (although young)
Yet had the English, French, and Latin tongue,
But said another they are happier men
Who have wives that cannot speak none of them,
For my wife has none but the English tongue,
Yet often with that she makes me wish her dumb.
In Cineas.
I Wonder what makes Cireas to be proud,
Seeing he is with no good gifts endowed?
He is not fair, nor rich, nor learned, nor witty,
And yet he is proud, alas the more's the pity.
In Pontum.
Pontus complains greviously, that he
Going so brave cannot esteemed be,
Pontus thou shall not unregarded pass,
I do esteem thee a vainglorious ass.
On a Pratler.
IT is no wonder Rubius tongue to hear,
But if he wisely talked, a wonder 'twere.
The wooden Age.
OF all the Worlds four ages there was none
So bad as this, the first a golden one;
The next of silver, and the third of brass,
The fourth more baser, of hard iron was,
But these our times, if rightly understood,
May very well be termed an age of wood.
Wherein some sticks, kindled with damned ire,
Makes such a blaze as sets the world on fire.
In Cornutum
TOms wife is sick, and therefore he does run
In have to fetch the Midwife, which being Aone,
He runs to call the women in with speed
To help his wife in this her extreme need;
The child being born, then Tom about does trot,
And never leaves till he has Gossips got:
Ah Tom I must needs say thou have hard measure,
To take such pains when others had the pleasure.
On Ned.
NEd swears a man can have no greater curse,
Then a light houswife, and an empty purse:
And what is it think you makes Ned of this mind,
It Is true, he does it by experience find.
On Rufus.
RVfus the Tapster does as bravely go,
As he were worth five hundred pounds a year,
And what is it that does maintain him so;
But nicking Cans and frothing Jugs of Beer?
For he to these contents has taken an Oath,
Never to fill Jug nor Can but half with froth.
On Brute.
BRute certainly foresaw the time would come,
Some would deny there e're was such a one,
And there fore he for to confirm the same,
Called this Country after his own name.
On Frances.
FRanks flesh is free, and yet it is not free,
Strange this may seem to some how it should be;
Franks flesh is free to any who so pleases;
Franks flesh is not free from French men's diseases.
On a Tapster that got a Wench with child.
BLame not the Tapster, why he did no more
Then broach a Hogshead n'ere was tapt before.
Contempt.
DRink quarts of Nectar, take Necotian,
Pregust, Regust, use all the Art you can,
Implore the Muses, mendicant Apollo,
Turn ore the leaves of famous Poets, swallow
Whole streams of Aganippe, study what
The highest ingenue e're aimed at;
Yet when you have done all, you must conclude
To be condemned by the multitude.
On Physicians and Lawyers.
SOme Physicians kill more then they do mend,
Some Lawyers make more quarrels then they, end
That he shall find who seeks for help to these
The remedy far worse then the disease.
Ill manners breed good Laws.
TArt Epigrams, sharp Satyrs, and good Laws,
Do all three of them proceed from one cause,
Bad manners to amend that is the cause,
Of making Satyrs, Epigrams and Laws.
To unmercifull Creditors.
Unmerciful, and yet expect you Heaven?
Forgive, or never look to be forgiven,
Nor do not think these words to be but wind,
Who show's no mercy, mercy shall not find.
To A. P. Singing.
WHen I that heavenly voice of thine did hear,
Sounding harmonious as a hevenly sphere,
To love I yielded straight, by which 't appears
Thou stolest away my heart thorough my ears.
Cato lib. 1.27.
HE that Speaks fair, and yet is false in heart,
Do thou the like, so art is met by art.
It is well spoken is will taken.
Being in London nigh to Gracious Street,
A country-Gentleman I chanc'st to meet,
Who asked the next way to go to the Tower,
Treason said I will do it in an hour.
The Conclusion.
CEase Muse, here comes a Critic, close thy page,
These lines are not strong enough for this age,
The nice new fangled Readers of these times
Will scarcely relish thy plain Country rimes.
They with no other pictures will be taken,
But only those are of Apelles making,
But yet if at thy plain ones they do bark,
Bid them write better, or else cease to carp.
FINIS.

