WJT'S PROGRESS: Wherein are launc't the various crimes,
Are incident to these sad times.
Chapmen quickly come and buy me,
Jf y' are wise, you will not deny me.
Wit is cheapned, wit is sought,
But wits near good till it be bought.


The Author Democritus Junior.

Printed in the year, 1647.

Wit's Progress.
I Have not (as the Philosopher of old did) wandered up and down Athens, with a
candle and lantern at noone day, to find out an honest man, (as if his
intention had bin to add light and splendour to the glorious eye of heaven, that
was a little to cynical; my purpose has been more charitable, yet trust me in
these times, I think it a kind of an herculean labor; every man I meet with
cries out of the badnesse of the times, when most men have a hand in making
them as they are.

Let every man begin his own work, and correct his own errors, and we shall
quickly find an alteration in the amendment of the times.

First to begin with the geat Physicians of the body politque (who have almost
served a prentiship in finding out a cure) they persuading themselves that she
was sick of a Plethora, struck a vein, but let her bleed to much, but I am
confident by succeeding passages, they willingly mistook the right vein, and
so drew some of her vitalls, by which means she has thus long labored with a
consumption. And the reason may be thus, they dealt with her (as the Empericks
of this age deal with their patients, whom they find to be rich and able they
procrastinate their cure from day to day, until they have drawn their patients
purse as empty of crowns, as their bodies of humors, of both so much as the
party hardly ever recovers.

I do not say it is thus, my fears, and the Kingdoms (especially of the
honester part) have to much reason to suspect it.

Thus having glanc't superficially upon the body of the Commonwealth, and the
dangerous estate she now continues in, let me reflect upon the religious part
(the soul which is religion) this has been purged off her legs too; this,
this glorious work, the structure of many ages, falling into the hand of
doting ignorance, is utterly thrown to the ground, and there lies panting for
breath. They have dealt with her (like ignorant artises) into whose hands, some
curious clock, or watch, has accidentally fallen, who to observe the curiosity
of the workmanship have taken it to pieces, but are in a labyrinth of error:
not knowing which way to set it together again.

There is another sort who serve as an Appendix to this Reformation, whom we
may style the corn-cutters of Religion, or the Leeches of the Commonwealth (I
mean Country Committees) these have a hand did deep in the purple gore of
the Kingdom, under pretense of doing good too.

I shall give you a story in Worcester, there was not long since a large heap
of stones, which suffered under the hated appellation of the cross (though
otherwise an indigested heap of stones, which age had made decrepit, and worn
out of form; this poor cross, for so they styled it, was arraigned and
condemned to perpetual They have built a gate to the prison with the st^n^ to
keep in honester men the^ they keep out.
imprisonment, before ever it was permitted to speak a word for it self, and
could their faith have flowne steeple hight, the poor cross which supports the
Weathercocke had suffered Martyrdom with her sister; but thanks to providence
for placing it out of their reach: but you may see they had a notable stomach
to it by their They dealt with the little Crosses upon the battlements as
Surgeons do with burnt -- pared off their heads and left the stumps standing
only.
nibling at the battlements. This poor structure which has stood long in
spite of rough Boreas blasts, was overthrown by the poisonous breath of a
bumkin Committee.

There is an old saying that three Tailors go to the making of a man, I am
confident that three times three, (if they are no better then some I have
known) and a whole country Committee will scarce make an honest man. Some there
are amongst them who have a grain of honesty more then others, who serve as
Gingerbread to stuff up the Fair, whom want of means, or wit, or both, has
drawn into the crowd; but let them pass, whilst I steer to the City, (the
grand magazine of all folly) there is not such a Fair in Europe for all
pedlers of Religion to sell off their fantastic toys in. Let them set up what
standings they will, no body contradicts them, and the good easy soft hearted
Women fall back to them let their Commodities be what they will; there is such a
rutting at these private meeetings and conventicles, that (I am confident) he
that is not a Cuckold or a bastard amongst them is a strangly happy man.
Certainly the people of this Island are grown very deaf in these latter
years, they delight so in noise; for unless their pulpit thumping Ministers
can out of their sweating zeal, wast 2 hours sand in railing against royal
Government, in a tone would deaf Mariners in a storm, he is not a man thought
fit to go in and out before the Sisters.

Laerna has not so many Monsters nor Hydra heads, as there are of these
theating imposters in every corner and nooke of the the City. These are
stipendiaries to the good women, if they are found to be able Men. Strange
impudency! when Religion is made but a cloak, to hide baudry! I could wish
some other climate, distant far enough had these hellish monsters, but that I
would not name Derricke, because he is a good Common-wealths-man. And since I
know it to be the custom of England to go singing from the Gallows to the
grave, in hopes they will mend before they end, I have penned their Recantation.

From the tyrany of the Turk and the Antichristian Pope,
From all traitors in England that deserve a rope,
Give them but halter and they will hang themselves we hope.
Good Dericke deliver us.
From the giddy Crow whose chief intent,
Is to subvert the Church and Royal Government,
From a bumkin Committee, and an everlasting Parliament.
Good, etc.
From a Sisters nunquam satis and all private Conventi^les.
Where a man shall labor till the sweat down trickles,
A game they love better then they love their victuals,
Good etc,
FJNJS

