Vaticinium Votivum: OR, PALAEMON'S Prophetic PRAYER. Lately presented
Privately To His now MAJESTY In a Latin Poem; and here Published in English.
To which is annexed a Paraphrase on Paulus Grebnerus's Prophecy.

With several ELEGIES ON CHARLES the FIRST. The Lord Capel. The Lord Francis
Villiers.

TRAJECTI.

Anno CAROLI MARTYRIS primo.

EPIGRAMMA.
REGUM Progenies, cujus Diademate nascens
Fulsit apex triplici, quem Tria Sceptra colunt:
Quem tria Sceptra colunt Te sors tamen invidet illis;
Arcetque a Patrio Gens mal^-fida Sinu.
Macte animis, sic fata jubent quae stamina Magni
Imperii, occulta sed ratione, trahunt.
Extorri sic Dulichio sua Regna videre,
Non nisi post long as illa dedere vices:
Ac variis debet terraeque marisque periclis
Quicquid ei famae secula longa dabunt.
Natus Maii 29. Ano. 1630. Aetatis suae 19.



To His Majesty.
SIR,
WIth truce to Your more serious Contemplations, my humble Muse has here
presumed to re-kiss Your Highness Hands, and once more wait on Your noble
Recreations.

When she received her first admission into your Princely Presence, she was
but in the Nonage of her Minority, and indeed in her first Coats; upon these
her second Addresses to Your Court, she has put on her Richer robes of State;
and for her Convoie, she has made Choice of some Persons of Honor both to
attend and bear up her Train.

With her Habit too, she has altered her Speech; and she that the last year
Courted Your Majesty in Latin only, has now varied her Tone, and breathed
forth her duty in a double Dialect.

This Ode (as I may call it) which was then warbled only with a single voice,
is now Set in Parts, and tuned in a sweeter Symphonie by a select Chore and
Consort of the Muses. I hope no jarring or disagreeing Notes here will sound
harsh in Your Harmonious ears; if they should, I shall be very sorry that I
have touched the Lyre, and the next Lesson shall begin and end in my own
Recantation.

It Is true, I must confess the Shrine to which these Poems are consecrated, is
too Magnificent; and the whole Miscellanie of these Paper- Oblations is too too
mean: let them therefore be Burnt, and the Flame of them may happily lend me
light enough to see mine own Error, and their Presumption.

In a word; the whole Woof and Warp of these Fancies is weaved and wound up in
the Pious Ejaculations of Your Majesty's Liege People, the Epiphonema of whose
Pathetick and Votive Acclamations, is a serious Prayer for the Advance of Your
Sacred Majesty, and Your Glorious Inauguration.

The Popular and spreading Sparkles of this Zeal, which have kindled Beacons
and Bonefires of Devotion in the hearts of Your Three Kingdoms, have in me
begot a sublimer Flame of Duty, which has been both fed and raised by the
Fuel and Fomentation of Your Princely Favors.

In this Flame I here humbly Offer up the Incens of these Prayers at the
Glorious Altar of Your Great Name; and in this better Sacrifice of Obedience, I
most submissively acquiesce

SIR, The humblest of Your Majesty's most Loial, and most sincerely devoted
Subjects PALAEMON.
-- Quo non manet observantior alter Imperiis REX magne Tuis. --



Serenissimo Augustissimoque Principi CAROLO Secundo, etc.
Prooemium.
REX sacer auspiciis Sceptri felicibus orte!
Sola salus Populi, deliciumque DEI!
Quem Figulus magni elegit Supremus Olympi
Vas speciale sibi, vas generale suis.
Magna Patris magni Soboles! spes alta Britannis,
Regius Augustos cui dedit ortus Avos.
Ipse ego quae vestris suffundam carmina Sceptris?
O quae Te magno CAROLE digna Precer!
Vive diu felix; sis Te felicior; aevi,
Nulla nec Imperii terminet hora Tui.
Exupera meritis Augustum, Nestora seclis,
Nervam laud, Numam Pace, favore Titum.
In spes cresce novas, quot profert messis Aristas,
Vel quot odoriferas terra refundit opes.
Cresce, impleque Tuis totum Virtutibus orbem;
Albion auspiciis Olbion ipsa Tuis.
Dum tibi multiplices superaddant Fata Coronas
Et Tibi quot Terrae, tot famulentur Aquae.
Au Roy de la grand Bretaigne. CHARLES II.
ODE.
DIeux, Protecteurs de l' Innocence,
Pouues vous encor resister;
A fair bien tossed e clatter
Les foudres de vostre vengeance?
N'aues vous pas assez tente;
De flechir par l' Impunite
Ces ames pleines de Malice?
Et n'est il pas bien tossed saison
De fair agir vostre Justice
Puis qu'on foul aux pieds la Raison?
2. Ie scay bien que vostre Tonnerre,
Gronde long temps sur les Humains,
Auant q'uil part de vos mains
Pour venir foudroyer la Terre:
Les hauts chesnes sont menacez,
Premier que d'estre terrassez
Par les se coucesses des tempests;
Et je scay que vostre Bonte
Ne frappe q'ua regret nos testes
Des coups q'uelles ont merit.
Place this between Folio 74, 75.

3. Mais lors que des Perfides Ames,
Par leurs desseins audacieux,
On port jusque dans les Cieux
Les eclats des Civilles Flames:
Lors que jusques dans les Enfers
Ils ont este chercher des fers,
Afin d'armer Leurs Barbaries;
Devez vous pas, Dieux Tout-puissans,
Fair choir ces Noires Furies
Aux Prieres des Innocens?
4. Desia de buict Hyuers les Marbres
Brisent leurs crystaux inconstans.
E'desia huit fois le Printemps
Rend leur verte depouille aux arbres:
Depuis que ces Caeurs de Rocher,
Qui n'ont que la form de chair,
S'endurcissans dedans leurs crimes;
Pillent sans restitution
Trois Peuples, rendus les victimes
De leur sanglante Ambition.
Null Sex, Rang, ny Privilege,
Du Roy jusques au Laboureur,
Na peu decliner la fureur
De leur Cruante Sacrilege:
Tous Aziles sont violez,
Mill beaux Palais desolez
De leur rage portent les marquis;
Bref, leurs Complots noirs and mechans
Ont less le Ciseau des Parques
Dedans les Villes and les Champs.
6. Leur insatiable Avarice,
S'attacquant mesme aux Immortels,
De la depouille des Autels
A presque fait le Ciel complice:
Car deguisant sa Laschete
Sous un masque de Piete,
Qui pour le fruit done l'ecorce:
Elle ensorcelle la Raison,
Et sous cette traitresse amorce
Abbreuue l'ame de poison.
7. Mais c'est en vain, Race Maudite,
Que pour colorer vos desseins,
Dessous des visages de Saints
Vous cachez un Caeur Hypocrite:
Vostre Zele malicieux,
Deuant le Tribunal des Cieux
Decouure a nud son imposture;
C'est un Flot q'uon ne peut calmer;
C'est un Feu, Duquel la Nature
Ne prend plaisir qua consumer.
8. Puisse enfin ce Zele profane,
Leur fair auoir le mesme sort
Du Grec, quia paya de sa mort
Le Temple brusle de Diane:
Que leurs Noms demeurent fameux
Dans la race de nos Neueux
Parla honte de leurs Supplices;
Et puisse la Posterite,
Considerant leurs Precipices,
Douter s'ils ont jamais este.
9. Mais non: il faut que ton Histoire,
CHARLES, Ressource de nos maux,
Pour Chef-daeuure de Tes Trauaux
En eternise la Memoire:
C'est la volonte des Destins
Q'uon voye unjour sur ces mutins
Ta just Colere assouuie;
Et que leur Fameux Chastiment
Dedans le recit de Ta vie
Trouue a jamais son monument.
10. Va donc, que le Ciel Te prospere,
Contre ces Titans inhumains,
Et consacre Tes jeunes Mains
A vanger Le Sang de Ton PERE:
O ROY! pour qui tout l'Vniuers
Fait les mesmes veux que mes Verse,
Te souhaittant des jours plus calmes:
La rage de ces Aquilons
Ne souffle, q'ua fin que Tes PALMS
Croissent mieux sous leurs Tourbillons.
De Regis Magnae Britanniae CAROLI I. in Insulam Vectim secessu, Obeunte Anno
MDCXLVII.
DUm prope septenum Civili in Mart Decembrem,
Insula Magna, olim Pacis alumna, subit:
Dum petit infando Sceptri pia jura Tumultu,
Et ciet iratos in sua Allnsio ad nomen Angl. Vot^s.
Vota Deos:
Impia dum tutas CAROLO negat Anglia Seeds:
Excipit Hunc parvo Vectis Tunc enim putabatur Regis securitati invigilatura,
and ab ejus partibus statura.
amica sinu.
Quid monstri hoc, Britones? Sol vester currit in ortum,
Quaerit and Eoas Phoebus anhelus aquas?
Anne Thyestaeam nova monstra aequantia coenam
Ipse fugit, radiis ut nocitura suis?
Scilicet, and retro hinc vobis patet omnia ferri,
Vestraque in adversas currere fata vices.
Definite infensos moniti jam temnere Divos;
Sin minus, aeterna nocte cavete tegi.
Ad Eundem. Postquam S. M. interfuisset in Insulae Vectis Conventus tempore,
circa finem Anni MDCXLVIII.
HAud aliter laeto Phoebum post nubila spectat
Lumine jam longo quassa carina Noto:
Quam me nunc Sacrae juvat oscula, CAROLE, dextrae
Figere; quam vultus posse videre tuos.
O REX! venturis Pia quem Patientia seclis
Commendat, Patriae prodit and esse Patrem.
Nunc quoscunque volet nectat Fortuna labores,
Sors mihi, Te viso, nulla nocere potest.
Upon His MAJESTY'S Arrival at the Isle of Wight.
LEt Turkey boast of Empire; France of Law;
Venice of Site; Gold, India; Water, Spaw.
Trade and Religions, London, Amsterdam;
Of Greatness Florence; or the Tartar Came.
All these concenter in one spot, one span,
The Isle of Wight, and CHARLES the I Will of MAN.
A MAN whose mind's above the Turkish Crest,
A KING who make's good Laws, and keep's them best:
A PRINCE who like to well built Venice stand's,
In midst of Waters, yet in sight of Lands:
Whose Roial Breast's an India, where is a Mint
Of Golden thoughts; base ones were never coined in it.
Whose Gift (as waters have a fame) can heal
The Evil, Oh would it might the Commonweal!
He trade's not in Religions; yet own's one
Professed by most, Practiced by Him, or none.
Fortunate Isle! to thee ill fortune bring's
If not the Greatest, yet the Best of Kings.
PALAEMONIS Vaticinium Votivum.
ALtera vix reducem Floram spoliaverat Aestas,
Exquo Caesareas, superatis fluctibus, Arces,
Discordem fugiens Populum divisaque Regna,
Liquerat, ut Gallos inviseret Inclytus hospes
CAROLUS; and fati consors haec Regia proles
Adstaret carae Genitrici, quam mala dudum
Occultis laetata dolis Fortuna, tenebat
Immeritis trinos jactatam cladibus annos,
Liligeri excelsas ubi Sequana Principis arces
Alluit, and Germana Dryas nemus incolit altum.
2. Illic dum variis sua PRINCEPS otia curis
Exercet, Phoebique arts colit atque Dianae,
Ludicra vel ficti tractat certamina Martis,
(Quae quum fata dabunt veros convertat in usus,)
Dumque pilae alterno modo tempus fallere jactu,
Vel saltu juvat aut disco, vel fraena feroci
Quadrupedi dare, vel circo componere gressus:
Una magis grandes animos infixa remordet
Altius and toto se volvit pectore cura,
Quae vetat hunc placidos occurrens carpere somnos,
Nutantis Patriae laesique Parentis imago.
Ergo ubi lenta dies Fatorum ex ordine fulsit,
Qua Populo indicat poenas vindicta Rebelli,
Et patiens nimium Pietas jubet addere coeptis
Consiliis jam fessa manum, ne facta ruentis
Sit rea and ipsa mali, si perstet parcere ferro,
Flectere quum rigidas nequeat Clementia mentes:
Haud mora, quo sua fata vocant huc tendere cursu.
3. Dum vero amplexu properat discedere Matris
Ille, Patrem volvens animo; discinditur aequis
Partibus Illustris Pietas atque haeret utrique.
Nota tamen Patris sors undique tristior urgens,
Accelerat dubium: sicque impiger advolat oras
Ad Batavum; atque (oculis vix dum lustrata) relinquit
Littora, sollicitis ubi dudum Nereus undis
Classem asservabat, grandique immania dorso
Gestabat, multo sed non sine murmr, Monstra
Quinque and bis septem, terrere valentia Phocas:
Has nuper pia cura Dei, de gente rebelli
Legitimum Justo tulit oblatura triumphum
PRINCIPI, ut illa forent successus omina fausti.
His vectus, multo comitatu insignis and armis,
CAROLUS alta petit, cedentiaque aequora sulcat.
Tum vota ad Superos multo cum murmr defert,
Explosoque quatit vicinum sulphur littus
Machina, Coelicolum cujus vox permeat arces.
Exciti rauca Tritones era concha
Implent, and Nymphae choreas circum agmine ducunt,
Gratoque exultant pressi sub pondere fluctus.
5. Et sic, Heroum fida stipante caterv^,
CAROLUS oppositas laeto alite tendit in oras.
Tum vero Britonum, cui semper chara Tridentis
Est and Tergemini Ponto inclyta gloria Sceptri,
Littore prospiciens, oculis dum vela recedunt
Et rapit aura rates, haec orsus vota PALAEMON.
6. "Nereidum Glau^ique cohors, tandem excipe laetas
"PRINCIPIS Augusti Puppes. Vos ponite, venti,
"Insanos fremitus; arctis vinctique catenis
"Desinite in Pontum rabido saevire flagello,
"Immanesque agitare iras: PAX regnet in undis:
"Et placidi Britonas cingant fausto omine fluctus.
"Ac veluti sacros quum destinat edere foetus
"Alcyon, and Thetidi pullos committit amicae;
"Sit vobis haec festa dies, qua CAROLUS altum
"Scandit and ulcisci laesos meditatus honores
"Et Patris and Sceptri, Gentem and sedare rebellem,
"Jamdudum optatos Pacis parat edere fructus.
7. O Regum soboles! cui nostra haec carmina surgunt,
Parce precor magnis Tu paulum, CAROLE, curis.
Sollicitumque Tui carmen dignare faventi
Lumine, and haec aures mereantur tangere sacras.
Quae Tibi fatidico panduntur Apolline vota.
I nunc, and Zephyro solum comitante, carinis
Scinde Tuis liquidos illaeso tramite sulcos,
Subjectumque Patris nunc credas Nerea Sceptris;
Ille Tuum nam sternit iter, famulaque ministrat
Puppibus ipse manu, nociturosque amovet imbres.
O quam se tali dignum laetatur honor,
Seque oneri supponit ovans, non pube superbus,
Quippe adeo fuit Heroum queis claruit Argos,
Thessala quum classis Phryxei littora Regis
Diripuit, quamvis multa illos secula jactent,
Et sint aeternis Astrorum nomina fastis
Inserta, aurata cum Puppe, and vellere rapto.
Graecia nil etenim, qua vindice fulget Jason,
Ficta tenet, veros quod PRINCIPIS aequet honores
Aeternum nomenque mei, quo clarus ab Indis
Splendet ad Oceanum cui Phoebus lumina condit.
8. Macte igitur, facilemque Jovis sperato favorem
Quo te fata vocant Regni, lacerique Penates.
Nascitur ecce novum tibi vellus and altera Cholchis:
Sed famosa magis quam qua se Graecia jactat:
Tangit enim Tua Caussa Deos hominesque vicissim,
Atque decus laesae Themidis: dum saevit habenis
Audaci violatque manu sacra jura Britannum
Gens fera laxatis; quam facta immanibus aequent
Titanum Monstris, sua quos audacia fixit
Et male tentatum facinus radicibus Aetnae,
Suppliciumque dedit Cyclopum pascere flammas.
Sic propria Haec Gens mole ruat, cui infanda superbo
Consilia impulsu tantum suasere furorem;
Martis ut in Patriam saevos accenderet ignes,
Utqueministerio Regum atria sancta prophano
Pollueret, vetitasque manu tractaret habenas
Impia, and optaret caput inter nubila condi.
9. Vade ergo, Regum o Soboles! and tuta pererrans
Neptuni famulos fluctus, jam Numine dextro
Utere; linque moras, nascentesque erige vires
Et procerum and Populi, quorum spirantia cultum
Pectora fida Tuum mala non infecit Erynnis,
Sed mente intrepida Tua, CAROLE, fata sequuntur.
10. Certe, aut veridica nos lauro fallit Apollo,
Nec valet obscuri secreta aperire futuri;
Aut quas Eumenidum furialis dextera torsit
Conjurata faces jamjam vanescere, nigris
Condere seque antris video, simul atque coruscum
Fulserit Augusti capitis jubar, and Tua notas
Lux optata diu Britonum percusserit oras.
Ac veluti, primos quum Titan exerit ignes,
Et Thetidis rubicunda sinus Aurora deaurat,
Littus in oppositum noctis se lumina condunt,
Praecipitantque fugam: medio vel summus in axe
Quum stat, and aequalis partitur pensa diei,
Luminis atque idem vitae dator; intima rursum
Lustra colunt umbrasque ferae, lemuresque fugati
Nocturnaeque striges repetunt feralia tecta:
Sic simul ac Patrium rutilis lustraverit Orbem
Sol novus hic radiis; vanescent saeva ferarum
Portenta, illicitas dudum exercentia praedas,
Atque fugam trepido rapient pede, seque nocentis
Dira lues Erebi taciturnis condet in umbris.
O quam poeniteat sanctum hunc aliquando rebelli
Sacrilegaque manu Sceptri violasse decorem,
Atque Caput Magni Sacrum tetigisse Parentis!
Quum Tibi juncta Themis, coelo cum vindice, dextram
Diriget, atque animis sua tandem sontibus addet
Supplicia, and solvet Captivi vincula Regis.
11. Non melius Pietas olim laudata refulsit
Illa Anchisiadae, quum praemonstrante Sibylla
Insignis ramo chari and genitoris amore,
Umbrarum petiitque domos, camposque nitentis
Elysii, and fecit sibi magnum in secula nomen.
Sicut enim natum Phrygius dum suspicit Heroes,
Haec eadem Te verba manent: (quum dextera victrix
Littoris objecti minitantia claustra recludens,
Qua jacet Oceano Vectis non fausta Britanno,
Et Regi populos, Regem populisque reducet,
Atque expulsa solo Britonum sua gaudia reddet:
"Venisti tandem; Tuaque exspectata Parenti
"Vicit iter durum Pietas? datur ora tueri
"Nate Tua, and notas audire and reddere voces?
"Sic equidem ducebam animo, rebarque futurum
"Tempora dinumerans: nec me mea cura fefellit.
"Quas ego Te terras and quanta per aequora victum
"Accipio? Quantis jactatum Nate periclis!
"Quam metui ne visa Tibi tot regna nocerent!
Tu contra: Tua me Genitor, Tua tristis imago
Saepius occurrens, absentem quaerere adegit.
Stant sale nunc Patrio classes mihi: jungere dextram,
Da Genitor, Teque amplexu ne subtrahe nostro.
12. O Tu! supremo cujus mortalia nutu
Omnia volvuntur; Tu, quo custode Monarchis
Intemerata vigent jura, and quo vindice nunquam
Magnatum scelus aut populi grassatur inultum:
Da Nato sua vota Pio, da jura Parenti,
Assere justitiam, frangat sua poena Rebels;
Imperioque olim secura pace fruenti
Auratos Tu read dies; and damna repende
(Quae videt invito jam messis septima Phoebo,)
Hisce bonis, per quae Saturnia floruit Aetas,
Ter septem sub Patre annis, and prole beata
Natorum, aeternos dum Sol volvetur in orbs.
Nec Tibi ni longis saturo, REX Inclyte seclis
Contingat carae dextram disjungere Sponsae,
Quumque pii norint Temet monitore Nepotes
Parcere subjectis and debellare superbos,
Pax aeterna Tui firmet fundamina Sceptri:
CAROLUS and propria faciens Te prole parentem,
Pacatum ipse regat patriis virtutibus Orbem.
13. Talibus orabat dicturus plura Palaemon,
Ni Superis ea cura foret plura addere votis:
Praeterea, jam fessus equos immergere Ponto
Ardentesque rotas properavit tingere Phoebus:
Et placidi dudum rapuere errantia venti
Vela oculis; tacita tenet ergo caetera mente.
14. Tunc quoque nos sequimur paribus Te Carole votis,
Dum mala vix aliud nobis Fortuna reliquit
Quam vota, and purae mentis solamina, Musae
Intermixta jocis, queis curae arcentur amarae.
Scilicet esse viae comites nos dura negarunt
Et nimis adverso volventia stamine lentas
Improba fata dies: ex quo Civilia diris
Arma Furor manibus rapiens, laxavit habenas
Jusque dedit sceleri, nos ut spoliaret inultos,
Et raperet varii compendia prima laboris,
(Hei mihi! quanta illis damna exhinc addita damnis!)
Gens fraeni impatiens; quae Te quoque cedere Regnis
Compulit e Patriis, variisque in gentibus actum
Inde novos vindictae animos hausisse coegit.
15. Ergo ut Alcidae primos tentare labores,
Et Britonum Marti primas appendere palmas,
In sua damna Tuam doceant haec Monstra juventam;
Invitis illas quanquam Tua carpere dextris
Et doleat Pietas tali clarescere Lauro.
PALAEMONIS Vaticinium Votivum.
SCarce had the Summer with her dounie wing
Brush't, and laid by the Wardrope of the Spring,
When Princely CHARLES with his fair Train did pleas
TO expose His Sacred Person to the Seas;
Trusting to the mercy of the Ocean more
Then those Land-Monsters which he left on Shore.
And now great France (in greatness more increa'st,)
Court's the Arrival of this stately guest;
Whose coming there was only to resign,
And offer up his Sorrows at the shrine
Of His dread Mother; who to make Her Moan
And Mourning less, did intermix his own.
Sad QUEEN! how has stern step-dame Fortune tossed,
And bandied Thee from Britain to the Coast
Of France! where Sein displaie's her silver-floods,
And grand Saint German vannteth her vast woods.
2. To this calm Rendezvous sad CHARLES repair's
With Sports to cozen and beguil his Cares:
Sometimes He Hunt's, and with his Vocal Horn,
Summon's Aurora, and the loitering Morn:
Sometimes He read's; and equally impart's
His well-divided hours for Arms or Arts.
Yet most He sport's in Martial Skirmishes,
(Which may b' in Earnest when just Heaven shall pleas.)
Sometimes He plaie's at Tennis; then again
Expert in Feats of Chivalrie, strive's to train
The stubborn Steed; and his rough fetlocks bring
Within the Cube and Compass of the Ring.
But ah! these Pastims are too short and brief
To flatter Sorrow, or to dandle Grief.
His Cares thus crush't, obtrude; and still abuse
His busy Fancy, with the whispered News
Of good or bad Events, which still relate
TO a Kingdom's Fortune, or a Father's Fate.
Yet now since Heaven does call; He Is bent to try
The worst of Chance, and out-dare Destiny,
Since the designed Time, and hovering Hours
At hand to Punish those Usurping Powers;
To put a Snaffle in the Head-strong-Jaws
Of Hot-spur-Rebels, who have tired all ways:
Wh' have jaded, spurgall'd Pity; and let loos
Her Reins; and made tame Mercy of no use.
3. Thus Ruminate's sad CHARLES, and float's betwixt
Duty and Zeal; unstable and unfix't,
Touched with the mutual Sens of the One and Other,
Of a Dear Father and Indulgent Mother;
At length the Ponderous thoughts of His Sire's fate
Weighed down the Scales, and ended the Debate.
Then from the Frontiers of fair France He post's,
And re-imbarck'd, arrive's on Belgia's Coasts;
Whose Continent before He well survei'd
He left, and in all haste His Anchors weighed,
Putting to Sea; where Nereus, with a Fleet
Of well-rigg'd-shipping, did his Higness greet.
A gallant Navy! whose full number might
Out-brave the boisterous Billows, and affright
Those huge Behemoths and vast Porpoises,
Which Tole the Waters and Excise the Seas.
4. These did propitious Providence provide,
And pre-ordain to be great CHARLES His Guide:
Whose just Desertion of a ship-wrack't CAUSE,
Buoi'd up and born by Usurpation was,
Some luckie Omen of Blessed CHARLES Success,
Which made His Power grow greater, and theirs less.
And thus re-ent'ring with His Roial Train,
He plow's the fertile Furrows of the Main.
And with low-bended-knees, but lofty eyes
Implore's high Heaven to bless his Enterpize.
The Cannons closed the Amen: and did enlarge
Their wide-stretch't- Organs to Report the Charge:
Both Rocks and Rivers trembled at the strokes
Of louder Guns; whose Center-shaking-shocks
Like the Cloud-cleaving Thunder, seemed to tear
The troubled Welkin, and affright the Air.
The pretty Tritons did that day belabor
Their well-tun'd-shells, which sounded like some Tabor,
Whiles the whole Chore of Sea-Nymphs did advance
And teach the Capering Surges how to dance.
5. Thus with His Princely Fleet whiles He does sail
Near Britain's Coast, fanned with a whispering Gale,
Tridented Neptune placed Him at the Helm,
Himself doing Homage to his threefold Realm.
But poor Palaemon at His Launching plie's
His task, and swell's the Canvass with his Sighs,
Whose trickling tears fell down like showers of Rain,
Striving to mix fresh Water with the Main.
Long in these doleful dumps he stood for lack
Of his loved Sovereign, and at last thus spoke.
6. "O Thou whose wonders are seen in the Deep
"Vnbottom'd Bowels of the Ocean! keep
"And Crown His Sacred Highness with divine
"Glories; whose Scepter is a Type of Thine.
"O! let the obseqvious winds, and waves allaie
"Their surly looks, and study to obeie.
"O! let all storms be chained up in abstruse
"And lonely caverns, and no more break loos,
"Whiles the whole Rabble of black Tempests sleep,
"Lulled by the warbling Music of the Deep.
"Let this Daie's Jubilee with Peace be blessed
"And hush't, as when Halcyon build's her nest:
"Such be that Day when great CHARLES does prepare
"TO encounter with Rebellion, and repair
"The Ruins of three Kingdoms, to increas
"His enemies Horror, but His Subjects Peace.
7. Dread Sovereign! whose very name give's fire
To my dull Muse, which stand's but to admire;
And in the amazement of that Zeal does greet
Thy Sacred Highness with unequal Feet.
Pass on in triumph with a prosperous Tide,
Whiles Zephyrus is thy Passport and thy Guide:
He, He Is thy Harbinger who swiftly clear's
The Coast from Tempests when thy Pilot steer's;
How does He smile, and smooth His cheerful brow
Ballanc't with so divine a weight as THOU!
The ship which wafted Jason to the shore
Of Colchis, which the vulgar did adore
And Deifie so much, that they did prize
Each Planck as Trophies to be fixed in the Skies;
That Ship was but a Cock-boat to thy Sail,
Or some poor punie Whiting to a Whale.
Had He been Fraught with Thee, he never had thought
Of that vain Voyage, and so dearly bought
A lock of Wool, and better-tutor'd Greece,
Would brag no longer of her Phrygian Fleece:
Those Pageant-pot-gun-Triumphs (if their story
Were true) were but mere Atoms to Thy Glory,
Which flame's like Heaven's bright blazing lamp through the whole
World, from the Artick to the Antartick Pole.
6. Go then blessed Mirror of Great Britain! go,
Implore Heaven's Aid above, whiles here below
Thy Subjects linger, ready with the Expense
Of their dear Blood, to fall in Thy Defense:
Fresh Trophies Court Thee; richer then that old
Fleece, fetched from Phrygia, though each lock were gold:
Thy Cause awake's the whole world, and clamor's high
For Vengeance, from a Supreme Deity.
Angels and Men are moved; when Devils dare
Entrench on Princes, and usurp the Chair
Of Sovereign Power; A Fact that cannot hold
Comparison, unless referred to the old
Unweildie Giants, threatening to unthrone
Their Jove, and scale the Castles of the Sun;
But as their brainless Fury was confined
And nailed to Aetna; so let these Youths find
The self-same Fate; whose Villainies have hurled
Earth from her Center, and unhinged the World.
How would two Houses pull twelv 'bout their ears,
Those twelv Celestial Mansions of the Spheres?
Whiles Stars, nay Moon and Sun may shine alone,
Since our New Lights have Lanthorns of their own.
Thus have these Phaetons fired, and turned each Town
(Heart-burn't before) to a Conflagration.
Strange Babel-By-Blows! to untile Thrones by a trick
Of State, and build a Commonwealth with Brick:
Dismantling Earthly Kingdoms, to prepare
Mountains in the Moon, and Castles in the Air.
9 Then sail auspicious PRINCE! and wafted over
The officious Waves, review Thy Native Shore;
New string thy nervless Subjects; and impart
Fivers and Arteries to the Peoples heart;
Resolved to hazard all, and to make good
Thy Roial Title, sealed in their Blood.
10. And now I grow Prophetic 'bove all Fiction;
And breathe Divinity in my wished prediction.
Black Clouds dissolv, and gloomie Horror go's
Back to that cursed Chao s whence she rose.
Not daring to creep nearer, or incroach,
When CHARLES shall in bright Majesty approach.
As when great Titan Charioter to the day,
Rides his Circuit in his rich Arraie;
The conscious Night retire's, and to bewail
Her Guilt the more, put's on a Mourning Vail.
Or look as when Sol's melting Beams pearch't high
To their Meridian, how the poor Herds fly
Headlong in Droves! as though they were afraid
Of those pale shadows which their flight has made!
So may those Gobling Ghosts, those Beasts of Prey
Sneak to their sootie Hen-roosts, and withdraw
At Thy dread-looks: so may those Serpents hiss
Back, countermanded to their first Abyss.
Let them Repent that Day, and Text it in
Their fatal Rubric, when they first did sin
Against their SOVEREIGN, daring to Conspire
And Spawn black Treason against Thy Sacred Sire.
Let them Repent, when Vengeance and Heaven too
Shall pay their Score, and give them what is their Due.
11. Thus did that good Anchises son of old
By the Authentic Sybils Oracle grow bold
To rescue his blessed Father, and thence made
A strange adventure through the Elizian shade;
Such was His private Piety, but Thy Zeal
Involv's three Kingdoms and their Publick-weal:
Each Act is Sacred, and each aim of Thine*
Center's in Heaven, and thence grow's Divine.
12. O thou great-wonder-working GOD above!
By whom the machine of the whole Earth does move;
Who rul'st both Sword and Scepter with a Rod,
And still'st the mutinous world with thy sole nod:
Inspire, inspire great CHARLES, and gently shed
Showers of Scepters on our Sovereign's Head;
That Justice may return to arraign those known
Loos Outlaries Thine enemies, and their own:
That we may injoie old Saturn's days of old,
To re-convert our Iron into Gold.
With these thronged Blessings was Thy Father Crowned
Thrice seven long Summers, leaving a Renowned
And Princely Progeny, which shall secure
This Throne as long as Sun or Stars endure.
But may thy Scepter, and thy Regal Power
Brook no Corrival, nor Competitor;
Whiles Princes made thy Tenants, hold the Leas
Both of their lives and fortunes to the Peace
Of glorious Britain; and preserved thus, own
Their selves and safeties to Thy Roial Throne.
13. In this sad plight Palemon did implore
The Eternal Powers, and fain would have said more,
But did referr the sequel of his Prayer
To Heaven's great Mercy, and the Almightie's Care:
Besides Sol had unsadled (for their eas
His Steeds) and drench't his Chariot in the Seas:
The Fleet was out of sight too, and to was best
For poor Palemon to conceal the rest.
14. Yet since winged Vollies of his wishes may
Wait on great CHARLES, as Convoies to His way,
He send's them wrapped in Sighs; as grieved to show
How little he could pay, how much must ow;
But whiles he breathe's, he will deprecate those dire
Accursed Band-dogs that have fanned this fire
Of Civil Discords; letting loos the unjust
Reins to licentious Murder, and black Lust:
Who welt'ring in their gore, have swam to the chin
In Bloody Riot, and Seditious Sin.
And here they have raised their Crimes by the exile
Of Thy blessed Presence, from this British Isle.
Which last Act, when their Fate grow's mellow, shall
Add to their Weight, and Crush them in the fall.
15. Go then great Champion; go; make good the story
That cite's Alcides, O may Thy first glory
Be vowed to Mars: whiles miscreants are thence made
The Maiden-handsils of thy fatal Blade.
And though it is pity such base Blood should stain
A Roial Fauchion; and but little gain
To kill such Hedg-hogs. Let not this Plea sue
Their Pardons, nor debar them of their due:
Since the grieved Realm does groan, and groan again,
Big with those Monsters, in the shape of men:
Whose violent pangs, and long Convulsion-fits
Have half bereft, and robbed her of her wits.
Be Thou then her Lucina, be, and close
Her womb, expanded through her teeming-throws;
And as they Brood still quell, and dissipate
The abortive Hydra's of an Headless State.
May Men and Angels further Thy intent
In this great Work, and wait upon the event;
Since now the Season, and the appointed Times
Are near to power down vengeance on their Crimes:
And the hour's at hand (if Soldiers may divine)
To seek their Ruins that have thus sought THINE.
FINIS.
An Advertisement to the READER in reference to the annexed Prophecy.
READER,
THis Prophecy received from an honorable Person, coming so opportunely to my
hand, I thought it but duty to transfer it to the Public view; not daring to
commit so great a sin in the secret concealment of a business of so general a
concernment.

Touching the Author, Paulus Grebnerus, he was a great Astronomer, and a man
of surpassing Piety, and known Integrity, whose Erudition likewise and
excellent Endowments, have received a public Character from this and other
Kingdoms.

His Prophecy here need no Panegyric; and a farther amplification, by way of
Apology, would prove impertinent where so many thousands have been so
thoroughly prepossest in the truth of his Predictions.

In a word, Scismaticks (that speak evil of Dignities, and despise Prophesies)
may perchance persist still obstinate; I am sure all ROYALISTS will rest here
well satisfied.

For my part, I shall therefore pray for the Conversion of the first, and
Confirmation of the last; wishing the one more Faith, and the other better
Fortune.

Farewell.
The PROPHECY of Paulus Grebnerus concerning these Times.
PAulus Grebnerus was here in England with Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1582. and
presented Her with a fair Manuscript in Latin, describing therein the future
history of Europe, here and there limming in Water-colors some principal
Passages.

Dr. Nevil, Clerk of the Closet, being in favor with the Queen obtained this
Book of Her, and bestowed it on the Library of Trinity College in Cambridg,
where it has been published to the view of all persons, till about five or six
years ago, by much perusing and ill handling, it was much slurred and defaced.

In his Predictions
He describes the Troubles of Russia, and the Election of a Swedish King,
SIGISMUND by name, to be King of Polonia, by which He shall irrecoverably
lose his own Inheritance.

That of the Swedish Race there should be one GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS by name, that
should take heart from the Distractions of Germany to invade the Empire with a
small Army; fight many Battles prosperously, but should at last perish in a
pitcht-Field.

That about that time should Reign Rex Septentrionalis nomine CAROLUS, qui
ducet Vxorem Mariam Papipisticam ex quo evadet Regum infelicissimus. Tunc
Populus ipsius Ditionis eliget sihi alium Imperatorem, Comitem; qui durabit in
Imperio tres annos, aut circiter. At postea idem Populus eliget alium
Imperatorem, Equitem, non ejusdem Familiae nec Dignitatis, cui detrudet omnia
sub pedibus suis: durabit aliquanto longiore tempore: and post hunc eliget
nullum.

Post hunc apparebit quidam CAROLUS e CAROLO descendens, cum immensa Class in
Litore Ditionis Patris sui, and cum Auxiliariis Danicis, Suedicis, Hollandicis,
Francicis prosrernet Adversarios Suos, and administrabit Imperium
perfelicissime, and long lateque dominabitur, and erit CAROLO Magno major.

Englished thus.
About that time a Northern King shall Reign, CHARLES by Name, who shall take to
Wife MARIE of the Popish Religion; vvhereupon He shall be a most unfortunate
Prince. Then the People of His Dominion shall choose to themselves another
Commander [or Governor] viz. an Earl; whose Government shall last three years,
or there about. And afterward the same People shall choose another Commander or
[or Governor] viz. a Knight, not of the same Family, nor Dignity, who shall
trample all things under his feet: He shall endure somewhat longer time: and
after him they shall choose none at all.

After him shall appear one CHARLES descending from CHARLES, with a mighty
Navy, on the Shore of His Father's Kingdom; and with Aid from Denmark,
Swedeland, Holland, France, shall overthrow His Adversaries, and shall govern
His Kingdom wonderful happily, and shall bear Rule far and near: and shall be
greater then CHARLES the Great.

A short Paraphrase on the foregoing PROPHECY.
HOw well could Grebner in those Blind Times see!
And in these Seeing-Times how blind are we?
Our new- Found-Lights are lost; those squint-ei'd-Elvs,
And purblinde Seekers, may now seek themselves;
Who have thus erred, imagining Prediction
Of Sacred Prophecy, but some feigned Fiction.
But we (blessed Grebner!) who have still admired,
And looked upon thee as some Soul inspired;
Will hold thy Saws no longer in suspens,
Which now we have reached with the Optics of our Sens;
Since what was once Apocalypse, is known
The unridled Truth of Revelation.
Those two grand Champions (that trod on the Neck
Of Nations, and had Kingdom's at Their Beck)
Are both exstinct; and Fame can only give
A bare relation that They once did live.
But Thou renowned CHARLES, whose matchless Fate
Designed Thee a Victim to the People's Hate;
(Maugre the malice of Thy Foes) were hurled
With Haleluiahs from the wondering world,
A Conqueror over Thy doom; from whence we may
Infer, Thou only liv'dst, we di'd that day.
And now look back; look back; and have recours
From whence these streams of Mischief had their sours,
Whiles those promiscuous Hodg-podg-Powers oppose,
Like high-swoln Floods that River whence they rose.
The Eagle thus dislodged; a Wren-like race
Of dunghil-Dors, soon pierch't-up in His Place.
And Lapwing-Libertie e're fleg'd, take's flight,
First has her Champion-Earl; the next a Knight,
Whose heavy Pressure has so imp't her wings,
She has lost by Consuls what she got by KINGS.
And now (but life's in Prophecy) we might
Die, and despair to see Thy Second Light,
Great CHARLES, who like the Bridegroom of the day,
Shall gil'd sad Britain with Thy glorious Raie;
Whiles all those shower-shot Mushroms, and those new
Created Brats, melt like the morning dew;
And all those Ignes fatui shrink and run
Like Exhalations at the rising Sun.
This is the Wish great KING, and pious Care
Of those who piece-forth Prophecy with their Prayer;
O may blessed Grebner be added to the Small
Prophets! and prove each line Canonical;
Whiles what in the old Queen's Reign he did divine,
May be fulfilled, and ratified in Thine:
O mai'st Thou Reign in Thy known Realms, who art
Enthroned already in Thy People's heart!
O mai'st Thou Rule! and spread Thy Fame through the whole
Earth; from the Artick to to Antartick Pole.
Till the just world with Grebner shall maintein
Thee a mightier Monarch then brave Charlemain.
FINIS.
Aeternae Memoriae, ET SANCTIS MANIBUS.

CAROLI I.

Nuper MAGNAE BRITANNIAE REGIS Pientissimi; Nunc vero Angliae
Proto-Martyris-Regii Gloriosissimi, SACRUM.

In iniquitatibus illorum Gloriam Tuam perfecisti.



Typis excusum Anno CAROLI Martyris primo, 1649.

Aeternae Memoriae CAROLI I. etc.
NE jam, Roma tuis Catilinae crimina chartis
Devoveas, jactesve tuos (o Brute!) triumphos:
Major enim quam quum vidisti haec Monstra, Britanne
Disque exosa magis tractatur Scena Theatro.
Non Patriae furtim ferales subdere taedas
Conjurata manus tentat, non Publica caecis
Nunc petitur Res consiliis, non dira recessus
Infandum molita nefas jam quaerit Erynnis:
Sed testem te, Phoebe vocat, quem caena Thyestae
Crimine velavit quondam polluta minori.
CAESAR enim periit, just quum Roma Tyrannos
Extimuit, veroque nefas culpante Senatu,
Plaudente hic Illegitimo REX CAESARE MAJOR
Fata subit laetus, Themidis faedatque secures:
Dum non visa prius Populis spectacula praebet
Turba ferox, Regis Sacram and scelerata prophanat
Cervicem Proprii sub limina Sancta Palati;
REGIS, quo Melior nunquam vel Justior alter
Lubrica vesanis admovit fraena Britannis.
White Hall, sive alba aula, Regii Palatii pars nobilissima, Publ. quondam
Legatorum auditionibus, and praeciputs aulae solennitatibus inserviens,
funestissimi spectaculi Theatrum and executionis locus deligitur.
Hic ubi vicinis quondam responsa Legatis
Ipse dabat, toto spargens Oracula Mundo
Insignis Triplici Diademate, saeva securim
Dextra parat; verum immoto jamjam ultima vultu
Fata videt, Mortemque Hostesque in Morte triumphans
Calcat, and intrepidus minitantem despicit Ensem:
Non minus Augusto spectandus lumine, Coeli
Mox ut abiturus sacras sublimis ad Arces,
Quam Populo quum jura dabat: Sic CAROLUS astra
Divorumque domos petit, and Ob pietatem seil. insignem ipsique supra exemplum
familiatem. * Ipsissima ejus verba in secunda compellatione Westmon. I die a
Martyr for My Parliament and People. I stand for the Laws of England, and the
Liberty of My People.
sibi cognita Regna:
Indomitoque Tuas animo, Themis Anglica, Leges
Asserit, and propriae tua praefet jura saluti:
Sed cadet hoc fulmen nec totum terreat Orbem?
Legibus o MARTYR Populoque! o victima nostris
Non been caesa malis, mundoque ignota priori!
Sic prophetico quodam spirtu afflatus alia compellatione expressi. That the
child yet unborn may curs the sad events of these violent courses taken
against Me.
Ovos venturi lugete haec damna Nepotes!
Quanta etenim tantos placabunt funera manes?
Caussa Dei, Caussa haec Regum est: qua lumina condit
Quaque oritur Phoebus, tangent Tua Fata Monarchas
CAROLE, dum Coelo volvetur Lucidus axis.
At conjuratae tandem Tibi sanguine dextrae
Litabunt, proprioque cadent Tibi victima ferro,
Dumque Tuo e cinere ut Phoenix renovabitur alter
(Proxima quem Sceptri faciunt Tibi jura secundum.)
CAROLUS, atque Tuos vindex exsurget in hosts,
Tota secundabit Terrarum Machina votis
Justa ejus conata Suis, interque Nepotes
Heroum in numero potiorem sera locabit
Posteritas, Tecumque olim post fata beabit
Suprema hunc Coelique domus, Divumque Corona.
Amen, o Deus!
(O vindex scelerum Regumque custos)
To the Sacred Memory of that late High and Mighty Monarch, CHARLES the FIRST;
He who fell Jan. 30. 1648. the Princely Proto-Martyr of Great BRITAIN, etc.
NO more of Annals; let great Rome grow mute
In quoting Catiline, or recording Brute*
Britain now wear's the Sock; the Theater's clean
Transplanted hither, both in Place and Scene.
No Vail nor Periwig-vizor; Murder, here
Without a mask dare's on the Stage appear,
Out-facing even the Sun, which often has fled,
And at less crimes shrunk in his frighted head.
Rome had some Plea (though she never justified)
Those fatal Swords by which great Caesar di'd.
But here a greater far then Caesar falls
By a spurious Senate and her Cannibals.
How do that Monster-headless-multitude
Gaze on the Beams, and giddily intrude
On's Sacred Person! murdering Him before
The eyes of Heaven! and at His own Door!
A Prince so sweetly Pious, Rebels must
Confess it is they were guilty, but He Just!
And now behold the Scene! White-hall's decreed
The fatal shambles where the Lamb must bleed;
White Hall! from whence He often dispersed and hurled
His Sacred Oracles through the Peaceful world:
There with an uncontrolled Courage, (higher
Far then that Scaffold) did His Soul asspire
In glorious Elohims, making His last state
His Haleluiah, or Magnificat.
Thus Great AUGUSTUS falling, did bequeath
New Edicts to the world, even at His Death,
Such as did Screen His Memory from the rust
Of black Oblivion; and embalm His Dust.
But Thou blessed CHARLES, whom History shall style
The Princely Proto-Martyr of this Isle.
Fell'st Champion of the Church; and did make good
The Realms grand Charter sealed in Thy Blood.
And could this dismal shock of Thunder light
Only on Britain's breast? and not affright
The Universe? to let us understand,
The general Dooms-daie of the world's at hand?
Children unborn shall still bewail the time
Of this sad Hour; and deprecate the Crime
Of those dire Regicides, whose blushing guilt,
For Vengeance crie's loud as that Blood the have spilt.
Thy Cause invoke's just Heaven, and does implore
Confederate Princes to the farthest Shore
Of all the world; as far as Phoebus raie
Does guild the Zodiac, and proclaim's the day.
And yet should all these fail; Blessed CHARLES it is known
Thou'st left a Princely Progeny of Thine own.
Who 'l expiate Thy Murder, OF resign
Their own Lives too, as Offerings at Thy Shrine.
And now see! see! another Phoenix rise!
From the blessed ashes of this Sacrifice!
A Second CHARLES! who shall in fame asspire,
And grow more Mighty then His Princely Sire.
And now, O may the unanimous world inthrone
Him soon! and re-invest Him in His Own.
May He outlive old Nestor's day and go
Not hence, but clothed in a Robe of Snow;
And then when envious Heaven too shall remove
His Swaie from Earth, O may He Reign above!
And meet His Sire, wh' (having past this flood
In Robes of scarlet di'd in His own Blood)
Sit's now a Crowned Martyr, and has free
Title to add a Fourth Crown to His Three.
Sur la mort de CHARLES I. Deffunt Roy de la Grand Bretaigne.
SONNET.
ANGLOIS, est il donc vray que ce PIEUX MONARQUE
Que Trois Peuples ont veu Regner si Justement,
Ainsy q'un Criminel assiste en jugement;
Et puis souffre le coup de la Mortelle Parque?
Est il vray que Charon ose amener sa Barque,
Jusques dessus le seuil de ce Grand Bastiment
Qui fut de son Palais le plus bell ornement;
Et que son sang l'ait teint d'une Eternelle marque?
Ouy; mais malaisement chez la Posterite,
Ce recit passeroit pour vne verite,
Tant de cet attentat les coups sont effroyables:
Si la Foy n'enseignoit un Christ persecute:
Ou que lon ne s' ceust pas, Que regnersur des Il Re d'Engelterra Re de los
Diabolos El Re di Francia Re de los Asnos, etc. Carol. V.
Diables
Est un pas dangereux pour tant de Piete.
In MARTYRIUM CAROLI I.
Epigramma.
DUm Populi curas, REX, per Tua damna salutem,
Jure novo veniunt jam nova Regna Tibi;
Quarta etenim Triplici superadditur ista Coronae,
Quod moriens Populo MARTYR es atque Deo.
E vivis ereptus IIII. Kal. Febr. Anno Aerae Christianae, MDCXLIX.
In CAROLI I. obitum Epigramma.
GRex erat, and viridi carpebat gramina campo
Grex felix; fidus cui modo Pastor erat.
Lex erat, and justae lis omnis subdita legi:
Lis felix, Legis cui modo Lator erat.
Rex erat, and placido Rexit Moderamine; Pastor
Et Legis-lator (plangite) justus obit.
Nunc sine lege Duces; sed non sine lite furores;
Nunc sine Pastore est Grex, sine Rege Thronus.
Omnia, Rex, Lex, Grex, jam sunt pessundata; Terris
Quid superest? nisi Faex: Plebs fere victa jacet.
Epigramma Historicum De Termino Hilarii Juridico in Anglia intercalato, Anno
Dom. 1649.
TErminus en Hilar I fuit hoc tristissimus Anno,
Purpura Regalis tincta cruore Togae.
In terra retinent spinas Diademata Regum;
In Coelo electis grata Corona datur.
Memoriae Sacrum Optimi Maximi CAROLI I.
GReat SIR, Your pardon that my ruder Verse
Dare's with her Feet profane Your Sacred Hers;
True Grief no Manners know's; and to begin
With Courtship, were but ceremonious sin.
Whiles You survived, blessed SIR, my Loial breath
Still waited on Your Service; and since Death
(Sent by the Actors of so black a Treason,
As puzzles Faith, and quite confounds all Reason)
Has hurled You hence; You justly SIR may call
My Bodied thoughts to wait Your Funeral.
My dwindling-dwarf-like-Fancie swell's not big,
Nor know's to wear a borrowed Periwig
Of Metaphors, nor from Parnassus rise
To ransack far-fetch't Phrases from the Skies;
Since all those pidling Epithites are too brief,
Great CHARLES, to show Thy Glory, or my Grief.
Go thou grim Conqueror; search thy kingdom through,
Examine every Vrn and Pitcher too;
Taste all thy Earths, and call at every Grot,
Even those whose Names, Rust and the Worms have got;
And tell me if in all thy Dark-hous be
Snch a Prince fallen, and Prince though fallen, as He.
Greatness and Goodness too, which seldom fall
Within the Compass of the self-same Scale,
In Him were poized, and divinely met;
Whose Meekness made Him Good, and Mercy Great.
His Meekness, oh! that inexhausted Mine
And Magazine of Moral and Divine
Graces, which like the influence, and the bright
Beams of the Sun, filled Britain with their Light.
But why am I thus partial? when that all
His Thoughts, Words, Actions, were Angelical?
Which like fixed Load-stars, did direct most men
To sail by the Compass of His Life and Pen:
Each pious action was so chaste, and such
As held it sin to think, but death to touch;
His Mercy such, as if He did but live
To know His Subjects failings, and forgive.
Unheard of Love! which could offenses mask
And sooner grant their Pardon, then they ask!
Thus was His Life un-pattern'd! but His Death!
Oh how the sens which suffocate's my breath
Curdle's my blood! and, like swift poison, flie's,
In curling flames through all my Arteries!
He di'd by th'barbarous hands of such a Fry
As fed on Furies, and have dreined Dry
The Lerna of all Murders, to new-stock
Mankind with spreading Crimes; such as may mock
Preceding Treasons, and the world supply
With a strange Mould to cast all Future by:
All former Acts were fictions unto this;
Raviliacks too is a Parenthesis;
A Murder so transcendent, Annals shall
Henceforth grow faithless and Apochryphal.
But Thou blessed Martyr, who have here laid down,
And changed a Temporal for a Glorious Crown;
Have finished Thy great Work, and by the event,
Attained more then they promised, but never meant.
Rest ROYAL SIR, rest in Your Sacred Hers
While we embalm Your Memory with our Verse,
And trickling Tears, which shall like Pearls refine
Your Urn, and serve for Diamonds to your Shrine.
You need no other Monument, who have
No less then three whole Kingdoms for Your Grave:
Whiles from the melting Marble of their Eyes
Is Crystalliz'd this Epitaph Here lie's
"Honor's rich Fountain, the True Faith's Defender;
"Religion, and the Law's Prop, and Extender;
"The purest quintessence of Christian Zeal,
"Best Father both of Church and Commonweal!
"Virtues rare Pattern; Wedlocks chastest Mirror;
"Rebellions and bold Treasons, Scorn and Terror;
"The spotless Sacrifice, for the wild flood
"Of's People's loud sins. CHARLES the Great, the Good.
CHRONOSTICHON Decollationis CAROLI REGIS, etc. tricesimo die Januarii, secunda
hora Pomeridiana, Anno Dom. MDCXLVIII.
Ter Deno IanI Labens ReX SoLe CaDente
CaroLVs eXVtVs SoLIo SCeptroqVe SeCVre.

CHARLES! -- ah forbear, forbear! lest Mortals prize
His Name too dearly; and Idolatrize.
His Name! Our Loss! Thrice cursed and forlorn
Be that Black Night, which ushered in this Morn.
CHARLES our Dread Sovereign! -- hold! lest Out-lawed Sens
Bribe, and seduce tame Reason to dispens
With those Celestial Powers; and distrust
Heaven can Behold such Treason, and prove Just.
CHARLES our Dread Sovereign's murdered! -- Tremble! and
View what Convulsions Shoulder-shake this Land;
Court, City, Country, nay three Kingdoms run
To their last Stage, and Set with Him their Sun.
CHARLES our Dread Sovereign's Murdered at His Gate!
Fell Fiends! dire Hydra's of a Stiff-neck't-State!
Strange Bodie-Politick! whose Members spread,
And, Monster-like, swell bigger then their Head.
CHARLES of Great Britain! He! who was the known
King of three Realms, lie's murdered in His Own.
He! He! who lived, and Faith's Defender stood;
Die'd here to re- Baptize it in His Blood.
No more, no more. Fame's Trump shall Echo all
The Rest in dreadful Thunder. Such a Fall
Great Christendom never Pattern'd; and 'twas strange
Earth's Center reeled not at this dismal Change.
The Blow struck Britain blind, each well-set Limb
By Dislocation was lop't off in Him.
And if She yet live's, She live's but to condole
Three Bleeding Bodies left without a Soul.
Religion put's on Black. Sad Loialtie
Blushe's and Mourn's to see bright Majesty
Butchered by such Assassinates; nay both
Against God, against Law, Allegiance, and their Oath.
Farewell sad Isle! Farewell! Thy fatal Glory
Is Summed, Cast up, and Cancelled in this Story.
FINIS.
OBSEQUIES ON That unexemplar Champion of Chivalrie, and Pattern of true
Prowess, ARTHUR Lord CAPEL.
It Is falls Astronomy. -- Nor are we yet
In utter darkness, though the Sun be set;
Since Thy star-beaming-influence prove's all
Those Rules Excentrick, and Apocryphal.
You Are hight'ned by Thy Fall, and do now shine
With doubled luster, since Thy last Decline.
Bright mirror of our Sphere! who art no less
Then Valor's wonder; Virtue's Masterpiece;
Filling whole Volums with Thy Fame; to tell
The World Thy Worth was her own Chronicle:
To tell the World, those Praises in the Wars
Thou'st purchased, might be numbered with the Stars;
And had Thy well-proportion'd-Daies been Spun
Out by Thy Deeds, Thou had outlived the Sun;
Forcing the World's great Luminarie to have
His Chaos climacterick with Thy Grave.
Thus Thy renowned Meeds like Incens hurled
On flaming Altars, have Perfumed the World
With such rich Odors, that scarce Envy knew
Whether Thou were to King or Realm most true.
Let State-Chronographers admire, and plead
Those Rites they ow to Honor; when they read
Thy rare Achievements; studying to refine
The truth of Modern History by Thine.
Carthage be dumb! our Colchester stand's now
Corrival with thee, and dare's more then Thou;
And all those Punick Wars, thy Walls could boast,
Have over and over been traversed on her Coast.
Rome's three Horatii are posed; our Isle
Has bred a Capel, Lucas, and a Lisle:
Whose matchless deed's have Dubbed them with that late
And glorious title of Triumvirate;
Whiles their transcendent merit strut's, and strive's
To stand on tip-toe in Superlatives.
And still there is something more; for, what was mixed
Promiscuously in these, in Thee was fixed.
In Thee that Pythagorean Maxime's true;
And what was stale Philosophy, prove's new
Divinity, since the Souls of all those Nine
Renowned Ones Transmigrated in Thine.
But why do we Adore Thee, made immens
And far sublimed above our Sphere of Sens?
Scorning bright Obelisques of Brass, or Stone
Should raise Thy Monument, who art Thine own.
Yet should Thou exspect a Shrine on Earth, we must
Make Colchester the Exchequer of Thy Dust:
Nor is it more then reason, since 'twere pity
To give Thee a less Churchyard then that City,
TO Interr Thee in her Breaches, and o're-turn
Her stately Bulwarks, to support Thine Urn;
Whilst the thronged streets would justle to make room
And spread their Towrs, as Trophies over Thy Tomb.
But this grand Task I recommend to those,
Who can limm Fancies in more lively Prose;
Whose Rhetoric may richly guild this Pile,
And raise Invention to a lofty style;
Such as may Conjure Horror, and oblige
Faith-founder'd- Zelots to confess that Siege,
That fatal Siege, whose Trenches were or'e-spread
With mangled trunks and bodies of the Dead;
Till the discolored Earth, thus di'd in Grain,
Blush't to behold such Shambles of the Slain:
And the pale Furies stood like heartless Elvs,
Trembling, to see Men do more then Themselves.
The Center-shaking-Brass grew hot, and spoke
In Flames of Lightning, and in Clouds of Smoke;
And Charon fainted, Ferrying Souls to Hell,
When Hecatombs of the Besiegers fell.
Amidst these Tragic Triumphs did Thou rear
Thy brave Top-gallant, 'bove the reach of Fear;
Undauntedly exposing Thy bold Head
To shocks of Thunder, and thick showrs of Lead:
Those Bullets were then Tame; and we may tax
The partial Sword that spared Thee for the Ax.
The Field (the Asylum of great Spirits) clean
Is changed here; the City is the Scene;
The Cannon showed fair-plaie: But Thou were pack't
Away, not by an Ordnance, but an Act.
The Scaffold turned a Stage: Where it is confessed,
The last Act (though most Bloody) proved Thy Best:
It proved Thy solemn Coronation, since
The Yard's Thy Palace; and a Glorious Prince
Thy President: Who after Him art hurled
To meet Thy Sovereign in another World.
Transferred from Earth to Heaven, to remain
A fixed Star, and wait on CHARLES his WAIN.
OBSEQUIES Offered up to the Memory of the ever Renowned and never to be
forgotten, ARTHUR, Lord CAPEL.
DO; paddle still in Blood, for it is not strange
Now if your thirsty dropsi'd Blades do range
On the whole stock of Man; or that they spread
To Trunck and Boughs, since they have lop't the Head:
For since the KING, who like one general Soul,
Did through each nerv and agile muscle roll;
And like some public Conduit did dispense
To every Vein, both Sap and Influence;
Shine's in His Crown of Martydom above,
Guilt and enameled with the Beams of Love;
The Cement thus unfix't and slack't, we must
Needs languish in to shuffled heaps of Dust:
And as in Bodies, where the Head is lop't
From off the weeping Stem, some Spirits dropped
From that great Magazine, into each part,
And left as Legacies unto the Heart;
Contract the Joints and Hands, then make them spread
As if they caught at the dislodging Head;
So after this vast Ruin, though the Frame
Of Nature were both discomposed and lame;
Yet in this crippled Structure, there might be
Some starts and leaps, which flowed (brave Lord!) from Thee;
On whom, as some not yet discovered Sours,
Which does to the suppled Earth fresh Sap disburs,
And through her veins melt's in a purling rill,
The exspiring KING His Vigor did distill.
And as some sullen Vapor which was spun
From the Earth's course Wardrobe, by the glaring Sun,
To some wild Meteors, hover's in the Air,
And on each Cloud shed's its unravel'd hair;
But wanting Active Heat to waft it higher,
Does in dull Slime and sluggish Mists exspire:
So before CAPEL was (like the early Flower
Which ruder Hands tore from the mangled Bower)
Rent from His Bleeding stalk, we might perchance,
Like vapors winged with His brave heat, advance
Above the Common-level, yet but now
His Flames shot-up no new Supply to allow.
We crumble shall to Ruin straight, and run
Into a wild Precipitation.
And as when Morning from the Azure Towers
Powr's out the day, and pluck's out th'unfledg'd hours;
The Earth unlock's its womb, each flower unweav's
Its odorous tresses, and untie's its leaves,
That so they may be spangled by that blaze
That from the blooming Sun's gilt luster strai's;
So now when He like a nevv-budded Star
That stud's the Orb's above, does from a far
Point out his Beams to us, let their clear Light
Steer us through the perplexed maze of night;
And our benumbed and frozen Souls so thavv,
He may both our Example be and Law;
For though that Man's a world within himself;
In Him no Passion svvell'd into a Shelf
To split His even thoughts, no Rock of Pride
Did intercept or justle the free Tide
Of vvell-poiz'd actions, and no Mountain there
Was by Ambition made, or Gulf by Fear.
His beauteous Actions too without did meet,
Still in such comlie and vvell-ballanc't feet,
And were so fairly knit, you would think they would been
Each one the Transcript of His Soul within;
No Byas His Religion vvarp't avvrie
Into a crooked Excentricitie,
'Tvvas sullied with no Ends; He could not tell
How to vamp Calvin with dark Machiavel.
No Widdovvs cooler sighs did fan His Cup,
He drank in's Wine no Tears of Orphans up;
His Pregnant Fields were moist'ned by the Skies,
Not wet with shovvers rained from His Tenants eyes;
And having thus with Virtue paved the Track
Which to His Vrn did guide His footsteps back;
He, when His full-fledg'd Soul cast off her Claie,
To bathe in Tides of never-ebbing day,
Did in so soft a Calm dismiss His breath,
As if 't were His Espousals, not His Death;
And that in His cold shroud He were to meet
The Portraict only of His Genial sheet.
In Praematurum Obitum Baronis CAPEL, ET Casum Mortis-Sociorum, VII. Id. Mart.
MDCXLIX.
TRes cecidere simul, Fato non dispare, Caussa
Quamvis dissimili, Hamilton,
MARCHIO, Capel,
BARO, Holland. Capite multati in Palatii Westmon. Area Publ.
COMES;
Dispar enim fuit haec ratio, (licet omnibus idem
Supplicium inflixit praecipitata Themis;)
Quod Hamilton,
Primus meritas Tibi solvit, CAROLE, poenas,
Immerita ast Capel,
Alium MARTYRA poena facit:
Holland. Capite multati in Palatii Westmon. Area Publ.
Tertius at dubii quondam damnatus amoris,
Se Tibi nunc Sic Petrus nutantis fidei poenitentiam egit lacrymis.
moerens reddere Justa putat.
Illustrissimi Herois Domini FRANCISCI VILLIERS Epicedium.
QUisquis amicus ades, nec moestos scindere crines,
Nec pigeat madidas Ungue secare genas;
Occidit illustris jnvenum fortissimus Heroes,
Quem subito Fati carpsit acerba manus;
Ille alios tantum vicit Virtutibus omnes,
Ante alios, quantum Pegasus ibat equos.
Hei mihi! cur tetricae ruperunt fila Sorores?
Cur stabat vacua tam cito Parca colo?
Curve ferox Miles vultus laniare decoros
Sustinuit? ferro durior ipse suo;
Dulce decus Patriae! cur te temerarius ardor
In medios enses, saevaque tela tulit?
Sors levis ut solita est rapit optima, praeterit ima,
Hei mihi tam dubias injicit illa manus!
Quam vellem hostiles pro Te cecidisse cohortes;
Cum Duce non tanti tota caterva fuit:
Tu tamen, heu facinus, turmis jugulatus ab istis,
Pressisti duram sanguinolentus humum;
Nec Species, Virtusve Tibi, nec profuit Aetas;
Pro Patria (Patriae Gloria) magne jaces.
Semper honos, lauds, and splendida facta manebunt;
Nunquam Lethaeis ista dabuntur aquis.
Vos igitur tristes tandem compescite luctus,
Nec calido madidas imbre rigate genas:
Qui modo plorastis, Lacrymas teneatis, Amici;
Non potuit fato nobiliore mori.
G. F.

OBSEQUIES On the untimely Death, of the never to be too much praised and
pitied FRANCIS Lord VILLIERS.
HEnce fond Philosophy! it cannot be;
The crazie World crawl's to his last Jubilee;
And though the Circle of the Year has been
A Snake in emblem, it cannot cast his skin.
At least I cannot beleev't; when every day,
Some stately piece is swallowed up in claie;
When Cedars feel the fate of Shrubs, and when
Great Peers expire, and tamely die like men.
How could Thou else thus steal away unheard,
Without a Troop of Angels for thy guard?
Without the Artillery of the Clouds, at this
Thy great and glorious Metempsycosis?
The Age is sure forgetful; or perchance
Nature Her self lay Bedridden in a Trance,
And those Torch-Constellations which shine
At others Herses, were all set in Thine;
As if they fell with Thee, and Fate would have
Their Chaos clymacterick with Thy Grave.
But, why do I epitomize a Theme
In this small Scedule which deserv's a Ream?
A Theme whose charming Magic might inspire
A cold Carthusian; and with Enthean fire
Kindle such raptures, as may re-ingage
Those Buskin-Bonaerges of our Age
To Personate Thee with more lively tread,
And in loud language show the world who is dead.
Let brave Bellona, who has lately known
Thy Meeds, proclaim them; and with Warlike tone,
High as the sulphur-breathing-Brass, enlarge
Thy spreading triumphs, and report her charge;
She, She shall rear Thy Trophies, and displaie
Thy matchless Chivalrie, on that black day
Thou copd'st with Destiny, and did resign
Thy Temporal-Title, for a more Divine.
Nor could Thy Courage stop, or make a paus,
Where Honor called so loud; and such a Cause
As might provoke an Hermit, and make room
With His own Flame to meet His Martyrdom.
Armed with these resolvs, encountering Fear
Thou foild'st her quite, whilst in a brave career
Thou did out-dare the Destinies, and tread
A lofty measure through whole showers of Lead;
(Spite of the fury of the opposing crowd)
Cleaving Thy way, like Lightning, through a Cloud.
Thus midst these tragic Triumphs were Thou hurled
With loud Field-Musick from the affrighted world,
A Conqueror over Thy doom; witness that Peal
And vocal Vollie which chim'd forth Thy Knell;
To tell the world Thy Merit, maugre Fate
Still, still survive's, and is Invulnerate.
How large the story, or how ample; we will
Not now remember, since 'twas writ with steel
And registered in Blood. The indented Face
(Though no great Volume) was the Commonplace,
And Index of Thy Valor: every scar
Seeming at least some mistick Character;
While's we admire those Marginal Notes, and vexed,
We cannot Comment on so deep a Text.
But why do I revolv the short-writ-storie
Of fading Youth; or recollect the Glory
Of Thy blessed Beauty (which though once the Throne
Oth' Lilly and Rose) was blasted before blown?
Prepo'strous Fate! to anticipate and bring
On Winter e're Thou did enjoie Thy Spring!
To obnubilate Thy Morning-Sun, and shroud
Thy dawning splendour in a gloomie Cloud!
But ah! Complaints are shadows, and too brief
To show the world Thy Goodness or our Grief;
Nor can we circumscribe, or with weak sens
Define Thy Merit, which is so immens.
Alas! we knew 't was not the Cob-web-shrine
Of Flesh could lodge so bright a Soul as Thine;
TO was not a Cabinet of Claie could hold
So rich a Jewel; nor the brittle Mould
Of Earth contain a Seraphin, in all
His blessed dimensions so Angelical.
Why should we fondly then repine; or why
Thus pity Him, we rather should envy?
His state transcend's our Passions; nor may we
Revers or Counterman'd Heavens grand Decree:
Though We could weep a deluge to ingross
Our Griefs, and make them ample as His Loss.
And You blessed Madam (mirror of Your Sex,
And wonder of our Age) surceas to vex
Your Soul with sad Remembrance; whiles You smother
And bury quick all Comforts in a Brother.
Those Diamond-Tears You daily shed (of more
Account then all those on the Indian shore)
Are spent in vain; and You profusely prize
His loss, to waste the Treasure of Your eyes.
His Fame require's no Monumental-stone,
Nor Epitaph; why should You then bemoan
His Funeral- Obsequies, and thus make room
In The Tablet of Your Heart, to erect His Tomb,
Where You, blessed Votaress, piously resign
Your Sighs, as Incens, offered at His Shrine.
Whilst in the Torrent of these Tears You swim;
Madam, You do bewail Your Self, not Him
Who soar's above Your Sorrows; and sit's in
Commission, with some blessed Cherubin,
Enthroned in those Celestial Mansions, where
He shine's like Heaven's bright Champion, in His Sphere
On the MARTYRDOM Of His Late MAJESTY, etc.
COm, com, let us Mourn; all eyes, that see this Day,
Melt into Showrs, and Weep your selves away:
O that each Private head could yield a Flood
Of Tears, whilst Britain's Head stream's out His Blood;
Could we pay what His Sacred Drops might claim,
The World must needs be drowned once again.
Hands cannot write for Trembling; let our Eye
Supply the Quill, and shed an Elegy.
Tongues cannot speak; this Grief know's no such vent,
Nothing, but Silence, can be Eloquent.
Words are not here significant; in This
Our Sighs, our Groans bear all the Emphasis.
Dread SIR! What shall we say? Hyperbole
Is not a Figure, when it speak's of Thee:
Thy Book is our best Language; what to this
Shall e're be added, is Thy Meiosis:
Thy Name's a Text too hard for us: no men
Can write of it, without Thy Parts and Pen.
Thy Prisons, Scorns, Reproach, and Poverty
(Though these were thought too courteous Injury)
How could Thou bear? Thou Meeker Moses, how?
Was ever Lion bit with Whelps till now
And did not roar? Thou England's David, how
Did Shimei's Tongue not move Thee? Where Is the Man?
Where is the King? CHARLES is all Christian.
Thou never wanted'st Subjects, no; when they
Rebelled, Thou made Thy Passions to obeie.
Had Thou regained Thy Throne of State by Power,
Thou had not then been more a Conqueror.
But Thou, thine own Soul's Monarch, art above
Revenge and Anger, Can Thou tame Thy Love?
How could Thou bear Thy Queen's Divorce? must She
At once Thy Wife, and yet Thy Widow be?
Where are Thy tender Babes once Princely bred,
Thy choicest Jewels, are They Sequestered?
Where are Thy Nobles? Lo, in stead of these
Base savage Villains, and Thine Enemies:
Egyptian Plague! 'twas only Pharaoh's doom,
To see such Vermin in His Lodging-room.
What Guards are set, what Watches do they keep?
They do not think Thee safe, though locked in Sleep.
Would they confine Thy Dreams within to dwell,
Nor let Thy Fancy pass their Sentinel?
Are Thy Devotions dangerous? Or do
Thy Prayers want a Guard? These faulty too?
Varlets, 't was only, when they spoke for You.
But lo a Charge is drawn, a Day is set,
The silent LAMB is brought, the Wolves are met.
Law is arraigned of Treason, Peace of War,
And Justice stand's a Prisoner at the Bar.
This Scene was like the Passion-Tragedie,
His Savior's Person none could Act, but He.
Behold what Scribes were here, what Pharisees!
What bands of Soldiers! What falls witnesses!
Here was a Priest, and that a Chief one; who
Durst strike at God, and His Vicegerent too.
Here Bradshaw, Pilate there: This make's them twain,
Pilate for Fear, Bradshaw condemned for Gain.
Wretch! could not thou be rich, till Charles was dead?
Thou might have took the Crown, yet spared the Head.
The have justified that Roman Judge; He stood
And washed in Water, thou have dipped in Blood.
And where is the Slaughter-Hous? White Hall must be,
Lately His Palace, now His Calvarie.
Great CHARLES, is this Thy Dying-place? And where
Thou were our KING, art Thou our MARTYR there?
Thence, thence Thy Soul took flight; and there will we
Not ceas to Mourn, where Thou did ceas to Be.
And thus, blessed Soul, He Is gone: a Star, whose fall,
As no Eclips prove's Ecumenical.
That Wretch had skill to sin, whose Hand did know
How to behead three Kingdoms at one blow.
England has lost the Influence of Her KING,
No wonder that so backward was Her Spring.
O dismal Day! but yet how quickly gone?
It must be short, Our SUN went down at Noon.
And now, ye Senators, is this the Thing
So often declared; Is this your Glorious King?
Did you by Oaths your God, and Country mock,
Pretend a Crown, and yet prepare a Block?
Did you, that swore you would Mount CHARLES higher yet,
Intend the Scaffold for His Olivet?
Was this, Hail Master? Did you bow the knee
That you might murder Him with Loialtie?
Alas! two Deaths! what Cruelty was this?
The Ax designed, you might have spared the Kiss.
London, did thou Thy Prince's Life betraie?
What? could thy Sables vent no other way?
Or else did thou bemoan His Cross? then, ah!
Why would thou be the cursed Golgotha?
Thou once had Men, Plate, Arms, a Treasury
To bind thy KING, and have thou none to free?
Dull beast! thou should, before thy Head did fall,
Have had at least thy Spirits Animal.
Did You, Ye Nobles, envy CHARLES His Crown?
Jove being fallen the Punie-gods must down:
Your Rays of Honor are eclip'st in Night,
The Sun is set, from whence You drew your Light.
Religion Vail's her self; and Mourn's that she
Is forced to own such horrid Villainy.
The Church and State do shake; that Building must
Exspect to fall, whose Prop is turned to Dust.
But ceas from Tears. CHARLES is most blessed of men;
A God on Earth, more then a Saint in Heaven.
Vota Phileireni Anglici.
Faedere Matrimoniali, cum Gallia inito.
LIlia Carle, Foedera tulit domus Lancast. and Ebor.
Rosas Henrice, and Scotiae and Angliae.
Regna Jacobe
Junxistis; coeant Lilia, Regna, Rosae.
Associata diu maneant, unaque morentur
Grata, virescentes, Lilia, Regna, Rosae.
Sit CAROLUS Magno Major, sit Maximus, and quo
Nomine Roma stetit, Roma superba ruat.
Te Hyberniae.
Lyra mulcet, avetque Scotiae.
Leo, observantque Angliae.
Leones,
Galliae. Insignia in scuto Regio.
Lilia cumque Rosis Te recreare student:
Una Fides, consorsque Salus, Deus unus Iernum,
Scotum, Anglum, Wallum, Pace vigente beent.
Consilium Phileireni Anglici.
REgi Sceptra, Deus Regi sacraverat Enses,
(...).
Quae Regis Regi read, Deique Deo.
Vaticinii Votivi Palaemonis Coronis.
VEr rediit, spiransque Pater per cuncta vigorem
Cynthius, obliquum jam pene retrogradus orbem
Exegit; vicibusque suis nova pensa revolvens
Dispulit e Coelo nimbos, Terraque fugavit
Squallentes Hyemis vultus, Austrosque furentes:
Ex quo jam meliore olim concepta PALAEMON
Spe sua vota fovens, animo tua fata recurrit,
Gens Britonum malesana, and te miratur in illis
Non periisse malis, and adhuc spirantia vitae
Signa dare, ac propriis nondum occubuisse ruinis.
Jam prope bis senas variis erroribus actam
Latonam peragrasse Domos stellantis Olympi,
Flora redux, Floraeque suis Philomela querelis
Indivisa comes, torpenti nunciat Anglo:
Ex quo, Fatorum non sat been conscius, oris
Tunc discedenti Batavum Tibi Vota PALAEMON
CAROLE justa dedit: sed quamvis justa, supremo
Res aliter tunc visa Jovi qui fata gubernat.
Quippe ausis nimium laxas immisit habenas
Criminibus, totamque dedit cumulare furorum
Mensuram Sceleri, Vindicta ut grandior aequas
Indicet poenas Titanum crimine lapsis.
Sic visum est: ut quae nimia torpedine damni
Conscia Plebs fuerat proprii, mutabile vulgus
(Sed nimis heu! sero tandem!) sua fata doleret:
Sic visum est superis: majori ut CAROLUS astris
Insereret radio caput immortale coruscans;
Quadruplicique inter divos fulgente Corona
Martyrii aeternam sacro in Diademate palmam
Necteret, and veros ferret de Morte Triumphos.
Sic visum est: ut Tu cui Jus Virtusque secundum
CAROLE jam spes nostra, Locum Titulumque dedere,
Herculeos prima tentans cum pube Labores,
Dignus Avis and Patre, Tuis scelerata Triumphis
Colla Rebellantum calcares, Justaque tandem
Supplicia inferres vindex Titanibus istis;
Quorum ausis eversa jacent Tria Regna: prophano
Quae aggressi (ceu Thessalicis quum dextra Gigantum
Montibus avulsum substravit Pelion Ossae)
Consilio junxisse simul; Sacrumque Cacumen
Scandere in his Sceptri In binis ea de re conciliis habitis, Vxbridg. and
Westmon.
violata Pace Britanni,
Et Regum Divumque ima radice revulsas
Evertisse Domos, atque altitonantis Olympi
Derisisse minas, complesse and caedibus Orbem
Pacis amatorem, Pacisque insignia Beati Pacifici.
Sacris
Gestantem in Titulis. Ah! Quis nam talia fando
Temperet a lacrymis? Sed Tu qui fata gubernas,
Sum Pater, rerumque gyris moderamine justo
Ac sapiente praees, quondam haec versurus in usum
Permittis meliorem: atrox sua poena sequetur
Ausa nefanda, olim and seros vindicta nepotes
Abjurare Patrum detestarique docebit
Nomen, and aeternis viventia crimina chartis.
Talia, sed volvens animo majora, PALAEMON
Verba, animi testes, moestas ad Tamesis oras,
Tristior ipse ciens (nam tunc in Tamesis oris
Luctus eum tenuit, postquam Te CAROLE, nobis
Eripuit violenta manus, Caeloque locavit)
Cantabat. Sed quis valeat cantare dolendo?
Dumque silent Nymphae attonitae? vel arundine mota
Ceu cantus imitata Syrinx peccasse veretur;
Hispidus obscuro latitat dum Glaucus in antro
Fata gemens Britonum: dum sparsae hinc inde Napeae
In fontes oculos vertunt, Dryadumque choreae
In cursus incompositos, and Panis amores
In luctus abeunt; dum Nereus ipse Tridentem
Excussum cecidisse timet; dum stagna profundis
Pene refusa vadis Divisos orb Britannos
Concutiunt, mersamque videt sub pondere Gentem
Quam mage dilexit terris ille omnibus unam.
Talia quis valeat calamos inflare videndo?
Quis lacrymas cohibere? istas linque ergo PALAEMON
Et Batavum citus adnando te transfer in oras.
Hic and enim amissi radians ut Imago Parentis
CAROLUS alter adest, cujus spes Gloria nostras
Eriget exoriens, Tempestatumque furentes
Dispellet nimbos, and reddet gaudia Coelo
Atque solo Britonum, postquam satis ira Deorum
Saevierit, Dextraque Jovis jam fracta revellent
Pectora vindictam minitantes sontibus ignes.
Hic erit and votis locus amplior, hic and Apollo
Agnataeque novem, tranquilla Pace fruuntur,
Litora tuta silent illic. Dumque ora tueri
Principis and sacro dabitur Tibi lumine vultus
Posse frui tandem meliores fistula cantus
Exeret, and calamos inflabunt vota, PALAEMON,
Tunc mage certa tuos; seu se se accingere Marti
Ille paret, laesosque Patris cum sanguine manes
Lustrare, ac, Vmbris offerre piacula Tantis:
Seu Pedibus prostrata ferox Audacia, Sacram
Porrigat, Illiusque legate Clementia, Olivam.
Ad ANGLOS jam novennali Bello Civili inter se dissidentes. (...).
TErtia ter jam dissidiis Civilibus aestas
Exarsit, nec Hydrops spoliis discordia vestris
Insanam prope rupta sitim satiare valebit,
O Britones! certe vos infelicia Trojae
Fata manent, decimum si tandem insanus in annum
Vos furor hic rapiat, nec saevo parcere ferro
Pacis amor, Divumque metus, Rectique cupido
Edoceant, propriae metam and posuisse ruinae.
Una medela tuis superest tantum, ANGLIA, damnis:
Da Regi Sua Jura Pio, da Justa PARENTI.
FINIS.

