Opobalsamum Anglicanum: AN ENGLISH BALM, LATELY Pressed out of a Shrub, and
spread upon these Papers, FOR The Cure of some Scabs, Gangreeves and Cancers
indangering the Body of this Commonwealth; and, to whom it is now tendered, by
the VVELL-AFFECTED English, in a Double-Speech, disjunctively delivered, by one
of their Fellow-ship, both to the Faithful, and Malignant-Members of the
Representative-Body of this Kingdom.

Penned, by the Author of Britains Remembrancer GEO: WITHER Esquire.

Psalm: 141.5,6. Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be a kindness; and
let him reprove me, and it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break
my head, etc,

When their Judges are overthrown in stony places, then they shall hear my
words, etc.

Printed in the Year, 1646.

Opobalsamum Anglicanum. OR, An English-Balme, lately pressed out of a Shrub,
etc.
THE PREFACE.
GReat hopes I had, of perfecting, e're this,
My VOX-PACIFICA, and songs of PEACE:
For, FAIRFAX, with his Victories, begun,
So stoutly, and successefully, went on,
That, neither Summers heat, nor Winters cold,
Brigade, nor Army, Fortified Hold,
Nor Force, nor Policy; No, nor their wiles,
Who did oppose, in secret, all the whiles,
Could bring his brave procedeings to a stand;
Till he had marched quite throughout the Land,
As in a Triumph; And, had brought even those
Presuming, and proud Bragadochean-Foes,
(Who had despised, and slighted his beginnings)
To be the sad Spectators of his winnings;
And, to be prostrate-suiters, unto them,
For Life, and Mercy, whom they did contemn.
Our BRETHREN, also, and their General,
If, we impartially consider all,
From first to last (and, mar not things, in making,
By rashly misbelieving; or mistaking)
Have greatly added, to the hope of that,
Which, I, and all good men have aimed at.
At least, I think so; and will so believe,
Till I shall know, that they my hopes deceive;
For, I my duty, shall discharge the better:
And, if they fail, their shame will be the greater.
Our PARLIAMENT, has also, done, what they
With so distempered a Body may,
(And so dismembered) laboring about
The Publike-welfare; and, in working out
Her Saving-Health, against those interruptions
Which are without; and all those hid corruptions
Within her Members, hindering the success
Of their Designs, and our desired Peace:
And, I have waited, now, a compleat-Yeare,
To hear that VOICE proceed, which I did hear
So long ago; and, which, had then proceeded,
If Justice had been done, and Mercy heeded
But, all this time, though often aside I, went
(And, many an hour my best endeavors bent)
To harken out, and bring unto this Nation,
The longed for News of Reconciliation,
No sound, I had thereof; yet, every day,
I heard those Rumors, wherewith others ^ay,
And, do delude themselves; and, must, perchance,
Till they repent their wilfull-Ignorance,
And take that course, which Avarice, and Pride,
Has made them wave, and, hitherto deride.
As when a Surgeon, who has undergone
A Cure, and, therein, his endeavor done
According to the Art by him professed:
When, he, the sore has searched, clens'd, and dressed,
With Tents, and Plasters proper thereunto,
(And, all things else, befitting him to do)
If, on the Wound, his Medicine works naught
Of that effect, which, thereby has been sought;
But, keeps it at a stand, or, makes it worse:
He, presently, begins another course;
And, if that, also, fails him, grows assured,
It is a Cancer, hardly to be cured;
And, may become a Gangreeve, which will stay
His Patient, if it be not cut away.
So, I, observing well, how many ways
The healing-hand of Providence, now, lays
His Plasters on our wounds; and, yet, how far
Our Maladies, from perfect healing ^re:
I, searched for the Cause, and, quickly found
There was Malignant-matter in the Wound,
Which would into a Cancer, be corrupted:
And, peradventure (if not interrupted,
By timely care) into a Gangreeve grow,
Which, will effect the Bodies overthrow:
Or, else (beside much trouble, grief, and cost)
Occasion many Members to be lost.
Which, when I had discovered; my true zeal,
(Although I may have little thank to deal,
In such a Cure) provoked me unto
That, which, most Friends and Strangers use to do
When one is fallen sick: That is, to tell
What, they believe or know, may make him well:
And, I conceiving somewhat to that end,
Would now, perform the duty a Friend.
A dangerous Disease brooks no delay:
I will not, therefore, trifle time away
In useless Prefaces: but, with what speed
Is possible, will, to the Cure proceed.
And, lo; the Simple, whence we will enforce
A Balm to cure it, shall be this Discourse.
The WELL-AFFECTED, having suffered wrong,
By some, too soon entrusted, and too long,
About those Cures, for which, with joynt-consent
Our State-Physitians called a Parliament:
And, they well knowing, that, this Double-Colledge,
Has neither been, through want of Care or Knowledge,
Defective in their duty, or unjust;
(Although some Individuals faild their trust)
Were studious, how, a course they might invent,
To have the Trust-infringers roundly shent,
Yet, all their Faith-full-Friends, kept free from blame:
And, Providence did thus effect the same;
(By means of one among them, who intends
To lose himself, e're they shall miss their ends)
Upon a time (which I remember not)
The Well-affected-Partie, had the lot,
To meet with (but, I know not where it was)
The Members of both Houses, in one Place;
And, finding some occasion of their stay,
(I know not how) till they their minds might say;
They, having, intellectively, collected
The WORTHIES, from the Persons-misaffected;
And, with humility, attention prayed,
First, to the Faithfull-Members, thus they said.
The Speech of the VVell-affected-English, to the Faithful Peers, and to their
constant Trustees, being Members of the honorable House of Commons.
STARS, of the great, and lesser magnitude;
Behold us not, as if we would intrude
Upon your Orbs; nor think, this Throng appears
To interrupt the motion of your Spheres;
To hinder your aspects; or, take offense
At any late effect, or influence,
Derived from your Power; or, at ought done
By you, in both; or either House alone,
When, violence their motion suffers not,
Whereby prodigious things may be begot:
For, so heroic, and so noble, ever,
Has been your prudence, and your stout endeavor,
To keep upright the wheels of Charles his waine;
And, every harmfull Vapor to restrain,
Exhald by Meteors, to the wrong of them,
Whose habitations are within your Clyme;
That, we confess, with praise, and admiration,
Your constant Labors, in the preservation,
Of this distracted Empire; and, present
All humble, and all due acknowledgment,
For persevering, through those many stops,
Obstructing the fruition of our hopes.
We are not ignorant how many Fears,
How many reall-mischiefes, Rubs, and Snares,
Great hazards, hardships, murm'rings, calumnies,
Scoffs, and almost-Impossibilities,
You, with untired constancy have past,
In hope, to wrestle out, for us, at last,
The Blessing we desire: And, we confess
You, are the means of what we, yet, possess
We do ascribe, as to the Second-Cause,
The preservation, of our Lives, our Laws,
Our Conscience, Liberties, and of what e're
To us, or ours has been esteemed dear,
To be from you: And, we confess, likewise,
That, in your Honor, and your safety, lies
Our safety, and our Honor; and, that, we
In your well-being, judge our Weal to be;
And, every danger, and disgrace of your,
To be a danger, and disgrace, of our.
Excuse us therefore, if the Double-due
Of what, we owe, both to our selves, and you,
Produces an Attempt and an effect.
Which you do nor imagine nor expect;
And drew us to the pardonable Fault.
Of making this unlooked-for Assault
Upon your patience; since, the thing we do,
Is that, which we appear obliged unto;
And, tends to naught less, then the preservations
Of you, of us, and all the British-Nations.
Suspect not, our assembling, thus, together;
Nor look upon us, as if we were either
Of their Confederacy, or their Condition,
Who come to raise an uproare, or Sedition;
Or, to compel you forceably, to do
What our wild Fancy hurried us unto:
But, rather, pleased be to understand,
That, we are of those people in the Land;
Who are most peaceable; and, well content
To be obedient to that Government,
Which does preserve the Freedoms of the Nation,
Continuing firmly on the first Foundation;
And, free from Superstructures, which pervert
The works of Nature, by the Quirks of Art.
We are no Partners, with those Factious-Fellowes,
Who bring the fuel, or, who blow the bellows
Of Civill-Discords: nor, of those, that, Dary
Their Principles, when their Designs miscarry:
Nor of their Creed, who will believe no more,
Then, what they have believed heretofore:
Or, what their Grandfires did believe, of old;
Or, what shall by their Priest, to them be told:
Nor are we of their mind, who, therefore do,
What they have done, because, they have done so:
But, we are men, who, good advisement had
Of what we do (though some, yet, think us mad;)
Men, that, have all our best endeavors vowed,
To loose no Freedom Reason has allowed;
Men, who resolve to seek a perfect way;
To walk it, as uprightly, as we may;
To keep unchanged, GOD'S and Natures Laws,
And, change all other things, as there is cause.
SIRS, we are they, who, for the Common-right,
Began to speak, e're we began to sight;
Some of us, are well known to be the men,
Who, with the Purse, the Person, and the Pen,
Engaged our selves, this Quarrel to defend,
Before we had an Army, or a Friend,
To aid, or second us. We did expose
Our selves, against the violence of those,
Who exercise Oppressions of all sorts,
In Monopolies, Arbitrarie-Courts;
And upstart Offices; although it cost
Our liberties, and our preferments lost,
Whilst they, who such rewards to us afforded
Were for their Villainies, enricht and Lorded.
And, we are they who, but a while ago,
When Tyranny did so presumptuous grow,
(And, to such impudency, as to dare
Improve wrongs-private, into open-warre)
Who did oppose it: yea, when Superstition
Was, to oppress us, joined in Commission
With Tyranny, and these came both together
So furiously, and boldly marching hither,
That, justly, you began to be a fraid
Of Publike-Ruine, and called out for aid;
We were the men; even we, who first of all
Came in, to your Assistance, at your call.
And, when we came, we came not backward, in,
Or, as if we insensible had bin
Of your, as our own dangers: But, came flying,
As if we heard our Wives, or Children crying,
Come help, or we are murthred! without stay,
Our Callings, and Estates we flung away:
Our Plate, our Coin, our Jewels, and our Rings,
Arms, Ornaments, and all our Pretious-things,
To you we brought as bountifully, in,
As if they had old rusty horshooes bin:
Yea, (GOD is witness with us) we, our lives,
Our Parents, our dear Children, and our wives,
Have often valued at so low a rate,
And, so neglected them to serve the State,
At your Command; as if they had not seemed
Things, worthy to be any whit esteemed.
Through heat and cold; through dangers and through Fears;
Through wa^ts and wounds; and through swords and spears.
Yea (which is worse) through their neglects and scorn,
For whom (in part) we, all these things have born,
We have adventured; that, we might-uphold
Your Honor, to the uttermost we could.
Which we repeat not, to derive from thence,
Selfe-praise; but, to beget a confidence
In you, this day, that, we appear as Friends
With our first-love, and with as loyal ends
As when we first came in to offer to you,
The services, we able were to do you:
And, we are still resolved, if need appear,
To be as free, and forward as we were,
Your Dignity, and Honor to maintain;
Yea twice mote, yet, and three times thrice, again.
If you (which we suspect not) shall go on,
With faithfulness, to do the work begun;
And, shall nor faint, nor fail, in your pursuit
Of what, you are about to execute:
We do engage, with you, to fall or stand;
To give assistance, both with heart, and hand,
To all your just Designs; and, settle them
In spite of those, who shall our hopes contemn.
Yea, whether your Antagonists are they,
Who, here at home, your Counsels would betray;
Or, Enemies who, from abroad, shall dare
Invade our Freedoms; we resolved are
To stand the shock, of all their threats, and powers,
Be they States, Prelates, Kings, or Emperors,
Or, altogether: For, what, hard can be
To these three joined? GOD, and You, and We?
But, You, and We, (as reasonable men)
Must, to GODS help, add our endeavors, then;
Or else, both You and We, in vain presume
That, GOD our Coadjutor will become.
Our best endeavors, too, must be employed,
Where we most likely are to be destroyed;
Which, otherwhile, he better may discern
Who trims the Sails, then he that Guides at Stern,
You are the Brain, the Liver, and the Heart
Of this great Body, and the Vitall-part
Which gives it motion: But we are the Hands,
Whereby it Acts; The Feet whereon it stands;
The Bulk and Bones which must the burdens bear:
And, We with You, may claim to have a share
In all the senses; and, without offense
In that, which has been called the Common-sence.
By us together, therefore, and alone,
Our Duties must respectively be done,
According to the Common-Interest,
(And to the Faculties, by us possessed,
United, and a sunder) with such care
To heed each others counsels, doubts, and Fear,
And with such mutual readiness to add
All comforts, all good helps that may be had,
And all endearements, which may knit together
Our Forces, and our Loves to one another,
That, none may come between us; or, find way
To mix with us, our Counsels to betray.
This last, will more endanger us, then all
The strength of Spain and France united shall,
If we prevent it not: And, there is need
That, hereof, at this present, we take heed:
For, of this Evil, to our grief, we view
Both symptoms and effects; yea, not a few.
Most honored Peers and Commons; whilst you wake,
And watchful are, that we no harms may take,
We sleep not so supinely, as to slight
Our own security, or, that which might
Endanger You: And, by this means, our eyes
And Ears, have made some late discoveries,
Which, your employments for the Publike-weale,
(Or trust-abusing friends) from you conceal,
With such fair guildings, that, both You and we
Are lost, unless, they quickly heeded be;
And, heeded so, that, likewise, you provide
A remedy, and see the same applide:
For, we have good Provisions, often, and many;
But, little execution made of any.
Your Courage, and your wisdom we confess,
Your Piety, your Care, and watchfulness,
In your own Persons; and, that, you oppose
With good success, your most Malignant Foes
Which are abroad; by means of that dispis'd,
(Yet valiant Army) lately modelliz'd,
In Gods own time: But, noble SIRS, there be
Worse Foes within, then those abroad you see:
And such they be, as do require you should
As much reduce your Houses, if you could,
As you have done your Army: For, we fear
Disguised Foes do lurk among you there,
Which need a Privy-search; and one to show them,
Who by their Spots and secret marks, does know them
Foes, that, have put your Friends quite out of grace;
Plead Privilege of Person, and of Place:
Such, as by some well-doing, now and then
Have done more harm, then Troops of fighting men,
And Private-Priviledges, have enjoyd,
Till Publike-Freedomes, are almost destroyed.
Hic Dolor, WORTHIES! all our doubts are here;
Hence, is our greatest Grievance, and our Fear.
We slight as Trifles, all the Frights and Foes,
Which, some, for our discouragement propose
To be considered on. We slight all that,
Wherewith we have been menaced of late;
As Well the threats of open-Foes, at home;
As those, which from Beyond Sea hither come.
The Cavaleers, who swagger up and down,
And mix among us, now, in every Town,
And Country village (with their foolish brags)
We fear no more, then when their Feather wags.
Although the King should frowardly be bent
Against the Propositions you have sent,
Or, by delaying his assent, delay
That Blessing, which we look for every day;
It would not startle us: Nor, do, we fear
Those Inconveniences which may appear
Drawn on us, by the Prince his running from
The Kingdom, whereto he was praid to come,
To make a misadventure into France:
Nor, how, the Queen her Projects may advance
By that Occasion: For, GOD'S providence
Has, for our good, it may be, sent him hence:
And, we may find, when all accounts are cast,
Their Losses, will be greatest at the last.
Our hearts it not a whit discourage can,
That some have hopes, the Hollander or Dane,
May by persuasions, their own fingers burn
To do their Neighbors, here, an evill-turne,
Which, (ere the Cup, now filled, has gone round)
Unto their own destruction may redound:
Nor fear we those Alliances, with which
Great Princes, one another do bewitch,
And, knit themselves together in a band,
Which binds them, like a Cable made with Sand.
Nor are we frighted, with the Leagues of those,
Which have been old confederated Foes
Against this Kingdom, though we often hear
Of mighty men, who, in their Cause appear;
And, of great sums, raised by their Munks and Friars
(Whose brats, men say, sit by their neighbors fires)
Though Fame reports of many Horse and Men,
Which they will set aflote (they know not when)
With Ships and Arms, and other things in hope,
Beside the Curse and Blessing of the Pope,
We fear them not: for GOD, before they come,
May, peradventure, find them work at home;
Or they will (as of old) but make a crack,
And stinck, and smoke a little, and fall back:
Since, they who act their Catholick-Designes
Observe the Principle, Self-love injoynes,
As men do here; and will no longer drive
Their neighbors Car; then they thereby may thrive:
Yea, we our selves, by dear experience, know
That, Aid soon promised, is in coming, slow.
Nor fear we, that, our Army, or the City,
(As they who more suspicious are then witty,
Suspect of late) will any thing assay,
But, that, which they with your good liking may,
Whilst firm to your own Principles you stand;
And, act not with your left-malignant hand.
Nor do we fear a breaking with the Scot;
For, greater cause of fear they give us not,
By ought we see then some of us have given
To them, of late; So, we and they are even,
In giving Cause; as, we hereafter shall
In ruins be, if we asunder fall.
Nor fear we (though revived among us are,
Old-Prophesies, which put Young-fooles in fear)
That they who do with Ireland, now, begin,
Shall not give off, till England they do win:
For, till our wickedness does here increase
To equal us with them, in barbarousnesse,
(And bloody crying-sinnes) there is no dread,
Of being, by those Bloodhounds conquered,
Or, any other; if we will prevent
The threatened Plagues, by being penitent;
And, ere it be too late, some course foresee
To escape those Foes, that mixed among us be.
These are the Foes, whom most of all we fear,
And, those, of whom we wish you to beware.
For, without these, all other, outward F^s,
Would prove like rags, set up to fear the ^rowes;
And, harm us, by their furiousness, no more,
Then Paper-guns discharged against the shore.
Nay, other Foes would be occasion, rather,
To make us prudently more strength to gather;
Arm us within, against our Foes abroad;
And, make us fly unfainedly to GOD.
But, these, if long connived at, will be able
To make the meanest Rascals formidable,
That shall oppose us: These, will skrew into us,
If suffered) Principles, that, will undo us
Without another Foe, and draw us, on,
To trust in our own wits, as they have done;
And leave our Faith and confidence in GOD,
To seek our happiness, in flesh and blood:
These, have, already, made us, grow afraid
Of those, that are our Friends, and bring us aid;
Yea, fearful of our selves; nay, of our shade,
And, things, by mere imagination, made.
These, will deprive us, e're perceived they are,
Both of the Bones and sinews, of the War;
Steal from us, to be Factors for their ends,
Our Wives, our Children, and our bosome-friends;
Enfeeble, by degrees, the publike-strength,
And, altogether, ruin us at length.
That, you may know, we speak the truth of these;
Observe it, now, in practice, if you please:
For, you your selves, have seen with lamentations,
Their practices, and their prevarications.
Behold, your Friends and servants are disgraced;
Malignants, in Authority, are placed;
They, who inform you, how we are abused,
Are, for Suborners, shamelesly, accused,
And, voted such, without due proof or hearing;
Or, any probability appearing.
They, who came, first, our Freedoms to redeem,
Are set among the hindmost, in esteem:
Even by their prevalency, who, conceal
Their disaffections, to the Commonweal.
These, by their cruelty, injustice, pride,
And wicked practices, have justifide
All Courts and Persons, that corrupt have bin,
Before this Reformation did begin:
And, these, by fooling some, and failing more;
By making Villains rich, and good men, poor;
By sleighting others; by oppressing many,
And, seldom doing Justice unto any,
Have so displeased, and enraged so,
The generality, that, mad they grow;
And, are upon the point, if none prevent,
Of showing symptoms, of their discontent.
And, upon whom, do your Malignants lay
The blame of this? who, do these (think you) say,
Is cause of all our Troubles, and distractions?
Of our oppressions, and our large exactions,
But, even this Parliament? nay, many a one,
Who for this Parliament, has said and done,
And suffered much; begins to think the same,
And, that, the best among you are to blame,
In most that is amiss: because, they see
Their known Oppressors, kept among you be.
What would this come to, if the many cries,
Of men oppressed, should make the People rise?
And, like a furious whirlwind, hurry hither,
Newters, Malignants, Friends and Foes together,
In such a posture, as a Multitude
Disordered comes? how, could it be withstood?
What, could be done or said, that, might assuage
The roarings, of such Waters, when they rage?
Then, what, your packt and false Committees vote,
Would not be valued at an old cracked groat:
Nor would the people, in their fury hear you,
Although both Houses, should assent to clear you.
None, would be able to distinguish, then,
Betwixt the Faithful, and the Faithless men,
Who, had occasioned this: But, while you have
Their Company, their sins to you will cleave;
And, nothing will be able to prevent
Your sharing, in their shame and punishment:
For, these, we fear, would hardly be so tame,
As He, who, but to seize Five Members came.
Or, if the offenders, who, now home are brought,
Should practice (as it is likely some are taught)
To work upon the peoples discontent,
And, so much their distempratures foment,
As, that, they should withdraw away from you,
Their former Love; or, their obedience due,
To your Commands: or, make them colder, in
Their zeal, then they, in former time, have bin;
How, would it all our present hopes endanger?
How, would it hearten an invading-stranger?
How, would it please, and reincourage those,
Who seem your Friends, but, till they may be Foes?
And, then, how nimbly would your False ones prove,
That mischief, for their purpose, to improve?
How quickly, then, would many turn upon you,
Who, hitherto, have outside-service done you?
How many scandals, would there, then, be raised,
From actions, which are, at this present, praised*
How many flatring Priests, who, now applaud
Your courses? and, ascribe the praise and laud
Which you deserve; would say as much for them,
Whose practices, both you, and they condemn?
And, then, what will it profit those among
Your Members, who delight in doing wrong,
That they when an apparent wrong they do,
Shall add a greater injury thereto,
To clear themselves of what they were accused?
What, will it profit them, to have abused
The well-affected, by unjust proceeding,
And false reports, the Parliament misleading,
To cast a heavy censure upon those
As wilful Malefactors, or, as Foes,
Who, if impartially they had been heard,
Instead of punishment should have reward?
What will it them avail, by saving, thus,
Their credit for, a while, by wronging us,
If they at last, be to those Judges turned,
By whom their power and censures will be scorned?
Excuse us, if our love and faithful care
Compel us, plainly to express our fear,
By these Expostulations; and to vent
Our counsels thus, beyond all president:
For, neither have our dangers, nor our crimes,
Had any president in former times;
Nor can we think our selves, from treason free,
If, in these perils, we should silent be.
Oh! let us not be judged to exceed
Our Bounders, at a time of so much need;
Nor, suffer us, who seek but to maintain
Your honor, and your lives, to speak in vain:
But, rather, purge, or cure, or cut away
Your Gangreev'd-Members, with what speed you may.
If, you suppose there are no such among you,
As we suspect; that, thought will greatly wrong you.
And, bring you all in danger, by degrees,
Of dying without sense of your disease.
You know, there have been breakers of their trust,
And, many Members heretofore unjust
In both your Houses: And, why may not there
Be such among you, as aforetime were?
Nay, who can think there are not, who does see
What oppositions, yet, among you be?
For, where much disagreement, see you shall,
There, out of question, some are naught, or all;
Since bitter Factions, rarely have been made,
But, where are to be found, both good, and bad,
Or all corrupted. And, the man who says
That, none, among you, walks corrupted ways,
Is, doubtless, one of those, who has deserved,
To have his ways and walkings well observed.
Are none of those, think you permitted, yet,
In either House of Parliament, to sit,
Who, when the City should have been betrayed,
Did know of it? think you, when Waller said,
(To strengthen his Confederates) that, he
Knew many, who thereto, would aiding be
In either House? think you, he should have had
His pardon; if none feared he could have made
The saying true? Or, that, he naming none,
Should, into banishment, so cheap have gone,
Unless, because, he could have named so many,
That, if the Houses should have questioned any,
It might have brought upon us, at that season,
A danger, almost equalling the Treason?
What ere ye think, we think, this was the cause,
Why he, who was in breaking of the Laws,
The Principal, escaped with life, when they
That Accessaries were, their debts did pay:
And, are we bound to think now Wallers gone,
That, here, of his Confederacy are none,
While we perceive Delinquents so defended,
As yet, they are, and we so ill befriended?
Who, in both Houses, would have scorned more
To hear such questions asked, heretofore,
Then Strafford and the Prelate, who, are now
A headless pair? And, which is he of you
Among the Commons, who enjoyed a name
More honorable, and a fairer fame
Then Hotham had? which of you stood so strong
A charge as he? and, held it out so long
Without recoyling? Or, engaged this Nation
Unto him, by a greater obligation,
Then he did, for the time? And, yet, at last,
You saw he fell; because, he had not plac'^,
The Structure, (though 'twere strong) upon those rocks,
That could abide reiterated shocks.
And, if men, in desert so eminent,
(Till we discovered in what path they went)
Fell from that bravery in resolution,
And, so much constancy in execution,
Then well may we distrust that, some of those
Who, at this present make fair seeming shows,
May possibly be false? At least, when they
Have trodden heretofore beside the way,
And, are at present probably suspected;
Though, they in some things, faithfully have acted?
Since, we have often, experience had, that, none
Have to the Commonwealth, more mischief done,
Then some, who, for a while, have, had the fame
Of Patriots; and, did but play that game,
Till they had opportunity, to catch
That grace at Court, for which they lay at watch.
And wherefore should it seem to wrong the rest,
If, we have jealousies of some expressed,
Who gave us cause? (And, if no cause there be)
What mean those symptoms, which, thereof we see?
Wherefore, do some of you, your selves bewail,
As if you felt some limbs of your to fail?
Why do you halt, sometimes, and are so slow,
At other times, when you should faster go?
And, find defects among you, now and than,
Which frustrate good designs, do what you can?
Wherefore, so frequently, do you divide,
As if you had a Palsy, on one side?
And, often, have so much ado to stay
Your Votes, from running on the left-hand-way?
Yea, wherefore, do the best among you find
Some failings, of your fellows, in this kind,
If none be questionable? Or, if we
Offend, in saying such among you be,
Why, are there daily, strivings in your womb,
As if Rebecca's twins, again, were come
To be new born? and, to afflict the Mother,
By struggling how, they may supplant each other?
Why, are complainings, if no wrongs be done?
Who can Oppressors be, if, there be none
Within your Houses? Or, if none of your
Corrupted-members, have abused their Power?
Since, all Oppressors, every other where,
May have, or, ought to have, redresses there?
As Samuel said to Saul; if none are spared
Whom GOD condemns, whence are these bleatings heard,
Which fill our cares? How, come the Amalakites
To be so jocund, and the Israelites
So much dis-heart'ned? What madmen are they,
Who bring Petitions, almost every day,
Against your Members? And, wherefore do some
(Although, they prisoners for it are become)
Still prosecute their charge, and Plaints, as far
As men imprisoned enabled are,
Against those men; if, really they be
From Guiltiness, and just Suspicion free?
And, why, are not Accusers daily heard,
That, knaves may punished be, and goodmen cleared?
If, all are in their actions so upright,
Why do not they, on whom aspersions light,
Offer themselves to trial by the Laws,
According to the merit of the Cause,
Without respect of Persons; that, the greev'd
May in their sufferings duly be releev'd?
The mouth of clamor stopped, if she has made
An outcry, when no cause, at all, she had?
And, that, all men who truly guiltless are,
May not in scandalls, with men guilty, share?
Why should you, like the Benjamites connive
At wickedness, until Gods Justice drive
The much incensed-people, of the Land,
To come, and to require it, at your hand?
Nay we draw nearer: Why, have you so long,
Pursued the King, because he did us wrong,
To keep from censure, those, who merit blame;
If, you your selves, have done the very same?
Why, may not we as justly question them,
Who break their trust to us; as, you do him?
And, hope, that, GOD will find us out a way,
VVereby, the Commonwealth deliver may
Her self from those, that, her Trust-breakers be,
(In most convenient time) as well as he,
Gave us this Parliament, even when else, none,
Knew how, without Rebellion, to have done,
What, now, we do? although the King had broke
That Trust, wherewith, the Crown he undertook.
Consider this; and, keep your selves, and us
From straights, and courses, which are hazzardous,
Least you both loose the glory you have got,
And, feel a mischief, when you fear it not.
For, if you do not wicked men protect;
Yet, while their prosecutions you neglect,
You may incur the curse of their offense,
Who do the work of God, with negligence;
And to destruction, all your friends expose,
By being too indulgent to your Foes.
Let GOD, or Baal be served: For, hate we do
Those, that are always halting between two.
All they, who in simplicity of heart,
Adhere to one, though to the worser part,
Are, so far in the way of walking right,
That those we hate not, though with them we fight.
Nor shall we fear, when reconciled these be,
But, that, they will be found as true as we.
Take not we pray you, this free-powring out
Of Gileads Balm, as if we went about
A needless Cure: Or, would have men believe
We did anoint, when blows, and wounds, we give;
Nor think, we rub too hard: For, we are friends
(What ere we may be thought) whose love intends
Your honor with your weal: And, having found
How to advance them, do as we are bound.
We are no Mountebanks, who would endear
Our Surgery, by putting you in fear
Of greater dangers, then indeed are found:
But, we would search the bottom of the wound;
Because, we cannot perfectly be healed,
Till all our kown corruptions, are expelled.
We know no means of saving you, and us,
But, by plain dealing; and, by speaking thus;
That you may take some wise, and speedy course,
To stop this mischief, ere it grows worse.
The Common remedies, are at a loss;
The Sanctuary gold, is mixed with dross;
And, there is no means to part them, which we know
But, by attempting that, which we do now:
Nor can you save your honor, (though you save
Your selves) if long, you ill companions have.
For, what your evil Members, have mis-done,
Upon your score, is every day set on,
As well as your best deeds: and, in your faces
Their dirt is hourly fl^ng, to your disgraces.
Those Resolutions which conduce unto
The Publike-weale, want but a Voice, or two,
Sometimes, of being lost: such are their wiles,
Or, such their number: And, if otherwhiles
They carry on a Vote, in your despite,
That seems not to advance the publike-right,
You bear the blame thereof, as much as they:
Yea, to the Parliament, the People lay,
Not only, that which is concluded on
In either House, although the same were done
By some unjust contrivance: But, it bears
The faults of every Member, too, of theirs,
Whose life is scandalous; yea, it pertakes
In blame with him, for each known escape he makes.
For, when abroad the Common People hear
A Member of your Houses, lie, or swear,
Or, some of them, no conscience make to pay
Their long due debts; when, well enough they may;
Or, see them reeling out of Tavern doors;
Or, impudently, courting of their Whores;
Or some such way employed: Oh! how quick,
They shoot at you their Arrows! and, how thick!
Some say in scorn; and some, in discontent;
These, are the Members of our Parliament:
These, are those Worthies, that, must set us free
From Tyranny: These, our Deliv'rers be:
These are the Chosen ones, who to this Nation
Must bring the blessing of a Reformation:
Yea, these, whom here you thus debauched see,
Pertaining, to the Honest-party be,
Or to the Godly; the Malignant says:
And, on them, descants many other ways,
With such like scoffings, as no modest ear
Can without grief, or indignation hear.
All which, reflects on you, who are the best;
And, so it will, till you reform the rest.
How can you be insensible of this?
And, since an injury supposed it is,
To let aspersions, on one Member fall;
Why brook you them, who scandalize you all?
Why keep you those unquestioned, who are thought
Blame-worthie; till, the blame on all is brought?
If you seem all concerned, though but one,
Be some way touched, as if he had misdone;
How much more are you scandalized if they
Who justly do accuse, have cause to say,
They could not have their Informations heard;
Nor legall-tryall; nor, their due regard?
How does this scandalize you, if, when we
(As by our Covenant injoynd we be)
Have Informations brought, which closely touch,
On what concerns the publike-safety, much,
We have, not only, waited with submission,
And hearing sought by Speech, and by Petition;
But, persevered, also, weeks of days,
Nay, months and years; and, then, tired with delays,
Gave off, because, we none, that while, could find,
To heed our Cause, or, bear the same in mind?
How scandalous is this? It Is either true,
That, in your Houses, there be very few
Affecting Justice; or, they hardly found;
Or, that in their employments they abound;
Or, else, that they perceive the question'd-crime,
Would come to trial, in an evil time.
This saves your Credits: For, God has a season
For every thing: and (though you see no reason,
Of such, and such obstructions, or delays)
Does all things timely; and walks prudent ways.
And, peradventure, he will now, begin
To do, what has so long deferred bin.
Work you, with him; as, also, we intend;
And, he shall give our hopes, a happy end.
Take not thereat offense, as if, we wrong you,
When we affirm there are false-men, among you.
Why seems the scandal, any whit the more,
To have this spoken at the Senate-doore,
Then, to be made the common talk, of all
Who travail through the streets, or walk the hall?
What are men less dishonored, though none dare,
In print, to publish, that, they Traitors are?
If every man, almost, who hears their names
Thinks, knows, and speaks of their deserved shames?
And, wonders, that, no Member, no Committee,
No County, Corporation, Town, or City,
Takes thought to question them? or, forth to learn
The truth of that, which does so much concern
The Common-Peace? For, it is no work for one,
Except for him that means to be undone:
So chargeable, so troublesome, they make it;
So long; so dangerous, to undertake it.
These things, we mention not to be the least
Detraction from your dues, or interest;
Or, from your Honor: or, because, we grudge
You, or your Houses any Privilege
That may preserve your Persons, or that Power,
Which may be for the Publike-weale, with your:
But, we would only mind you, to have care
No other, make them larger, then they are,
Both to th'indamaging of Us and You;
Who know, that, all the Privileges due
To Public Persons, were, at first, bestowne
More for the Publike-sake, then for their own,
And, presently are forfeited; if, used
Beyond their bound, or, any way abused.
When Cato, that great Senator of Rome,
Whose dignity, it did as well become,
As any man's here living, to have claym'd
Those Privileges, whereat, some have aimed:
Although his Innocence was often abused,
And, He, no less, then fifty times accused
By false Informers; and, though, thereupon
The Senate, thought to have decreed, that, none
The boldness should assume, in future time,
To charge a Senator, with any crime,
Not fully proved against him; Cato, rose,
And, their intention, stoutly, did oppose.
By this Edict, said He, we should deprive
The Commonwealth, of that preservative,
VVhereon her Safe-subsistence, much depends:
This, would secure her Foes, destroy, her Friends,
And, make it safer, Treason, to commit;
Then, to endeavor, for preventing it.
He, that shall give occasion of suspicion,
Has, so far, forfeited the true condition
Of one in Innocence; that, he must bide
The rubbings of the Test, till he be tried;
And, cannot, justly, say, it is a wrong
Yo bear, what to purgation, does belong:
Since, every man is bound, as well to shun
Appearances of Ill, as, evill-done:
Else, to submit (for giving of offense)
Unto the trial of his Innocence.
Suspected-men, therefore, if innocent,
With noble Cato, rather, are content
To stand accused; and, guilty to appear
Some space, then, willingly, to leave a fear
Upon the Public; or, to countenance
A Custom, which might Treachery advance;
Or, bar a needful, or, a just-proceed,
Against those men, who guilty are, indeed.
But, faulty-men accused (if, still, they find
Their power continue) fee'l another mind.
Unto their guiltiness, they malice add;
They grow revengfull, mischievous, and mad,
Plunge, in the toil, strive, strugle, scratch and tear;
Rage like a Tiger, roar out like a Bear;
And are so netled, that, you may behold
Their guiltiness, before the same is told;
Yea, and by hearing them, e're them you see,
May know what Vermin, and, what Beasts they be.
These things consider, with a serious thought,
And, let to trial, every man be brought
Who has deceived his trust; or, ought, neglected,
Or done, whereby, false-dealings, are suspected.
If you intend, in safety, to remain;
Hear all, who, reasonably, to you complain:
And, judge with Righteous Judgment, that, GOD may
Delight to be among you, all the day;
That, all your Members, may be men approved;
And, Iealousies and grudgings, be removed;
So, you shall strengthened be, in one another,
And, knit, with such assurances, together,
That, there shall neither be, in all your actions,
Frauds, failings, fears, repentings, or distractions.
So shall the Peoples hands with you be strong,
And, we in hope, of that which does belong
To our just Rights. Then, all your open-Foes
Their greatest strength; their greatest hope shall lose,
And, all their new-designes, and juggling plots,
With Us, the French, Danes, Hollanders, or Scots,
Shall come to naught; or, by preventing-grace,
Redound unto the welfare of this place.
Then, you shall get Confederates, and Friends,
Who, heeding, with your just, and prudent ends,
That power and Counsel, timely, you provide;
Will think, they in your Friendship, may confide.
And, then, we, likewise, whom you often have tried,
Will, firm to you, at every need, abide;
Still, freely hazard all our livelihood,
Our Limbs, our Lives, and our dear Childrens blood,
To vindicate our Birthrights, and our Laws,
In spite of all th'opposers of our Cause.
Yea, if the much desired Reformation,
Of those, who are the Chosen, of our Nation,
You shall begin; we, will to you adhere
So closely, that, you shall not need to fear
Effecting it; although, of Trustie-men,
There were not, in both Houses, five times ten:
For, we are confident, half of that number,
Well roused, would wake us all, out of our slumber:
Strike terror, into all the hearts, of those
Who dared, that undertaking, to oppose;
And, make (when their Foundation they had laid)
Malignancie, and Tyranny, afraid.
We are as confident, (and, to this Nation,
We dare assure it, on our Reputation,
And, on our Lives) that, if, you shall go on,
To do this Work, as, yet, it may be done;
You should, not only, show the VVordly-wise,
How far, just-dealing, out strips Policies;
But, also you shall honesty reduce
To practice; bring true Piety in use;
And, build up such a Fabric, in this Land,
Of Prudent-Government; that, it should stand
To be a pattern, for all Christendom;
And, flourish, till the Son of GOD, shall come.
But, if you hear us not, with such respect,
That our just-motion, may have due effect:
Then, know from us (for, 'twill be worth your knowing)
That, down the Hill of ruin, you are going;
That, all things you shall order, or ordain,
Vote, or debate on, will be done in vain:
That, by our Contributions, and our Aid,
Destruction, shall be, for a while, delayed,
But, not prevented: That, the Hypocrites,
Shall do you, for a while, as great despights,
As have been, lately, done unto you, here,
By our profane, and, Godlesse-Cavaleer;
And, that, GOD shall give back again these Lands
Into this Kings, or, some worse Tyrants hands;
Till, his Avenging-power, has rooted hence,
All those, who, without either care, or sense,
Of public miseries; of private woes;
Of their own fall; of others overthrowes;
Of either GOD or man; of heaven or hell;
Have spurned, at the way, of doing-well.
For, let us not suppose, that, we may trust
Upon our Cause, though, that be very just.
The Iewish-cause was good: yet on them, fell
Destruction, for not handling of it well,
And, for Injustice; wherein, we offend
So grossly, that, unless we soon amend,
GOD will put off (if we can truth presage)
The Work now doing, till the following age:
And, then, shall rise another Generation,
And make complete, that work of Reformation.
Which now is hindered, by the cunning sleights
Of Tyrants; Hypocriticall-deceits;
Selfe-seekers; and the Avarice and Pride,
Of some, who seem to take the better side.
And, that, which has by Iehu, been begun;
Shall, by Elisha perfectly be done.
But, we, no longer, Noble Senators,
Will tempt your patience, or oppress your ears
With our bold pleadings; lest, by speaking much,
We unawares, upon some strain may touch,
Which by our ill expression, or mistake,
Us, to miscensures, liable may make.
What e're we say, be pleased to believe
We, would not, willingly, occasion give,
Of your displeasure; or, of discontent
To any Member of this Parliament
That, makes conscience of his publike-trust;
Much less would we in any thing, disgust
The whole, convened together; or, forget
Our selves so far, as to dishonor it:
Or, draw one Line, that really, might shame
Or, shadow, any Glory of the same.
To witness, that we mean the thing we say,
The faults now found, our purpose is, to lay
On those, with whom we found them, and, with whom
To chide a little, we, are hither come.
On those, alone, to whom reproves are due;
On those, whose falsehoods, have dishonored you,
By thrusting in, among you; Even, on those,
The burden of our Speech, we will impose:
And, (by your Favor) as we cause do find,
Speak, now, to them, a parcel of our mind.
"The WELAFFECTED, when they ended had
"This Speech, unto the Faithfull-Members made,
"Paws'd, for a while; to mark, if an assent
"Were likely to be granted, with content,
"To their desire of Leave, to speak their thought,
" Of, and to those, by whom, our Woe is wrought;
"And, ghessiing (by their grave, and gracious smiling)
" Them, to that motion, not to be unwilling;
"They made a low obeisance: Then, withdrew
"A little back; and, taking into view
"The Trustlesse-Members, fixed, on them their eyes;
"And, with a Speaking-frowne; spoke, in this wise.
The Speech of the WELL-AFFECTED, to their perfidious-Trustees, dishonouring the
Parliament, by deserting the same, or, by not acting cordially therein.
STand off, ye Traitors; that, me may not smutch
A Blameles-Member, whilst your faults we touch:
Stand further off, we say; lest, whilst we speak,
Some Foolish-fellow may our words mistake;
And, think; we have a purposed intent
To lay aspersions on the Parliament.
Stand, yet a little further, from among them;
That, every man may see we would not wrong them,
But, rather, do them honor by assayng
To help prevent their scandal and betraying,
By making, every wronged Subject know
From whom, their troubles, and oppressions flow.
So; being singled out, as you are, now,
None, but a Brainlesse-Foole, or, some of You,
Can be so impudent, as to apply
Our Checks, to that High-Courts indignity;
Or, seem displeased, because, our minds we say
As fearlesly, as honest Freemen may;
Since, we presume no further, then to do,
That, which necessity compels us to;
And, that, which being longer time delayed,
May come too late; and, quite in vain, be said.
When first this Parliament conveen'd together,
Who called for such as you? How came you hither?
Confess the truth; are not you some of those,
Who made the Burgers drunk, when you were chose?
Or, bribed them, with hopes, that, when you dye,
You would bequeath their Town a Legacy?
Or, be, at least, so neighbourly unto them,
As none of those discourtesies to do them,
Which, must, undoubtedly, have been expected,
If, they your profer'd service, had neglected?
Though now you look upon us, as if we
Your Vassals, and your slaves, e're long should be;
Are not you some of those, who came, and went
And spoke, and wrote, and su'd for our consent?
Were not you they, who trotted up and down,
To every Inn, and Alehouse in the Town,
To gain a Voice? Did not you, for your ends,
Crouch to your equals; importune your Friends;
Court your Inferiors; scrape acquaintance, with
Mere Strangers; Feast, the Cobbler, and the Smith?
Nay more; upon the drunken Tapster fawn,
And, leave your word and promises in pawn
With Chamberlaines, and Hostlers, that, they might
Be Factors for you, being out of sight;
To move their Customers, who had a Voice,
To make you Objects, of their servile choice?
Sure, you are some of them, although we see,
A Metamorphosis in you to be,
Which puts great distances, 'twixt what you are,
And, what, but some few years ago, you were:
For, we, that were your equals, or your betters,
Are, to your courtesy, no common debtors,
If you will condescend, to let us know,
We do not out of your acquaintance grow;
Which we shall hazard, too, unless we seem
To have your wisdom in most high esteem;
And, in your sayings, doubtlesly, confide;
Although, you know, we know, your Worships li'd.
When, first, your Fellows left us, you, are they
Who, having not the grace to run away,
Abode behind, to see that service done,
Which, had been mist, if all the Knaves had gone.
For, (give the Devil his due) had you not staid,
Our Counsels, and our Cause to have betrayed,
This WAR, whose date, as yet, we do not know,
Had quite been ended, nigh four years ago:
Which, whilst such Vipers, we, among us, cherish,
Will have no end, till You, or We, shall perish.
Hear, therefore, now, a sober word or twain,
Lest, you repent your wilfulness, in vain.
Stop your Career, before it be at height,
And, face about, ye Madmen, to the right.
We wish not your destruction or your shame,
Nor, take we pleasure to divulge your blame,
Though you malign our weal: Take therefore, heed.
To what we say; and, wherein you proceed.
Be not so overdaring in your sin;
Lest, such your pay be, as your work has bin.
Or, lest, you roll your selves, if you persever,
Down to that pit, whence no man can deliver.
For, though you think your walkings are concealed;
Your secret paths and courses be reveald.
Your private Aims, your Avarice, your Pride,
Your fraud, and double-dealings are espide;
And, we perceive the guildings, and the paint,
Wherewith, your cursed Projects you be-saint.
Though some of you, your selves have falsely named
The GODLY; and some other of you shamed
The HONEST- party, by pretending to
What, you had never, yet, the thought to do,
Your grand Hypocrisy, the people notes,
Both in your Vows, and selfe-denying-Votes;
And how you cheat, delude us, and oppress
With mock-showes, of dissembled Holiness.
They mark, how you perform your Declarations;
Your Orders, Covenants, and Protestations;
And, when your turns are served, with what pride,
You cast your Promises, and Friends aside.
They have observed, what Designs you drive;
Whose game you play; whose profit, you contrive;
How, though with faces toward us you row,
Quite from us, your intentions are to go:
And, by the preparations, for the Scoene,
We find what, you to put in action mean.
It is observed, how, some of you desire
'Twixt us and Scotland to renew the fire;
And, how you wish occasions may be given,
That, they by force of Arms might hence be driven,
Whom you invited in: As if, GOD took
No notice, when your Covenant were broke
In wishes and desires, whilst you are free
From breaches of your Faith that actual be:
Whereas, in vain an outward Truth, you show;
Unless, the purpose of the heart be true.
They have observed, how, some of you, as wide.
From Moderation, on the other side,
Have by pretending fairly with the SCOT,
Endeavored how those plagues may be begot,
Which in appearance, you would fain prevent;
And, how, you sow the seeds of discontent.
You work upon the weakest of both Nations,
By secret ties, or open Aggravations
Of those discouragements, which they have had;
Or, of those failings, which by them were made,
By those Decoyes, which best can use the wing,
The foolish Ducks into your snares ye bring;
And, whatsoever way your Grandees go,
Your Party takes, like Wild-geese, in a row.
It is observed what mischiefs you intend,
By seeming friendly, where you are no Friend;
By slandring of their Piety and Zeal,
Whose valor, has preserved the Commonweal,
And, by contriving, and dispersing lies,
To breed distrusts and foster Jealousies.
Apparent are, your Projects on the City;
Your Arbitrarie strains, in each Committee.
To work the people into discontent,
And bring an Odium on the Parliament.
It Is seen, how, needlessly, you often protract
By long delays, what, you with speed, might act.
It Is seen, how, to accommodate each other,
Even you that are at odds, can join together
Against the public, and exchange as friends,
Your courtesies, to further private ends.
How, in Petitions, you confound and cumber
Your selves, and us, by taking without number,
Or order, Causes in; and, heeding neither
Right wrong or method, shuffle all together
Into a Chaos; where, we find our grief,
Increased, by endeavoring for relief.
And, otherwhile, your malice does make void
Those Orders, too, whereby might be enjoyed
The Parliaments intentions, to relieve
Those, whom the Foe, or, our own Party grieve;
And, by pretending justice, dares abuse
The justice, and the wisdom of the House.
For, when their order shall concern the right
Of any man, to whom you bear a spite,
It Is but an Order (sleighting it) you say,
Got from the House upon some busy day,
Without Commitment, or Report thereon,
As if, all right were at Committees done:
Or, as if you impli'd, that, times there are,
Or, opportunities, (if watched they were)
In which, your Houses well considered not,
What we petitioned, or what they vote:
Whereas, indeed, there is nothing done amiss
In Parliament, but that which granted is
On those Reports, which false Committees make:
For, every man almost, does notice take,
How, they are managed; how, they are made,
By those, who are Crafts-Masters in the trade:
How, they are brought to meet, or keep away,
As, this, or that man, it advantage may:
And, how, when their debates are at an end,
You can, when up Reports are drawn and penned,
Insert a sentence, word, or circumstance
Which may the Cause mar, hinder, or advance
As you shall please: And, by this cunning way,
The Parliament, to scandalls you betray,
When manifold affairs compel them to
Commit some, to such hypocrites as you.
We likewise more then jealousies have h^
That some of you, have Agents here been mad^
For Royalists: And, that, you had at Court,
Your Factors, and your Leagers to report
Your services, for them performed here;
And, to the King, your persons to endear.
We hear, whose peace was made; who also made it,
With what respect, and on what terms he had it*
Who did his lodging at the Court provide;
And guess we do, why here he does abide.
We could declare, which of you had intentions
To fly to Oxford, and, by what preventions
You stayed, when you purposed to have went,
We know who raised horse; who, money sent;
And who did other services which you
Are loath to hear of, least we prove them true.
For, of such things, you guilty know each other;
In private, you discourse of them together;
And, hear them spoken of from day to day,
Yet question not the speakers; nor give way
To those that would; except, it may be, there,
Where, you who are accused permitted are
To hear, examine, and debate the cause,
Contrary both to conscience, and the Laws:
By which means, some have traitors been so long,
That, now, to question them, it seems a wrong,
Because, they were not questioned heretofore;
As if that took off guilt, which makes it more;
Or, as if 'twere a clearing men from sin,
To let them live unquestioned, long, therein.
But, doubtless, if the blood of one man spilt
Ten years ago, makes nothing less his guilt,
Who did the murder; we no reason see
How, they, who traitors, to the public be,
Excusable, or innocent should grow,
By having many years continued so;
And, who by scaping their just doom, so long,
Increase our private, and the public wrong.
Can ever we have hope, that such as you,
Will to the Common-Liberties be true;
Who, to infringe our Freedoms did begin
Ere into Trust, you had admitted bin?
And screwed your selves into it by those ways,
Which neither are our profit, nor your praise?
You thought it not enough, that, you had got,
(By practices, which Law allows not)
Your selves, made Members of this Parliament;
But, also, for the better settlement,
Of your Designs; you seek to bring in those
Who in your purposes with you may close:
And, to that end, intrude upon the right,
Of other men, with all your wits and might.
You ride, and send; you promise and entreat;
Feast some; speak others fair; some others threat;
And, many other diligences use,
The soon deceived people to abuse;
That, you may draw them, to confer their Voices,
On men, who are not their, but your own choices.
From which high impudence, and bold intrusion,
We make this undeniable conclusion;
That, now, the ordring of the Common-Cause,
Our Liberties, Lives, Liveli-hoods, and Laws,
Is in the power of many, who were chose
Not, by our Countries friends; but by her Foes;
And, such as had nor wit, nor care to know,
On whom, the Publike-trust, they did bestow.
And, if in this proceeding you go on,
What can we hope will follow thereupon?
But, that, if long this Parliament should sit,
Your Members, still, new-members would beget
On every Corporation, Shire, and Town,
Till they had made their Members so their own,
That, our free choice were generally lost,
As at this present day it is almost.
For, on the Writs injuriously you seize;
You put them back or forward as you please;
And, whereas, if they had come forth together,
And, been within some little time sent thither
Where choice was to be made; more satisfaction,
It would have given us; and drowned that Faction
Whose manifold corruptions made you doubt
Those new Elected-ones, would purge them out:
But you contrived it so, that they must come,
By one and one, or else by some and some,
That they the better may be prepossest
(Before they know the publike-Interest)
By you to your advantage; who intend
By making show, of a Religious end,
And holding up two Factions to abide
The safer; till, you better can provide.
And, you are they, who when you in are taken,
Had rather three whole Kingdoms should be shaken
Then your least Privilege dispensed withal,
What reasonable bar foe're befall.
No men are half so zealous in that cause
As you, by whom our Liberties and Laws
Are most infringed. Oh! how you, ride and run
And plot, when Informations are begun
Against a Member! Be it right, or wrong,
How you consult together! how, you throng,
To that Committee, whither they are brought!
How speedily exceptions, forth are sought
Against th'informers? what severity
Are they examined with? how partially
Are proofs considered? how slur'd and slighted!
How, are the persons wronged and despighted?
How, inhumanly, are they, often reviled?
How, of their Liberties are they dispoiled?
How are they scandall'd by false imputations,
Of base Conspiracies, and subornations?
How frequently are spread, to their disgrace
(By men of seeming gravity, and place)
Injurious rumors? which even they who speak them,
Know to be false; because, they first did make them?
Thus you have used us; and, drawn in some
Your partners, in injustice, to become,
Because they thought you good, and, us as had
As by your sly deportments, we were made:
And, by these practices, with many more,
(Which, we by dear experience, come to know)
You have almost improved them so far,
That, men may be as wicked as you are
Without reproof: Because, but few or none
Dare, now, to speak, of what you have misdone.
These things, with wrath, and scorn, the people heed.
And, how in other matters you proceed,
To that High-Courts dishonor, which, in show,
You seem to serve, but, seek to overthrow,
They notice take, with whom we do comply;
What Stars and Compass you have steared by;
For whom, you oftnest at Committees are;
Against what Persons, you do most appear;
What great Rewards, and Titles you propose
To pay a debt, which King nor Kingdom owes;
How, you acccompt; and, what Accounts you take
Whom you displace; whom Officers you make,
On whom the richest places you confer;
How, to your selves, Delinquents you endeare,
And, how you vex them, with affronts and braves,
Who, have preserved you from being slaves.
The People, your indulgence, likewise, marks
To your dependents, and malignant Clarks;
To what a height of pride, and wealth they clime
By serving the corruptions, of the time;
To what a vastness their estates are grown,
By that, which has the public, overthrown;
What Privileges, are by some, enjoyed,
Whilst they who suffered for them, are destroyed;
Whilst they are slighted, and without regard,
Whose better service, merits best reward;
Whose Bounty, has enabled you to give;
Whose valor, was the means, by which you live;
And, by whose perseverance, you possess
The hopes of all your earthly happiness.
For, it is by them, whose blood you cast away
That, you have bread and raiment, at this day;
And, that within your Parlers, you may sit
Of all your braveries, unplunder'd, yet,
Whilst your Deliverers are like to sterve,
Through want of what you wast, and they deserve.
It is from you, whence all these mischiefs come,
Which, to this Nation, are so troublesome.
The Privileges upon you bestowne
For public ends, are used for your own.
The Duties, which have been enjoined unto us,
Are made, by you, but engines to undo us,
Or, to betray us, to the spite of those,
Whom, for the public safety, we oppose.
The Power, which we to save our Freedoms, gave,
You have employed, Freemen to inslave;
And, would, should others act as you have done,
Set many Tyrants up, instead of one.
But, You, and HE, whose wilful ignorance,
Of our just Rights, has made him follow France
In his Designs; and, hope in imitation,
Of that French-Tyrant, who enslaved his Nation,
To bring our English-necks to that base Yoke;
Even You and He, shall know you much mistook;
And, that, if too sharp curbs, our courses check,
We, shall go near to break the Riders neck.
Our Nation much can bear; and, now and than
Brook somewhat more, then at all times it can;
But, tread not on us: For, you will not find,
In English-Yeomen, your French-Peasants mind.
Our Citizens, have served to be free;
So born our Nobles, and our Gentry be:
And, though French-Spaniels fawn, when they are beat,
Our true-bred English-Mastives, scorn it, yet.
We hated Tyranny, though in the King;
And, will not brook, in you, the selfsame thing.
Presume; not, therefore, to provoke too far,
Abused patience, lest, deceived you are.
By Justice, and by Kindness, you may take us;
But, ever by force, you bend us, you will break us.
To keep us Freemen, we have you elected;
Our rights we claim; and, more is not expected:
Nay, so far are we from desiring more,
That, we, will, freely, back again restore
What e're you give us, if it shall be known
You give us any more then is our own.
It is not our desire, that, for our sake,
You, ought that is the Kings, from him should take,
Or any Trust of our, but, what abused
By him has been; or, what may be misused,
Both to his harm and our: nor are we bent
Either to keep, or change the Government,
But, as GOD pleases, and shall move the Nations
To do, hereafter upon just occasions;
And, as it seems expedient: For, we see
Things-lawfull, inexpedient, sometime, be;
Especially, when we shall snatch at them,
Before they either have stood out their time,
Or, we are fitted for them: This, rash course,
Instead of mending; makes matters worse:
And, therefore, till, GOD, plainer shall disclose
Those purposes of his, which no man knows;
We seriously, endeavor, and desire,
Our King, unto his people, should retire;
And, by Repenting, burnish up that Crown,
Which, for our sins and his is rustie grown.
For, though our Cause be better; yet, since we
Are in our selves, as blameable as he;
And, unto Godward, in Offenses even;
We could as well forgive, as be forgiven.
But, in this point, your hearts are not upright:
Yea, and among your selves, you differ quite;
For, some of you, mistaking the intent,
And, loyal purpose of the Parliament,
(Who leaves no means untride, whereby, it may
Reduce the King unto the regall-way,)
Have, out of Policy and (and, hope of that
Which we were ever, far from aiming at)
Appeared desirous to contrive it so,
That, he, and we might more asunder go,
Until our differences might increase
Into impossibilities of Peace.
Some other of you, to the King adhere,
Not out of loyalty, but, out of fear,
To whether side, you may most safely go,
To save your selves; still, staggring, to and fro,
Inconstantly, from the one, to the other side,
According to the Current of the Tide;
Not caring, whether Party thriveth best,
But, as it may advance your interest.
And, this, has made you otherwhile, assay
How, you might either Him, or Us betray.
Whereas, if you were faithful to that end,
Which, outwardly, to favor you pretend;
And, in the means, with patience, would await
Gods leisure, without wavering, or deceit;
(Endeavoring, as we have truly done,
That, He, and We might meet again in one)
GOD, who, at pleasure, turns the hearts of Kings,
And, light, out of the greatest darkness, brings;
Might make this Breach, a means, perhaps, become,
To knit a True-Love-knot through Christendom;
Occasion give, to make this King endeavor
To banish Tyranny, from hence, for ever;
And, be the first of Kings, who, truly, shall
Lay down his Crown, his Dignity, and all
At CHRIST his feet; and, take them up again,
To act his will; and by his Law to reign.
For, though the Kings late failings do exceed,
And, though GOD, peradventure, has decreed,
To cast both him and His, down from the Throne,
Or, do to him, as justly he has done
To many Kings and Tyrants; yet, this Nation
Has hitherto, received no Revelation
Of such a purpose; nor command, that they
Should cast him, of their own accord, away.
And, therefore, very wisely does our State
Gods own proceedings seek to imitate,
In prosecuting him, and his offenses,
As, GOD does us, in our impenitences:
That, if the King, still frowardly go on,
He, by his own Designs, may be undone,
And, GOD himself remove him: So, shall we
Of our own sufferings, no avengers be,
Ought further, then good conscience, and our laws,
May justify our progress in the Cause.
For, by this patient waiting on his will,
Whether God bring him back, or let him, still
Proceed and fall; yea, whether unto him,
Or unto none, he give that Diadem
Which he abused: GOD, shall so bring to pass
What, for his glory, pre-ordained was;
That, it shall likewise, to our Weal, redound,
And, we with David, shall be blameless found
Of hastening our deliverance, e're the day,
According to our own devised way,
As some have done; and, thereby mixed the Blessing
With many bitternesses, in possessing.
This patience, and this prudence would bring on
That work, which is desired should be done.
And, here should be that look't-for Kingdom then,
Which will advance, all good and honest men.
A Kingdom, wherein, they who are unjust;
Where Parasites; were they who fail their trust,
And men of wicked hearts, and shameless faces,
Shall have nor credit, Offices, nor Places.
This, this is that, ye Rebels which ye fear;
This, makes you so enraged as you are:
This, makes you, in vain projects to persist,
And, drive a Factorage for Antichrist;
Whilst you are persevering, to fulfill
The fleshly longings, of your private will.
But, know, that, on your paths GOD has an eye;
An open-care, to every poor man's cry:
An able-hand, a stretcht-out-arme to fetch
Your Policy and Power within his reach:
And, that though for a season you may thrive,
In acting what you wickedly contrive;
Yet, e're it shall befall as you fore-think,
The Floods shall rise, and make the Mountains sink.
Then, turn back to your Vows, e're it is too late;
By Justice, help repair this ruined state;
Unite your selves, unfainedly, to those,
Whom, seeming to assist, you, still oppose.
Be warned oh Judges: and oh King be wise,
And, sweeten so your daily sacrifice,
With Justice, and with Mercy, that, GOD may
From these three Kingdoms, turn his wrath away*
That all the long-long sufferings he has daign'd,
That all the victories we have obtained;
That all the counsels, vows, cries, prayers, and tears,
Of trusty Commoners, and faithful Peers,
And all that wealth, and blood, this cause has cost,
May not, through want of unity, be lost.
Make not this Parliament, without effect,
By which, our greatest good we did expect.
Permit not that, which our chief praise has had,
A scorn, by your corruptions, to be made.
Sad not their hearts, who in their trust are true;
Who had ere this, prevailed, but for you;
Who, undeservedly, share, now, among them,
The blame, wherewith, your guiltines does wrong them,
And, will do so, til Justice, forth shall thrust,
The wicked, from the Assemblies of the just.
Make not more Breaches: For, alas! there are,
More then enough, already, every where:
And, yet perhaps, no more then shall promote
GOD'S glory; who, can press an Antidote,
Out of those poisonous fruits, and banefull things,
Which forth from our corrupted nature springs;
And, teaches us often times, even by offenses,
The knowledge of approved Excellencies.
That Independent-Presbyterian-Ginn,
Which of divisions has occasion been,
Shall never move to propagate that end,
Which many fear, and many do intend:
For, by his providence, and grace preventing,
GOD, shall at last, extract from our dissenting,
A wholsomer production, to these Nations,
Then, yet, arides the vulgar expectations:
Unless; a crying Epidemick-sin,
To mar the blessing, cast some poison in.
Good-men, to both opinions do belong;
Truth, is in both, with error mixed among;
The face of both opinions, you put on,
Or off, as your designs are to be done.
Sometime, an Independent-Garbe you choose;
Sometime, you Presbyterian-vizards use,
Untrue to both: and, when they see your scope,
They, will become as useless, to your hope,
Whom you deceive; as, to their hopes you are,
Of whose opinions, you, a while appear.
(...) who the WELL-AFFECTED, termed be,
Are they, who in the Common-Cause agree,
Although our judgemens vary; we, are loath
To quarrel, to the ruining of both
Opinions; or, the ruining of all,
For differing, but in points dogmaticall:
Lest, whilst for chafe, and straw, we make a Fray,
Our neighbors come, and steal the corn away.
Some of us like one Party; some, the other;
Some of us, are not much in love with either;
Nor so displeased with either, as to joy
In ought, which their due comfort may destroy.
For, Patriots with both of them are found;
Both, build their faith, and hope, upon one ground;
And, we believe, that, when GOD, from our eyes,
Has scraped the scalos, purged out our maladies,
(And, brought us by his grace, to treat together,
Without prejudicating one another)
We, then, who, (being somewhat out of tune)
Do, for the present, harsh divisions run;
Shall, when our notes, are tuned, and rightly placed,
Join in a Diapason, at the last:
Which, to our great contentment, will disclose
That Perfect-Musicke from some discords flows.
We, therefore hope, (though yet your fraud prolongs
Our jealousies, and multiplieth wrongs)
That, all your Engineers, and cunning plots
Shall nor divide the English, from the Scots;
Nor separate those English from each other,
Who by their Covenant are knit together;
Till they have done their work, and you are pai'd,
What they deserve, who have their trust betrayed.
Or, else, till they or we commit that act
Which totally dissolveth our contract:
And, we to them, who, shall unjustly take,
Or, give the cause, that cursed Breach to make.
But, whatsoever Blessing may ensue,
No portion of it, can belong to you,
In this estate: For, plainly, we descry,
That, in the gall of bitterness you lie;
We (...), although we cannot hinder it,
What you pursue, whilst in the House, you sit;
What things abroad, you practice, and allow;
What, you in secret, favor and avow;
And, to effect, your purposes to bring,
How, you abuse both Parliament, and King.
We know the means, by which you entered in:
Upon what Principles, you did begin:
What course you took, before you were elected;
What fame you had; of what you were suspected;
In what base projects, you a hand have had;
How poor some of you were; how rich, now made
By public ruins; and, what follow must
If you be long continued in your Trust.
We have observed, though many crooks it has,
The turnings, and the windings of your path.
How you divide the Clergy, by your sidings;
How your divisions, and your sub-dividings,
You multiply, and many ways foment
To work destruction to the Government
In Church and Commonwealth; and, how, your tricks
(Extracted from the Jesuits politics)
Do shake the Fundamentalls, whereon stand
The safety, wealth, and honor of the Land.
We see, although we cannot, yet prevent
Or, well express the same, how you have spent
The Publike-Treasures; how the Publike-Pow'r
Is brought, it self to weaken, and devour:
How, you oppress the Country without pity;
How, you abuse the Bounty of the City;
Her valiant sons, how you have wronged and slighted;
Their faithful service how you have requited;
And, what, unless both you and we amend,
Will be our portion, and your later end.
Yea, we grow sensible, with what delay,
Our suits are trifled off, from day to day:
How long we wait, to have Petitions heard;
And, when committed, how you dis-regard
Our charge, by keeping witnesses in town;
Our tedious pains in trotting up and down,
To woo for meetings; that our time and cost,
In feeing Clerks, and Council, be not lost:
All these, with other hind'rances, unnam'd,
(For which, the Houses are not to be blamed)
We suffer, to our bitter discontent,
And, to the scandal of the Parliament
Through your defaults; who, have, by sitting long,
Learned new contrivances, for doing wrong;
And, such obstructive, and destructive ways,
As were to us unknown in former days.
GOD, be your speed, as your designs are just:
Else, let them thrive, as we believe they must.
Our hope, you were; but now, our Fear, you be:
And, kept, by you, as lambs by wolves, are we.
Regardlesse, of our welfare, you are grown;
Gods cause pretending, you pursue your own;
Increasing, by the Commonwealths decrease;
Improoving, by the ruin of our Peace;
And, making to your selves, even as you list,
A Priesthood, Laws, a Gospel, and a Christ.
We that have been your first, and fastest friends,
(If, ever, you had honouroble ends
In order to the public) have, of late,
But served your turns, in serving of the State.
This, having, for our fordwardnesse enjoyed,
That, we are most oppressed, and first destroyed:
And, through your fault, are grieved by their neglect
Whom we most honor, and do best affect.
Nay, which is worse, you who on us have brought
This mischief, must, the Publike-friends, be thought,
And we Delinquents; for no other cause,
But seeking execution of the Laws;
Or, for endeavoring how to break open
Some necessary passage, to our hope,
When we are almost stifled in the throng
Of miseries, which have oppressed us long.
If, as our VOW injoyns us, we accuse
Your Fellows, who, have seemed to abuse
Their Publike-Trust; Though, by our Information,
We, only, seek the Kingdoms Reformation;
Yet, such is your injustice, that, instead
Of suffering us to have a fair proceed,
(According to the merit of the Cause,
The Subjects Privileges, and the Laws)
You fall on us, as if that we were they
Who were accused, the Kingdom to betray:
At leastwise, we are used, and looked upon,
As if some great offenses we had done.
The men informed against, you do permit
In their own Cause, Examiners to sit;
To hear debates; our witnesses to see,
And speak with them, ere they examined be;
To act as Judge and Party; To enlarge,
The guilty; to condemn, without a charge,
Us, that are innocent; and to pursue us,
As, if unquestionable Rogues, they knew us.
And, if you were not, yet, more impudent,
It might be borne: But, to the Parliament,
You seek to make us odious; and to leave us
Nor friend, nor bread, nor ought that ease may give us
And, which is worse then this, by having thus
Thus impudently, made a scorn of us;
(Whose good affections gen'rally are known)
The people so discouraged are grown,
That, had not some, a love unto the State,
Which will outlive your tyranny, and hate;
The Parliament, would be deserted so,
And their Just-Quarrell so defamed grow,
That Traitors would be traitors without fear;
And, none be bold to say, they Traitors are.
A multitude of other ways you grieve us,
Through misinforming them, who should reli^ (...)
Through mis-reports, and making outward shows,
Of better fruit, then on your dunghill grows:
And, we have little hope of gaining ease,
Till GOD himself, by miracle shall please,
(Or, by some extraordinary way)
To change your minds, or root you quite away:
For, our most just-complaints, do naught assuage,
Your cruelty, but, more increase your rage.
Our Patience, no respect at all has won us,
But, rather, makes you more insult upon us;
Yea, and the more, your wills we stoop unto,
The more we have to suffer, and, to do.
If we seem forward for the Commonweal,
With popularity, you brand our zeal.
If we contribute more then some of you,
With enviousnesse, our bounty you pursue.
And, whereas, we should favored be, therefore,
You do not only make our burdens more
Then other men's, when ableness have we,
But, lay them on, when we unable be;
And, for our being first in contribution,
Intend to make us last in restitution.
Nay, some of us, have cause to be afraid,
Well-doing, shall with evil be repaid:
For, we, whilst you proceed; as yet you do,
Have more then symptoms that it will be so.
If want, compel us for our own to pray,
With empty hands you send us, often away;
With long delays, our patiences are tried,
Ere we can get our suits heard or denied;
And, then, lest too much grace, you should afford,
You seldom, give us one respective word;
But, look upon us, with such pride, and scorn,
As if to be your vassalls, we were born.
Meanwhile your Favorites, forsooth, and they
That, humor you in your imperious way,
Are, for small merits, largely gratified:
(Or, such as nearly are to you allied)
Their suits (if they petition) are preferred:
If they complain, ere long, they may be heard:
And, (though it were by chance) if well they do,
They get for trifles, thanks, and money too.
If nearer pinched, our suits, we do renew;
And, being slighted, some distemper show,
^our zeal, one hasty word, of ours, more heeds,
^hen all our good, and well-deserving deeds;
and, well we escape, if to an empty purse,
^ou add not somewhat else, that shall be worse.
Thus, we with our poor children, and our wives,
Are forced to live uncomfortable lives;
Whilst you, and they, whom open foes, we call,
Piece up, your tattered fortunes, by our fall.
For, of one Moity, they have us bereft;
And, you, have robbed us, of what they left.
By our opposing them, we shall be sure,
Of their despite, even whilst our lives endure:
By persevering, to our Country, true,
We are in danger of the like from you;
And so, which side soever shall prevail,
We have a mischief on us, by intaile
To us, and to our heirs. For, you in heart
United are; though, corp'rally, apart;
And, join, by close compliances, in one,
In hope to finish, what you have begun;
Which is nor worse, nor better; but, to raise
Your houses, both by good, and evil ways;
And, for this end, to ruin, you would bring
Law, Gospel People, Parliament and King;
But, ere your hopes effected you shall see,
Hark Traiters, what your destiny shall be.
Hark, and observe it: For, it is the doom,
That, shall, without all peradventure, come
Upon their heads, who have their trust betrayed;
Oppressions on their faithful servants laid;
Or, multiplied their wealth, with greediness,
By preying on their Country, in distress.
And, it is this; He that such wrongs requites,
Shall give you portions with damned hypocrites:
Your pride, by shame, shall suddenly be followed;
You shall spew up the gobbets, you have swallowed;
Your way shall perish: you, shall quite be thrust
Forth, from that Congregation of the Just,
Which you pollute: GOD, in your steads will place
Men, rich in wisdom, honesty, and grace:
Such, as are truly called, duly sent:
Such, as befit an English-Parliament:
And, able, then, that Senate shall become,
To curb their Foes abroad; and, Knaves, at home.
So, having uttered what we had to say;
Now, you among the Faithfull-members may
Go shroud your selves again: For, pleased are we,
You should be thought, as honest, as they be,
If, you will yet, repent; and, justly, do
The Publike-worke, which you are called unto.
We, likewise, could be very well content,
That, none shoud say, or think, these lines were meant
Of any one, within the Senate-doore,
If, cause there were, of no such thought before,
As we do intimate: For, we are come
Not with a sword, but, OPOBALSAMUM
To cure your Ulcers, and to make you clear
From all those Blots, which, now, on you, appear.
We, no man, individually, disclose,
But, speak, what almost every Reader knows;
And, whereof each man tattles to his friend,
(It may be) to a less commodious end.
We speak in Generals, that, men to blame
Might be reprooved, without open shame;
And, by themselves, in private, take occasion
To seek their safety, with our preservation;
And, these things, to their own amendment mark,
Before those Mastives bite, which, yet but bark.
We charg you, here, with naught, but what we know,
And, what is known to many thousand more:
Nay, here is nothing mentioned, but what you
And, your own Consciences, do know is true.
We were advised hereof, before we spoke it;
We are not ignorant, how some will take it;
Nor, with what secret malice, and despite,
They will pursue it, to their utmost might:
For, some of us, already, though unheard,
Are censured; nay, many have not spared,
Of one yet living, publicly, to say
He executed was; and, named the day.
Yet, we resolved were, Elihu-like,
Without respect of Persons, truth to speak.
If you desirous be, that none should lay
These matters to your charge; your surest way,
Is not, to rage; or, furiously to turn
Upon the Writer; or, the Book to burn:
But, rather, to repent; and, make a show
That, of these free reproves you do allow;
And, of our setting thus before your eyes,
A perfect draught of your deformities.
Yet, best of all your shame would be prevented,
If, order you procure, to have it printed,
And, some, Reward, bestowed upon those,
Who have charactered thus, their Countries Foes:
For, none can think, that they, who guilty be,
To such a motion, ever would agree;
Or, that, a prudent-honest man will frown,
To see the wickedness of Knaves made known.
However it succeeds; we say, and swear,
We neither for your frowns, or favors care:
Which protestation, if you think untrue;
Make trial; do your worst, and so adieu.
Thus, ended they their Speech; But, e're 'twas done,
A sullen murmuring, began to run
Throughout the guiltie-party; yea, they all
With anger looked either red, or pale.
Some snuft, some puffed, some grin'd; the mouth some wride;
Some bit their lips, some hung their heads aside.
Some, jeerd, some fleerd, some raged; and they who had
Least honesty and wit, appeared most mad.
Some, ran into the Hall, in discontent,
To see, if they had put their Speech in Print:
Some, home; some, to the Tavern walked back,
(From whence they came) and drunk a quart of Sack.
Some, swore; and cursed all the Well-affected:
Some threatened him whom justly they suspected
To be the Penner of it, and they swore
If they could help it, he should write no more.
Some, did advise to apprehend, and call him,
To some Committee, and, there soundly maul him,
That, others may take warning, how they dare
Speak truth to them, who love no truth to hear.
But, others minding what a Vote had past,
On that Committee, which abused him last,
And; being fearful, that his good intent,
Would e're long time, unto the Parliament,
So evident be made, that their despite
Would rather on their heads then his alight;
They waved that, and, being at a stand,
In thinking, what they best might take in hand,
At length; Come let us smite him with the tongue,
Said one of them, who knew what does belong
To deep revenge; and let us daily strew,
Some scandals of him, wheresoever we go.
Another of them, wiser then the rest,
(In earnest, partly, partly too, in jest)
Persuaded much, to let him quite alone,
And mend, what they themselves amiss had done.
A few, approved the Motion; but, not all:
We therefore, know not, yet, what will befall.
But, you shall hear, within a day or two,
(If you have patience) what they mean to do.
Here, thought I, to conclude; but, hear, ye, now,
Before we part, a word or two, to you,
Ye WORTHIES of both Houses; and, all ye
Who, VVell-affected to this Kingdom be.
Now, hear HIM, for himself, who, has not spared
To speak for your avail; nor been outdared
By any danger, to declare his mind,
According as our Covenant has enjoynd.
He is not ignorant, how great a Stake,
He has among you: Nor, how, course to take
To thrive, as others do. But, he disdaines,
For any hope on earth, to take the pains;
To vary from his heart, in Word, or Action,
To humor any man, or any Faction.
Be pleased to consider, that, all this
Was penned, for no private end of his;
Nor can procure him ought, save their despite,
Who, in the wrong of harmlesse-men delight;
Unless, you faithfully to him adhere,
As by our solemn-Vow, engaged you are;
Which, does obliege, that, firm you stand to those,
Who do their best, Delinquents to disclose;
And, likely means, and lawful ways invent
To bring them to deserved punishment.
Thus, I, (as heartily, as any One)
According to my Faculties, have done;
And shown these Times, and, those, perhaps, to come,
That, Poesy, may have an useful Room,
In great Affairs; and Poets, fill their place,
Whether, the times, be generous or base.
Though I no Patron find, assured I am,
This Work would not have done the Author shame,
In better times: Nay, if an Irish-Bard
Had sung thus much, to them, they would have heard
His Numbers with respect: and many things
Bestowed; beside a Harp with silver strings.
But, I shall think my game has well been played,
If I, with mischief, shall not be repayd
For my Good Will; nor, le^t, when I have done,
To bear the burden of dispights, alone.
For your own sakes, take heed, I humbly pray,
It ^ot so; lest, you repent it may,
When you, by One, and One, oppressed shall be,
And, then, forsook; as, you deserted me.
I am not, for my self, of ought afraid,
Which can to me, be either done, or said:
For, what my Foes can take, I, well can spare;
And, nothing have to lose, for which, I care.
There Is Wealth in want, there is Honor, in Disgrace,
And, Life in Death, for him, that is in my case.
I ask of you nor Riches nor Reward;
(Though, those things, I, sometime, too much regard)
Let where you please, your Bounty be bestown;
So, I may have, what, justly, is mine own:
That, will suffice, to set me fully free,
From all Engagements, now, oppressing me;
And, leave to those, for whom, I should provide,
Enough, to keep them, both from want, and Pride.
I ask no Honors: For, no hope I have
Of honor, here, till I am in my grave:
And, if to me, some share be, then, allowed,
It will be best; for, 'twill not make me proud;
Nor in my life time, those Corruptions nourish,
Which, make of men in honor, Beasts that perish.
I ask not for my self, the smallest thing,
Which, merely, to my-selfe, may profit bring;
But, all I shall desire, is, these two Boones,
(Which, I conceive, are just, and equal ones)
First, this; that, I, whose credit, now, appears
To have continued seven and fifty years,
Without reproach (except it be among
That crew, who cannot slander with their tongue)
May not, with you, a Good-opinion lose,
Though that Report, which, my malicious-Foes
Have lately made to my disreputation;
(By laying to my charge a Subornation)
Till, fully, and impartiallie, you hear
How, I shall make their impudence appear,
Who have traduced me; and what streights they pass,
(What open injuries, and what disgrace)
Who, in a conscionable path, shall go;
And, to the Public, would their duties do,
As I have done: They judge, as cause appears;
And, let him perish, that, Right-Judgement, fears.
This, not for mine own honor do I crave;
But, that, your honor, may no blemish have;
And, that, by taking my repute away,
The Divill, (who such plots does often lay)
Disparage not the Truths, that I have told,
To make them ineffectuall, if he could.
To this end, only, I your Justice crave,
That, now, (with yours) my honor I may save;
And, to no other end: For, it is to me,
Honor enough, an Innocent, to be.
And, yet, who knows, but, GOD, may look upon
The wrongs, which have to me of late been done?
Who knows, but that ere long, receive he may,
The Ports of Haman, and of Mordecai?
Or, make, what seems my shame, to be my glory,
When future Ages, read this Ages story?
My next (oh! Noble Friends) and last request,
Is this; that, if I should be so oppressed
As is intended, you, would think upon
Those, whom, by serving you, I have undone;
That, Half of Me (who, had a share, in that,
Which I adventured freely, for the State)
And, those, Branched from us, who thereby are left
No means of Bread, or Breeding; but, bereft
Of all their outward-helpes: Oh! let them find
More grace, then yet I do: yea, be so kind,
That, unto them, may truly paid be,
What, on the PUBLIKE-FAITH you owe to me,
In Debts, on fair account, due from this Nation,
By private, and by publike-Obligation.
My Naturall-Affection, makes me fear
This Motion needful. Therefore, have a care
You slight it not; For, doubtless, if you do,,
GOD will require it; and, requite it, too.
Yea, if you shall forget what I prefer,
GOD, will remember, your REMEMBRANCER
And, when your Children shall with hunger pine,
Provide abundance of good-things for mine.
Thus hopes, and thus believes, GEO: WITHER.

Fiat Voluntas Dei.
The Printer to the Reader.
Readers;
THe Author of the Receipt prescribed in this Poem, desired me, for the better
operation thereof, to entreat you to make use of it without prejudicacy; and
with a belief that he aims sincerely at the publike-cure, without any private
respects, but such as may stand with the common-interest; as will appear to
those, who know what hazzards he shall run, if this be distasteful to them who
have both him, and his estate in their power: and how possible it is, that
there may be more who have tongues to vote against him, then of those who have
understanding to judge the reasonableness of his undertaking, in this time of
corruption; wherein, something must be attempted to remove our insufferable
pressures: and, doubtless it is better that somewhat should be irregularly
done, then all of us undone; especially when nothing is purposely mis-done, or
maliciously intended, by him.

He protests he is neither for, or against the Presbyterians, Independents,
Scots, English, King, Parliament, Members, or People, more or less, then
according as he (in his judgment and conscience) thinks it may conduce to the
wrong or right way, from, or toward the truth of GOD, and the peace of the
Kingdom; with a charitable respect (so far as is possible) to the remedy of
our general distemperatures, without the wrong, or disquiet of any person, who
wilfully draws it not upon himself. And this impartiality (as he conceives)
ought to make his words, the more considerable, and the more acceptable to all
those, who desire the same peace, which he endeavors to promote, and
establish, between the Nations, and between the English themselves; whose
prosperity can be no way secured, but, by our counterworking to this
Jesuiticall principle, Divide and impera: Only thus much partiality (if it be
a partiality) he confesses himself inclinable unto, that he cannot choose but
believe, that party to be most just and honest, which is most favorable unto
an honest man in honest causes, though it may be over-voted by half a score
voices; especially, when it is in a Cause seemingly repugnant to their own
Interest, and on the behalf of a stranger who neither solicited any one of
them to befriend him, nor had liberty to use the means of his Justification.
What, he means, hereby, perhaps some of you, better understand, then I do; if
not, I believe you will better understand him hereafter, when he has raised
the vindication of his late censure out of the ashes of his burned papers;
which, if he have life and liberty, he bids you confidently expect; and to be
as confident, that it shall be done (if the good party may prevail) with the
preservation of the honor of the House of Commons, of every worthy Member
thereof, and of the whole Parliament. And so I humbly take my leave.

Your Servant, Benevol. Typographus.


