ANTINOMIANS AND FAMILISTS CONDEMNED By the SYNOD of ELDERS IN NEW ENGLAND:
WITH THE Proceedings of the Magistrates against them, And their Apology for the
same.

Together with A Memorable example of Gods Judgments upon some of those
Persons so proceeded against.

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill near
the Royal Exchange. 1644.

A Catalogue of such erroneous opinions as were found to have been brought
into New England, and spread underhand there, as they were condemned by an
Assembly of the Churches, at New Town, Aug. 30. 1637.
The Errors 1. IN the conversion of a sinner, which is saving and gracious, the
faculties of the soul, and workings thereof, in things partaining to God, are
destroyed and made to cease.

The Confutation. 1. This is contrary to the Scripture, which speaks of the
faculties of the soul, (as the understanding and the will) not as destroyed in
conversion, but as changed, Luke 24.45. Christ is said to have opened their
understandings: Joh. 21.18. Peter is said to be led whither he would not,
therefore he had a will. Again, to destroy the faculties of the soul, is to
destroy the immortality of the soul.

Error 2. In stead of them, the Holy Ghost does come and take place, and does
all the works of those natures, as the faculties of the human nature of Christ
do.

Confutation 2. This is contrary to Scripture which speaks of God, as
sanctifying our souls and spirits; 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. purging our consciences,
Heb. 9.14. refreshing our memories, Joh. 14.26.

Error 3. That the love which is said to remain, when faith and hope cease, is
the Holy Ghost.

Confutation 3. This is contrary to the Scriptures, which put an express
difference between the Holy Ghost and love, 2 Cor. 6.6. And if our love were
the Holy Ghost, we cannot be said to love God at all, or if we did, it was,
because we were personally united to the Holy Ghost.

Error 4, 5. That those that be in Christ are not under the Law, and commands
of the word, as the rule of life. Alias, that the will of God in the Word, or
directions thereof, are not the rule whereunto Christians are bound to conform
themselves, to live thereafter.

Confutation 4, 5. This is contrary to the Scriptures, which direct us to the
Law and to the Testimony, Esaias 8.20. which also speaks of Christians, as not
being without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.22.

Error 6. The example of Christ's life, is not a pattern according to which men
ought to act.

Confutation 6. This position (those actions of Christ excepted which he did
as God, of as Mediator, God and Man, or on special occasions, which concern
not us,) is unfound, being contrary to the Scripture, wherein the example of
Christ's life is propounded to Christians as a pattern of imitation, both by
Christ and his Apostles. Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek, etc. 1 Cor.
11.1. Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ, Ephesians: 5.2. Walk in love as
Christ has loved us, 1 Pet. 2.21. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example, that ye should follow his steps, 1 John 2.26. He that says he
abides in him, ought so to walk, even as he has walked.

Error 7. The new creature, or the new man mentioned in the Gospel, is not
meant of grace, but of Christ.

Confutation 7. The false-hood of this proposition appears from the
Scriptures, which first propound Christ and the new creature as distinct one
from another, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature.
Secondly, The new man is opposed to the old man, the old man is meant of lusts
and vices, and not of Adams person, Ephesians. 2.22.24. Therefore the new man is
meant of graces and virtues, and not of the person of Christ, Col. 3.9.10.
Thirdly, The new man is expressly said to consist in righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4.25. and to be renewed in knowledge, Col. 3.10. which are
graces, and not Christ.

Error 8. By love, 1 Cor. 13.13. and by the armor mentioned Ephesians. 6. are
meant Christ.

Confutation 8. This position is near of kin to the former, but secondly, the
opposite, 1 Cor. 13. means that love which he exhorts Christians to bear
one toward another, which if it were meant of Christ, he might be said to
exhort them to bear Christ one to another, as well as to love one another, 2.
Faith and hope there mentioned, have Christ for their object, and if by love
be meant Christ, he had put no more in the latter word, then in the two
former. 3. And besides, it may as well be said, Faith in love, as Faith in
Christ, and hope in love, as hope in Christ, if that were the meaning. And by
armor, Ephesians. 6. cannot be meant Christ. First, because two parts of that
armor are Faith and Hope, whereof the Scriptures make Christ the object: Col.
1.5. Beholding the sted fastness of your Faith in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.19. If in
this life only we had hope in Christ, etc. now these graces, and the object of
them cannot be the same. Secondly, a person armed with that armor, may be
said to be a sincere righteous patient Christian, but if by the armor be
meant Christ, sweet predication should have been destroyed, and you might more
properly say, a Christifyed Christian.

Error 9. The whole letter of the Scripture holds for a covenant of works.

Confutation 9. This position is unsound, and contrary to the constant tenor of
the Gospel, a maine part of the Scriptures which in the letter thereof holds
not forth a covenant of works, but of grace, as appears, Joh. 3.16. 1 Timothy
1.15. Mat. 11.28. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12.

Error 10. That God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, may give themselves to the
soul, and the soul may have true union with Christ, true remission of sins,
true marriage and fellowship, true sanctification from the blood of Christ, and
yet be an hypocrite.

Confutation 10. The word [true] being taken in the sense of the Scriptures,
this also crosses the doctrine of Ephesians. 4.24. where righteousness and true
holiness are made proper to him, that has heard and learned the truth, as it
is in Jesus.

Error 11. As Christ was once made flesh, so he is now first made flesh in us,
ere we be carried to perfection.

Confutation 11. Christ was once made flesh, Joh. 1.14. no other incarnation is
recorded, and therefore not to be believed.

Error 12. Now in the covenant of works, a legalist may attain the same
righteousness for truth, which Adam had in innocence before the fall.

Confutation 12. He that can attain Adams righteousness in sincerity, has
his sin truly mortifyed, but that no legalist can have, because true
mortification is wrought by the covenant of grace, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not
have dominion over you, for you are not under the Law, but under Grace.

Error 13. That there is a new birth under the covenant of works, to such a
kind of righteousness, as before is mentioned, from which the soul must be
again converted, before it can be made partaker of Gods Kingdom.

Confutation 13. This is contrary to Titus 3.4. where the new birth is made a
fruit of Gods love to wards man in Christ; of any new birth besides this, the
Scripture speaks not. It is also contrary to 2 Cor. 3. where it is made the
work of the Spirit, (that is, the Gospel) opposed to the letter (that is, the
Law) to give life; the new birth brings forth the new creature, and the new
creature argues our being in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.17. It is true indeed Gods
children that are borne again, must be converted again, as Mat. 18.3. but
that conversion is not from that grace which they have received, but from the
corruption that still remains.

Error 14. That Christ works in the regenerate, as in those that are dead, and
not as in those that are alive, or, the regenerate after conversion, are
altogether dead to spiritual acts.

Confutation 14. This is contrary to Romans 6.11. Ye are alive unto God, in
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.1.5. He has quickened us, 1 Pet. 2.5. Living stones,
Gal. 2.20. The life that I now live.

Error 15. There is no inherent righteousness in the Saints, or grace, and
graces are not in the souls of believers, but in Christ only.

Confutation 15. This is contrary to 2 Timothy 1.5. The unfeigned faith that dwelt
in thee, and dwelt first in thy Grandmother, 2 Pet. 1.4. partakers of the
divine nature; which cannot be, but by inherent righteousness, 2 Timothy 1.6.
Stir up the grace of God which is in thee, Job. 1.16. Of his fullness we all
receive grace for grace: but if there be no grace in us, we receive nothing
from his fullness, 2 Cor. 4.16. Our inward man is renewed day by day, Romans
12.2. with Ephesians. 4.23. we are changed or renewed.

Error 16. There is no difference between the graces of hypocrites and
believers, in the kinds of them.

Confutation 16. If this be true, then hypocrites are wise, humble, merciful,
pure, etc. and so shall see God, Mat. 5.8. but they are called fools, Mat.
7.26. Mat. 25.1, 2, 3. neither shall they see God, Mat. 24.51. Mat. 13.20, 21,
22, 23. Heb. 6.7, 8, 9. the difference of the grounds, argues the difference
in the kinds of graces.

Error 17. True poverty of spirit does kill and take away the sight of grace.

Confutation 17. This is contrary to Mark. 9.24. Lord, I believe, help my
unbeleefe: if this were so, then poverty of spirit should hinder thankfulness,
and so one grace should hinder another, and the graces of the Spirit should
hinder the work of the Spirit, and cross the end why he is given to us, 1
Cor. 2.12.

Error 18. The Spirit does work in Hypocrites, by gifts and graces, but in
Gods children immediately.

Confutation 18. This is contrary to Nehem. 5.15. So did I because of the fear
of the Lord: Heb. 11.17. Noah moved with fear, prepared an Arc.

Error 19. That all graces, even in the truly regenerate, are mortal and
fading.

Confutation 19. This is contrary to John 4.14. they are graces which flow from
a fountain which springs up to eternal life, and therefore not fading, Jer.
31.39.40.

Error 20. That to call into question whether God be my dear Father, after or
upon the commission of some heinous sins, (as Murder, Incest, etc.) does
prove a man to be in the Covenant of works.

Confutation 20. It being supposed that the doubting here spoken of, is not
that of final despair, or the like, but only that the position denies a
possibility of all doubting to a man under a Covenant of grace, this is
contrary to Scripture, which speaks of Gods people under a Covenant of grace,
in these or other cases, exercised with sweet doubtings and questions: David
was a justified man, (for his sins were pardoned, 2 Samuel 12.12, 13.) yet his
bones waxed old through his roaring all the day long, and the heaviness of
Gods hand was upon him night and day, and the turning of his moisture into the
drought of Summer, Psalm. 32.3, 4. And Gods breaking his bones by withholding
from him the joy of his Salvation; Psalm. 51.8. show that he was exercised with
sweet doubts, and questions at least, as this position speaks of: and the
like may be gathered out of Psalm. 77.3, 4. where the holy man Asaph, mentions
himself, being troubled when he remembered God, and that he was so troubled, he
could not speak nor sleep, and expostulateth with God, Will the Lord cast off
for ever? and will he be favorable no more? and verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. These show
that he had at least sweet doubts, as the position mentions, and yet he was
not thereby proved to be under a Covenant of works, for he does afterward
confess this to be his infirmity, verse. 10. and receives the comfort of
former experiences, in former days, and his songs in the nights, and of Gods
former works, verse. 5, 6.10, 11, 12. and he resumeth his claim of his right
in God by virtue of his Covenant, verse. 13.

Error 21. To be justified by faith is to be justified by works.

Confutation 21. If faith, in this position be considered not simply as a
work, but in relation to its object, this is contrary to the Scripture, that
so appropriateth Justification to faith, as it denies it to works, setting
faith and works in opposition one against another in the point of
Justification, as Romans 3.27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what
Law? by the Law of works. no, but by the Law of faith, and verse. 28. We
conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law, and
chap. 4. 16. Therefore it is by faith, that it may be by grace, compared with
verse. 4. To him that works is thereward reckoned not of grace, but of debt.

Error 22. None are to be exhorted to believe, but such whom we know to be the
elect of God, or to have his Spirit in them effectually.

Confutation 22. This is contrary to the Scriptures, which makes the
commission which Christ gave his Disciples in these words, Go preach the Gospel
to every creature, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mar.
16.15.16. where the latter words imply an exhortation to believe, and the
former words direct that this should not only be spoken to men known to be
elected, or only to men effectually called, but to every creature; The
Scripture also tells us, that the Apostles in all places called upon men to
repent, and believe the Gospel, which they might not have done, had this
position been true.

Error 23. We must not pray for gifts and graces, but only for Christ.

Confutation 23. This is contrary to Scripture which teaches us to pray for
wisdom, Jam. 1.5. and for every grace bestowed by virtue of the new Covenant,
Ezech. 36.37. as acknowledging every good gift, and every perfect giving is
from above, and comes down from the Father of lights. The whole 119. Psalm,
besides innumerable texts of Scripture, does abundantly confute this, by
showing that the servants of God have been taught by the Spirit of God to pray
for every gift and grace needful for them, and not only for Christ.

Error 24. He that has the seal of the Spirit may certainly judge of any
person, whether he be elected or no.

Confutation 24. This is contrary to Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong to God;
and such is election of men not yet called.

Error 25. A man may have all graces and poverty of spirit, and yet want
Christ.

Confutation 25. This is contrary to Matthew. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in
spirit: but without Christ none can be blessed, Ephesians. 4.22.24. he that has
righteousness and true holiness, has learned the truth, as it is in Jesus,
and therefore has Christ.

Error 26. The faith that justifies us is in Christ, and never had any
actual being out of Christ.

Confutation 26. This is contrary to Scripture, Luke 17.5. Lord increase our
faith, Ergo, faith was in them, 2 Timothy 1.6. faith is said to dwell in such and
such persons, therefore faith was in them, Esaias 64.7. No man stirs up
himself to lay hold upon thee.

Error 27. It is incompatible to the Covenant of grace to join faith
thereunto.

Confutation 27. This is contrary to Mark 16.16. Preach the Gospel, he that
believes shall be saved, Romans 4.3. Abraham believed, and it was counted to him
for righteousness, and Abraham is a pattern to all under the Covenant of
grace, Romans 4.24.

Error 28. To affirm there must be faith on man's part to receive the
Covenant; is to undermine Christ.

Confutation 28. First, Faith is required on man's part to receive the Covenant
of grace, according to these Scriptures, John 1.12. To as many as received him,
even to them that believed on his name, Mark 16.16. He that believes shall be
saved. Secondly, to affirm there must be faith on man's part to receive Christ,
is not to undermine Christ; but to exalt him, according to these Scriptures,
John 3.33. He that believes has put to his seal that God is true; and so
honors Gods truth, which cannot undermine Christ; Romans 4.20. but was strong in
the faith, giving glory to God, etc.

Error 29. An hypocrite may have these two witnesses, 1 John 5.5. that is to
say, the water and blood.

Confutation 29. No hypocrite can have these two witnesses, water and blood,
that is, true justification and sanctification, for then he should be saved,
according to these Scriptures, Romans 8.30. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Acts 26.18.

Error 30. If any thing may be concluded from the water and blood, it is
rather damnation, then salvation.

Confutation 30. This is contrary to the Scriptures last mentioned.

Error 31. Such as see any grace of God in themselves, before they have the
assurance of Gods love sealed to them are not to be received members of
Churches.

Confutation 31. This is contrary to Acts 8.37.38. where the Eunuch saw his
faith only, and yet was presently baptized, and therefore by the same ground
might be admitted.

Error 32. After the revelation of the spirit, neither Devil nor sin can
make the soul to doubt.

Confutation 32. This position savours of orrour, else Asaph. had not the
revelation of the Spirit, seeing he doubted, ( Psalm. 73.13) whether he had not
cleansed his heart in vain, and that God had forgotten to be gracious; then
also faith should be perfect which was never found, no not in our father
Abraham.

Error 33. To act by virtue of, or in obedience to a command, is legal.

Confutation 33. So is it also Evangelicall, the mystery of the Gospel is said
to be revealed for the obedience of faith, Romans 16.25. Also the Lord Jesus is
said to be the author of salvation to all that obey him, Hebr. 5.9. If we love
Christ we are to keep his Commandments, John 14.29.

Error 34. We are not to pray against all sin, because the old man is in us,
and must be, and why should we pray against that which cannot be avoided?

Confutation 34. This is contrary to 1 Thessalonians. 5, 23. 1 Cor. 13.7.

Error 35. The efficacy of Christ's death is to kill all activity of graces in
his members, that he might act all in all.

Confutation 35. This is contrary to Romans 6.4. Our old man is crucified with
him, that the body of finne might be destroyed, that we should not serve sin:
contrary also to Hebr. 4.14. that he might through death destroy him, etc. and
1 John 3.8. whence we infer, that if Christ came to destroy the body of sin, to
destroy the Devil, to dissolve the works of the Devil, then not to kill his
own graces, which are the works of his own Spirit.

Error 36. All the activity of a believer is to act to sin.

Confutation 36. Contrary to Romans 7.15. as also to Gal. 5.17. the spirit
lusts against the flesh.

Error 37. We are completely united to Christ, before, or without any faith
wrought in us by the Spirit.

Confutation 37. The term [united] being understood of that spiritual
relation of men unto Christ, whereby they come to have life and right to all
other blessings in Christ, 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son has life: And the
term [compleatly] implying a presence of all those bands and ligaments and
means as are required in the word, or are any ways necessary to the making up
of the union, we now conceive this assertion to be erroneous, contrary to
Scripture, that either expressly mentions faith when it speaks of this
union, Ephesians. 3.17. that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, Gal. 2.20.
Christ lives in me by faith; or ever implies it in those phrases that do
express union; as coming to Christ, John 6.35. and eating and drinking
Christ, verse. 47. compared with verse. 54. having the Son, 1 John 5.12. and
receiving Christ, John 1.12. and marriage unto Christ, Ephesians. 5.32. if there be
no dwelling of Christ in us, no coming to him, no receiving him, no eating nor
drinking him, no being married to him before and without faith; but the former
is true, therefore also the latter.

Error 38. There can be no true closing with Christ in a promise that has a
qualification or condition expressed.

Confutation 38. This opinion we conceive erroneous, contrary to Esaias 55.1, 2.
Ho! every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, Matthew. 11.28. Come to me
all ye that are weary and heavy laden, John 7.37. If any man thirst, let him
come to me and drink, Revel. 22.17. Let him that is athirst come, Mark 1.15.
Repent and believe the Gospel: if the word indefinitely be sanctified, for the
begetting of faith, if the Gospel it self be laid down in a conditional
promise, if the Apostles and Prophets, and Christ himself, have laid hold upon
such promises to help to union, and closing with himself, then there may be a
true closing with Christ in a promise that has a qualification or condition
expressed.

Error 39. The due search and knowledge of the holy Scripture, is not a safe
and sure way of searching and finding Christ.

Confutation 39. This is contrary to express words of Scripture, John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, for they testify of me, Acts 10.43. To him give all the
Prophets witness, Romans 3.21. the righteousness of God witnessed by the Law
and the Prophets, Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, Acts 17.11. The
Bereans were more noble, in that they searched the Scriptures daily. If the
Prophets give witness to Christ, if his righteousness be witnessed by Law
and Prophets, and that they be noble that daily search the Scriptures, and
that Christ so far allows their testimony of him, that the Scripture says,
there is no light but in and according to them, then the due searching and
knowledge of Scriptures, is a safe way to search Christ; but the former is true,
therefore also the latter.

Error 40. There is a testimony of the Spirit, and voice unto the Soul,
merely immediate, without any respect unto, or concurrence with the word.

Confutation 40. This immediate revelation without concurrence with the word,
does not only countenance but confirm that opinion of Enthusianisme, justly
refused by all the Churches, as being contrary to the perfection of the
Scriptures, and perfection of Gods wisdom therein: That which is not revealed
in the Scripture, (which is objectum adaequatum fidei) is not to be believed:
but that there is any such revelation, without concurrence with the word, is no
where revealed in the Scripture, Ergo. 1 Cor. 4.16. Presume not above that
which is written. Again, if there be any immediate Revelation without
concurrence of the word, then it cannot be tried by the word, but we are bid
to try the spirits. To the law and Testimony, Esaias 8.20. to try all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. So the Bereans, Acts 17.11. and the rule of trial is the word,
Joh. 5.39.

Error 41. There be distinct feasons of the workings of the several Persons,
so the soul may be said to be so long under the Fathers, and not the Sons,
and so long under the Sons work, and not the Spirits.

Confutation 41. This expression is not according to the pattern of wholesome
words, which teaches a joint concurrence of all the Persons, working in every
work that is wrought, so that we cannot say, the Father works so long and the
Son works not, because the same work at the same time is common to them both,
and to all the three Persons, as the Father draws, Joh. 6.44. so the Son sends
his Spirit to convince, and thereby draws, Joh. 16.7, 8.

Error 42. There is no assurance true or right, unless it be with out fear
and doubting.

Confutation 42. This is contrary to Scripture; the penman of Psalm. 77. had
true assurance, ver. 6. and yet he had doubts and fears of Gods eternal
mercy, ver. 7, 8, 9. The best Faith is imperfect and admits infirmity, ver. 10.
1 Cor. 13.10, 11, 12. Where there is flesh that does fight against every grace,
and act thereof, and is contrary to it, there can be no grace perfect, Ergo,
doubting may stand with assurance, Gal. 5.17.

Error 43. The Spirit acts most in the Saints, when they endeavor least.

Confutation 43. Reserving the special seasons of Gods preventing grace to his
own pleasure, In the ordinary constant course of his dispensation, the more
we endeavor, the more assistance and help we find from him, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5.
He that seeks and digs for wisdom as for treasure shall find it, Hos. 6.3. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you, while you are with him; If by endeavor be
meant the use of lawful means and Ordinances commanded by God, to seek and
find him in, then is it contrary to Mat. 7.7. Ask, seek, knock, etc.

Error 44. No created work can be a manifest sign of Gods love.

Confutation 44. If created works flowing from union with Christ be included,
it is against John's Epistles, and many Scriptures, which make keeping the
Commandments, love to the Brethren, etc. evidences of a good estate, so
consequently of Gods love.

Error 45. Nothing but Christ is an evidence of my good estate.

Confutation 45. If here Christ manifesting himself in works of holiness,
be excluded, and nothing but Christ nakedly revealing himself to faith, be
made an evidence, it is against the former Scriptures.

Error 46. It is no sin in a believer not to see his grace, except he be
wilfully blind.

Confutation 46. This is contrary to the Scripture, which makes every
transgression of the Law sin, though wilfulness be not annexed; and this
crosses the work of the Spirit which shows us the things that are given us
of God; 1 Cor. 2.12. and crosses also that command, 2 Cor. 13.5. Prove your
faith, and therefore we ought to see it.

Error 47. The Seal of the Spirit is limited only to the immediate witness
of the Spirit, and does never witness to any work of grace, or to any
conclusion by a Syllogism.

Confutation 47. This is contrary to Romans 8.16. to that which our Spirit bears
witness, to that the Spirit of God bears witness, for they bear a joint
witness, as the words will have it: but our Spirits bear witness to a work
of grace, namely that believers are the children of God, Ergo.

Error 48. That conditional promises are legal.

Confutation 48. Contrary to John 3.16. Matthew 5.3. etc.

Error 49. We are not bound to keep a constant course of Prayer in our
Families, or privately, unless the Spirit stir us up thereunto.

Confutation 49. This is contrary to Ephesians. 6.18. 1 These. 5.17.

Error 50. It is poverty of spirit, when we have grace, yet to see we have no
grace in our selves.

Confutation 50. The weak believer Mark. 9.24. was poor in spirit, yet saw
his own Faith weak though it were. Peter when he was brought to poverty of
spirit by the bitter experience of his pride, he saw the true love he had
unto Christ, and appealed to him therein, Joh. 21.15. Paul was less then the
least of all Saints in his own eyes, therefore poor in spirit, yet saw the
grace of God, by which he was that he was, and did what he did, and was truly
nothing in his own eyes, when he had spoken of the best things he had
received and done, Ephesians. 3.18. If it be poverty of the spirit to see no grace
in our selves, then should poverty of spirit cross the office of the Spirit,
which is to reveal unto us, and make us to see what God gives us, 1 Cor.
2.9.10, 11, 12. then it should make us sin, or cross the will of God, which
is, that we should not be ignorant of the gracious workings of Christ in us
from the power of his death and resurrection, Romans 6.3. Know ye not, etc. then
would it destroy a great duty of Christian thankfulness, in, and for all the
good things which God vouchsafes us, 1 These. 5.18.

Error 51. The soul need not to go out to Christ for fresh supply, but it is
acted by the Spirit inhabiting.

Confutation 51. Though we have the Spirit acting and inhabiting us, this
hinders not, but I may and need go out to Christ for fresh supply of Grace,
Joh. 1.16. Of whose fullness we have all received, and grace for grace; 2 Cor.
12.8. Paul sought thrice to Christ for fresh supply; Heb. 12.2. Look unto
Christ the Author and finisher of our faith.

We must look up to the hills from whence comes our help, Ephesians. 4.16. by
whom all the body receives increase, and to the edifying of it self.

Error 52. It is legal to say, we act in the strength of Christ.

Confutation 52. This is contrary to the Scriptures, the Gospel bids us be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10 and be strong
in the grace that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.1. and Paul says, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. and that was not
legal strength.

Error 53. No Minister can teach one that is anointed by the Spirit of Christ,
more then he knows already unless it be in some circumstances.

Confutation 53. This is also contrary to Scripture, 2 Cor. 1. It is God that
stablisheth us with you, etc. Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.12.14. The Corinthians and
Ephesians, were anointed and sealed, and yet were taught more of Paul in his
Epistles then only in some circumstances.

Error 54. No Minister can be an instrument to convey more of Christ unto
another, then he by his own experience has come unto.

Confutation 54. This is contrary to Ephesians. 4.11, 12. the weakest Minister may
edify the strongest Christian which has more experience then himself.

Error 55. A man may have true Faith of dependence, and yet not be justified.

Confutation 55. This is contrary to the Scripture, Acts 13.39. Al believers
are justified, but they that have true faith of dependence are believers,
therefore justified.

Error 56. A man is not effectually converted till he has full assurance.

Confutation 56. This is cross to the Scripture, Isa. 5.10. wherein we see
that a man may truly fear God (therefore truly converted) and yet walk in
darkness, without clear evidence; or full assurance.

Error 57. To take delight in the holy service of God, is to go a whoring from
God.

Confutation 57. No Scripture commands us to go a whoring from God, but first,
the Scripture commands us to delight in the service of God, Psalm. 100.2. Serve
the Lord with gladness, Isa. 58.13. Thou shall call the Sabbath thy delight,
Ergo. Secondly, God loves not such as go a whoring from him, Psalm. 73. ult. but
God loves a cheerful server of God, 2 Cor. 8. Therefore, such as serve him
cheerfully, do not thereby go a whoring from him.

Error 58. To help my faith, and comfort my conscience in evil hours, from
former experience of Gods grace in me, is not a way of grace.

Confutation 58. What the Saints have done and found true comfort in, that is a
way of grace; but they did help their faith, and comfort their conscience from
former evidences of Gods grace in them: Psalm. 77.5, 6, 11. I considered the
days of old, and called to remembrance my songs in the night; and by this
raised he up his faith, as the latter part of the Psalm shows; and this was
in evil hours, ver. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, that in
simplicity and godly pureness, we have had our conversation, and this was in
sad hours ver. 4, 5, 8, 9, 10. Job 35.10. None says, Where is God that made
me, which gives songs in the night? here the not attending to former
consolation, is counted a sinful neglect.

Error 59. A man may not be exhorted to any duty, because he has no power to
do it.

Confutation 59. This is contrary to Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your salvation
etc. For it is God that works in you both the will and the deed, Ephesians. 5.14.
A wake thou that sleep, so 1 Cor. 15. ult.

Error 60. A man may not prove his election by his vocation, but his vocation
by his election.

Confutation 60. This is contrary to 1 These. 2.4. knowing your election,
because our Gospel came unto you, not in word only, but in power, 2 Thessalonians.
2.13, 14. God has elected you to life, through sanctification of the Spirit,
whereunto he has called you by our Gospel.

Error 61. All Doctrines, Revelations and Spirits, must be tried by Christ the
word, rather then by the Word of Christ.

Confutation 61. This assertion of it intends to exclude the word, we conceive
it contrary to Esaias 8.20. John 5.39. Acts 17.11. also to 2 John 4.1, 2. Try
the spirits, every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, etc. where Spirits and Doctrines confessing that Christ is come in the
flesh, are made distinct from Christ.

Error 62. It is a dangerous thing to close with Christ in a promise.

Confutation 62. This is contrary to Joh. 3.16. Act. 10.43. Isa. 55.1, 2.
Matthew. 11.28. Joh 7.37. If Christ in these places invite men to come unto him,
and bids them incline and hearken, and tells them their Souls shall live, and
they shall drink and be refreshed by hm, and by these promises encourages
them to close with him, then it is no dangerous thing to close with him in a
promise, it is no danger to obey a Command of God: but we are commanded to
believe the Gospel, Mar. 1.15, 1. the promise being a part of the Gospel.

Error 63. No better is the evidence from the two witnesses of water and blood,
mentioned 1 John. 5.6, 7, 8. then mount Calvary, and the Soldiers that shed
Christ's blood, and these might have drunk of it; poor evidences.

Confutation 63. Then what God has ordained or made an evidence, is no better
then what he has not made, then Christ loses his end in coming by water and
blood, verse. 6. then the Spirit should agree no better with the witness of
water and blood, then it does with Mount Calvary, and the Soldiers: but the
Spirit does agree with the water and the blood, and not with the other, 1 John
5.7. These three agree in one.

Error 64. A man must take no notice of his sin, nor of his repentance for
his sin.

Confutation 64. This is contrary to David, whose sins were ever before him,
Psalm. 51. he considered his ways (and the evil of them) that he might turn
his feet to Gods Testimonies, Psalm. 119 59. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just, etc. If we say we have not sinned we make him a liar, 1 John 1.8, 9, 10. Job took notice of sin and of his repentance, I abhor my
self and repent in dust and ashes, Job 42 6. David sees, and says, I am
sorry for my sins, Psalm. 38 28. Solomon's penitent must know the Plague in his
heart, that is, his finne and the punishment thereof, 1 Kings 8 38.

Error 65. The Church in admitting members is not to look to holiness of
life, or Testimony of the same.

Confutation 65. This is contrary to Romans 1.7. and the inscriptions of diverse
Epistles, being directed to Saints, and Saints by calling, and 1 Cor. 14 33.
Churches of the Saints, Acts 2. the members there, were said to repent before
they were admitted, and 1 Cor. 5. the incestuous person should not then have
been cast out for want of holiness, and Paul could not be received into
communion without Testimony, Acts 9 26.

Error 66. To lay the brethren under a Covenant of works, hurts not, but tends
to much good to make men look the better to their evidences.

Confutation 66. If that be done ungroundedly, it is contrary to Isa. 5.20.
where woe is pronounced to such as call good evil, etc. and Ezekiel. 13.22. that
make such hearts sad, as the Lord would not have sadded; and it is against the
rule of the Covenant, 1 Cor. 13. besides, it may trench upon the devils office,
in accusing the Brethren, and then it will be good to tell untruth, good to
break house and Church Communion, then good to break nearest relations, then
good to bite one another, and good to offend the little ones, Matthew. 18.

Error 67. A man cannot evidence his justification by his sanctification, but
he must needs build upon his sanctification, and trust to it.

Confutation 67. First, this is contrary to 1 John 3.18, 19. where the holy
Ghost says, that by unfeigned and hearty love we may have assurance, and yet
neither there nor any where else would have us trust to our sanctification, so
verse. 7. He that does righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous.
Secondly, if poverty of spirit, which emptieth us of all confidence in our
selves, may evidence a man's justification without trusting to it, then may
sanctification without trusting to it; but the former is true, therefore also
the latter. Thirdly, if it be an ordinance of God to evidence our justification
by our sanctification, then we may do this without trusting to it: but that is
apparent from, 2 Pet. 1.10. Ergo.

Error 68. Faith justifies an unbeleever, that is, that faith that is in
Christ, justifies me that have no faith in my self.

Confutation 68. This is contrary to Hab. 2.4. For if the just shall live by
his faith, then that faith that justifies is not in Christ. So John 3. ult. He
that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him: it is not another faith
will save me.

Error 69. Though a man can prove a gracious worker in: himself, and Christ
to be the author of it, if thereby he will prove Christ to be his, this is but
a sandy foundation.

Confutation 69. This is contrary to these Scriptures, John 14.21. and 28. He
that keeps my commandments, is he that loves me, and he that loves me,
shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will show my self unto
him, 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we
love the brethren, and 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son has life: therefore
he that can prove that he has spiritual life, may assure himself that he
has Christ.

Error 70. Frequency or length of holy duties or trouble of conscience for
neglect thereof, are all signs of one under a Covenant of works.

Confutation 70. This is contrary to these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.58. Be
abundant always in the work of the Lord: if the faithful in Christ Jesus be
commanded to abound always in the work of the Lord, that is, holy duties,
then frequency in holy duties is no sign of one under a Covenant of works:
but the former is true, therefore also the latter; as also 1 These. 4.17.18.
Psalm. 55.17. Evening and morning and noone will I pray and make a noise, and he
will hear me; and elsewhere, Seven times a day do I praise thee, Psalm.
119.146. Psalm. 1.2. So also contrary is the third branch to these Scriptures, 2
Cor. 7.8.11. the Corinthians were troubled in conscience, and sorrowed that
they had neglected the holy duties of Church censure toward the incestuous
person, and Isa. 64.7. and 8. Cant. 5.2. Romans 7.19. I do not the good I would,
which he lamenteth and complains of.

Error 71. The immediate revelation of my good estate, without any respect to
the Scriptures, is as clear to me, as the voice of God from Heaven to Paul.

Confutation 71. This is contrary to John 14.26. He shall teach you all things,
and bring all things to your remembrance, etc. whence we reason thus. If the
Spirit reveal nothing without concurrence of the Word, then this revelation of
the Spirit without respect to the Word is not clear, nor to be trusted: but
the Spirit does reveal nothing, but with respect to the Word, for John 14.26.
If the office of the Spirit be to teach and to bring to remembrance the things
that Christ has taught us, Esaias 8.20. what ever spirit speaks not according
to this Word, there is no light there.

Error 72. It is a fundamental and soule-damning error to make
sanctification an evidence of justification.

Confutation 72. This is contrary to these Scriptures, Romans 8.1. They that
walk after the Spirit, are freed from condemnation; and are in Christ, and so
justified: so 1 John 3.10. In this are the children of God known, etc.

Error 73. Christ's work of grace can no more distinguish between a Hypocrite
and a Saint, then the rain that falls from Heaven between the just and the
unjust.

Confutation 73. This proposition being general includes all gracious works,
and being so taken is contradicted in the parable of the sower, Matthew.
13.20.21, 22. where the good ground is distinguished from the stony by this,
that it brings forth fruit with patience, so Hebr. 6.9. there is something
better in the Saints then those common gifts which are found in Hypocrites.

Error 74. All verbal Covenants, or Covenants expressed in words, as Church
Covenants, vows, etc. are Covenants of works, and such as strike men off from
Christ.

Confutation 74. First, this is contrary to Scripture, Esaias 44 5. One shall
say, I am the Lords, another shall call himself by the name of the God of
Jacob: Romans 10.10. With the mouth confession is made to salvation. Secondly,
contrary to reason, for then the Covenant of grace is made a Covenant of
works, by the writing, reading, and preaching of the same, for they are
verbal expressions of the Covenant on Gods part, as Church Covenants verbally
express our closing herewith.

Error 75. The Spirit gives such full and clear evidence of my good estate,
that I have no need to be tried by the fruits of sanctification, this were to
light a candle to the Sun.

Confutation 75. This opinion taken in this sense, that after the Spirit has
testified a man's good estate, the person need not to be tried by the fruit of
sanctification, is contrary to the scope of the whole first Epistle of Saint
John, where variety of arguments are propounded to all believers in common, 1
John 5.13. to distinguish the persons of believers from unbeleevers; the water
is annexed to the Spirit and blood, 1 John 5.8.

Error 76. The Devil and nature may be cause of a gracious work.

Confutation 76. The words are unsavory, and the position unsound, for taking
[gracious] according to the language of the Scripture, gracious words, Luke
4.22. Let your speech be gracious, gracious words are such as issue from the
saving grace of Christ's Spirit indwelling in the soul, which neither the
Devil, nor nature is able to produce, for Christ professes, John 15.3, 4.
Without me ye can do nothing, nothing truly gracious, John 3. What ever is
borne of the flesh is flesh, and Romans 7.18. In my flesh dwells no good, (truly
spiritual and gracious) Genesis 6.5. Every imagination of the thoughts of a man's
heart, are evil, and that continually; Besides, the Devil is that evil and
wicked one, only wickedness, an adversary to Gods grace and glory, that which
is contrary to corrupt nature, and the hellish nature of Satan, and above the
power of both, they cannot be the causes of gracious works.

Error 77. Sanctification is so far from evidencing a good estate that it
darkens it rather, and a man may more clearly see Christ, when he sees no
sanctification then when he does, the darker my sanctification is, the brighter
is my justification.

Confutation 77. This is contrary to the Scripture of truth, which rather
gives the name of light to sanctification and holiness, and even for this
use, to clear our justification, 1 John 1.6, 7. For the holy Ghost concludes
as from a clear and infallible promise, and proposition, that if we walk in
the light, as he is in the light, then does the blood of Christ cleanse us from
all sin; meaning, that then and thereby it appears that it is done: as by
the contrary unholinesse, and unholy walking is like darkness, which obscureth
all the goodly presumption flourishes and hopes of an unregenerate man, verse.
6. For this purpose, 1 John 5.8. the water of sanctification is made a
witness, now the nature of a witness is not to darken and obscure matters in
question, but to clear them, and Psalm. 51.10, 11, 12. when David saw his heart
so unclean, and his spirit so altogether out of order, his justification was
not then brighter, for then he should have had the joy of his salvation more
full, and not so to sink as that he begs it might be restored to him, as
implying, that his joy for the present was wanting to him.

Error 78. God has given six witnesses, three in Heaven and three in earth,
to beget and build justifying faith upon.

Confutation 78. This expression answers not the pattern of wholesome words,
for if this position be taken thus, God has given all these six witnesses
both to beget and also to build justifying faith upon, it is contrary to
Scripture, for God has not given all these fix witnesses to beget justifying
faith, because the water of sanctification, which is one of the six, does not
go before justifying faith, but follows after it, for our hearts are
justified by faith, Acts 15.9.

Error 79. If a member of a Church be unsatisfied with any thing in the
Church, if he express his offense, whether he has used all means to convince
the Church or no, he may depart.

Confutation 79. Contrary to the rule of our Savior, Matthew. 18. If thy brother
offend (convictingly) admonish; whence it is evident, that in our carriage
toward a private brother we must convince him, before admonish him, much less
separate from him. Therefore our carriage toward the whole Church must upon
greater reason be with like prudence, and tenderness; whence the argument
follows thus. An offense taken before conviction will not bear an admonition,
much less separation from a brother or Church: but the offense in the question
propounded is such, Ergo.

Error 80. If a man think he may edify better in another congregation then
in his own, that is ground enough to depart ordinarily, from word, seals,
fastings, feastings, and all administrations in his own Church,
notwithstanding the offense of the Church, often manifested to him for so doing.

Confutation 80. It is contrary to the condition and station of a member of the
body in which he stands, 1 Cor. 12.27. A member must not put it self from the
body upon its own thoughts; as the admission of a member was by the consent of
the whole, so likewise must his dismission be. It is contrary also to the duty
of a member, Ephesians. 4.16. there must be an effectual working in every part for
the edification of the whole which this departure from the administration of
all the holy ordinances in the Church will necessarily hinder. It is contrary
also to the good of the whole Church, and the rule which the Lord has
appointed for the preservation thereof, 1 Cor. 14 33. God is not the author of
confusion, and therefore not of this practice which will certainly bring it,
for if one member upon these his imaginations may depart, why may not ten, yea
twenty, yea an hundred? Why may not the Pastor upon such grounds leave his
people, as well as they him, considering the tie is equal on both parts?

Error 81. Where faith is held forth by the Ministry, as the condition of the
covenant of grace on man's part, as also evidencing justification by
sanctification, and the activity of faith, in that Church there is not
sufficient bread.

Confutation 81. This position seems to deny faith to be a condition at all,
or at all active, and so if condition in this place signify a qualification in
man wrought by the holy Ghost, without which the promises do not belong to
men, this is contrary to Scripture, for John 6.48. Christ is the bread of life,
and yet in the same chapter faith is held out as a condition of the covenant by
the Ministry of Christ himself; and the activity of it is held forth in these
words, Verily I say unto you, unless ye eat the flesh, and drink the blood
of the Son of man, you have no life in you, and who so eats, etc. As for
the lawfulness of evidencing justification by sanctification (if it be
understood of that sanctification which is by faith in Christ) it is contrary
to the intent of the whole Epistle of John, besides many other places of
Scripture which yet hold forth bread sufficient (if by sufficient is meant that
doctrine, which in its right use is wholesome and good food) for it was written
that their joy might be full; yet the evidencing of justification by
sanctification is expressly held forth chap. 1. verse. 7. where he says, If we
walk in the light, as Christ is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin; by walking
in the light, in opposition to walking in darkness spoken of before, verse 6.
Sanctification is evidently meant, and this is expressly noted to be an
evidence of our good condition, when it is said, if we so walk, the blood of
Christ cleanses us from all finne.

Error 82. A Minister must not pray nor preach against any error, unless he
declare in the open Congregation, upon any members enquiry, the names of them
that hold them.

Confutation 82. This is contrary to Scriptures, which teach Ministers to pray
and preach against all errors by whom soever they be held, when it calls
them Watchmen and Stewards, in whom faithfulness is required in all
administrations: yet withal it enjoyneth them if a brother sin not openly,
to admonish him in secret, first between them two alone, and afterward in the
presence of two or three witnesses, and after that (and not before) to bring
the matter to the Church, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17.

Unsavory speeches confuted.
These that follow were judged by the Assembly aforesaid, as unsafe speeches.
1. TO say that we are justified by faith is an unsafe speech, we must say we
are justified by Christ.

Answer 1. Faise, for the constant language of the Scripture is not unsafe; but
we are justified by faith, is the constant language of the Scripture, Romans 5.1.
being justified by faith; the righteousness of faith, Romans 10.31, 32.
Righteousness by faith, Phil. 3, 9, 10.

2. The distinct phrase of the Scripture used in distinguishing Legal and
Evangelicall righteousness is no unsafe speech, but such is this, Romans 9.31,
32. Israel found not righteousness, because they sought it of the Law, and not
of, or by faith, so Romans 10.5, 6. The righteousness of faith, says thus, etc.
The Apostle makes these two so directly opposite, as membra dividentia, or
contrary species, that there is no danger one should be taken for another, but
that it is so safe, as that he that affirms the one denies the other: yea in
the most exact expression that ever Paul made, to exclude whatsoever might be
unsafe toward a man's justification, you have this phrase, yea twice in the
same verse, Phil. 3.9. not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ; And again, The
righteousness which is of God by faith ((...)) Ergo, it is no unsafe speech,
yea it must be said on the contrary from those grounds, that to say a man is
justified before faith, or without faith is unsafe, as contrary to the language
of the Scriptures.

And for the second part, that we must say, we are justified by Christ, it is
true so far, as that it cannot be denied, nor is it unsound or unsafe at all
so to speak, but if it mean a must of necessity always, or only so to
speak as it is here set in opposition to the phrase of being justified by
faith, then it is utterly false, for as much as the Scripture leads us along
in the way of other expressions ordinarily, and the Apostle gives us the truth
of doctrine and soundness of phrase together, Romans 10.3. Christ is the end of
the Law for righteousness to every one that believes.

2. To evidence justification by sanctification, or graces, savours of Rome.

Answer. Not so. 1. Rome acknowledges not justification in our common fense,
Scil. by righteousness imputed. 2. Rome demies evidencing of our justification
and peace with God, and teaches a doctrine of doubting, and professes that a
man cannot know what God will do with him for life or death, unless by
special revelation, which is not ordinary. But if they mean old Rome, or
Paul's Rome, to which he wrote, it is true, that it savours of the doctrine that
they received, as appears, Romans 8.28. All things co-worke for good (the evil
of every evil being taken away, which is a point of justification, and this is
propounded under the evidence of the love of God) to them that love him,
because Romans 8.2.9.13.14. the evidencing of our being in Christ, freedom from
condemnation, and adoption is prosecuted by arguments from sanctification, as
by having the spirit, being led by the spirit, walking after the spirit,
mortifying the deeds of the flesh by the spirit: and if hereto were added the
doctrine of Saint John so abundant this way in his first Epistle (whereof I
have already made mention) I doubt not, but it was the faith of the Church of
Rome that then was, so that the speech is unsavory, and casting a foul
aspersion upon a good thing expressed in the Scriptures, but as for the point
it self, that is included, we refer it to its place, to be discussed, when
it is rightly stated.

3. If I be holy I am never the better accepted of God, if I be unholy I am
never the worse, this I am sure of, be that has electodome must save me.

Answ. These words savor very ill, and relish of a careless and ungraclous
spirit, for howsoever we grant that our acceptance unto justification is
always in and through Christ the same in Gods account, yet this expression
imports, that though a man's conversation be never so holy and gracious, yet he
can expect never the more manifestation of Gods kindness and love to him,
contrary to Psalm. 50. ult. To him that orders his conversation aright I will
show the salvation of God, and John 14.21. It implies secondly, that though a
man's conversation be never so vile and sensual, yet he need not fear nor
expect any further expression of Gods displeasure and anger to break forth
against him, or withdrawings of his favor from him, contrary to Psalm. 51.8.11,
12. where God breaks David's bones for his sin, and Jonah 2.4. Jonah was as
one cast out of Gods presence, and 2 Chronicles. 15.2. If you forsake him he will
forsake you: And in a word it imports, as if God neither loved righteousness,
nor hated wickedness, contrary to Psalm. 5.6 7. and did take no delight in the
obedience of his people, contrary to Psalm. 147.11. The Lord delights in those
that fear him, etc. As concerning the last clause, he that has elected me
must save me: it is true, the foundation of Gods election remains sure, yet
it is as true, that whom he chooses, he purposes to bring to Salvation,
through Sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These. 2.13.

4. If Christ will let me sin, let him look to it, upon his honor be it.

Answ. This retorts the Lords words upon himself, Prove. 4.23, 24 Keep thine
heart, etc. Ponder thy paths, etc. and therefore no less blasphemous, and is
contrary to the professed practice of David, Psalm. 18 23. I was upright before
him, and kept my self from mine iniquity: The latter clause puts the cause of
Gods dishonor upon himself, no less blasphemous then the former, and
contrary to Romans 2.23. where the dishonouring of God is laid upon themselves.

5. Here is a great stir about graces and looking to hearts, but give me
Christ, I seek not for graces, but for Christ, I seek not for promises, but
for Christ, I seek not for sanctification, but for Christ, tell not me of
meditation and duties, but tell me of Christ.

Answ. 1. This speech seems to make a flat opposition between Christ and his
graces, contrary to that in Joh. 1.16. Of his fullness we all received, and
grace for grace; and between Christ and his promises, contrary to Gal. 3.13,
14. Christ was made a curse that we might receive the promise of the Spirit,
and Luke 1.70. with 74. And betwixt Christ and all holy duties, contrary to
Tit. 2.14. and therefore hold forth expressions not agreeing to wholesome
doctrine.

6. A living faith, that has living fruits, may grow from the living Law.

Answ. This whole speech is utterly cross to the sound form of words
required, 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words. 1. That a Hypocrite
may have a living Law, is contrary to James 2.17. where the hypocrites faith is
called a dead faith. 2. That a hypocrite may bring forth living fruit, is
contrary to that, Heb. 9.14. 3. That all this grows from a living law,
contrary to 2 Cor. 3 6. where the law is called a killing letter, and to Gal.
3.21. If there had been a law which could have given life, etc.

7. I may know I am Christ's, not because I do crucify the lusts of the flesh,
but because I do not crucify them, but believe in Christ that crucified my
lusts for me.

Answ. 1. The phrase is contrary to the Scripture language, Gal. 5.24. They
that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. 2. It
savours of the flesh, for these three things may seem to be expressed in it.
1. If Scripture makes not opposite, but subordinate, Romans 8.13. I through the
Spirit crucify the flesh. 2. That if I do not crucify my lusts, then there
is an open and free way of looking to Christ, contrary to the Scripture, Mat.
5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, both in boldness
of faith here, and fruition hereafter, 2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that names
the Lord Jesus, depart from iniquity. 3. That believing in Christ, may ease me
from endeavoring to crucify my lusts in my own person; which is so gross,
that it needs no more confutation then to name it. 4. The safe sense that may
be possibly intended in such a speech is this, If I crucify the flesh in my
own strength, it is no safe evidence of my being in Christ, but if renouncing
my self, I crucify the flesh in the strength of Christ, applying his death by
faith, it is a safe evidence of my being in Christ: but this sense conveyed
in these words, is to conveigh wholesome doctrine in an unwholesome Channel,
and a darkening and losing the truth in an unsavory expression.

8. Peter more leaned to a Covenant of works then Paul, Paul's doctrine was
more for free grace then Peter's.

Answ. To oppose these persons and the doctrine of these two Apostles of
Christ, who were guided by one and the same Spirit in preaching and penning
thereof, (2 Pet. 1.21. Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy
Ghost, 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God) in such a
point as the Covenant of works and grace, is little less then blasphemy.

9. If Christ be my Sanctiflcation, what need I look to any thing in my
self, to evidence my justification?

Answ. This position is therefore unsound, because it holds forth Christ to be
my sanctification, so as that I need not look to any inherent holiness in my
self; whereas Christ is therefore said to be our sanctification, because he
works sanctification in us, and we daily ought to grow up in him, by receiving
new supply and increase of grace from his fullness, according to 2 Pet. 3.18.
Grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The proceedings of the General Court holden at New Town in the Massachusetts
in New England, October. 2. 1637. Against Mr. Wheelwright and other erroneous and
seditious persons for their disturbances of the public peace.
ALthough the Assembly of the Churches had confuted and condemned most of those
new opinions which were sprung up amongst us, and Mr. Cotton had in public
view consented with the rest, yet the leaders in those erroneous ways would
not give in, but stood still to maintain their new light, which they had
boasted of, and that the difference was still as wide as before, viz. as great
as between heaven and hell: Mr. Wheelwright also continued his preaching after
his former manner, and Mistress Hutchison her wonted meetings and exercises, and
much offense was still given by her, and others in going out of the ordinary
assemblies, when Mr Wall. began any exercise; and some of the messengers of the
Church of Boston, had contemptuously withdrawn themselves from the general
Assembly, with professed dislike of their proceedings, and many evidences brake
forth of their discontented and turbulent spirits; it was conceived by the
Magistrates, and others of the Country, that the means which had been used,
proving uneffectuall, the case was now desperate, and the last remedy was to
be applied, and that without further delay, lest it should be attempted too
late, when fitter opportunity might be offered for their advantage, as they
had boasted, and did certainly expect upon the return of some of their chief
supporters, who by a special providence were now absent from them: And for
this end the general Court being assembled in the ordinary course, it was
determined to begin with these troublers of our peace, and to suppress them by
the civil authority, whereunto there was a fair occasion offered upon a
seditious writing, which had been delivered into the Court in March, when Mr.
Wheel. was convict of sedition, etc. under the hands of more than threescore of
them, and entitled A Remonstrance or Petition, the Contents whereof were as
follows:

We whose names are under written (have diligently observed this honored
Courts proceedings against our dear and reverend brother in Christ, Mr. Wheel.
now under censure of the Court, for the truth of Christ) we do humbly beseech
this honorable Court to accept this Remonstrance and Petition of ours, in all
due submission tendered to your Worships.

For first, whereas our beloved Brother Mr. Wheel. is censured for contempt, by
the greater part of this honored Court, we desire your Worships to consider
the sincere intention of our Brother to promote your end in the day of Fast,
for whereas we do perceive your principal intention the day of Fast looked
chiefly at the public peace of the Churches, our Reverend Brother did to his
best strength, and as the Lord assisted him, labor to promote your end, and
therefore indevoured to draw us nearer unto Christ, the head of our union, that
so we might be established in peace, which we conceive to be the true way,
sanctified of God, to obtain your end, and therefore deserves no such censure
as we conceive.

Secondly, Whereas our dear Brother is censured of sedition; we beseech your
Worships to consider, that either the person condemned must be culpable of
some seditious fact, or his doctrine must be seditious, or must breed sedition
in the hearts of his hearers or else we know not upon what grounds he should
be censured. Now to the first, we have not heard any that have witnessed
against our brother for any seditious fact. Secondly, neither was the doctrine
it self, being no other but the very expressions of the Holy Ghost himself,
and therefore cannot justly be branded with sedition. Thirdly, if you look at
the effects of his Doctrine upon the hearers, it has not stirred up sedition
in us, not so much as by accident; we have not drawn the sword, as sometimes
Peter did, rashly, neither have we rescued our innocent Brother, as sometimes
the Israelites did Jonathan, and yet they did not seditiously. The Covenant of
free Grace held forth by our Brother, has taught us rather to become humble
suppliants to your Worships, and if we should not prevail, we would rather
with patience give our cheeks to the smiters. Since therefore the Teacher, the
Doctrine, and the hearers be most free from sedition (as we conceive) we
humbly beseech you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, your Judge and ours,
and for the honor of this Court, and the proceedings thereof, that you will
be pleased either to make it appear to us, and to all the world, to whom the
knowledge of all these things will come, wherein the sedition lies, or else
acquit our Brother of such a censure.

Further, we beseech you remember the old method of Satan, the ancient enemy
of Free Grace, in all ages of the Churches, who has raised up such calumnies
against the faithful Prophets of God, Eliah was called the troubler of Israel,
1 King. 18.17, 18. Amos was charged for conspiracy, Amos 7.10. Paul was counted
a pestilent fellow, or moover of sedition, and a ringleader of a Sect, Acts
24.5. and Christ himself, as well as Paul, was charged to be a Teacher of New
Doctrine, Mark. 1.27. Acts 17 19. Now we beseech you consider, whether that
old serpent work not after his old method, even in our days.

Further, we beseech you consider the danger of meddling against the Prophets
of God, Psalm. 105.14.15. for what ye do unto them, the Lord Jesus takes as
done unto himself; if you hurt any of his members, the head is very sensible
of it: for so says the Lord of Hosts, He that touches you touches the apple
of mine eye, Zach. 2.8. And better a millstone were hanged about our necks,
and that we were cast into the sea, then that we should offend any of these
little ones, which believe on him, Matthew 18.6.

And lastly, we beseech you consider, how you should stand in relation to us,
as nursing Fathers, which gives us encouragement to promote our humble requests
to you, or else we would say with the Prophet, Isa. 22.4. Look from me that I
may weep bitterly, Labor not to comfort me, etc. or as Jer. 9.2. O that I had
in the wilderness a lodging place of a wayfaring man. And thus have we made
known our griefs and desires to your Worships, and leave them upon record with
the Lord and with you, knowing that if we should receive repulse from you,
with the Lord we shall find grace.

Amongst others who had subscribed to this writing, William Aspinwall was one,
and being returned for one of the Deputies of Boston, it was propounded in the
Court, whether he was fit to be received a member of the Court, having
subscribed to the said writing, which was so much to the dishonor and contempt
thereof, etc. Whereupon he was demanded if he would justify the matter
contained in the said writing: which when he had peremptorily affirmed, by the
vote of the Court he was presently dismissed: Whereupon Mr. Cogshall, another
of the Deputies of Boston, who had not subscribed to the said writing, being
then a Deputy of the Court, spoke very boldly to the Court, and told them, that
seeing they had put out Mr. Aspinwall for that matter, they were best make one
work of all, for as for himself, though his hand were not to the Petition, yet
he did approve of it, and his hand was to a Protestation, which was to the
same effect; Whereupon the Court dismissed him also, and sent word to Boston to
choose two new Deputies: then Mr. Coddington the third Deputy, moved the Court
(by Order from the Town of Boston) that the former censure against Mr. Wheel.
might be reversed, and that the Order made against receiving such as should
not be allowed by the Magistrates might be repealed; whereby the Court
perceived their obstinate resolution in maintaining this faction, and thereupon
gave Order he should be sent for; and for the Law, the answer was, that
whereas a Declaration had been made of the equity of that Law, and that
specially for the satisfaction of those of Boston, and an Answer had been
published by some of them, wherein much reproach and slander had been cast upon
the Court, to which a reply had been made above six weeks since, but was kept
in upon expectation that the late Assembly would have had some good effect, in
clearing the points in controversy, and reconciling the minds of the adverse
party, but they continuing obstinate and irreconciliable, it was thought fit
the whole proceedings about the law should be brought forth, and accordingly
the next day, the Declaration, the Answer and the Reply were all brought to the
Court, and there openly read; which gave such satisfaction to those which were
present as no man ought to object, and some that were of the adverse party, and
had taken offense at the Law, did openly acknowledge themselves fully satisfied.

When the Warrant came to the Town of Boston, they assembled together and
agreed (the greater part of them) to send the same Deputies which the Court
have rejected, pretending that it was their liberty, and those were the ablest
men, etc. but Mr. Cotton coming amongst them, and perceiving their rash and
contemptuous hehaviour, by his wisdom diverted them from that course: so they
chose two other, but one of them they knew would be rejected, because his hand
was also to the seditious writing, as it fell out, for he refusing to
acknowledge his fault in it, was also dismissed, and a new Warrant sent for
another to be chosen, which they never made any return of, but that contempt
the Court let pass.

When Mr. Wheelwright appeared, it was declared to him, that whereas he was
long since convict of sedition and contempt of authority, and time had been
given him from Court to Court, to come to the knowledge of his offense, the
Court thought it now time to know how his mind stood, whether he would
acknowledge his offense, or abide the sentence of the Court? His Answer was to
this effect, that he had committed no sedition nor contempt, he had delivered
nothing but the truth of Christ, and for the application of his doctrine it was
by others, and not by him, etc.

To which it was answered by the Court, that they had not censured his
doctrine, but left it as it was; but his application, by which he laid the
Magistrates, and the Ministers, and most of the people of God in these
Churches, under a Covenant of works, and thereupon declared them to be enemies
to Christ, and Antichrists, and such enemies as Herod and Pilate, and the
Scribes and Pharisees, etc. persuading the people to look at them, and deal
with them as such, and that he described them so, as all men might know who
he meant, as well as if he had named the parties; for he was present in the
Court a little before, when both Magistrates and Ministers did openly profess
their judgment in that point, and that they did walk in such a way of
evidencing justification by sanctification, etc. as he held forth to be a
Covenant of works.

Secondly, the fruits of that Sermon of Mr. Wheelwright, together with the
Declaration of his judgment in that point both before and since, have declared
it to tend to sedition: for whereas before he broached his opinions, there was
a peaceable and comely order in all affairs in the Churches, and civil state,
etc. now the difference which he has raised amongst men, by a false
distinction of a Covenant of grace and a Covenant of works; whereby one party
is looked at as friends to Christ, and the other as his enemies, etc. All
things are turned upside down among us: As first, in the Church, he that will
not renounce his sanctification, and wait for an immediate revelation of the
Spirit, cannot be admitted, be he never so godly; he that is already in the
Church, that will not do the same, and acknowledge this new light, and say as
they say, is presently noted, and under-esteemed, as savouring of a Covenant of
works: thence it spreads into the families, and sets divisions between husband
and wife, and other relations there, till the weaker give place to the
stronger, otherwise it turns to open contention: it is come also into Civil
and public affairs, and has bred great disturbance there, as appeared in the
late expedition against the Pequeds; for whereas in former expeditions the
Town of Boston was as forward as any others to send of their choice members,
and a greater number then other Towns in the time of the former Governor; now
in this last service they sent not a member, but one or two whom they cared not
to be rid of, and but a few others, and those of the most refuse sort, and that
in such a careless manner, as gave great discouragement to the service, not
one man of that side accompanying their Pastor, when he was sent by the joint
consent of the Court, and all the Elders upon that expedition, nor so much as
bidding him farewell; what was the reason of this difference? Why, nothing but
this, Mr. Wheelwright had caught them that the former Governor and some of the
Magistrates then were friends of Christ and Free Grace, but the present were
enemies, etc. Antichrists, persecutors: What was the reason that the former
Governor never stirred out, but attended by the Sergeants, with Halberts or
Carbines, but this present Governor neglected? Why, the people were taught to
look at this, as an enemy to Christ, etc. The same difference bath been
observed in Town lots, rates, and in neighbor meetings, and almost in all
affairs, whereby it is apparent what disturbance the seditious application of
Mr. Wheelwright has wrought among us; therefore as the Apostle says, I would
they were cut off that trouble you; and as Cain, Hagar, and Ismael, were
expelled as troublers of the families, (which were then as commonwealths) so
justice requires, and the necessity of the peace calls for it, that such
disturbers should be put out from among us, seeing it is one of their tenants,
that it is not possible their opinions, and external peace, can stand
together; and that the difference between them and us is (as they say) as wide
as between Heaven and Hell.

Further the Court declared what means had been used, to convince him and to
reduce him into the right way, as first at the Court, when he was convict of
his offense, the Ministers being called together did labor by many sound
arguments, both in public and private to convince him of his error and sin,
but he contemptuously slighted whatsoever they or the Magistrates said to him
in that behalf; and since that much pains had been taken with him, both by
conference and writing, not only privately, but also by the late Assembly of
the Churches, wherein his erroneous opinions, which were the groundworke of his
seditious Sermon, were clearly confuted, and himself put to silence, yet he
obstinately persisted in justification of his errroneous opinions; and besides
there was an Apology written in defense of the proceedings of the Court
against him, which though it were kept in for a time in expectation of a
Remonstrance, which some of his party were in hand with, for justification of
his Sermon, yet it was long since published, and without question he has seen
it: besides the Court has used much patience toward him from time to time,
admonishing him of his danger, and waiting for his repentance, in stead whereof
he has threatened us with an appeal, and urged us to proceed: To this Mr.
Wheelwright replied, that he would, by the help of God, make good his
doctrines, and free them from all the arguments which had been brought against
them in the late Assembly, and denied that he had seen the Apology, but
confessed that he might have seen it if he would. This was observed as an
argument of the pride of his spirit, and wilful neglect of all the means of
light in that he would not vouchsafe to read a very brief writing, and such as
so much concerned him.

Although the cause was now ready for sentence, yet night being come, the Court
arose, and enjoined him to appear the next morning.

The next morning he appeared, but long after the hour appointed; the Court
demanded what he had to allege, why sentence should not proceed against him;
He answered, that there was no sedition or contempt proved against him, and
whereas he was charged to have set forth the Magistrates and Ministers, as
enemies to Christ, etc. he desired it might be showed him in what page or leaf
of his Sermon he had so said of them; The Court answered, that he who designs
a man by such circumstances, as do note him out to common intendments, does as
much as if he named the party: when Paul spoke of those of the circumcision, it
was as certain whom he meant as if he named the Jews; when in Bobemia they
spoke of differences between men, sub una and sub utraque, it was all one as
to have said Papists and Protestants; so of the Monstrants and Remonstrants:
for by the means of him and his followers, all the people of God in this
Country were under the distinction of men under the Covenant of grace, and men
under a Covenant of works. Mr. Wheelwright alleged a place in Matthew. 21.
where Christ speaking against the Scribes and Pharisees, no advantage could
they take against him because he did not name them, but it was answered they
did not spare him for that cause, for then they would have taken their
advantage at other times; when he did name them. One or two of the Deputies
spoke in his defense, but it was to so little purpose (being only more out of
affection to the party, then true judgment of the state of the cause) that the
Court had little regard of it. Mr. Wheelwright being demanded if he had ought
else to speak, said that there was a double Pharisee in the charge laid upon
them. 1. In that the troubles of the Civil State were imputed to him, but as
it was by accident, as it is usual in preaching of the Gospel. 2. That it was
not his Sermon that was the cause of them, but the Lord Jesus Christ. To which
the Court answered, that it was apparent he was the instrument of our troubles,
he must prove them to be by such accident, and till then the blame must rest
upon himself, for we know Christ would not own them, being out of his way.
After these and many other speeches had passed, the Court declaring him guilty
for troubling the civil peace, both for his seditious Sermon, and for his
corrupt and dangerous opinions, and for his contemptuous behavior in diverse
Courts formerly, and now obstinately maintaining and justifying his said
errors and offenses, and for that he refused to depart voluntarily from us,
which the Court had now offered him, and in a manner persuaded him unto; Seeing
it was apparent unto him, from that of our Savior, Matthew. that we could not
continue together without the ruin of the whole, he was sentenced to be
disfranchised and banished our jurisdiction, and to be put in safe custody,
except he should give sufficient security to depart before the end of March:
Upon this he appealed to the Kings Majesty, but the Court told him an appeal
did not lie in this case, for the King having given us an authority by his
grant under his great Seal of England to hear and determine all causes
without any reservation, we were not to admit of any such appeals for any such
subordinate state, either in Ireland, or Scotland, or other places; and if an
appeal should lie in one case, it might be challenged in all, and then there
would be no use of government amongst us: neither did an appeal lie from any
Court in any County or Corporation in England, but if a party will remove his
cause to any of the Kings higher Courts, he must bring the Kings Writ for it;
neither did he tender any appeal, nor call any witnesses, nor desired any Act
to be entered of it: then he was demanded if be would give security for his
quiet departure, which he refusing to do, he was committed to the custody of
the Marshall. The next morning he bethought himself better, and offered to
give security, alleging that he did not conceive the day before that a
sentence of banishment was pronounced against him, he also suffered to
relinquish his appeal, and said he would accept of a simple banishment; The
Court answered him, that for his appeal, he might do as he pleased, and for
his departure, he should have the liberty the Court had offered him, provided
he should not preach in the mean time; but that he would not yield unto; so in
the end the Court gave him leave to go home, upon his promise, that if he were
not departed out of his jurisdiction within fourteen days, he would render
himself at the house of Mr. Stanton, one of the Magistrates, there to abide as
a prisoner, till the Court should dispose of him.

Mr. Cogshall.

THe next who was called, was Mr. John Cogshall, one of the Deacons of Boston,
upon his appearance the Court declared that the cause why they had sent for
him, was partly by occasion of his speeches and behavior in this Court the
other day, and partly for some light miscarriages at other times, and that they
did look at him as one that had a principal hand in all our late disturbances
of our public peace. The first thing we do charge you with, is your justfying
a writing called a Remonstrance or Petition, but indeed a seditious Libell, and
that when Mr. Asp. was questioned by the Court about it, you stood up uncalled,
and justified the same, saying to this effect, that if the Court meant to
dismiss him for that, it was best to make but one work of all, for though
your self had not your hand to the Petition, yet you did approve thereof, and
your hand was to the Protestation, which was to the same effect; whereupon you
being also dismissed, used clamorous and unbeseeming speeches to the Court at
your departure, whereby we take you to be of the same mind with those who made
the Petition, and therefore liable to the same punishment; upon this the
Petition was openly read, and liberty was granted to him to answer for
himself. His first answer was, that what he then spoke, he spoke as a member
of the Court: to which it was answered again, that 1. he was no member of the
Court standing upon trial whether to be allowed or rejected, at such time as
he uttered most of those speeches. 2. Admit he were, yet it is no privilege of
a member to reproach or affront the whole Court, it is licentiousness, and not
liberty, when a man may speak what he list; for he was reminded of some words
he uttered at his going forth of the Court, to this effect, that we had
censured the truth of Christ, and that it was the greatest stroke that ever was
given to Free Grace.

To which he answered, that his words were mistaken; for he said that he would
pray that our eyes might be opened to see what we did, for he thought it the
greatest stroke that ever was given to N. E. for he did believe that Master
Wheelwright did hold forth the truth. He was further charged, that at the
Court, after the day of elections, he complained of injury, that the Petition
which was tendered, was not presently read before they went to election.

To which being answered; that it was not then seasonable, and against the
order of that day, but the Court were then ready to hear it, if it were
tendered; whereupon he turned his back upon the Court, and used menacing
speeches to this effect. That since they could not be heard then, they would
take another course. To which he answered (confessing he spoke over hastily at
that time) that his words were only these, then we must do what God shall
direct us. He was further charged that he should say, that half the people
that were in Church Covenant in N.E. were under a Covenant of works, this he
did not deny, but said he proved it by the parable of the ten Virgins, Mat. 15.
After these and many other speeches had passed between the Court and himself,
by which it plainly appeared that he had been a very busy instrument, in
occasioning of our public disturbances, and his justifying of Mr.
Wheele-wrights Sermon; and the Petition or Remonstrance being seditious
writings, a motion was made for his banishment, but he pretended that there was
nothing could be laid to his charge, but matter of different opinion, and that
he knew not one example in Scripture, that a man was banished for his
judgment; it was answered, that if he had kept his judgment to himself, so
as the public peace had not been troubled or endangered by it, we should have
left him to himself, for we do not challenge power over men's consciences, but
when seditious speeches and practices discover such a corrupt conscience, it is
our duty to use authority to reform both. But though a great part of the Court
did incline to a motion for his banishment, yet because his speech and
behavior at present were more modest and submisse, then formerly they had
been, and for that he excused his former intemperances by his much employment
and public businesses, it was thought fit to deliver him from that temptation;
so he was only sentenced to be disfranchized, with admonition no more to
occasion any disturbance of the public peace, either by speech or otherwise,
upon pain of banishment and further censure.

Mr. Aspin,

THe next who was called was Mr. William Aspin, to whom the Court said that his
case was in a manner the same with Master Cogshalls, his hand was to the
Petition, he had justified Master Wheelwright his Sermon, and had condemned the
Court, and therefore what could he say, why the Court should not proceed to
sentence? For he had been present and heard what was said to Master Cogshall,
to have convinced him of his fault, and therefore it would be needless to
repeat any thing. To this he answered and confessed the Petition, and that his
heart was to it as well as his hand, and that that for which Master Wheelwright
was censured was for nothing but the truth of Christ, and desired to know what
we could lay to his charge therein. The Court told him that he being a member
of this civil Body, and going contrary to his relation and oath, to stop the
course of Justice in countenancing seditious persons and practices against the
face of authority, this made him a seditious person. He answered he did but
prefer a humble Petition, which he could not do but he must intimate some
cause why, and that Mephibosheth in his Petition did imply as much of David's
unjust sentence against him as was in this Petition. The Court replied that be
was ill advised to bring that example for his Justification which makes
clearly against him, for Mephibosheth does not charge David with any injustice
not so much as by implication, but excuses himself and lays all the blame
upon his servant. Then he alleged the Petition of Esther to Abasuerus; but
neither would that serve his turn, for she petitioned for her life, etc.
without charging the King with injustice. He still fled to this plea, that it
is lawful for Subjects to Petition; the Court answered that this was no
Petition, but a seditious Libell, the mis-naming of a thing does not alter the
nature of it: besides they called it in the first place a Remonstrance, which
implies that they pretended interest, and is in the nature of it a plea, which
challenges a right of a party: besides they give peremptory Judgment in the
cause, and that directly opposite to the judgment of the Court; the Court
declared Mr. Wheelwright guilty, they proclaim him innocent, the Court judged
his speech to be false and seditious, they affirmed it to be the truth of
Christ, and the very words of the holy Ghost, which is apparently untrue if not
blasphemous. Further in pretending their moderation, they put arguments in the
peoples minds to invite them to violence, by bringing the example of Peter
drawing his Sword, wherein they blame not his fact, but his rashness. And that
of the People rescuing Jonathan, which to make the more effectual, they say
that it was not seditious.

Lastly, it was great arrogance of any private man thus openly to advance his
own judgment of the Court, therefore it will appear to their Posterity as a
brand of infamy, upon these erroneous opinions, that those who maintained them
were not censured for their judgment, but for seditious practices: He further
pleaded, that no Petition can be made in such a case, but something may be
mistaken through misprision as trenching upon authority, the Court answered,
that if they had only petitioned the Court to remit his censure, or had
desired respite for further confiderations, or leave to propound their doubts,
there could have been no danger of being mistaken. Besides there was no need
of such haste in Petitioning, seeing the sentence was not given, but deferring
till the next Court, Master Wheelwright enjoined only to appear there. The
Court then being about to give sentence, Master Aspin desired the Court to show
a rule in Scripture for banishment; the Court answered as before, that Hagar
and Ismael were banished for disturbance: he replied that if a Father give a
child a portion and sent him forth, it was not banishment: but it was answered,
the Scripture calls it a casting out, not a sending forth; and one said further
that he was a child worthy of such a portion.

Then the sentence of the Court was for his dis-franchisement and banishment,
and time given him to the last of March upon security for his departure then,
which he presently tendered, and so was dismissed. The Court intended only to
have dis-franchised him, as they had done Mr. Cogshall, but his behavior was
so contemptuous, and his speeches so peremptory, that occasioned a further
aggravation, and it appeared afterward to be by an overruling hand of God,
for the next day it was discovered, that he was the man that did frame the
Petition, and drew many to subscribe to it, and some had their names put to it
without their knowledge, and in his first draught there was other passages so
foul, as he was forced to put them out, and yet many had not subscribed, but
upon his promise that it should not be delivered without advice of Mr. Cotton,
which was never done.

William Baulston, Ed. Hutchison.

AFter these, two of the Sergeants of Boston were called, William Baulston, and
Ed. Hutchison, these both had their hands to the Petition, and justified the
same, William Baulston told the Court, that he knew that if such a petition
had been made in any other place in the world, there would have been no fault
found with it. The other told the Court, (turning himself in a scornful
manner) that if they took away his estate, they must keep his wife and
children; for which he was presently committed to the Officer. The Court
reasoned a good while with them both, but they were peremptory, and would
acknowledge no failing, and because of their contemptuous speeches, and for
that they were known to be very busy persons, and such as had offered
contempt to the Magistrates, for that they were not of their opinion, they were
dis-franchised and sined, William Baulston twenty pounds, Ed. Hutchison foety
pounds.

The next morning Ed. Hutchison acknowledged his fault in his mis-behaviour in
the face of the Court, and so was released of his imprisonment, but both were
disabled from bearing any public Office.

Tho. Marshal, Dynely, Dier, Rich. Gridly.

ANother day were called four more of the principal stirring men, who had
subscribed to the Petition, Thomas Marshal the Ferry-man, who justified the
Petition so far, that he would not acknowledge any fault; yet he answered
more modestly then the former, therefore he was not fined, but dis-franchised,
and put out of his place. Dynely, and Dier, had little to say for themselves,
but perfisting in their justification, they were also dis-franchised: likewise
Rich. Gridly, an honest poor man, but very apt to meddle in public affairs,
beyond his calling or skill, (which indeed was the fault of them all, and of
many others in the Country) mean condition, and weak parts, having nothing to
say, but that he could find no fault, etc. was dis-franchised.

Mistress Hutchison.

ALl these (except Mr. Wheelwright) were but young branches, sprung out of an
old root, the Court had now to do with the head of all this faction, (Dux
faemina facti) a woman had been the breeder and nourisher of all these
distempers, one Mistress Hutchison, the wife of Mr. William Hutchison of Boston
(a very honest and peaceable man of good estate) and the daughter of Mr.
Marbury, sometimes a Preacher in Lincolnshire, after of London, a woman of a
haughty and fierce carriage, of a nimble wit and active spirit, and a very
voluble tongue, more bold then a man, though in understanding and judgment,
inferior to many women. This woman had learned her skill in England, and had
discovered some of her opinions in the Ship, as she came over, which had
caused some jealousy of her, which gave occasion of some delay of her
admission, when she first desired fellowship with the Church of Boston, but
she cunningly dissembled and colored her opinions, as she soon got over that
block, and was admitted into the Church, then she began to go to work, and
being a woman very helpful in the times of childbirth, and other occasions of
bodily infirmities, and well furnished with means for those purposes, she
easily insinuated her self into the affections of many, and the rather,
because she was much inquisitive of them about their spiritual estates, and in
discovering to them the danger they were in, by trusting to common gifts and
graces, without any such witness of the Spirit, as the Scripture holds out for
a full evidence; whereby many were convinced that they had gone on in a
Covenant of works, and were much humbled thereby, and brought to inquire more
after the Lord Jesus Christ, without whom all their gifts and graces, all their
contributions, etc. would prove but legal, and would vanish: all this was
well, and suited with the public Ministry, which went along in the same way,
and all the faithful embraced it, and blessed God for the good success that
appeared from this discovery. But when she had thus prepared the way by such
wholesome truths, then she begins to set forth her own stuff, and taught that
no sanctification was any evidence of a good estate, except their justification
were first cleared up to them by the immediate witness of the Spirit, and that
to see any work of grace, (either faith or repentance, etc.) before this
immediate witness, was a Covenant of works: whereupon many good souls, that
had been of long approved godliness, were brought to renounce all the work of
grace in them, and to wait for this immediate revelation: then sprung up also
that opinion of the in-dwelling of the person of the Holy Ghost, and of union
with Christ, and Justification before faith, and a denying of any gifts or
graces, or inherent qualifications, and that Christ was all, did all, and that
the soul remained always as a dead Organ: and other of those gross errors,
which were condemned in the late Assembly, and whereof diverse had been
quashed, by the public Ministry; but the maine and bottom of all, which
tended to quench all endeavor, and to bring to a dependence upon an immediate
witness of the Spirit, without sight of any gift or grace, this stuck fast,
and prevailed so, as it began to be opposed, and she being questioned by
some, who marvelled that such opinions should spread so fast, she made answer,
that where ever she came they must and they should spread, and indeed it was a
wonder upon what a sudden the whole Church of Boston (some few excepted) were
become her new converts, and infected with her opinions, and many also out of
the Church, and of other Churches also, yea, many profane persons became of
her opinion, for it was a very easy, and acceptable way to heaven, to see
nothing, to have nothing, but wait for Christ to do all; so that after she
had thus prevailed, and had drawn some of eminent place and parts to her party
(whereof some profited so well, as in a few months they outwent their teacher)
then she kept open house for all comers, and set up two Lecture days in the
week, when they usually met at her house, threescore or fourscore persons, the
pretense was to repeat Sermons, but when that was done, she would comment
upon the Doctrines, and interpret all passages at her pleasure, and expound
dark places of Scripture, so as whatsoever the Letter held forth (for this was
one of her tenants, that the whole Scripture in the Letter of it held forth
nothing but a Covenant of works) she would be sure to make it serve her turn
for the confirming of her maine principles, whereof this was another, That the
darker our sanctification is, the cleerer is our justification; And indeed most
of her new tenants tended to slothfulness, and quench all endeavor in the
creature: and now was there no speech so much in use, as of vilifying
sanctification, and all for advancing Christ and free grace, and the whole
pedigree of the Covenant of works was set forth with all its Complements,
beginning at Cain, If thou do well shall thou not be accepted? then it is
explained and ratifyed at Mount Sinui, and delivered in the two Tables, and
after sprinkled with the blood of Christ, Exodus 24. and so carried on in the
Letter of the Scripture, till it be complete, as the Covenant of Grace by the
Spirit, seals, forgiveness of sins, one of the venters whereon Christ begets
children, etc. and in the end wherefore is all this ado, but that having a
more cleanly way, to lay all that opposed her, (being near all the Elders and
most of the faithful Christians in this Country) under a Covenant of works,
she might with the more credit, disclose and advance her masterpiece of
immediate revelations, under the fair pretense of the Covenant of free Grace;
wherein she had not failed of her aim, to the utter subversion both of
Churches and civil state, if the most wise and merciful providence of the
Lord had not prevented it by keeping so many of the Magistrates, and Elders,
free from the infection: for upon the countenance which it took from some
eminent persons, her opinions began to hold up their heads, in Church
Assemblies, and in the Court of Justice, so as it was held a matter of offense
to speak any thing against them in either Assembly: thence sprang all that
trouble to the Pastor of Boston, for his free and faithful speech in the
Court, though required and approved: thence took Mr. Wheelwright courage to
inveigh in his sermon against men in a Covenant of works (as he placed them)
and to proclaim them all enemies to Christ, Scribes and Pharisees, etc. whereas
before he was wont to teach in a plain and gentle style, and though he would
sometimes glaunce upon these opinions, yet it was modestly and reservedly, not
in such a peremptory and censorious manner, as he did then and after; for they
made full account the day had been theirs, But blessed be the Lord, the snare
is broken, and we are delivered, and this woman who was the root of all these
troubles, stands now before the seat of Justice, to be rooted out of her
station, by the hand of authority, guided by the finger of divine providence,
as the sequel will show.

When she appeared, the Court spoke to her to this effect. Mistress Hutchison.
You are called hither as one of those who have had a great share in the causes
of our public disturbances, partly by those erroneous opinions which you have
broached and divulged amongst us, and maintaining them, partly by countenancing
and encouraging such as have sowed seditions amongst us, partly by casting
reproach upon the fa^^^full Ministers of this Country, and upon their
Ministry, and so weakening their hands in the work of the Lord, and raising
prejudice against them, in the hearts of their people, and partly by
maintaining weekly and public meetings in your house, to the offense of all
the Country, and the detriment of many families, and still upholding the same,
since such meetings were clearly condemned in the late general Assembly.

Now the end of your sending for, is, that either upon sight of your errors,
and other offenses, you may be brought to acknowledge, and reform the same,
or otherwise that we may take such course with you as you may trouble us no
further.

We do desire therefore to know of you, whether you will Justify and
maintain what is laid to your charge or not?


Mistress Hutchison. I am called here to answer to such things as are laid to my
charge, name one of them.


Court Have you countenanced, or will you justify those seditious practices
which have been censured here in this Court?


Hutch. Do you ask me upon point of conscience?


Court No, your conscience you may keep to your self, but if in this cause you
shall countenance and encourage those that thus transgress the Law, you must
be called in question for it, and that is not for your conscience, but for
your practice.


Hutch. What Law have they transgressed? the Law of God?


Court Yes, the fifth Commandment, which commands us to honor Father and
Mother, which includes all in authority, but these seditious practices of
theirs, have cast reproach and dishonor upon the Fathers of the Commonwealth.


Hutch. Do I intertaine, or maintain them in their actions, wherein they stand
against any thing that God has appointed?


Court Yes, you have justified Mr. Wheelwright his Sermon, for which you know
he was convict of sedition, and you have likewise countenanced and encouraged
those that had their hands to the Petition.


Hutch. I deny it, I am to obey you only in the Lord.


Court You cannot deny but you had your hand in the Petition.


Hutch. Put case, I do fear the Lord, and my Parent do not, may not I
entertain one that fears the Lord, because my Father will not let me? I may
put honor upon him as a child of God.


Court That Is nothing to the purpose, but we cannot stand to dispute causes
with you now, what say you to your weekly public meetings? can you show a
warrant for them?


Hutch. I will show you how I took it up, there were such meetings in use
before I came, and because I went to none of them, this was the special reason
of my taking up this course, we began it but with five or six, and though it
grew to more in future time, yet being tolerated at the first, I knew not why
it might not continue.


Court There were private meetings indeed, and are still in many places, of
some few neighbors, but not so public and frequent as yours, and are of use
for increase of love, and mutual edification, but yours are of another nature,
if they had been such as yours they had been evil, and therefore no good
warrant to justify yours; but answer by what authority, or rule, you uphold
them.


Hutch. By Tit. 2. where the elder women are to teach the younger.


Court So we allow you to do, as the Apostle there means, privately, and upon
occasion, but that gives no warrant of such set meetings for that purpose; and
besides, you take upon you to teach many that are elder then your self,
neither do you teach them that which the Apostle commands, viz. to keep at home.


Hutch. Will you please to give me a rule against is, and I will yield?


Court You must have a rule for it, or else you cannot do it in faith, yet you
have a plain rule against it; I permit not a woman to teach.


Hutch. That is meant of teaching men.


Court If a man in distress of conscience or other temptation, etc. should
come and ask your counsel in private, might you not teach him?


Hutch. Yes.


Court Then it is clear, that it is not meant of teaching men, but of teaching
in public.


Hutch. It is said, I will pour my Spirit upon your Daughters, and they shall
prophecy, etc. If God give me a gift of Prophecy, I may use it.


Court First, the Apostle applies that prophecy unto those extraordinary times,
and the gifts of miracles and tongues were common to many as well as the gift
of Prophecy. Secondly, in teaching your children, you exercise your gift of
prophecy, and that within your calling.


Hutch. I teach not in a public congregation: The men of Berea are commended
for examining Paul's Doctrine; we do no more but read the notes of our teachers
Sermons, and then reason of them by searching the Scriptures.


Court. You are gone from the nature of your meeting, to the kind of exercise,
we will follow you in this, and show you your offense in them, for you do not
as the Bereans search the Scriptures for their confirming in the truths
delivered, but you open your teachers points, and declare his meaning, and
correct wherein you think he has failed, etc. and by this means you abase the
honor and authority of the public Ministry, and advance your own gifts, as
if he could not deliver his matter so clearly to the hearers capacity as your
self.


Hutch. Prove that, that any body does that.


Court Yes, you are the woman of most note, and of best abilities, and if some
other take upon them the like, it is by your teaching and example, but you show
not in all this, by what authority you take upon you to be such a public
instructor: (after she had stood a short time, the Court gave her leave to sit
down, for her countenance discovered some bodily infirmity.)


Hutch. Here is my authority, Aquila and Priscilla, took upon them to instruct
Apollo, more perfectly, yet he was a man of good parts, but they being better
instructed might teach him.


Court See how your argument stands, Priscilla with her husband, took Apollo
home to instruct him privately, therefore Mistress Hutchison without her husband
may teach sixty or eighty.


Hutch. I call them not, but if they come to me, I may instruct them.


Court Yet you show us not a rule.


Hutch. I have given you two places of Scripture.


Court But neither of them will suit your practice.


Hutch. Must I show my name written therein?


Court You must show that which must be aequivalent, ^ing your Ministry is
public, you would have them receive your instruction, as coming from such an
Ordinance.


Hutch. They must not take it as it comes from me, but as it comes from the
Lord Jesus Christ, and if I took upon me a public Ministry, I should break
a rule, but not in exercising a gift of Prophecy, and I would see a rule to
turn away them that come to me.


Court, It is your exercise which draws them, and by occasion thereof, many
families are neglected, and much time lost, and a great damage comes to the
Commonwealth thereby, which we that are betrusted with, as the Fathers of the
Commonwealth, are not to suffer.


Diverse other speeches passed to and fro about this matter, the issue was, that
not being able to bring any rule to justify this her disordered course, she
said she walked by the rule of the Apostle, Gal. which she called the rule of
the new creature, but what rule that was, she would not, or she could not tell,
neither would she consent to lay down her meetings, except authority did put
them down, and then she might be subject to authority.

Then the Court laid to her charge, the reproach she had cast upon the
Ministers, and Ministry in this Country, saying that none of them did preach
the Covenant of free Grace, but Master Cotton, and that they have not the Seal
of the Spirit, and so were not able Ministers of the New Testament: she denied
the words, but they were affirmed by diverse of the Ministers, being desired by
the Court to be present for that end. The matter was thus, It being reported
abroad that Mistress Hutchison did slight them and their Ministry in their
common talk, as if they did preach nothing but a Covenant of workerr, because
they pressed much for faith and love, etc. without holding forth such an
immediate witness of the Spirit as she pretended, they advised with Master
Cotton about it, and a meeting was appointed at his house, and she being sent
for, and demanded the reason why she had used such speeches, at first she would
not acknowledge them, but being told that they could prove them by witnesses,
and persuaded to deal freely and truly therein, she said that the fear of man
was a snare, and therefore she was glad she had this opportunity to open her
mind, and thereupon she told them, that there was a wide difference between
Master Cottons Ministry and theirs, and that they could not hold forth a
Covenant of free Grace, because they had not the Seal of the Spirit, and that
they were not able Ministers of the New Testament.

It was near night, so the Court brake up, and she was enjoined to appear
again the next morning. When she appeared the next day, she objected that the
Ministers had spoken in their own cause, and that they ought not to be
informers and witnesses both, and required that they might be sworn to what
they had spoken: to which the Court answered, that if it were needful, an oath
should be given them: but because the whole Court (in a manner man by man) did
declare themselves to be fully satisfied of the truth of their testimones, they
being 6. or 7. men of long approved godliness, and sincerity in their course,
and for that it was also generally observed, that those of her party did look
at their ministry (for the most part) as a way of the Covenant of works, and
one had been punished about half a year before, for reporting the like of
them. The Court did pause a while at it, whereupon she said that she had Mr.
Wilsons notes of that conference, which were otherwise then they had related:
the Court willed her to show them, but her answer was she had left them at
home: whereupon Mr. Wilson (with the leave of the Court) said, that if she
brought forth his notes, they should find written at the foot of them, that
he had not wirtten down all that was spoken, but being often interrupted, he
had omitted diverse passages; then she appealed to Mr. Cotton, who being called,
and desired to declare what he remembered of her speeches, said, that he
remembered only that which took impression on him, for he was much grieved
that she should make such comparison between him and his brethren, but yet he
took her meaning to be only of a graduall difference, when she said that they
did not hold forth a Covenant of Free Grace, as he did, for she likened them to
Christ's Disciples, and their ministry, before his ascension, and before the
holy Ghost was come down upon them; and when she was asked by some of them,
why they could not preach a Covenant of Free Grace, she made answer, because
they had not the Seal of the Spirit: upon this the Court wished her to
consider, that Mr. Cotton did in a manner agree with the testimony of the rest
of the Elders: and as he rembembred only so much as at present took most
impression in him, so the rest of the Elders had reason to remember some other
passages, which he might not hear, or not so much observe as they whom it so
nearly and properly concerned; All this would not satisfy Mistress Hutchison,
but she still called to have them sworn, whereupon the Court being weary of
the clamor, and that all mouths might be stopped, required three of the
Ministers to take an oath, and thereupon they confirmed their former testimony.

Upon this she began to speak her mind, and to tell of the manner of Gods
dealing with her, and how he revealed himself to her, and made her know what
she had to do; The Governor perceiving whereabout she went, interrupted her,
and would have kept her to the matter in hand, but seeing her very unwilling to
be taken off, he permitted her to proceed. Her speech was to this effect.

Mistress Hutchison. When I was in old England, I was much troubled at the
constitution of the Churches there, so far, as I was ready to have joined to
the Separation, whereupon I set apart a day for humiliation by my self, to
seek direction from God, and then did God discover unto me the unfaithfulness
of the Churches, and the danger of them, and that none of those Ministers could
preach the Lord Jesus aright, for he had brought to my mind, that in the 1 John
4.3. Every spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
is the spirit of Antichrist; I marvelled what this should mean, for I knew
that neither Protestants nor Papists did deny that Christ was come in the
flesh; and are the Turks then the only Antichrists? now I had none to open
the Scripture to me, but the Lord, he must be the Prophet, then he brought to
my mind another Scripture, He that denies the Testament, denies the death of
the Testator, from whence the Lord did let me see, that every one that did not
preach the New Covenant, denies the death of the Testator; then it was revealed
to me that the Ministers of England were these Antichrists, but I knew not how
to bear this, I did in my heart rise up against it, then I begged of the Lord
that this Atheism might not be in my heart: after I had begged this light, a
twelve month together, at last he let me see how I did oppose Christ Jesus,
and he revealed to me that place in Esaias 46.12, 13. and from thence showed me
the Atheism of my own heart, and how I did turn in upon a Covenant of works,
and did oppose Christ Jesus; from which time the Lord did discover to me all
sorts of Ministers, and how they taught, and to know what voice I heard, which
was the voice of Moses, which of John Baptist, and which of Christ; the voice
of my beloved, from the voice of strangers; and thenceforth I was the more
careful whom I heard, for after our teacher Mr. Cotton, and my brother
Wheelwright were put down, there was none in England that I durst hear. Then
it pleased God to reveal himself to me in that of Esaias 30.20. Though the Lord
give thee the bread of adversity, etc. yet thine eyes shall see thy teachers;
after this the Lord carrying Mr. Cotton to New England (at which I was much
troubled) it was revealed to me, that I must go thither also, and that there I
should be persecuted and suffer much trouble. I will give you another
Scripture, Jer. 46. Fear not Jacob my servant, for I am with thee, I will make
a full end of all the Nations, etc. then the Lord did reveal himself to me,
sitting upon a Throne of Justice, and all the world appearing before him, and
though I must come to New England, yet I must not fear nor be dismayed. The
Lord brought another Scripture to me, Esaias 8.9. The Lord spoke this to me with
a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this
people, etc. I will give you one place more which the Lord brought to me by
immediate revelations, and that does concern you all, it is in Dan. 6. When
the Presidents and Princes could find nothing against him, because he was
faithful, they sought matter against him concerning the Law of his God, to
cast him into the Lions den; so it was revealed to me that they should plot
against me, but the Lord bid me not to fear, for he that delivered Daniel, and
the three children, his hand was not shortened. And see this Scripture
fulfilled this day in mine eyes, therefore take heed what ye go about to do
unto me, for you have no power over my body, neither can you do me any harm,
for I am in the hands of the eternal Jehovah my Savior, I am at his
appointment, the bounds of my habitation are cast in Heaven, no further do I
esteem of any mortal man, then creatures in his hand, I fear none but the
great Jehovah, which has foretold me of these things, and I do verily believe
that he will deliver me out of our hands, therefore take heed how you proceed
against me; for I know that for this you go about to do to me, God will ruin
you and your posterity, and this whole State.


When she had thus vented her mind, the Court demanded of her, how she expected
to be delivered, whether by miracle as Daniel was, to which she answered, yes,
by miracle as Daniel was. Being further demanded how she did know that it was
God that did reveal these things to her, and not Satan? She answered, how did
Abraham know that it was the voice of God, when he commanded him to sacrifice
his son?

Mr. Cotton being present, and desired by the Court to deliver his judgment
about Mistress Hutchison her Revelations, answered, there be two sorts of
Revelations, some are without or besides Scripture, those I look at as
Satanicall, and tending to much danger, other are such as the Apostle speaks
of, Ephesians. 1. where he prays for a spirit of revelation to be given them,
those are never dispensed but according to the word of God, though the word
revelation be uncouth, yet in Scripture sense I think it not lawful so to
express it, and when ever it comes, it comes with the ministry of the word.
Being again desired to express himself particularly concerning her
revelations, he demanded of her (by the leave of the Court) whether by a
miracle she does mean a work beyond the power of nature, or only above
common providence? for if (as you say) you expect deliverance from this Court
beyond the power of nature, then I should suspect such a revelation to be
false. To this she answered, you know when it comes, God does not describe the
way. Mr. Cotton asked her again, whether (when she said she should be
delivered) she meant a deliverance from the sentence of the Court, or from the
calamity of it? She answered, yes, from the calamity of it. Mistress Hutchison
having thus freely and fully discovered her self, the Court and all the rest
of the Assembly (except those of her own party) did observe a special
providence of God, that (while she went about to cover such offenses as were
laid to her charge, by putting matters upon proof, and then quarrelling with
the evidence) her own mouth should deliver her into the power of the Court, as
guilty of that which all suspected her for, but were not furnished with proof
sufficient to proceed against her, for here she has manifested, that her
opinions and practice have been the cause of al our disturbances, and that she
walked by such a rule as cannot stand with the peace of any State; for such
bottomless revelations, as either came without any word, or without the sense
of the word, (which was framed to humane capacity) if they be allowed in one
thing, must be admitted a rule in all things; for they being above reason and
Scripture, they are not subject to control: Again, she has given a reason
why she has so much slighted the faithful Ministers of Christ here, why? it
was revealed to her long since in England, that all the pack of them were
Antichristians, so as she durst hear none of them, after Mr. Cotton and Mr.
Wheelwright were once gone; for they could not preach Christ and the new
Covenant (as she affirms), why, but they did preach somewhat, and if they
could not hold forth Christ in a Covenant of Free Grace, then must they needs
hold him forth in a Covenant of works, then are they not able Ministers of the
New Testament, nor sealed by the Spirit; for the servants of God, who are come
over into New England, do not think themselves more spiritual then other of
their brethren whom they have left behind, nor that they can or do hold forth
the Lord Jesus Christ in their ministry, more truly then he was held forth in
England, and seeing their ministry was a most precious sweet savor to all
the Saints before she came hither, it is easy to discern from what sink that
ill vapor has risen, which has made so many of her seduced party to loath
now the smell of those flowers which they were wont to find sweetness in: yet
this is not all (though it be too too vile) she can fetch a revelation that
shall reach the Magistrates and the whole Court, and the succeeding
generations, and she has Scripture for it also, Daniel must be a type of
Mistress Hutchison, the Lions den of the Court of justice, and the Presidents
and Princes of the reverend Elders here, and all must sort to this conclusion,
she must be delivered by miracle, and all we must be ruined; See the impudent
boldness of a proud dame, that Athaliah-like makes havocke of all that stand
in the way of her ambitious spirit; she had boasted before that her opinions
must prevail, neither could she endure a stop in her way, as appeared once
upon a slight occasion when her reputation being a little touched upon a
mistake, yet so carried as she could not get the party upon that advantage
which she expected, she vented her impatience with so fierce speech and
countenance, as one would hardly have guessed her to have been an Antitype of
Daniel, but rather of the Lions after they were let loose. The like appeared in
her, when she could not have her will against her faithful Pastor for his
opposing her opinions, as she apprehended, so as neither reason, nor Scripture,
nor the judgment and example of such as she reverenced could appease her
displeasure. So that the Court did clearly discern, where the fountain was
of all our distempers, and the Tragedy of Munster (to such as had read it) gave
just occasion to fear the danger we were in, seeing (by the judgment of
Luther writing of those troublous times) we had not to do with so simple a
Devil, as managed that business, and therefore he had the less fear of him;
but Satan seemed to have commission now to use his utmost cunning to undermine
the Kingdom of Christ here (as the same Luther foretold, he would do, when he
should enterprise any such innovation under the clear light of the Gospel) so
as the like has not been known in former ages, that ever so many wise,
sober, and well grounded Christians, should so suddenly be seduced by the
means of a woman, to stick so fast to her, even in some things wherein the
whole current of Scripture goes against them, and that notwithstanding that
her opinions and practice have been so gross in some particulars, as their
knowledge and sincerity would not suffer them to approve, yet such interest
has she gotten in their hearts, as they seek cloakes to cover the nakedness
of such deformities, as in the mean time they are ashamed to behold.

The Court saw now an inevitable necessary to rid her away, except we would
be guilty, not only of our own ruin, but also of the Gospel, so in the end
the sentence of banishment was pronounced against her, and she was committed
to the Marshall, till the Court should dispose of her.

Another day, Captain John Underhill was sent for, and being charged with
joining in the said Petition, acknowledged the same, professing that he could
see no fault in it: being demanded a rule by which he might take so much upon
him, as publicly to contradict the sentence of the Court, etc. he alleged
the example of Joab his rough speech to David, when he retired himself for
Absaloms death, and that David did not reprove him for it. To this the Court
answered.

First, That Joab was then in the matters of his own calling, and being
General of the Army, had liberty by his place to give advice to the King in
causes of that nature, but when he failed in the manner of his speech, therein
he is not to be excused, and therefore not to be followed.

Secondly, Joab did not contradict or reprove any Judicial sentence of the
King, but only an inordinate passion.

Thirdly, He was occasioned by an urgent necessity of the safety of the King
and State.

Fourthly, That which he spoke was in private, for the King had withdrawn
himself.

Fifthly, It appears that David did take it as a great miscarriage, for he
presently displaced him.

Again, in our cause the Captain was but a private man, and had no calling to
deal in the affairs of the Court, therefore no warrant from hence. He
insisted much upon the liberty which all States do allow to Military Officers,
for free speech, etc. and that himself had spoken sometimes as freely to Count
Nassaw.

But it was answered, we are not to look at whatsome do tolerate, but what is
lawful, and there may be a reason of State, to connive at that disorder at
some season, which may not with honor and safety be permitted at another.

Being further demanded, how they came so many of them, to be so suddenly
agreed in so weighty and doubtful a case, he answered, that many of them
being present when Mr. Wheelwright was convict of sedition, they were sore
grieved at it, and suddenly rushing out of the Court, a strange motion came
into all their minds, so as they said (in a manner all together) Come let us
petition; and for his part, from that time to this, his conscience which then
led him to it, will not suffer him to retract it.

The Court pityed him much, and were grieved at his obstinacy, that when all
his arguments were taken away, he had no defense left, he would yet maintain
a bad cause by the light of a deluded conscience, and withal they took notice
how these ungrounded revelations began to work, and what dangerous consequences
were like to follow of them, when so many persons upon such a sudden motion had
no scruple to enterprise such a seditious action, nor can be brought by any
light of reason or Scripture, to see their error: so the Court (when they saw
no other remedy) dis-franchised him, and discharged him of his place, but
allowed him his quarters means.

There were diverse who were not present when that sudden motion or revelation
first set the Petition on foot, but were drawn in after, who soon found their
error, and did as freely acknowledge it, and desired to have their names put
out of it, which was easily granted, and their offense with a loving admonition
remitted.

It had been observed a good time since, that some of the leaders of this
faction (by occasion of new Disciples, being inquisitive about their tenants)
would let fall these answers, I have many things to tell you, but you cannot
bear them now; and there is a great light to break forth, if men do not resist
it, and you shall see the bottom hereafter; and one of them reproved the rest,
telling them that they had spoiled their cause, by being over hasty and too
open, etc. And now it began to appear, what their meanings were, for after
Mistress Hutchison had discovered the secret by her speech in the Court, then
others opened their minds, and professedly maintained these Enthusiasmes as the
Oracles of God. And that such revelations as Abraham had to kill his Son, and
as Paul had in the Ship, and when he was caught up into the third heaven, etc.
were ordinary, so that Mr. Cotton took notice of the danger of them, and
publicly confuted them in diverse Sermons. Among other like passages there was
one that fell out, at Mr. Wheel his farewell to those whom he used to Preach
unto at the Mount.

One of his own Scholars told him openly, that he had Preached
Antichristianisme, and had set up a Christ against a Christ; the same party
maintained immediate revelations without any word at all, saying, that the free
promises were only for those under the Law, but we are to look for all our
assurance by immediate Revelation, and that in the New Testament there are no
signs, no not our baptism, for the baptism of water is of no use to us, when
once we are baptized with the Holy Ghost: he said also that a man might be
adopted and not justified, and that every new creature is as a dead lump, not
acting at all, but as Christ acts in him, and denied all inherent
righteousness, and that the commandments were a dead Letter. These things
were so gross, as Mr. Wheelwright could not but contradict him, yet he did it
so tenderly, as might well discover his near agreement in the points, though
his wisdom served him to be more reserved till a fitter season; for that
poor man being newly come on to the profession of Religion, must needs learn
those points of Mr. Wheel, or draw them as necessary consequences from some of
his tenants: And it is frequently found to be an effect of all unsound and
unsafe doctrines, that still the Scholar goes a step further then his Teacher.
So it has proved in former times, Luther, and no doubt many of those who did
embrace his errors, in the first edition of them, yet lived and dyed in the
true faith of Christ, but the succeeding generations (inheriting those
erroneous tenants, which they had drawn from their godly forefathers, but not
their godliness) proved heretics and schismatics to this day. So it has
been in the Churches of Rome, and others, and so we may justly fear in these
Churches in New England, howsoever that many that now adhere to these
Familisticall opinions, are indeed truly godly, and (no doubt) shall persevere
so to the end, yet the next generation, which shall be trained up under such
doctrines, will be in great danger to prove plain Familists and Schismatics.
This discovery of a new rule of practice by immediate revelations, and the
consideration of such dangerous consequences, which have and might follow
thereof, occasioned the Court to disarm all such of that party, as had their
hands to the Petition, and some others, who had openly defended the same,
except they should give satisfaction to the Magistrates therein; which some
presently did, others made a great question about it, for bringing in their
arms, but they were too weak to stand it out.

Thus it pleased the Lord to hear the prayers of his afflicted people (whose
souls had wept in secret, for the reproach which was cast upon the Churches of
the Lord Jesus in this Country, by occasion of the divisions which were grown
amongst us, though the vanity of some weak minds, which cannot seriously
affect any thing long, except it be offered them under some renewed shape) and
by the care and endeavor of the wise and faithful Ministers of the Churches,
assisted by the Civil authority, to discover this Masterpiece of the old
Serpent, and to break the brood by scattering the Leaders, under whose conduct
he had prepared such Ambushment, as in all reason would soon have driven
Christ and Gospel out of New England, (though to the ruin of the instruments
themselves, as well as others) and to the repossessing of Satan in his ancient
Kingdom; It is the Lords work, and it is mavelous in our eyes. Mr. Wheel. is
now gone to Pascal, Mistress Hutchison is confined in a private house, till the
season of the year shall be fit for her departure, some of those whom God has
left to be most strongly deluded, are preparing to follow them, and we hope
the Lord will open the eyes of the rest, and persuade them to join again with
their sometime dear and most beloved brethren, that peace and truth may again
flourish in New England, Amen.

After the Court had thus proceeded, some of the Churches dealt with such of
their members as were found guilty of these erroneous and seditious practices,
the Church of Roxbury (after much pains and patience to reduce them)
excommunicated five or six; and the Church of Boston, by the solicitation of
some of the Elders of the other Churches, proceeded against Mistress Hutchison,
the manner and issue whereof is set down in the next.

AT Boston in New England, upon the 17. day of October 1637. the wife of one
William Dyer, sometimes a Citizen and Millener of London, a very proper and
comely young woman, was delivered of a large woman child, it was stilborn,
about two months before her time, the child having life a few hours before
the delivery, but so monstrous and misshapen, as the like has scarce been
heard of: it had no head but a face, which stood so low upon the breast, as the
ears (which were like an Apes) grew upon the shoulders.

The eyes stood far out, so did the mouth, the nose was hooking upward, the
breast and back was full of sharp prickles, like a Thornback, the navell and all
the belly with the distinction of the sex, were, where the lower part of the
back and hips should have been, and those back parts were on the side the face
stood.

The arms and hands, with the thighs and legs, were as other childrens, but
in stead of toes, it had upon each foot three claws, with talons like a young
foul.

Upon the back above the belly it had two great holes, like mouths, and in
each of them stuck out a piece of flesh.

It had no forehead, but in the place thereof, above the eyes, four horns,
whereof two were above an inch long, hard, and sharp, the other two were
somewhat shorter.

Many things were observable in the birth and discovery of this Monster.
1. The Father and Mother were of the highest form of our refined Familists,
and very active in maintaining their party, and in reproaching some of the
Elders, and others, who did oppose those errors.

2. The Midwife, one Hawkins wife of St. Ives, was notorious for familiarity
with the devil, and now a prime Familist.

3. This Monster was concealed by three persons above five months.

4. The occasion of concealing it was very strange, for most of the women who
were present at the woman's travail, were suddenly taken with such a violent
vomiting, and purging, without eating or drinking of any thing, as they were
forced to go home, others had their children taken with convulsions, (which
they had not before, nor since) and so were sent for home, so as none were left
at the time of the birth, but the Midwife and two other, whereof one fell
asleep.

5. At such time as the child dyed (which was about two hours before the
birth) the bed wherein the mother lay shook so violently, as all which were in
the room perceived it.

6. The after birth wherein the child was, had prickles on the inside like
those on the childs breast.

7. The manner of the discovery was very strange also, for it was that very day
Mistress Hutchison was cast out of the Church for her monstrous errors, and
notorious falschood; for being commanded to depart the Assembly, Mistress Dyer
accompanied her, which a stranger observing, asked another what woman that was,
the other answered, it was the woman who had the Monster, which one of the
Church of Boston hearing, enquired about it from one to another, and at length
came to Mistress Hutchison, with one of the Elders of the Church, to whom she
revealed the truth of the thing in general only; this coming to the
Governors ear, he called another of the Magistrates and sent for the
Midwife, and (in the presence of the Elder, to whom Mistress Hutchison had
revealed it) they examined her, who at first confessed it was a monstrous
birth, but concealed the horns and claws, and some other parts, till being
straightly charged, and told it should be taken up, and viewed, then she
confessed all, yet for further assurance, the child was taken up, and though
it were much corrupted, yet the horns, and claws, and holes in the back, and
some scales, etc. were found and seen of above a hundred persons.

8. The Father of this Monster, having been forth of the Town, about a Month,
and coming home just at this time, was upon the Lords day (by an unexpected
occasion) called before the Church for some of his monstrous opinions, as the
Christ and the Church together, are the new creature, there is no inherent
righteousness in Christians, Adam was not made after Gods Image, etc. which
he openly maintained, yet with such shuffling, and equivacating, as he came
under admonition, etc.

A brief Apology in defense of the general proceedings of the Court, holden
at Boston the ninth day of the first month, 1626. against Mr. J. VVheelwright
a member there, by occasion of a Sermon delivered there in the same
Congregation.
FOrasmuch as some of the Members of the Court (both of the Magistrates and
Deputies) did dissent from the major part, in the judgment of the cause of Mr.
Wheelwright, and diverse others have since censured the proceedings against him
as unjust, or (at best) over hasty, for maintaining of which censures, many
untruths are like to be spread abroad, whereby the most equal Judges may be in
danger of prejudice; and so the honor not of the Court only, but also of the
trial and justice it self may be blemished: It is thought needful to make
this public Declaration of all the proceedings, with the reasons and grounds
thereof, so far as concerns the clearing of the justice of the Court. As
for such passages as fell by occasion, and are too large to be here inserted,
such as desire to know them, may receive satisfaction from three or four of
Boston (being Mr. Wheelwright his special friends) who took all by Characters
(we doubt not) will give a true report thereof; As for such as have taken
offense, that the cause was not first referred to the Church, we desire them to
consider these reasons.

1. This case was not matter of conscience, but of a civil nature, and
therefore most proper for this Court, to take Cognizance of, and the rather for
the special contempt which had been offered to the Court therein, and which
the Church could not judge of. 2. In some cases of religious nature, as
manifest heresy, notorious blasphemy, etc. the Civil power may proceed,
Ecclesia inconsulta, and that by the judgment of all the Ministers. 3. It had
been a vain thing to refer a cause to the judgment of those who had openly
declared their prejudice therein, both in the Court and otherwise, as by two
Petitions under the hands of most of them, delivered into the Court on his
behalf, did plainly appear. 4. The heat of contention and uncharitable
censures which began to overspread the Country, and that chiefly by occasion
of that Sermon, and the like miscarriages, did require that the Civil power
should speedily allay that heat, and bear witness against all seditious
courses, tending to the overthrow of truth and peace amongst us: this only by
way of entrance, to the matter which now follows.

In the beginning of the Court, the Deputies upon the same of a Sermon
delivered by Mr. Wheelwright (upon the first day) which was supposed to tend to
sedition, and disturbance of the public peace, desired that he might be sent
for, which the Court assenting unto, one of the Magistrates (his special
friend) undertook to give him notice thereof, and accordingly at the next
meeting he was in the Town, ready to appear, when he should be called for,
which was not till two or three days after, and then he was sent for (not by
the Marshall, as the usual manner is; but) by one of the Deputies his intimate
friend upon his appearance he was made acquainted with the cause why he was
sent for, viz. To satisfy the Court about some passages in his Sermon, which
seemed to be offensive, and therewith a copy of it was produced, and he was
demanded whether he would own it: whereupon he drew forth another copy which
he delivered into the Court, as a true copy, (for the substance of it) so he
was dismissed very gently, and desired to be ready when he should be called for
again.

The next day he was again sent for by the former messenger: About this time a
Petition was delivered into the Court, under the hands of above forty persons,
being most of the Church of Boston (being none of the Petitions before
mentioned, which were delivered after) to this effect, that as freemen they
might be admitted to be present in the Court in causes of judicature, and that
the Court would declare whether they might proceed in cases of conscience,
without referring them first to the Church. To this the Court answered on the
backside of the Petition, that they did conceive the Petition was without just
ground, for the first part of it, the Court had never used privacie in
Judicial proceedings, but in preparation thereto by way of examination of the
party, etc. they might and would use their liberty, as they should see cause;
and for the other part of the Petition, when any matter of conscience should
come before them, they would advise what were fit to be done in it.

When Mr. Wheelwright came in, the Court was private, and then they told him
they had considered of his Sermon, and were desirous to ask him some questions
which might tend to clear his meaning, about such passages therein as seemed
offensive; he demanded whether he were sent for as an innocent person, or as
guilty? It was answered neither, but as suspected only; Then he demanded, who
were his accusers? It was answered, his Sermon; (which was there in Court)
being acknowledged by himself they might thereupon proceed, ex officio: at
this word great exception was taken, as if the Court intended the course of the
High Commission, etc. It was answered that the word ex officio was very safe
and proper, signifying no more but the authority or duty of the Court, and that
there was no cause of offense, seeing the Court did not examine him by any
compulsory means, as by oath, imprisonment, or the like, but only desired him
for better satisfaction to answer some questions, but he still refused, yet at
last through persuasion of some of his friends, he seemed content; The question
then put to him was, whether before his Sermon he did not know, that most of
the Ministers in this jurisdiction did teach that doctrine which be in his
Sermon called a Covenant of works; to this he said, he did not desire to
answer, and hereupon some cried out, that the Court went about to ensnare him,
and to make him to accuse himself, and that this question was not about the
matter of his Sermon, etc. Upon this he refused to answer any further, so he
was dismissed till the afternoon; The reason why the Court demanded that
question of him, was not to draw matter from himself whereupon to proceed
against him, neither was there any need, for upon a conference of the Ministers
not long before there had been large dispute between some of them and
himself about that point of evidencing Justification by Sanctification, so as
the court might soon have convinced him by witnesses, if they had intended to
proceed against him upon that ground.

In the afternoon he was sent for again in the same manner as before, and the
Ministers also being in the Town, and come thither to confer together for
further discovery of the ground of the disterences which were in the Country
about the Covenant of Grace, etc. they were desired to be present also in the
Court, to bear witness of the proceedings in the case, and to give their
advice as the Court (upon occasion) should require: so the doors being set
open for all that would to come in (and there was a great Assembly) and Mr.
Wheelwright being willed to sit down by the Ministers, his Sermon was
produced, and many passages thereof was read to him, which for the better
understanding we have digested into this order following.

He therein describes two Covenants, the Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of
Works; the Covenant of Grace he describes to be, when in the point of
Justification and the knowledge of this our Justification by Faith, there is
nothing revealed but Christ Jesus; but if men think to be saved, because they
see some work of Sanctification in themselves, as hungring and thirsting, etc.
this is a Covenant of Works; if men have revealed to them some work of
righteousness, as love to the brethren, etc. and hereupon come to be assured
that they are in a good estate, this is not the assurance of Faith, for Faith
has Crist revealed for the object, therefore if the assurance of a man's
Justification be by Faith, as a Work, it is not Gospel.

Having thus described those who go under a Covenant of Works, he pronounces
them to be enemies to Christ, to be Antichrists, to be flesh opposed to spirit;
such as will certainly persecute those who hold forth the truth, and the ways
of Grace; he resembles them to the Philistims, who stop up with the earth of
their own inventions, the Wels of true believers; he resembles them also to
Herod, who would have killed Christ so soon as he was borne, and to Herod and
Pilate who did kill Christ when he came once to show forth himself, and would
have kept him eternally in the grave; he further describes them out of the
second Psalm, to be the people of God as the Jews were, and such as would
take away the true Christ and put in false Christ's, to deceive if it were
possible the very elect; he also describes them by that in Cant. 10.6. they
make the children of Grace keepers of the Vineyard, they make them travel
under the burden of the Covenant of Works, which does cause Christ many times
from them. He comes after to a use of exhortation, wherein he stirs up all
those of his side to a spiritual combat, to prepare for battle, and come out
and fight against the enemies of the Lord; (those under a Covenant of Works) he
shows whom he means thus to excite, alluding to David's valiant men, to
Baruch, Deborah, Jael, and all the men of Jsrael, and bind them hereunto under
the curse of Meroz; He further exhorts them to stand upon their guard, etc.
by alluding to the 600. valiant men, who kept watch about the bed of Solomon, a
type of Christ; then he encourages those of his side against such difficulties
as might be objected, as 1. If the enemies shall oppose the way of God, they
must lay the more load on them, and kill them with the Word of the Lord; and
there he alludeth to those places which speak of giving the Saints power over
nations, binding Kings in chains, and of threshing instruments with teeth, and
foretells their flight by that in Esaias 21.15. They shall flee from the sword,
etc.

2. Though the enemies under a Covenant of Works be many and strong, (as he
confesses they are) yet they ought not to fear, for the battle is the Lords,
this he enforces by that in Josh. 23.10. One of you shall chase a thousand,
and that of Jonathan and his armor-bearer.

3. Against tenderness of heart, which they might have toward such under a
Covenant of Works, as are exceeding holy and strict in their way, he animateth
his party by persuading them, that such are the greatest enemies to Christ;
this he seeks to illustrate by resembling such in their zeal to Paul when he
was a persecutor, and in their devotion to those who expelled Paul and Barnabas
out of Antioch. He takes it for granted that these holy men trust in their
righteousness, and that it thrusts out the righteousness of Christ, and so
concludes and foretells from Ezech. 33. They shall die, and that their
righteousness is accursed, yet they transform themselves (says he) into
Angels of light.

4. That his party might not fear lest he should break the rule of
meekness, etc. he brings in the example of Stephen, Act. 7.58. and the
example of Christ, Joh. 8.44. and Matthew. 23.23.

5. To those who might fear, lest this strife should cause a combustion in
Church and Commonwealth, he answers and tells them plainly it will do so,
but yet to uphold their hearts, he arms them with the prediction of Christ,
Luke 12.49. and tells them that it is the desire of the Saints, that that fire
were kindled, and with that in Esa. 9.5. which he interprets of Michael and the
Angels, and with that in Mal. 4.2. and by that in the Revelation, the whore
must be burnt.

6. He arms them against persecution by exhorting them not to love their
lives unto the death, but be willing to be killed like sheep, seeing it is
impossible to hold forth the truth of God with external peace and quietness:
This he enforces by the example of Sampson, who slew more at his death then in
his life.

These passages of his Sermon being openly read, Master Wheelwright did
acknowledge and justify the same, and being demanded (either then or before)
whether by those under a Covenant of works he did mean any of the Ministers
and other Christians in those Churches, he answered, that if he were showed any
that walked in such a way, as he had described to be a Covenant of works, them
he did mean. Here diverse speeches passed up and down, whereof there was no
special notice taken, as not material to the purpose in hand.

The Court proceeded also to examine some witnesses about another Sermon of
his, whereat much offense had also been taken, and not without cause, (as
appeared to the Court) for in that he seemed to scare men not only from legal
righteousness, but even from faith and repentance, as if that also were a way
of the Covenant of works; but this being matter of Doctrine, the Court passed
it by for the present, only they (and the Ministers present, diverse of them)
declared their grief to see such opinions risen in the Country of so dangerous
consequence, and so directly crossing the scope of the Gospel, (as was
conceived) and it was retorted upon him which he in his Sermon charge his
adverse party with, (though uncharitably and untruly) when he says they would
take away the true Christ, that to make good such a doctrine as he held forth
(to common intendment) must needs call for a new Christ and a new Gospel, for
sure the old would not own or justify it.

Then the Court propounded a question to the Ministers, which (because they
desired time of consideration to make answer unto) was given them in writing
upon the outside of Master Wheelwrights Sermon, in these words; Whether by that
which you have heard concerning Master Wheelwrights Sermon, and that which was
witnessed concerning him, ye do conceive that the Ministers in this Country
do walk in and teach such a way of Salvation and evidencing thereof, as he
describes, and accounts to be a Covenant of works? To this question (being
again called for into the Court the next morning) they returned an affirmative
answer, in the very words of the question, adding withal, that they would not
be understood, that their doctrine and Master Wheelwrights about Justification,
and Salvation, and evidencing thereof, did differ in all things, but only in
the point presented, and debated now in Court, and that of this their answer
they were ready to give reasons when the Court should demand them, and that to
this they all consented, except their brother the teacher of Boston: After this
(by leave of the Court) the Ministers all spoke one by one in order, some more
largely, laying open by solid arguments and notorious examples, the great
dangers that the Churches and Civil State were fallen into, by the differences
which were grown amongst us in matters of Religion, offering themselves
withal to employ all their studies to effect a reconciliation, showing also
their desires that Mr. Wheelwright would be with them, when they should meet
for this purpose, and blaming his former strangeness as a possible occasion of
these differences of judgment. Others spoke more briefly, but consented with
the former; and all of them (as they had occasion to speak to Mr. Wheelwright,
or to make mention of him) used him with all humanity and respect; what his
carriage was toward them again, those who were present may judge, as they saw
cause.

The matters objected against Mr. Wheel. being recollected, and put to the
vote, the opinion of the Court was, that he had run into sedition and contempt
of the Civil authority, which accordingly was recorded to the same effect, and
he was enjoined to appear at the next general Court to abide their further
sentence herein. And whereas motion was made of enjoining him silence in the
mean time, the Ministers were desired to deliver their advice what the Court
might do in such a case: Their answer was, that they could not give a clear
resolution of the question at the present, but for Mr. Wheel. they desired that
the Court would rather refer him to the Church of B. to deal with him for
that matter; which accordingly was done, and so he was dismissed: such of the
Magistrates and Deputies, as had not concurred with the major part in the vote,
(some of them) moved that the dissent might be recorded, (but it was denied) as
a course never used in this or any such Court. Afterward they tendered a
Protestation, which was also refused, because therein they had justified Mr.
Wheel. as a faithful Minister of the Lord Jesus, and condemned the Court for
undue proceeding; but this was offered them, that if they would write down the
words of the record, and subscribe their dissent without laying such aspersion
upon the Court, it should be received.

Although the simple narration of these proceedings might be sufficient to
justify the Court in what they have done, especially with these of this
jurisdiction, who have taken notice of the passages in the general Court in
December. last, yet for satisfaction of others to whom this case may be otherwise
presented by same or misreport, we will set down some grounds and reasons
thereof, some whereof were expressed in the Court, and others (though not
publicly insisted upon, yet) well conceived by some, as further motives to
lead their judgments to do as they did.

And, 1. It is to be observed, that the noted differences in point of Religion
in the Churches here, are about the Covenant of works, in opposition to the
Covenant of grace; in clearing whereof much dispute has been, whether
sanctification be any evidence of justification.

2. That before Mr. Wheel. came into this country (which is not yet two years
since) there was no strife (at least in public observation) about that point.

3. That he did know (as himself confessed) that diverse of the Ministers here
were not of his Judgment in those points, and that the publishing of them,
would cause disturbance in the Country, and yet he would never confer with
the Ministers about them, that thereby he might have gained them to his
opinion, (if it had been the truth) or at least have manifested some care of
the public peace, which he rather seemed to slight, when being demanded in the
Court a reason of such his failing, he answered that he ought not to consult
with flesh and blood, about the publishing of that truth whcih he had received
from God.

4. It was well known to him that the Magistrates and Deputies were very
sensible of those differences, and studious of pacifying such minds as began
to be warm and apt to contention about them, and for this end at the said
Court in December, (where these differences and alienations of mind through
rash censures, etc. were sadly complained of) they had called in the Ministers,
and (Mr. Wheel. being present) had desired their advice for discovery of such
dangers, as did threaten us hereby, and their help for preventing thereof; and
it was then thought needful, to appoint a solemn day of humiliation (as for
other occasions more remote, so especially) for this which more nearly
concerned us, and at this time this very point of evidencing justification by
sanctification set into some debate, and Mr. Wheel. being present spoke
nothing, though he well discerned that the judgment of most of the Magistrates
and near all the Ministers closed with the affirmative.

5. That upon the said fast (Mr. Wheel. being desired by the Church to exercise
as a private brother, by way of Prophecy) when Mr. Cotton teaching in the
afternoon out of Esa. 58.4. had showed that it was not a fit work for a day of
Fast, to move strife and debate, to provoke to contention, etc. but by all
means to labor pacification and reconciliation, and therein had bestowed much
time, and many forcible arguments, yet Mr. Wheel. speaking after him, taught as
is here before mentioned, wholly omitting those particular occasions which the
Court intended, nay rather reproving them, in teaching that the only cause of
Fasting, was the absence of Christ, etc. and so notwithstanding the occasion of
the day, Mr. Cottons example, the intent of the Court for procuriug peace, he
stirred up the people to contention, and that with more then ordinary
vehemence. Now if any man will equally weigh the proceedings of the Court and
these observations together, we hope it will appear that Mr. Wheelwright was
justly convict of sedition and contempt of authority, and such as have not
leisure or will to compare them together, may only read that which here
follows, and receive satisfaction thereby, carrying this along with them,
that the acts of authority holding forth the face, and stamp of a divine
sentence should not be less regarded then the actions of any private brother,
which a good man will view on all four sides before he judge them to be evil.

Sedition and contempt are laid to his charge.

Sedition does properly signify a going aside to make a party, and is rightly
described by the Poet, (for it is lawful to fetch the meaning of words from
humane authority) In mag^^ populo cum saepe cooria est seditio saevitque
animis, etc. whence it does appear that when the minds of the people being
assembled are kindled or made fierce upon some sudden occasion, so as they
fall to take part one against another, this is sedition; for when that furor,
which does arma ministrare, is once kindled, the sedition is begun, though it
come not to its perfection, till faces et saxa volant: Tully says, Seditionem,
esse dissensionem omnium inter se, cum eunt alii in aliud, when the people
dissent in opinion and go several ways.

Isidore says, Seditiosus est, qui dissentionem animorum facit and discordias
gignit, He that sets men's minds at difference, and begets strife: And if we
look into the Scripture we shall find examples of sedition agreeing to these
descriptions. The uproare moved by Demetrius, Acts 19. was sedition, yet he
neither took up arms, nor persuaded others so to do, but only induced the
minds of the people, and made them fierce against the Apostles, by telling them
they were enemies to Diana of the Ephesians. Korah and his company moved a most
dangerous sedition, yet they did not stir up the people to fight, only they
went apart and drew others to them against Moses and Aaron; here was nothing
but words, and that by a Levite, who might speak by his place, but it cost
more then words before it was pacified. Now in our present case, did not Mr.
Wheel. make sides when he proclaimed all to be under a Covenant of works, who
did not follow him (step by step) in his description of the Covenant of Grace?
did he not make himself a party on the other side, by often using these and
the like words, We, us? Did he not labor to heat the minds of the people, and
to make them fierce against those of that side, which he opposed (and whereof
he knew that most of the Magistrates and Ministers had declared themselves)
when with the greatest fervency of spirit and voice, he proclaims them
Antichrists, enemies, Philistims, Herod, Pilate, persecuting Jews, and stirred
up them on his part to fight with them, to lay load on them, to burn them, to
thresh them, to bind them in chains and fetters, to kill them and vex their
hearts, and that under the pain of the curse of Meroz? Tantaene animis
caelestibus irae? would one think that any heavenly spirit could have breathed
so much anger, when an Angel would have given milder language to the Devil
himself? and all this without vouchsasing one argument to convince these
enemies of their evil way, or one word of admonition or advice to themselves,
to draw them out of danger. But it is objected, that he expressed his meaning
to be of a spiritual fighting and killing, etc. with the sword of the spirit
only. It is granted he did so, yet his instances of illustration, or rather
enforcement, were of another nature, as of Moses killing the Egyptian in
defense of his brother, Sampson losing his life with the Philistims, the fight
of Jonathan and his armor-bearer, and of David's worthies, Baruc and Jael, etc.
these obtained their victories with swords and hammers, etc. And such are no
spiritual weapons, so that if his intent were not to stir up to open force
and arms (neither do we suspect him of any such purpose, otherwise then by
consequent) yet his reading and experience might have told him, how dangerous
it is to heat peoples affections against their opposites, a mind inflamed with
indignation (among some people) would have been more apt to have drawn their
swords by the authority of the examples he held forth for the encouragement,
then to have been kept to spiritual weapons, by the restraining without
cautions, such as cannot dispute for Christ with Steven, will be ready to draw
their swords for him, like Peter; for furor arms ministrat, like him who when
he could not by any sentence in the Bible confute an Heretic, could make use
of the whole book to break his head; we might hold forth instances more then
enough. The wars in Germany for these hundred years arose from dissentions
in Religion, and though in the beginning of the contention, they drew out only
the sword of the Spirit, yet it was soon changed into a sword of steel; so
was it among the confederate Cantons of Helvetia, which were so many Towns as
nearly combined together, as ours here; so was it also in the Netherlands
between the Orthodox and the Arminians; so has it been between the
Calvinists and Lutherans: In every place we find that the contentions began
first by disputations and Sermons, and when the minds of the people were once
set on fire by reproachful terms of intendiary spirits, they soon set to
blows, and had always a tragical and boudy issue; And to clear this
objection, Mr. Wheel. professed before hand, what he looked for, viz. that his
doctrine would cause combustions even in the Commonwealth, as well as in the
Churches, which he could not have feared if he had supposed (as in charity he
well might) that those who were set over the people here in both States were
indeed true Christians; yea he not only confesses his expectation, but his
earnest desire also of such combustions and disturbances, when he says that it
is the Saints desire to have the fire kindled, as if he were come among Turks
or Papists, and not among the Churches of Christ, amongst whom Paul labored to
quench all fire of contention, but with the Corinthians, Romans, and Galatians,
and wished that those were cut off who troubled them, setting a mark upon such
as made division, and a note of a carnal mind: therefore this objection will
not save him, his offense is yet without excuse, he did intend to trouble our
peace, and he has effected it; therefore it was a contempt of that authority
which required every man to study Peace and Truth, and therefore it was a
seditious contempt, in that he stirred up others; to join in the disturbance
of that peace, which he was bound by solemn Oath to preserve.

But here he puts in a plea, that he did take the only right way for Peace,
by holding out the Lord Jesus Christ in the Covenant of free Grace, for without
Christ there is no peace, but get Christ and we have all.

To this we reply, first, We would demand of him what he accounts a holding
forth a Covenant of Grace? for saving that he says, this is a Covenant of
Grace, that is a Covenant of Works, no man can discern any such thing by his
proofs, for there is not any one argument in his Sermon to convince the
judgment that so it is, and if we search the Scripture, we find in the Old
Testament, Jer. 31. the Covenant of Grace to be this, I will write my Law in
their hearts, or, I will be their God, etc. and in the New Testament, we
find, He that believes in the Lord Jesus Christ, shall be saved, and that it
is of Faith, that it might be of grace; but other Covenant of Grace then
these, or to the same effect, are not in our Bibles.

Again, Though it be true, that get Christ and we have all in some respect,
yet we must remember him of what he said with the same breath, that Truth and
external Peace cannot possibly stand together, how then would he have us
believe, that such a holding forth Christ should bring the desired peace? This
is somewhat like the Jewish Corban, I will give to God, and he shall help my
Parents, or as when a poor man stands in need of such relief, as I might give
him, instead there of I pray to God to bless him, and tell him that the
blessing of God makes rich, or, as I give a Lawyer a Fee to plead my cause,
and to procure me Justice, and when the day of hearing comes, he makes a long
speech in commending the justice of the King, and persuading me to get his
favor, because he is the fountain of Justice; This is to reprove the wisdom
of God, by looking that the supreme and first cause should produce all effects,
without the use of subordinate acd nearer causes and means; so a man should
live out his full time by Gods decree only, without meat or medicine; this plea
therefore will not hold, let us hear another.

It is objected, that the Magistrates may not appoint a messenger of God, what
he should teach: admit so much, yet he may limit him what he may not teach,
if he forbid him to teach heresy or sedition, etc. he incurres as well a
contempt in teaching that which he was forbidden, as sins in teaching that
which is evil. Besides, every truth is not seasonable at all times. Christ
tells his Disciples that he had many things to teach them, but they could not
bear them then, Job. 16.12. and God gives his Prophets the tongue of the
learned, that they may know how to speak a word in season, Isa. 50, 40. and if
for every thing there be a season, then for every Doctrine, Eccles. 3.1. The
abolishing of the ceremonial Law was a Truth which the Apostles were to teach,
yet there was a season when Paul did refrain it, Acts 21.24. and the same Paul
would not circumcise Titus, though he did Timothy, so the difference of
persons and places, made a difference in the season of the doctrine: and if Mr.
Wheelwright had looked upon the words which followed in his Text, Matthew. 9.16,
17. he might have learned that such a Sermon would as ill suite the season, as
old bottles do new Wine, and by that in Esaias before mentioned, he might have
known that the Spirit of God does teach his servants to discern of seasons, as
well as of truths; for if there be such a point in wisdom, as men call
discretion, sure, Religion (which makes truly wise) does not deprive the
servants of God of the right use thereof. When Paul was to deal with the
sorcerer, who did oppose his doctrine, Act. 13. he calls him the child of the
devil, etc. but when he answered Festus, (who told him he was mad, and
rejected his doctrine also) he uses him gently, and with terms of honorable
respect. Though Steven calls the Jews stiffenecked, and of uncircumcised hearts,
etc. as knowing them to be malicious and obstinate enemies to Christ, yet Paul
directs Timothy (being to deal with such as were not past hope, though they
did oppose his Doctrine for the present) not to strive, but to use all
gentleness, instructing them with meekness, etc. 2 Timothy 2. The Prophet Elisha
when he speaks to Jehoram very roughly, as one not worthy to be looked at,
yet he shows a different respect of Jehosaphat, though he were then out of
his way, and under a sin, for which he had been formerly reproved, 2 King. 3.
Christ himself (though he sharply reproves the Pharisees, etc. yet he
instructs Nicodemus gently, when he objected against his doctrine, and that
somewhat rudely, Joh. 3. The Apostles would not forbear to Preach Christ,
though Rulers forbad them, Act. 3. yet another Prophet forbear at another
season at the command of King Amasia, 2 Chronicles. 25. so we see that this plea of
Mr. Wheelwright is as weak as the former, and will not excuse him from contempt.

If it be yet objected, that his Sermon was not all for contention, seeing he
raised and pressed an use of brotherly love, we grant he did so, but it was
ejusdem farinae, a loaf of the same leaven with the other, for he applies it
to those of his own party, to persuade them to hold together, and help one
another against those of the other party, whom he sets forth as their
opposites and encourages them thereto by the example of Moses, who in love to
his brother, killed the Egyptian.

A further objection has been made against the proceedings of the Court, as if
Mr. Wheelwright had not a lawful trial, as not being put upon a Jury of
freemen. But the answer to this is easy, it being well known to all such as
have understanding of matters of this nature, that such Courts as have power to
make and abrogate Laws, are tied to no other Orders, but their own, and to no
other rule but Truth and Justice, and why thrice twelve men sitting as Judges
in a Court, should be more subject to partiality then twelve such called as a
Jury to the bar, let others judge.

Now if some shall gather from that which is here before mentioned, viz. that
every truth is not seasonable at all times, if we shall grant that what Master
Wheelwright delivered was the truth, we must desire him to take only so much
as we granted, viz. by way of supposition only; for letting pass (as we
said) such points as were merely doctrinall, and not ripe for the Court
(depending as yet in examination among the Elders) we may safely deny that
those speeches were truths, which the Court censured for contempt and sedition,
for a brother may fall so far into disobedience to the Gospel, as there may
be cause to separate from him, and to put him to shame, and yet he is not to
be accounted an enemy, 2 Thessalonians. 3. Therefore when Mr. Wheelwright pronounced
such (taking them at the worst he could make them) to be enemies, etc. it was
not according to the truth of the Gospel. Again, to incense and heat men's
minds against their Brethren, before he had convinced or admonished them, as
being in an estate of enmity, etc. is not to be termed in any truth of the
Gospel; so likewise to bring extraordinary examples for ordinary rules, as of
Joh. 8.44. to incite his party to the like practice against such whose hearts
they cannot judge of, as Christ could of theirs to whom he spoke, is as far
from the rule prescribed to ordinary Ministers, 2 Timothy 2.25. and to all
Christians, Gal. 6.1. and Jam. 3 17. as that example of Elijah (by which the
Apostles would have called for fire from heaven upon the Samaritans) was
different from the Spirit whereof they were: so to resemble such among us, as
profess their faith in Christ only, etc. and are in Church fellowship, and
walk inoffensively, submitting to all the Lords Ordinances in Church and Common
wealth, to resemble such to branded Reprobates, and arch-enemies of Christ,
such as Herod, etc. we suppose has no warrant of Truth. We might instance in
other like passages, as his ordinary inciting to spiritual combats, by
examples of bodily fight and bloody victories, (being very unsuitable) but these
may suffice to prove that all he spoke was not true, and by this is the
offense more aggravated, for if it were seditious only in the manner, it must
needs be much worse, when the matter it self also was untrue.

But if any shall yet pretend want of satisfaction, by all that has been
produced, (for indeed it is beyond reason, how far prejudice has prevailed
to captivate some Judgments, otherwise godly and wise) and shall object
further, that his doctrines, etc. were general, and so could not be intended
of any particular persons, we desire such, first to remember what application
Mr. Wh. made of the same in the open Court, viz. that he did intend all such
as walked in such a way. Then again, let the case be put in a reversed frame,
some other had then taught, that all such as deny that sanctification (as it is
held by the other party) is a good evidence of justification, and that say or
have their assurance by faith, as a work of God in them have it in the way of
the Gospel, that these were enemies to Christ, etc. Persecutors of the way of
grace, etc. and should have stirred up others against them, with like
arguments, and vehemence as Mr. Wheelwright did, there is no doubt but Mr.
Wheel. and others of his opinion, would soon have pointed out those who must
necessarily have been intended by it: for it is well known that some proper
adjunct, or some noted circumstance may design a particular person or company,
as well as names, so Christ points out Judas by the sop, Paul the Jews, by
those of the circumcision, and the Antichrist, by That man of sin, etc.

But we meet y^^ with another objection, viz. that disturbance of unity is not
sedition, except it also lead to the hurt of utility.

To this we answer, first, that if it tend immediately to such hurt, we deny
the truth of the proposition; for if in the time of famine, a man should stir
up the people to fetch corn out of the houses of such as had it to spare, this
were to an immediate public good, yet it were sedition. If Jeremy (when he
taught the Jews, that they ought to set free their Hebrew servants) had also
incited the servants to free themselves, this had not been free from sedition,
yet it had not been against public utility: But they allege the examples of
Jehojadah, who caused a disturbance, yet without sedition; we answer, that
case was very unlike to ours, for Jehojadah being High Priest, was also
protector of the true King, and so chief Governor of the Civil State, and
Athaliah being a mere usurper, he did no other, then if a lawful King should
assemble his Subjects to apprehend a Rebel; and though a Prince or Governor
may raise a party to suppress or withstand public enemies or other evils, yet
it does not follow that a private man, or a Minister of the Gospel may do the
like: we read Nehem. 5.7. that he raised a great assembly against those who
did oppress their brethren, but we read not that Ezra did so, upon the
disorders which he complained of, and yet that which he did in assembling of
the people, for redress, etc. was by authority and counsel of the Nobles,
Ezra 10.8.

2. That this course of Mr. Wheel. did tend directly to the great hinderance of
public utility, for when brethren shall look one at another as enemies and
persecutors, etc. and when people shall look at their Rulers and Ministers as
such, and as those who go about to take Christ and salvation from them, how
shall they join together in any public service? how shall they cohabite and
trade together? how hardly will they submit to such Overseers? how will it
hinder all affairs in Courts, in Towns, in Families, in Vessels at Sea, etc.
and what can more threaten the dissolution and ruin of Church and
Commonwealth? Lastly, if it be alleged that such warlike terms are used by
Christ and his Apostles in a spiritual sense, we deny it not, but we desire
that the usual manner of their applying then may be also considered, for Paul
says, 1 Cor. 9. So fight I, etc. I beat down my body, etc. 1 Timothy 6.12.
Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, and 1 Pet. 2.11. and
Jam. 4.1. there is speech of the fight of our lusts, and Ephesians. 6.11. he bids
them put on armor, but it is to resist the Devil, not flesh and blood, not to
fight against their brethren, toward whom he forbids all bitterness and
clamor, etc. Ephesians. 4. And when he speaks of spiritual weapons, 2 Cor. 10. he
does non draw them out against the persons of brethren, but against high
thoughts and imaginations, etc. And if Mr. Wheel. had found out any such among
us, and planted his battery against them by sound arguments, he had followed
our Apostolic rule; Christ indeed threatens to fight against the Nicholairans
with the sword of his mouth, and if Mr. Wheel, had known any such here, as
certainly as Christ knew those, he might have been justified by the example,
otherwise not.

Therefore to conclude, seeing there be of those who diffent from Mr. Wheel his
doctrines, who have denied themselves for the love of Christ as far as be
has done, and will be ready (by Gods grace) to do and suffer for the sake of
Christ, and the honor of Free Grace as much as himself, for such to be
publicly defamed, and held forth as enemies to the Lord Jesus, and persecutors
like Herod and Pilate, and the uncircumcised heathen, etc. cannot proceed from
a charitable mind, nor does it savor of an Apostolic, Gospel-like, brotherly
spirit.

Mistress Hutchison being banished and confined, till the season of the year
might be fit, and safe for her departure; she thought it now needless to
conceal herself any longer, neither would Satan lose the opportunity of
making choice of so fit an instrument, so long as any hope remained to attain
his mischievous end in darkning the saving truth of the Lord Jesus, and
disturbing the peace of his Churches. Therefore she began now to discover all
her mind to such as came to her, so that her opinions came abroad and began to
take place among her old disciples, and now some of them raised up questions
about the immortality of the soul, about the resurrection, about the morality
of the Sabbath, and diverse others, which the Elders finding to begin to appear
in some of their Churches, they took much pains (both in public and private)
to suppress; and following the sent from one to another, the root of all was
found to be in Mistress Hutchison; whereupon they resorted to her many times,
laboring to convince her, but in vain; yet they resorted to her still, to the
end they might either reclaim her from her errors, or that they might bear
witness against them if occasion were: For in a meeting of the Magistrates and
Elders, about suppressing these new sprung errors, the Elders of Boston had
declared their readiness to deal with Mistress Hutchison in a Church way, if
they had sufficient testimony: for though she had maintained some of them
sometimes before them, yet they thought it not so orderly to come in as
witnesses; whereupon other of the Elders, and others collecting which they had
heard from her own mouth at several times, drew them into several heads, and
sent them to the Church of Boston, whereupon the Church (with leave of the
Magistrates, because she was a prisoner) sent for her to appear upon a Lecture
day, being the fifteenth of the first month, and though she were at her own
house in the Town, yet she came not into the Assembly till the Sermon and
Prayer were ended, (pretending bodily infirmity) when she was come, one of
ruling Elders called her forth before the Assembly, (which was very great from
all the parts of the Country) and telling her the cause why the Church had
called her, read the several heads, which were as follows.

1. That the souls of all men (in regard of generation) are mortal like the
beasts, Eccl. 3.8. 2. That in regard of Christ's purchase they are immortal, so
that Christ has purchased the souls of the wicked to eternal pain, and the
souls of the elect to eternal peace. 3. Those who are united to Christ have
in this life new bodies, and 2 bodies, 1 Cor. 6.19. she knows not how Jesus
Christ should be united to this our fleshly bodies. 4. Those who have union
with Christ, shall not rise with the same fleshly bodies, 1 Cor. 15.44. 5. And
that the resurrection mentioned there, and in John 5.28. is not meant of the
resurrection of the body, but of our union here and after this life. 6. That
there are no created graces in the Saints after their union with Christ, but
before there are, for Christ takes them out of their hands into his own. 7.
There are no created graces in the humane nature of Christ, but he was only
acted by the power of the Godhead. 8. The Image of God wherein Adam was made,
she could see no Scripture to warrant that it consisted in holiness, but
conceived it to be in that he was made like to Christ's manhood. 9. She had no
Scripture to warrant that Christ's manhood is now in Heaven, but the body of
Christ is his Church. 10. We are united to Christ with the same union, that his
humanity on earth was with the Deity, Jo. 17.21. 11. She conceived the
Disciples before Christ his death were not converted, Matthew. 18.3. 12. There is
no evidence to be had of our good estate, either from absolute or conditional
promises. 13. The Law is no rule of life to a Christian. 14. There is no
Kingdom of Heaven in Scripture but only Christ. 15. There is first engraffing
into Christ before union, from which a man might fall away. 16. The first thing
God reveals to assure us is our election. 17. That Abraham was not in a saving
estate till the 22. chap. of Genesis when he offered Isaac, and saving the
firmness of Gods election, he might have perished notwithstanding any work of
grace that was wrought in him till then. 18. That union to Christ is not by
faith. 19. That all commands in the word are Law, and are not a way of life,
and the command of faith is a Law, and therefore kills; she supposed it to be
a Law from Romans 3.27. 20. That there is no faith of Gods elect but assurance,
there is no faith of dependence but such as an hypocrite may have and fall away
from, proved John 15. for by that she said they are in Christ, but Christ is
not in them. 21. That an hypocrite may have Adams righteousness and perish,
and by that righteousness he is bound to the Law, but in union with Christ,
Christ comes into the man, and he retains the seed, and dies, and then all
manner of grace in himself, but all in Christ. 22. There is no such thing as
inherent righteousness. 23. We are not bound to the Law, no not as a rule of
life. 24. We are dead to all acts in spiritual things, and are only acted by
Christ. 25. Not being bound to the Law, it is not transgression against the Law
to sin, or break it, because our sins they are inward and spiritual, and
so are exceeding sinful, and only are against Christ. 26. Sanctification can
be no evidence at all of our good estate. 27. That her particular revelations
about future events are as infallible as any part of Scripture, and that she is
bound as much to believe them, as the Scripture, for the same holy Ghost is the
author of them both. 28. That so far as a man is in union with Christ, he can
do no duties perfectly, and without the communion of the unregenerate part
with the regenerate. 29. That such exhortations as these, to work out our
salvation with fear, to make our calling and election sure, etc. are spoken
only to such, as are under a Covenant of works.
All which she did acknowledge she had spoken, (for a copy of them had been
sent to her diverse days before, and the witnesses hands subscribed, so as she
saw it was in vain to deny them) then she asked by what rule such an Elder
could come to her pretending to desire light, and indeed to entrappe her, to
which the same Elder answered that he had been twice with her, and that he
told her indeed at St. Ives, that he had been troubled at some of her speeches
in the Court, wherein he did desire to see light for the ground and meaning of
them, but he professed in the presence of the Lord, that he came not to entrap
her, but in compassion to her Soul, to help her out of those snares of the
Devil, wherein he saw she was entangled, and that before his deparure from her
he did bear witness against her opinions, and against her spirit, and did
leave it sadly upon her from the word of God: then presently she grew into
passion against her Pastor for his speech against her at the Court after the
sentence was passed, which he gave a full answer unto, showing his zeal
against her errors, whereupon she asked for what errors she had been banished,
professing withal that she held none of these things she was now charged with,
before her imprisonment; (supposing that whatsoever should be found amiss,
would be imputed to that, but it was answered as the truth was, that she was
not put to durance, but only a favorable confinement, so as all of her Family
and diverse others, resorted to her at their pleasure.) But this allegation was
then proved false, (and at her next convention more fully) for there were
diverse present, who did know she spoke untruth. Her answer being demanded to
the first Articles, she maintained her assertion that the Souls were mortal,
etc. alleging the place in the Eccles. cited in the Article, and some other
Scriptures nothing to the purpose, she insisted much upon that in Genesis 1. In
the day thou eatest, etc. thou shall dye, she could not see how a Soul could
be immortally miserable, though it might be eternally miserable, neither could
she distinguish between the Soul and the Life; and though she were pressed
by many Scriptures and reasons alleged by the Elders of the same, and other
Churches, so as she could not give any answer to them, yet she stood to her
opinion, till at length a stranger being desired to speak to the point, and
he opening to her the difference between the Soul and the Life, the first
being a spiritual substance, and the other the union of that with the body;
she then confessed she saw more light then before, and so with some difficulty
was brought to confess her error in that point. Wherein was to be observed
that though he spoke to very good purpose, and so clearly convinced her as she
could not gainsay, yet it was evident she was convinced before, but she could
not give the honor of it to her own Pastor or teacher, nor to any of the
other Elders, whom she slighted had so much.

Then they proceeded to the third, fourth, and fifth Articles, about the body
and the refurrection of the old, which she maintained according to the
Articles, and though she were not able to give any reasonable answer to the
many places of the Scripture, and other arguments which were brought to
convince her, yet she still persisted in her error, giving froward speeches
to some that spoke to her, as when one of the Elders used this argument, that
if the resurrection were only our union with Christ, then all that are united,
are the children of the resurrection, and therefore are neither to marry, nor
to give in marriage, and so by consequence, there ought to be community of
women; she told him that he spoke like the Pharisees, who said that Christ
had a devil, because that Abraham were dead and the Prophets, and yet he had
said, that those which eat his flesh, should never dye, not taking the speech
in the true meaning, so did he (said she) who brought that argument, for it
is said there, they should be like the Angels, etc. The Elders of Boston
finding her thus obstinate, propounded to the Church for an admonition to be
given her, to which all the Church consented, except two of her sons, who
because they persisted to defend her, were under admonition also. Mr. Cotton
gave the admonition, and first to her sons, laying it sadly upon them, that
they would give such way to their natural affection, as for preserving her
honor, they should make a breach upon the honor of Christ, and upon their
Covenant with the Church, and withal tear the very bowels of their soul, by
hardening her in her sin: In this admonition to her, first, he remembered her of
the good way she was in at her first coming, in helping to discover to
diverse, the false bottom they stood upon, in trusting to legal works without
Christ; then he showed her, how by falling into these gross and fundamental
errors, she had lost the honor of her former service, and done more wrong to
Christ and his Church, then formerly she had done good, and so laid her sin to
her conscience with much zeal and solemnity, he admonished her also of the
height of spirit, then he spoke to the siders of the Church, and advised them
to take heed of her opinions, and to withold all countenance and respects
from her, lest they should harden her in her sin: so she was dismissed and
appointed to appear again that day sevennight.

The Count had ordered that she should return to Roxbury again, but upon
intimation that her spirit began to fall, she was permitted to remain at Mr.
Cottons house (where Davenport was also kept) who before her next appearing,
did both take much pains with her, and prevailed so far, that she did
acknowledge her error in all the Articles (except the last) and accordingly
she wrote down her answers to them all, when the day came, and she was called
forth and the Articles read again to her, she delivered in her answers in
writing, which were also read, and being then willing to speak to the
Congregation for their further satisfaction, she did acknowledge that she had
greatly erred, and that God had left her to her self herein, because she had
so much under-natured his Ordinances, both in slighting the Magistrates at the
Court, and also the Elders of the Church, and confessed that when she was at
the Court, she looked only at such failings as she apprehended in the
Magistrates proceedings, without having regard to the place they were in and
that the speeches she then used about her revelations were rash, and without
ground, and she desired the prayers of the Church for her.

Thus far she went on well, and the Assembly conceived hope of her
repentance, but in her answers to the several articles, she gave no
satisfaction, because in diverse of them she answered by circumlocutions, and
seemed to lay all the faults in her expressions, which occasioned some of the
Elders to desire she might express her self more clearly, and for that ever
she was demanded about the Article, whether she were not, or had not been of
that judgment, that there is no inherent righteousness in the Saints, but
those gifts and graces which are ascribed to them that are only in Christ as
the subject? to which she answered, that she was never of that judgment,
howsoever by her expressions she might seem to be so; and this she affirmed
with such confidence as bred great astonishment in many, who had known the
contrary, and diverse alleged her own sayings and reasonings, both before her
confinement and since, which did manifest to all that were present, that she
knew that she spoke untruth, for it was proved that she had alleged that in
Esaias 53. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; which she
had maintained to be meant of a knowledge in Christ, and not in us; so
likewise that in Galathians, I live by the faith of the Son of God, which she
said was the faith of Christ, and not any faith inherent in us; also, that she
had maintained, that Christ is our sanctification in the same sort that he is
our justification, and that she had said, that she would not pray for grace,
but for Christ, and that (when she had been pressed with diverse Scriptures,
which spoke of washing and creating a new heart, and writing the Law in the
heart, etc.) she had denied; that they did mean any sanctification in us:
There were diverse women also with whom she had dealt about the same point,
who (if their modesty had not restrained them) would have born witness against
her herein, (as themselves after confessed) wherefore the Elders pressed her
very earnestly to remember her self, and not to stand so obstinately to
maintain so manifest an untruth, but she was deaf of that ear, and would not
acknowledge that she had been at any time of that judgment, howsoever her
expressions were; Then Mr. Cotton told the Assembly, that whereas she had been
formerly dealt with for matter of doctrine, he had (according to the duty of
his place being the teacher of that Church) proceeded against unto admonition,
but now the case being altered, and she being in question for maintaining of
untruth, which is matter of manners, he must leave the business to the Pastor,
Mr. Wilson to go on with her, but withal declared his judgment in the case
from that in Revel. 22. that such as make and maintain a lie, ought to be cast
out of the Church; and whereas two or three pleaded that she might first have a
second admonition, according to that in Titus 3.10. he answered that that was
only for such as erred in point of doctrine, but such as shall notoriously
offend in matter of conversation, ought to be presently cast out, as he proved
by Ananias and Saphira, and the incestuous Corinthian; (and as appears by that
of Simin Magus) and for her own part though she heard this moved in her
behalf, that she might have a further respite, yet she her self never desired
it: so the Pastor went on, and propounding it to the Church, to know whether
they were all agreed, that she should be cast out, and a full consent appearing
(after the usual manner) by their silence, after a convenient pause he
proceeded, and denounced the sentence of excommunication against her, and she
was commanded to depart out of the Assembly. In her going forth, one standing
at the door, said, The Lord sanctify this unto you, to whom she made answer,
The Lord judges not as man judges, better to be cast out of the Church then
to deny Christ.

Thus it has pleased the Lord to have compassion of his poor Churches here,
and to discover this great imposter, an instrument of Satan so fitted and
trained to his service for interrupting the passage, Kingdom in this part of
the world, and poisoning the Churches here planted, as no story records the
like of a woman, since that mentioned in the Revelation; it would make a large
volume to lay down all passages, I will only observe some few, which were
obvious to all that knew her course.

1. In her entrance I observe, 1. Her entrance. 2. Her progress. 3. Her down
fall.


1. The foundation she laid was (or rather seemed to be) Christ and Free Grace.
2. Rule she pretended to walk by, was only the Scripture. 3. The light to
discern this rule, was only the holy Ghost. 4. The persons she conversed with
were (for the most part) Christians in Church Covenant. 5. Her ordinary talk
was about the things of the Kingdom of God. 6. Her usual conversation was in
the way of righteousness and kindness.
Thus she entered and made up the first act of her course.

In her progesse I observe,

First, her success, she had in a short time insinuated her self into the
hearts of much of the people (yea of many of the most wise and godly) who grew
into so reverent an esteem of her godliness, and spiritual gifts, as they
looked at her as a Prophetess, raised up of God for some great work now at
hand, as the calling of the Jews, etc. so as she had more resort to her for
counsel about matter of conscience, and clearing up men's spiritual estates,
then any Minister (I might say all the Elders) in the Country.

Secondly, Pride and arraigning of her spirit.

1. In framing a new way of conversation and evidencing thereof, carried along
in the distinction between the Covenant of works, which she would have no
otherwise differenced, but by an immediate Revelation of the Spirit. 2. In
despising all (both Elders and Christians) who went not her way, and laying
them under a Covenant of works. 3. In taking upon her infallibly to know
theelection of others, so as she would say, that if she had but one half
hours talk with a man, she would tell whether he were elect or not. 4. Her
impatience of opposition, which appears in diver passages before.
Thirdly, Her skill and cunning to devise.

1. In that she still pretended she was of Mr. Cottons judgment in all things.
2. In covering her errors by doubtful expressions. 3. In shadowing the true
end, and abuse of her weekly meetings under the name of repeating Mr. Cottons
Sormons. 4. In her method of practice to bring the conscience under a false
terror, by working that an argument of a Covenant of works, which no Christian
can have comfort without, viz. of sanctification, or qualifications, (as she
termed it.) 5. In her consident profession of her own good estate, and the
clearness and comfort of it, obtained in the same way of waiting for immediate
Revelation which she held out to others.
In her downfall there may be observed the Lords faithfulness in honoring
and justifying his own Ordinances.

1. In that he made her to clear the justice of the Court, by confessing the
vanity of her revelations, etc. and her sin in despising his Ministers.

2. In that the judgment and sentence of the Church has concurred with that
of the Court in her rejection, so that she is cast out of both as an unworthy
member of either.

3. The Justice of God in giving her up to those delusions, and to that
impudency in venting and maintaining them, as should bring her under that
censure, which (not long before) she had endeavored and expected to have
brought upon some other, who opposed her proceedings.

4. That she who was in such esteem in the Church for soundness of Judgment
and sincerity of heart (but a few months before) should now come under
admonition for many foul and fundamental errors, and after be cast out for
notorious lying.

5. That she who was wont to be so consident of her spiritual good estate,
and ready (undesired) to hold it forth to others (being pressed now at her last
appearance before the Church to give some proof of it) should be wholly
silent in that matter.

6. Whereas upon the sentence of the Court against her, she boasted highly of
her sufferings for Christ, etc. it was noted by one of the Elders (who bare
witness against her errors) that the spirit of glory promised in Pet. to those
who suffer for well-doing, did not come upon her, but a spirit of delusion, and
damnable error, which as it had possessed her before, so it became more
effectual and evident by her sufferings.

7. Here is to be seen the presence of God in his Ordinances, when they are
faithfully attended according to his holy will, although not free from human
infirmities: This American Jesabel kept her strength and reputation, even among
the people of God, till the hand of Civil Justice laid hold on her, and then
she began evidently to decline, and the faithful to be freed from her
forgeries; and now in this last act, when she might have expected (as most
likely she did) by her seeming repentance of her errors, and confessing her
under valuing of the Ordinances of Magistracy and Ministracy, to have redeemed
her reputation in point of sincerity, and yet have made good all her former
work, and kept open a back door to have returned to her vomit again, by her
paraphrasticall retractions, and denying any change in her judgment, yet such
was the presence and blessing of God in his own Ordinance, that this subtilty
of Satan was discovered to her utter shame and confusion, and to the setting at
liberty of many godly hearts, that had been captivated by her to that day; and
that Church which by her means was brought under much infamy, and near to
dissolution, was hereby sweetly repaired, and a hopeful way of establishment,
and her dissembled repentance clterly detected, God giving her up since the
sentence of excommunication, to that hardness of heart, as she is not
affected with any remorse but glories in it, and fears not the vengeance of
God, which she lies under, as if God did work contrary to his own word, and
loosed from heaven, while his Church had bound upon earth.

FINIS.

