(...) (...) a young man named Thomas White. We made what haste we could to the
river Charroll, intending (had we been pursued) to swim over it; but finding
the coast clear, we kept the bank about a mile, and then leaving it, took the
North Pole for our guide; and (that we might avoid the danger of His Majesty's
Scouts) declined all high ways, and villages, crossed over plowed lands,
enclosed pastures, high hedges, and deep mierie ditches, till we came into the
open fields. Having journied thus all night the morning light began to appear,
and discovered unto us, that we were not full ten miles from Oxford, though, I
think, had we gone in a direct line, we might have been twenty.

My body was much weakened by my long restraint, wet I was in my feet, weary,
hungry and thirsty, but 'twas no time to linger now, nor any secure place was
there for refreshment: on I must. Well after a 40-miles circuit, my companion
and I with joyful hearts arrived at Aylesbury in Buckinghamshire, where we met
with two more of our fellow prisoners, and were all of us courteously received,
and beyond our expectation relieved by the worthy Commanders, and other
Gentlemen of that garrison, whose favor and bounty I shall ever acknowledge
with a thankful heart.

I was requested by some of those worthy Gentlemen to set down briefly the
usage of the prisoners in Oxford, 'twas my duty to satisfy their desires, and
I have done it as succinctly as I could, leaving the full prosecution and
farther enlargement of so sad a story to him, who shall hereafter write a
second book of Martyrs. The Reader shall find nothing here, but what I either
selt, or saw, or else received by information from those, who have drawn their
proofs from their own woeful experience.

The persons imprisoned I shall reduce to these 3. heads. 1. Gentlemen, under
which title I comprehend Parliament men, Commanders, and the Officers in the
Parliaments Army. 2. Ministers. 3. Common Soldiers, such I mean, as did bear
arms, or else such Yeomen and men of inferior quality, who were taken
prisoners to fill up the number, though so far from making opposition, that
they were only following their Country affairs, and husbandry in the fields.

1. Gentlemen.
1. The Gentlemen whom I found in the Castle, when I was first imprisoned, were
these; Captain Wingate, a member of the House of Commons, he was kept close
prisoner in a little room, and not suffered so much as to take the air for
his healths sake, by which means he grew very sickly; Captain Walton a member
of the House of Commons, Captain Scroope, Captain Lidcot, Captain Austin,
Captain Catseby, Captain Vivers, and Captain Lilburne, all close prisoners,
their friends not permitted to speak with them; yea some of their wives were
denied access. Captain Lilburne was put in irons, Capt. Scroope and Capain
Walton being chamber fellows, had their bed taken from them by that barbarous
Smith, who threatened to tie their necks and heels together. Some had their
liberty sometimes to walk in the Castle court (a little stinking yard, and the
only place, that the prisoners had to ease nature, Smith not permitting any,
no not with a keeper, to go to any other upon that necessity) and those were
Sir William Essex Knight, Cap. Flemming. Capt. Primrose a Scotchman, Capt.
Haslewood, Cap. Scotchforth, and Mr. Ingram, who made an escape, Lieut. Dingly,
Lieut. Fuller, Lieut. Lindsey a Scot, Liut. Cotterell, Ensign Adams, Mr. Moody
and Mr. Ellis both of the liveguard to his Excellency the Earl of Essex.

When Marleborough was taken were brought in Mr. John Francklin Esquire, a
Member of the House of Commons, Lieut. Col. Ramsey, and a Sergeant Major (whose
name I remember not) both Scotchmen, M. Brown. and young Cap. Francklin. About
the same time were brought in Captain Hamilton, and Captain Forbes both
Scotchmen.

After the taking of Cyrencister, Mr. George a Member of the House of Commons,
Lieut. Col. Carr a Scot, whose valor was much spoken of for his once or twice
repulsing P. Rupert's forces, when they had entted the Town, with many other
Captains and country gentlemen were imprisoned in the same Castle: most of
these (nay that worthy Commander himself Mr. Carr did not escape) were, when
they were taken, stripped of their clothes, and put into old filthy rags: most
of them also, when they were with us, were constrained for a time to quarter on
the bare boards: how long they continued so I know not, for within 4. or 5.
days after I my self was cast into a dungeon, and saw them no more.

How inhumanly the monster Smith dealt with these worthy Gentlemen their own
Petition to His Majesty with the Articles exhibited, or at least that were to
be exhibited against the said Smith, will in due time demonstrate. I must crave
pardon, if I have, or shall fall in the caco-graphie of the names of men, or
places.

2. Ministers.
2. The Ministers who were prisoners in the Castle were these, M. Harvert of
Banbury, who was (when I was put into the Dungeon) close prisonet, on whom some
vile persons cast many base calumnies, and most false aspersions; but when upon
examination his innocence appeared, he might have been released upon the taking
of a new Protestation, which was in many things (as I conceive) quite contrary
to that which was framed by the Parliament, and sent into all parts of the
Kingdom, which new Protestation he refusing was still detained. Doctor Claiton,
what he was charged with I could never (though I were sometimes his
chamber-fellow) understand from him. Mr. Gregor^e of Cyrencister, and Mr.
Stanvill, a neighbor Minister of his, who in their passage toward Oxford,
were not only despightfully, but most sordidly abused. The terms of Cobblers,
Tinkers, and Tub-preachers put upon them: yea these Atheistical wretches asked
them inderision, Where is now your God? Mr. Stanvils lodging, when he first
came to us, was on an old Mat on the ground. There was but one Minister more,
namely my self, the meanest I confess of all the rest.

The Lords residing at Oxford issued forth a kind of Proclamation (I know not
what fitter name to give it) to secure those of the adjacent villages, who
following their lawful occasions should repair to Oxford: business of
importance brought me thither, which when I had dispatched I went to the Inn
for my horse, but 'twas taken away by one Cap. Whitley, who seized on it,
because he was informed, that I was a roundhead (a great crime you see is laid
to my charge) when I demanded my horse of Whitley, he committed me, and in my
passage toward prison I and the Officer with me met Smith the Marshall, who
carried me before the Lord chief Justice Heath, who upon examination of the
matter seemed angry with the Officer, that contrary unto the late published
Order I should be so injuriously dealt with, told me that I should not be
wronged, and gave me many good words, wherein he was fruitful, but proved at
last very barren in his actions. I took my leave of his Lordship, and
depatted, presuming, that I was not only a freeman, but conceiving also a
probability of getting nay horse again: but I was no sooner gone from my Lords
presence, but the Catch-poude Smith laid hands on me again, and sent me to the
Castle, From whence I twice petitioned Sir Robert Heath, that either some
charge might be made good against me, or else that he would be pleased to grant
me my liberty. But because I rejected the new Protestation (for he was made
acquainted with it) he also rejected my Petitions; so imposing a necessity of
taking that Protestation, which does (if we respect the letter it self) give
liberty to accept; or refuse it.

After a fortnights imprisonment, Smith tells me, that there is no charge
against me; and if I will take the Protestation, and pay my sees, I shall be
released. When I had read the Protestation, I gave Smith a fair answer, hoping
to obtain my freedom without yielding to his conditions: but the man grew
choleric, and commanded me to answer directly whether I would take it or not.
I told him plainly, I could not. Upon this he cursed me bitterly, and put me
out of my chamber, so that for a fortnight I was forced to make the boards my
bed, many times was I solicited by Smith, but seeing he could not prevail,
after about ten weeks imprisonment in the Castle, and after he had soundly
beaten me with his cane, he put me in the dungeon at Bridewel, and how it was
with me there you shall hear anon.

And by the way I cannot but make known the unkindnesse of Dr. Radcliffe,
Principal of Brasen-nose College, and his injustice toward me I was his
Curate in the Country, after I was by the maliciousness of some people driven
from a small Living which I had in Oxford: how I was oppressed by the base
calumnies and violent dealings of those men, will appear hereafter. Nine
weeks was I in prison, and yet would not the Doctor, though resident in
Oxford, in all this time send after me, to inquire, whether I were living or
dead: here is his unkindnesse. And when after so long a season, I had gotten an
opportunity of writing (paper and Ink being before kept from me) and desired
of him that money (which was justly due to me for my pains in his Cure) he
returned me this answer, that he would not pay me one penny; there was his
injustice: and when I was in the dungeon, he gave out menacing speeches (as I
am informed by persons of credit) that when Smith had done tormenting me, he
himself would begin: and I may add in this he showed his cruelty: but I
leave him to his baggs of gold and silver, though perhaps the Soldiers will
not.

3. Common Soldiers.
3. Whom you are to understand by common Soldiers, I have expressed before. I
found not many of these in the Castle at my first entrance. But after nine or
ten days space, there were nine score persons brought from Marleborough, wet
and very dirtie, who, after their coards were taken off, were put up into an
high Tower, and lodged upon the boards: the rooms were so stuffed with them,
that they could not lie down one by another; I went to comfort them, and to
pray with them, as often as I could get leave; and by that means was a more
frequent spectator of their miseries, then other men; at last I was threatened,
that if I did not forbear, I should be shut up into the same place with them.
On these poor souls, did the Viper Smith exercise his more then savage
cruelty: He allowed them but five farthings a day, so that many of them grew
very sick; all very weak. Smith was often solicited to show more mercy: but
his answer was still; Hang them damned rogues, villain tra^tors, the Devil
take them, they are too well used; nay, when some of them were ready to expire,
and he acquainted therewith; nay, when some were brought and laid before his
face, yet would not this inhumane wretch suffer any thing to be administered to
them for their recovery, so that they dyed.

Most of these men being pinched with hunger and thirst were brought even to
the gates of death, and now there began to be a great cry amongst them
forbread, and water; but Smith, and his officers denied them both, though a
river ran under the Castle-wales. When some of them were brought forth for
examination, and other ends, they drank the water wherein most of the
gentlemen had washed their hands, they drank the rain water in the Castle
court, and (as I have been credibly informed) some of them have drank their
own piss. By this means Smith presumed, that he had made them pliable, and
like soft wax fit to receive any impresion, and therefore tells them, that so
many of them, as would take the protestation, and pay their fees should be
released; Many yielded, and with great charge purchased their liberty, of some
of these poor men Smith received above twenty pounds a man for their sees,
they that refused were put up again in their old mew, and now the tiger Smith
began to rage against them worse then ever, and after a season, when they were
extreme hungry, sent this message to them that as many as would take the
protesttation should have a penny worth of cheese every day, and shortly after
their liberties; Many poor souls embraced the offer, and protested, but
within three days their cheese was denied them, and their liberty too,
unless they would pay large fees, or serve under one of his majesty's Cap: or
be Smiths servants. Most of these some way or other obtained their freedom,
but some still held out, and utterly refused the protestation, to the greatest
part of whom God has since given a gracious deliverance.

The fame (or rather the infamy) of Smithes cruelty began to fly through town
and country; Money was sent to the poor prisoners from their friends and
other charitably persons, but sometimes they fared little the better for it,
for if Smith knew it, he would take it from them, it was an usual thing with
him to pick men's pockets; It may be, it had been formerly his trade. If they
bought meat, his servants, if they found it would eat it from them. Many of
the proore prisoners were wounded and one Mr. Bettresse an honest Surgeon of
the town doing his best to' cure them, was requited with Smithes cruelty, who
twice imprisoned him, who having after much importunity and payment of large
fees procured his liberty, durst not uisite his Patients any more, so that
their wounds stanke and festred, and some of them dyed.

This bloody persecutor Smith, more cruel then those in Queen Mary's days
(for he has been the death of many a man, and I am persuaded, that had not
there been secret ways to convey food to them that many scores of these
Marleborough men had perished for want of it) has beaten many, wounded some,
exercised cruelty toward all; some has he tied neck and heels together for
the space of 44. hours not suffering them to have one bit of bread, or drop of
water, some have been tied after that manner three Weeks without intermision
having only enough to keep life and soul together: and all this, either
because, they called for bread, and water, or for that, they refused the
Protestation, and at last those poor souls, that refused, were conveyed from
the Castle to Bridwell, and there put some of them into a dungeon, and the rest
(for the dungeon would not receive all) into a little base cold room on the
top of the house.

Not long after their departure, Smith in his fury calls me to him, strickes me
on the face, head, and arms with his Cane, and then after many a bitter Curse,
and blasphemous Oath (and yet this bloody Atheist would be thought to be one,
that defends the Protestant Religion) calls me Rogue, and Traitor, and charges
me with dissuading the Prisoners from taking the Protestation, would not
suffer me to answer for my self, but presently causes me to be bound with a
Coard, and so carried through the Marketplace (it was on the Market Day) and
commanded them, that guarded me, to tell the people, that I was a Tub Preacher,
and then to clap me into the dungeon at Bridwell; they executed their commands
with great exteritie. The dungeon was full of people, so that being straightned
for want of room, I was driven to sit all night for 3. weeks together on the
bottom of the Dungeon stairs, it stanke greivously, no lodging was there, but
the bare ground, no house of office but the same place (in some places of it a
man might have gone almost over his shoes in piss.) Our fare was only water,
and a penny worth of bread once in 24. hours. sometimes penie half penie,
and for 4. or 5. days 2. penieworth. Money we had some of us, but nothing
could we buy for it, the master of the Bridewell was put in prison for
releiving us, two keepers set over us, and charged on pain of death not to
permit any person to speak with us, we had no place for the easement of nature
but that where we were in, both night and day, also sickpersons were forced in
the same place to empty their stomaks, so that the stinch of the place was
enough to poison us.

The Cyrencester men (for some of them were brought out of the churches
thither) that were imprisoned over us, dyed daily, many among our selves grew
extreme sick, and we all feared the plague. We petitioned Smith to be removed
to some other place, or at least that the sick men might; he denied both. We
petitioned again, that the sick men might have nourishement convenient for
their weak estates, he answered us, that they should have nothing but bread
and water, and if in case they dyed, should be cast on a dunghill; we saw
nothing but death before our eyes, whereupon some of our company went to work
with their knives, and in time with those weak instruments, and a little piece
of timber, that was leftcarelesly amongst us, made a hole through the
dungeon-wall ('it was a thick wall built with soft freestone, and therefore the
more secable) out of which most of us issued, that were in health, leaving
behind us 5 sick persons nigh unto death. Those a so that were in the little
chamber on the top of the house, being formerly acquainted with the whole
business, opened their door, and whilst the keepers were sleeping, or otherwise
negligent, got to the hole, where we received our bread, and water, cut it or
tore it wider, I know not whether (for I was gone some hours before) came into
the dungeon, and so through the same place that we did.

Many footsteps of Gods immediate providence might be seen before, and in the
very act of our deliverance. Some of our Company gat out the Lords day late at
night; I, my self, and some others durst not go forth then, fearing the watch.
The hole, which was toward a Bakers yard, was open Monday all day, only a
stone set against it, and yet not discerned, when in the Evening I and some 4.
more had gotten out, and durst not, because the streets were full of people,
presently leap over the Bakers Wall, on a sudden one in the same yard came
with a Candle behind us, whom we thought to have been our Keeper, and therefore
hastily leaped altogether into the street, and yet were not taken notice of by
those that passed to, and fro in it, neither was the hole discerned by the
fellow with the Candle, though he were close by it, but the rest of our company
afterward escaped out.

We, who have thus seen the salvation of God, may say with thankful hearts:
God is the Lord by whom we escaped death, the Lord loses the prisoners;
blessed be our strong Rock, and praised be the God of our salvation.

Postscript.
By way of Postscript, I must acquaint you with some things Omitted.

1. Cyrencester men were barbarously dealt with, before their coming to
Oxford, and in their passage to it: most of them were stripped of their
Clothes, some of their very shirts, so that many amongst them, were almost
naked, they weredriven like Horses in the Cart-waies; and when they came to
Oxford, wet and dirtie, as they were, almost up to the middle, were put in
Churches, where many of them were starved by Smith, who would not ^ermit their
wives or sisters to com at them, and many their flesh even rotting from their
bones dyed for want of Surgeons. I believe also, that many of those, that
were Ransomed, will scarce ever recover their former strength again, so cruelly
were they handled by this Serpent Smith, but I hope that some one or other will
fully set out to the veiw of all the World their sufferings, and Smithes
unparralled Cruelty.

2. There are 2. Smiths, both Marshalls of his Majesty's Army: one of them
Provost Marshall general, a sluxen-heaired man, and this is the Smith
mentioned in this Discourse. The other Marshall of the Horse, a tall big
fellow, and has been formerly (as some say) a Fencer, a man of a bloody mind
also.

3. Smithes Fees for a Gentleman are 20. shillings, for a Minister (but I must
entreat him to forbear me a while) ten shillings, and for a Common Soldier
(...). shillings a day, so long as they continue under him.

FINIS.

