The dark Lantern, Containing A dim Discovery, in Riddles, Parables, and
Semi-Riddles, intermixed with Cautions, Remembrances and Predictions, as they
were promiscuously and immethodically represented to their Author, in his
Solitary Musings, the third of November 1652. about Midnight.

Whereunto is annexed, A POEM, Concerning A Perpetual Parliament.

By Geo. Wither Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by R. Austin, and are to be sold by Richard Lowndes at the
white Lion in PAUL'S Churchyard, near the little North Door. 1653.

To the Reader.
THese Poems were delivered forth to be published about three months past,
with an expectation that they should have been imprinted forthwith, and had
either an accidental or a negligent delay preventing their publication the
last Term; and perhaps (I being absent) they were afterward purposely delayed,
that they might come forth at the beginning of this Easter Term, by their
design, who more considered the Booksellers advantage, then how much the
hastening of them might concern the public; by which means it was not finished,
until that very day whereupon the Parliament had an unlooked for period: and
yet peradventure, in regard of the many timely Cautions and Remembrances, which
have been heretofore despised, or neglected, Providence has permitted these to
be delayed, until their publication came too late, for effecting that which
was intended.

Howsoever it will be useful to some other ends; at least to testify to the
world, that what is now come to pass, was foreseen, and endeavors used for
prevention thereof, which might probably have had good success, if contempt of
many forewarnings had not hindered the same, it may be, to make way for the
accomplishment of somewhat, fore-declared in my Britains Genius; in which Poem,
I labored as much in vain to reduce the late King, to make use of that means
which would have effected his restoration, as I have hereby done to preserve
the Parliament: and I heartily beseech Almighty God, that I may not have
occasion to be as fatal a Remembrancer to them who are now in Throne; lest
worse things happen to them, then to their Predecessors, which I am assured
will follow, if their proceedings (which I yet suspect not) be not really
designed, and made answerable to their fair pretendings. There are many faults
escaped in the printing, by reason of my absence, and a Copy hastily, and not
very plainly written, some of which are here corrected, the rest I leave to be
amended, as you find them.

PAge 5. line 25. for coral read carnal. p. 32. l. 9 r. Then such as
Innocencies cause, etc. p. 49. l. 29. r. Aegypts thrall. p. 72. l. 13. for foot
r. fork.

TO THE PARLIAMENT, AND PEOPLE OF THE Commonwealth of England.
SO let me speed, in all that I pursue,
As, in what follows, I mean well to you:
And, as I bear a loving faithful heart,
To all of you, united and apart;
Although, I peradventure, may appear
On some occasions, bitterly severe,
To those, in whom, I private-failings see,
Which, to the Public may obnoxious be;
To make them judge themselves, and escape the doom,
Which, from another judgment, else may come:
For, at no single person, have I struck,
By any line, or passage, in this book.
If here, I further seem to have presumed,
Or, more upon my self to have assumed,
Then may be warrantable thought, at first,
Examine it, before you judge the worst;
And, try by circumstances (as ye may)
What Spirit, has directed me this way;
Or, for what likely ends, or for whose sake,
I could, or dared, this attempt to make;
Except it were for GODS, for your, and mine,
As they with one another, do intwine.
Yea, search, if my Religion, studies, ways,
Or, manners (which have been throughout my days,
Before your eyes) may any sign afford,
That, I have, hitherto, in deed, or word,
Been an Impostor; or, presented you
With ought, that has been useless, or untrue;
And as that justly may incline your mind,
Let these expressions acceptance find.
If madness, they appear; consider well,
That, such miscensurings have often fell
On sober men, when those deluding crimes,
Were prevalent, which reign in these our times.
If foolish, they be thought; remember this,
That, truest wisdom, seems foolishness
To worldly prudent men, when, God, forth brings
To fool their wisdom, despicable things.
Men, hear fools gladly, when themselves are wise,
And, meekly pity rather then despise
Their folly, learning, thereby, sometimes too,
More, then by their own wisdom, they could do:
But, wise, mad foolish, or, what ever I am,
To do this work, into the world I came;
To these times, was reserved; to this end, taught;
And, to the sight of many things, am brought,
Which, else I had not known, nor would have seen,
But, that, I tied, (as by the leg) have been,
( Ten years together, ten days work to do)
To know them, whether I so would or no.
And, when I knew them, I would fain have done
My own work first, or else, like Jonas run
To Tarsis, or Lundee, or any whither
(Adventuring through Seas, and Tempests thither)
Much rather, then to have proceeded on,
In doing that, which I, at last, have done.
For, I am like the world, in many things,
And, often so tempted by her promisings
Of ease and safety, in another course,
That, I, with much strife, did my heart enforce,
To prosecute her duty; as ye may,
Perceive, if, you the following tract survay.
But, my own thoughts, would neither let me sleep,
Nor suffer me a waking-peace to keep,
Or, follow my affairs (though they were brought
Near to a point, of coming quite to naught)
Till, I, my musings, had in words arrayed
To be, by you, and other men, survay'd.
All those affairs, aside, I, therefore threw,
To cloth my meditations, for your view;
Which, being finished, I can now lie down
And sleep, as well as any man in Town.
The times are dangerous; and, I am told,
By that which is my Guide, I should not bold
Beyond discretion be; which makes me talk
In riddles, and with this Dark Lantern walk:
That, I may see my way, and not be seen
By every one, whom I may meet, between
My goings out, and in: and that it may
Give light to some, who are beside their way,
As I occasion find; and, where I see
The light that is offered, may accepted be.
But, what my visions are, as in relation,
Unto this Parliaments perpetuation
I plainly shall unfold; because, it may
Concern you all, with good advise to weigh.
Yea, fearlesly, my free thoughts, I will show,
What liking, or dislike, soever ensue.
For, though to all intents by me designed,
They may not reach; it much contents my mind,
That I have freed my soul. by thus employing
My Talent, to an inward rests enjoying;
And, raised a Witness up, that may declare
To future times; what GOD'S proceedings are.
If this find acceptance, it will be
A sign of future peace, to you, and me.
If, you reject it; I will fit my mind
To bear the troubles, which are yet behind:
Bewail, our manifold procrastinations,
Of GOD'S intended blessings, to these Nations.
Possess the little portion, I have got
As lost, or, else, as if I had it not;
And, strive to wean my heart, from things abroad,
To seek my rest; and peace, alone in GOD:
A refuge, so secured to me, that, neither
My frailties, faults, or foes; or these together:
Or friends, or Trustees failings, either may
Hazard, or forfeit; tear, or fool away.
Your most humble, and most faithful Remembrancer, Geo. Wither.

A DARK-LANTERNE, OFFERING A Dim Discovery, in Riddles, Parables, and
Semi-riddles, intermixed with Cautions, Remembrances, and Predictions, as they
were promiscuously, and immethodically represented to their Author, in his
solitary musings, the third of November 1652. about midnight. And, concluding
with the Result of a Contemplative Vision, revealing a probable means of
making, even this present Parliament, to be both perpetual, and acceptable to
these Nations to the end of the World.
He, that goes with this LIGHT, his way may find:
Him, that against it comes, it makes blind.
HE, from whose perfect Light, all true Lights come,
Spoke Parables; yea, spoke naught else, to some;
And, Providence, by many various ways,
Of dispensation, to the world convayes
The means, of carrying on, those works which tend
To man's perfection, at his later end;
And, to the wonderful accomplishment,
Of what, eternally is his intent;
Bringing often times about, the self-same things,
(Or, such like) toward their accomplishings;
That, prudent men, might understand thereby
What he designs, and therewith all comply.
When Jacobs Off springs (who, for many ages
Were figures, types, examples, and presages
For future times, and states) became perverted,
And, grew to be so blind, and stubborn hearted,
As to despise the warnings, precepts, cautions,
And good advise, which for their preservations
Their Prophets had perspicuously declared;
GOD, justly, sent unto them afterward,
His mind in Parables, whereof but few
The meanings, or interpretations knew:
And as they more and more, from him declined,
(And, from the truth) the more he couched his mind
In dark expressions, till they nothing saw
But what their pleasure made to be a Law.
Prince, Prophet, Priest, and People, then, became
Wholly corrupt; a scandal, and a shame
To their Professions, and to all their Nation,
By an unlimited prevarication;
Whereby, the means ordained to recure them,
Was rendered isntrumental to obdure them,
By their own fault, and those hypocrisies,
Which, justly, drew a vail, before their eyes.
For, whereas, usually in times preceding,
GODS errands, were made plain, at their first he eding,
So, also, were their Priests, and Prophets, then,
Renowned, wise, and honorable men,
Even in their outward being; which, did add
Repute to that, which in command, they had:
But, He ardsmen, and fruit-gatherers, afterward
(With such as brought no motives of regard,
According to the flesh) were sometime sent;
Which, in their hearers, did but scorn augment.
And, thus, contempt increased: the truths then told,
Were not alone, wrapped up in manifold
Strange ambiguities, obscure expressions,
Dark Metaphors, or much beclouded Visions,
Which few could understand; but, some, likewise
Illustrated their words, and Prophecies,
(Or, rather veiled them) with circumstances,
Which, did enlarge their hearers ignorances;
As also their disdains: for, otherwhile,
They personated things, absurd, and vile,
In vulgar apprehension: such as seem
Deserving rather slighting, then esteem;
Yea such, sometimes, as wicked did appear
To those, who morally men righteous were:
As when, they were made signs unto that Nation,
Of their shame, nakedness, or desolation,
And of GODS lasting love, although they had,
By their adulteries, him jealous made.
As with the Jews, he, formerly has done,
GOD will proceed with us; and has begun
Already, so to judge (and visit here)
As he did them, when they rebellious were.
He, so, by changes, moves us to repent;
And, judgments blends with mercies, to the intent
That, he, into capacity might woo us
Of that great good, which he desires to do us.
This, makes him, sometime smile, and sometime frown;
Now, raise us up; to morrow, pull us down:
This day, he, to our strongest enemies,
Renders us dreadful: They, whom we despise
That night triumph; and make us glad to fly
Into our chambers, and there sneaking lie;
Whilst they deride, insult, affront and jeer us,
Who, some few hours before, did greatly fear us.
This, makes him often fool our wisdom so,
That, we are at a non plus, what to do;
And, then, in our distress, to make our want,
Weakness, and failings, more predominant
For our deliverance, in a fatal hour,
Then all our wealth, our wisdom, and our power.
This, makes him lead us through the wildernesses
Of doubts, dispairings, troubles, and distresses
To our desired Canaan, as be led
His Chosen heretofore; and, as he did
To them in their respective aberrations,
So has he done, and will do, with these Nations.
As their, right so, our Princes, for oppressions
Are driven from their Thrones, and their possessions,
To eat (even with confusion of their faces)
Their bread with scarcity, in uncouth places;
Where, peradventure, they were mindful made
Of those forewarnings, which they timely had.
Our Lords (as their Remembrancer, foretold,
When they had greatest likelihood to hold,
And to increase their greatness) this day, see,
Their House of Parliament, destroyed to be,
Even by it self; and, that they are become
Vagrants abroad, or, else despised at home.
Some of their Palaces and Piles of State,
Are ras't, defaced, or left quite desolate,
For Zim, and Jim; for Vermin and such fowls,
As Dawes, and Ravens; great and little Owls.
Our Priests, that were the glorioust Hirarchy,
And proud'st in Europe, next the Papacy;
(Who, by the same pen warned, did return
Sharp persecutions, injuries and scorn)
Are now despoiled of all the pomp they had,
Dishonored, poor, and despicable made.
Their fair Cathedral Temples stand forsaken,
With still increasing ruins, rent and shaken;
And, in their steeds, those persons are deputed,
Whom they most hated, and most persecuted.
The Threats long since pronounced, now prevail,
The Priest and Prophet, are become the tail;
And mere Mechanics made dispensers are
Or those things, which to them committed were:
Persons, of so mean gifts, and small respect,
That, truth out of their mouths, gets but neglect;
Except with such, as undervalue not
Good wine, though offered in an earthen pot.
For our unthankfulness, and disregard
Of nobler Teachers, whom, we long have heard,
Without improvement; for, hypocrisies,
Mere outside worship, and formalities,
In prayers, fasts, and praises; and, for, giving
That which cost nothing, for great boons receiving:
For our backslidings, and, then, persevering
In frequent sinning, after frequent bearing:
For actions, not agrecing with our saying:
For painting, guilding, and for overlaying
Our Corrall structures, with feigned piety:
( False gold, producted by our Chymestry)
For falsifying, with a brazen brow,
The serious promises, which we did vow
To GOD and men, before the face of heaven,
When we into extremities were driven:
For adding to devouring slames, more fuel:
For being, in our very mercies, cruel:
For turning carelessy, our eyes, and ears,
From Widows prayers, and from Orphans tears:
Yea, though Remembrancers did (as it were)
In public, often pull us by the ear,
To mind it; yea, where many standers by,
Observed it; and, our gross stupidity.
For these things; and, for many such as these
God, having spoken to us, in our days,
By ordinary Preachers; now, begins
By others, to reprove us for our sins:
Not only such, as reason may allow,
Though called from the Shop board, or the Plough;
But, such, as we seem justly to contemn,
As making truths adhor'd, which come from them.
In steed of Teachers, trained up in the Schools
Of Arts, and of the Prophets; children fools,
Women and madmen, we do often meet,
Preaching, and threatening Judgments, in the street:
To some, pronouncing blessings; to some, woe;
Scattering their bread, and money, as they go,
To such as need; (though, in appearance, none
Can poorer be, then they, when that is gone:)
Yea, by strange actions, postures, tones, and cries,
Themselves they offer to our cars and eyes,
As signs unto this Nation, of some things
Thereby portended; which (although this brings
Contempt upon their persons) may be so,
For ought, the wisest of us, yet does know;
As were those actions, personated by
Some Prophets, whom the Jews did vilify.
It may be on that darkness, which they find,
Within their bearts, a sudden light has shined,
Reflections making, of some things to come,
Which leave within them, musings troublesome
To their weak spirits; or, too intricate
For them to put in order, and relate;
As they will easily believe on whom,
Such, more then natural, out-beamings, come)
And, that, has peradventure, thrust them on
To act, as men in ecstasies have done;
Striving, their Cloudy Visions to declare
(And, of what consequence, they think they are)
Till they have lost the Notions, which they had,
And, want but few degrees, of being mad.
This, Providence permits, to correct
Our deafness, and our former disrespect
Of nobler instruments, whose lights did shine
More clearly; and, who, laying line, to line;
Precept, to Precept; in and out of season,
Taught reasonably, even truth's, transcending reason:
Or, else, it has permitted been, to make us
Less heedfull, of the plague, that may or'etake us;
By tokens, and by symptoms, to us giving,
That, seem not worth our heeding, or believing.
And, I, perhaps, among these, may be one,
That was let loose, for service to be done,
In order to such kinds: (as, I believe
I am; as when I am gone, some will perceive,
Though, none observe it now) For, though I dress
The mind, and matter, of my messages,
In measured words, with some such other fancies,
As are allowed in Poetic frenzies,
And, pass for sober garbs: yet, now and then,
I blunder out, what worldly prudent men
Count madness; and, what, often, the best men, too,
Dislike awhile, and wish me not to do.
But, I best know my warrant; and proceed
As I am moved, with little fear, or heed,
What others judge: for, till some slips, or errors
Expose me, to be liable to terrors,
There Is nothing, to my hurt, can dreadful be,
Save my own flesh, and be that gave it me.
And, as this makes me, madly seem to dare;
Even so, that seeming madness, does prepare,
And draw some, out of novelty, to heed,
What, they had never, else, vouchsafed to read:
And, these my ridlings now, are an invention
Designed partly, unto that intention;
And, partly likewise, to amaze those Readers,
Who, to my purposes, are counter-pleaders.
When, others think, the times afford me may
Enough to speak of, I have naught to say:
When my heart calls upon me, I cast by
My own affairs, and to that call apply,
As I occasions find, uttring sometimes,
My thoughts in prose, another while in rimes;
One while, by sharp, and bitter strains reproving;
Sometimes, by admonitions, calm, and loving;
Yea, Jigs of recreation, sometimes sidling;
And, now, I Am fallen into a fit of Ridling.
Riddle my Riddles, then, you, that have heard
Truths, often, and plainly spoke without regard,
(Except it were, in mischioss, to combine
Against their peace, who cast their Pearls to swine)
Riddle them if you can: For, in them lies,
A dim character of our destinies.
Within these Problemes, those things couched are,
Which I, once thought, more plainly to declare:
But, from that purpose, have now changed my mind,
That, seeing, you might see, yet still be blind:
That, you might read, and yet not understand
The work, which GOD and men, have now in hand:
Or, which of those things will be first, or last,
Lest, future fates appear by what is past:
And, that, your misinter pretations may
Produce those good effects, which you delay:
For, to that purpose, all, which I unfold,
Histerologically shall be told.
Yon, likewise, who often read, in serious wise,
Shiptons Predicts, and Merlins Prophecies;
Or, vain conjectures, from the constellations,
Wherewith, Impostors, have long fooled these Nations,
Neglecting that, the while, which both foreseen,
And, brought to pass, in your own days, has been:
Riddle those Riddles; or, at least peruse them,
And, if you find them frivolous, refuse them.
Riddle these Riddles too, even you, that seek
The common-peace, with hearts upright and meek:
You, that have understanding to discern
The present times; and, willing are to learn
Good lessons from a Pismire: For, to you,
By this Dark Lantern, I shall give a view,
Of things far off, and rubs now in your way,
Whereat, through want of light, you stumble may:
And, likewise, of effects, whereto, perchance,
You, by these glimmerings, may raise advance.
Observe them well, without enquiring, what
Their Authors meaning was, in this, or that,
Till, you your selves, have searched, how they in reason,
Suit our affairs, our persons, and the season,
According to your judgments: for, that, shall
Be somewhat to the purpose, though not all.
But, where no sense that is likely, you can rear,
Leave it, as that, which lies without your sphere;
For, that, which SHALL BE, will receive a being,
From each dissenting Readers disagreeing;
From that man's knowledge, who the sense has got;
From that man's ignorance, who knows it not;
And he that would, and he that would not too,
Shall help effect, what GOD intends to do.
Thus, through a long lane, I have drawn you in,
Where my new Grove of Riddles does begin,
With, now and then, a plain Lawn intermixed,
And, here and there, a small sherewood betwixt;
With such digressions, that, you will sometimes doubt,
Whether I lead you, further in, or out.
But, it is a wild plot, where are walks, and bowers,
Made for my own content, as well as yours:
And, if they tedious seem, you may be gone
At next low gap, you see, and no harm done.
The harvest of our Era now draws near,
And, faithful Laborers will then appear
To order that fair field, where in was sown
The Corn, which now with tares is overgrown:
And, to distinguish Wheat, from that which had
Resemblance of it, both in stalk, and blade.
Yet, every day, Impostors creeping in,
Will, by pretended holiness, begin
To plant themselves; seeking their lusts to feed,
By scattering adulterated-seed;
And laboring, to destroy those means, whereby
Truth may appear in perfect purity.
In little time, shall many changes be,
And interchanges, which will make men see
Their wisdom to be folly; their chief might,
Flat feebleness; their high esteemed light
Mere darkness; and, that, most things by them done,
Will have effects, which they never thought upon.
In that Catholicon, or Mithridate,
Which Providence, confected has of late.
To temper, or dispell, what has diseased
The Body Politic; it has been pleased
(As finding it, a mixture requisite)
Vipers, and mortal poisons, to unite
With wholesome things; yea, mineralls and mettle,
Sulphur, and Steel, fixed matter, to unsettle:
The Serpents brains, with faithful Turtles hearts:
Of Lions, Lambs, and Foxes, some choice parts:
Somewhat of Hares, that swift and fearful be:
Somewhat of Snailes, in whom we nothing see,
But slownesse, and, by well compounding these,
A cure preparing is, for our disease:
Fire, Water, Earth, and Air, (though disagreeing,
In qualities) if well mixed, give a being
To that, which cannot be, by any one
Or, any two, or three of these alone:
And, so, at last, shall every contradiction,
Among us, add some Dos, to our perfection:
Yea, they who pulldown, and they who erect
Shall in the close, concur in one effect;
That, he, who is all in all, may have due praise
By every contradiction in our ways;
And, that, out of their discords, he may bring
A Diapason, making every thing
Assent together, in the consummation
Of his designment, at the worlds creation.
For, whilst this medicine fermenting lies,
The wheels of temp'r all contrarieties
Move on; and, every day, abroad will send
Productions, few, discerning to what end:
And, yet, each individual circumstance,
Somewhat, the Grand-designment, shall advance,
Yea, foolings, failings, fraud, and treachery
As well as truth, and true sincerity,
Shall add thereto; and, herein, will alone,
The difference be; such, as have justly done
Their duties; and, in doing them persever,
(Or, willingly, and knowingly endeavor
As they are able) will enjoy the bliss,
Which, they who counter-operate shall miss.
I.G.N.R.N.S. with, other some,
Such like, confederated are become,
To ruin this Republike; and, have laid
Designs, whereby it may be soon betrayed,
And, infamous, insensibly, become,
With all wise men abroad, and here at home.
These (though but few observe it) have, long, had
A purpose these three Islands to invade;
And, to possess them, with a people far
More barbarous then Kernes, and Redshanks are.
Some of their Party, to promote their ends,
Do yet appear to be our faithful friends;
And, into every place of Power, and Trust,
Themselves, and their confederates have thrust.
In Towns and Boroughs, Cittadells and Cities,
In Courts, and Counsels, and in all Committees;
In offices of profit, and command,
Throughout the Commonwealth, at Sea, and Land
They have Abettors; and, so bold they grow
That, every man almost, their aims may know;
And, their attempts, although but fools they are
Are at this present time, improved so far
That, they have shaken that, wherein consists,
Our honor, and our noblest interests;
And into practice, they begin to draw
Among us here, the Clagefurtian Law.
M.N.O.P. Demas, Diotrophes,
Peripateticks, Stoics, Pharisees,
With others, who, in judgment differing be,
Will, altogether, as one man agree,
To fortify their private interest,
Indangering (by what shall be possessed
Unduly) that, which is to others due:
Until the faithful Shepherds do pursue
Their claim aright; the same deriving from
Their Foster-Fathers, whence, it first did come;
And, of whom, it was long since propheci'd
That, GOD, by them, a portion would provide
For those, he sends forth, to preserve the beauty
Of holiness, when, man, forgets his duty.
Some other accidents, time will beget
Which may be marked out, by our Alphabet:
By, and for envy, jealousy, and pride,
Shall, A. B. C. be laid awhile, afide.
Despised also, V. and I. shall be
P P. and S. against C S. and P.
Shall then conspire; and, for a Salve employ
That, which it self, and all things, does destroy,
If Alpha and Omega, help not more
Then all the other letters, did before:
For, common helps, will be applied in vain,
The fury of their madness, to restrain.
The causes, whence this hazard will arise,
Are such as this; observe it, and be wise.
The Temple of the Gods, which heretofore
Stood open to the prayers of the poor,
Is closed up, and few admitted in,
But, such as are conveyed by a gin,
Contrived so narrow, that the people say
It was choked up, the first, or second day:
And, with distemper, they exclaim, that this
Of all their grievances, the greatest is:
Because it puts their patience, to more trialls,
Then, if of Justice, they had quick denialls:
Turns hopes into despairs; converts their lives
To living deaths, their b^lmes to corosives.
The Saints likewise, that must propitiate,
On their behalfs, and offer at the gate
Of justice and of mercy, their petitions
Are not so sensible of their conditions;
Nor from all partiality so free
As Mediators always ought to be.
This, makes one grumble in his privacies;
Another, gapes out open blasphemies:
Some, with such indignation filled are,
As, if they Giant-like, would make a war
Against their GODS (if, lookers on, may guess,
By their distempers, of their purposes)
And, universally, there is a cry
So lamentable, and raised up so high,
That, if these Deities, shall not in time,
With due compassion, bow their ears to them,
And, their just Prayers, and requests fulfill,
A higher power, these plaints examine will,
And these inferior Gods, shall tumble then,
From heaven like Lucifer, and die like men:
Riddle this Riddle, and resolve me whether
This Temple, be Pantheon, or some other,
Wherein Subdeities, invoked are:
What Temple e're it be; we wish it were
More open; lest upon those Gods, it bring
Contempt, or worse, and ruins every thing
To them subordinate: for, hence does flow
Most other grievances, complained of now;
And, hence rise those confusions, which increase
Our troubles, and procrastinate our peace.
From hence is it, men's suits prolonged are
Beyond their lives; and after twice five year,
As far from ending, as when they begun;
Yea, endless, till poor Suitors are undone,
At these words, an Illusion cried, take heed;
And, further do not in this strain proceed;
Lest, some Interpreters, interpret, so,
Thy Riddles, that the Ridler they undo.
The sudden caution, startled me a while;
Yet, back returned it with a strong recoil;
Suggesting, that I overmuch bewrayed
Their nakedness; and them too open laid
Whose shame I ought to hide, and, that so far
It may provoke them, who soon angry are,
As thereby to endanger at the least,
My quiet, and my private interest.
How, therefore, this objection I past over,
E're further I proceed, I Will here discover.
Against these doubts, my Genius up arose,
And, quite out of my heart, their poison throws;
Assuring me, I had no cause to fear
What other men's interpretations were;
Or, to suppose the safety of this Nation
Were not more worthy of a preservation
Then their repute, who are quite senseless grown,
Both of the public danger, and their own.
Or think it better that a general
Disease o'respread us, rather, then to call
A Scab, a Scab, or, timely to declare
The cure of these things, which destructive are.
It told me, (and with arguments not weak)
The cause, and time, required me now to speak
Without respect of persons; and, that, I
Was bound unto it by my fealty.
It told me, 'twas a duty whereunto
I was ordained; and, which I Am kept to do.
It represents unto me, from what strong
And spiteful Adversaries; and, how long,
I have preserved been, since I begun
To do such works, when they were to be done.
It bids me to record, by what strange ways,
(And means unlikely) I have all my days,
Deliverances obtained; even when I had,
Oppressions, that might make a wise man mad;
And, not one friend, me, in those streights to own,
But, such as GOD still raised me up unknown.
It bids me mind, how often (when I have had
No other help) his Providence has made
The malice of my fees, things to project
Against me, which my succor, did effect;
And, without which, I probably had lost
Just expectations, with much pain and cost.
It bids me mark, how many there are still,
(Who, without cause, have born me evil will)
That daily do expect to see me stumble,
When they may add a kick, to make me tumble:
How, in those High Assemblies, where they deem,
It may most disadvantage my esteem,
They whisper out detractions; or, speak loud
Those things, which cannot justly be avowed:
How enviously, they often make relations
Of what GOD gives, beyond their expectations;
With such periphrases, as may infer
That, my supplies, were got as ill as their.
It wills me, likewise, seriously to heed,
How, they in other things, with me proceed;
How, by their spite, all public favors done me.
Bring naught, as yet, but cost, and troubles on me,
Which had e're this destroyed me, had I not
Preventions, from a Power above them got;
And, by these mercies, it conjures me to
What, conscience, and my judgment, bids me do.
It minds me to be mindful of that power,
Which has preserved in every evil hour.
How plentifully, I have still been fed.
Even when I saw not means, of next days bread
But, what was in their hands, who would not spare,
The least supply, when most distressed we were.
How, my repute, with good men, was maintained,
When with unjust aspersions, I was stained:
And, when our Princes, on their Judgment Seats,
Thundered against me, nothing less then threats.
It charms, to observe, that, though I get
Little or nothing, of that public debt
Which was assigned, and which has now been due
Ten years (by claims approved just and true,
On treble trialls) and, though ever since,
It yields me naught, but troubles and expense;
That GOD, has naythelesse, improved of late,
My Mite, into a competent estate;
Merely, by such unlikely means, as those
Which Jacob used, when in the watering troughs,
He laid his whit led sticks, till he was paid
The wages, which his Master had delaid.
It calls on me, to look back upon
Those works, which have within my days been done;
(And chiefly those, which stand in some relation
Unto my self, together with this Nation)
What strange effects, and unbelieved things,
Have followed my fore conjecturings:
What risings, and what fallings, I have heeded:
What mercies, and what judgments have succeeded
Our various paths. It urges me to weigh,
What may bety'd me, if I disobey
The motions of my heart, and what event
He may expect, who shall be negligent
To do his duty, when his eye perceives
What GOD intends; and, when his heart believes,
He dreams not; but, is really required
To act, according, as he is inspired:
And, somewhat tells me, that, if after all
These mercies, and remembrances, I fall
From my resolves; GOD justly may expose,
And leave me, to the malice of my foes.
Lest, yet, my frailties, or self interest,
Or carnal reasons, somewhat might suggest
To blow all this away; it, comes sometimes,
At midnight (as it did of late) and chimes
Dreadful Alarms, which, do awaking keep
Mine eyes, when other men are fast asleep:
From darkness, then, it fresh advantage taking,
(And from vain thoughts, which too often keep me waking)
Thus, it invades me; what is that, which thou
Li'st muzing on, and ruminating now?
Art thou contriving, how to lay foundations
For thine own family, when Kings, and Nations,
Are tumbling down? and, when impartial fates,
Are overthrowing Monarchies, and States?
Is this a time to settle, when there are
Earthquakes, that shake the mountains, every where?
Is this a time to plant, when thunder-strokes,
Root up high Cedars, and break down strong Oaks?
Is this a time to purchase, when the trouble,
And hazards, make the payments more then double?
Or wheel thee (as by trial thou have found)
Into a fruitless and a tedious round?
But, if a seasonable time, it be
For others, can it so befall to thee,
Whilst thou delayest his affairs, from whom,
The means to make thy purchases, must come?
When, GOD, to build thy house, has now begun,
Will It then, to finish it to others run?
As if, he, who from nothing, heretofore
Thus far, has brought thee, now, could do no more?
Oh take good heed, what course, thou do pursue,
(And, what neglect) lest else, thy course, thou rue.
God, has already, made thee to possess
The gates of those that were thine enemies:
And by a means unlooked for, restored
That, which was taken from thee by the Sword:
Houses, by others built, to thee are granted,
Orchards and Gardens, which thou have not planted,
He gives, in recompense for what was lost
In public service; yea, without the cost
Of this Republike; and, had more bestowne
E're now, perhaps, if thou to do thine own
Had not delayed his work, and, to thy hope
For this (it may be) he will put a stop.
Why, then, with frnitlesse musings, busied are
Thy thoughts, on what, must be another care?
Deferring that, which thou art called unto,
And seeking daily, somewhat else to do?
Art thou afraid, lest thou thereby may lose
Thy late recruits? or, reinrage thy foes?
Or, mar thy quiet? cursed is that fear;
And, thou too, if therein thou persevere:
For, when a temp'r all blessing, makes us worse,
It is a plague, beyond a tem'prall curse
And, if thou take not heed will quite deprive thee
Of that which Providence, did freely give thee.
But, who are they? or, where inhabit those
Who dare to take away, what, GOD, bestows
If thou adhere to him? whom need'st thou fear,
If in thy duty, thou shall persevere?
Nay, rather, which of those, that seem to be
Most dreadful, shall not be afraid of thee
If he be guilty? and who (though on high
He bears his head) shall not, in privacy,
Think on thy lines, with trembling, when he hears
What they declare, and what his conscience fears?
If thou, said my good Angel, have not, yet,
Quite shaken off, thy fears, and fanting fit;
Consider, wisely, of this Generation,
In those things, which have thereto, nigh relation:
Sum up together, that, which thou have heeded
In those thou fear: mark, how they have proceeded;
What, they have been; what, at this time, they are;
What, they may be, before they are aware;
What, they design, in what paths they are going;
What, they have done; what, they are daily doing;
What Labyrinths involve them; what, confusions
Enclose them round, as also what conclusions
Are following; and, then, thou will not fear
Their power as foes, nor for their friendship care.
If, still, some outward interest, be that
Which thou desir'st to save; consider, what
Thereto conduces: for, sometimes, the thing
We fear to loose, is kept by hazarding:
And, lost in seeking to preserve the same,
By other means, then that, through which it came.
If, thou, permit the proud, without a check
To follow their career, they will break, their neck.
And, with themselves (as our affairs, now stand)
Endanger all the people of this Land.
Where, then, will thou be safe? or, where will thou
Enjoy with peace, what thou possessest now?
But, if a word in season, thou shall speak,
Who knows, what instruments despised and weak
May compass? and, who knows, but that, of them,
Who, heretofore thy cautions did contemn.
Some, touched may be, with sense of their condition,
And, turn back, from the path-wayes of Perdition?
And, who knows not, that many may be found
(Whose actions blameless are, whose faiths are sound)
That, by these hints, may heart and courage take.
Their Neighbors, from their dreamings, to awake?
At least, therein thy duty having done,
If any be secured, thou shall be one.
When these things were inspired, and duly weighed,
My heart, which was a little while dismayed
From prosecuting, what I had begun,
Assumed new courage, and went boldly on:
And, these expostulations, may perchance,
Some others, to the like resolves advance
On like occasions; unto which intent,
These few short steps, beside my way I went:
For I confess, my theme I following not,
Have rambled out, as if I had forgot
What I at first proposed; and instead
Of Riddles, to plain language do proceed.
But, I will wheel about, and with the rein
Turn Pegasus, into his path again;
Though, he, in his digressions (as we say
Of Beggars) never is beside his way.
Once on a time (thus did old tales begin,
E're I was born, or thought I should have been)
A foolish people over much at ease,
Their wantonness, and vanity to please,
Among their may-games, brought home from the wood,
Trees, which had else, till now, unheeded stood.
Of these, they made, by hewings, knocks, and smoothing,
That, look like something, which resembled nothing.
And, out of knotty, shapelesse logs, did hew
Some statues not uncomely to the view.
These, e're quite shaped, with some jeers, and mocks,
They set up higher, upon other blocks.
Then, them repolished, and painted so,
That, of what stuff they were, few men could know.
Beginning then, their own work, to admire,
They raised them higher every day and higher,
Till Idols they became; with whom, they grew
At first, familiar, and did them bestrew
With flowers and garlands: shortly after, they
Bowed humbly down before them, every day;
Till custom, had their judgment more befooled;
But, then (when these, mishrin'd they did behold,
Sparkling with Jewels, and with gold aray'd)
They, of their own Creations, grew afraid.
And, at the last, (as at the last, all do
That whoring after their own fancies go;)
These fools, repented of their superstition;
Bewailed the slavery, of their condition;
With some appearances, of an intent
To grow more wise, as well as to repent:
Yea, to blaspheme, their new made GODS they spared not,
And, would have pulled them down again, but dared not.
For, by their flattring attributes (long, given)
They had advanced them, to a sphere, or heaven,
Where, uncontrolled, a power they exercised
According to their lust; and those despised
Whose hands had made them, and whose breath had blown them
Too high, for their ambitiousnesse, to own them.
Yea, by their incantations, these, had brought
Strong spirits, into what their hands had wrought;
Inliv'ning, and enabling them unto
Those actions, which their makers might undo.
Yet, persevere, this blockish people will
To make such idols, and advance them still;
Till both they, and their idols are destroyed
Unless the GOD of Gods, my fears makes void.
For, most men being of a slavish mind,
Are nat'rally to slavishnesse inclined:
And to fulfill their brutish lust will fawn
Upon a Dog, and lay their souls to pawn.
Riddle this Riddle, if you can, and tell
What People, this may be, and where they dwell:
Which I believing you with ease may do,
Will add this following Parable thereto.
There was a time, when silly Bees could speak,
(A people, of much industry, though weak)
And, these, among themselves, made grievous moans,
As being much oppressed, by their drones;
Who (having made intrusions among those
That had an uncontrollable dispose
Of their Republike) did in sundry wise,
Encroachments make on their proprieties;
And, greedily, unto themselves derive,
The fatness, and the sweetness of the hive.
Complaints in private, no redress obtaining,
Increast to open, and avowed complaining:
Which finding like successes, they begun
To buz, as when their swarming time, draws on:
Then, to shut up their cells, to shake their wings,
To leave their wonted work, and show their stings.
The Drones, at first, were startled much thereat;
But, being not so wise, as they are fat;
Neglected still, the course which might prevent
The mischief then appearing imminent:
Which, when I saw, I would no longer stay;
But, said, GOD help them; and so come away.
This Parable, if rightly moralliz'd,
Affords a meaning not to be despised.
And so does this which follows: as I went
On Pilgrimage unto the Parliament,
Dispersed in my way, I saw the cocks,
(Which kept the hens, and capons from the fox)
With broken wings, with backs, without a feather
To hide their naked bodies, from the weather;
With plumelesse tails, with scarred necks and breasts;
With empty bellies, and with combs, and crests,
Cut quite away; and scraping with their feet
On dunghills, for their food, and in the street,
So despicably, that it could appear
By nothing save their spurs, what once they were:
And, Popinjaies, and Parrets, clothed and fed,
By what the valor of these purchased,
(And, trimmed with ill got feathers) strutted by,
Casting upon them a disdainful eye:
Which when I saw, methought (I tell you true)
It was no good presage; pray, what think you?
News, if you look for, I but little know,
Save, such as this next Parable does show.
A fair ship, now lies floting on the floods,
Well filled with Passengers, well fraught with goods,
Labring to fix an Anchor on the strand
Of her wished harbor, which lies near at hand.
By many storms, much tackling, she has spent;
Her Masts are shater'd; and her shrowds are rent:
Her ammunition, and her stores are wasted,
Her bread and bevorage is evil tasted:
Her keel springs leaks, through her uncawked seams;
Her knees are weakened, bruized are her beams:
Her Pump is broke, no Cable sound has she;
And, Anchors have been slipped, till none there be:
Her Helm hangs loose, her Cards have great defects;
Her compass likewise often misdirects:
And every where, she crazinesse does feel,
From Prow to Stern, from topmast, to the Keel.
In this condition, too and fro she drives,
And, on the waves, with much ado, yet lives:
For, now of late again, the Seas go high;
A stiff gale blows, and she exposed does lie
To many hazards, close without the Bar,
Betwixt two Forelands, which in kening are:
If she were fitted, forth again to stand
To Seaward, Pirates threaten; if to Land
She makes; the rocks lie scattered, here and there,
In which, as great, or, greater dangers are:
And, which is worse, they, who in her abide,
Are mutinous; and, some what else beside:
Some ignorant, some treacherous, and, some
Ambitious, how, possessors to become
Of what is other men's: yea, some of those
Who, have this goodly ship at their dispose,
Have in delays, their time, and stores, misspent,
For private ends; or, for accomplishment
Of worse designs: and, in this great distress,
(In part through fear, in part through guiltiness)
So much amuz'd, and so amuzed are,
That, they are at a loss, what course to steer,
Themselves to save; and compass their design;
Without which, to no course, they will incline
The Owners, and the Passengers, have waved
No means, whereby this Vessel might be saved:
For, to that purpose, they have not alone,
Put hand, to all things needful to be done;
And, faithfully, unto their labor stood;
(Even with the frequent hazard of their blood)
But also, willingly away have cast
Their goods; yea, some have thrown forth to the last
Of all their outward visible estates:
Few of her Masters, or her Masters Mates,
In her extremities, adventring ought;
Although their Cabbins, with rich goods are fraught.
The danger still increases; and those few
In place of trust, who to their trust are true,
Perceiving all endeavors rendered vain
By their decrease, to whom does appertain
That Vessels charge; they labored seriously
To find out an expediment, whereby
Some other Pilots might be timely sent
Their near approaching shipwreck, to prevent.
And, that by making of their Canons roar,
They might invite help, from the neighbring shore.
The motion pleased all, save such as had
Self Ends to fear; and, these a faction made
So strong against it; that, this Vessel, yet
Hulls there, with many perils, round beset;
Not knowing (without hazard) either how
To ride safe, tack about, or venture through
The narrow Channel; whose hid winding lies
Obscured from their knowledge, and their eyes:
And, one dark night, or, but one tempest more,
Might wrack her on the sands, or on the shore.
But, maugre all these hazards; she at last,
In her wished harbor, shall an anch or cast;
For, to the Leeward, lies an unseen Bay,
Where, through the soft Ouze, run aground she may
Without a bruize; and, shall recruits take in,
Even where 'twas feared, she should have splitted bin.
You therefore, who conceive your interest
To be concerned by what is here expressed,
Prise God alone, when fafe this Ship shall be,
For none could have secured her, but he.
And let not those, to whom the same relates
Slight what this Parable insinuates,
Which next ensues: for, it has an use,
That much to their advantage may conduce.
A homebred Lion (of a hair unknown
In Africa) by being overgrown,
And dreadful to his Keepers, will thereby
Awake the rage of smothered jealousy,
And lose his tail; except between his paws,
He couch his head, and hide his teeth and claws;
Or Rampant grow; and what will follow then?
Ask those you credit, they are Cunning men:
Of me you ask in vain; for it is my fate,
Seldom to be believed, till it is too late.
But that stout Lion by his prudency
May easily improve this jealousy,
Both for the Public safety, and the increase
Of his own honor, also, if he please;
And I do probably presume he will,
If my well-wishes, have not fooled my skill.
Before that time, they who have took delight
In deeds of darkness, will put out the light
By which the footsteps of their foes are known,
And whereby they might see to guide their own:
Instead whereof, perhaps erect they shall
An ignis fatuus, which will hazard all.
To each man then shall Providence dispose
That, which for his chief happiness he chose:
The dogs, who to their vomit do retire,
And swine (who love to wallow in the mire)
Themselves with their beloved fil^h shall fill;
And they that are unclean, shall be so still.
The wilful Adder, who does stop his ears,
And will not heed the Charmer whom he hears,
Shall feel a voice within him, that will shake him
Out of his dumps; and from his deafness wake him,
When it is too late to hear what might prevent
The dint of his forewarned detriment.
The Leaches shall by salt a vomit take;
Or else continue sucking, till they break.
The Bubbles, who in emptiness do find
Their pleasure, shall be puffed up with wind
Till (being blown to nothing) there appear
No signs, that in the world such bladders were.
The sons of earth, who with the Gods make war,
Shall heap up hills on hills, till crushed they are
Even by their own Designs; the Dogs that prey
Upon their Flocks, and tear their wool away,
Shall bark no more, but only snarle and grin,
And run about the fields without a skin.
The shrubs and Briars, which more proud are grown,
Then were the Cedars, lately broken down;
Among their leaves and thorns, a fire do hide,
Which on a sudden will consume their pride.
The grubs and maggots, but e're while so small,
So poor and weak, that they could hardly crawl,
Have got bulk, strength, new forms, aspiring wings;
Yea dreadful teeth, and horns, and claws, and stings:
But, by a storm, whereof they have no dread,
They shall consume as fast as they were bred:
Within the circuit of our Northern Clime
Not long before, or after these, in time,
Out of the putrified barbed steed,
Shall generated be a numerous breed
Of noisome hornets, which abroad will fly,
Much mischief doing, and next winter die.
Friends possibly may meet (our Proverb says)
But mountains never; yet in these our days,
That Proverb's crossed: for hills have often met,
With purpose on each other to beget
A longed for issue; and it is believed
By many, that they somewhat have conceived
Of great concernment: but you will see the birth
Prove nothing, but a moldring lump of earth;
(As they themselves will be, till clay and dust,
Seek better things, then to fulfill their lust:)
For none can answer now our expectation,
But that great hill, whence comes our salvation.
All this from objects which are found within
Our British Orb, has preconjectur'd bin;
But those that follow next, to me appear
By things which I observe without our sphere.
The blasted Orange, and the crooked Vine,
With many trees on either side of Rhine
Shall twist together, that beneath their shade,
A shelter for the Thistle may be made,
Till they perceive what curse is in pursuit
Of that rejected plant, root, branch, and fruit;
And then they will wiser grow; lest they may become
Exposed justly to the self-same doom.
Mean while, the tawny Olive shall assay
His roots into those Valleys to convay,
From whence it was displanted; and effect
His purpose, by a Wile which few suspect;
Except the Willow, and the Oak foresee
What for their mutual good should thought on be:
And both the frogs and mice, which are in fight,
Be wary what is watched for by the Kite.
By which means they shall break a grand design
Which is on foot, their States to undermine;
And they who of this Peace first movers are,
Shall of that blessing reap the greatest share.
Observe this well: if ever you shall see
(As possibly it may permitted be)
That from it height, the RED-CROSSE shall decline,
The half moon for that time shall Northward shine,
(With an ill influence upon the Seas)
Beyond the Pillars of great Hercules,
And Southward not be retrograde again,
Till that a reascension shall attain.
But losses are sometimes a gainful prize;
By over-sights, men grow to be more wise;
And they who know not yet what may concern
Their welfare, will perhaps more wisdom learn,
When more experience makes their judgment stronger,
By suffering loss and scorn a little longer.
We, on this side the water, are not yet
Confused enough that Order to beget,
Which must estadlish us; and shall therefore
Pursue self-interest, a little more.
With new wine our old bottle must be filled,
(Endangring wine and bottle to be spil'd)
Till such as are in power be pleased to hear
The counsel of a slighted engineer:
With new cloth our old garment patched must be,
(Whereby the rents made wider ye shall see)
Till every old rag be worn out, and then
The Robe so rent, shall be renewed again:
And they that own it, be secured more,
And much more dignified, then heretofore;
If they who must complete it make their choice.
By lot divine, as well as humane voice:
Whereto self-seekers never will agree,
Until enforced by some streights it be.
But when this comes to pass, there shall appear
A new light shining in our hemisphere,
That will disperse the clouds and fogs, which make
So many cross each other, and mistake
The way of safety; then we shall perceive
Our Opposites desire to interweave
Their interests with ours; and to have share
In that which God will for these Isles prepare:
Wherein if we accord, we shall possess
Each other, and the world in Christian peace;
Till he approaches to ascend the Throne,
Who must unite all Nations into one.
Then shall the blazing Comets, which have seemed
Fixed stars, and been by many so esteemed,
(Even of the greatest magnitude) down from
Their heights be thrown; and more despised become
Then Glowormes, or those rotten chips, that glare
In darkness, as if real lights they were:
Then every single person shall be brought
Unto his Test; and that which he has wrought
Shall pass a fiery Trial, such as were
Made fat with public spoils; and clothed are
By ruining of others; will that day
Be hungry, poor, and naked sent away,
And rendered the scorn of every one,
Whom they oppressed, despised, and trampled on.
Then they, who large indulgences contrive
For others, that themselves they may forgive;
Who cunning are, at fast and loose to play;
Who take to morrow, what they give to day;
Who make their seeming favors, means unto
Those mischiefs, which their malice could not do.
Who Spider-like, weave cobwebs, with pretense
To catch the noisome flies which give offense.
When none but harmless Bees their engines take,
For, through them wasps and hornets passage make.
They, who do sacrifice unto the dead
That wherewithal the living should be fed;
Even when they (wanting what should life preserve)
Lie naked, harbourlesse, and like to starve.
And then such as innocents cause betray,
And justify the wicked, then shall they
Who add more grease to fatness; and where is none
Scrap't off, the flesh that is left unto the bone.
Then shall all these, and such like, to their doom
With fear, with trembling, and amazement come,
And undergo deserved punishment,
Unless beforehand timely they repent:
In which condition they may yet receive
Remission, and in future safety live.
Then also they, who now are forced to take
The juicelesse apples of Asphaltis Lake,
(Insted of that which was the price of blood,
Limbs liberty, and of their livelihood)
Shall better be rewarded; and confess
There is a GOD that loves righteousness.
Then they who have received stones for bread,
( Scorpions for fish) shall with good things be fed.
Then they, who served like Tantalus have bin
(With fruits and waters, which their lips and chin
Have often touched in vain) shall that enjoy,
For which they fruitless labors now employ:
Yea, they who got but gall and vinegar,
When in their greatest Agonies they were,
Shall see what Sampsons Riddle has implied,
On them, and their oppressors verified:
Out of their eaters carcasses, will meat
Extracted be; and sweetness they shall get
Out of the bones and ruins of the strong,
By whom they formerly received wrong.
Then ravenous Wolves, shall Lambs and Kidlings feed,
The thistly field shall bring forth precious seed:
The Crocodile shall tears of kindness weep;
The Ramping Lion to the cross shall creep:
And such things as were noisome heretofore,
Shall make our future benefit the more.
Then, from the buried Ox, will forth arise,
A swarm of thrifty honey making flies,
That shall with sweetness, and with plenty store
These Islands, from the midland, to the shore;
And, spread their floting hives over all the Seas,
'Twixt both the Tropicks, to the Antipodes,
(And all without) that blessings which now are
Somewhere enjoyed, may then be every where;
To make preparatives for that which brings
Into one body, all dispersed things.
Other events, that seem of consequence,
I do foresee approachings, not far hence:
But so obscurely, that I cannot say
(Without some doubtings) whereto tend they may
For, far beyond my apprehension lies
The chain of those concealed contingencies
Which draw on future things: and that frail glass
Through which the light, disclosing them, must pass,
Is so defective, that it may perchance
Misrepresent them in some circumstance.
Yet by the inlightnings, which the sacred Writ
On sanctified reason does beget,
If we will weigh, consider, and compare
Those WORDS and works, which past and present are,
To GOD and men relating; we of some
Things future, may aright informed become.
Yea, out of question, by these are foreshown
To all intents, as much as need be known,
Relating either to our private fates,
Or unto Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and States:
If thereto, for the right end, men apply
Their sense in faith, and with humility.
To find what sense my Parables contain,
No man that is wise, shall need his wits to strain;
For e're three years, are three months past the middle
Most men the meaning of them will unriddle,
Without an Oedipus; and think that he
Who made them, had Cassandra's destiny.
But these mere trifles are, respecting that
Of whose approach I tidings can relate:
For long it shall not be, e're that be done
Which will cut off all tyrannies in one:
Yea that which many thousands have expected,
Hundreds of years, shall fully be effected,
Before the Wheel of Time, now rolling by
Has past M. D. C. L. X. V. and I.
Which numbers how to calculate aright,
From this that follows take a little light.
First, to begin it, you must learn to find
What year the Roman Empire first declined,
All whose Characters, used in numeration,
Thus placed, according to their valuation,
Explain a mystery: for of that State
Whereto they did belong, they showed the date:
And at that season 'twill completed be,
In which Rome looks for her next JUBILEE.
My Ridling fit now leaves me for a time;
And here I Will put a period to my Rhyme.
My inward perturbations are past over,
My brains begin, by settling, to recover
Those wits, whereby I may, like other men,
Converse; and follow my affairs again.
My night adventures I have passed through,
And they who meet me in the streets to morrow
Will searce believe how mad I was this night,
Until they shall peruse what I now write;
And most of them, will then, (it may be) deem,
That others are more mad, then I yet seem.
The Perpetual PARLIAMENT. BEING The Result of a Contemplative Vision,
revealing a probable means of making this Parliament to be both perpetual,
and acceptable to these Nations, if they so please.
A Paradox, though this appear to some, Consider it, lest else, a mischief come.

IS that designed? then it is time to vary
My Thems, lest, on a sudden, all miscarry.
Riddles adien, let clouds away be blown,
And my Dark Lantern, quite aside be thrown;
That e're it be too late, I down may charm
The Spirits conjured up, to do us harm:
For in my contemplations I have had
A Vision, which has some discov'rie; made,
And in a plain song I intend to sing,
How we may concord, out of discords bring,
Order out of confusions, and restore
That Peace, whose late infringements we deplore;
Where, to begin the work; how to proceed,
That which is yet but words, may be a deed,
And to declare our means of settlement,
to be an everlasting Parliament.
It may appear, (and will be thought perchance)
At least much rashness, if not arrogance,
That I adventure to employ my pen
Upon a subject, which more able men
Have hitherto declined, and which of late,
Has ground administered of much debate,
(And much dispute) to Counsels of renown,
Without a full resolve, as yet made known:
But these are blasts, whereof small heed I take
For chafe and feathers only, they can shake;
And he that all things has at his dispose,
Is pleased some expedients to disclose
To poor and simple persons, now and then,
Which he conceals from wise, and noble men:
He, sometimes calls men from within the grates,
To Counsel grave, and mighty Potentates;
And they in meekness have embraced the same
Without a jealousy of any shame
Which might thereby reflect disparagements
Upon their wisdom, from those instruments.
Nor is there any cause, why such as are
Made isntrumental, those things to declare
Which may be serviceable, should therefore
Esteem their wisdom, or themselves the more;
Since they have nothing, but what they receive,
And are but earthen pipes, to help derive
To others, what into themselves they take,
Not so much for their own, as others sake.
And if assume ought to my self I would,
I nothing know, that arrogate I could
By what shall be proposed, more then they,
Who have not to this end a word to say,
If they desire to serve you; when they shall
Meet such occasions, as I met withal.
For, as when two great Armies, long engaged,
Having each others fury so enraged,
That over all the fields there are bespread,
Disorders raised out of despair and dread;
Such renovations on the hills and valleys,
Of charges and retreats; of routs and rallies,
So loud a noise of drums, and guns, and eries;
Such clouds of smoke and dust to blind their eyes;
Such stops by them that slain and wounded ly,
Such througs and tumults among those that fly,
And, such confusions, that the Chief Commanders
Know not what course to take; if then, bystanders,
Upon a neighboring hill, shall thence discern
Where some advantage lies, which may concern
Their friends engaged; and from among them one
Shall (ventring down) inform them what is done;
Where their foes weakness lies; and how they may
Rally their broken troops, and win the day,
What great thing has he done, whereof to boast?
Or what dishonor has that Army lost,
By his officiousness? or what is his gains
But knocks perhaps, or woundings for his pains;
From those, it may be, of his Party too,
Who know not what he thither came to do.
This is my case; who for such services,
(And such adventures heretofore as these)
Have gained so little, that none needs envy
The profit which I have received thereby;
Or, those advantages I might expect,
If that which I propose should take affect;
Considering, how many still there be,
To make my best deeds mischievous to me.
But, whatsoever shall thereon succeed
With what is now intended, I Will proceed,
As my peculiar work; and to be done
By no man, if I let the same alone.
For, (as it by my Journall Books appears)
Somewhat above the term of forty years
I have been on the hills of contemplation,
A voluntary Watchman for this Nation.
I, often, when none to second me I knew.
In times of greatest danger stood perdue.
I often was prisoner took, and did enlarge
My self, at all times, at my proper charge.
I, more then once, to escape my Foes made shift,
With nothing, but my life, and raiment left;
And have persuaded been (even ever since
J reached the years of ripe intelligence)
That (next unto his service) GOD, in chief,
Gave me my being, faculties and life,
To serve my Country, and to have an eye
On those who hindered her prosperity;
And, to employ my studies and my wit,
Jn searching out what might advantage it,
Though no man should regard it; yea, though still
J injuries received for my good will:
And this has often produced such fruits as these,
Judge me, or use me for it as they please;
J shall, at last, be paid for all J do:
And, so shall they, who dare oppose it too.
Having thus prefac'd, to anticipate
Miscensures, J, my Visions thus relate.
When with sad thoughts J many nights and days,
Had overlooked my one, and others ways,
Considering seriously, both what they were
And in what posture, our affairs now are;
I saw so much confusion, and disorder,
The Chaos daily, so much widing further
By new confusions, and so few, that see
Or credit, in what hazards we now be,
That in these overwhelmings I almost
Was swallowed up, in danger to be lost:
And doubtless in those whirlpools lost had bin,
But that the clew, by which I ventured in,
Did bring me forth, and set me on a Station
Where I might view them, without perturbation;
With safety too, and with so true a light
That, thereby plainly, I discover might
From whence this Chaos springs; and by what course
We might (if possible) drink up the source,
Or make some such diversion, as would win
An entrance, where good order might begin.
As I stood musing, how this could be done,
A voice within me said; this works for none
But him to do, who first did out of naught
Bring something; and from something, all things brought.
Then said my heart, LORD, though this work, to thee
Belongs alone, yet instruments there be,
By which thou workest all things here below;
Some isntrumental means, now therefore show,
Whereby this may be done; and, then alone
Shal't reap that honor which infues thereon.
Instead of vocal answer hereunto,
A firm persuasion, that it should be so
Possessed my soul; and that he whosoever
Would faithfully and seriously endeavor
A restoration, either should acquire
The full accomplishment of his desire;
Or so much toward it, as might at least
Secure him in his noble interest.
Herewith well satisfied, aside I threw
My own affairs, and privately withdrew
Into my self, in season to begin
That undertaking which I now am in;
And whereto you, by these long lanes are led,
To signify that I Have considered
The Propositions, which to light I bring,
With good precautions, and examining.
One afternoon, as on my couch I lay,
About the evening twilight of the day,
My contemplation introduced there,
A mask, that might beseem a theater;
And many grave spectators: for thereby
Was represented our late tragedy
From that time, when the Prologue did begin,
Even to the very act, we now are in;
With each material circumstance, which might,
Be usefully presented to my sight,
Pertaining to this Nation, and to those
Who are, or have been, thereto friends or foes.
It likewise drew a map before mine eyes,
Of all our past, and present miseries,
With those distractions, and those contradictions.
Which do prolong or multiply afflictions:
As also of each actor and his actions
Confusedly wrapped up with their transactions,
As they to me, and other men appear,
When we do look upon them in our fear;
Or as they passed by us day by day,
Whilst we among the same confusions lay.
This mummery withdrew: and then me thought,
It back again, each part and actor brought,
Distinctly represented, so that I
Might perfectly discern with reasons eye,
What in themselves they were; and that we had
Of many things a wrong conjecture made.
That some, which to our practice were commended,
Have to our shame, and our destruction tended:
That others, which we judged might destroy
Our interest; produced what we enjoy.
That wicked projects, other while brought forth
As good effects, as those of real worth,
(Though not without a woe, to them, by whom
Offenses, and prevarications come)
That some, which good appeared, were nothing so,
That, others, making but an evil show,
Were (if considered simply) very good,
Or, better then they seemed, if understood
According to the time, and present state
Of these affairs, whereto they did relate.
A Curtain then was drawn aside, that showed
A Table, whereon portraited I viewed
A Directory, teaching me the use
Of all that I had seen, with their produce:
Which could my memory, have brought away,
Had done this work (which I intend to day)
Much better, then this picking out again,
What their impression left upon my brain.
A thousand several things (some, neither fit
For my expression, nor in season, yet
To be divulged) were brought as in procession
Before me, in an orderly progression.
Sometimes confusedly, there passed by
Strange Apparitions, which away did fly,
E're I could well disern them; or my thought
Take notice, to what purpose they were brought.
Sometimes bright shinings from a light I had,
Which cheered my heart, and made my spirit glad.
Another while, a darkness me surrounded,
Which, all my notions, for a time, confounded,
And sadned so my spirit by privations,
That I well near lost all those observations
Which I had made sometimes appeared to me
Such things, as in our Antimasks we see
Ridiculous, and worthy laughing at;
Sometimes things terrible, and after that
Appearances, which promised to some,
Much comfort, peace, and happiness to come;
And so the Vision vanished, and the day
By that time to the night had given way.
But by what represented thus has been,
By well considering what I have seen;
(By spelling out, what every character
Held forth, and what things evidenced were
By readring all together) found has bin
Where that great work must first of all begin,
Which may make up our breaches, when thereto
Our selves we settle, as we ought to do.
In brief, I saw, that in the settlement
And constitution of this Parliament
Upon a just foundation laid with speed,
A course of restoration might succeed;
And draw on by degrees, a means to bring
Into right order, every other thing
Conducing to our Weal; and if we take
That way whereof proposal I shall make,
I dare adventure, if it do not thrive,
To lose my head, or be interred alive.
I have attained assurance (and without
So much as any shadow of a doubt
That by this Parliaments misconstitution
We are incapable of that fruition
Which we expect; that for the most part thence
Proceed the causes of our indigence
And myseries; and that it is naythelesse
The chief, or sole means left of our redress.
Even this in being now, this which men seek
To bring into contempt, and to dislike.
This, which they (justly too, in some respect)
Have labored to make of no effect,
And to annihilate, as if thereby
(And thereby only) they should perfectly
Enjoy their full desires, and be secured
From all the troubles hitherto endured.
Even by this Parliament, God will effect
That future settlement which we expect,
If we too long delay not the pursuit
Of an impartial rativall recruit.
For though the body of it being made
Of many members, has among them had
(And has yet) overmany so corrupted
That they have not alone much interrupted:
The activenesse of those that have been sound,
But are often likely also to confound
The whole at once, by seeking how to please
Their lusts, or friends, or how themselves to ease:
Yet by their faithfulness, who have been true
Unto their trust, and active to pursue
The public interest, redeemed we are
From that captivity in which we were;
And many things enjoy of him esteem
(Though by some wants, enjoyments less do seem)
Whereof we had e're this been quite dispoil'd,
If they in their endeavors had been foir'd.
It therefore were an Act of Tyranny,
(Of high injustice, and of cruelty)
To wrap up these, with those that have misdone,
Because some fail, to have respect to none;
But cast off all at once, and from us thrust
With men unrighteous, those that have been just.
For if we weigh things well, it is their praise,
That they have marched through uneven ways,
(Often, ill accommodated) and have long
Opposed without weariness, a strong
And cunning enemy; that they have bin
Assailed by some without, and stob'd within
By bosom foes; that they were lamed too,
In their own limbs, yet forward still did go
With perseverance: and that also they
Stand for us in the gap, even to this day;
It is their glory, rather then their blot,
Though their good purpose they accomplish not.
It is from these that we denominate
This Parliament; in them is lodged the fate
Of this Republike; yea, what e're it seem,
This, as I said, is that which must redeem
Our late lost honor; and if e're this shall
Dissolved be, down all our Structures fall,
Not to be raised, without the cost of more
Then has been spent upon it heretofore.
For what should keep it up? can wise men think,
They shall uphold it, that it may not sink,
Whom these depute? who while they do subsist,
Preserve, with much care, their own interest?
Can any of us, reasonably believe
The power which to their Substitutes these give,
When they themselves are outed, shall be able
To keep up strongly, that which is unstable,
Until a Phoenix, yet unhatch'd arise
Out of their ashes, with renewed supplies?
When, having far less power, and less esteem,
(As being an extraction out of them
Who are prejudicated) they shall contend
With those immergencies, that may ascend?
But, grant it possible, what way shall we
Contrive, whereby this power dissolved may be
Without a force, that may endanger more
Our safety, then it has done heretofore?
(Since by a Law, it was perpetuated
Which is not rashly to be abrogated;
And which without inforcement, can by none
Repealed be, save by it self alone?)
It were not rational we should petition
That they now sitting (weighing their condition)
Dissolve it should, till they can be assured,
How they may for the future be secured,
For giving their entrusted power away,
To those they know not; or, to such as may,
Ruin both them, and those too, for whose sake,
They served, that reasonlesse resolve to make;
Yea, should they leave to such uncertainties,
(And, to such hazards, as might thence arise)
This Commonwealth, it were an Act unjust,
And, an unanswerable breach of trust.
This Parliament, though (by and for our sin)
Her vigorous actings have delayed bin,
Through those obstructions, which it long has had,
And, is by many foul bespatterings made
Unacceptable; though, that it should reign
Over them, the sons of Belial, do disdain:
Although, some also (without cause) have thought
That, to defame it, I my self, have sought
(Because thereto misunderstandingly,
They such invectives, and reproofs apply,
As were intended only against those,
Who seeming to be friends, were secret foes.)
Yet since it first begun (even all along)
I have perceived what works thereto belong,
And ever had a care how to prevent
Their scandal, by a plain distinguishment
Of Doves from Crows, and of men's private factions,
From public, and authorized transactions.
For as that man, who can nor hear, nor see,
And half whose limbs, corrupt and rotten be,
May possibly be all the means reserved,
By which a noble house may be preserved
From extirpation; so, how bad soever
This Parliament may be, (or may appear)
I am assured, by many a circumstance,
It is that means by which GOD will advance
This Commonwealth, unto that settlement,
Which may accursed Anarchy prevent,
If those conditions be not long neglected,
Whereby our happiness may be effected.
As heretofore, when Sarah was bereaved
Of that which gave her hope to have conceived,
She, naythelesse, obtained a lovely son,
In whom a numerous Offspring was begun:
And whence did spring that light, and that salvation,
Which is the happiness of every Nation;
Even so, when we had wanted many a year,
The likely Symptoms of enjoying here,
Another Parliament; yea when a stop
Was raised and proclaimed, against the hope
Of such a mercy, when naught did appear
But that whereby dispairs increased were:
When Tympanies had swollen our Sarahs womb,
And made it rather seem to be the Tomb
Of dead things only, then to quicken ought,
Which for our comfort could from thence be brought;
Lo, then, (and not before) it did conceive
A son of Consolation, to revive
Our drooping hearts; and which, if faithlesnesse
Deprive us not of what we may possess,
Will free us from all tyrants, and restore
Those rights which they usurped heretofore:
And not restore our liberties alone,
But propagate the blessing here begun,
Throughout the world, until all other Nations
Are freed from their Oppressors usurpations.
Before the sons of Jacob entrance found
Into their promised Land, they had a round,
Or Progress to fulfill, and many years
They in the Deserts were Probationers,
By several hardships, thereby to improve
The seeds of faith, new sown at their remove
From Egypt; and by signs and wonders shown)
To make unto themselves their frailty known.
But they at each restraining of their lust,
Brake forth into repinings and distrust;
Yea into flat rebellions, into rearing
Of Idols (when his Law GOD was preparing)
Into a wicked causlesse murmuring
Against the means of their delivering
From Aegypts trial; and into wishes vain
That they might thither back return again.
For which of many hundred thousands none
Enjoyed the promised rest, but two alone.
And we are just like them; yea, we have done
Since God, to bring us from our thrall begun,
The very same things in the wilderness
Of our Probation; and our carcasses
Shall there be left, unless we do betimes
Make an attunement, for our passed crimes;
And with unfainedness that course pursue
Which leads unto the rest, that is in view.
So shall our Leaders, likewise, who comply
With such transgressers, and unsanctifie
Their power: so shall, moreover, those
Who with our Dathans, and Abirams close
In their conspiracies, and quite from all
Their likely hopes, and present glory fall.
For on conditions, (as King John had
His Throne) the peoples heads, they have been made,
And if they shall from those conditions swerve,
They must expect the portion they deserve.
Let them endeavor, therefore, how they may
Remove that fear and jealousy away
Which does possess the people, and withdraws
Their good affections, with apparent cause:
Let those, ( even those, who have among the rest,
Been least to blame, and have deserved best)
Consider, that by such as careless are
Of those great burdens, which they seem to bear,
The weight increases, and, that they so fast
Decrease, on whom their weightiness is cast,
As will e're long over whelm them, if with speed,
They do not to some remedy proceed.
Let them take notice, that the people rage
At their delays, as likely to engage
In some disorderly resolve, unless
They see that followed with more seriousness
Which they desire; either a Parl'ament
New made, or somewhat that is equivalent:
For thereby, they conceive, (and that thereby
Alone) their sufferings may have remedy.
And somewhat to that end (although not so
As most would have it) may be sit to do.
Yea, if I have not misadvised bin,
Our cure must with the Parliament begin.
Assist ye therefore, to promote the same,
Lest ye partake with sinners in their shame.
There is a course, whereby without disgrace,
Or danger, you may bring that work to pass,
And free your selves from that great cost and pain,
Which without thanks, or profit you sustain;
Afflicting others too, by those confusions
Which are increast by your irresolutions.
Until a better, therefore shall appear,
Be pleased that expediment to hear,
And, if of those preventions, or that good,
It promises, you find a likelihood,
Take heed, that no self-interest, divert
That Approbation, whereunto your heart
Inclines you; for God will find it out,
And cross the counter-work you go about.
In England, and in Wales, there is a Shire,
For every week that is numbered in the year.
By twelve, according to the months divide
The Counties, with their persons qualified
For Knights and Burgesses, proportioning
As near as may be, to an equalling
The number of the whole, so, or so many
Unto each month, without omitting any.
Ascertain then, the month and day, wherein
Each twelfth part an election shall begin;
(The middle of the week, appearing best
As being furthest from the day of rest)
On each first Wednesday, of each month, let those
By whom their Deputies are to be chose,
Respectively convene in every Shire,
Upon that month, and Wednesday every year,
Which is to them assigned; and having chosen,
(At months end) let each twelfth part, of the dozen,
Send up their chosen men, to represent
Their Shires and Boroughs in the Parliament:
And on that very day, in which they come,
Let all their Predecessors give them room.
Thus one month some; and month by month for ever,
Let each twelfth part, still orderly persever
To take a turn, till every share has had
A month in every year; and having made
Their choice, let them still enter and withdraw
Successively, by a perpetual Law,
No man a place of trust, supplying there,
At one election, longer then one year.
Thus, as the Thames, does still continue one,
And is the self-same river, though there run
A new supply of waters every day
Along the channel, so continue may
This Parliament, by annual supply,
To be the self-same everlastingly,
With very little charge or molestation
To those who choose, or represent the Nation.
Thus may this Parliament, be both together
Successive, and perpetual; yet neither
Enjoying such a perpetuity
As can occasion future tyranny,
Or present grievances; not that succession,
Which may bring danger by an intermission:
But make that constitution, which will add
All power, which may from both of them be had,
Either to compass, what good men affect;
Or to prevent the mischiefs they suspect,
What I intend may plainly be conceived;
And to that end, some things may be contrived
Much better, if your wisdom shall refine
The rudeness of my proffered design;
And by authority, some rules provide
Whereby the elected may be qualified;
And their Electors too; for 'twere unjust,
In things of this concernment, those to trust
Who have disturbed our Peace, until a time
For their Probation be allotted them:
And till they likewise, by some good desert,
Make manifest a reconciled heart,
Atested, and approved by those Judges,
Who shall suspend their former privileges.
And since, even they who are the best affected
To Public welfare, often have elected
Such as deceive their hopes; since there is no eye
But GODS, that sees the hearts hypocrisic:
Since it appears in the best Record,
(Even in the volumes of the sacred Word)
That lots were needful in the choice of those,
On whom they did a Supreme Trust impose:
Yea, since, even when the purest Congregation,
In all the world, had with deliberation,
(And from among the most approved men,
Which to their knowledge lived among them then)
Elected two; a lot was also cast,
That GODS Election might on theirs be placed,
To send forth him, who was to be employed
In executing of the place then void:
Since also GODS Election, joined with our,
May peradventure on the Elected pour
New gifts; since we by doubtless warranty
May with that ancient President comply:
Since it will probably give good content
To prudent men, and may often times prevent
The choice of those, whom for sinister ends,
A numerous corrupted Party sends:
Why may not? nay, why should not two be chose
For every place that is void, and one of those
Be sent by lot? that GOD may have a voice,
And join with men in making up their choice?
Since they, who must this Nation represent
Are GODS Vicegerents in the Government,
As well as our Trustees? who would not more
Conside in such a choice, then heretofore
They did in others? or, then they will do
In them, who shall not now be chosen so?
Why was it not? why should it not be thus,
If this the Kingdom be of GOD WITH US?
But that self-seekers find, were this admitted,
They by reputed fools, should be outwitted?
And get no Jnlet, others to devour
Hereafter, by an evil gotten power?
Yea, wherefore has the lot been from among
All our Elections kept away so long,
But that Usurpers, and Intruders know
It would their Kingdoms wholly overthrow;
Make them afraid, that CHRIST would reign indeed
Among us, (as they sometimes hear and read)
And that they should hereafter never come
To revel (as they have done) in his room:
Nor will they, doubtless, if this take effect,
Except it be our failings to correct;
When GOD shall by permission for our sin,
Reject the lot, and let a Knave come in.
If therefore some Prevision might be made,
That we should lots to our Elections add,
A great security would thence redound,
And much contentment therein might be found.
Moreover, as an out-work pertinent
Remisseness in Electers to prevent,
(Upon whose due performance much depends,
Which to the public woe, or welfare tends)
It were not labor lost, if whensoe're
To execute that duty we appear,
Some short speech might be made, or cautions read,
Whereby it should be offered to our heed,
How much it will concern us, to take care
What choice we make, and what the danger; are
Which may ensue; lest for sinister ends,
(For fear of great men, or to please our friends)
We may displace our trust, and cast away
Our selves, and all, for ever, in one day.
To which intent, our Orator should show
What trust it is, which we that day bestow:
What benefits may gen'rally arise
By choosing men courageous, honest, wise,
And fearing GOD; what perils will ensue
(Which by forepast examples he may show)
If cowards, fools, ungodly men, and vicious,
Or to the present Government pernicious
Elected be; he likewise may declare
How qualified such persons should appear,
And warn them, that they never do unhallow
Their choice, with any such as these that follow.
Men over-talkative, and loving much
To hear themselves speak; for not many such
Can keep or give good counsel; and they will prate
Much precious time away, in vain debate.
Your common Gamesters: for, they are unjust
Unto themselves, and them we should not trust
With other men's estates, who have been known
To lose, or hazard, desperately their own.
Men to their pleasure overmuch addicted,
For Public works, will be by these neglected.
Such as apparently are Avaritious,
Or of Promotion greedily ambitions:
For if their ends thereby acquire they may,
These may be hired, their Country to betray.
Such as indulge their lust, and famed are
Ju their uncleanness to persevere;
For they will leave their Charge, to please their whore,
And shame their fellows, if they do no more.
Of irreligious persons make no choice,
For these will very seldom give their Voice,
But in the Negative, to any motion.
That may be for advancement of Devotion.
Choose none who are defamed in any kind,
As being vicious; for these means will find
To hinder all enactings, which restrain
Ill manners; or to sober life pertain.
Elect not children: for it is unfit
That in our Supreme Counsel they should sit,
To Vote in Grand Affairs, whom Law restrains
From managing, what to themselves pertains.
Choose none, who are observed to withhold,
Their long due debts, when they discharge them could;
Or outlawed persons; for, unfit are they
To make our Laws, who will not Laws obey.
Choose none, who shall solicit, or propose
That they for your Law makers may be chose;
(And their Electors, by the old abuse,
Of feasting, wine, and banquetings seduce:)
For they, who shall uncalled, themselves advance
To that great work, have much more arrogance
Then worth; and it is also ten to one,
They for themselves, have something to be done.
And lastly, take good heed, that none get in
By your Elections, who have active bin
Against this State, till you, of them have had
Good proof, whereby secure you may be made:
For he that has into subjection brought,
A Thief, who on the way, to rob him sought,
And straight way trusts him, with his sword and horse,
Takes not a very safe, or prudent course.
This being done, (as in preceding ages)
Let those who are Elected have their wages
Well paid, and rendered proportionable
To what the times require, to make them able
To serve their Country in the Parliament
Without their private cost or detriment:
For both our Laws, and equity requires,
That Laborers should be allowed their hires:
Yea, it is a kind of bribery, in those
Who offer, without wages to be chose;
And Boroughs, which unable seem to bear
That charge, not worth the representing are.
Beside, their choice, is (for the most part) made
By some Malignant Stewards; or, over awed
By misaffected Landlords, to the wrong
Of what to them, with others does belong:
And their objections are but cavillings,
Who shall allege, that these est ablishings
Infringe their Ancient Right: for, be it known,
The Commonwealth no privilege can own
Destructive to it self: much rather, we,
Who now, by Conquest, teinvested be
With what was lost, are bound to settle it,
Not as our foes wish, but as may befit
The present, and the future preservation
Of safety, peace, and freedom to this Nation.
Moreover, as upon the House of Peers,
It was the custom, in preceding years,
That there the Sages of the Law, attended;
To whose debate such points were recommended,
As to the Law related; so, let some
Selected be, and summoned to come
To whom each matter questioned relates,
To be advised withal, in their debates,
As needful it shall seem; whether the cause
In controversy shall concern the Laws,
War, Merchandise, or whatsoever may
Require their best experience on the day
Thereto assigned: that every work begun
May by it proper instrument be done.
Which will prevent much doing, and undoing,
And make now comers, in short time, as knowing,
As they that have sat long, and finish more
In three weeks, then in three months heretofore.
These outworks, will much strengthen, and secure
The works within: yet that they may endure
All sieges, underminings, and scaladoes,
Battries, assaults, and stormings, with Grenades,
By soes without, and treacheries within,
To build a Cittadell, let us begin
Upon some Fundamentalls; and provide
They may for ever, unrepeal'd abide.
Let it inviolably be decreed,
That Cities, Shires, and Boroughs do proceed
Once every year, upon the time assigned,
(On penalty of being deeply fined)
To make Elections; that we never may
For time to come, be headless for one day.
Let it be overlasting banishment
To him, who shall to change this Government
From being a Republike, motion make:
And to act further if he undertake,
Let it be death, with total confiscation
Of his estate, without commiseration;
Unless the great Disposer of all things,
(Who, as he lists, sets up and pulls down Kings)
Shall thereto by a conquering power compel;
And, not to do it then, were to rebel.
Whoever with the public Treasury
Shall stand entrusted; and does knowingly
Defraud the Commonwealth; or shall purloine,
(Whether it be in goods, or ready Coin)
The worth of twenty ounces in pure plate,
Let it be loss of life, and of estate.
Whoever this Republike shall betray
Maliciously, or for advance or pay,
Resign his Trust; or cowardly give up
What he had means to keep, or likely hope;
Let it (when proved) be death without reprieving,
Or any hope of temporal forgiving.
Whoever shall from any foraigne State,
Or Prince, take pension; or negotiate
With them, or with their Agents, when they are
With us in Treaties, or in open war,
In State affairs, unless the State gives leave;
Let him, without a pardon, death receive.
Above a month together suffer none
To sit hereafter in the Speakers throne,
On some great penalty: Because thereby
Both public wrongs, and private injuries
May be occasioned. Impose the like
On him that shall absent himself one week
From Parliament, without a good cause shown;
Or, that without leave shall depart the Town.
Let some appearance every day be made,
That this great Body never want a Head
That Is visible; and to prevent what may,
Unthought upon, befall us in a day.
Yea, on the Sabbath, for an hour or two,
Convene; for, it is a Sabboth-work you do:
And Venice, has by long experiment
Found, that this Caution may be pertinent;
Nor will it over-burthensome appear,
When they are to continue but one year.
Let none in Parliament have toleration
To mention ought to their disreputation,
Who absent are; except they undertake
Of what they shall aver good proof to make,
On pain of an expulsion; or, permit
An Intimation, likely to beget
A misconjecture, to the injury
Of him, that is not present to reply:
But let the Accusers and their Accusations
Be known, that those may have due vindications
Who are traduced; For, no man should enjoy
A privilege, his neighbor to destroy.
Moreover, lest the Parliament become
(By multiplying Suits) more burdensome
Then all those other Courts, of whose oppressions
We have complained, (and render our conditions
Less curable) let it admit no Cause
But such as has no remedy by Laws
In force; or, for a non-fruition
Of Justice, by their partial execution.
For, by removing of such grievances,
And to provide against immergencies
Which may occurr (both in affairs abroad,
And here at home) they will have still their load.
If not: the being of a Parliament
Thus constituted, doubtless, will prevent
So many mischiefs, that it will return
Large recompenses for all charges born.
Let it expulsion be from thence, for ever,
With some great mulct, for any whosoever,
That, as a Member of the Parliament,
Shall sit two years together; yea, though sent.
And, let no Lawyers practice for a Fee,
Or plead, whilst of the Parliament they be:
Or any, who there siteth as a Peer,
Be Judge of any supreme Court that year;
Or, during that employment, execute
A Place, permitting not a Substitute;
That, in Appeals, none may infringe the Laws,
By being Judge and Party in one Cause.
And, that to all men, justice may be done,
Among your Fundamentalls make this one;
That whatsoever shall be taken from
One, few, or many (through all times to come)
In public wants, and dangers, be repaid
By equal Taxes, generally laid:
And, that they shall not make, or abrogate
A Law, diminishing one man's estate
More then another, without recompense,
On whatsoever occasion or pretense.
Yea, let all men's estates reduced be
To less then forty shillings, yearly Fee,
Rather then friend or foe, should justly say,
The public faith were broken, any way.
Which would enrich us, and innoble more
Then, if our hills of chalk, were silver over;
Our sand pure gold; our pebles, pearls of price,
Our fields as fruitful as old Paradise;
And, every son, which forth each mother brings,
As Prince, or Lord, and all their Fathers Kings.
Then to prevent, the drawing those together,
Who, for by-ends, would fortify each other;
Let him that place in Parl'ament supplies,
Who shall by letter, word, or otherwise,
Either contrive, solicit, or propose
Another, during that time, to be chose,
Be from his Trust, exiled with disgrace,
Never to be admitted, to that place.
And, that all Fundamentalls ratified
In Parl'ament, for ever may abide
Inviolated; let no man be sent
A City, Town, or Shire, to represent,
Till by Indenture, under hand and seal,
He stand engaged to the Commonweal,
And his Electors, that by no endeavor,
He shall repeal, or any way for ever
Weaken these Fundamentalls; but assay,
At all times, to enlarge them what he may:
For, Parl'aments (as heretofore our Kings)
Are but Trustees; and therefore in such things,
As to the public damage may redound,
As well as they, should Act within some bound.
By these provisions, (with some other such
Made Fundamentalls, we might very much
Advantage this Republike; and as far
As humane industries enabled are,
(To promise safety and establishment)
Secure from change the present Government,
Till men may dry-shod walk upon the sand,
From Deal, and Dover, Cliffs to Callis strand;
Or, Penmin Maure, be set on Snow-down hills,
And, Time unto their springs, turns back the rills.
This, would be like the river, wherewithal
The Tyrant Queller, cleans'd the Augean stall,
(As Poets faign) and wash away that soil,
And blood, and filth, which does our beauty spoil.
By these means, we might both in one, contrive
A true successive Representative,
Completed in a safe establishment,
For ever, of the self-same Parl'ament,
Producing all their just desires together,
Who seek the one, or who desire the other;
And with prevention of all harms, that may
Be feared, by the one or other way.
By these means, we shall never be without
A Supreme power, or live in any doubt
Of harmfull change, if wisely we pursue
This course; and to our selves continue true.
By these means, there will still be an appearance
Sufficient, to keep up a perseverance,
In all great undertakings, with due order,
And with such quick dispatch, the suits to further
Of men oppressed; that, they may hope to see
Those plaints determined, which yet endless be;
And never will have end, till wit or force,
Reduce us unto this, or some such course.
By this expedient, they that are in place
At present, may resign without disgrace
The Trust they have, to take a while their ease,
(Or follow their affairs, as they shall please)
And after one year, back perhaps return
To reassume the burdens they have born.
Hereby a likely means will be contrived
Of that security, which is derived
From many Counselors: and, distribution
Of burdens, will make easy execution;
More quick, yea, and more cheap dispatches too,
For those, who shall have ought with them to do.
By these means, if, a worthless Member come
Among our Worthies, to supply a room,
His heart may changed be; whereas, now, they
Who came in honest, are often drawn away
From their first Principles, with them to close,
Who, mean to gain, what e're the Public lose:
Or, at the worst, he must from thence be gone
Before much mischief, can by him be done.
And, such as do confederate and plot
That, for themselves, advantage may be got,
(Though to their Countries loss, and neighbors wrong)
Shall want the time and means, which does belong
To such contrivements, as are frequent now,
When, most, each others minds, and interests know:
For, by new Parties, monthly, coming in,
They Will break, as fast as they to knit begin;
And, Gins, which heretofore effects have took
By kindred and alliance, will be broke.
By these means, they, who do command, to day,
Shall learn again to morrow, to obey.
Many, shall be encouraged to enable
Themselves, in public, to be serviceable;
And, in few years, some thousands more then now,
The common interest, will learn to know;
And, how they may advance it, when they come
From that grand School, to live again, at home;
And, think themselves, obliged, every where,
To further it, as well as sitting there.
By this means, every man, within his Orb
Shall be restrained; and none have power to curb
Supreme authority; or, to aspire
By his ambition to a Station higher
Then shall be safe to all, and judged fit
For this free State, with prudence to admit:
Nor shall the da^ingst tyrant in the land
Presume to move a tongu^, or lift a hand
Against that power; o^ plot, vent, or concceal
Ought which may damnifie this Commonweal.
Yea, by this means, we calmly shall reduce
The Parl'ament, unto it genuine use,
Without advent'ring what may intervene
By Intervalls; and, what has feared been
(Not without cause) by hazarding to call
A new one; or, by an additionall
Supply to this; as now affairs relate
To home designs, and our next neighbring State:
But, if we fail in any circumstance,
Here mentioned, we never shall advance
The Public interest to that effect,
Which by this Parliament we might expect;
Nor escape that tyranny, which is designed
By those, who are contrarily inclined:
For, they that would be tyrants (knowing those
Who did the Regal tyranny oppose
Still zealous, for the peoples liberty)
Will to effect their purposes comply
With any party; and, then, by displacing,
By disenabling, or else by disgracing
The well-affected, at last, compass that
Which is by them, in secret almed at,
(Unless prevented) and involve us more
In servile slaveries, then heretofore.
For, doubtless, most of those who did befriend
The tyranny of Kings, will to that end
Adhere to these, in hope by doing thus,
To be revenged at last, on them and us.
These are no such Proposalls, as may hatch
A Cocatrice; or, be abused to catch
A private interest. No impostures are
Beneath a fair pretense obscured here:
Nor does their Author act the Mountebank
To any end: For, he expects not thank
For ought by him designed; nor, cares for more
But to discharge the debt upon his score;
And (if occasion be) to find a gap,
Through which, without a mischief, he may escape.
Which, if he do, he will confess, it is more
Then ever he could boast of heretofore;
Or, any other, who thus interrupted
The wilful practice of a power corrupted,
Unless that GOD, whom nothing can withstand,
Secured him, by an overruling hand;
Or, by a miracle did change their heart,
As when he did great Nineveh convert.
This is the sum of that, which I remember
Kept me awake, some nights of this November,
When my affairs, which then at hazard lay,
Had tired in vain my body all the day;
For, my necessities required the one,
My conscience cried, the the other must be done;
And, if, now ought the worse thereby I fare,
My lot, as I am able, I will bear.
Much more was represented to my view,
Which I am unprepared (as yet) to show,
And you to hear: but, if I had a pen
As acceptable, as some other men,
(And undisturbed) it might produce perchance,
That, which the Public weal, might much advance:
Or, had I but a volubility
Of tongue, to help my fluid memory;
Or, durst declare my thoughts, e're them I see
Arrayed in words, that, weighed they first might be:
Yea, could I speak, as many now can do,
More in one hour, then they e're thought in two,
(Or, then I can be understood in three)
Much more esteemed would my Proposalls be.
Here I had fixed, but, that there comes to mind
A supplement, remaining yet behind,
Of somewhat represented, as relating
Unto this Parliaments accommodating,
With due conveniences; and with supply
Of things pertaining to the Majesty,
Of Supreme Senates: For, though, doubtless, they
Are best adorned, who themselves array
With holiness; though, they have most renown
When righteousness and mercy, is their Crown:
And, though the dignity of Governments,
Consists not in outward ornaments,
Or, neat accommodations; yet, the wise,
Having regard to man's infirmities,
Did in all ages, by their joint consents,
Add to essential things, such accidents
As might to those men, make their worth appear,
Who could not see, what in themselves, they were:
And, that they who discerned it, might not find
Discouragements, in that which is enjoined,
To which end, we prescribe unto the sick,
A gilded pill, and trim with Rethorick,
Our Arguments, thereby to palliate
What, we to others would insinuate.
And, to this end, were tipifi'd to me,
Some things, which will, perhaps, hereafter be,
Mark them, if they be worth your heed: if not,
Let them be passed over, as forgot.
Methought, I saw WHITEHALL new modeled out;
With Towers adorned, with strong walls fenced about;
With buildings, having much variety
Contrived into a neat conformity
Of fair aspect, and duly beautified
With Gardens, walks, and with what else, beside,
Did render it magnificently fit
For their abode, who did inhabit it.
Beside the Fabrics, destined unto
Mere public use, and common works to do;
As, in the Firmaments wide Orb, there are
Twelve mansions; so, twelve structures, saw I there,
In each of which (as in the Zodiake,
The twelve celestial signs, their Stations take)
The Senators, who month by month, were chose,
Had their distinct abodes; each one of those
In lodgings, by himself; yet, altogether
In one pile, who, in one month were sent thither:
That, for convenience they might be near
On all occasions; and, that every Shire,
Might thereby find the easier addresses,
And, quick dispatches in their businesses.
A constant Table, of one meal a day,
Was there prepared for a frugall pay,
That none might be compelled to stray forth
To places unbeseeming men of vvorth:
And, all things pertinent to preservation
Of health, with every fit accommodation,
Was there contrived, so, as that they might
Pursue the Public service, with delight.
No famliy, was licensed there, to host;
No, not a wife (except a week, at most,
In guest-wise) lest the public services
Might be disturbed by household businesses:
Or, least the drudgeries, or nastinesse,
Occasioned by a numerous access
Of children, servants, and their visiters,
Might spread diseases, in infectious years:
And lest among them, some, through want of grace,
Might bring an evell name upon that place.
Nothing uncomely, or disordered there
Could I behold; no noyses did I hear,
Or such loud clamors, as have often been heard,
Among the rude Jncommers, and the guard;
But, such an lawful silence, as if there
The Turks Grand Signior, always present were
By Mutes attended. To offend the eye,
Or smell, no dung, or sinks, did open lie.
I saw not thee, a despicable shed;
No Coach housed there, or any Coach horse fed:
No little children in the garden sprawling,
Or, in the Galleries, or Chambers yawling:
No Bakers Boy went tooting of his horn:
No Milk pails there, from place to place were born,
As in those Courts, and Allies which we see
Pestered with Inmates, and poor lodgers be:
Nor was there born through any passage there,
(Save such, as out of common concourse were)
Unscemly burdens, or, ought else permitted
But what the honor of the place befitted.
A Guard was needless then for their defense,
(Since, justice, mercy, and true innocence,
Are guard enough, and keep more safe, by far,
Then if an armed Phalanx doubled were)
They had true peace within; and through the land
No man against them, durst to lift a hand;
But, every one was ready to attend them,
And with their lives, as their life, to defend them.
Yet, for magnificency, and to further
The preservation of respect and order,
In times of concourse; and that no address
Be made, but with all due respectiveness,
They had an able Band of men selected
Out from among those persons well-affected,
Whose faith and valor had been well approved
In public services; who, had unmoved
Stood firm in trialls, and whose conversation
Had gained them an honest reputation;
And these, armed, governed, decently arrayed
In liveries alike, and duly paid,
Appeared to give attendance altogether
When Princes, or Ambassadors came thither:
And, in their turns, at other times, to do,
That service, which they were enjoined unto.
Rhen, forasmuch, as outward habits draw
Respect unto men's persons, there, I saw
That custom, which all Senators did hold
In strict observance, through most times of old,
The Knights and Burgesses who represent
The Nation, entered not the parliament
In common habits only; but, each one
A robe. or upper garment, did put on
Peculiar to that Semate, differing neither
In fashion, stuff, or color from each other.
To signify (as I conceive) thereby
Their brotherhood, and their equality;
And that, they being thereby differenced
From vulgar persons, might be honored
According to their place, and known among,
And by the people, as they past along
Into the Senate; or, as to and fro,
from place to place, on their affairs they go.
Moreover, when that they had laid aside
Their Senate robes, about their necks I spied
A golden Wreath, which thereat pendent had
A Tablet, whereon was enamelled,
The British Isles, within the Ocean placed;
And with a Verge of curled waves embraced:
Which was bestown upon them for a badge
of honor, and likewise to privilege
Their persons, wheresoever they were unknown;
That due respect might every where be shown,
And no affronts received. These badges were
From man to man, (and still from year to year)
Resigned to their Successors, to be born
By those whom their Electors should return.
Much more I saw, which should I here relate,
Would yet appear, things worthy laughing at;
(As these declared, already do to some)
But, when the days of their admittance come,
(Which I believe draw near) it will be found
That these Previsions had some likely ground;
And that the heart, from whence all this did flow
Meant well to you, though these things prove not so.
Hear me with patience, but a few words more,
And, to their freedom, I Will your ears restore.
As country folks, to keep out Witches, do
within the threshold, nail a horses shoe,
So did I, at the fore-door of this piece,
Insert a charm, to keep out prejudice:
And, now, if some way else, it in be brought,
That, at the Backdoor, I may thrust it out,
I Will fix a Si quis, (or it may be mo)
Upon the Postern Gate, before I go.
If any think the posture we are in
Will still as prosperous be, as it has been,
Or, that GOD will this Nation still deliver
By miracles, although we shall persever,
In high prosumptions, and supreme neglect
Of that compliance, which he does expect;
They greatly are deceived: For, know, the end
Of most things, on contingence does depend.
We of this Nation, having walked upon
The Pythagorean Y or, Ypsilon
Are come unto the foot thereof, this day,
Where lies before our face a double way,
The one of them directs us unto
Prosperity; the other to our woe:
On this hand, Bliss, on that hand, Curses lie;
Proceed this way, and live; go that, and die.
Even David's temp'rall Kingdom, (though there had
Large promises, concerning it, been made)
Was on his heirs entailed, for their fruition,
Not absolutely, but upon condition;
Which, being broken; all the external power
And glory of it vanished; so shall our.
Moreover, if that any shall believe
Our hazards are far less then I conceive;
Let them not trust to such a dream as that,
Lest they discover, when it is too late,
The dangers threatening us: For, I have been
Informed aright, what perils we are in.
And, whereas, of those things which passed by
From time to time, I sought to satisfy
My private knowledge only, (that I might
Assured be I had observed aright)
If I had thereby gathe'rd proofs, to show
To other men, the truth of what I know,
I should of such things demonstration give,
As few suspect, and fewer would believe;
And you would see, that we are in a course
Like his, who in a dark night rode his horse
Over Chepstow bridge, upon a single board,
When loud to him, the dreadful waters roared,
(Beneath the broken arch) and seemed to say,
Oh fool! take heed, there is danger in the way.
And some, perhaps, if they assured were
What hazzards they have past, would die through fear,
As it is said he did, when he had sight,
Next morn, of what he escaped overnight.
We think perhaps, we all this while have been
Upon as plain firm ground as Richmond-green,
Or in a Course, wherein as safe we run
As on the race at Bausted-downs at noon;
When we are rather dancing over the tops
Of tottering pinacles, on rotten roper,
Where, but that we by providence are kept,
We down had fell, at every Stride we stepped.
Yet, for the most part, every loss and straight
Which we are in, makes us but lay more weight
Upon the weak; and each Deliverance
Does but increase our pride and arrogance.
As if we were resolved, without heed
of judgments, or of mercies, to proceed,
Until confusion should compel us to
What we might orderly, and timely do.
Lastly, if any shall be pleased to say,
Or dream (as peradventure many may)
That, with affairs I intermeddle here
Which pertinent to my Superiors are,
And not to me: To all these be it known,
The business which I treat of is mine own.
I claim, in this Republike, with the best,
A share, proportioned to my interest;
And freedom, boldly to express my mind
As often as I just occasion find.
the common liberty, and common peace
Are truly mine, and no man's, more, or less:
I fought for it, and I pay for it, thrice my share,
According to the part, which many bear.
My Countries wrong is mine; her grief my sorrow,
And therefore they that wound her thrust me through.
They, who her wealth or honor fool away,
Fool me, when in that kind the fools they play:
And, therefore they, who thereto Traitors be,
Are therein also Traitors unto me;
And no man can without apparent wrong
Restraint impose upon my pen, or tongue,
In pleading of her cause; nor will I fear
To act my own work in my proper sphere.
For, though I have not power to make a Law,
Or raise an Army which can keep in awe
Her private enemies, and open foes;
Yet, I have charms equivalent to those,
In some respects; which operate unseen
Those ends, whereto they have intended been;
And will have due effects, in their despite
Who seek to trample on the common Right.
In this assurance, here I Will add a close,
To this, and leave the event to GOD'S dispose;
Who, if we shall neglect (a few weeks more)
Good counsel, as we have done heretofore,
Will break down that, which might preserved have bin,
And, on another Base his work begin.
Nov. 30.
FINIS.

