ANATOMY LECTURES AT GRESHAM COLLEGE.

By that Eminent and Learned Physician Dr. THOMAS WINSTON.

AS PE RA T EN DO * AD AR DU A PE R
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by R. DANIEL, for Thomas Eglesfield at the Brazen Serpent in
St. Paul's Churchyard. MDC LIX.

AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present thee with the Anatomicall Lectures of that learned Physician
Dr. Winstone, who in his life time was well known for an excellent Practitioner
of Physic. In his youth he was a traveller unto Padua, where then was the
chief seat of Physic, and best Physicians there to be found for tutours, but
not so now. He lived many years the public Reader of Physic in Gresham
College, and being fellow of the College of Physicians of London, I suppose
read these Lectures in his appointed course in their College. He was one of
the eldest Physicians in the College when he died, as you may see by the
Catalogue of Physicians in their dispensatory, where you may find his name next
Dr. Harvey's, these Lectures are digested into a plain and clear method,
comprehending the whole body of Anatomy, as then understood; they being far
more exact, concise, learned, and adorned with greater varieties then those of
Dr. Reads, or any yet extant in the English. It Is judged they will be well
worth thy perusal, and as well requite both thy purse and pains, which has
been the chief endeavors of

Thy ready Servant F. P.

TABULA.
DE divisione corporis humani Page 3 De divisione Ventris inferioris. Page 5 De
Cuticula Page 10 De Cute Page 13 De Adipe Page 16 De Panniculo carnoso Page 19
De membrana Musculorum propria. Page 21 De Musculis ventris inferioris. Page 22
De Musculo oblique descendente. ibid. De Linea Alba. Page 25 De Musculo oblique
ascendente. Page 26 De Musculis rectis. Page 27 De Musculis Pyramidalibus. Page
31 De Musculis transversis. Page 32 De Peritonaeo. Page 33 De Vasis
Vmbilicalibus. Page 37 De Epiploo. Page 38 De Intestinis. Page 42 De Ano. Page
60 De Mesenterio. Page 61 De Pancreate. Page 64 De Vena Porta. Page 66 De
Arteriis Abdominis. Page 71 De Ventriculo. Page 72 De Hepate. Page 81 De Vesica
Biliaria. Page 87 De Trunco Venae Cavae descendente. Page 90 De Trunco Aortae
descendente. Page 93 De Liene. ibid De Renibus. Page 101 De Vreteribus. Page
115 De Vesica Vrinaria. Page 118 De Vasis semen praparantibus. Page 122 De
Parastatis. Page 125 De Testibus. Page 126 De Vasis semen deferentibus. Page
130 De Vesiculis seminariis. Page 132 De Prostatis. ibid. De Pene. Page 134 De
Thorace. Page 138 De Mammis Virorum. Page 140 De Musculis medii Ventris. Page
141 De Claviculis. Page 144 De Sterno. Page 145 De Costis. Page 147 De
Diaphragmate. Page 149 De Pleura. Page 152 De Mediastino. Page 153 De Thymo.
Page 154 De Vena Cava ascendente. ibid. De Arteria magna ascendente. Page 162
De Nervis per Thoracem disseminatis. Page 163 De Pericardio. Page 163 De humore
in Pericardio contento. Page 164 De Cord. Page 169 De Substantia Ventriculis
and Auriculis Cordis. Page 173 De Pulmonibus. Page 194 De Aspera Arteria. Page
200 De Oesophago. Page 206 De Capite. Page 208 De Partibus communibus. Page 210
De Pericranio and Periostio. Page 211 De Capitis Figurae, Suturis, and Cranii
Substantia. Page 213 De Cranio. Page 217 De Meningibus. Page 219 De Tenui
Meninge. Page 224 De Vasis per Cerebellum disseminatis. Page 225 De Cerebri
Substantia. ibid. De Nervorum Paribus. Page 235 De Infundibulo, Glandula
Pituitaria, and Rete mirabili, and Cerebri usu. Page 241 De Cerebello. Page 247
De Spinali Medulla. Page 250
DE DIVISIONE CORPORIS HUMANI.
THe diversity of Considerations in Physic have made various divisions of the
body of Man. Amongst the Greeks, Divisio Curativa secund.
Hippocrates, Hippocrat.
respecting the curing part, divides the Body into Contenta, Continentia, and
impetum facientia, which Galen follows 1. de Feb. and Avicenna 4. Galen.
Avicen. Paulus Aegi^^.
Can. sent. 1. Paulus Aegineta, lib. 1. cap. 100. with the same consideration
divides the Body into the Head, the Chest, the Belly, the Bladder. In this last
100 years Fernelius 2. Meth. cap. 1. into three Regions. Fernel
a Gula, and ends in mediam partem jecoris. e medio jecinore ad tenues venarum
parts, quicquid incidit inter axillas and inguina. 3. Musculos complectitur,
membra and ossa; denique corporis molem ab ingrassu arteriarum and venarum
minorum, which division Riolanus deduceth out of Galen, Riolan.
lib. 8. cap. 2. (...). The place is only De Aloe and de nocumentis ejus. It is
worthy of observation, in regard of the common Practice of Aloes in dry Bodies;
but nothing to the purpose that it is cited in Riolan.

The second Consideration is Anatomicall: here Hippocrates helps us not.
Aristot. lib. 1. Divisio Anato. Aristot.
de Histor. Animal. cap. 7. divides the Body into the Head, the Neck, the
Chest, the two Arms, the two legs, and Rufus Ephesius, Rufus. Galen.
lib. 1. cap. 3. But Galen gives the best, which now is followed, lib. de
inaequal. intemperie, divides the Body into the Head, the Chest, the Belly, the
Extremities. Yet Galen prosecutes not this division, nor Vesalius, nor
Columbus, nor Fallopius, although they write expressly of Anatomy. Laurent.
Bauhin.
Andreas Laurentius has been curious; Bauhinus exact in this business, as
necessary for the healing part of Physic, to know the proper seat and place of
every disease. And therefore with these Fathers of Anatomy we will set out the
Body with its divisions into three Regions or Ventricles, and the Extremities.

The upper Region begins here Regio.


But the other three we will show you, and will begin with the lower Region,
that it may with expedition be removed: for it is the sink of the Body, and
most subject to offend you. This last then is divided into many parts, which we
will carefully express, in regard they are so confounded and made hard by
names.

De divisione Ventris Inferioris.
All Cavities where any nourishing moisture is contained in the body,
Anterioris Ventris nomina.
by Hippocrates are called Bellies, but we are to speak of only the lower
Belly, which is properly called (...), improperly (...), which Rufus Ephesius
interprets, super ventrem posita cutis, the Arabians Mirach, the Latins
Venture, Alvus, and this carries the name of whatsoever is contained between the
pointed Cartilage, and the Share bone.

This is divided into two parts; the fore part, and the hinder part. The fore
part is subdivided into three Regions. Epigastrica, Vmbilicalis, Hypogastrica.

Epigastrica Henry Stephens translates Superventralis. Reg. Epigast.
Riolanus falsely out of Rufus Ephesius 2. cap. 12. Stomachalis.

It begins at the pointed Cartilage, and descends within two fingers of the
Navel. It has the sides which are called Hypocondria. Pliny, Hypocondria.
Praecordia.
Praecordia, sed male. In the right, almost the whole Liver is seated, in the
left a great part of the Liver, and all the Spleen. The Middle, which takes the
whole Epigastrion and in this part; Epigastrion.
the Stomach and Liver is contained. The upper part of this Region is called by
Rufus Ephesius and by others (...), (...).
(...), Cor. And we say the passions of this part to be knawings and affections
of the heart. Scaliger calls the Pit of the Stomach Malogranatum, Malogranatum.
(...).
a name of the Arabian Translatours: also (...), a caedis opportuno loco, says
learned Julius: of some Scrobiculum Cordis. Scrobiculum. Regio Vmbilicalis.


The second is Vmbilicalis. It begins at the end of the short Ribs, and is
terminated at Os Ilium, some three singers beneath the Navell. It Is without
Bones, therefore called by Galen (...), Inania. (...).
There are three parts of this middle Region: the sides are falsely called
Ilia; parts Lumbares by others. Lumbar.
In the Right is the right Kidney with part of the Colon, all the Caecum, and a
piece of the Jejunum.

In the left side, the left Kidney, with a piece of the Colon and Jejunum. In
the middle, almost all the Jejunum. This Umbilicus has parts: Vmbil. part.
(...). Regio Hypogastrica. (...). Abdomen.
The top is called (...): the part above (...): the part beneath it, (...): the
skin about it, (...), a rugis fortasse, quasi aniculam dicas.

The third Region begins three fingers beneath the Navell, and ends at the
Sharebone: it is called by Hippocrates and Aristotle (...): of Galen
Hypogastrion: Parvus venture: Abdomen, but male, says Julius Scaliger, quia
porcorum tantum fuere abdomena: Yet having Celsus to friend, we retain that
name: but for sumen; Sumen
suillum tantum est, and a suum mammis. Columbus and Vesalius borrow Persius's
words, Aqualiculus: Aqualiculus.
which Marcellus Empericus uses pro ventriculo; and so Seneca ad Lucilium, Cum
pervenerit cibus in ventrem, Aqualiculi fervore concoquitur. Theodorus Gaza
translates Aristotle's (...), Aqualiculum. Learned Casaubon renders it (...),
ut ex aquali funditur aqua, sic ab illa part urina: so that pinguis
Aqualiculus may be rendered a fat Bladder, and Julius Scaliger, Quicquid in quod
aqua intercutis colligitur, Aqualiculus est. So that to fit this word to this
Region I know not; nor likewise how Julius does apply Popam, Popa.
which he deduces a Popinis frequentatis. But Adrianus Turnebus lib. 30. cap,
7. a Popis, qui victimarii er ant, and se hostiarum visceribus been curabant.
and vetus Interpres a Popanis panibus. But this is not language for this
Anatomicall chair. Let it be Abdomen, Sumen, Aqualiculus, Popa; It is divided
into three pieces, the right and left are called Ilia, Ilia.
for that the Ileon is here partly contained; the seminary vessels, the
Bladder, the rectum intestinum. In the middle which is called Hypogastrion,
Hypogastrion.
and is the name of the whole, and the under part of this is divided into 3.
pieces: the sides we call Inguina, Inguina.
where the production of the Peritonaeum is. Pubes.
The middle Pubes, which properly signifies the first wool.

The hinder part of this third and lower Region begins at the lowest rib, Regio
posterioris ventris. nomina.
and ends at the Extremity of Ossis sacri coccygis, as Bauhinus would have it.
It Is called by all (...), (...).
Cinctum: which amongst the old Romans was a kind of Garment: and Turnebus has
it, Erat vestis infra pectus corpus comprehendens similis subligaculo, a broad
belt, or Bases. It is divided into two parts, the Superior and the Inferior;
the superior is the fleshy part, which is called (...), Palpa, the Loins,
(...).
and is from the bending of the Back, and contains the right and left Kidney.
The Inferior has three parts, the right and left, which are round and fleshy,
which are called Nates ab innitendo, Nates.
because they serve for Cushions: the middle Pyga, Pyga.
which is the Cleft of the Breech, with the wrincles and the Podex.

This is the several description of the inferior Belly, and his 3. Regions
and parts: of all which we will take a more particular view, dividing it into
parts containing and contained: Parts corporis Continentes. Contentae.
Communes.
the containing are either common or proper. The Common are five. The Cuticle,
the Cutis, the Adeps, the Panniculus carnosus, and the Common coat of the
Muscles: and these are so called, because they not only cover the Belly, but
the whole Body except the yard, and the Scrotum which want fat, and except the
forehead and the neck, which wants (as Fallopius will have it) the fat and the
Panicle. Propriae.
The proper parts are the ten Muscles, the Peritonaeum, and some add the
Omentum: they are called proper, because they are only found here. The Parts
contained either belong to Concoction, Contentae.
or Expulsion, or Generation. Of all these we will speak as the time will give
leave.

De Cuticula.
THe first Common coat is called Epidermis, Nomina. Epidermis. Cuticula.
quod supra cutem nascitur. Celsus, Cuticula, sed male inquit Spigelius. But my
old fellow student gives us but a Grammar Rule for it. Other of the Latins
call it Cutis superficiem: Cutis superficies. Integumentum. Continuum.
pelliculam, cutis integumentum. Aristotle 3. Histor. Animal. cap. 10. will
have it continuum, except where the Pores are, the Mouth, the Nails, Julius
Scaliger adds Imum Intestinum, and Glandem. We add the Ears, the Eyes, the
Nostrils. It Is called scarf-skin.

It is a thin Coat drawn over the skin, white, Membranea.
without blood, as Galen would have it. Yet Charles Steven, obtusum tribuit,
sed male, Sine sensu.
as appeared in Gunters Case. 1. It is begotten not ex semine, for then it
could never after a loss be repaired. Generatur non ex semine, non ex
spermaticis partibus.
2. Not of Spermaticall parts, as Nerves and Veins, brought to the skin, and
there thickened and spread; so it should have sense and blood and be red: but
it is white except in ano, where it is dusky, and in parts which with much
rubbing are red. 3. Not of Excrements: Non ex excrementis.
neither of first Concoction, as are the Stercoracea; nor of the second, as are
Urine and Choler; nor of the third, which are either vaporous or serous. The
vaporous are spent insensibly by the Pores: the serous are the relics of
watery humors, which are so mingled with Choler, that they cannot be fixed.
As for the sordes, and strigmenta, and other Excrements of this last
Concoction; they have no part in the generation of this Scarf. Yet Picolhominy
would have them thickened and dried to the skin, and to make up this Coat: so
then in bathings and washings it would be wiped off. 4. Aristotle would have it
in the 10. sect. of his Probl. 28. to be a passion of the skin, and begotten ex
cute resiccata: non ex cute resiccata. Rex Bohemiae sine cuticula.
and so it should be an accidental part exeventu generata, as was in the case
of Lewis King of Hungary and Bohemia, who was born without this Cuticula: but
with what misery is known if we want it at any time, and was apparent in him,
by his white hairs, which came upon him at 14. years of age: and in scaldings
and rubbings, where this Coat is worn and rubbed off. The fifth opinion
therefore which is most followed, is that this Scarf is begotten in mingling
seed with blood, from which arises a moist and glewy vapor, Ex vapore eleoso.
thrust forth by internal heat of the skin, but thickened by the frigidity of
serous humors in the womb, but without the womb ab aere frigido. I say
begotten in the womb, which is apparent in Partu Caesareo; and we see it in
abortives, and Riolanus Blackmore, whose blackness went not lower then this
Coat. My Master Aquapendente observes it to be double, Duplex.
and the upper to be thinner, and in rubbing to arise scaly under a shallower
vesicatory we have often observed it.

It Is exposed to all outward injuries: therefore thicker then the skin, Cute
densior.
and more compact, as appears in the humors which come a Centro ad
Circumferentiam; and easily pass the skin, but are here detained. adora
vasorum.
to stay transpiration of spirit and natural heat, in plantis pedum, ad
transpiratio^em prohibend^m. Vix separabilis.
and volis manuum. It is with difficulty separated from the skin; but with
scaldings, and such like. In serpents it is lost about Autumn: they begin from
the Eyes. Silkworms loose it four times in 40. days. Men never but in great
sicknesses as we have many times seen it in Scarlet fevers, and in women with
Paintings.

It has neither public nor private actions. Riolanus says there is no use,
Error Riolani.
but ortum habet ex necessitate materiae, but it has diverse. medium Tactus:
for the Cuticle taken away, the skin feels, but with pain.

De Cute.
THe Second common covering is the Skin, which lies close to the Cuticle. Galen
in 3. de Loc. affect. cap. 6. Cutis.
gives the name of Cutis to all that is above the muscles: and Julius Pollux
calls (...) quodcunque caperet: (...).
and from hence comes our Cutis says Father Scaliger. The Latins use Corium,
Alutam, Pellem; Corium, Aluta. Pellis.
which are for Beasts.

It Is a similary part mingled with seed and blood made for the defense,
Desinitio.
covering and ornament of all parts.

It has his peculiar substance, Substantia.
it is like a Nerve or membrane naturally white; sometimes colored by the
humor that is under it: easy to be extended, Extensibilis sensus exquisiti.
of exquisite sense, by reason of the Nerves his separation is painful. It is
a middle substance between flesh and nerves; not altogether a bloody, as flesh,
nor without it, Ex semine.
as a nerve. In his first Generation the seminary part has the victory:
therefore it is white, and therefore healed with a seame. Columbus would have it
begotten of the Extremities of the vessels. non ab extremis vasorum. non ex
nervis mollioribus.
Varolus, ex nervis mollioribus, coming to the superficies, and so spread into
threeds, and degenerate into skin by the concurrence of blood. Picolhominy
would have it ex semine. With Vesalius it is a medium between a Nerve and
musculous flesh. It is not of dried flesh, as Galen says; for the Adeps lies
between the flesh and it, non ex carne resiecata.
except in plantis pedum, and volis manuum, where it is tied without fat, for
the stronger apprehension of things, it is of a middle nature between flesh and
Nerve.

Aristotle 3. Homo tenuissimae cutis.
de Histor. Animal. cap. 11. says that Man in proportion to his bigness has
the most thin skin. Yet it is thicker then any membrane in the Body of Man,
Labris, Palmis, digito. rum extremis. Cervice densissima.
it is thinnest in the Lips, palms of the hands, and fingers ends, quia tactus
Iudex: it is thin in the face, in the sides, yard and scrotum. It Is thick and
strong in the Neck, Back and Thighs. I have seen the Hungars to hang their
Semiters in it as in Belts, Zische.
and the Bohemian Zische made the heads of his Drums of it, and the History is
ordinary of the Persian King that made his windows of it and the Legacy of
Edward the third. Edw. 3.


Figure is from the parts it covers. Figura. Connexus.


Connection is different: from some parts easily separated; from others hardly:
as from the two lower venters, the Arms and Thighs.

Cutis facies interior quae pinguedinem respicit, Superficies exterior.
Interior. Front mobilis.
consideranda. Exterior, cui cuticula adnata erat, in qua pori.

In the forehead it is moveable: in the rest of the body not. Yet Ludovicus
Septalius thinks that the skin of the forehead is not moved secundum hominis
arbitrium, but by the help of the muscles of the upper Eyelid, which serve for
motion. S. Aug.
St. Augustine 14. de Civit. Dei. cap. 24. speaks of a man of his own
knowledge, who without stirring his head or hand would move his hair to his
face and throw it back again: and some that could move their ears at pleasure,
either one or both, and could sweat when they would. I believe the Father. The
rest in the face sticks most close. In other Creatures it is moveable: in the
Horse, the Buck, the Hedgehog: and the Elephant kills flies with moving his
skin.

It has six veins: 2 from the jugulars, Venas habet 6.
two from the Axillaryes, two from the Groyne, id est, from Epigastrica and
Mammaria, and it has so many arteries: it has no proper and definite number
of Nerves: Nervi. Majores in Papillis.
but the two greatest are about the Teats: so many in the palms of the hands,
the roots of the Nails, and the Extremity of the Yard.

All the Ancients deny any action to belong to it, either Common or Private,
except Concoction. Laurentius gives it animalem Actionem, if you consider it
the immediate instrument tactus.



Emunctorium Universal.

De Adipe.
THe third Common covering is the Fat, Situs.
which in men lies immediately under the skin, in beasts under the fleshy
membrane. Galen. error.
Galen in the 4. de usu part. puts the fleshy membrane next the skin; and
therefore your late Anatomists say he never cut any but Monkeys. But fat cannot
gather without the help of this fleshy membrane. Infants new born want fat: but
not membrana carnosa. It Is called (...). (...), Pinguedo.
But (...) properly is Pinguedo. It is no latin word as Servius says, though
Pliny uses it. It is soft and moist by heat quickly melted, but hardly
congealed. In norned Beasts it is called Axungia: in porcis, Lardum. Axungia.
Lardum, (...) i.e. Adeps. Sevum.
But (...), Adeps, Sevum, Suit, is not easily molten, and being melted it
hardens quickly, This is found in Omento, the Reins, the Heart, the Eyes, the
joints, between the Fingers. But this here next the skin is properly Pinguedo,
it is Caenosus and Subflavus, besprinkled with many glandules to serve for a
Common Emunctuary or avoidance of the whole Body, when nature is able to cast
nociva in habitum Corporis.

Generation. Aristotle 3. De Part. Generatio. Exsanguine cocto. see. Arist. a
calore.
Animal. cap. 9. would have it to be exsanguine cocto aut finis probae
coitionis. So Vega, Argenterius and Iobertus. Picolhominy a sextuplo calore,
from the warm oily vapors of blood. proper nourishment of fire. 4. it
resolves, it discusseth. And howsoever Aristotle says in the 4. of his
Meteors, that Quae a frigido concrescant, and a calido solvuntur, frigida sunt,
as pinguedo does: Yet it is the mind of Aristotle, that Quae frigore
concreverunt, and facili calore resolvuntur, non multum caloris amiserint.
Besides, frigus non ingreditur opus naturae. Exsanguine oleose.
We therefore say it is begotten of the oily and aeriall part of the Blood,
that is pure and elaborate, and sweats like dew by the help of moderate heat out
of the smaller veins, and thickened by the respective cold of the membranes.

The Brain, the Eyelid, the Yard, the Scrotum have not any, that it hinder not
their bending and natural distentions. Venae tres.
There are three veins disseminated through the Fat of this Venture. Externa
Mammaria. Epigastrica externa. a Lumbaribus, and these are many.

Use 1.

De Panniculo Carnoso.
THe fourth Common Covering is this fleshy Membrane, Galeno notae.
which Curtius will needs thrust upon us, was unknown to Galen: but if it
please you to see lib. 3. de Administratione Anatomica, his 5. and 7. cap. You
shall find the description of it. A Graecis (...). (...) Membrana carnosa.
Panniculus carnosus. Musculus membraneut. Generat. ex semine.
the Arabic translatours call it membranam carnosam. Panniculus carnosus and
nervosus, Fallopius. Bauhinus, musculus membraneus: because, in those Creatures
that move the skin, it is so interweaved with fleshy fibers, that it seems to
be a Muscle, but in men it is tota nervea.

Generation. Of seed, as all other membranes are: yet in new born Infants it is
like flesh in color: in elder Bodies, membranous.

Connexus. Connexus.
It is tied to the skin by veins, arteries and nerves, and is interlaced with
fat: yet so as it sticks to the membrane of the Muscles by fibers; toward the
loins and Back it grows more fleshy, by fibers to the forepart of the neck,
the forehead, the broad muscle of the cheek, that it can hardly be separated.
So in those that are starved, it is nothing but a membrane: in those that are
fat, it may be called membrana adiposa, as Riolanus does. Membrana adiposa.
Riolan.
In Man it is immovable, all Anatomists say, except the forehead. But for his
Motion, you have heard the curiosity of Septalius. In Beasts it moves the skin;
so the Horse the Rider. It has exquisite sense, so that sharp humors or
vapors biting it causes Rigor or shiverings, and concussive motions: and
that pestiferous Pandiculation in Gregory the greats time is famous;
Pandiculatio^ temporibus Gregorii.
and hence those Christians took up the crossing their Mouths whenever they
yawned.

Use 1. Aristotle says, Vbicunque cutis per se ac fine carne est, vulnerata
non coit,

De Membrana Musculorum propria.
THe fifth common Covering is not observed by Galen, Ante Cabrollium ignota.
nor any of the Ancients; none of our Modern writers make mention of it, but
Cabrollius, Riolanus and Bauhinus, thinking it to be a covering of the
external oblique muscle: the later deny it. It Is apparent if you begin to
separate it in Epigastrica Regione, Separatur in Epigastrica Regione.
about the edge of Spuriae, and so run from the Vertabra to the Sternum,

It Is the common membrane of the Muscles, thin, nervous and fibrous, Definitio.
which has his beginning from the nervous strings of the Muscles.



Glandulae Inguinales are seated at the production, or rather lower then the
Cremast; they are spongie, soft, The seat of pestilentiall botches. Use 1. to
be emunctoria hepatis. 2. to be Beds for the Epigastrion. 3. To defend the
Seminaries: all Anatomists overslip the mention of these.

De Musculis vemtris Inferioris.
FRom the Common coverings of the Body, we come to the proper parts of this
inferior Region, which are 10. Muscles, the Peritonaeum, and some would have
the Omentum.

The general Doctrine of Muscles, has been most learnedly discussed by Dr.
Baskervile, to whom I can add nothing but my admiration.

These 10. Musculi 10.
Muscles according to the position of their fibers, cover this lower belly, on
each side 5. Two oblique descendent or external. 2. ascendent oblique or
internal. 2. Pyramidales. 2. right. 2. transverse.

De Musculo oblique descendente.
THe oblique descendent Muscles are so called from the descending obliquity of
fibers. A fibris oblique descend.


Situs. Situs.
In the sides of the Belly, to cover it.

Figura Tiquetra, Figura.
and they are the largest in the Belly.

Origo, secundum Laurentium, is fleshy from the pitch of Os Ilium, Origo sec.
Laur. ab osse Ilii. Ratio 1.
and nervous ab Osse Pubis. every muscle must have his original ab immobili
Principio. But os Pubis in the respect of the Ribs is immovable.

Resp. hat the ribs respectu Lineae alba sunt immobiles.

os Pubis.

Resp. This Muscle does not serve principally for respiration, but per
accidens, contrahendo thoracem, id est, contracting the chest. Of this opinion
was sometimes Bauhinus, which he upon better search forsook: and Laurentius had
it from my Master Aquapendente.

The second opinion is as new. Riolanus would have all the Epigastricall
Muscles, Secundum Rilanum a vertebris Lumbar.
but the right, to arise from the transverse Apophysis of the Loins, and so to
run into Lineam albam: but withal to be fixed and strengthened to the Bones of
Pubis and Ilium, and the lower ribs: because they receive their nerves a
Lumbaribus,

Resp. The rule is true. But that opposition is understood from the rectitude
of fibers, besides the nerve is always inserted circa caput or ventrem Musculi.

But the intercostall.

Secundum Bauhinum a 6, 7, 8, and 9. cost^^.
and from the lower side of the 6, 7, 8, and 9. ribs: and have various
beginnings and Triangular, from out of the spaces of these ribs to every pin
there comes a nerve. They have beginnings also from the tops or points of the
transverse passages of the vertebrae of the Loins, tendonous. Therefore their
beginning is spread from the sixth rib to the last almost vertebra of the
Loins: Finit.
it ends almost in the middle of the Abdomen at the white Line, and os Pubis in
a broad tendon made of infinite oblique fibers.

In their rise they are closed into Seratus major digitatim, Connexus Serato
majori, etc.
as likewise Serato Postico inferiori, and into the three lowest Ribs.

They are pierced in two places. Perforationes duae.
1. at the Navell. 2. in the Inguina, pro exitu seminalium. In women, for two
round and nervous ligaments Vteri, which end close to Nympha,

Linea semicircularis is omitted by all: only the Name, Casser has in his
Tables. Vsus. the same that Linea Alba, to tie the tendons in their beginning
and the Region of the Right from the rest, to avoid all dangers in Chirurgicall
applications.

De Linea Alba.
LInea Alba is here in the middle of the Belly, Compositio.
made of the meetings of the tendons of all the Muscles, except the Right:
between which it makes a space. Here the Tendons of the oblique are so joined,
that they seem one Tendon.

It begins nervous, at the pointed Cartilage, Origo.
and ends in Commissura Pubis. Above the Navell it is larger according to the
distance of the Right Muscles, beneath not so broad. Alba.
It Is white because it is free from flesh. Yet many times it is covered with fat.

Use. First to tie all the Muscles in a common bond to hold the right and left
side together. In women with child this line seems bluish some weeks a partu,
but grows out with Time.

De Musculo oblique ascendente.
UNder the External Muscles are the two oblique ascendent or internal, A
fibris oblique ascendentib.
which have opposite fibers to the descendent, which make an intersection like
the Letter X.

They are of the same Substance, Quantity, Figure, Composition, Number and
Temperament that the Descendent are. But their beginnings are different: for
these have their rise from the edge of the Appendix of os Ilium fleshy, Origo
ab Ilio.
and join with the Cremasteres, and have fibers which grow transverse from Os
Ileon; but ab osse Sacro, and the transverse edges of the Loins (as Laurentius
observes) membranous: and spreading upwards cover the Ilia, till they come to
the Cartilages of the 4. short Rib, Ad quartam Costam.
and so to the forepart of Abdomen; where they end in a broad double nervous
Tendon, which with his duplicature above the Navell imbraceth the Right Muscle,
Circa rectum duplicatur.
but beneath is single, as Silvius observes. It runs close with the Tendon of
the External, as if the Right were in a sheath.

Having compassed the right Muscle, it is united to Linea Alba, and there
inserted.

By this imbracement the right Muscle is made stronger. Ad robur ejus,
In his way to Linea Alba the duplicature is so close to the Intersections of
the right Muscle, that they can hardly be separated. They meet at the pointed
Cartilage and the Navell, and Os Pubis. Bauhinus observes that they have four
veins and arteries a muscula, Ven^ quatuor. a Muscula and a Lumbaribus. Nervi.
ortae a Lumbaribus, and dissemiuatae per regionem abdominis and Peritonaei, a
nervis Lumbaribus, which are inserted with the courses of the fibers, a branch
whereof entering a Production of the Peritonaeum runs into the Testicles.

Use First, Comprimere ventrem ad Pubem. Septum, as Columbus would have it. 3.
stringere thoracem. Picolhominy denies, because the muscles move not that part
from whence they arise, but that into which they are inserted: but they arise
from the Costae, which are firm and cannot be moved, says Picolhominy.

De Musculis Rectis.
THe third pair of Muscles are Recti, A fibris rectis.
for their straight fibers, which run secundum rectitudinem Corporis. Carpus
calls them Longi. Longi.


Laurentius and Bauhinus would have the rise from the forepart and upper part
of Os Pubis, Origo sec. Bauh. and Laur. ab osse Pubii.
and so run close together to the Navell, where they seem to be united: but
after, the higher they go, the more they are separated, and are larger till
they come to the sides of the Cartilages of the short Ribs, and so inserted
between the spaces with a Broad fleshy tail. The reason Bauhinus gives, that
the ossa Ilii and Pubis non moventur. Quia non moventur.
But Galen in 5. De usu part. cap. 14. would have them begin from sternum, A
sterno sec. Galen.
and from the Cartilages of the 4th. rib; nay, from the Cartilage of the sixth
rib, with a nervous tendon with a strong and fleshy beginning and so end with a
tendon in Os Pubis. Mundinus, and Bartolinum.
Curtius, Willichius and Casparus Bartolinus follow this opinion. tendinosum
principium, and finem carnosum. Picolhominy and Columbus would have these Recti
to have duo principia: Sec. Pic. duo Principia.
one nervous, which is the uppermost, the other Carnosum, which is indeed the
Pyramidales. And this is Riolanus's opinion. Intersectiones Galeno ignotae.
Aliquan. do 3. Aliquan. d. 4.


They have diverse nervous intersections ignotas Galeno, as Bauhinus persuades
me, commonly three. In long-sided men four. It Is observed that one is always
directly under the Navell, infra umbilicum (says Spigelius) the rest above the
Navell. And each intersection has his nerve from the inter costales. Casserii
sent.
Hence Casserius will have as many Muscles here, as there be intersections.
Bartolinus, Bartol.
who follows him, makes some arguments for his opinion. Internodium nervus
accedit. in se, could not equally press all parts. per corpus: albeit there be
longer then these.

Respon. ad prim.This Muscle to have diverse nerves; and some in the head, and
some in the Belly.

Ad secund. It Is not fit that according to all the Length there should be an
equal compression, as in pressing the Bladder, where only the tail is
contracted.

Ad tertium. There is not the like Expulsion in the whole body, as is in the
Excretion of the Excrements. Therefore not many muscles, but one.

Here in regard of the intersections the Tumors are oblongi.

Use 1. intersect.
of the intersections is to tie the right to the oblique ascendent and
descendent Muscles.

In the inside of these muscles there run Epigastrica ascendens and Mammaria
descendens with a branch of vena Cava, Epigast. ascend. Mammaria.
which goes under the Clavicles. Both these. Branches are joined a little above
the navell per anastomases. And hence it is that we put Cupping-Glasses in
bleedings of the nose to the first intersection of the right Muscle,
Cucurbitulae.
not to the Region of the Liver, as common Practitioners do. Inventum Sylvii.
By these Anastomases (says Sylvius) Lac recta ab Epigastrica in pudenda
decurrit, whereby appears the great consent between the breast and the womb.

They have 2. Arteriae 2. Nervi 4. ab Intercost.
arteries. They have 4. nerves, which are from the Intercostales, but come from
the lower vertebrae of the chest, and so piercing the Peritonaeum, insert
themselves into the intersection of these Right Muscles.

Use 1. To press the Belly to the Back.

De Musculis Pyramidalibus.
PYramidales, ita dicta a Figura. A Figura. Massa invenit. Fallopiani.
Succenturiati. Triangulares. Principis Rector. sec. Pes. and Col. sed male.
Massa was the first founder of them. Yet Picolbominy calls them, Fallopiani.
Silvius, Succenturiati. because they help the descendent and transverse
muscles. Laurentius, Triangulares. Vesalius and Columbus make them Principia
Rectorum. But that cannot be. First, because they have their peculiar Membrane.
cum fibris rectorum. in medio Lineae Albae. Os Pubis: but the insertion of the
Recti are there Membranous. Therefore these are the fourth pair of Muscles,
which have their beginning from the outward part of Os Pubis, and by a crooked
passage run in albam lineam, non in rectam. Sinister brevior.
The left is least and shortest, the longest not above 4 fingers. Yet sometimes
they reach to the Navell, Ad Vmbilicum.
by a small Tendon.

Use 1. Gently to press the Bladder.

Fallopius: and if at any time, they come not from the Appendix Ossis Ilii, but
beneath from the strong ligament. Neither can they be any part of the right
Muscle; because whilst we gently piss, no part of breathing is hindered: which
should, if they were pieces of the right Muscle. For the right Muscle
contracted, the Chest is pressed. Non ad Erectionem.
Columbus puts upon Fallopius that he appointed them for Erection.

De Musculis Transversis
THe last are the Transverse, A fibris transversis.
for their transverse fibers which run secundum latitudinem Corporis, a
Mundino, Latitudinales; a Columbo, Transversales.

Ortus. Ortus a vertebris.
From the transverse edges of the vertebrae of the Loins, and ab ossibus Ilii
and Pubis are shut under the ends of the Cartilages of the false ribs, and so
become fleshy: and end in Lineam Albam with a membranous Tendon.

My observation is, that this Muscle under the point of these Cartilages is
joined with the Diaphragma, Nexus Diaphragmati.
and have continuated fibers: so that these truly pull downwards the Diaphragma
for Excretion.

They stick close to the Peritonaeum, Peritonaeo.
and are hardly separated. They have the same perforations that the oblique
Muscles have. Foramina.


Vsus. To press down the middle and sides of the Belly, but especially Colon,

But why are these lowermost the Recti in the middle, the oblique without.
Because the transverse press most, the right next, and the oblique least of
all, ut in ligaturis constat.

This is the short description of the 10. Muscles Abdominis; which are all
principally for compression of this Region: but secondarily for the
violent-motions of the chest. So that sometimes one, sometimes anothet works:
but when all, then is their aequalis compressio, which working with the
midriffe, there follows, 1. Expulsion of Excrements, strong expirations,
spiritus cohibitiones, and faetus expulsiones. It Is the observation of
Bauhinus. Observe. Bauh.
All other muscles in their Rest are straight, but in Action crooked. These
before they do any thing are crooked, and when they work, they bend inwards,
whereby they easily press the under cavities.

De Peritonaeo.
REmotis Musculis, Membrana.
a thin large Membrane invests the whole cavity of the lower Belly; it is called
Peritonaeum. Peritonaeum. Ziphac.
Ab-Arabibus, Ziphac.

Figure, Figura. Superficies externa. Interna.
is ovall, and woven like a Cobweb. The outward superficies is fibrous, that it
may stick to the Muscles: the inward is smooth and slippery, and besmeared over
with an oily moisture, to make the way free for the Bowels.

Ortus, Ortus se cundum Bartolin. a perioft. Secund. vert. secund. t. Lauren.
simul generari. Sec. Fall lop. a nervis Mesaraic. Investit omnes parts.
Substant. Membranea. Sec. Fall. lop. tertia fibra. Duplex.
secundum Bartolinum is, from the periostium of the first and second vertebrae
of the Loins: where it is thickest, and cannot be separated. Laurentius would
have it, as the parts spermaticall, to be made together; or if otherwise he
inclines to Fallopius, to arise from the fold of the nerves, which gives
beginning to the Mesentery. From this the Liver, the Kidneys, and all parts of
this Region receive their coats.

His substance is membranous; thin, but strong for farther distention of these
parts: it is thin, that it be not burdensome to the under parts. Fallopius puts
it between him and the light, to find 3 sorts of fibers in it. It Is double
every where: his thickness is not equal; for the backpart is thicker then the
forepart. In men from the pointed Cartilage to the Navell it is thickest,
Densior ad Vmbilicum. Error Anatom.
the better to endure the disorders of the stomach. But I do not think with all
Anatomists that ever nature made a defense for disorder; but well to preserve
the heat of the parts, and help concoction: which is more requisite in upper
parts, then in the lower, Aduterum.
as is apparent in women, in whom it', thicker from the navell downward, for
the safety of the burden.

The Coats of the Kidneys are not so thick as these of the Stomach, the Guts,
Duplicatur ad vesicam, Mesenterium, Renes, Ligament. Hepatis.
the Bladder, and the womb. It investeth the Bladder between two Coats, and a
Duplicature of it cloatheth the Omentum, Mesenterium, and the Ligament of the
Liver.

Connexus, is above to the Diaphragma. Connexus. Diaphrae Ossi Pubis.
And therefore the midriffe inflamed, the Hypocondria rise upward. Hypocondria
tumida by Hipocrates Meteora; tensio duplex. 1. intro and sursum conversa. 2.
for as conversa. Meteorismus Hypocond. est tumor tractabilis and aspectabilis
causa, vel inflaminatio diaphragm. vel tenuium intestinorum. For As conversa vel
viscerum inflammatio vel schirrus, vel inflatio, quae aut fugax, aut contumax.
Hypocondria aequalia quando mollia, solida, succi plena: inaequalia quando
dura, tensa, arida. Beneath, to ossibus Ilii and Pubis: before, to Linea Alba,
Lineae Albae. Lumbor. Muse.
and to the Tendons of the transverse Muscles: behind, to the membranes of the
nerves of the Loins, and to all parts that it gives to any membrane. Tris
Foramina.


It has 3. Foramina above, although Fernelius denies perfortation. Ad
Oesophag. ad ven. Cavam. ad Aortam. ad vasa descendentia.
1. On the left for the Oesophagus. 2. On the right for vena cava. 3. for the
Aorta, vena sine pari, and for the nerves, sexti paris. Beneath for the
fundament, the Bladder, the womb; for the veins, Arteries and nerves descending
to the Thighs: besides for the spermatick vessels descending to the Stones. But
these Foramina may be better called productions. Before in Foetu, it is
perfortated; but afterward shut, except in (...).

It has vasa from Diaphragma, Vasa a Mamaria ab Epigastr.
Mammaria, and Epigastrica; and sometimes a seminalibus. It has some small
branches of the nerves from those of the Muscles of the Belly.

Use 1. Is to cover all the parts of the lower Region. Fallopii.
Fallopius adds, to keep the spirits from dissipation, that the heat of the
Guts may be preserved.

De Vasis Vmbilicalibus.
SInce some vessels are carried through the Coats of the Peritonaeum,
therefore, before we put it by, we will speak of the Navell, and his vessels
which are four, 1. vein, 2. Arteries, and Ourachus.

Vitruvius would have Vmbilicus the Centrum Corporis: Vitruvius.
which is to be understood when the arms are spread abroad, and the feet to
their farthest distance. Vesalius.
Vesalius, Commissura Pubis.

Vein takes his original from the roots of the Portae, Vens.
in the hollow of the Liver, and is a branch of Portae and Azygos, having
pierced the fissure of the Liver running between two coats of the Peritonaeum,
it is brought to the Navell. It Is called the Nutricula Embryonis, Nutricula
Embryonis.
because the nine months child is nourished by it. As for his original in
Foetu, a venis uteri, as Columbus would have it, and Picolhominy, it is not a
Consideration fit for this time, fit ligamentum. 2.3. Arteria 2.
but here it degenerates into a ligament.

The two Arteries coming from the branches of Arteria Iliaca are strengthened
by this membrane, and so come upward to the Navell, and as you see are
degenerate into two side ligaments of the Bladder.

Peritonaeum to the Navell.

It Is called Ourachus. Ourachus.
It Is a hollow pipe, dedicated to the bringing of urine to the Amnion. Varolus
would have all the urine to be in the Bladder till the hour of partus; hence it
is that Infants the first day piss so much.

These 4. Ligamenta fiunt.
vessels meeting in the Navell, the birth being performed, as having done their
office, degenerate into ligaments, Ad Hepar. Ad vesitam.
to hold the Liver and the bladder stiff that it move not. It appears to be
hollow, by the history of diverse, who in the suppression of urine, have voided
it many months by the Navell, as Vesalius, Columbus, Picolhominy say. As for
the pricking of the Navell in dropsy bodies, we leave that consideration to our
Therapeuticall Anatomists.

De Epiploo.
FRom the common and proper coverings of the Belly, we come to the parts
contained. And they either belong to Concoction, Excretion, or Procreation, of
which we are to speak, not following the nature or dignity of the parts, but
their fit and apt section. And therefore first of Omentum.

It Is called Epiploon, Epiploen.
quod supernatat. The Latins, Omentum, ab opimento, quasi ob opime: some from
Omaso, ratione adipositatis; but the best say Omentum, quasi Ommentum, quod est
supermano, Omentum, ab opimento. ab Omaso. ab Ommento. Rete. Zirbus.
because it floats above the guts. It is called Rete or Reticulum, from the
woof of the veins and arteries, or as Picolhominy says, quia sua densitate
adiposos vapores capit. The Arabians call it Zirbus, and Aristotle's conclusion
is, that omnia sanguinea have Omentum: but some fatter then others. Men and
monkeys have the greatest, In foeminis majus.
and women greater then men, says Aquapendente. Hunts-men and footmen have
the smallest, and most free from fat.

Substance. It is membranous, Substant. membranea.
or rather made of 2. Membranes of Peritonaeum which lies one upon the other,
besprinkled with a durty, soft and putrescible fat. Situs, ad ventriculum. ad
Diaphragm. Connexus. Hepati. Vesicae Biliariae. Duodeno. Colo.


Situs. His forepart is seated at the outward Coat of the Bottom of the
stomach, the lower goes backwards under the Diaphragma.

Connexus, to the Liver and to the Gall with membranous fibers, Duodenum,
Colon, where it serves for a Mesentery to the spleen, Lieni. Pendulum. Observe.
Prop. nexus,
whether the greatest part does bend, and there especially where the branches
of the spleen vein are inserted. It hangs loose: the reason Fallopius could not
find. Yet I have observed it to have diverse membranes and fibers from the
Peritonaeum; especially on the left side, and where the musculous flesh of the
transverse muscle appears. In children it is not Pendulum; from whence, and why
not so in men? It reaches beneath the Navell, seldom to the Os Pubis, and then
in women says Hippocrates, Ad Os Pubis.
4. Apherisin. 6. It is cause of barrenness, Os uteri comprimendo.

Figure, Figura.
Is like a Falconers Pouch, narrow-mouthed with a Round verge.

Vasa are a vena Porta Gastri Epiplois dextra and sinistra: Vasa. Gastri Epip.
Dextra. Sinistra. Arteriae a Caeliaca. Nervi a 6. Par. Ad Pon. 1, s. sec. Ves.
ad 5. lib.
none from Cava. Arteries from the Coiliaca and Mesentery branch, his Nerves
from the sixth pair. His fat is not much, lest he should weigh down the Guts;
his weight is not commonly above lib. 1. at most, although Vesalius says he
has seen one of 5. lib. Riolanus says that it grows and consumes with the
body.

Use 1. To comfort the stomach and Guts, and maintain their inborn heat:
therefore it is scribled with veins and arteries. Galens Fencer having lost
part, was constrained to wear woollen coverings to keep his belly warm.

Bauhinus adds to moysten the Guts.

vena porta into the spleen, stomach, Duodenum, Colon.

Ventricle, Colon and Diodenum to the Back, the liver and spleen together.



Hypocondria and spleen, it is full of serous blood. Receptaculum sanguinis
foeculenti.
And therefore many times unjustly we blame the spleen, when the spleen is
well, and has cast all into the omentum. Here is that noise which is made from
the Bowels, and so observed by Turnebus at Paris in a notable knave who spoke
out of his bowels, his mouth being shut.

De Intestinis.
HAving removed the Kell, Bauhinus next discovers the vena Porta and her
branches. Laurentius, Riolanus begin with the Guts; which we for shortness
sake will follow.

The Guts are called Intestina, Intestina. Interranea.
and Interranea, unde exenterare. Riolanus is curious in all the names given
them by the Greeks, which would merit a censure if we had time. Chordae.
The Translatours of Avicen and the Arabians call them chordas fides, Being
dry, they are usefully to Musicians.

Situs, Situs.
is in the lower belly, and fills up as you see, the greatest part of this
Cavitie.

Connexus, Connexus Mesenterio. Omento. Dorso. Renibus. Substant. Memb.
is by the mesentery and Omentum to the Back, and to both kidneys, and so held
by the Cavity of the Os Ilium.

Substantia, is membranous, to make way without breaking for distention when
they are filled with Chylus, faeces, or wind. Densior ad Rectum. Longa,
Rotunda, Cava, Corpora.
It Is thicker downwards, as about the end of the Colon, and Rectum. They are
long, round and hollow bodies, full of windings, the better to hold the chylus,
and whatsoever shall slip from the stomach inconcocted.

They have 3. Coats, one Common, Tres Tunicas habent a Perit. Commun.
which mediately comes from the Peritonaeum: but immediately, the Duodenum, and
part of the Colon, being lodged under the stomach from the lower membrane of
the Omentum. Iejunum, Ileon, and the great Guts from the Membranes of the
Mesentery: this is full of right fibers. 2. proper. Exterior, Fibrosa magis.
The outward is strong and full of fleshy fibers. Fallopius will have it
thicker then the inward Coat. But Vesalius the contrary. These are fleshy, as I
say, for heats sake to help concoction, and to be like muscles to thrust out
the smallest thing with the help of the compression of the Muscles of the
Belly.

The inward is nervous, Interior.
albeit it seems fleshy. It is spread over with a Crusta which is membranous,
and begotten of the Excrements of the third Concoction, least the mouths of the
mesaraicks coming into the internal Coat should be stopped and grow callous:
since by them as by a filter the thinner portion of chylus is strained, which
may be like values to hinder the reflux of the chylus. Rugosior in Iejuno and
Ileo.
Both these Coats are thickest in Colon and Rectum. But all are not with like
wrincles: for Iejunum and Ileon have more wrincles, the better to stay the
chylas for fit concoction, and sucking into the Mesaraick veins. Their wrincles
are transverse and moveable, to make the way more easy for the chylas, that it
be not stopped with violence.

These 2. proper Coats are thicker. Propriae densior.
1. to make the expulsive faculty the stronger. 2. to secure the Guts in some
diseases, as in Dysenteries, whereas many times the inner Coat and the middle
remains sound and untoucht. Molliores quam ventriculi.
Yet both are softer and thinner then the Coats of the stomach, because that
there hard and inconcocted things must be received: here commonly but those
that are soft and pappy.

They have according to Fallopius all sorts of fibers, Habent omnia genera
fibrarum.
although some would have them have only the transverse, for their better
strength. The inner Coat has oblique fibers to hold; the middle, transverse to
expel. The common coat has right fibers to draw: and these are fewer then the
transverse, and fewest in the small Guts, more in Colon, most in Recto. By
their transverse fibers whatsoever is contained is thrust out. Motus (...).
And this motion of the Guts is called (...), qui fit contrahentibus and
colligentibus sese intestinis superne deorsum, that by this motion the faeces,
wind and peccant humors, may be thrust forth. But if these fibers move inferne
sursum, nihil per inferiora excerni potest.

They are clothed without, Pinguia.
pinguedine; within, muco. Picolhominy will have the crassa to have verse.
adipein; gracilia humiditatem. Varolus calls i^ pinguedinem caenosam. With this
they are glazed like earthen vessels, by which lubricity the faeces are
praecipitated. Besides to keep them from continual molestation of choler and
sharp humors.

They are long, Longi^^d.
and reach from the Pylorus to the Anum. Some hold that they are continuated
bodies to the stomach; But if any be curious, he shall see that the Duodenum is
as it were sewed to the stomach. Besides, the outward Coat that does invest the
stomach is fleshy: In the Guts, the inward Coat is carnous. Moreover the fibers
of the stomach and Oesophagus are one, which made Fernelius to make the Gullet
as part of the stomach, but are here different. The Guts therefore are seamed
together, and not originally made of the stomach. Septies Corporis sec. Ricl.
Our late Anatomists observe them to be seven times so long as the whole body.
And to make this good, Riolanus juggels in the length of the Oesophagus, if at
any time they fall short, and brings the authority of Celsus, who casts the
length of the Oesophagus into this reckoning. Sometimes they are nine times so
long, Novies.
and that common place os Hipocrates in his book de structura hominis, will
have them 13. 13. cubitor. sec. Hip. and Ruf. Vinar. Ital. 14. sec. Vesa.
cubits long, and never less then 12. And so Rusus Ephesius. Vesalius will
have them 14. Italian else and an half. Picolhominy will have them measured by
multiplying the body by 6. So as if the body be 5. foot long; then the Guts
must be 30. foot.

They are not all of a like bigness. Magnitudinis variae.
Yet I cannot learn that either the Ancients or the Modern have been here
curious. It Is most certain, that according to the Bulk of the whole body so
they differ in bigness.

Use 1.That the aliment slip not away, before perfect concoction and
distribution of the pap, and we should be continually urged to take more, and
so by our voracity kept from business. Hence it is that Animalia, which have
their passages recti from the stomach to the Anum, eo gulosiora, and the more
gyri the more sparing in diet.

but one, then they should be always eating or unfit for society, as it
happened at Montpelier in the Body of him whom Cabrolius dissected who had but
one Gut, Hist. Cabrol.
and that like a Roman S. Besides such a length as we have spoken off was most
fitting, that no part or portion of the chylus should slip away unsucked by the
Mesaraicks.

The Guts are continuated and without division. Yet in regard of their
membrances they receive variation; for some are tenuia, Tenuia tria.
because they have a thin membrane. And these are three; Duodenum, Iejunum,
Ileon. Some are great and thick, because they have thick coats, Crassa 3.
and perfect the thickest part of juice, and these likewise are three; Coecum,
Colon, Rectum. We will speak of all these in orders; for every one of these
differ in substance, figure, seat, greatness and number of windings. Yet there
have been some that will have but one Gut, as being but one ductus, some 2. and
to this opinion they bring Hipocrates, viz. Colon and Rectum. So Aristotle.
Intestinum simplex, alterum latius. And Galen leaves out Duodenum, because it
has no windings nor bouts. But we will give Duodenum to be a Gut. Duodenum,


Duodenum is the first Gut of the three small ones: by Celsus juncturam
ventriculi cum summo intestino. Olim digit. 12.
It is so named of Herophilus, (...), because the ancients found it 12. fingers
long. But since men have been of lesser stature, it is always 4. Raero 6.
seldom six. Riolanus is here inconstant, and says he has seen 12. and but
once 6. (...). Galen.
Galen calls it (...). Columbus gives all this Gut to Pylorus, and this by the
authority of Celsus and Rufus Ephesius.

Processus. Ortus.
His Ortus is from the lower mouth of the stomach on the right side, and bends
his course in a Recta linea downwards without windings as it were under the
stomach, Situs.
Nexns.
and is tied to the Ligaments of the vertebrae of the Loins, and ends where the
Anfractus begins.

It is the narrowest of all the Guts, to hinder the chylus from sudden descent.
Laurentius observes 4. Quas, observand. 1. vena Intestin.
remarkable things in it. 1. The vena Intestinalis, which is a branch of vena
Porta, and is carried down in a right line with his Artery from Coeliaca.
Porus Cholidochus. Pancreas to keep him moist, lento humore: which if it be
overfull and thickened with homours, it streigtneth the Gut, and hinders the
descent of the chylus, and causes continual vomitings.

Iejunum is the second of the small Guts, and is so called for his vacuity.
Iejunum sic dictum. 1. ob Hepar vicinu^. 2. ob Suctum Mesar. 3. ob fluxum
Chyli. 4. ob acrimon. Bilis.
There are diverse causes allotted by our authors for his emptiness. The first
is the vicinity of the Liver sucking the chylus. The second, the plenty and
greatness of the Mesaraick veins. 3. The fluxibility of the chylus. 4. The
acrimony of Choler, which suffers nothing to lodge there. But this cause I
cannot assent to, for that I persuade my self that the Porus Cholidochus runs
along the sides of the small Guts between two coats, and is not mingled with
the chylus until it comes to Ileon and Colon, where it is mingled, and colors
the excrements, and helps their expulsion. Mirum Riolani.
But Riolanus never found it empty.

His Ortus is where the gyri are first observed under the Colon, Ortus.
and above the Navell. Riolanus would have it ruddy, ob viciniam Hepatis. It Is
of a bluish color according to Bauhinus. It Is 12. Longit: 12. palm.
handfulls and 3. fingers long: when it is free from wind it is of the bigness
of a small finger. It ends in Ileon, and in his beginning has Porus
Cholidochus.

The third and last of the small Guts is the Ileon. (...) absolute dictum,
Ileon.
propter membranorum tenuitatem, as Bauhinus has it, and not quia longissimum,
as Laurentius; and (...), Volvulus.
a circumvolvendo, quasi intestinum circumvolutum dicas; and Volvulus, ob
plures circumvolutiones, for the more profitable stay of the Chylus.

His Ortus is beneath the Navell downwards, Ortus.
it is less then Iejunum; but neither is it so empty, nor has it so many
mesaraick veins. His beginning is narrower then the rest about a fingers
breadth. Nay it is narrower then either Iejunum or Duodenum: so that I wonder
at Vesalius's modesty, that he should not dare to determine his beginning. Yet
Riolanus, where more livid: Bauhinus, where more ruddy (but that is not
perpetuae veritatis) and fewer veins, and less empty. So then he begins under
the right kidney, and runs up toward the left side, and making his bout, ends
in Caecum. It is the longest of all the Guts, 21. handfulls and a half; Long.
21. palm. sec. Ruf. 15. Cub.
Rufus Ephesius, 15. cubits; Bauhinus, just as long as all the rest. This falls
many times into Scrotum, which begets Herniam Intestinalem, where they so
harden, that they cannot be reduced. Hence it is most apparent, that the
Excrements are made in Ileo; for as Picolhominy observes, they cannot go back
from Caecum, no not wind from the great into the small; as likewise vomitings
in Iliaca passione, ab obstructo vel inflammato Ileo. The cure of this by a
Caustic is a daring, and never to purpose, full of hazard, if you remember the
prediction.

Crassae have thicker coats, Cacum.
and the thicker part of Chylus. Their beginning is from the right side, where
the great extuberances are, from whence a Labell or Appendix which is called
Caecum Intestinum, (...), ab obscuro usu nomen habet. Monoculus. Soccus.
Aliis Monoculus, quod unum tantum foramen habet. Yet Bauhinus says it has
two, with so thin a division that it may seem but one, so as if one were the
end of Ileon, and the other the beginning of the Cacum. Galen took the thicker
part of Colon to be Cacum, Error Galen.
and therefore he says Cacum to arise on the right side, and Colon on the
left. Carpus, Silvius, Massa, Carpi, Silvii, Massae.
and the first Anatomists of the last 100. years reputed it to be an Appendix:
Ad Cbylum.
for his use is different in foetu to receive the liquid excrements. in homine
to hold chylus, ne quid humidi alimenti disperdatur, says Picolhominy. I have
found it full of liquid excrements. As for Galen, Ad excrementa.
he stands reprehended by Vesalius because he cut only Monkeys who want this
Appendix. Fish and birds have many Appendices for reservation of their Aliment,
and so have hogs; and other ravenous Creatures have either a large or a double
one. I will tell no tale; I have seen within this two years 5. hang along the
Colon; I did dissever their Coats. I know the difference between the adipous
fibers and it. He was a brave Glutton.

His Substance is thick, Substantia.
4. fingers long. his breadth a thumb, like a little sack, sharp at the bottom
like a worm. Nay Aquapendente says that he has found in this a live worm; and
Laurentius a Cherry-stone. After four months its narrower then any of the rest
of the Guts. It Is fixed to the right Kidney by the Peritonaeum, Nexus Reni,
Mesent.
not always free from the Mesentery. By what passage then does the Liver suck
the juice? Certainly it must remeare into the Colon, and so be drawn from
thence.

Colon is the second of the great Guts. Colon a (...).
Some will have it a (...) retardo, because the faeces are here stayed; others
a (...), a torquendo, for the great pain that is here.

His Ortus is larger then any part else, Ortus. Situs. Connexus Reni dextro,
quandoque vesi cae bilariae.
and this large part the ancients called Caecum, as we now told you.

Situs. In the right side, and sticks to the right Kidney, and so runs up under
the hollow of the Liver, touching the Gall, unto which oftentimes it is tied
with nervous fibers. Hence many times we see a yellow tincture; which comes
from the transudation of the thinner part of Choler: and so bending upwards
under the bottom of the stomach by the intervention of the Omentum, Omento.
traverseth the body over the small Guts; (...) as tied to the Diaphragma
immediately, as Riolanus would have it; Lieni.
but to the spleen by thin membranes: and so bending backwards, it is strongly
tied to the left Kidney. Repi sinistro.
No wonder therefore if pains of the Kidneys be confounded with those of the
Cholick. It Is lesser toward the spleen, with Cells. It offends not the spleen
and Kidney, and so runs leftwise as unto the seat of the Navell, making about
toward a beginning of Os Sacrum, and so to Os Pubis in a straight line. But
his first beginning is at Os Ileon, straight and narrow in Rectum, from which
by a band or ligament it is severed.

Vesalius gives us counsel to examine this narrow place well, Vesalii
consitium.
for that it is so capable of pain, and the whole Gut is nothing but the shop
of crude phlegm, easily digested in the thin Guts by the narrowness of the
place, and the multitude of veins. It Is likewise by his bigness made the
receptacle of wind, which is both here begotten, and by the air from beneath
received.

The use of this bigness Picolhominy has from Fernelius, Vsus magnitudinis.
as he confesses, to be the receptacle of wind which is shot down hither, but
cannot return propter valvulas Caeco accumbentes; as is apparent by Belchings
which are sometimes without taste, as coming no farther then the stomach. For if
from Ileon or Colon, then their smell and taste would be offensive. In this
worms are begotten: Locus vermium.
but not only here as some would have them, and so from hence crept out into
the mouth and nostrils: Error quorundam.
But their error says Picolhominy is double. First we have learned from
Aristotle, that worms are not only begotten here, but in the stomach, in the
Brain, in naribus.

Rectum it has no tie to the Mesentery to moisten it. Go outwardly according
to his length, there is a dirty fat fixed to it to facilitate expulsion.
Riolanus observes secundum Coli longitiedinem extrinsecus fimbrias adiposas,
Fimbriae adiposae.
fatty strings from the spleen to the beginning of the Rectum. All his length
is 7. palms and 2. fingers; Longit. 7. palm.
his latitude, the bigness of a fist. It is the biggest of all, where wind
murmures; the receptacle of excrements artificially made with Cells to be
evacuated in convenient times, and runs up like a Roman. S, that they run not
out violently, but commonly make a noise.

It has 2. strong ligaments, Ligam. duo. Omento. Dorso. ad longitudinem sec.
Laurent.
the upper to the Omentum, the other to the Back. Laurentius, Bauhinus, and
Bartolinus observe that for the preservation of the Cells there is a ligament
which runs through the middle and upper part, about the bigness of a finger,
which relaxed or broken, the Cells are dissolved.

The Substance of this Gut is more fleshy then the rest, Substant. magis
cellulata.
and has more cells to receive in order what slippeth inconcocted.

Concerning the seat of this Gut, Situs ad Hepar, and ad ventric.
which is so near two noble parts, the Liver and the Stomach, it is questioned
upon what ground Nature has here seated it. Anatomists find 2. reasons. Ratio
2.
2. Reason,That the aliment which has slipped by, from the Stomach and small
Guts, might be here concocted and fitted for the Liver. So that the heat of the
Stomach and Liver helps here concoction. Mundinus will have a convenient stay
of the Excrements to help concoction of the stomach: but the Belly being
costive, all appetite is lost, and concoction spoiled by the stench which
arises from these parts. Riolan.
Riolanus, Faecum calore the concoction of the stomach is helped. His argument
taken from Chemists from the digestion that is made fimi calore is good. Hip.
Hippocrat. lib. de humoribus. Non secus ac terra stercorata hyeme calida est,
ita etiam ventriculus Coli vicinitate. So Aristotle concerning the Vterus, to
be placed between the sordes alyi and vesicae, that by their heat the heat of
the Vterus may be increased.

Colon is seated under the hollow of the Liver, Ad cavum Hepat.
that the thinner and sharper part of choler sweating through may stir up the
expulsive faculty: for in man only the Colon is touched by the vesiculam bilis.
Carpus makes two reasons. Carpi prima Ratio. Secund.
The first, That all descent downwards is easy. Secondly, They are softened by
the Omentum. Vesalius, because the Colon is so far from the Center of the
Mesataicks that it can never yield but little juice, and that little that it
has of the Mesentery, is of the left side. Valvula a Baubino inventa 1570.


Nature has set a Valvula at the beginning of Colon where it is joined to
Ileon, that in great compressions of the Belly putrified winds and Excrements
should not fly up and down from the Colon to the Ileon, and so hinder the
distribution of Chylus, and provoke stercoraceum vomitum, as in Iliaca
passione. This valve Bauhinus found first in Anno 1570. and so acknowledged by
my Master Aquapendente, and presently after by Piacertino; which is membranous,
round and thick, and opens upward: and good reason, since the Excrements are
carried out of the Ileon into the Colon by ascent, not by descent. Hence it
appears that the materials of Clysters, no not wind, can ever come into the
Tenuia: to make man both comfortable to himself and sociable: which if the
vapors should ascend from this dunghill, it should infinitely offend them
where the Pylorus is open, and so have but the stench Tenuium Intestinorum.
Laurentius who gives this invention to Bauhinus would have it open downward.
Laurent.
Pavius of Leyden denies this valve. Negat Pavins.
Others envying this honor to the good old man, give it to Andernacus,
Andernacus.
who indeed has never a word of this that I could find in his Dialogues.
Riolanus gives this to Varolius, as being found out ante natum Bauhinum.
Varolius. 1591.
But Riolanus may please to remember that first Varolius was set out but 1591.
and although he would prove it for Varolius by dedicating his book to the
Brother of Pope Gregory XIII. who was created Pope 1572. Yet he lived in
Pontificatu 13. years. But Riolanus is so sharp that he will find forth a
second for these valves, Solomon Albert. 1594 Piccol. 1586.
and that is Solomon Albertus of Witteger 1594. and so a third, Piccolbominy a
Citizen of Rome, who found 3. valves 1586. and dedicated his Book to Sixtus
Quintus, Sigfrid. 1598.
then Pope. Io. Sigfridus 1598. brags of this invention.

Qui velit ingenio cedere, rarus erit.
But I wonder that Riolanus should not rather force the two places of Galen
against Bauhinus. Gal. 5. Meth. c. 2. and 13. Met. cap. 17.
The first in 5. Meth. 2. Superioribus intestinis utendum medicamentis per os.
For Quae per sedem injiciuntur, ventriculo vicina subire nequeant. And 13.
Method. 17. Quae per sedem infusa sunt, ea ad Iejunum usque ascendere nequeant.

Rectum is the last. Rectum. (...).
It Is called of Hippocrates (...), because all Anatomists say, Principium habet
ubi intestina circumvolvi desinunt. But that is false, for it has anfractus
throughout: Ortus.
so then his principium is in the top of Os sacrum.

Situs. Situs.
In the top of Os sacrum, and a right line goes down into the Extremity of the
Coccygis, to which by the help of Peritonaum it is strongly tied in men under
the Bladder. Nexat vesicae.
Hence the sympathy of these parts.

It Is a handful and half long, Longitu do ^nius palmae cum dimid.
three fingers broad, corpulent, thick and fleshy. Therefore it is the easier
healed. It Is larger downwards, his end is called (...), Sphincter, lest any
thing should slip away against our wills, but thrust forth by a voluntary
compression: Bauhinus observes it to have appendices ^ingues exterius adnatas.

Venae. Duodenum has Intestinalem. Iejunum, Venae, Duodenum habet
Intesti^alem. Iejunum, Ileon, and Coli pars, Mesaraicas. Haemorrhoides internae.
Ileon and Coli pars, beneath the left Kidney, Mesaraicas within oblique
streams. The end of Colon at Rectum, from the left Mesaraick vein. Rectum has
double veins. The inner from the left Mesaraick, which is sometime joined Ramo
Splenito, from whence are the Haemorrhoides internae. The other from
Hypogastrico Ramo Cavae: hence the External. Arteriae.
The Arteries are likewise double. 1. a Mesenterica inseri^re. 2. from
Hypogastrica, and these are Hamorrhoidales.

Nerves come from the sixth pair. Nervi.
D^odenum a thoracicis Pylorum cingentibus. Caetera intestina the Roots of the
Ribs, and those many; Hence that exquisite sense. The end of Rectum has four
nerves from the fifth conjugation Ossis sacri.

Chylus,to concoct, to distribute. Chylus that there be not a continual
ingestion and egestion.

De Ano.
THis is Recti Intestini finis, thicker above then beneath. It is so fixed to
the skin, that it cannot be separated, as in palpebris and front; Insepar, a
cute.
therefore Galen calls it cuticulosum musculum, vel carnosam cutem. There is
another Muscle above this, which is transversus. So Fallopius calls these two
muscles, but Laurent. nullum numerum assignat, but calls all Sphincterem.

Connexus. Connexus.
Backward it is Ossi Coccygis: before, to the neck of the Bladder and Yard; by
the sides, to round Ligaments Ossis sacri.

The other two Muscles are Levatores, Musculi levatores 2.
which are small ones, lodged under the bladder, membranous and thin, from the
ligaments Ossis Pubis and Sacri, and compass the Intestinum, and a piece of
them goes up to the Roots of the Yard.

These draw up the Podex ab Excretione, and the root of the Yard.

De Mesenterio.
MEsenterium, so called, quasi (...). a Circle. It Is placed behind them. It Is
called mesaraeon. (...). Lactes.
Gaza translates it Lactes.

Figure is Circular, plain, Figura Circularis.
contracted into folds. His original is narrow, broader in the middle,
especially in the left side, where it runs down right along. Ortus.


Ortus is at the first and third Vertebra of the loins from the inner coat of
the Peritonaeum, from whence Membranae producuntur, which run into 2. Membranes
of the Mesenterie, where the uppermost is joined above the productions of the
Mesenterie: the other at the beginning of Os Sacrum. This is seen after the
remove of the Guts and the Peritonaeum that invests the Renes; and hence that
great consent between the loins and the Guts: for from hence diverse Nerves. No
wonder then if from Cholick pains a Paralysis do come.

It Is compounded of membranes, veins, arteries, nerves, glandules and fat.
Membranes duas.


It has 2. membranes which lie one upon another, firm and strong, so that by
some it is called duplex Peritonaum. First for the better strength of the
vessels, which are many. Secondly, that the seat of the Guts in violent motions
should not be confused. And for this they are tied to the Back.

Veins it has many, Vena^ a Mesaraica superiore and inseriore. Ab Arab.
Lacteae.
like strings at the root of a tree; and they grow greater, and so fall into
Venam Portam. Vesalius doubts whether there be any a Cava for the aliment; for
he could not find them, and so he confesses ingeniously. The Arabic
Translatours call these Venas Lacteas, and having found a name, Gasparus
Asellius I hope will pardon me, if I give the Arabians the honor of Invention,
or at least of putting in mind.

Arteries from the Inferior and Superior Mesenterica, Arteria.
which with their continual motion fan and purify the Guts, and refresh them
with vital spirit, and defend them from Corruption. All which run into one
that is lodged upon the Back.

Nerves, Nervi.
from the sixth pair, from the roots of the Ribs, which spreading like a
membrane invest the branches of the Arteries and are warmed by them: and some
come from the Loins, and these with the veins and arteries enter the Center of
the Mesentery, and are spread to the Coats of the Guts.

Glandulae multa, Glandula.
unto which many Capillary veins come, distinguished with infinite branches of
Vena Porta, and Arter^a magna. The greatest is in the midst, where the vessels
are collected, and the distribution of them made, both for strength and
division, and to hinder the vessels from pressing, whereby the distribution of
chylus may be stayed; as when they are schirrous, and hence Vniversalis
Atrophia, and many other diseases, so as Riolanus calls the Mesenterium
Medicorum Nutriculam. Medicar-Nutricula.
Besides it were not fit and safe that small vessels taking so long a journey,
but should have some strength given them, lest in violent motions they should
crack. And lastly to moisten the Guts, that their Concoction may be Elixatione.

Fat here is plentiful, Pinguedo.
both to nourish the natural heat of these cold parts, and to fill up middle
spaces.

Some divide the Mesenterium into Mesaraeon, which is ea portio Mesenterii quae
tenuia Intestina colligat. Mesecolon, Mesecolon.
quod Colon in dextro and sinistro latere connectit. In the midst it is tied
by the Omentum. Yet beneath to the Rectum, which is called Appendicula
Mesenterii. Galen divides it into dextram, sinistram, mediam.

Use. 1. To be a common Ligament to tie the Guts together unto the vertebra of
the Loins, least by accident they should be folded together, or slip with their
weight downwards, except a piece of Colon which is tied up by the Omentum.

De Pancreate.
PAncreas or Sweetbread, is a loose unshapen body, Pancre^^, corpus
glandulosum.
all kernels, it does seem all fleshy, for the likeness it has with flesh: in
moderate bodies red, but within whitish. In fat bodies all fat. It Is also
called Calicreas. Riolanus calls it secundarium lienem, Calicreas. Secundarius
Lien.
or lienis vicarium: because it does the duty and office of the spleen, giving
a tincture to the blood, and making it pure and clean for the Liver. It Is 3. or
4. fingers broad. It reaches from the Liver unto the Spleen. Latitudo. 4. dig.
Nay sometimes it is as great as the Liver, and as weighty, Historia Thuan^.
Connexus. Lumbis. Ventricul^. Duodeno. V^sis.
as in the Case of Mounsieur de Thou, that great and learned Historian of the
last hundred years.

Connexus to the first vertebrae of the Loins by a membrane of Coat of the
Omentum, beside the bottom of the stomach and Duodenum, for the maintaning the
Vena Porta, and Arteria Caeliaca in their places. It Is most times single,
sometimes double. If we will believe Riolanus. It Is also tied with thin
membranes to a lobe of the liver, to the bottom of the stomach, to the spleen,
that it press not by his weight the descending Vena Cava and Aorta, whereby
the course of blood and spirit might be intercepted. It Is sometimes tumified
and schirrous, so that it hinders the passage of the chylus into the Liver, by
binding the trunck of Venae Porta, whereby the whole body is wasted. Sometimes
it is so swollen that it presses the Duodenum, that there it binders the free
descent of chylus, so that it causes vomitings.

Venae, a Vena Porta, for his nourishment. Venae.


Arteries, from Caeliaca, for his life. Arteriae.


Nerves, from the sixth pair. Nervi.


It Is full of kernels, 1. Glandulae.
to suck up all the crude portions of blood which the Omentum and Mesentery
could not contain, whereby the blood may be the purer. Secondly, by his moist
heat to boil and concoct what is not made fit for Vena Porta to carry into the
Liver. Seeds febrium.
This is the seat of intermitting agues and Hypochondriack melancholy, and as
a public sink, into which all ill humors are sucked.

Use 1. To strengthen the division of the branches of vena Porta and Caeliaca
Arteria, the nerves which are carried to the ventricle, Duodenum and Ramum
Splenicum, and spleen.

in Balneo Mariae. vertebrae of the loins, by there hardness the stomach may be
hurt; or any thing either hard or full may hurt the vessels. Pylorus, that
nothing that is inconcocted slip out.

Vide Ramum descendentem venae Portae.

De vena Porta.
OUt of the hollow of the liver arises a vein, Porta.
whose ingresse is called Port, (...), between two little risings of the Liver,
Magna.
least it should be pressed by the vertebrae. It Is the greatest next to Cava;
and therefore Magna ad Portas nominatur, because by these branches the
elaborated chylus is carried per portam into the Liver, and therefore the
Mesaraicks were called Hepatis manus. Some call not all the vein Porta, but
that which coming out of the Liver is free.

It Is divided into Roots, Trunk, and Branches.

The Radices; Galen in his book de venis, Radices.
assimilating this vein to a tree, will have the Mesaraicae and those other of
the lower belly to be the Roots, and the Trunk to be in the Liver: so then the
Radication of veins is not in the Liver; which we hold, and say that the Roots
are dispersed through the substance of the Liver as from their principium
Distributionis and Radicationis, which from small ones growing great to
greater, are joined to the Roots Cavae, and at last make this outlet of the
Liver one Body, which is vena Porta.

The Truncus, Truncus.
going a little obliquely downwards, is carried under the Duodenum; where
before it makes any great Branch, Cysticus Ramus.
Cysticus Ramus comes from out the forepart and upper part of the Trunk, and is
distributed into the neck and body of the Gall; Gastricus dexter.
Gastreepiploicus. Intestinalis.
Gastricus dexter which besprinkles the stomach beneath and the Pylore with
small veins. Laurentius adds Gastroepiploicus Ramus at the right fundus
ventriculi and Epiploi, Intestinalis runs down right the Duodenum. These two
last come many times from the Mesenterico.

Having branched himself into these four, Splenicus Ramus.
the whole trunk is divided into Splenicum and Mesentericum. The upper and the
lesser is Splenicus, which is all spent in the spleen, stomach, and Omentum.
This is transversly carried into the spleen, where before it enters it runs up
the left side of the stomach.

Gastrica minor, with small Branches: then Gastrica major, Gastrica Minor.
Major. Coronaria Stomachi.
which are the biggest in the stomach: then Cornarius stomachicus, which runs
about the mouth of the stomach.

From the lower part of the Splenicus Ramus. Epiplois dextra,
1. Epiplois dextra, a small branch which stretches it self down on the right
hand to the inferior membrane of the Omentum, and unto the Colon to which it
is joined. Epiplois Postica.
2. Epiplois Postica, far greater, which runs in 2. branches into the lower
Coat of the Omentum where Colon is fixed. Pancreae.
3. Pancreae, which run into the Pancreas between these Epiploides.

From the upper part of this Rami Splenici close to the spleen, come sometimes
three, sometimes more, sometimes but one, which is called Vas breve, aut
venosum. Sometimes vas breve is closely united to the Coat of the stomach, Vas
Breve.
sometimes it is distant the breadth of four fingers.

It runs between the Coats from above the fundus ventriculi toward the mouth,
where it spews in Melancholicus succus to raise appetite. In melancholy bodies
it is large; and Bauhinus will have by this the stomach to power liquid matter
into the spleen, as appears after cold drink by the murmurings of the left
side. From hence is it that hunger in some cannot be endured. By this black
vomitings are made deadly. Cum Phrenica.
Some Anatomists have here observed a conjunction between Vas Breve and
Phrenica, which is a branch of vena Cava, so that by this way blood in lienosis
per nares expurgari potest: according to that famous place of Hippocrates in
Epid. 2. Hippoc.
Exemplo Bionis lienosos hamorragia narium levari. Bauhinus adds 2. other
branches, which Laurentius never names, Epiplois sinistra, Epiplois sinistra
and Gastroepiplois sinistra, which are not branches of the Splenici Rami, but
come from the trunk Venae Portae, and sometimes from Ramo Mesenterico.

Use 1. To nourish the stomach, spleen and Omentum.

Mesentericus Ramus is duplex; Ramus Mesen. 2. Dexter. Caecalis Laurent. 14.
Mesent.
Dexter and Sinister. Laurentius adds Caecalem, which runs in Caecum.
Mesenterica dextra runs in Iejunum, Caecum, Ileon, and Coli partem dextram, and
has 14. branches most commonly, from whence innumerable veins arise, which are
spread between the two coats into which they open: but not into the Cavity of
the Guts, which is lined with a Crust from the Excrements of the 3. Sine
valvulis.
concoction. These have no valves, as Columbus would have us believe. quasi in
puncto. sponte or art, be cast from the whole Intestino, if there were valves?
Galen. in 3. de Fac. Not. 13. says that these same veins recarry blood from the
Liver to nourish them and carry chylus to the Liver, and at the same time, pro
diversa partium attrahentum natura, desiderio and robore. Sinister.


Mesenterica sinistra is with many branches carried into the middle of the
Mesentery, and into that region of the Colon, which from the left side of the
stomach reaches to the Rechum.

His most remarkable branch is Haemorrhoidalis interna, Haermorrhoidalis
Interna.
which, as Bauhinus has it, is but one, but has many branches about the Anum.
This sometimes comes a Ramo Splenico, but seldom from the spleen. It spues out
always with pain black blood, but not in any great abundance.

Vena Cava differs from vena Porta, Differentia inter Cavam and Portam.
which is softer and looser, Cava thicker and harder.

Use 1. To nourish parts which the Cava touches not. 2. To carry chylus ad
Portam, and so to the Liver, when it has prepared for it.

De Arteriis Abdominis.
AOrta arising out of the left ventricle of the heart is divided into an upper
Trunk, which is the lesser, and into a lower, which is the bigger; and runs
down to the Extremities. Some of his branches accompany venam Cavam, others
Portam.

The Artery is whiter, thicker, lanker, and not so full of blood as the veins,
for fitness of motion.

Arteria concomitantes Portam tres. First, Caeliaca, Caeliaca.
for that he sends many branches to the stomach, Cavae, Duodeno, Iejuni initio,
Coliparti, Hepati, Vesicae Bilariae, Pancreati, lieni. These come all from a
part of Aorta, which is in the Spina, and are joined in Pancreate with Porta,
as Gastrica, Cystica, Epiplois, Intestinalis; and the rest, whose names answer
to the branches of vena Porta, Mesenterica

Use 1.To give heat. chylus, and to carry it up into the left ventricle. But
the valvulae of the great Artery seated in his rise apparently hinder any thing
from coming into the heart from the Artery, but not from the heart to the
Artery.

De Ventriculo.
THe stomach, which is the common receptacle of meats and drink, the
storehouse of the first concoction, (...).
is by the Greeks called (...) which is indeed a common name for all Cavities:
but more properly (...). (...). Serenus. Pliny.
All Anatomists are busy in extolling it, as Q. Serenus. As being sick, all
other parts suffer. Pliny he is as witty to depresse it, giving it the title,
Pessimum Corporis vas, instat ut Creditor, and saepius die appellat. Huic
luxuria conditur, huic navigatur ad Phasin, huic profunda vada exquiruntur, and
nemo ejus vilitate^ aestimat consummationis faeditate. This is too much to put
the errous of fancy upon a part. But his necessity is as handsomely maintained
by that quarrelling Dialogue of Mevius Agrippa in Livy, Mevius Agrippa.
where he brings in all the parts against the stomach, as having the prime
pleasure of whatsoever it takes; therefore the rest would forbear: but
conquered by their malice, they found how necessary it was. But discourses of
this kind we will forbear: for our intent at this time is to speak only of the
structure and use of parts.

It Is hollow vessel, round, Definitio.
long and membranous, full of all sorts of fibers, made to receive meat, and to
juice it.

Figure, Round, for receipt, Figura.
and to be freer from hurt, long like a bag-pipe. It Is hollow, and of the
greatest cavity of the whole body, It is largest and most round toward the
left hand; and thinner to the right, to give place to the liver, that by
degrees meat may recede to the left. And therefore the first sleep is best on
the left side. Before, it is bost; and behind, two bosses, between which there
are two sinus; but being blown they appear not, Sinus duo.
to make way to the vertebrae, and to the descending Trunk of Cava and Aorta.

His external superficies is plain, Externa superficies. Interna.
smooth and whitish: within, it is rugged and ruddy, like unshorn velvet. In
fourfooted beasts it is sphericall, because only man has a broad back; In the
rest it is sharp. In creatures that are toothed on both sides, Duo apud Riolanum.
it is but one. Riolanus would have us believe that he found two ventricles in
one man, as likewise in a woman, 1624. within four leagues of Paris; and these
two stomachs were divided ore angusto. In those that have teeth on one side,
it is fourfold. In feathered creatures twofold, sometimes three. Magnitudo 5.
palmar.
It Is five handfuls large, according to Hippocrates, for the better stowage,
that we be not always eating; but once filled, we may be fitter for other
business. My master Aquapendente measured the bigness of the stomach by the
distance between the clavicles and the pointed cartilage, Aquapendens.
and from the pointed cartilage to the Navell, and from the Navell to the
Share-bone: for if the space which is from the pointed cartilage to the Navell
be greater then that which is beneath the Navell, the stomach is great; if not,
it is little. The other is a common sign, that a great mouth has a great
stomach: howsoever, it differs in greatness according to the bulk of the body.
Histor. Riolani.
Riolanus reports that he dissected an Ethiopian woman, who had a stomach no
bigger then a gut: but what gut, Situs.
he names not.

His Situs is near the Center of the body, for the more equal distribution of
nourishment; not near the mouth, nor too near the chest, that it hinder not the
instruments of respiration.

He has membranous and fleshy sides, free from bones for his better extension.

Connexus; Connexus Oesophago.
By the Oesophagus to the mouth under the midriffe between the liver and the
spleen. His greater part bends to the left fide, the better to poise the body,
the upper right part lies under the hollow of the liver for heat. On the left
it almost touches the midriffe; and therefore full, he hinders the motion of
the Diaphragma, and so causes a shortness of breathing. On the back part are
the vertebrae, to which it is tied, as some would have it. The muscles of the
loins are as soft Pillows beneath the guts and the Omentum, with which it is
not covered, as Laurentius would have it. Yet all give heat and help
concoction, and preserve the middle and upper Regions from stenches.

Observe the Cavity under the left side of the stomach and Diaphragma shut up
with membranes, Cavitas inter ventriculum and Diaphragma.
wherein Pituita colligi potest. Hip. 7. Aph. 54. which causes pain having no
vent. Yet the disease is conquered, when the matter passes per urinas. Neither
is this passage impossible, says Galen upon the text, when we see matter
between the chest and the lungs to be coughed out in suppuratis, quandoque in
ossibus per abscessus, quandoque per cutem sanam exsistentem excidere sanguinem
in ossibus quae fracta occalluerunt. But I give over the discussion of this to
my Masters of Pathologicall Anatomy: for me, it is sufficient to point our such
a considerable Cavity.

Substance, Substantia membranea.
is nervous and membranous, as you see: the fitter in all repletion for
extension, and in vacuity for constriction. In great eaters or drinkers by
their continual repletion it is made thinner, and so unapt to be corrugated:
Hence their weakness of stomach. Quibus corpus ventriculi gracile, ii deterius
concoquunt quam quibus carnosum. And this passion is called Atonia. Atonia.


Coats are three. Tunicae 3. Commun. a Peritonaeo 1.
1. is common from the Peritonaeum. It is the thickest that comes from the
Peritonaeum, and has right fibers, and sticks so close that it can hardly be
separated.

2. Carnosa 2.
Coat is tota Carnosa. It has circular fibers and various about the mouth for
the shutting of it; many transverse fibers, which contracted cast out what is
in the Cavity of the stomach, or in his body, per singultum. It has few
oblique: together they gently bind the meat; if hardly, then sensim and sine
sensu they thrust the meat versus Pylorum.

3. Coat is nervous, Nervosa 3.
common with the Gullet, the Tongue, the Palate, the Mouth, as appears by the
bitterness of the mouth, and hte yellowness of the tongue, when the stomach
abounds with choler. And Hippocrates in Pr. observes, Hippoc.
that men near to vomiting their lower lip will shake. Fallop.
And Fallopius in his lib. de Purg. Medicament. observes that Caput per Palatum
evacuare non possumus, quin simul etiam ventriculum evacuemus. And therefore it
is commanded that not any thing be put into the mouth, that is ungrateful to
the stomach.

It has all forts of fibers for his better strength, which is greater then
that in the Guts, because it receives harder things, Besides, by these it is
made fitter for extension. The most are right, and are not so conspicuous,
which serve, like a hand to draw nourishment; oblique, to hold; transverse, to
expel. The Superficies of this inner coat id drawn over with a crust from the
excrements of the 3. concoction. Crust^ interior.


Use. That it grow not callous, Vsus ejus.
whereby the mouth of the veins may be shut, and so hinder, A Fallopio,
Exteriores a sanguine, and interiores a chylo. And this he had from Avicenne.
Besides, by these it is made unequal; for a smooth superficies would give way
to aliment.

Consider 3. things. The two orifices, and the bottom. The upper and left
orifice, Orificium superius.
whose names we have heretofore given you, is of exquisite sense: and from
hence those passions, which are commonly called from the heart. Avenzoar helps
me with one, Verruca stomachi.
that is verruca stomachi.

Situs. Situs ad undecimam vertebram.
About the two vertebrae of the chest it is continuated with the Oesophagus, and
thicker then the lower mouth, that it be not offended with what glides by
unchewed. It Is full of fleshy circular fibers, as I told you, to shut both meat
and vapors in close. In some ob moerorem it is so close, that they can swallow
no solid thing: as likewise that no posture neither backward or forward should
bring back into the Gullet that which is in the stomach. It hangs nearer the
back then to the pointed Cartilage.

The next is the Fundus, Fundus.
which is almost seated in the middle Region of the Epigastrion, the bottom of
the stomach: It is not the most fleshy part as some would have it; whom
Vesalius derides. Yet it is the seat of the chylosis, which is from the in-born
property and specificall form, and innate heat of the stomach, and the
neithbour parts: for all are willing to help, as appeared by the Dialogue of
Agrippa.

The lower and right Orifice is covered by a piece of the liver: it bends,
Orificium dextrum.
as Bauhinus observes, a little upwards, not as Mundinus and Curtius, right
down: sed superiora spectat, says Laurentius. It differs about 4. fingers in
breadth from the bottom. Within, it has beside^ his transverse fibers,
Circulus Pylori.
a circle thick and strong, like an orbicular muscle, says Bauhinus, which is
sometimes schirrous, and opens and shuts impulsu naturae, non voluntatis. It Is
less then the upper mouth, yet big enough, as appears by the swallowing of
stones. Here our writers of Anatomy, as Vesalius and the rest, tell fine
stories of swallowing rings, and a Jewel with 40. Diamonds, Historia.
and a Cross with 5. Diamonds, and the like. It thrusts down by his strength
the chylus into the Duodenum: where from the left side he begins to thichken,
there is his beginning; where on the right, there is finis ventriculi, and
Duodeni initium. If it be loose it makes a stinking breath from the vapors of
the small guts and his own cavity.

His Vessels are many. Venae. Gastrica dextra. Minor, Mojor. Coronaria. Vas
breve. Gastreopiplois dextra, Sinistra.
First, six venae a Porta. The first is Gastrica Dextra, Gastroepiplois dextra,
Gastrica Minor, Gastrica Major, form whence Cornaria stomachica, Gastroepiplois
sinistra, Vas breve. These bring all blood to nourish it; and Galen in 5. de
usu Part. 4. says, that whilst the chylus is concocted, the thinner part is
sucked and turned into blood; or carry it into the spleen, or per portam ad
Hepar. Hence those sudden refections ex vino odorato, jusculis, altisque
corroborantibus assumptis: and this is followed by Bauhinus, and by Vesalius;
but timide, as that modest man speaks. But Avicen is plain for it. Nigrities in
fundo.
There is observed a kind of blackness in the bottom of the stomach, which
comes from the splenick Branch; and the rather, for that in some which die
suddenly, it has been an occasion to suspect Poison.

It has all his Arteries from the Coeliack Branch, Arteriae.
which accompany the veins, except Gastrica Minor.

It has nerves from the sixth pair. 2 at the mouth from the recurrent, Nervi.
duo ad orificium.
and they compass the upper mouth, so as you would think the mouth to be made
only of nerves. Hence that exquisite sense. From the left nerve a branch comes
to the Pylorus; where when it has dispersed it self, it runs to the cavity of
the Liver. There are two other that run to the bottom. Others from those that
are inserted into the spleen: so that the head, the heart, the lungs, the
spleen, may well suffer from the stomach. In some there is a Meatus from the
Gall, Meatus Cholidothus.
which carries with it choler into the stomach. Hence those choleric
vomitings. Bauhine reports of a family in Spire, Historia.
that every third day vomited choler plenteously.

Use 1. To receive meat and drink.

chylus.

De Hepate.
WE are now come to the Prince of this Region, the Liver, Hepar, Iecur, quia
^uxta Cor. It Is the fountain of blood and natural faculties, the seat of the
vegetable soul. Plato calls it the seat of Love; Cogit amare Iecur. It Is the
root of the veins, non generatione. Vesalius had a conceit that the Liver was
begotten of the veins, Vesalis e^or.
because they were woven into it, and the Parenchyma to be but an access. But
we say that the Liver is Radix and principium venarum. Yet so, as omnia simul
ex semine generantur, licet non omnes parts simul perficiantur: but
Distributionis and Radicationis. I know the Aristotelian School, as Averroes,
and his follower Zabarell, and the rest, would have Cor principium perficiens
sanguinem. But we leave this Problematicall Anatomy to another place, and fit
our discourse to that which you pleased to command us; that was the History of
parts for structure and use. So then out of the hollow part comes the Roots of
Porta; out of the convexe part, the Roots venae Cavae. If these at any time are
either stopped, as in obstructions, or grown feeble per Atoniam, we hate all
meats, especially flesh and wine. But as in the (...) of this part, the good of
all is placed: so in the (...), destruction, as may appear in the very
superficies and outward habit of the Body.

Situs, Situs.
is in the highest part of this Region. Yet not far from the Center of the
Body, the fitter for distribution. Some will have it under the Diaphragma a
fingers breadth distance, that it hurt not his motion, and cause short
breathing. Nay in dropsies it causes Tussiculam. Here the Error of common
Practitioners is detected, Error Practicantium.
who presently prescribe Expectorantia. In living bodies, the greatest part is
under the short ribs for his better defense. It seldom takes up both
Hypochondria, although 1628. in Bears wife it was tied with membranous fibers
to the spleen. In those that are newly born, it takes up the left
Hypochondrium, because their stomach is at leisure.

Connexus. Spinae Lumborum, Connexus.
and to the midriffe by the Peritonaeum: from which it has three ties, least
being heavy it might fall and oppress the stomach which it compasses. The
first is membranous, broad and strong, and is fixed to the membranous circle of
the Diaphragma. It Is called Suspensorium by some, and therefore when the Liver
grows great, Diaphragmati.
the Diaphragma is drawn down; and so erecto vel suptno corpore, respiratio
difficilior. The second tie is strong, broad and double, from the coat of the
Liver which is made of the Peritonaeum, and is tied to the pointed Cartilage,
Cartilalagini enfiformi.
and to the lower membrane of the Diaphragma, and sometimes to the Cartilages
of the short ribs, the better to hold the Liver forward. Suspensorium.
And some call this Suspensorium.

The third, is the Vena Vmbilicalis, Venae Vmbilicali.
whereby it is tied to the Navell, that the Liver start not up, and so oppress
the Diaphragma, and the Pericardium, and so cause sudden death. It Is sometimes
tied to the Omentum, where the principium of Porta is, and sometimes in the
convexe parts of the Peritonaeum by fibers. Fibris.
But this manner of tie Picolhominy never saw. I hope I shall decline
arrogance, Obser. Prop.
if I say truly I have found them. Columbus will have but two, as Circa Cavam
and Suspensorium.

Figura. Figura. Lobi duo, quand^que qu^^^or. Rufus Ephesius.
It is various. Some have no division; others two lobes: sometimes four. Rufus
Ephesius gives to every one his name, and the Extispices did magnify them
according to their great divisions, which are by Vesalius justly condemned.
It Is Corpus Continuum. Caput ejus, Superficies interna.
His convexe part or Caput is smooth, to give way to the midriffe. The inside
is unequal and hollow, the better to embrace the stomach, and make a fit place
for the Gall. It Is wrought at the coming out of Vena Porta. The right side is
round and thick; the left is acuminatum. It Is one entire in man, Magnitu do.
and greatest. His bigness is known by the length of his fingers, as Rhasis
and Avicen teach us. The largest bodies have biggest, for the more ample
sang^ification and remaking of dissipated spirits: for man having most
functions of the soul, and so most dissipation of spirit, therefore more blood
and vital spirit were required for him. Avicen observes little livers to be
always hurtful: and Riolanus amongst other of his miracles which fell within
his experience, Historia Ri^lani. Vesalii 20. lib. In timid^ magnum.
remembers a Liver no bigger then a Kidney. Vesalius gives us one of twenty
pound weight. Cowards and Gluttons have the greatest. Cowards, because the
vitals are weakest, and so need to be recompensed by the strength of the
natural faculties. Gluttons, in respect of large diet: for the Liver being
plentifully fed, grows great. Pliny and Riolanus strive who can make it last
longest. Pliny 100. Plinii Historia 100. an.
years; and therefore in mortuis vetustatis patiens. And Riolanus makes one
sweet after a years boiling.

Substance, Substant. Petru Apo,
is like clottered and grumous blood, imo ex menstruo, red and soft, covered
over with a simple membrane which comes a Peritonaeo; between which and the
Parenchyma sometimes arise pustulae, as Galen observes. Hipporates, carnosum
viscus and fibrosum: and to be sine fibris amongst the Extispices, was ominous;
nay monstrosum. This by his proper and in-born virtue gives temperament and
redness. Along with flesh are sowed the Roots of Vena Cava, and Porta, Radices
Portae nigriores.
with some Arteries: but more Roots of Porta. In the lower part there is most
blood made, They are distinguished by their blackish color, and more Roots of
Cava in the upper part: for there is the greatest distribution. They are known
by their whiteness, and in these are the Anastomoses which transversly are
made into the roots of these veins, Anastomosis insignis.
whereby the mutual transitus appears: howsoever Picolhominy could not find
them in the greatest Liver neither raw nor half-boyled. Yet in those that dye
newborn, if it please you to blow Venam Vmbilicalem, you shall perceive the
air to pierce both the Coats of Porta and Cava, lungs, heart, and Guts;
besides that famous Anastomosis which is like a common passage to both trunks.
By these the humors of the habit are purged, and we say the upper Region by
the Kidneys, the lower by the belly are discharged. Amongst these roots diverse
branches are made, which make the trunk that goes to the Gall.

Arteries run from the Caeliaca close to vena Porta, Arteriae
and are most in the hollow parts; few in the upper, because Diaphragma
sufficiently cools it.

Nervi, Nervi.
are two small ones: one from the Orifice of the stomach; the other from the
roots of the Ribs on the right side to give sense; although little is here
required, since it is a part made only for nutrition.

It has two Actions, Actio Communis, Privatae.
one Official and Common, which is to make blood: the other private and
peculiar to nourish it self.

De Vesica Biliaria.
IT is not questioned by any but that the Liver makes blood by his own proper
heat; and it is an eternal rule of Nature, that heat does Congregare
homogenea, and segregare beterogenea. And since all nourishment has heterogene
parts; for nothing that is simple does nourish, so as the sweetest makes blood,
the bitter part of aliment choler, and the earthy and black part melancholy,
the watery serum. These as unfit for nourishment are separated and case forth.
Yet they have their use, as I shall show you in their order, and therefore
nature has made proper receptacles for them. Vesicula Biliaria. Follicvlus
felleus. Situs. Connexus.
And for choler, (...), Vesicula Biliaria, or folliculi fellei.

Situs, in the right and hollow part of the Liver to be ready to receive choler.

Connexus. It Is fixed above to the Liver, Figura.
and where it touches the right side of the stomach and Colon, oftentimes per
transudationem it gives to them a tincture. And hence those perpetual burnings
of the stomach, says Bauhinus.

Figure, Figura.
is long, somewhat round, hollow, which grows less: it is lesser then the
spleen or Kidneys, because the quantity of this Excrement is lesser in the body
of man. Some say it is like a Pear.

Substance, Substantia membran. Duae tunicae.
is membranous, the better for dilation. It has 2. coats, the outward a
Peritonaeo without fibers, and begins just without the Liver: the other is his
proper coat, thick and strong, and has this property, that it is not bitter,
nor hurt with choler, although all other coats are. It has all kind of fibers
for his better strength. It Is defended by a crust which comes from the third
Conconction.

It Is divided into three parts: The bottom, the neck, and the two Ductus.

Fundus is the larger part of the vessel, Fundus.
and looks downwards, when the Liver is in his natural position. It Is ovall,
and of a yellowish color, and sometimes blackish, when it keeps it too long;
and sometimes it begets stones.

Cervix, Cervix.
is the streighter part, and is harder then the Fundus, and by little ends in a
straight passage, which making a half circle ends in Porum Biliarium; where we
have often seen three valvulas; 3. Valvala Laurent.
which Riolanus says was a fiction of Laurentius, which hinders the
regurgitation out of the common meatus.

Meatus are two: Meatus duo.
one which comes directly from the Liver, and beneath the valves inserts it
felf into communem canalem, where before it enters, it is called Canalis
Hepaticus, Canalis Hepaticus,
and so runs into the Guts about principium Iejuni. The other is made of the
countition of the vessels, and runs into the bladder of the Gall, and so
passing down the valves, makes a common channel with Canalis Hepaticus.

It is to be observed, that sometimes this Canalis, or Porus Cholidochus, Porus
Cholidochus.
makes a double insertion before he comes into the coats of the Guts.

There is a third meatus, Ad stomachum.
which is a division of the second, and runs into the stomach a little above
the Pylorus. But this is but rare. Vesalius once saw it in a Gally-slave at
Rome, Charles Steven often at Paris. All wonders are at Paris.

These are infelices naturae (...), (...).
because they are always troubled with vomiting. Hist. Vesalii.
But this was not so in Vesalius's slave. That which runs into Duodenum, if it
be greater then it should, it causes loose bellies, and great pains; these are
(...). (...). Vasa. Arteriae. Neavus Vuicus.


Vessels are small. Cystica Gemella from Porta, for nourishment.

Arteries from Caeliaca. One small Nerve from the sixth pair, and that hardly
perceived.

Use. To receive, Vsus, Cerui non sine ductu Hepatico.
hold and expel choler from the Liver; but whether it be necessary, it is
doubted, since Bucks live without it, but not sine ductu cholidocho Hepatico.
Fernelius reports diverse to have died by his emptiness. Yet Dioscorides
commends wormwood for purging it.

De Trunco Vena Cavae descendente.
VEna Cava a veteribus, Vena Cava, Maxima, Iecoraria, matter venarum.
maxima dicitur. ab Hippocrate, Iecoraria, Venarum matter, except the umbilicall
and Porta, cum reliquis spermaticis ortae. His branches are spread per Hepar,
and mingled in the body of the Liver with the branches Portae, secundum
Vesalium, there making one trunk from Os sacrum to Iugulum. Yet, Doctrinae
gratia, we divide it into Truncum ascendentem, Truncus Ascend. Truncus Descend.
of which ^h^ our discourse of the chest, and in Truncum descendentem, which
coming forth, and bending downwards, runs along with the artery; and in his
passage, First, he sends from his Trunk Venam adiposam sinistram, Vena adiposa
sinistra.
which gives diverse branches to Eustachius Glandulae, and to the outward coat
of the Kidney. Dextra ab Emulgente.
The right adiposa comes seldom from the Cava, but from the Emulgente.

The second is the Emulgent ab officio, Emulgens.
Renalis ab insertione dicta. It Is the greatest that comes from the Trunk, it is
thick and short with an oblique descent, in exortu quandoque gemina, quandoque
triplex, magnitudine pares. In his insertion into the Kidney, quandoque in
quinque ramos dividitur; and to keep it from a reflux into Cava, Nature has
placed valvulas, as also in the veins of the spleen.

The third is Spermatica. Spermatica Dextra.
The right is sometimes double ab eminentiori sede Trunci, with a knop, seldom
from the Emulgent. Sinistra ab emulgente.

The 4. Lumbares, duae aut tres, Lumbares plures.
from the lower side of Cava: so that you must turn Cava over to see them.
These enter foramina nervorum between the 4. vertebrae of the Loins, and so run
up to the brain on both sides spina lis medullae. Some will have them descend
from the internal Iugular per spinalem medullam, and so joined per anastomosin
lumbaribus. And by this way, both Hippocrates lib. de Genitura; and Aristotle
in Problemat. will have Cerebri spiritus and materiae seminalis portionem
deferri a Cerebro. Beneath these about the 4. vertebrae Lumborum it is divided
into 2. branches, which are then called Iliaci. Iliaci. Ram.
They present in their division a great L, which above Os Ilium run down toward
the thighs. But presently upon the division on the outside, there comes forth
Muscula superior, which traverseth Musculos lumborum addominis and Peritonaei,
Muscula superior.
and arises equally on each side one. Sacra.
In the division comes forth Sacra, which runs ad nutritionem medullae ossis
sacri. Ramus Iliacus in progressu descends into an inward and an outward
branch. From the Interna comes Muscula media, Muscula media
which goes to the muscles Femoris, and to the skin of the breech; and
Hypogastrica, which runs to the muscles Recti, Hypogastrica. Haemorrboidales
externae.
and to the external Haemorrhoides; and another of this branch runs to the
Bladder, and Yard, and ad collum uteri, per quas menses in gravidis and
virginibus fluunt.

Ab externo Ramo comes first Epigastrica, which runs to the Peritonaeum and
musculi abdominis, Epigastrica.
as under Rectum musculum, and is here joined with Mammaria. 2. Pudenda, which
runs over Os Pubis to the Scrotum, and to the skin Penis. In women it runs in
Sinum muliebrem, Pudenda.
Pudendi Labra, Nymphas; and by this sanguis ad mammas refluit. And this by
some is called Epigastrica interna. 3. Muscula Inferior.
Muscula inferior runs ad musculos Coxendicis and ad cutem: coming forth, they
change their name, and are now called crurales, of which in our History of the
extremities of the body.

De Trunco Aortae descendente.
AOrta, Arteriae descentis truncus Caeliaca. Mesenterica superior, inferior.
at the second vertebra Thoracis pierces the Diaphragma, and so per imum
ventrem, where it gives 3. branches to Porta, as Caeliace, and Mesenterica
Superior and Inferior, and the rest venae Cavae and accompany her branches.

De Liene.
SPleen is the Receptacle of feculent blood. Situs.
Riolanus has been curious in the names.

Situs is in the left Hypochondrio under the Diaphragma backward, close to the
short ribs for safeguard, and therefore in healthy bodies it cannot be felt. His
hollow is turned toward the Liver, to make way for the stomach, as it were a
left Liver. In some it is higher, in some it is lower, which seat made way for
that observation of Hippocrates 6. Epid. sect, 2. tom. 38. Hippoc.
Quibus lien deorsum vergit, his pedes and genua calent, nares and aures
frigent. So then the lower part obstructed, causes crassum sanguinem: and to
heat the lower parts. But what is this to the seat of the spleen? Error Anatom.
I pity to see how our Anatomists will draw in pieces by the ears. But to our
purpose. His place is properly under the Diaphragma, to which it is tied
tenuibus fibris, Connexus. Diaphragmati. I Omento. Reni sinistro. Laxatum
adinguina.
and by the Peritonaeum by the Omentum, to the outward coat of the left kidney.
In bodies that are sound, it never comes beneath the lowest rib; although
sometimes it reaches to the groin, relaxatis lig amentis, says Columbus, and
his breadth to the liver, says Bauhinus, and Aretaeus lib. 1. de signis and
curis morborum diuturnorum. cap. 14. before Bauhinus. In dextram partem usque
ad jecur toto corpore increscere visus est. But I fear the humors lodged in
the Omentum many times deceive us.

His magnitude and color varies, Magnitudo.
Hippocrates commends a small one, but not such a one as was in Riolans
Duchess, Hister. Rioiani
which was the breadth of a nail: but the Pancreas recompensed it.

It Is thick and great, Densus.
but far less then the Liver. Increscit lienosis, says Hippocrates.
Andernacus relates to twenty pound weight. Cardanus has a cure for it, which
is beating, to make in smaller: but my Master blames the Cure.

His color is obscure and dark. Color.
But unnatural spleens look blew, leaden, ashy. It has one simple membrane
and thin, from the Omentum immediately, which invests it round about, and is
sometimes as thick as a cartilage, as in Sir Nicholas Fortescue.

Figure is various, long, Figura.
and somewhat flat like an Oxe-tongue, broad above, which is the head, and
narrow beneath, which is the tail. Some will have it by the position of the
ribs. Along his Cavity there runs a white line with a little rising where the
entrances of the veins are, Linea alha ejus.
the better to serve them and the Arteries: when it is praeter naturam, his
figure is subject to change by his sucking of humors, it being a vessel rare
and spungious.

Substance, laxe, full of veins and Arteries. Substantia.
It seems to be nothing but thick, black, concrete blood, wrapped up with many
fibers, the fitter to receive gross humors. Hippoc. de Cauterisat Lienis.
Aegineta
Hippocrates in passions of the spleen commends the cauterising of it. Paulus
Aegineta in lib. 6. de remedic. cap. 48. teaches us the manner, by taking the
skin up with a hook, and so thrusting it through cutem distentam in 3. places
did make six eschares, Albucasis. Rossetus.
and Albucasis does not much differ. Rossetus reports, that the Turks burn
their footmen to the spleen, to make them more agile and active. Yet Aretaeus
will have them live unhappily when the blood by this vessel is not depured,
Aretaeus.
because the body is nourished with thick and impure blood, so far is it from
making them nimble. Fallopius.
And Fallopius, and my Master Aquapendente delivered doctrinally, that omnia
lienis vulnera are lethalia, as may appear by the great vessels which run in,
and come out of it.

The first vessel is Ramus Splenicus, Ramus Splenicus.
of which in our history of Vena Porta. This enters the spleen in his Cavity,
and makes many branches into it, not apparent as in the Liver. for they come
not into the substance, to make there any Cavity, but are terminated at the
hollow of the spleen, so as it seems to be fibers covered over with thick
gross blood. This Ramus Splenicus carries from Porta the thick earthy part of
Chymus, to make blood for those parts which Splenica sends branches to: and in
regard the spleen cannot perfect all that is brought in, therefore nature has
made two vessels for receipt; one above which is Vas Breve; the other that
goes downwards which is Vena Haemorrhoidalis. Vas Breve. Vena Haemor^hoidalis.
Vas Breve we have spoke of. Yet some will have this to be wanting sometimes,
or obstructed; and then according to Avicen, Coronaria stomachica does the
business, or Ramus Splenicus, or Haemorrhoidalis interna: and sometimes this
humor is purged by the arteries, not only into the Guts, whereby the
excrements are colored; but likewise by the emulgent into the Kidneys: and
hence black pudled urines. although it is rare from the emulgent vein branches
to be sent to the spleen; or from the Caeliaca into the great artery, and so
into the emulgent; Silvii observat.
yet Silvius observed three branches from the emulgent vein to be carried into
the spleen. Hence in melancholy diseases Diuretica are commended, and that by
the authority of Hippocrates. But whether the great quantity of waters, which
run in two hours by urine, Aquarum transitus.
pass not all or part out of the stomach per Vas Breve into the spleen, and so
by the splenick artery into the Caeliaca, and so into the great trunk of the
artery which leads to the emulgent, or else from the stomach to the Guts, per
Mesaraicas to the liver, and so into vena Cava and emulgentes to the Kidneys,
is apparent in calculosis.

Arteries it has, and more them the liver, Arteria.
which Galen knew well, although Columbus and Vesalius deny it. But both these
have been reprehended by Piccolbominy, and worthily.

It has all from the Caeliaca, not only for life, but for the bettering of
thick earthy blood, and likewise to carry into A^rta^ the serous humor; so
that the spleen inflamed, you may feel pulsation presently.

Nerves but small, Nervi.
from the sixth pair, and from the roots of the ribs on the left side, which run
along his membrane, not his substance.

Concerning the use, Deusu, secundum Erasistratum,
there have been both amongst the ancients and modern great disputes.
Erasistratus 4. de usu part. cap. 15. thought there was no use of it: and Rufus
Ephesius in lib. 2. Rufum,
de appel. calls it ignavum membrum, nullo ministerio fungens. Aristotle de
part. Aristotelem,
Animal. 3. cap. 7. says there is some use, viZ. Iecur and lien juvant ad cibi
concoctionem, and imposes necessity upon it per accidens, such as belongs to
the excrements of the Belly and bladder: so that those creatures which have hot
stomachs, have small spleens, as Hawks, Kites, and Pigeons, whose earthy
excrements run for the making of feathers, as in fish for the making of scales.

Averroes upon this place says, Averroem,
that the spleen is fere necessarium, because, habemus juvamentum hujus membri
attrahere hoc excrementum terreum ex sanguine ad se, confidimusque de hac
notitia. And further neither Aristotle nor Averroes go. So that I wonder why
our late Disputants should bring in Aristotle to their party. Galenum,
Galen never knew any other use, but to be the receptacle of feculent blood.
Hugo. Senens.
Hugo Senens. upon Avicen. 1. Can. disputes the Question against Angelus de
Aretio, that held that the spleen was principium sanguinis ex chylo
generativum; which is contradicted by the Greeks, and by Avicen, and all the
Arabtan School. The modern Anatomists of this last 100. years, strive to
magnify this part. Vlmum,
Vlmus in his Book de Liene, will have arteriall blood begotten here, and so
propagated per Ramum Splenicum arteriosum in Caeltacam, and from thence in
Aorta^, and so in sinistrum cordis ventriculu^. Neither do the three valves
seated in the vestibulo Aortae, any thing hinder, but only suffocation, which
might happen by the rushing of this blood. Carolus Piso follows Vlmus. Carolum
Pisonem,
But where are those plexus venarum and Arteriarum? I could never see them, nor
Vesalius before me: neither are they dispersed through the substance. Besides,
those sanguinea animalia which have no lungs, or small ones, and no spleen, or
but little; yet they have arteriall blood. Where is this arteriall blood made?
Piccolh.
Piccolhominy will have a double use of the spleen. a lutulento succo. ad
copiosiorem sanguinem conficiendum. Bauhinus labors for the dignity of the
spleen, Bauhinum,
and brings many Arguments, as his seat above; so has Colon. 2. No part is
nourished with the excrement it draws, but with laudable blood. It Is true
that the spleen receives earthy blood, and does refine it, and the purer goes
for his nourishment, and the excrement all part is thrust out by Vas Breve, and
vena Haemorrhoidalis interna, according to their own grounds. Bartolinus brings
many more arguments; but we will conclude, that he is useful for receipt,
Verus usus.
and for depuring and helping of sanguification, and not making; for the succus
melancholicus is generated in the liver cum massa sanguinea.

De Renibus.
THe third receipt of the excrements of blood, which is not found in fowls nor
fishes, quia non habent pulmonem sanguineum, ut sint valde sitibunda. Averroes
in Aristotelem lib. 3. de part. Animal. cap. 9. To this purpose nature has
made three instruments. 1. The Kidneys, which by a hidden property draw serum,
not pure, but mixed with Blood, which is not separated by concoction, but by
tran fusion. 2. The ureters, which when it separated, carry it away. 3. The
Bladder, which receives, holds, and expells it in fit times.

The Kidneys are called (...), (...). 2.
quod est ningere; they are two: most authors say, Ratio.
for the better provision in cases of obstruction, as if one should be stopped,
the other might suck away the water. But Duretus upon that rule of Hippocrates,
Duretus.
Renum repent dolor obortus cum urina suppressa, lapillos aut crassam urinam
meiendo reddendam oslendit; It may seem strange, that the passion of one
Kidney, either altogether stops urine, or yields it by drops; and gives his
reason from sympathy, which is in societate of ficii. Historia.
And thy he confirms by the History of President Pibracius, who died of the
stone in the left ureter. To this I will add a History related by Forestus of
the Delphe Merchant, Foresti Historia.
who having a stone in the lest Kidney, his urine was altogether sto^t, and
with out pain in the right, or any obstruction there: and he gives the reason
to be ex torpore per consensum officium non praestitisse, vel forte ob
condolentiam. These two reasons may receive examination when we shall have
time, or when it please my Reader in Pathologicall Anatomy. Cur duo.
But we say that nature has made two Kidneys for more strong and more equal
attraction from the liver, Ob aequalem attractionem.
as two eyes for equal aspect. So then she has made two; for one little one
had been too little for so great a business; and one great one had not poysed
the body, and therefore two. Historiae Vesalii and Eustachii.
Vesalius saw one in habente ventrem impense prominentem. So Botallus observed
one great one, and Eusta^hius two on the left side, and one on the right.

Situs. Situs.
Behind the guts and stomach, under the liver and spleen, close to the
Ridge-bone, and the sides of Cava and Aortae, but not equally distant, the
better to draw water (...) Cava, which was of necessary use, whilst it was in
the small veins bepatis and mesenterii: but now come into larger passages, and
thickened by the heat of the liver and heart, there is no use of it. Non
aequ^lis.
Their seat is not one against the other, that they hinder not traction. They
are lodged upon the muscles which bend the thigh, a little beneath the edges of
the short ribs, in the hollow between the Ribs and the huckle-bone, wrapped
between two Coats of the Periton^um; Inter duplicaturam Peritonaei.
and therefore the Kidney may be wounded, the Cavity of the belly untoucht: and
wherefore in the stone not out? Hence stupor craris by the compression of the
muscles and nerves descending. Concerning Bauhinus's Question de Nephrotomia,
Avicen. in 3. Can. 18. Nephrotomia. Avicen.
sen. does discommend the Practice. Est enim operaetio ejus qui rationem non
habet. I^^. de part. follows this text. Serap.
Serap. tract. 4. cap. 22. says, that some of the ancients command to cut the
back super latus duoram Iliorum in loco Renum. But his judgment concurres with
Avicen, that Audacia est diffi^ilis vehementer. This is the judgment of the
Arabians.

The right is lower then the left, Ren dexter inferior sinistro. Con^rar.
secundum Rufum and Piccolhom.
because it gives place to the liver; it reaches to the third vertebrae of the
loins. Rafas says, the right is higher and greater. Piccolhominy says, it is
commonly higher, quia all parts of the right are higher then the left. And both
Rufus and Piccolhominy have this opinion from Aristotle 3. Piccolh.
de Part. An. cap. 9. Quia motus ex part dextra provenit, natura dextra
validior est, and supercilium dextrum majus, and arcuatum magis quam sinistrum
habetur. And Averroes puts to it, Averroes.
Quia officium ejus validius est, habetque suum situm modo quo melius attrahat.
But we find the contrary: for it is only then equal, or lower then the lest,
when that part of the liver comes shorter and hollower. They are seldom even,
in regard of the position of the liver and spleen. Yet Riolanus has seen them
equal.

The left is under the thinner piece of the spleen, Sinister.
higher then the right, that sometimes it reaches to the second vertebra of
the Chest. The right for the Emulgent veins shortness, is seated close to the
Trunk of vena Cava: the left for double length of his Emulgent, is not so near
the Cava; they are four or five fingers distant one from the other, and seldom
nearer. Yet neither is half higher then the other. In beasts the left is
higher. Some have observed certain Rami or vessels which run from the left
Kidney into the right Testicle, but in women to the right part of the uterus.
Conne^us Lumbis.


Connexus, is by the benefit of the external Coat of the Peritonaeum to the
loins. Riolanus says better inter duplicaturam Peritonaei, which is membrana
adiposa, Membrana adiposa.
ab Aristotele (...), which is subject to be dislocated and thrust out of
place, even to Os sacrum, and has been taken pro schirroso mesenteri^. Well,
they are tied to the loins, the Diaphragma; Diaphragma. Dexter, Caeco and
Hepati. Sinister Colo, Lieni, venae Cave, Aorta, vesica.
the right to Caecum, and sometimes to the Liver: the left to Colon, whereby
many times the Colic and Nephritick pains are not distinguished: yet both
eased by Clysters. To the spleen, to vena Cava and Aorta, by the Emulgent
vessels; to the Bladder by the ureters; to the liver, heart and Brain, by the
veins, Arteries and Nerves; hence that diversity of passions.

Figure, is long and broad; broader upwards, Figurae.
and eminent, flat backwards: to the Ilia long and bossy, answerable to the
bent of the Hypocho^dria: forwards like a bean; so that their faces to the Vena
Cava are hollow for the more fit receipt of the vessels.

Their Magnitude is answerable to the Quantity of the serum, which is avoided.
Magnitudo.
But the left is lesser and shorter then the right. Yet they are of the length
of 4. vertebrae, and the breadth of 3. fingers at most. Their bigness is much
different in men.

Before we come to the substance of the Kidney, it is fit that we take view of
the two membranes, with which each Kidney is invested.

The external membrane has, Externa membrana.
as the inner, his beginning from Pe^itonaeo. But the external shuts it in as
in a purse, and therefore it is called Renum Fascia. Renum Fascia.
This sticks not close to it, but is easily separated; it receives into it
vena^ adiposam, and sometimes a branch from the Emulgent. It is wrapped about
with a great deal of fat, Adep^.
which is made of the surplusage of the nourishment of the vessels; but the
right is not so fat as the left, says Aristotle, which Eustachius denies.
Aristotle lib. 3. de part. Animal. cap. 9. because the right side is dryer and
subject to more motion: now all motion does consume fat: which Eustachius
denies, and brings the example of the motion of the heart and the eyes. Yet
Averroes, Quia membrorum dextrum validius and calidius; motus autem pinguedinem
liquet: in sicco it is true, in hun^^d^ false.

Adeps of the Kidney. Adeps.
Piccolhominy would have their matter to be oily, aeriall, and lentoris
cususdam particeps, vapors of the blood. Their efficient cause, not being the
frigidity of the membranes, but their thickness; so that the vapors arising,
and struck into these thick membranes, quasi suo lentore viscati membranis
adhaerescunt^ and there concocted and made thicker, tandem in adipem
concrescunt: so that a great part of oily and excellently elaborated blood runs
with the water into the Kidneys, by whose heat it is turned to vapor, and so
breathing forth per Caeca Renumspiracula, strike into the thick membrane of the
Kidneys; where sticking, and there further concocted, is thickened, and comes
to be Adeps.

Use of this fat is Vsus ^dipis.
least by the continual gliding of water, they should languish and grow weak.
serum, by his gentle and supple moisture.

Si pingues admodum efficiuntur, Pinguiores deteriores.
dolores profecto accidunt lethales. Arist. lib. 5. de part. Anim. cap. 9.
Before we come to the Substance of the Kidneys, Eustachius puts us in mind of
certain external glandules which are fixed to the upper part of each Kidney.
Glandulae Eustachi^.
These were first observed by Bartholomeus Eustachius Anno 1560. 1560. Bauhin.
Bartolin. Capsulae Atrabilariae.
and since acknowledged by Casserius, Bauhinus and Bartolinus, who calls them
not, as Eustachius, Glandulas, but Capsulas Atrabilarias. Casserius Renes
Succenturiatos. Casserio Succenturiati. Magnitudo 4. digitor. secundum
Bartolinum.
They are as many as the Kidneys: their greatness is not always equal. Their
length is two fingers, and the breadth one; sometimes the right, sometimes the
left is bigger, according to the Kidney it is fixed to. They are hollow, and
contain within them a feculent black humor, which I could never see.

Their Figure answers to the Kidney: Figura.
no such matter, but is an informis and unshapen glandule.

Connexus, Connexus.
To the outward membrane of the Kidney, and sometime to the membrane of the
Diaphragma strongly. Hence it is that they have not been observed, because
taking out the Kidneys they are left sticking to the midriffe, says Bartolinus.
They are taken away with the duplicature of the Peritonaeum:

Venae and Arteriae from the midst of the Emulgent, Venae and Arteria ab
Emulgente.
sometimes from the Kidney, sometimes from Cava, sometimes from Adiposa,
sometimes from all these places.

Nerves come with those of the Kidneys. Nervi.


Use of them is conjecturall, Vsus Glandul.
and only Bartolinus has made his judgment of them; which is to be the
receptacle of thick, black, choleric humor, which comes from the liver, and
spleen, and here kept, because it could not pierce the narrow passages of the
Kidneys. Hence black urines. Bauhinus, Bauh. 2.
for to strengthen the divisions of those plexus nervosi, which run with the
arteries to the coat and substance of the Kidney, which I take to be true.
Piccolhominy only names them, which, because their Parenchyma is not different
from the Kidney, he is willing to judge them extuberant pieces of the Kidneys.
He says they are not constantly found in all, and when, as the sixth finger,
from abundance of stuff. But their Parenchyma do differ. Tunic^ interna Renum.
Hujus origo.
The inner coat of the Kidney comes immediately a Peritonaeo, and sticks fast
to the flesh, and is his proper tegument. It Is thinner then the former, without
fat; immediately it has his beginning from the common coat of the vessels
dilated, which enter the kidneys, and so spread, keeps their substance
united, and makes the superficies slippery, and so turning in, it enters with
the vessels, and so covers them, and strengthens them.

Substance of them is firm and hard, Substantia solida, porosa.
like to the substance of the heart: only it wants fibers: neither is there any
fleshy viscus but these two that have sensible Cavities. They are solid, yet
exceeding porous: if you please to blow the Emulgent, you shall perceive the
air to come even to the outward coat: least by their laxity, urine might
plentifully slip away; as likewise to hold the stronger heat for the better
separation and transcolation. Yet where the Emulgent vessels spread themselves,
there their substance is more loose and unequal, and is pierced with passages
which run through from the ureters, and the part^ dugged with flesh, which are
in substance, figure, and office, like Glandules. The outward superficies is
smooth, Externa superficies.
like a liver, but somewhat darker in those that are well. But in sick they
have variety of colors. Raro inaequales. Historia.
It Is rare to see a Kidney unequal on the outside, as Oxen and Calves have.
Yet Eustachius observed such an one in a wench of 11. years of age, and in a
woman in Roma. Some would persuade us that from the Caruncles within, as from a
bunch of Grapes, Non per sangui nem uffusum.
the Kidneys of Infants to be filled up with the effusion of blood, which makes
the superficies of the Kidney to be equal. Therefore in cutting the Kidney
along the back, a bluish flesh is observed: the inner part where the Caruncles
are is much redder. Bauhinus says, that the Kidneys of bears are made of
Glandules, like bunches of Grapes, tied and knit together by a membrane, and
filled up with fat.

Before we divide the Kidney, Vasa.
we are to observe the vessels that enter, and the vessels that come forth.
Those that enter, the first are Venae, which come a Cava. Venae.
1. is Adiposa. The right seldom comes from the Trunk, but from the Emulgent;
Adiposa.
the left from the Cava: and these bedew the outward coats, and are many
branches, amongst the which one goes ad Capsulas Atra^^larias, which there
entering is spent.

The second is Emulgent, Emulgens.
of each side one, from the Trunk of the Cava, very large; not for a plenteous
supply of nourishment, but for the freer passage of serum, and is inserted into
the hollow of the Kidney, sometimes double, Duplici, triplici ramo. Sinister
Ramus duplo longior. Valvulae B^uhini.
sometimes treble. These branches are but short, yet the left is as long again
as the right, and the insertion of the right many times higher. At whose
insertion Bauhinus observes certain valves, that hinder the reflux of serum
into Cavam. Here likewise a branch, one or more, Vni^ur Azygo.
of Azygos is united. Hence that consent between the chest and Kidneys.

Arteriae. Arteriae Emulgentes.
They have one of each side from the Trunk of the great artery: it is called
Emulgent. It is very great, the better to draw the great quantity of serous
moisture which is in the arteries, as likewise to apply them with heat, which
is apt to be extinguished by this serous excrement.

These are seated between the vein and the ureter. Situs inter venam and
ureterom. Ratio 1.2.
First, that by their motion they may thrust the serous blood into the Kidneys.
2. To hasten the descent of the serum which is now strained.

These in two parts enter the Cavity, and immediately divide themselves into
four or five branches, which afterward divide themselves into a great many
more, which are dispersed through the substance of the Kidney, and mingled
together are united, Desinunt in Carunculas.
and so insensibly end. These Capillary branches come into the Caruncles, that
by them percolation may be made. Neither was there need of another; for that
they draw not pure excrement as both bladders do. Yet sometimes a Ramo Iliaco
there arises another artery, Aliquando ortae ab Iliaco.
with a vein, and so are fixed in the kidney together.

Nervi come from the stomachicall branch of the sixth pair, Nervi.
which descend down to the roots of the vertebrae of the loins, and are spread
into the proper membrane of the Kidneys, and about the beginnings of the
arteries of the mesentery, which run up to the Capsulas Atrabilarias. Ad
Capsulas.
Another part enters with the Emulgent arteries, Ad Cavitatem.
the Cavity of the Kidneys, and are so dispersed through the substance of them.
Hence that consent between the Kidney and stomach, and that exquisite sense,
non tantum gravativus dolor, Seeds Calculi.
when the stone is fallen from out of the flesh of the kidney; whose firm
substance gives not way, as the bladder does, but by the nervous branches of
the ureter, which are dispersed through the substance of the kidney. Yet there
is far greater pain, when it comes into the full ureter; where so long as it
sticks, so long is the fit.

Out of each kidney comes forth a white nervous vessel, which is called
ureter, of which we will speak by and by; but first open the kidney.

This inner Cavity or venture is called Pelvis, or Infundibulum: Cavitas
interna, Pelvis.
it is made of a nervous membrane, which comes not from the Emulgent vessels
(for these are spent in the fleshy substance) but are of the ureters; Ab
ureteribus.
and for other Cavity you are not to seek in the kidney of a man, but from what
comes from the ureters, and is made by their concourse; Dividitur in 2.3.
whose first division is in two or three branches, and so in more; but ends not
in hairs, as other vessels do, but in broad end, which receive the Caruncles;
Carunculae 8, 10.
so that commonly there are 8. or 10. Rami, which are fashioned like pipes.

Carunculae, made of the substance of the kidney, yet harder then the flesh,
and less colored, sharp, and like little Glandules, enter the extremities of
the ureters, and like a slope-lid, cover them; through which, as through pipes,
watery humor tincted with choler, is strein'd through, as milk from a seel,
into this common Cavity which is called Pelvis, and so by the ureters
transmitted to the bladder.

They are many in number, for the more sudden streining of water: these have
most narrow holes, that blood run not along with it. Riolanus will have that
ample Cavity in exortu ureteris within the kidney to be Pelvis vel
Infundibulum, and those 3. or 4. holes which are in Fornice Pelvis, make the
Cribrum which the ancients spoke of. Each of these holes cut have other two,
Papillares. Tubuli 12. Carpus Author, secundum Neoseric^s.
which being cut, show the Carunculae Papillares. In great kidneys twelve
Caruncles have been observed, with twelve tubult. Our late Anatomists will have
Carpus upon Mundinus to be the first finder of these Carunculae, forgetting
that Aphor. of Hippocrates 4. tent. 76. Quibus in urina crassa exsistente
carunculaep^rvae, Hippocratis ^otae. Capilli.
autveluti capilli una exeunt, iis a renibus excernitur. Upon which place says
Galen, that parvae Carunculae were Renum substantiae indiciae; Capilli non
Renum, but of those meatus, qui deorsum a Renibus in vesteam feruntur, says
Avicen. Cant. 1. sec^^^^^ Avicen. Actuarium.
prima Doct. de urinis. and some of these hairs were a handful long, says
Actuarius. And Hippocrates in lib. de Glandulis, says, that the kidneys have
many Glandules. So then I shall, if it please you, give this honor to
Hippocrates, although Galen says he never saw veras Carunculas. Therefore the
new life we will give to Carpus, before Rondeletius times, Non Bondeletii.
who challenges the invention to be his, and calls them Processus Mammillares.
Processus M^^^^^^^^es. Vsus.


Use. To purge the blood from water which is in the veins and arteries by their
own attractive power.

De Vreteribus.
Vreteres, Vreteres.
water-pipes, and watercourse; and they are two, on each side one, which
resting upon the muscles of the Loins, Situs.
between two Coats of the Peritonaeum, Connenus Peritonaeo, vesicae.
unto which they are tied, bending inward a little, and so descending, are
joined to the bladder. Sometimes two, three, or more branches come out of the
kidney, which either a little beneath the kidney, or above the bladder,
Historia Bauhini.
grow into one. Bauhinus observed two, and each made his own Cavity in the
kidney, separated with a thin membrane, and equally great, and so descended
into the bladder; the one into the bottom, the other near the neck of the
bladder. Their coming out is large, and appears like a little long bladder,
which is sometimes full of stones; and sometimes they come out with 3.4. or 5.
branches, and presently make this one Body.

Figure is round, Figura Rotunda.
a handful long, the breadth of a straw. In calculosis after the fashion of a
Gut dilated, into which the stone descends, and sometimes runs back again. It Is
hollow, crooked, like the letter S. In women they are broad, straight, and
short: therefore calculous passions are with less pain. Substantia, Venae
albae. Canaliculi nervosi. Fibris obliquis.


Substance is white. And therefore Celsus calls them venas albas, Aristotle
Canaliculi nervosi: nervous, free from blood, and dense. They are commonly said
to have but one Coat, with oblique fibers. But in truth, if you open them,
their fibers are right, Re^^is.
and so close as if they made one proper Coat. They are like the inner
substance of the bladder, and are continued to it; from which they cannot be
separated, but from the kidneys they can. Therefore some will have their
original from the bladder, into whose backer and lower part they are fixed,
not far from the neck, where they run between two Coats of the bladder, about
the breadth of a finger; but some two fingers breadth one from the other. By an
oblique and narrow passage, they enter the cavity of the bladder, so that the
urine sweats not through, but by a manifest passage comes into the bladder. And
this oblique course hinders the reflux of urine into the kidneys, which
Piccolhominy refers unto two valves or Ostiola foris intro spectantia. Error
Piccolh.
But with the best diligence I could never find them. Sure I am that the Coats
so shut, that wind cannot get forth, as it is seen by children that blow them.

Venae, they have like hairs; Venae.
small arteries from the neighbor parts; of which some are evident, and
elegantly besprinkled in the outward Coat.

Nervi from the sixth pair, Nervi.
and from Spina. Hence their exquisite sense, whilst a stone either sticks in
them or passes by them.

Use. To convey, Vsui.
as by a channel, serum into the bladder, which is there called urine.

De vesica urinaria.
THe last Instrument is vesica urinaria.

Situs. Situs.
In the lowest Region of the Hypogastricum, joined to the Rectum, in cavity
Pelvis. It Is made by Os sacrum, Coxarum, and Pubis. It floats between two coats
of the Peritouaeum, which make a proper venture for it, empty. It lies under Os
Pubis. The bigness of a Windfor Pear. Those creatures only have bladders which
have lungs; and the hotter lungs, the greater bladder. The old Greeks children
did, as our boys do now adays, blow it, and rub it for extension. But they had
pretty verses to that purpose. In greatest extension it yields no urine,
because it cannot contract his fibers.

Concerning Cystotomian, (...). Rosetus.
or the Franconian cut, for the stone in this Region, Rosetus in lib. de partu
Caesareo, gives many encouragements for it. And the great objection of wounding
a nervous part is answered by wounds of Peritonaum and tunica Cerebri. And the
story is famous in Paraeus of that famous Archer, which being condemned to die,
Historia Paraei.
was given by the Magistrates to Parisian Surgeons, and by them cured. So that
it is as safe as the Mariana cure.

Connexus. To the bottom, and before to the Peritonaeum loosly, Connexus
Peritonaeo, Ourcho, Arteriis umbilicalibus.
by the ligament Ourachum which reaches to the Navell; on the sides, by two
umbilicall arteries, which serve only for this use, lest in the progress and
motion, it fall into the neck, and so hinder excretion.

These enter not the bladder, but run along the sides with the outward coat of
the bladder, and so descend in Pelvim, where they are inserted into a branch of
Rami Arteria Iliaca, which goes in Arteriam Haemorrhoidalem externam, which
insertion is five inches hollow. Cervix. Recto.
On the back part his neck, not his Fundus, is tied to Rectum. It is but one,
seldom two; although the French Surgeon Coiter, Coiteri Historia.
would have us believe that he found two in a wench: and Riolanus relates the
story of learned Casaubon, Historia Casaubeni.
who died here in St. Martines Lane; in whom, as he says, two bladders were
found, one full of stones. But I do rather believe, that stones coming down
along the ureter, and coming to the passage between the two coats of the
bladder, there stayed, and in time made the division large; and the coats
giving way, seemed to be two bladders, when in truth they were but the coats
separated with descent of rubbish.

Figure, Figura.
is long, and somewhat round; hollow, for the better receipt of water. It has
but one Cavity, in which urine, sand, and stones many times are contained. This
Cavity growing less, ends in a straight neck; so that the parts of the bladder
are two, Fundus and Cervix, which is armed sphinctere.

Substance is partly membranous, Substantia membranea,
for strength and fit extension, to hold urine for convenient times to be
avoided, and for corrugation after it is emptied. It Is partly fleshy,
especially his neck: nay Piccolhominy will have it to have a peculiar flesh and
Parenchyma of his own, Sine Parenchymate. Piccolhom.
as indeed all parts have.

Membranam triplicem habet; Tunica Communis.
one common, and two proper: the external a Peritonaeo, strong and thick,
about which outwardly there is plenty of fat. The 2. proper coats are joined
together, thicker and thinner, as they are distended; about the bottom, and
the insertion of the ureters thickest.

Interna is bright, white, thin, nervous, of exquisite sense, Interna.
at the bottom slippery and smooth, and lined with a moist humor, It Is closly
woaven with all manner of fibers, whereof the right are inmost, the transverse
outward, and the oblique midst, according to the order of their functions,
attraction, retension, expulsion. This is easily separated, if it be a little
blown. This coat, toward the bottom, is full of wrinkles, to defend it from
salt and sharp urine. Laurentius would have it defended with a crust, Sine
crusta.
which is begotten of the excrements of the third concoction.

The middle coat is thicker, Tunica media.
and besprinkled with fleshy fibers; not red, as in muscles, but somewhat
white, as in the coats of the stomach and guts: sometimes they are more
conspicuous, so that you would call them a fleshy membrane; and my Master
Aquapen dente calls it Musculum totam vesicam circumvolventem.

It has 3. foramina. Triaforamina.
Two close by the Neck, where the ureters enter: The third in the neck; which
coming under Os Pubis and body of the Yard, make that common channel. The neck
is almost fleshy with some, right under which are the transverse, which are
above Prostatas, that the urine slip not away. Some show a muscle beneath the
Glandules for the sphincter. So no seed without urine, as in those which want
the upper sphincter.

The use of the sphincter is to bind and shut the neck of the bladder.
Sphincteris usus. Venae. Arteriae.


Vona and Arteriae all over the body, and another branch along the neck; and
these from the Hypogastrica and Pudenda.

Nervi, Nervi.
one from the sixth pair, the other from Spinalis medulla.

Use. To receive the serum, Vsus.
not that it draws it, but that which is expelled from the kidneys, and by his
own weight falls downwards, as into a cistern, where it stays till a fit
time of excretion, which is partly by natural faculty, partly by animal. And
this is the true dogmaticall History of all parts which belong to nutrition.

De Vasis semen praeparantibus.
NOw to the parts of Generation, which are many; yet all concur to the making
of seed, and his ejectment. In the making we are to consider six pieces. 1.
Which are either for preparation, Parts ad Generationem 6.
or 2. Concoction, or 3. perfect it, or 4. carry, or 5. preserve it, or 6.
eject it. Of all which we are to give you the History.

Praparantia Spermatica are of each side two; one vein, and one artery.
Praeparantia 2.


Vena Dextra, a little beneath the Emulgent, Vena dextra a Cava.
arises from the upward face of the Trunk of vena Cava, as from a long and
thick knop; and therefore out of this side comes the more pure blood. Some
would have a little branch of the Emulgent to fall likewise here, as
Piccolhominy: but this is very rare, as Vasalius says.

Vena Sinistra comes not from the Cava; Vena sinistra ab Emulgente.
so it should stride over the Aorta, and by his perpetual motion, venture a
breaking, or be checked in his business. Therefore he begins from the lower
side of the Emulgent; and therefore makes more watery stuff.

To this a branch of the Cava is sometimes joined. Galen would have this
brackish blood to beget a kind of pleasure: but Vesalius denies it. And
Columbus brings the History of one that had lost his left stone by a Hernia,
and yet his pleasure was equally continued.

Arteriae dua come out of the middle of Aorta, far beneath the Emulgent,
Arteriae 2.
with purer blood and spirit. Dextra.
Dextra over the Trunk of Vena Cava in an oblique course goes to the Vena.

Sinistra runs along her vein; Sinistra.
and if it be at any time wanting, then the left vein supplies it with a double
bigness.

The Arteries are bigger then the veins, Venis majores
for the larger quantity of heat, blood, and spirit. Seldom are both arteries
wanting: and if at any time, they cause sterilitie, quia the vital spirits
flow not.

The right vein with her artery, and the left with hers, a little divided, are
lodged upon the Peritonaeum, Situs ad Peritonaeum.
and coming downwards, are joined by fibrous ties, and are obliquely lead about
the ureter; and at the entrance of the production, many anastomoses appear,
which being divided from the Cremasteres, and the little nerve of the sixth
pair, are not lead, as is commonly reputed by all Anatomists, into Parastatas;
Observatio propria. In Albugineam.
but as I have observed, they make two several insertions, distant a barley
corn, into Albugineam, and so into the stone by several orifices, and so
discharged back out of the stone into vasa deferentia. I know the generally
received opinion is, that the vein and artery woven together by many
Anastomoses make one body, Corpus varicosum.
which is called Corpus varicosum, and Pampiniforme. But we have observed, that
the vein, even to Albuginea, carries blood: but the artery in the midst of
the production, begins to make it white: so that I shall (if you please to give
me leave) say that the arteries give matter for seed, and the veins nourishment
for the stones and coats into which they are branched.

De Parastatis.
ALl Anatomists say, that these vessels make one body varicosum, which is
called (...), or Parastatae. Parastatae nexus.
They are tied at both ends of the stone, but looser in the midst from the
stone. So that at one end the preparing vessels are received; at the other let
out to the deferentia, or ejaculatoria vasa.

Their superficies seem to be membranous, Superficies glandulosa. Vsus juxta
antiquos.
but within glandulous and spungie. The Anatomists put them to this use, that
they suffer not seed to go from the Praeparantia to the deferentia without
perfecting, which is by the irradiation of the stone; and therefore Bauhinus
would have them called Testiculos. But we find no such insertion into the head
of the stone, but that they separated, the insertion of the vessels appears in
the body of the stone. But for the deferentia, we cannot separate them from
the Fundus; so that they make one body with the stone, as we shall show you.

De Testibus.
WHat names the Greeks or Latins have given, we will not be curious to repeat
for honors sake, but only that which you have commanded me, which is the
structure and use of parts.

They are commonly two, seldom one, rarely three. Testes due, rare tres. Situs.


Every man knows their place to be without the Belly, at the root of the Yard,
and this for chastities sake. For those creatures which have their stones
within, are more lecherous and more able. For when as blood was to be made
seed, which was to be done with multiplicity of alterations, therefore the
vessels of this work were to be brought to some length; therefore nature thrust
them out of the body, and made the Scrotum the receipt for them. It seldom
happens, that children of a cold temperame^t have them within the body,
although insome till the eight or tenth year. In men they are bigger, and
hotter out of the temperament of the body, for the abundance of heat that has
thrust them forth. It is not my charge to deliver you the benefit man has by
their outward seat, in avoiding the annoiances of stinking seed.

It has two coverings. 1. Common, Duae tun^^ae. 1. communis.
which is made of the common covering of the body, the Cuticula, Cutis. Adeps
there is none, because nothing that is oily remains of the aliment of the
stones; and the Panniculus Carnosue being here thinnest, changes his name, as
Riolanus will have it, and is called Dartos. Panniculus. Dartos.
This covering is looser on the left side, and therefore that stone hangs
lower. 2. Proper are two, vaginalis, Propriae duae. 1. Vaginalis a Paulo
Capreolo. (...).
which is external, and a Paulo is called Capreolrais, (...), and comes from
the production of the Peritoneum, strong, but thin; without is joined with many
fibers to Dartos. So that some take it to be a proper coat, and call it
Erithroides, Erithroides.
deriving it from Musculo Cremastore dilatam, which gives his beginning to
Hernia Carnosae. It Is lined within with a watery humor, and with many veins.

His use is to tie close the seminary vessels to the stones. Vsus ejus.
Inter^^, Allbuginea, a spermaticis.


The inner coat is Albuginea, which is derived from the coat of the spermatick
vessels, thick, and very strong, and does immediately involve the substance of
the stone, Substantia medullosa cum gyris.
for the better strengthening his soft and loose medulla. It appears with gyri,
as the Brain has.

I have observed three foramina to enter the medullous substance, Perforata 3.
Inter bus Hydrocele.
with a diverse insertion of the vessels: between these two coats, when water
is gotten, it makes Hydrocele. Piccolhominy and Vesalius call this Epididyma,
and I know Columbus disputes the number.

Figure, Figura Rotunda.
Round or ovall, a little flat on both sides: It varies sometimes in respect of
the extuberances of Parastatae, which in great leachers seem to be as great as
the stones. The upper part is called the head, Caput, Fundus.
the lower the Fundus. Concerning their heat, in regard of the right or left
side, I shall not consent with the Master of Anatomy: since those which bring
seed, come both from Aorta. Columbus determines their bigness to a hens egg.
But the great ones are the worst, and signify a shallow brain. And the Italians
call a Black-head Coglione. Coglioni.


Substance, Substantia.
white and glandulous, medullous, with anfractus, or circumvolutions, as are in
cortice Cerebri: between which I have thrust blood forth, as in Corpore calloso
Cerebri: milky, that there may be some similitude inter generans, and id quod
generatur. Those that have loose stones, have debilem calorem, and some
disease. They have no Cavity: they have a muscle on each side, and that long,
small, of fleshy straight fibers, not arising from the transverse muscles, as
is commonly by all observed; but from the oblique ascendent muscles, and so run
within the vessels to the head of the stones. These are called Cremasteres,
sive Suspensores, Cremasteres.
because in these muscles the stones are hanged without burden to the vessels,
and in Coitu they pull them up together: whereby the seminary channel being
shortened, sooner and easier the seed comes forth.

Vasa, from the Spermaticks. Vasa.


Nerves, from the 6. pair, Nervi.
and from the 21. of the spina.

Use of the stones is first by their inward faculty to give form, color,
strength, Vsus.
and prolificall heat to the seed. And therefore they are said to be the first
instruments or principal parts of Generation. How they heat the body, is
apparent by those that are gelt, whose temperament, substance, manner, and
habit are changed. And the Chest from these receives alteration: Consensus cum
pectore.
as old coughs are ceased sed by tumors of the stones, and the tumors of the
stones by coughs, as is apparent in Hippocrates, Epid. sect. 3. And it is
apparent in the change of the voice a Coitu in young people: and the reason is,
says Vesalius upon that Text, because the recurrent nerves, and those in the
stones, come from the 6. conjugation. Besides, vena Azygos shuts it self down
ad venam renalem and spermaticam. Lastly, in dignity they are like the heart;
Imo respectu speciei nobiliores Cord, secundum Laurentium. For cordial
Epithemes put to the stones, do as much relieve as put to the heart.

De Vasis semen deferentibus.
THe Ejaculatory or Deferentia are partly without the Abdomen in Scroto,
Deferentia.
and partly within it. Columbus will have them drawn from the Praeparantibus,
Vesalius from the stones.

It Is plain from the lower end of the stone, wreathed, and where they are
parted from the stones, round, and white, with a small cavity. Connexus
Praeparantibus, Ossi Pubis.
They are carried upward, and tied to the Praeparantia, the same way the
Praeparantia did descend by the production of the Peritonaeum, and so to Os
Pubis; and they bending downwards, joined to the Peritonaeum above the ureters;
and behind the bladder, Peritonaeo circa ureteres ad Rectum.
next to the Rectum, close to the neck of the bladder are u^ited. But there
they dilate themselves on both sides, and made thicker they are fixed into the
sides of the seminary bladders. So that these deferentia, the right into the
right, and the left into the left Prostate, Desinunt in communem ductum Vsus.
end in communem ductum, which is immediately before the sphincter of the
bladder.

Use, to carry seed, which is elaborated in the Parastatae, and perfected in
the stones, ad Prostatas, as into a treasury; where the right vessel is joined
with the left, that the seed of both stones might be carried together, and so
shot out by the Yard.

Behind these Prostatae, unto the orifice of every deferent vessel is a
caruncle placed within the passage of the Yard, which shuts it like a valve,
least unwillingly the seed may be hurt, or the urine thrust into the channel,
should run back into the vasa seminaria, by which seed from the Prostatis in
Canalem is expressed, which are seen when the bladder is dissected.

De vesiculis seminariis
VEsiculae seminariae are made ex coalitu venae and arteriae, Vesiculae
seminariae Vesalio, Columbo, and Fallopio notae. Error Caroli Stephani,
Rondeletii, Laurentii.
says Galen. They were first found by Hierophilus, and at large described by
Fallopius, Vesalius and Columbus knew them. Charles Steven mistakes them, and
calls them Parastatas. I wonder why my Rondeletius should brag at the last that
he first found them. And Laurentius is willing to give him that honor for
Countries sake.

Situs, Situs.
between the bladder of urine, and the ligament of Rectum, close to the side of
deferentia. They are thick, and united, and wreathed with many Cavities says
Bauhinus.

Use is to contain seed for many months, Vsus.
as keeping it for fit times. We will not omit the observation of Galen. Galeni
observatio.
14. de usu part. cap. 9. that in these is contained tenuis humor similis
semini, but far thinner then seed. And this is true.

De Prostatis.
THe Prostatae were well known to Galen, Prostatae Galeno notae. Error Piccolh.
as appears 2. de sem. 6. and 14. de usu part. 9. So that I wonder Piccolhominy
will deny this knowledge to Galen. Fallopius calls them Glandulosum assistens,
Corpora glandulosa. Minores Testes.
and Varolus Minores Testes. And in truth they are two kernels, seated at the
neck of the bladder, and the root of the Yard, where the Deferentia united make
communem ductum, and contribute to it fibers to the Glans on both sides, as I
shall show you, who first observed it.

Their Coat is thick, least being spongious, the seed should glide away. It Is
full of blind pores, which by pressing are seen, and so thrust out seed like
grains into the common passage to a manifest quantity: hence pleasure.

Substance is hard, spongy, Substantia spongiosa.
and whiter then other kernels, and great, because they contain as much as is
sufficient for the procreation of four or five children.

Here is the seat of Gonorrhaea, Seeds Gonorrhaea.
as is observed by Vesalius in the man which he dissected in Padua, who had all
these vessels open and loose, even to cervicem vesicae.

Use. To receive seed, and keep it for a time, and give it his last perfection;
Vsus.
since in these it is thicker and whiter: neither is there any part that has
more. Hence by the inferior muscles of the Yard, and sphincter of the Anus
pressed behind, is crushed the seed into the common passage.

De Pene.
TO recite the Names given to the Yard by all sorts, Penis.
were to triumph in loosnesse, and make sport with modesty: we will therefore
pass them over, and come first to his seat.

Situs is known in part to all, Situs.
it sticks to Os Pubis close to the Commissure. It Is tied in Perinaeo with
ligaments and muscles round under the stones: Nexus.
and this upper part without the belly is called (...), (...).
and the lower (...). (...). Figura. Dorsum Penis,


Figure is long, and somewhat round. The broader and upper part is called
dorsum Penis. In thickness and length he varies. Yet man has shorter then any
other Creatures, because these procreate by riding; Some would have his length
to proceed from the ligament which is at the bottom of the bladder. So that
the vasa umbilicalia tied too near the Navell, draw up the bladder, and so the
Yard is shortened.

It has the common coverning, without fat, that it might not hinder his
erection. The Panicle here by Riolanus is called Dartos: Dartos.
which reaches to the lower part of the Glans, to which it is tied.

Substance is peculiar, Substantia e duobus nervis.
made of two hollow nerves, between which runs a channel: these as ligaments
arise from the lower part Pubis, and upper Isthii, and so run up to the Glans;
first a little severed, then joined. Their inward substance is hollow like a
pipe, spongy and blackish, and as it were filled with black blood, and as made
of innumerable branches of arteries, veins, and nerves cast into a net. Between
these two bodies is there a hollow passage common to seed and urine, which is
called (...), (...).
Fistula urinaria, which is the substance of the bladder, extended to the end
of the Yard, or the neck of the bladder producted. Yet Bauhine would have it
differ from the substance of the bladder, quia vesica cocta ab hoc canali
recedit.

Here Bauhinus puts to our memory, which other Anatomists overslipped, a
membrane thin, which covers the Glans and channel, begotten of Pia Matter,
Inter. Tunica a pia Matre, secundum Baubinum.
which invest^ the nerves of the Yard, which is of exquisite sense. The other
is an external coat, fleshy, made of transverse fibers, for the expulsion of
seed and urine. It Is rare to see two channels, one for seed, and the other for
urine. Historia.
Yet Vesalius reports of a Lawyer of Friuli that had two distinct passages.

It has four muscles seated close to Perinaeo, Museuli 4. in Perinaeo.
which are covered with much fat; two side ones, which come from Coxendicis
appendice beneath the Yard, first nervous, then fleshy, short and thicker then
the other two, and so run into the body of the Yard.

Their use is erigere, Vsus eorum.
flectere, and sustinere in congressu. Their insertion is not far from the
exortus of the Yard. The other two muscles arise fleshy a sphinctere any
secundum longitudinem penis, and by the sides of the channel are carried, and
so make their insertion in the midst.

Their use is to dilate the lower part of the channel in mixione, and coitu,
and prostatas comprimere. And between the muscles is the place for cutting in
the stone.

Venae. Error Columbi. Venae ab Hypogastrica and Pudenda. Arteriae.
Columbus will have here no veins, which I wonder at. Yet it has both
external or Cutaneae which come from Hypogastrica and Pudenda, and are for a
while parted, and then come together, and so accompany the arteries, and are
ended with their arteries. Internal are two from the Hypogastrica, which are
inserted in the root of the Yard, and through his length are dispersed. About
the midst the right goes into the left, and the left into the right. Yet so as
a vein goes along the back, promiscuously accompanied with nerves even to the
Glans.

It has two great nerves, Nervi 2. ab osse sacro.
which come from the medulla ossis sacri or the root of the Yard. The one is
lost about the midst of the skin of the Yard and stones. The other is
internal, and so runs along the back dispersed to the Glans, Glans.
which is the head of the Yard, fleshy, and softer then the rest, that it hurt
not, and pointed for better entrance. His flesh is sensible and solid; his
substance is spongy, Spongiesae substenitae.
not hollow. It Is covered with a most thin membrane. It has another made of
the duplicature of the skin, which is called Praeputium. Praeputium. (...).
Corona. sutura. (...). Femen.
The upper part is called (...), the circle, Corona. The lower line Sutura, or
(...). that to the Fundament (...). between the fundament and the stones (...),
Femen aut interfemineum.

In the head there has been of late years a new disease, or rather a new
symptom of the old, which is called Chrysstalline from his shining
brightness, Chryslailine.
very frequent in France. I have seen one not far from this place; and I heard
of another about Temple Bar, for which my Counsel was asked.

De Thorace.
FRom the lower belly our Anatomicall Doctrine has led us to the middle
Region, in which reigns the king of life.

This middle belly is called Thorax, (...), Thorax, (...).
id est, salire, for the perpetual motion of the heart. And although
Hippocrates, Aristotle, Rufus Ephesius, and the rest of the ancients did
include the lower belly; yet with Galen and the Physic School we shut it up
between the Clavicles and the pointed Cartilage.

Situs is between the upper and the lower belly, Situs.
for the fitter and apter distribution of life and heat. In the upper part are
the clavicles; in the lower the midriffe; before, the sternum; behind, the
vertebrae of the Back. The right and left side are walled with 12. ribs, and
diverse sorts of muscles.

Figure is ovall, Figure.
and most capacious; the fore part and hinder part broader here then in any
other creatures, for the better capacity of lungs and heart; for man has most
use of spirit.

Substance is not altogether bony, Substantia non tata ossea, nec carnea.
as is the scull; so all motion should be lost; nor all fleshy, as is the lower
belly, so all parts might fall in together, and so cause suffocation. Therefore
Nature has provided an instrument with an intercourse of flesh and bones: so
that by the bones an equal amplitude i^preserved, and by the muscles a
freedom of motion is maintaied. Therefore having placed this great Prince, the
Heart, in the chest, she presently set a guard about it for his defense and
security, which was to be preserved by cold air. Therefore she put him into a
moveable castle, that by his spreading, air for his refreshing might be drawn
into the lungs; and by his contraction, fuliginous vapors and smoaks might be
expelled.

The Chest is divided into parts containing and contained. Parts continentes
and conentae; communes, propriae. Propriae, durae, out melles.
Containing are either common or proper. The common are our first five recited
in our lower belly, as scarfskin, skin, fat, the fleshy pannicle, and the
membrane of the muscles. The proper parts are either hard or soft. Hard are
either bones or Cartilages. Soft are either fleshy properly, as muscles; or
improperly, as corpora mammarum, which according to the sex do differ; or are
membranous, as Pleura, Mediastinum.

Parts contained are all instruments of life and respiration, as the Heart,
Contentae.
the Lungs, the Vena Cava ascendent, the Asperae Arteria, the Vena Arteriosa,
the Arteria Venesa. the Nerve of the 6. Conjugation. Of all which in an
Anatomicall method we will speak, and first de mammis virorum.

De Mammis Virorum.
THe Breasts are the first; Mammae. Papillae. diversa a saemin.
which are called Mammae, or Papillae, Pappes. Riolanus is curious in Names,
which we will omit. The composition and the end is not the same in men and
women, although the seat be the same, and fixed upon Pectoralis musculus, to
take from women that brag, that they should have an ornament which men want.
In men they are made of Scarf-skin and fat. In viris sine glandulis. Hippoc.
Secundum Aristotelem Lac ieneutes.
Hippocrates denies them Glandules. Bauhinus says the like. Yet is some men who
have carnem spissam, says Aristotle 1. Hist. Animal, cap. 12. there is found a
certain moisture like unto milk, but unfit for nourishment. Yet we read of
diverse which had great store (as of him in Cardanus) and that to be Physical;
Cardanus. Matthiolus ad Epilepsiam. Vsus ad tutelans, ad pulchritudinem.
in Matthiolus good against the falling sickness. These are made for the
defense of the contained parts, their beauty and pleasure.

In their Center are the Papillae or Teats, of a spungy substance, Papillae.
substantis spongissa.
according to Vesalius, which Riolanus denies, and says that they are a double
skin with a production of the membrane of the glandulous body, which is
fistulous; and Laurentius will have it like the head of the yard, apt to be
erected.

They have external veins ab axillari ramo; and internal a subclavio, Vena ab
axillari a subclavio.
for their nourishment: and arteries for their life. Yet Riolanus does deny the
teats to have either veins or arteries. Nervi a Costali.
Nerves for exquisite sense a Costali. This black Circle about them is called
Areola, by the Greeks (...). (...) Vsus.


The use of the Teats in men is altogether for beauty sake.

De Musculis medii ventris.
WE come to the Muscles, Musculi ad Costas, out
which are of two sorts. Either they are placed upon the ribs, and so fixed to
them; or are woven in between them, and are called Intercostales. Intercostales.
The first sort move the shoulder and the back; and these are placed under
them: or they move the chest; and these are outward or inward. The external
are either before or behind. Before on both sides are three; we will only name
them, and leave the consideration of them to another place. The first is
Pectoralts, which is under the the Paps; the second, Serratus major; the third,
Serratus minor. Behind on each side ten. Cucullaris, Latissimus, Levator
patientiae, Rhomboides, Serratus posticus superior, Serratus posticus inferior;
Sacrolumbus longissimus, Semispinatus, Splenius, Complexus.

Concerning the Intercostales, we will a little beyond custom enlarge our
selves. Intercostales 44.
The Intercostales 44. in number: for the spaces between the ribs are on each
side eleven, and every space has two muscles: so that each side has 22.
whereof 11. are external, 11. internal. These are fleshy, narrow, and long,
according to the length of their spaces. Their fibers are carried from one rib
to another obliquely, in a contrary position: so that the internal and
external cut themselves as the letter X. Intercostales externa.
The external or superior are carried from the inferior part of the upper
ribs to the upper part of the inferior ribs. These begin behind from the
transverse process of the vertebrae, unto which the ribs are tied, and with
fibers obliquely forward throughout the whole course of the ribs to the
Cartilage, and are joined to the Sternon, not capable of tendons through the
shortness of the space. Internae.


The internal Muscles are carried from the upper part of the lower ribs, unto
the inferior part of the upper ribs, and begin from that part where the ribs
are bended, and with oblique ascending fibers are carried forwards, and fill up
both the bony and cartilaginous spaces of the ribs, and keeping the same order
in the fibers are carried into the bones of the Sternon. These fibers not
justly distinguished, make authors to number them diversely: as Columbus to 89.
Secundum Columb. 89.
But Avicen put this consideration into him. Can. 1. Fen. 1. Doct. de Musc.
Vesalius considering six spaces belonging to the ten ribs, gives four muscles
to each space, and three spaces to the short, to each space two muscles. But
Varolus well observes to the dilatation and constriction of the chest, all
muscles according to their greatness to concur.

In the use of these muscles Anatomists do differ. Vsus secundum Vesalium.
Vesalius would have the external muscles in expiration to bring the ribs
together; the internal to sever them, and so to serve for inspiration.
Columbus. Riolanus.
Columbus will have none of this. And Riolanus will not have the ribs to be
moved by these muscles at all. So that we say with Bauhinus, that they serve
for dilatation. I add contraction, and that per accidens, as they are carnous
ligaments.

De Claviculis.
THe consideration of these and the ribs, Clovicula.
properly belongs to the History of Bones, But least we should speak of the
chest without bones, I will give you briefly a discourse of both; and first of
the channel bones, which are (...), (...).
Claviculae, because they shut up the whole chest. They are two, of each side
one.

Situs in the lower part of the neck; Situs
and the upper part of the chest. They are not straight, but like a long S.

Figure long and thick, Figura In viris magis ourvs,
and more crooked in men then women, that they hinder not the motion of the
arm. In women they are less crooked, and lifted upward; and hence they are
not so active, as we may perceive by their flinging of stones: besides in
regard of beauty, not to have there a dint inward in the top of the chest as is
in men. How subclavius and pectoralis muscles do arise we will not speak; Vsus.
but tell you that they are made least the shoulders with the arm should fall
into the chest, whereby many motions of the arms would be lost, to which they
are a strength. Yet some would have them not to belong to the fabric of the
chest, because most beasts which have chests want them.

De Sterno.
THe forepart of the chest is called Sternon; it is convexe, long, Sternum.
and broad, like to an old fashion dagger with a handle, as Bauhinus would have
it; and therefore it is called Ensiforme. Ensiforme.


The Substance of this is not as other bodies is, solid, but spongy, ruddy,
Substantia spongiose.
and compounded of bones and cartilages. In old men it is but one bone. In
children it is altogether cartilagineous. It begins in the middle to be first
bone, and then the upper part before the lower. Notata 6. lin. quandoque 4. vel
3.
In children six pieces are marked with a transverse line: in more years
sometimes three, and sometimes four appear; and the lines from beneath wear out
first. The first bone is broad and thick, and has a hollownesse in the upper
part of it on both sides, to which the head of the clavicles is inoculated. The
second is narrower, and has many sinus, Perforatum.
which receive the cartilages of the third fourth, and sixth rib. In women,
first Silvius, and then Eustachius, observed a broad hole for the transmitting
of vessels. The third is less, and ends in the pointed cartilage, which by the
Arabian Translatours is called Malum Granatum. Cartilago Ensiformis, variae
figurae.
It has many forms, not altogether pointed, for it is sometimes broad,
sometimes forked, oftentimes round. It has a hole in it, which is observed by
few, Observat foramin.
for the conveiance of venas mammarias cum Nervo. Being pressed by outward
injuries, or inward griefs, it brings all the offenses of the stomach.
Concerning Procidentiam of this place, Codronchius. 1602.
Codronchius 1602. wrote of it, as of a new disease of this part. But we leave
his discourse to be examined by the Masters of Anatomy Therapeuticall.

We may observe here but a little beneath there is sometimes a palpitation,
which comes not always from Caeliaca Arteria, but from the motion of the
heart, striking the center of the Diaphragma. In men the whole Sternum is more
elevated, in women for their greater breasts more depressed.

Use is the same of the ribs and pointed cartilage by his softness and
yieldings to give way to external injuries, Vsus.
and to defend the parts that are under it, as the mouth of the stomach, which
indeed never hangs backward. Yet in living, compression of this part or
friction will cause nauseam. Besides, in vomituris, here, not backward, we
complain of Pain.

De Costis.
COstae are commonly twelve on each side. Melancthon inlib. de Anima, Costae
12. Melancthon, in Adamo 13.
says that Adam had 13 and Fallopius follows. We will not irreligiously play
with Scripture. To our Anatomists. Fallopius. Riolanus. Columb. Bauhinus.
Fallopius saw two several times 13; Riolanus once; Columbus once in a woman
at Pisa, 13. and in Padua 11. Bauhinus remembers one with 13. which one upon
the left side was perfect, that on the right side was imperfect. Piccolh.
Piccolhominy says that in both sides they never go above 12. howsoever, their
number argues plenty or scarcity of stuff.

They are divided into two sorts, Verae 7.
true and false; true are the upper seven, because with the vertebrae they make
a perfect figure; (...) duae. (...) tret.
and these have their proper names. The two uppermost are called (...),
retorta. The next two (...), solidae. The last three (...), pectorales. The
last 5. are called false ones, Nothae 5.
because they are less and shorter; neither do they touch the Sternon: they
are softer, and almost cartilagineous. The eleventh and twelfth are tied to the
Diaphragma. Their substance though it be bony, Substantiae spongiosae.
yet it is spungy. The upper seven have a double articulation to the vertebrae,
the rest a simple. The upper seven reach to the Sternon, the other five not.

Figure is like a bow; Figura.
in their rise they are narrow and round, and so grow broader, and then
narrower. The lower side is thinner. The first is the broadest, the lowest the
narrowest. The broader part is called Palmula; Palmula.
that which is next the Spina, Remulus. Remulus.
The inside is smoothest; the lower edge is hollow, and has a channel (yet
Vesalius places this in the upper 3) to receive a vein, an artery, and a nerve.
Hence it is plain that apertion is to be from above downward, and that between
the 5. and 6. rib, retracta cute, ne transversae fibrae intercostalium (quod
per rectam sectionem fieret) dissecentur.

Use is for the defense of the contained parts, Vsus.
and for the upholding the muscles of respiration, lest falling they should
hinder the motion of the heart, lungs, and lower belly.

De Diaphragmate
AT the lower end of the Ribs is the Diaphragma, Diaphragma.
so called first by Plato, as Galen tells us 5. de loc. affect. By some of the
Greeks (...), (...).
because with this the mind is hurt; by Pliny, Praecordia, Praecordia.
quia cordipraetenduntur. Yet Celsus takes Praecordia for Hypochondriis, Septum
transversum.
and this for Septum transversum, because it divides the instruments of
respiration from those of nourishment, transversly cutting the body into two
venters. Aristotle calls it (...), (...). Cinctum, Disseptum.
Cinctum, Cingulum; Macrobius, Disseptum. It is the first and principal
instrument of free respiration.

Figure is circular-like. Figura circularis.
Some will have it like a Place, others like a Racket. It Is the most noble
muscle of the whole body: it is but one, and great, answerable to the lower
part of the chest. Fish, although they breath not, yet they have it; but with
them it is membranous. In fouls it is wanting, which is recompensed by the
motion of their ribs.

Situs is cross the body, Situs.
and is carried from the Sternon along the extremities of the short ribs to the
region of the loins, as low as the 22. vertebrae; ad 22. verteb.
some will, even to Os sacrum. In quiet it is carried upwards, as is seen in
dead bodies; but when he moves and is contracted, hebend ^s downwards.

Substantia is divided into two circles. Substantia in duos circulos. Nerveus.
The first is nervous, seated in the midst as in a center from whence many
fibers run, as to his circumference. Most Anatomists hold this to be the head
or beginning of this muscle, as Vesalius and Silvius. Yet Hippocrates lib. de
Oss. not. properenem exurgit. Some will have it a cartilagine ensiformi;
Piccolhominy, a costarum cartilaginibus. Laurentius will have this nervous part
to be the tail, but gives no reason. Carnous.
The other circle is all fleshy, tied about the chest, and compasses the
first. 2. Membran.
It has two membranes: the lower a Peritonaeo, the upper a Pleura. Bauhinus
will have it have a proper coat, which is very thin, that by his own proper
circumscription he may be distinguished from other parts.

Vena come from the Trunk of the Vena Cava ascendent. Venae Threnicae. Nervi ad
nerveum circulum.
And they have two arteries and two nerves a spinali medulla out of the 4. and
5. vertebrae, and are from thence carried into the nervous circle.

His perforations are two. Perforationes 2.
The one to make way for the Oesophagus into the stomach, the other for the
ascent of the Vena Cava to the Heart. Some do add a third for the descent of
Aorta. But this, and sine pari, sticks close to the vertebrae; and the midriffe
comes close to both. Some will have these to be no perforations, but
productions of the Peritonaeum and Pleura. It Is observed of those that die of
any wound of this part, that they die laughing, Hippoc, risu mortui vulnevati.
as by Hippocrates 7. Epidem. Tycho thrust through the midriffe died laughing.

Use is for free respiration. Vsus ad liberam respirationens.
It Is loosened in expiration, and bent in inspiration. But from whence this
motion? is it insetus, aut aliunde? as from the heart striking the center of
the midriffe; or from the Systole and Diastole of the lungs; as while we breath
they are dilated, and the midriffe is drawn downwards. But in expiration the
lungs being contracted fuga vacui, the midriffe is contracted. 2. ad
Hypochondriorum ventilationem. 3. ad excretianem.
2. To fan the Hypochondria, especially the liver, which in his upper and
unequal part has no arteries. 3. To help the excretion of the belly stuff: for
if this muscle from above, as it were with hands, should not press the
bowels, it were indifferent for the excrements to be voided upwards or
downward. Seeds Risus. Plin.
Pliny will have it the seat of mirth, and Aristotle titillationis; and homo
and piscis titillantur.

De Pleura.
WHat the Peritonaeum is in the lower Region, Pleura.
the same is Pleura in the middle; for it embraces and invests all the parts
of the chest, but the twelfth rib.

His substance is nervous; Sul stantia tenuis.
but thin as the Peritonaeum: and some will have it thicker and stronger; but
that is contradicted by sight. It Is thickest toward the Back. Superficies
externa, interna. Ad vertebras pinguis. Duplex.
His outward superficies is unequal: the inward (as it were answered) is
smooth with fat. It Is fatty toward the Vertebrae. It Is perforated where it
sends vessels either within or without the chest. It Is double for the securing
the intercostall vessels, which are carried through the duplicature of it.

Venae, Venae.
from the intercostals and Azygos, with so many arteries.

Nervi from the 6. pair: Nervi. Vsus 1. ad tutelam. 2. ad vestitum partium. 3.
ad enstod^am (...) pulmom^^^.
and in this duplicature is begotten Pleuritis.

Use is 1. to defend the lungs from the hardness of the ribs. 2. To invest all
the contained parts, for it gives a common coat to them all. 3. Some add to
keep the lungs that they fall not between the spaces of the ribs.

De Mediastino.
MEdiastinum is a double membrane, Mediastinum duplex membrana.
right and left. Galeno (...): because it divides the cavity of the chest,
which the Pleura incompasseth, into two parts. Columbus calls it
intersepimentum, and dissepimentum. Intersepimentum Columb. Situs.
Their rise is from the middle of the chest from the Pleura doubled by one
softer and thinner then Pleura; and their length is from the jugulars to the
midriffe: their depth from the chest to the vertebrae. Their cavity has many
membranous fibers, which concur in the making of a voice. Persorotio.
In this cavity many times there is a collection of humor, which Columbus will
have perforated. Yet Paraeus discommends this operation. Galen used it in servo
Marulli Minographi, and he found the Pericardium fixed to the Sternon. and
Hippocrates lib. de intern. affect. costam treaeo, fortassis mediastinum.

Use, first to hold the Pericardium firm, Vsus. 1. tenere Pericardium. 2. ad
tutelam v^sorum. 3. Pulmones dividere.
that it move not to the sides to the Sternon, or to the vertebrae. 2. To
secure the vessels in their passages. 3. To divide the parts from contagion
that might happen to each other.

Thus have we run over all the coverings of the chest. We come now to the Parts
contained, as Vena Cava ascending, the great Artery, the Pericardium, the
Heart, the Lungs, the Aspera Arteria, the Oesophagus.

De Thymo
THymus or (...), Thymus. Substantia spongiosa.
the sweetbread, is a glandulous body, soft and spongy, white. It Is the
greatest and the softest. It Is seated in the highest part of the chest, Situs
ad Sternum.
Juxta jugulum, under the Sternon and above the vertebrae, for securing the
divisions of the vessels which run to the arms and shoulders like a pillow. It
varies with our years. Infantibus major.
In those that are new born it is great, in regard of the tenderness of the
vessels, and their weakness: but in adultis it dries and decreaseth even to a
small quantity.

De Vena Cava Ascendente.
WE have heretofore divided Venam Cavam into Truncum descendentem and
ascendentem, Vena Cava ascendens.
of which we will now speak. Vena Cava is derived from the upper part of the
liver, and by his proper perforation pierces the midriffe to the heart, and so
takes his course to the jugulars. But in this way he yields 4. branches. 1. is
Phrenicus Ramus. 2. Coronalis. 3. Azyges. 4. Intercostalis.

Phrenicus, Phr^^ica.
which Bauhinus calls Diaphragmaticus, is one out of each side, and is
disseminated with many branches throughout the Diaphragma, and sends some to
Pericardium and Mediastinum; and sometimes the right arises within the chest,
and sometimes the left beneath the Diaphragma from Vena Cava, with which, and
with Adiposa it is often joined. The Trunk going forward pierces the
Pericardium about the eight rib, where he makes a large Sinus, and so making
himself round, he ascends in a whole Trunk and a piece by the way into the ear
of the heart, and so into the ventricle of the heart as into a Cistern. And
without the heart, having cut the Pericardium, appears Coronaria. Galen will
have it a little one, Coronaria.
Vesalius a great one. Such as it is, it compasses the whole Basis of the
heart like a Crown. It is many times simple, Simplex. quandoque duplex.
seldom double, and shoots out branches down almost to the point of the heart.
But the most are on the left side, as being thickest, and therefore in most
need of nourishment.

Azygos is the third, Azygos simplex.
and is without fellow, and in man it is commonly one, The Vena Cava having
gotten about the Pericardium, brings forth this vein sine Pari, between the 4.
and 5. vertebrae of the chest. Out of the back and inferior side of the Cava,
it goes in a right line. But above the Trunk asperae Arteriae bending sometimes
to the Spina to the right, sometimes to the left, where it touches the Coats of
the vertebrae, it runs up; and coming to the middle of them, it runs down, and
so about the 8. or 9. vertebrae is in the midst. And so coming down under the
artery, toward the end of the chest dividing it self, pierces the Dia.
phragma with the Aorta, In sheep it goes down the left side: and in all that
chew the cud it is double; one on the right, another on the left: which is in
men very rare. Duplex apud Bauhinum quandoque,
Yet Bauhinus observed that once he found out of each side one, which sprang
out of the Trunk of Vena Cava, about the third vertebra, and both inserted
themselves into the head of the Emulgent. Sometimes above the Emulgent it is
joined to the Cava, sometimes beneath, even at Os Sacrum, it enters the Cava,
Therefore Bauhinus advises, Observatio ejusdem.
that in the beginning of a Pleurisy Vena Poplitis or Saphena may well be
taken, and after apply Cupping-glasses to the loins; because it has been
observed that purulent matter of a Pleurisy has critically been avoided by
urine. Valoula Amati.
Riolanus embraced the invention of Amatus Lusitanus concerning the valves
which belong to this vein, and brags, Tres Riolani.
Ego caeteris Anatomicis perspicacior ac diligentior vidi quod videre non
potuerunt; and I fear, things not to be seen. Sure I am, Fallopius denies them,
and so does Laurentius, and Eustachius in lib. de Vena sine pari. Well; but
where does he put these three valves? The one in his exortu, In exortu unam
inveni.
the other two directly opposite, to hinder all sudden rushings of blood.

This vein has 8. branches, Rami hujus octo,
to nourish on both sides the 8. lower ribs and spaces, and shoots many small
veins into Oesophagus. It has communion with the chest veins which come from
the Axillary. Hence the benefit of bleeding on the same side: Iungitur
adiposae, quandoque E. mulgenti.
it is sometimes joined with adiposae, and as I said, with the Emulgent, for
the better purging the lungs by them; (and not by Arteria venosa) and so to the
left ventricule of the heart; and from thence into the great arteries, and so
to the Kidneys.

Intercostalis is the last, Intercostalis duplex ad 3.4. spacia.
and nourishes 3. or 4. spaces of the upper ribs. But this is sometimes
wanting, and then Azygos discharges that duty. Some have observed a valve in
his exortu, he is on each side. It comes a Ramo Subclavio at the beginning of
the jugular veins, A Subclavio.
and puts some of his branches into the vertebrae where the Nerves come forth.

The Trunk of Vena Cava having pierced the Pericardium, and so being upheld by
the Mediastinum and Thymum, runs upwards in a straight line, and whilst he is
in the chest it is called Subclavius, and from this comes diverse veins from the
upper and from the lower part. From the lower, before that Subclavius is
divided, come four branches. Mammaria^.
1. Mammaria. 2. Mediastina. 3. Cervicalis. 4. Muscula inferior. Mammaria has
diverse beginnings from before, and the middle seat of the Bifurcation.
Sometimes a Subclavit rame, sometimes from the very Trunk Venae Cavae before it
is divided, this runs under the Sternum to the pointed cartilage, where he
sends perforamen ensiformis out a branch, and by his way he is mingled with
Azygos and Intercostales through the several spaces of the ribs, and so part
of it goes forth of the chest to the muscles there and the breasts, and part
goes down to the muscles of the belly to the branches of Epigastrica, where
they join along the Hypochondria to the flanks. Mediastina.


Mediastina comes from the Trunk of the left Subclavii by the region of the
internal jugular, and is carried above the hollow of the lung, and the
Pericardium, per Thymum and Mediastinum. Hence it is called by Laurentius, A
Laure^^^^ Thymica diciter.
Thymica. and Laurentius puts to it Capsularis, because he would have the
Pericardium to be nourished by it. Howsoever, it runs into the Diaphragma along
with the Nerve for his better nourishment.

Cervicalis is a small vein which runs upwards close to the Vertebrae,
Cervicalis.
and gives nourishment to the muscles which lodge upon the vertebrae, and
thrusts his branches sometimes into the for amina of the nerves for the aliment
spinalis medullae.

Muscula Inferior has his original sometimes from the external jugulary by
the upper muscles of the chest, Muscula inferier.
and the inferior of the neck; before they come out of the cavity of the
chest, they are from the Subclavio, but once come out they change their name,
and are called Axillaris.

Axillaris before it is divided gives two branches, Scapularis interna, and
externa. Axillaris ^a^^^. Scapularis interna.
Scapularis internae runs along the muscles of the shoulder, and under the
glandules of the arm-holes. Externa.
Scapularis externa runs to the external part of the shoulder, and a piece is
carried between the flesh and the skin. After this the Axillary is divided into
an upper vein, which is Cephalica, and into a lower which is Basilica;
Cephalica. Basilica. Thoracica superior. Thoracica inferior.
out of this comes two branches; Thoracica superior, which runs to the chest,
and is plainly seen in women's breasts. Thoraica inferior runs along the chest
whithout, and joins it self with branches of Azygos, and distributes it self
along the broad muscle of the Back. And therefore in Pleurisies out of the
Axillary of the same side blood may be taken.

From the upper part Subclavii 3. veins arise; Muscula superior, Iugularis
externa, and interna; which ascend up by the sides of the neck; and each
orifice has 2. valves to hinder the falling back of blood, otherwise the upper
parts should have no nourishment.

Muscula superior runs along by the external jugular, Muscula superior.
and into the skin and back-part of the neck it spreads many branches.

Iugularis externa is commonly one in each side, Iugularis externa. ^trinque
duplex.
sometimes two in his rise, and sometimes two in the middle of his course. It
differs a fingers breadth from the internal, and from under the clavicle he
sends forth two branches. The one arises to the back part of the head; the
other ad Deltoidem musculum sub acrono, and so running likewise up the neck, he
comes to the corners of the inferior jaw, where part of him is dispersed into
fauces; the other part behind the ears into the forehead upon the Temples,
where it meets with some branches of the forepart. So that you see a branch of
this runs to the face, ears, and forehead. And therefore menta behind the ears,
for the shortness of the way, in passions of the eyes is to good purpose.
Besides, there is an Anastomosis between the inward and outward jugulars and
their arteries. Concerning the apertion of this outward in Apoplexies and pains
of the head, Apertio ejus.
in forti angina, asthmate acuto, in passions of the Lungs (nay Riolanus in
that of the spleen, and sides commends ti. Rosetus. Prosper Alpinus. Carpus.
) Rosetus de partu Caesareo page 430. and by my Master Prosper Alpinus lib. de
med. Aegyptior. cap. 10. and Iac. Carpus teaches the way, id est, a finger
distance beneath the angle of the nether jaw. Yet we know the danger by
Hippocrates 6. Epid. 5. sect. tom. 22. Hippoc. Lisae.
and Donatus Grammaticus calls them Lisae, quod ex iis elisis animal statim
extinguitur: unde elisum, quicquid ex tali causa mortuum est. Galen. Averroes.
Lethalis.
And Galen and Averroes pronounce that Iugularibus percussis mortem infer ex
immodica sanguinis profusione. I saw it in Padua, and in a Patient in
Tower-street. But he had leaches in the midst of the neck about the
Bifurcation. From this to the Cephalica some have observed a Branch.

Iugularis interna is great in man for his great brain. Iugularis interna.
It arises a cavo subclavio close to the commissure Claviculae cum Sterno, by
the side of Aspera Arteria. It sends small branches ad fauces: and this inward
branch close to the Styloides, enters the Cranium, and is applied to the Sinus
Durae Matris, pouring blood into them. And this was called apoplectica by the
Arabian Translatours. Apoplectica Arabibus.
Andervacus observes some to have 2, 3, or 4, on a side.

De Arteria Magnae Ascendente.
IT is but one labor to look upon the Arteries and the veins: only in the
history of the Arteries these things are considerable. Aorta. ^ Tunicae 3.
First in his texture. Aorta in his original is divided into 3. Coats; the
external is soft and membranous; 2. harder; the 3. cartilagineous: Coming out
of the left ventricle, he presently encompasseth the Basis of the heart with 2.
small branches, seldom with one, which are called Coronaria, Coronaria.
and so coming forth under the Trunk Venae Arteriosae, ascends upward; and is
lesser then the descending branch. 2. Azygos sine arteria. Carotis.
Azygos has no artery within the chest. 3. without, it changes his name, and
is called Carotis, because pressed together hominem caro sive sopore gravat. It
runs by the sides asperae Arteriae, with the internal jugular to the Basis of
the Scull. But the left is not mingled with Carotis as the right is. 4. That
the external jugular has no artery, Externa jugularis sine arteria.
but will have those pone aures to be from the internal.

De Nervis per Thoracem disseminatis.
ALI Anatomists hold as a position aeternae veritatis, Nervi 8 ad pectus.
that all Nerves come from the Brain: some from within, and some from without
the Scull. Those which belong to the chest (for their history we now deliver)
are 8. Diaphragmatici duo.
Two Diaphragmatici, which spring from the space between the third and fourth
vertebrae, and so between the duplicature of the Mediastinum descend to the
nervous center of the midriffe. Two recurrentes, Recurrentes duo.
which descending out of the Calvaria from the 6. pair, run by the side of the
Carotis, till it comes to the Iugulum, where it divides it self into 3.
manifest branches; Recur. dexter circa axillarei.
of which these recurrents are one branch. The right recurrent embraces the
axillary artery, and so winding about it as about a screw, runs upwards into
the muscles of the Cervix with small but many branches. Recurrens sinister
circa truncum magnae arteriae. Vocales a Galeno inventae.
The left recurrent for the straightness of the axillary is not bowed, but
winds it self about the Trunk of the great artery, where it bends to the back.
These are likewise called vocales, first found by Galen. They are the
principal instruments of the voice: for these being cut or intercepted, as by
cutting a live dog in one of these branches, he is made half-voiced presently.

Costalis, Costalis.
and so to the Viscera. Stomachicus, which runs between the duplicature of
Mediastinum, Stomachicus.
where is a great plexus nervorum, ten or twelve branches for the lungs, and so
piercing the Diaphragma, comes to the left mouth of the stomach, and so to the
head of the Colon: whence many times after along colic comes Raucedo.

De Pericardio.
THe Heart being the noblest part in the Body of man, Pericardion.
therefore nature has provided a peculiar defense for it, which is called
Pericardion. The Latins have many names, as Cordis involucrum, Capsa, Capsula,
Arcula, Vagina: Capsula. etc.
The purse of the heart, a large membrance compassing the heart.

Figure is Pyramidall, Figura Pyramidalis.
or rather like a Pine-kernell: In the Basis larger, and so runs down sharp at
the point.

Situs, in the midst of the chest, Situs.
and closed by the membranes of the Pleura.

Connexus, to the Mediastinum, Connexus Mediastino, Pleurae, Spinae, nervoso
circulo.
by many fibers; before, to the Pleura, where the cartilages of the sixth or
seventh ribs of the left side; behind to the spinam dorsi; beneath to the
nervous circle of the Diaphragma; and this is a privilege only for man, and
the securing the Vena Cava's inlet to the heart, says Vesalius and Riolanus.
Yet more to the left side then right side, and so strongly, but without
breaking it cannot be separated. This tie makes as if the motion of the heart
were directed to the center. Concerning his original Anatomists do differ:
Some from Mediastinum, others from Pleura. It Is made of two coats: Tunicae
duae, 1. A Mediastino.
the outward is from the Mediastinum, Basis of the heart and the Pericardium, A
vasis Cordis.
are borrowed from the Pleura by this common coat.

Substance is conveniently strong; Substantiae fortis.
for if harder, it would have hurt the Lungs; if softer, it might be hurt by
the bones. Yet it has a hardness for maintaining motion of the heart.
Superficies externa, interna.
His outside is fatty and fibrous: his inside smooth and slippery, for the
easier motion of the heart. It Is tied to the Basis of the heart, which is over
against the fifth vertebra of the chest; but not tied to the body of the heart,
but is equally so much distant from the Basis, the point and the sides, as is
fit for his dilatation, and to contain his serous humor. Perforata.
It Is perforated in his Basis for the inlet and outlet of Venae Cavae, Venae
Arteriosae, and Arteriae Venosae, and Magnae Arteriae.

Vasa from the Mediastinum, Vasa.
and partly veins from Phrenicae, where it is joined to the Diaphragma. And you
know Laurentius did create a new vein here called Capsularis. Sine Arteriis.
It has no arteries, for it wants them not in regard of his near seat to the
heart. It has nerves from the recurrent. Vsus 1. ad Cordis tutelam. 2. ad
serosum humorem. 3. ut sit vinculum.


Use 1. To defend the heart, and keep him from pressure. 2. To contain the
serous humor. 3. As a ligament to tie him in his proper seat.

De Humore in Pericardio contento.
IN this purse is contained a serous humor like urine, Humor.
but free from acrimony and saltness. Negatur a Curtio. dubitat Vesalius.
Extincto nascitur secundum Vegam. Semper adest secundum Piccolhomineum. 1. a
semin.
Matthias Curtius denies there is any in living bodies, and Vesalius doubts it.
Thomas a Vega 5. de loc. affect. Extincto animali enasci scribit. Fallopius and
all since him positively conclude it. But how it comes hither they agree not.
Piccolhominy sets down six opinions. 1. from the watery part of seed in the
first Generation, as from the flatulent part of seed air is begotten in the
ears. Ab adipe agitato.
from the thicker part of air breathed in, which is turned into water. A denso
aere.
from the watery excrements of the third concoction which is made in the veins
and arteries of the heart. And this has some probability, A serosis
excrementis.
because the palpitation of the heart, which is caused by too much moisture
here, is cured by letting of blood, according to Galen and Aegineta. A
glandulis linguae.
which slide by the arteries into the heart, and so into the Pericardium. A
Potu.
which like dew comes down the aspera Arteria, and so into Arteriam venosam.
And this is seen in a dog licking milk died with saffron.

It Is not denied but that it is most in dead bodies, since the spirits that were
about the heart are now cold and resolved into water; for this cause it is most
plentiful in women, Copiosior in senibus and foeminis. In becticis biliosior.
and in old men. In Hecticks there is but little, and that yellowish: where
there is too much, beside Palpitation, there is fear of sudden death and
suffocation.

Use, Vsus 1. ad incendio tueri.
is first to keep the heart from burning, that it grows not dry, as in fevers,
fastings, 2. ad facilitandum motum.
and watchings. 2. To facilitate the motion of the heart, which dissipates and
spends sensim: but once stayed, it brings forth hairs in the chest: but held
within this purse; if the water be thick and glewy, some will have it turn into
hairs. 3. Vt innatet Cor.
3. That the heart might swim in it, so that it weigh it not down.

Bauhinus observes in the cavity of the chest there is a water mingled cruore,
Observatio Bauhini de cruore.
with the which the parts of the chest are moistened, and cooled, and besmeared,
which per Diapedesin sweats like dew from the vessels. Carpus de cruore
miraculoso.
Carpus speaks of the miraculous cruor which came out of the right side, and
Laurentius out of Pericardium. But we with all reverence will forbear this
discourse.

De Cord.
WE are now come to the heart, the Prince of the vital faculty, the fountain
of all natural heat, the root of the Arteries, and, secundum Averroem, the
Principium perfectivum sanguinis. Cor a currendo. (...) quasi (...).
It Is called Cor a currendo, from his perpetual motion; of the Greeks (...),
quasi (...), because it has the principality over all parts. Never was any
creature without a heart, nor any with two hearts. As for Pliny's Partridges,
they are toys; and the bini vertices, and the Mucrones duo in cord are fit
stories for Monsieur du Cledat to believe.

Situs in the medio of the hollow of the chest, that is his Basis, id est,
says Riolanus, Situs in medio pectoris.
in the midst between the clavicles and the midriffe, and Sternum, and
Vertebras, both for security, and the better to poise the body at the fifth rib,
and compassed with the lobes of the Lungs as with fingers. His Mucro is forward
on the left hand, and under the left pappe toward the cartilages of the sixth
and seventh ribs on the left side, for the better entrance of Vena Cava.
Aristotle would have it for the warming of the left which is colder then the
right, which is made hot by the seat of the Liver, Vena Cava, and vena sine
pari. So that both parts in strength, heat, and weight are equal.

But from what part this motion? Pectus ferire basin cordis cum Aorta ibi
eminente, quae cietur cumipso Cord eodem momento; provide Cor cono suo oblique
feriens centrum nerveum Diaphragmatis basi sua, vel potius per Aortam pectus
tangit, and molliter percutit. Riolanus page 372.

His motion is felt more on the left. Motus ad sinistram. 1. propter
ventrieulum.
1. for that the left ventricle, the receipt of vital spirit, is here more
perceived. 2. In regard of the great artery which is on that side, 2. Propter
arteriam magnam.
from whence principally comes his motion. In dead bodies his weight and great
artery makes him bend on one side.

Connexus is by the help of Pericardium to the Mediastinum, Connexus
Pericardio, Vasis. Figura Pyramidalis.
to the Diaphragma, and per vasa aliis partibus.

Figure is peculiar, and not communicable to any other part, as being
Pyramidall, or like a Pine-nut. And this figure is most useful, since length
is fittest for attraction and expulsion; roundnesse for amplitude, strength,
and defense. It was fit the Basis to be upward for the better receipt of blood
into the right ventricle: for if the Conus had been uppermost, it had sent many
vapors to the brain. It is not equally thick: in his dilating it is round, in
his contraction oblique, and almost Pyramidall. The upper part which is called
Basis, Caput, Radix, Basis.
is broader for the receipt of his vessels. The lower part is called Vertex,
Mucro, Mucro, etc.
Conus, Cuspis, Apex, Extremum, and Cauda. His superficies is smooth and
polite, Superficies lavis.
except it be made unequal by the fat, and by the swelling of the coronary
vessels.

Magnitudo is not all alike, Magnitudo.
and in man it is greater then in other creatures, as the brain and the liver in
proportion. His length is to the breadth of six fingers: 6. digit.
his latitude and depth, four. In timidis majus.
In cowardly creatures it is great; as in Hares, Hearts, Asses, Weesels: so that
the heat being in too great a receipt is weakened. In valiant men it is little
and small, for the union of his heat. Cael. Rhodig. lib. 4. cap. 16. Historia
Rhodig.
says that some thought the heart to grow ij. in a year till man comes to 50.
then so to decrease to an 100. which is the last period of life.

His parts are either external, or internal. External, as the Pericardium,
(of which we have spoken) his proper coat which is so thin that it cannot be
separated: His Adeps; his two sorts of vessels; the one which compasses the
heart; the other that enters the ventricle, his Auriculae. The internae are his
fleshy substance, his ventricles and vales.

Adeps is more in man then in any other creature: Adeps.
which may make some wonderment, if you consider his heat, which will suffer
little on the left ventricle, but all on the right, to the very Conon. Massa
will have it from the thicker part of the blood, the thinner evaporated. But
Achillinus has invented a pretty one. As butter is made by a strong motion, so
adeps here. It is about the Basis, where the greater and lesser vessels are
seated. Nature would have it Adeps non Pinguedo, lest molten by the heat of the
heart it might prove dangerous. Riolanus has seen the heart all wrapped in
fat. Women have more and yellower then men.

Use is to moisten the heart, Vsus adipis humectare Cor.
lest being heated by his continual motion it should dry; but especially in
great fastings and exercises: and according to the increase or decrease of the
heat does it augment or diminish, so much does heat feed upon it. Bauhinus
observed many times certain pieces of fat to be in the ventricles Cordis. But
the Conus is moistened from the humor contained in Pericardio. Coronaria
valvula.


His vessel to nourish the outward part, is Vena Coronaria, which is single,
seldom double. It has a valve like a halfmoon, to hinder the blood from
flowing back into Cavam. To nourish the inward part is Vena Cave. Of both of
these Branches heretofore, as likewise de Arteria Coronaria.

Nervi, from the sixth Conjugation, Nervi.
or from the nerves of the Pericardium, which are distributed in the Basis of
the heart along the Vena Arteriosa. This nerve being stopped, causes sudden
death.

De Substantia, Ventriculis and Auriculis Cordis.
SUbstance, is thick flesh, red, not musculous: Substantia crassa, ex sanguine
arteriali.
it is made of the thicker blood, Ex sanguine arteriali secundum Aponens. page
49. not so red as muscles, yet harder: exceeding thick and solid, that the
spirits and inborn heat which is in the heart should not breath through and be
broken with continual motion. It is more solid in the point then in the Basis:
and here the right fibers are more compacted and thicker then in the head of
the muscles or tendons. Sedas facultatis vitalis. Omnia genera fibrarum.
This flesh is the seat of vital faculty, and the first cause of functions of
the heart. It has all sorts of fibers, though not conspicuous as in a muscle,
to make his motion and defense from injuries. Therefore Galen calls it (...),
(...).
or carnosum viscus. It is not a muscle, because it has all sorts of fibers:
besides, it has natural motion, not voluntary as muscles have.

Motus is continual, Motus continuus.
to prevent his own combustion. This is twofold; Diastole and Systole, which
are made by his fibers: and between the motion there is Quies duplex, Quies
duplex. Diastole cum Conus ad Basin.
id est, Perisystole. Diastole, or Amplification, is when the point by his
right fibers is drawn to the Basis of the heart, and so the heart is made
shorter, but the sides are distended and made sphericall. Diastole non fit
Cordis parientibus diductis and elevatis, ut in folle, as Erasistratus thought,
sed when the point. Yet Riolanus has a third opinion, that in Diastole the
Basis comes to the Conus, and in Systole it does abcedere, quia Conus most
solid and hard cannot be inverted ut adducatur and abducatur.

Use, Vsus sanguinem e Cava haurire in dextrum, aerem in sinistrum. Systole cum
Conus a Basi.
to draw blood by the Vena Cava in dextrum, and air per Arteriam venosam in
sinistrum ventriculum, his valves loosing and yielding to their entrance.

Systole, seu Contractio, is when the point goes from the Basis, and the heart
put to his length and grows narrower, the right fibers loosened, and the
transverse which compass the heart drawn together, and the valves Venae Cavae
and Arteriae venosae shut, Vsus, 1. ad expellendum songuinem e dextro in venam
arteriosam. 2, Aerem ex arteris venosa in Aorsam. Effi^itur ligamentis.
the great artery and Arteria venosa opened, giving way to the blood from the
right by Venam arteriosam into the Lungs, from the left to vital spirits into
the great artery, with a portion of vital blood cum suliginibus per Arteriam
venos^n. This motion is called Systole seu contractio, and depressio dicitur.
This contraction is made by those strong ligaments which are in the inward
ventricles of the heart, which in contraction fall and bring with them the
coats of the heart. But the Motus Cordis originally is seated in the left
ventricle. Motus originaliter in sinistro.
Therefore the right needs no ventilation, except communicated from the left,
as appears by those vessels of the left ventricle, to which only pulsificall
power is communicated. So the motion of the right is like that in the ears,
which is because the neighboring part moves; or from agitation of the blood,
not for that there is in it any faculty of moving: for when the auricula are
dilated, the rest of the arteries are shut. Quatuor motus, duo auricularum, duo
ventricule. rum.
So therefore in viva sectione Animalis alicujus four motions are observed
differing in time and place. 2. proper of the ears. 2. of the ventricles.
Neither is this motion from the nerves, as Fallopius and Piccolhominy would
have it, but from the Parechyma of the heart, and so is natural, not animal
and voluntary.

It has 2. cavities which are called ventres.

Dextra, Ventricu. lus Dexter Semicircularis,
is not exactly round, but has his proper circumscription, and semicircular,
and compasses the bottom of the heart. Yet comes nto to his extremity as
Vesalius would have it. Largior sinistro,
It Is larger and greater then the other for the great quantity of blood it
receives. Sinus sanguineus. Ruf.
Therefore of Rufus it is called sinus sanguineus and venosus. It is a looser
and softer flesh, and of a thinner wall: into this Vena Cava ascends whilst
the heart is dilated it pours in his blood that it might be here concocted and
cleansed. And of the thicker part the inward substance of the heart is
nourished. The thinner part with the same contraction per septum is sweat
through into the left ventticle for the generation of vital spirits; Natus ad
pulmones.
for for the lungs was this ventricle made, as is apparent; for they only have
it who have lungs. In caeteris which respire not, but transpire only, as fish,
have not this right ventricle. So that this right ventricle and the lungs were
made for the left's sake.

Sinister is exactly in the midst of the heart, Sinister Rotundus.
it is narrower then the other, for that it contains less matter. His cavity
is round, and comes down to the point, and has as much flesh as thrice the
right, for the better keeping of natural heat; and more solid, that the vital
spirits vanish not. Therefore it is called Sinus spirituosus, Sinus spirituosus.
arteriosus ventriculus. In this cavity are made the vital spirits, which by
the arteries with arteriall blood are communicated to the rest of the body for
his nourishment and refection. Materies spirituum, Aer externus, sanguis,
The materials are air and blood mixed together. Air received in by the
mouth and nostrils, prepared in the lungs, and per arteriam venosam, whilst the
heat is dilated, is carried into the left ventricle. Blood attenuated in the
right ventricle, partly into the lungs per venam arteriosam for their
nutriment, and partly per septum, is drawn by the ventricle, and retained there
by his innate property, mingled with the air, where by the in born faculty of
the heart, spirit, and continual motion it is perfected, and becomes vital
spirit, and arteriall blood, which in the contraction of the heart is poured
into the great artery, for the life and nourishment of the whole body.
Superficies interna ventriculorum inaequalis.
The inward superficies of both ventricles is unequal and rough, least spirits
and blood there entering, before they be perfected, should glide away. And here
to this business the valves concur. The unevenness is partly ob foveas
plures (which in the left are remarkable) and partly for fleshy bits,
Portiunculae, which about the point of the heart thin and small, in the right
five or six, in the left two, thicker and stronger, unto which the nervous
fibers of the valve, do grow. Ligamenta cordis.
And these by some are called the ligaments of the heart. This is the hottest
according to Galen; howsoever the Peripatetick will have the right. Yet is it
not so hot as to produce hairs, as Pliny reports of Aristomenes, Messen. lib.
11. Historia Benivenii.
cap. 37. and Benivenius and Muretus in var. lect. which is a sign of wicked
man; although sometimes of a crarftily wise and a daring man, Habens in anima
serviles pitos.
sometimes of an eloquent, as Hermogenes in Caelio Rhodig. and Leonidas in
Plutarcho.

These ventricles are divided with a partition which is called Interstitium, or
Paries, or Septum, to keep the contents of the ventricle from sudden juncture.
sic Plato de fatuo, Septum.
It is from the right extuberant; from the left hollow, and of the same
thickness that the left side of the heart, as if the heart had been made for
the left ventricle. It Is full of cells, Cellulatum, poros^^n.
and porous to the right, that the blood in the left might be sweet for the
generation of spirit and arteriall blood. These pores cannot be seen in dead
men, because they fall together. These spiracula or for aminula, as Riolanus
calls them, are carried in a doubtful tract; so that no probe can pierce them:
Ad mucronem pellucidum.
but toward the point where the Septum is most thin, even in dead bodies it is
pervious, whereby the blood may the better be strained through, as is apparent
in an oxes heart well boiled.

Concerning the translation of blood into the left ventricle from the right
there are diverse opinions. De transitu per septum. Galen, Aver. Piccolh.
Laurent. Riolan. Bauhin.
Galen, Averroes, Piccolhominy, Laurentius, Riolanus, (howsoever Bauhinus
mistakes him) and Bauhinus, all these say that the blood is carried through
this Septum from the right into the left. Vesalius is not so forward, Vesalius
dubitat.
but professes his ignorance how per Septum in regard it is so thick. Columb.
Platerus, per venam arteriosam.
Columbus and Platerus say positively that the blood in the right is
attenuated, and by venam arteriosam carried into the lungs, that there
prepared, per Arteriam venosam in might come into the left ventrucle. Botallus
Botallus found out a way by himself; forsooth, from the right ear unto the
left. Vlmus a Caeliaca in Aortam ad Cor.
Vlmus, sanguinem arterialem to be prepared, attenuated, and concocted in the
spleen; thence into the Trunk of Aorta, and so into the right ventricle of the
heart, where mingled with the air prepared in the lungs. But do not valves
hinder this passage? Varolus, per Intestina. Mercatus cum Columbo.
Varolus denies all passages to the left, but only by the trunk from the
Intestina. Mercatus inclines to Columbus concerning the passage, only the finer
part to nourish the lungs, and the thicker and grosser to come to the heart per
Arteriam venosam, and there refined for the rest of the body.

At each side of the Basis of the heart there is an Appendix, which neither in
regard of profit or action, but from similitude is called Auricula, Auricula.
which about the ventricles before the orifices of the vessels are placed to
carry stuff into the heart.

Dextra, Dextra.
which is set before Vena Cava, is greater, and makes with Vena Cava, as it
were, one common body. It Is greater then the left, and his point stands upward.

The Sinistra is placed ad Arteriam venosam. Sinistra.
It Is much less, because his orifice is lesser then that of Vena Cava. It is
likewise sharper, longer in his side, and more wrinkled in his external
superficies, and more crested then the right: harder, but less fleshy, and
thicker, because the ears must answer to their ventricles, since they serve for
a kind of preparation of matter. They are hollow, for the enlargement of their
Sinus, and have a peculiar substance, not communicable to any other part: they
are cuticular, Cuticulares.
least they break by attraction, and for the better following the motion of the
heart: because when the heart is dilated, they like skins are contracted, and
thrust matter to the heart: when they are drawn together the valves are
dilated, because they are moved in a distinct time. The reason (says Galen)
is, because when the heart is distended it is filled; the ears when they are
filled are distented. Extended they are smooth and equal, contracted they
wrinkle, within they answer to the unequal superficies of the ventricles. They
are thin, the fitter for contraction; Tenues.
they are soft and nervous for strengths sake, for that is strongest that is
most nervous. Hippocrates in lib. de Cord, in sectione vivorum, observed the
motion of the heart ceased, yet these to move. Galen in 7. Administrat. cap.
11. Historia Galent.
reports the heart boiled not to grow soft, nisi demptis auriculis: neither the
Pike can be boiled, nisi dempto Cord. Give me leave to thrust in the story of
Pliny lib. 11. Pliny.
cap. 37. that those men who have been poisoned, or Cardiaco morbo periere,
those hearts cannot be burnt. So Vitellius endeavored to prove that Piso
poisoned Germanicus, because his heart would not burn. But he was saved, Quia
Germanicus morbo Cardiaco decesserat. To this give me leave to add the story
of of that most excellent Historian Monsieur du Thou, Cor Zuinglii.
who reported that the heart of Zuinglius could not be burnt, although the rest
of his body was.

In a Hearts heart, the left ventricle is greater then the right, and the bone
in the orifice of Aorta is here placed to keep up the valves. Riolani Historia.
Riolanus reports a story of President Nicholaus of 80. years, who had a bone
ad radicem Aortae, as Hearts and stagges have; fit stuff for a Lawyers heart.

Use 1. Vsus 1. Sanguinis impetum probibere.
To keep the heart from sudden choking, that might happen by any irruption of
blood and air, as if they were Diverticula, into which is received the materia
regurgitans in Cordis ventriculis. 2. 2. Ad iutelam vasorum. Cor refrigerare.
To defend the vessels in the motions of the heart. Hippocrates adds a fourth,
to be like fans or bellows to cool the heats. Vesalius denies these Uses, but
gives us no better. Varolus thinks they were made for the conservation of air.

Vessels are 4. Vasa 4.
and so may orifices in the most eminent part of the ventricle about the Basis
of the heart. Vesalius and Varolus say that their original comes from the
heart. These are likened to the four great rivers of the great world, Nilus,
Tagus, Tigris, and Euphrates. In the right Vena Cava, and Vena Arteriosa. In
the left Arteria Magna, and Arteria Venosa. These are disposed as in the rest
of the body, where a vein is not joined to a vein, but to an Artery; so that of
these two, although they be of the same nature and office, and come out of the
same ventricle, yet they are placed alternatim: and as a vein lies between an
artery, so the great vein lies by the side of the great Artery, and Vena
Arteriosa on the other side of the great Artery, and then Arteria Venosa next
to Vena Cava on the other side. Turn up the heart, and you shall see their
place and seat: within these are 11. valves, or portals, Valvulae 11. tres
singulas trium vasorum orificiis, duae arteriae ven^sae.
which Hippocrates calls Pelliculae Cordis latitantes, Galen (...), and
membranarum Epiphyses. And they arise from these orifices; whereof some are
Tricuspides, others Semilunares. Some from without, inward to the ventricles of
the heart, to which with strong ligaments they are tied to Septum, especially
toward the point, with which in dilataon of the heart the ligaments stretched,
they draw themselves, and to the body of the heart, as if they turned up the
valves. Some from within are turned outward: and those that serve for dilation
and bringing in, are greater then those that carry out, because the heart draws
with a greter force dilated, then expells contracted, Yet all are stretched in
dilatation of th heart, in which the trisulcae make clefts by which stuff is
brough in.

The sigmoides shut close the extremities of their vessels, Sigmoides.
and hinder the egress of matter; but in contraction all are contracted, and
then the trisulcae shut up the empty places which by their dilatation they had
made, and so keep back the reflux of blood.

The Sigmoides flagging make clefts, so that blood an spirit may freely pass
forth; but if throught stretched, they stop the whole orifice.

Use, Vsus Communis vallarum, refluxum proh bear. Quae intus for as, efferunt.
Quae for as intro, ferunt and ^rabunt.
Communis, of all valves, to keep back the matter from reflux. But the proper
use of these, quae intus for as, efferunt, and bring out matter from the heart,
that it flow not back again. But those which are made to bring in, as quae
for as intro, ferunt, least it flow not out, whereby the heart might be wearied
with diversity of labor. But why three valves? Because no other number could
exactly shut and open these orifices, as you may see by the orifice of Arteria
Venosa, which shuts not close; and therefore there are but two there.

Vena Cava having pierced the Diaphragma, Venae Cava pars in auriculam dex.
tram ingreditur.
and come to the heart with a short branch, but with an ample and large
orifice, thrice bigger then that of Aorta; a small part is received into the
right ear; but the greater part runs straight to the jugulum, as Galen observed
in his 6. de usu part. cap. 4. From the right ear it is inserted into the right
ventricle, from whence it cannot be separated.

The use of this piece of brance (for so I must call it) is to carry blood from
the liver up to the right ventricle, Vsus bujus partis, sanguinem efferre.
into which in his dilatation it is poured: neither can there any great
quantity pass this way into the right ventricle, when as soon as it comes to
the mouth of the Auricula, there is a membrane full of admiration, which stops
half the forepart of this Auricula, as Eustachius observes; Eustachii valvula.
and then going forward to the orifice of Vena Cava in this ventricle, there
grows a membranous circle, which gives strength to the heart, which looks
inward, and a little more in divides it self into 3 strong valves, which from a
broad base ends in an obtuse point, and being shut, falls together into the
form of a spears point, and are called Trisulcae or Tricuspides, In dextr,
Trisulcae.
with which many filaments and fibers joined together, grow and appear with
fleshy explantations: that by these, tanquam ligamentis, in compressions of the
heart they might be stretched, and so the orifice almost shut. This circle
opened with his fibers, is like a Crown which the Kings anciently were wont to
wear. These valves in Vena Cava and Arteria Venosa for as intro spectant, For As
intro, ne refluat sanguis in Cavam.
to hold the blood, that in contraction of the heart it run not into the Cavam.

I wonder how Columbus mistakes himself, who will have these valves, with those
of Arteria Venasa to serve for the emission of blood, as if they were intus
for as. But Piccolhominy reprehends him. Since therefore this branch that enters
the heart, is lesser then that which ascends, and that there are ports and
stops in the Auricula dextra, and right ventricle: since no common passage from
the lungs in Cavam, whereby these branches might be spread through the whole
body, I cannot see that all blood that is for nourishment comes first to the
heart, there to be perfected. Vena arteriosa.


The other vessel of the right ventricle is Vena Arteriosa, a vein by office,
because it carries blood. 2, Because it stirs: an artery by substance; for
it is like it having two coats. It Is fixed with a less orifice then Cava has,
to the right ventricle; from whence (as you have heard Vesalius say) it
arises, when in respect of his connection it is better said to be a branch of
Aorta, which is plain in foetu. But in truth it is begotten with the rest of the
spermaticall parts. His coats are thick and hard, that they be not hurt by
respiration; neither ought they to be easily dilated, which was for two reasons
profitable. 1. That the whole capacity of spirits might be free from the
instruments of spirit. 2. That blood rush not violently into the heart. And
since the lungs were to be nourished with thin and vaporous blood, only the
most thin is elaborated, and being filled here by these thick walls, is made
here thinner for their fitter nourishment. Besides, to keep this right
ventricle from cold air, for the branches of Aspera Arteria, which drawing
cold air, are carried between the branches Venae Arteriosae, and Arteriae
Venosae: whereby the air drawn per Caeca spiracula is communicated. Now if it
had but one coat, it should draw as much air as Arteria Venosa: so at length
the right might be extinguished. Therefore he draws not more air then is fit
for the refreshing of the spirits in the right ventricle. Pividitur in duos
ramos, in dextrum and sinistrum pulmonem. Vsus.
Thus resting upon Arteria Magna is divided into two Trunks, which are carried
to the right and left lungs. And these are disseminated into innumerable
branches per Pulmones.

Use is in the contraction of the heart, to take and carry a great part of the
blood out of the right ventricle for nourishment into the lungs. In the body of
this vessel there are three valves which intus for as spectant, Valvulae tres
intus for as, sig moides dictae.
and every one like a half moon; they seem to be so hard, that they are like a
round cartilage.

Arteria venosa is a vessel of the left ventricle, Arteria venosa.
whence it was. It is an Artery by office, because if contains air, and
carries it, and has pulsation, which by sense cannot be perceived: yet it is
the more probable, because it is continuated to the left ventricle. It is a
vein by substance: his orifice is greater then that of Aorta. It has a thinand
simple coat, that the air which comes from Aspera Arteria's branches may the
better pierce, and the laxe substance give way to the attraction of the air
into the heart for the better tempering of his heat and fuliginous vapors
returned into Asperam Arteriam. It is a great vessel, and in his outlet from
the heart divided into two branches, as if it had two orifices. The right runs
under the Basis of the heart into the right lung: the left like Vena Arteriosa
into the left, where it is divided into innumerable branches.

This and Aorta are joined in their rise; only there goes between them a
certain piece which made a channel, and was perforated in foetu. Botallus
observed between these valves of this part another, which was always gaping,
by which the blood did flow and reflow. in Venam Cavam.

Use is in dilatation of the heart to draw air out of the lungs, Vsus, cord
dilatato, trahere aeram e pulmonibus. Contractio spiritus in Pulmones.
and in his contraction to carry a portion of vital blood, with fuliginous
vapors, into the lungs. And least all the air should go back into the lungs,
at the orifice of this vessel there is a membranous circle out of Substantia
Cordis, which leads inward, and is divided into two valves, Duae valvulae,
For As intus.
for as intus, which are greater then those a Vena Cava, and end in an obtuse
point, and are stronger, and have longer filaments, and more fleshy; of which
one respects the right side, the other the left, which joined, are like an
Episcopal miter.

There are but two valves; quia it was fit that it should not exactly shut. 1.
That since all parts want blood and spirit, the lungs might likewise have a
continual supply. 2. Quia, they only give a continual passage to the avoiding
of fuliginous vapors out of the heart, since nature has allotted no other
part. Bauhinus observed in 1611. Observatio Bauhini. 1611.
that from the Arteria Venosa there went out of the left ventricle a branch up
to the left lung; and so winding down by the side of the great artery under the
midriffe, was inserted into the emulgent; a fit passage for the avoidance of
matter out of the lungs into the Kidneys.

Riolanus gives three uses of this vessel. Vsus 1. Aerem in Cor. 2. Fuligines
exportare. 3. Sanguinem in pulmones.
First, to carry air into the heart. 2. To bring forth the Purgamenta spiritus
vitalis. 3. To supply the lungs with arteriall blood. And these three are done
by the same passage at one time, neither does the artery cease to beat. Arteria
Magna. Venae pulsatiles. Audaces. Substantia. Tunicae 2.1. Exterior tenuis sine
sibris transversis.


Arteria Magna is the other vessel of the left ventricle. Some call arteries
Venas pulsatiles. The Arabian Interpreters, Venas audaces. Of these there are
three sorts, Aspera Arteria, Arteria Venosa, Arteria Magna. His Substance is
membranous, the fitter for distention. It has 2 particular coats. The
exterior is thin, and soft, with many right fibers, some oblique, none
transverse. 2. Interior densa.
Interior coat is five times as thick as that of the veins. First, that
arteriall blood and spirit evaporate not, 2. That it be not cracked with the
continual motion of the Systole and the Diastole, Cum sibris transversis
tantum.
It has only transverse fibers for the sudden distribution of blood and
spirit. Galen puts another coat to it, which is in the inward superficies like
a cob-web. They are without sense, as veins are, least they should suffer by
their continual motion.

This great one has his rise out of the left ventricle, with a large mouth,
from whence by his contraction blood and spirit elaborated in the left
ventricle is conveyed with heat into the whole body: and least in the
dilatation they should run back into the ventricle, nature has put three
valves in his orifice, Tres valvulae intus for as Sigmoides.
Sigmoides intus for as vergentes, as are in Vena Arteriosa; but are greater and
stronger, quia the body of this artery is stronger then that of Vena Arteriosa.
These hinder the aliment drawn out of the guts by the Mesaraick arteries from
coming to enter the heart. In some creatures it is cartilagineous, in some
bony, secundum Aristotelem. Quia quod movetur, movetur supra aliquo quiescente,
cui innititur dum movetur. The branches of this artery come along with those a
Porta and Cava; yet sever with Cava. As the veins which come to the skin have
no arteries: so in the substance of the muscles, they are seldom seen with
veins, because the blood is thinner and the spirits breathed from the arteries
can come further without help of an artery.

Use of this great artery and his branches have a double consideration, Vsus
duplex. 1. ut canales. Ad spirituum vitalium retentionem, etc.
1. as they are pipes or channels. 2. as they have pulsation. As channels they
are given to the parts for three causes. 1. That they may hold spiritual and
vital blood; and distribute it through the whole body. 2. To carry vital
spirits for the upholding of the parts. 3. To transmit with the same spirit,
heat, and vital faculty through the whole body.

As they have pulsation, 2. ut pulsatiles, 1. Naturalem calorem fovere, etc.
they have 3 uses. 1. To preserve the natural heat of the parts by saving it,
for otherwise it would be extinguished. 2. By his motion to hinder putrefaction
in the veins; for blood else would soon putrefy. 3. To shake the blood into the
substance of the parts, whereby nutrition may be made. This motion of the
arteries is called pulsus, Hic motus Pulsus.
which is perfected by dilatation and contraction, and it is not insitus
arteriis, but flows a Cord, as appears if you tie an artery, beneath the
ligature it moves not; and are simul dilated and contracted with the heart.
Only in this they differ, that the motion of the heart is greater and
vehementer.

Arteries are close under veins, not for safeguard, but that by his motion they
may force blood to come into the veins; as likewise being dilated, they draw
from the veins, and contracted cast it back again by the mutual passages of
the veins and arteries: so likewise by their mouths terminated in the skin, all
fuliginous excrement they may avoid, and draw a great part of air into them.
And this is that that Hippocrates says, Totum corpus for as introque spirabile
est. Hence is his necessity. Neither was there any creature ever without a
heart, although the Auspices in Pliny did feign many creatures without hearts,
when they would deter the Emperors from some enterprise.

De Pulmonibus
RIolanus commands us, that before we touch the heart, we show the vessels, and
then the lungs. Yet with Bauhinus we bring the lungs in the last place. These
are the receipt of life, spirit, and air, for the refreshing of the heart; and
the instrument of respiration and voice, and given to those creatures
quaerespirant, and have a neck: and therefore fishes, quia non respirant, want
lungs and the left ventricle of the heart. They are called (...), quod est
respirare.

Situs in the hollow of the chest, Figura.
a little different from the mouth, least by the sudden arrival of the air
they should be too much cooled. Yet in bodies with long necks, where the air
comes not conveniently tempered, we see a disposition to consumptions and dry
diseases. In the living whilst we draw in air, they fill the whole cavitie,
except the hollow between the coats of the Mediastinum: whilst we expirare,
they fall; but not so much as in dead bodies, for that they are full of air
and blood. And although we use with bellows to blow them, yet are they never so
full, as in the living; because they are to hold air for many motions of the
heart, as is plain in Diverse, and singers.

Connexus to the neck and back, Connexus collo,
by the benefit of Aspera Arteria, although the greatest part is free of them,
whereby they may more freely move; and by the intervention of the Mediastinum,
they are tied before to the Sternum, Sterno,
as likewise by certain fibers to the sides of the chest and Pleura: behind, to
the vertebra. Per fibras Pleura.
If too straightly tied, it causes a difficulty in breathing. Massa. ne Cor
deprimant.
Yet Massa says there is good use of these ties in regard of the heart, least
it should be crushed with the weight of the lungs. They are likewise tied to
the heart per venam arteriosam, and arteriam venosam.

Motus is diversely argued. De motu. secundum Aristotelem a Cord, Galen. ad
fugam vacui.
Aristotle 3. de Part. Animal. cap. 6. will have the motion of the lungs to be
a Cord. Galen will have them move non propria vi, sed ad fugam vacui: as
appears in wounds of the chest, the air entering, the lungs move not, because
the air fills the empty place. But the chest being whole, the lungs
necessarily are dilated to avoid vacuum. Neither do they only fall, as Bauhinus
observes, ad vacui fugam: but either pressed by the chest, or by the air
expired, or by both, they fall together. Yet so, as Nature ties them to the
Pleura, that they may follow the motion of the chest. Laurentius, ad motum
Pectoris.
Laurentius will have them move, non a Cord, quia illius motus perpetuus non
est: nec vi propria, sed per accidens they follow the motion of the chest.
Aver. propria vi.
Averroes will have them move propria vi, non thoracis motum sequi: for so
there might be granted a perpetual motion. Riolan. motu insito.
Riolanus his motus is insitus, and depends not from any other, and is dilated
and contracted like a bag, not like a bellows: for in a free breathing, the
chest standing still, the lungs move, quia respiramus. And breathing is
perfected by dilatation and contraction.

Figure is fitted to the parts they rest upon. Figura ad cavitatem Pectoris.
Therefore without, they answer the cavity of the chest, and are extumescentes:
within, they are hollow, that they might the better yield with his lobes to the
heart, and be his covering. The right joined to the left, represent the cloven
foot of an ox.

They are divided by the benefit of the Mediastinum into Dextrum and Sinistrum.
Dividuntur in dextrum and sinistrum.
So that one side either hurt or lost, the other may be of use, as we see in
consumed bodies, where one side is quite gone, and yet they live by the benefit
of the vessels that come from Aspera Arteria and the heart. Each Lung is
divided by a line obliquely drawn transverse over against the fourth vertebra
of the chest into two lobes; In duos iobos.
the upper and the lower lobe: yet so, as they are tied by membranous fibers.
This is rather a note of section then division. They are so divided the better
to embrace the heart, and lest in stooping they should be pressed. Besides, if
they were continuated the length of the chest, Ne dilatatio impediretur.
it would hinder the fit disatation and constriction. These are sometimes
called the Alae, Alae.
because they are sometimes spread like wings. They are three, sometimes more,
often two; and in those who have short chests, quintus lobus is seldom found.

Substance is thin, rare, laxe, spongy, Substantia rara, spongiosa, In f^tu
rubra.
and as it were made of the froth of blood; all for lightness and motion; it is
woven with three sort of vessels, and covered with a thin membrane, which
according to our years in softness, color, and substance differ, and the
variety of our aliment: for in faetu, whilst the heart and lungs move not,
their substance is red: but after having aereum alimentum, they turn to a pale
yellow. In long sicknesses they grow spotted with dusky and black spots.

Membrana, which invests it, is from Pleura; Membrana a Pleura. Communis cum
vasis.
and where the vessels enter the lungs, there their coats is common. This is
thin and light, soft, that it might be dilated, and shut with more ease. It is
porous for the excretion of purulent matter, in Pleurisies and Peripneumonia,
per anacatharsin tussiendo. Superficies laevis.


His Superficies is smooth, and as it were drawn over with a slipperie humor.

Nervi are but small, Nervi exiles.
because the lungs need but little sense; they are form the sixth pair, and
enter not the flesh of the lungs, lest their continual motion might breed
pain. Hence it appears that all the lungs are without pain.

Vasa, Vasa.
three sorts, which no other part has. It has Asperas Arterias, veins from
Vena Arteriosa, and smooth arteries from Arteria Venosa; and all three have
their peculiar action. The Bronchia Asperae Arteriae are placed between the
veins and the arteries which are a-crosse into the lobes on both sides, and so
end in capillares. The first vessel is proper to the lungs, of which we will
speak next. The other comes from the heart, of which we have already spoken.
Yet some considerations we will add, as that the Vena Arteriosa serves the
natural faculty, the Arteria Venosa the vital, and Aspera Arteria the
Animal. The two vessels are far greater then the lungs bigness may seem to
require, if we proportion them with other parts. Yet in respect of the
continual motion of the lungs they quickly consume much nourishment. Besides,
they not only carry natural blood, and vital with vital spirit, but also by
their own extremities and the extremities Asperae Arteriae, they are a receipt
for air, and bring it into the ventricles. If but a small branch of this is
broken, the lungs grow purulent. We will here add a rule of Fernelius,
Fernelii consilium.
that in passions of the lungs, we should open the liver-veine of the left arm,
quia the veins of the lungs come from the right ventricle of the heart, and
this is derived from the left side of Vena Cava, which runs by the left lobe
into the arms. For the best evacuation is secundum rectitudinem fibrarum. But
the lungs receive not blood from Cava, but from Vena Arteriosa: yet emptying
Vena Cava, ad fugam vacui (says Riolanus) you empty the lungs.

Concerning their nourishment, it is different from that of other parts; as
their substance is different: for as their substance is the thinnest, so is
their nourishment the most pure and thin. In other parts their coats are thin
and fine, whereby the thick blood may be distributed to their parts that are
about them. For the body is nourished with the blood it draws through the coats
of the vessels. The arteries are thick and dense, whereby a small quantity of
thin and vaporous blood may be drawn for the maintenance of life. But in the
lungs the coats of the veins are thick, that only the finest may come through,
that the aliment might answer his part; and the arteries, thinto effuse and
breath plenty of fine and thin vital blood. So that here the artery has the
coat of a vein to give plentifully sanguinem spirituosum. So that what the vein
by his thickness keeps back, the artery with his thinness may recompense.

Concernign the motion of the arteries of the lungs, it is the same with that
of Magna Arteria.

Use. per Asperam Arteriam, Vs^ ^d Cord s refrigeri^m.
and so by his common Anastomoses with Arteria Venosa, into the heart at his
dilatation. So that they prepare it that it come not foul, or impure, or cold
to the heart. ^d vocem and respirationem.
Piccolhominy.

De Aspera Arteria.
THe third vessel proper to the lungs is Aspera Arteria; a name from his
unequal substance, and to distinguish it from the smooth arteries. Canna
pulmonis.
It Is commonly called Canna Pulmonis. It Is a hollow pipe, and greatest in all
that have lungs.

Situs. Before the Gullet, Situs, ante Oesophagum, ad laryngem.
in the lower part of the fauces, and so open, it is carried into the lungs. His
lower part is divided into many pipes; the larynx is head, which is to be
spoken of in the history of the mouth.

Connexus, Connexus faucibus.
above by the help of the inward coat to the jaws; by the external, before and
at the sides to the muscles and vessels; behind, with certain fibrous ties
Oesophago, that his descent might be the safer.

Substance, is partly membranous, Substantia partim membranes, partim
cartilaginia. Duaetunicae. Interna
partly cartilagineous. It has two coats from Pleura, and annexed strongly by
the membranous ties of the cartilage, and like a hard pipe; and by this coat is
tied to the neighbor parts, and joins and separates the recurrents. Interna is
stronger, and comes from the coat which invests the Palate, to defend it from
all sharp vapors, distillations, or purulent matter. His length is woven with
right fibers, soft and smooth, and lined as it were with an unctuous humor,
that it be not dried with great heats, and clamourous motions which would
offend the voice, and the transmission of air. For the jaws and aspera arteria
dried make clangosam vocem: Clangosa vox, Rauca.
but superfluous moisture, as in distillations, makes raucam: although it is
bedewed with humor from the Glandules seated in the root of the Laryns, as
likewise with a portion of the drink which descends the channel. It is of an
exquisite sense, Exquisiti sensus.
as it appears if any thing happen to go awry. Between these two coats, the
cartilages, and their proper, membranous ligaments are placed.

Compositio is of many cartilages, Compositio.
which show like rings, but they make not a perfect circle: for the fourth part
is cut from behind, and is membranous, and are like the Greek sigma, or Latin
C. These in the passage are equally divided from themselves, but are joined by
the internection of membranous Ligaments. Hence in angina suffocante, having
divided the skin, we cut between cartilage and cartilage, and give to the lungs
air by a small pipe, as was not many years since tried by a Knight in
Lincolnshire. And there is a tale for Lincoln.

The uppermost cartilages are greatest, and their thickness is more then their
breadth, especially in the midst forwards: as they grow downward they grow
thinner, until they end in a membrane.

They are tied in man by a carnous ligament: Bauhin.
but Bauhinus makes a question why we call not these ligaments muscles, which
cut themselves as the intercostall muscles do, and fill up the cartilages
places. And is the best composition for this part. For if it had been made of
one solid cartilage, it should have been alike opened; which would have made a
difficulty of breathing, since it must rise and fall with the lungs. And the
like inconveniences had happened, if it had been made of altogether circular
cartilages: neither was it fit to be made of an entire membrane; for so
flagging together, the cavity might have been stopped. For soft substance had
not been fit to be an instrument for voice, which is made by dilatation and
contraction. Therefore when we inspirare, the ligaments are distended, and the
cartilages are diduced. But when we do expirare, they are loosened, and fall
one within another, so that the cartilages touch one another, as is seen when
we blow the lungs of a dead man. Cartilagines instrumenta vocis.
Therefore the cartilages are instruments of voice; and the membranous
ligaments that join them, are the instruments of respiration: for the artery
prepares it for the Larynx, and the Larynx is the prime instrument of voice.
Behind, toward the Oesophagus it is membranous, that it hinder not his
dilatation; and therefore that the Oesophagus may the more spread it self, it
is as it were received into the cartilages Asperae Arteriae, especially in the
swallowing of hard meats: besides, in the act of swallowing the Oesophagus
descends, and the Larynx rises.

This pipe entering the chest about the four vertebra, Introitus ad quartam
vertebram; in duos ra^os dividitur.
is divided into two trunks, of the which the right runs into the right lung,
and the left into the left side; the which for every lobe is divided into two
branches, and these into more, which are sometimes triangular, sometimes
square, and so checker-wise, and so spread to the last point or edges of the
lungs; round, open, cartilagineous, that they may sort better with the lungs
dilatation and constriction. The branches of the Aspera Arteria run between the
branches of Arteria Venosa and Vena Arteriosa: but those of Aspera Arteria are
bigger, and are in the middle passage: behind is the vein, before is the
artery, because his thinness requires the shorter way for his security. It Is
joined per anastomoses to both; the one for air and avoidance of smoke, the
other for blood for his nourishment. The smooth join the aspera to the heart,
and there are small veins communicated to Aspera Arteria for aliment; but to
laevibus there are none, because they carry blood in them.

Beneath the Larynx there are certain glandulae, Glandulae.
which sometimes swell that they suffer not liquid thigs to pass, but solid by
compression make their way.

ad attractionem aeris.
may draw air, which comes attracted from the nostrils and mouth, and sent to
the heart; and by the same passage heart sends back unprofitable air with
smoky excrements. 2. 2. Vt sit instrumentum vocis.
That it might be an instrument of voice: and therefore it is called by
Hippocrates organum spirabile and vocale. 3. 3. Vt tussi inservias.
That by it may be thrown out by coughing or screatu what is fallen from the
head, and collected in the lungs: as in ashmaticall bodies, whilst aany slimy
or pitchy matter remains in the substance of the lungs, they are free from
fits: but so soon as it stops one of the great branches of this artery, there
is danger of choking; which continues so long till either the matter is
ejected, or goes back into the substance: which is the cause that some for many
years are asthmaticall, yet never have any fit.

De Oesophago.
THe Gullet Graecis is Oesophagus, Oesophagus, Stomachos. Meri.
ab (...), cibum fero; and (...), a longitudine; Arabibus, Meri and Vesset. Yet
(...) is taken sometimes for the upper part, which is commonly called gula:
sometimes for the lower, as the mouth of the stomach: sometimes for the stomach
it self: and by Hippocrates for the orifice uteri. It is the high way of meat
and drink into the stomach. Situs.
It begins from the lowest cavity of the jaws, at the root of the tongne,
behind the Larynx. It touches on each side the glandules and the neck, and so
running through the chest between the aspera arteria, and the vertebrae of the
neck and the chest, coming to the sift vertebra of the chest, inclines a little
to the right hand to give way to the great descending artery, Ad nonam
vertebram penetrat nerveum circulum diaph. Circa undecimam verteb. Connexus ad
fauces, vertebras, asperam arteriam.
and so about the ninth vertebra pierces the nervous part of the midriffe, and
about the eleventh is the left orifice of the stomach, and there with two
nerves fixes himself.

Connexus, inhi s beginning, to the fauces by the coat which invests the mouth,
and so the ventricle, to the vertebrae, to aspera Arteria, to the adjacent
parts by the help of the membranes which come from the ligaments of the back.

Figura, is round, Figura.
that by a little place much may be carried, and more free from meninges. It is
long, since the mouth is so far distant from the stomach, and is distended like
a red Gut.

Substance, is between flesh and nerve. Substantia inter carneam and nerveam.
Therefore it may be enflamed, and be subject to convulsion: it is nervous, ut
extendi possit, when it receives meat, and so fall together. It is fleshy and
soft, to give way to the descent of meat: and lest by his softness it might
hinder swallowing, therefore it stands stretched at length.

It has three coats. The first common, Tunica tres, Communis a vertebrarum
ligamentis. 2. Propri^, externa, carnos^.
which comes from the ligaments of the vertebrae: the second proper. The
outward is fleshy and thick, as it were a muscle perforated, and takes his
beginning at the second cartilage of the Larynx, and has only transverse
fibers, that by these the aliment drawn by the fibers of the inward coat may be
thrust into the stomach; and these help in vomiting: for if the upper fibers be
first contracted, then diglutition is made; if the mouth of the stomach, then
for vomiting. Interna.
with thin and right fibers for the drawing of aliment out of the mouth into
the stomach; and this is not covered all with a vail, and there it might from
the cuticle be separated from the skin. It Is nervous, and harder then the
outward, and more sensible, for the more exquisite taste of those things that
are swallowed. And this continuated with the palate, mouth, lips, to the left
orifice of the stomach. It has very few oblique fibers, least meat might be
detained, which might be a hurt to both arteries.

Venae, Venae, a Cava, and a Corona. Portae. Arteriae, ab Aorta and a Call.
coronario. Nervi, a sexto Pari.
Few; yet some a cava and a Coronario portae.

Arteries, from the trunk of the Aorta descending, and a Caeliaco Coronario.

Nerves from the sixth pair, which for securities sake are carried obliquely,
and wound about the Oesophagus, at last are fixed about the stomach.

Use is to be like a funnell to pass meat into the stomach. Vsus.


De Capite.
HAving finished the Histories of the natural and vital parts, Capui.
we come now to the Head; which is the seat of the Animal. This third venture,
the Head, is properly that which ends at the first vertebra. It Is placed in the
supreme place for the honor of understanding; Situs intellectus gratia; Non
oculerum, ut Galeno placuit. Rotundum. Magnitudo dispar. In duat parts
divisum; Capillata.
according to Galen, for the eyes sake, not for their security, as for doing
their office. It is round, not perfectly, because it is bent at the sides, and
most forward. His greatness is not always alike, but the greatest, if all be
proportionable, is the best.

It is divided into two parts; the one is hairy, the other smooth. Hairy from
the forehead to the Coronall suture, and to almost the middle of the head is
called Sinciput. Sinciput.
The hinder part from Sutura Lamdoides, and so to the first vertebra of the
neck, Occiput. Occiput. Vertex.
The middle between these, Vertex. It is veluti Centrum Calvariae, about which
the hairs in gyrum vertuntur. It is called (...). (...).
It is sometimes double, and they are called (...), (...).
Bivertices, double-crowned. Spigel. page 3. The side-pieces between the ears,
Parts continentes, Communes, Propriae. Externae, Pericranium, Periostium,
Cranium. Internae, tunicae duae.
the eyes, and the neck, Tempora. The parts are either containing or contained.
Containing are common; as Cuticula, Cutis, Pinguedo, Panniculus Carnosus; or
proper: and these are either external, or internal. External, as
Pericranium, Periostium; and two membranes, the muscles and bones of the
Cranium, although the head of man has very little flesh upon it. Internal,
the two Coats; Tenuis, and Dura Matter.

The contained are Cerebrum, Contentae; Cerebellum, Cerebrum.
and Cerebellum; from whence the medulla arises, which without the Cranium is
called spinalis.

De Partibus Communibus.
WE leave the discourse of hairs; in which argument Bauhinus is very large:
Pilorum suprema pars, Media, Insima.
yet we will play with a hair, and divide it in partem supremam quae interdum
finditar, and in partem mediam quae slectitur, and imam, the roots, which is
glewed with a white and mucous substance, and is the root for his strength to
stick to his skin. They are not round, as is believed by you. Non rotundi.
You may observe with a perspective glass that they are square, like stipites
and caules: neither are they begotten, as it is commonly thought, Non ex
fuliginosit excre. sed ex attracto sanguine.
ex fuliginosis cerebri excrementis, but ex sanguine attracto per radicem pili
in reliquum trunoum: for the same in birds are pennae, as you may see by the
quills in young fowl, which in the roots are bloody; and by the scales in
fishes: and Hippocrates in 6. Epidem. Calvities sequitur, exhausta sanguinis
debita copia; ejus scilicet a quo pili proveniunt. Spigel. 311. Moist brains
bring forth long ones; and dry, short ones. As for the history of common parts,
we have spoken in the region of the lower belly; only here the cuticula is
thicker, and the cutis not of that exquisite sense as in the other venters.
Here is no pinguedo, but a small quantity in occipite in some, in front in
obesis; and in those that have no wrinkles: for Rugae ob carnosam membranam
fiunt. Spigel, 312. Membrana carnosa is under the skin, and sticks to a
musculous part; and therefore it moves at our pleasure.

De Pericranio and Periostio.
THe first of the proper containing parts is Pericranium. Neither do we
confound it with Periostium, as Laurentius and Fallopius would have us, and as
we will show you presently.

The Pericranium is a thick and solid membrane, Pericranium a Pe tost^^o
differt.
lying under the Panniculus carnosus, and so called, because it compasses all
the Cranium without.

To this the Periostium is joined by certain fibers. Periostio neditur, molle,
tenu, exquisiti sensus. Ortus a dura Matre.
It Is soft, thin, and of an exquisite sense, because it breeds of the processes
of the dura Matter, which comes forth of the sutures of the Cranium. These
processes are of the nature of ligaments, which extending themselves over the
Crunium, and meeting together, and so united, makes this membrane, which not
only invests the Cranium, but also the temporal muscles, not so far as their
insertion, but ad ossajuguli for their defense. This being so thick and solid,
cannot be properly said to be a proper coat of the muscles. This runs over the
forehead to the nose, beneath the eyes, and makes that ligament for the adnata
tunica of the eyes.

Cranium. Vsus, Investire Cranium.
meninx to the Cranium, that the brain fall not together. Ligare meningem
Cranio.
Pericranium.

Periostium is under it, a nervous membrane, most firm, and thin, and sticks as
close as it does to other bones. Cutem Pericranio. Periostlum, Negatur a
Fallopio, Laurentio; Bauhinus dentibus negat.
By this all bones have sense. It is called Periostium, quasi Circumossalis.
Laurentius and Fallopius deny this part. But Vesalius teaches us to divide it
with the point of a knife. Bauhinus says all bones have it, except teeth, the
inside of the scull, and the articulations of bones, lest in their motion they
should cause pain.

De Capitis Figura, Suturis, and Cranii Substantia.
HIppocrates, and Vesalius follows him, laid it down for a rule, that the
figure of th Cranium and of the sutures, according to their number and seat,
make a variation. Figura
And therefore I intend to speak something of the figure of the head; which is
either natural, or depraved. Naturalis,
Natural is like an oblique sphere inclined, and is bended at the Temples,
with an outset of the fore and back-part, whereby it may hang equally poised
upon th neck.

The depraved figure is that which differs from this, Depravate.
and that is threefold. Galen calls this Monstrum. Hippocrates, figurae
acuminatae; and this is done by the midwifes first stroakings and bindings.
Some nations affect this as generous and noble: with the French and Low Dutch
it is frequent. But Bauhinus gives a reason, because they lay their children on
one side. The Germans have rounder heads, because they are laid upright.

The whole bone which covers the brain is called Calvaria, Calvaria, Cranium.
Osseum ad tutelam.
or Cranium. It was necessary to have it bony, for the better defense of the
noble part which is lodged under it. It is round, that it might be the sreer
from danger. It is great, for the receipt of the Cerebrum and Cerebellum.
Componitur ex pluribus ossibus.
It Is compounded of many bones, lest it should be cracked or broken all over
with any wound or violent accident. His composition by diverse sutures and
seams is most defensible: Raro sine suturis.
seldom any head found without sutures: yet sometimes the Coronalis is blotted
out, and sometimes one of the rest. Many times in old men then are all worn
out; but the last are the temporals. Those about the Aequinoctiall have no
sutures, says Paraeus. But Riolanus found some in his Moor. Where they are all
wanting, there is continual headache, as Celsus has it. If the head be flat
before, there is no coronall suture: if behind, there is no Lamdoides: always
the Sagittalis is remaining, and so the figure is T. If flat before and behind,
then like an X. But we will give you in brief an exact account of all the
futures, which are either common or proper. Neither are they different in men
and women, as popular error would make us believe.

The common are those which divide the scull from the Os Sphenoides, ethmoides,
Communes tres.
and the upper jaw. And these are three. The 1. separates the os occipitis a
Sphenoide, and compasses totum os Cuneiforme. The second, coming out of the
hollow of the Temples, divides the upper jaw from the forehead. The last is
brought in by the late Anatomists, and divides the os frontis a Cribroso.

The proper sutures are five. Suturae propriae 5. verae 3. mendosae 2.
Three Verae, and two Mendosae. I know that some make many more, but to no
purpose, being but all pieces of the Mendosae.

The first of the proper is Coronalis. 1. Coronalis, Arcualis, Puppis. 2.
Sagittalis.
The Arabian Translatours call it Arcualis, Puppis. And this crosses the top of
the head to the Temples. The second is Sagittalis: this is stretched along the
head per medium, even from the Lamdoides to Coronalis: sometimes to the top of
the nose, which is always in infants, and in some till seven years of age:
it is seldom found, in women, and less in men; especially, if they have flat
faces: this sows the two bones sincipitis together, and some the 2. frontis,
and sometimes it runs to a part of occiput. The third is Lamdoides. 3.
Lamdoidis.
It Is called Lamdae and Prorae sutura: it is like a Greek L, and seams the bones
of the back-part of the head. Mendosae duae. Temporales, Squamosae, Corticales.
The Mendosae are two, and are Temporales, squamosae, id est, Corticales,
because like scales they are coated one over the other, and may be called
Commissurae better then Suturae. Bauhinus makes four or five, and sometimes six
of them.

Use 1. 1. Vsus ligare duram Cratio.
To tie the dura Matter to the Cranium, so as to keep the brain from compression
or swaying. But in those that have no sutures, how then? Certainly the dura
Matter is tied to the Cranium within with many fibers, which come not near the
seat of the sutures. Besides, old men have not sutures. 2. 2. Adliberam
transpirationem.
For the freedom of transpiration of fuliginous and offensive vapors. Hence
those that have most and largest sutures are freest from pain. Piccolhominy
quarrels at this doctrine of Uses of Hippocrates and Celsus. But Fallopius
reconciles this difference from the internal or external cause. 3. 3. Viam
vasis praebere.
To give way to the vessels to come forth, as Venae puppis, and the rest that
are for the nourishment of the Periostium and the Pericranium. 4. 4. Nefractura
communicetur.
That the fracture or fissure of one be not communicable to another. Cranium
even, and of equal parts, yet she made it of diverse.

De Cranio.
SUbstance of the scull is variable according to our years: Cranium, infanlibus
cartilagineum.
in those that are newborn it is cartilagineous and membranous, especially near
the sutures, and in the midst and more elevated part of the head. And this
says Galen. 1. 1. Ad partune facilitandum. 2. Ad augmentum. Laminae duae.
For facility of birth. 2. 2.Ad augmentum. Laminae duae.
For augmentations sake in infants: in elder years it is bony. The Anatomicall
school says that it has two tails, which are called sometimes Squamae,
sometimes Laminae. In men they are thicker then in women; and the upper is
thicker, harder, and more equal then the undermost. The under Lamina has
certain furrows in it for the safer passage of the vessels. Between both these
there is a middle substance which Hippocrates calls (...), (...)
which is loose, hollow, fungous, which some call Meditullium. Meditullium.
This contains a red medullous juice, fit for the nourishment of the two
Tables; and this has veins and arteries with blood and spirit; and this is
that blood which first appears in Trepaning. Between these two Laminas
sometimes there is a collection of humor made by transcolation, which causes
infinite pain: and pocky pains eat this first Table; but (says Bauhinus)
never to the second. Yet I have seen in the Hospital both Tables eaten through
with the Pox. About the Temples it is thin, and behind the head up to the Nucha:
and this Celsus would have Surgeons observe, lest in trepaning they cease when
they come to the show of blood. It is pierced with many small holes for the
outlet of veins and arteries from Dura Matter. Octo ossa Cranii.
There are eight bones which belong to the Sculls, Os Frontis, Ossa Sincipitis
duo, Ossa Temporum duo, Os Occipitis, Sphenoides, and Ethmoides. But of these
in the history of the Bones.

De Meningibus.
THese Meninges are to the Brain, Meninges.
as the Peritonaeum and the Pleura to the inferior and middle venters. The
Greeks call them Meningas, the Arabian Translatours Matres; Matres.
quia from these all membranes are generated. They are two; Dura, and the
Tenuis, sivepia. Crassa est Cuticularis.
Crassa Meninx is hard, Cuticularis, and the thickest and strongest membrane of
all the body. His greatness answers to the bigness of Cranium, and fills all
his sinus and cavities. It is greater then the Pia Matter, that the fullness of
his vessels press it not, whereby it might cause continual pain, and
sometimes Apoplexiam: which in some causes their noses to bleed after death.

Connexus is to the Basis of the Cranium, Connexus Basi Cranii.
to the sharp processes, and to the rundells of the holes, except to the sinus
where Glandula Pituitaria is seated, and to the sides where the sinus are which
give way to the Carotides branches: it compasses the inner face of the scull.
It Is in that distance from the brain, that the Pericardium is from the heart,
that it hinder not the perpetual motion of the elevation and depression of it.
Besides the tie by the sutures to the Cranium, the whole superficies is tied
mediis osibus: whereupon Hippocrates commands that the bone divided by the
Trepan should not by force be removed, Hippoc.
but by suppuration. But our modern Surgeons are more daring, and that with
good success. It Is fixed to Pia Matter, and to the brain by the vessels.

Columbus brags that he was the first that found this membrane to be double;
Duplex.
and it is as other membranes of the body are; Externa. superrf.
whose superficies or outward part is like a Tendon, hard and uneven, partly
for the fibers which appear in the top: where the sagittal suture joins with
the coronall often certain Tubercula are found, by which they are firmly joined
together. The intercourse of veins they judge to be like fig leaves.

Interior coat has a smooth, Interna.
slippery, and white superficies, free from all fat, but run over with a moist
humor. It is of a more exquisite sense then the outward which must touch the
bone. Perforata.
It has many holes, first to give way to the veins which run to the
conjugation of the nerves. It Is pierced for the passage of the Infundibulum,
and where the descent of the Spinalis Medullae; and lastly, where os spongiosum
is, it is like a Cieve.

It Is double in the top of the head, Vertice dividitur ad corpus callosum.
and divides the brain in half to Corpus callosum into dextrum and sinistrum,
with reduplication of the Dura Matter, continued to the third sinus, and so
along the head to the top of the nose. It Is there tied to the septum of the
instrumentum of smelling: and so backward. This reduplication of Dura Matter is
called Processus superior, and is like a Sithe. Falx.
Falx dicitur of Vesalius, and all since him. It is broad behind; in the lower
part it is continued with Cerebellum. But the back process; which is shorter,
distinguishes Cerebellum a Cerebro, and covers it, and is here three or four
times as thick as in any other place. Here are two sorts of channells, the one
with the arteries, the other with the veins, and these are called posteriores
sinus. There are four sinus, Sinus 4.
which are made by the foldings of Dura Matter. Fallopius will have sometimes
ten, sometimes six. They are like channells which pour out blood into the
substance of the brain, and Pia Matter; and into these do enter the internal
jugulars. They have not the coat of a vein nor artery; yet do the office of
both, both for portage, and pulsation, and nourishment; for it was not fit to
carry veins through the soft and yielding substance of the brain. Fallopius,
Laurent, Piccolh.
Fallopius will have no arteries to come to these sinus. Laurentius will have
internas venas ingredi, and power forth blood. Piccolhominy will have both veins
and arteries, which I do assent to. Laurentius lays an imputation on some that
say veins run through these sinus, and not extra vasa contineri. The author of
this heresy I cannot find.

In the back part in the Basis Occipitis between Cerebrum and Cerebellum, Sinus
duo ad spinalem.
there are two sinus on each side, on the right and the left. Their beginning
is at the side of the hole spinalis medullae, where the internal jugulars
enter, and end at the middle Lamdoides, and the top of Cerebellum; and meeting
there together make one common cavity, which by Hieroph. is called (...),
Torcular.
Torcular: for that from hence blood is pressed out of the veins and arteries
into the substance of brain. Sinus 3.
Out of the meeting of these the 2 does arise the third sinus, which runs along
the top of the head under sutura sagittalis, between the right and left side of
the brain, from the upper part of Lamdoides, unto the bones of the nose: from
hence many veins are dispersed tenui Matri: and this is the uppermost sinus.
The fourth is the shortest and lowest, and begins at Torcular, Sinus 4.
as the 3 sinus does, and runs down between Cerebrum and Cerebellum, and is
ended ad nates Cerebri. And from hence you may make good the number of
Fallopius's sinus; which all thrust blood into the Dura Matter, and Pia into
Cerebrum and Cerebellum. Sed male.
It is to be observed, that in most parts of the body the veins are near the
arteries, so that they touch one another, and accompany together; but not in
the brain and his membranes; for here the Orifices of the veins look downward,
the arteries upward; because the veins give nourishment as the arteries spirit,
which is apt for ascent: and both these by the duplicature of the membranes.
For it was not possible either by outward skin, or by the bones, or by the
inner marrow of the brain.

Use 1. 1. Vsus, Corebrum vestire.
of this Dura Matter to cover the brain, nerves, and spinalem medullam, and to be
a defense for it. 2. 2. Artorias defendere.
To keep the arteries from hurt in their dilation, which might impeach them
with the hardness of the bones. 3. 3. Cerebrum a Cerebello dividere.
To divide Cerebrum a Cerebello, and right and left sides. 4. 4. Ligare
Pericranio.
To tie the ligaments by the sutures to the Pericranium, that the brain sway
not downwards, and so press the ventricles.

De Tenui Meninge.
HAving removed the Dura, Pia Matter.
the Piae Matter comes to our view; which in respect of his thinness, and in
comparison with other membranes is called (...). Duplex.
It Is double, as Laurentius would have it, as Peritonaum, Pleura, and Cornea
Tunica are, for the fitter portage of veins and arteries. It Is thin, the better
to thrust it self into all the sinus: besides, that his weight trouble not the
brain. It Is (...) similis. It Is the proper and immediate covering of the brain,
not only for the outward superficies, but for the most retired and hidden
passage, and foldings. Origo a Pelvi.
It comes from the ventricles, not from above, but from the lower parts, as
from the Pelvis; and with it are carried arteries from the Carotis and
Cervicall by the sides of the Sphenoides.

Use 1. 1. Vsus. Cerebrum investire.
To cover the brain, the Cerebellum, the medullam spinalem, and nerves. 2. 2.
Vasa corroborare.
To strengthen all the vessels which run through it for their fit and apt
distribution, Piccolhominy will have it the exact instrument of the sense of
touching.

De Vasis per Cerebellum disseminatis.
VEssels which pass through the brain are twofold: Veins and Arteries; or
branches of the fourth sinus Durae Matris. The veins are five: two from the
internal jugulary, Vens 5. duae ab internis jugularibus, tres ab externis.
Arteriae 3. a Carotide, and a Cervicali. 1. Vesalius, Platerus, Columb.
and three from the external. Arteries are branches of the Carotis and
cervicall Artery, and not spent in rete mirabili, as some would persuade, but
are 3 from the Carotis, and one from Cervicalis arteria. Vesalius with Platerus
denies any manner of veins to come to the body of the brain. Columbus will have
himself to be the first author of this Doctrine, not only to run through the
coats, but to enter the body and substance of the brain.

De Cerebri Substantia.
BEfore the Masters of Anatomy come to the brain, they all make Harangues in
praise of this noble part. But we decline this business, as tying our selves
to the structure and use of parts; and therefore set by this his nobility.

Goddesses to be born of this part was anciently believed; and therefore to eat
it was forbidden among the Greeks and ancient Romans. Neither had the first
Greeks a name for it: (...) came in late. The Latins Cerebrum, and signifies
whatsoever is contained within the cavity of the Cranium.

It Is seated in the highest part of the body, Situs.
guarded with bones and coats: Avicen says for the eyes sake, the better to
watch the whole body.

Figure is round, and answers the figure of Cranium, Figura.
although it receives not his conformation from it. For I do not think as
Piccolhominy does, that parts receive their figuration from bones, quibus ossa
aliqua sunt destinata. Yet as we said of the figure of the scull, so we say of
the figure of the brain.

Magnitudo excels most of other creatures; Magnitudo,
so that a man has more brains then two Oxen, says Rufus. For being the
instrument of reason, it had need of many spirits; and many spirits must come
from plenty of blood; and much blood in a small body cannot be contained; and
for their retention being thin, a moist and glewy was fittest to hold them; and
such is moles Cerebri. Men have more brain then women. It Is commonly a span
long, his latitude and depth lesser. Piccolh. ad 4. lib.
Piccolhominy and Bauhinus will have it four or five pound weight. And big men
should have great store of brain, and children heavy, in regard it is so moist.

Connexus is by the common tie of veins, Connexus.
arteries, and nerves, although they come from it; and to the Cranium
mediantibus matribus by many fibers from the lines of the sutures.

Substantia is soft, and full of moisture, Substantia mollis, etc.
white, yet not all; for that which is next to the anfractus is of an ash
color, in regard of the quality of veins which run there: but that which is
deeper,in is whiter, for the making of the spirits bright and fair, not dark,
as in melancholy bodies. It Is soft for the more easy impression of spirits:
yet with a firmness, lest so soon as they should be fixed, they should vanish
as quickly. It Is softer then the Cerebellum. Galen gives a reason, for that it
is principum mollium nervorum ad sensus instrumenta pertinentium. Yet it is
harder behind; for those harder nerves that were to pass from thence to the
rest of the body:

Temperamentum is cold and moist, Temperamentum frigidum and humidum.
that if fire not with perpetual motion and thinkings, nor the thin animal
spirits be presently spent and consumed. Hippocrates in his lib. de Glandulis,
says it is the coldest of all parts of the body. Yet we see the motion it self
were enough to heat it, although it has many veins and arteries besides.

Dividitur in duas parts, Dividitur ina parts, 1. Cerebrum, 2. Cerebelium.
a forepart and a back-part. The forepart is the greater; and in this are the
animal spirits made; and keeps the name of the whole, which is cerebrum; the
lesser is cerebellum. And these are separated by the duplicature of the Dura
Matter, which likewise divides the forepart of the brain according to his
length again into two equal parts, a right and left, and down unto corpus
callosum. This duplicature goes no lower, but from his figure is called falx
messoria; so that one side may ache, the other free. The use of this division is
to carry securely the thin veslels which come from Dura Matter for the
nourishment of the brain.

Superficies externa is rather of an ash color then white. Superficies externs,
It has many anfractus, circumvolutiones orbiculares, sulcos circulares a
Piccolhomineo, and spiras a Vesalto: whereof some are deeper then others. This
part by Laurentius is called Varicosa. Aristotle would have them made Levitatis
gratia; Varicosa. 1. Vsus levitatis gratia. 2. ad tutelam vosorum
Gulen, and the Physic school for the security of the vessels which run with
Tenui meninge, and so insinuate into these anfractus. So had the superficies
been smooth, these thin vessels had been subject to rupture through the
Diastole and Systole, especially in Plenilunio, when the brain is most extended
with moisture. Bauhinus gives another use, Vsus 2. ad spirituum recreationem,
sec. Bauhin. see^ Erasistratum, ad intelleclum. Deriditur a Lauremia. 2.
D^visio. sec. Brthin. in corticom and medullum. sec. Paccosh.
sctl. for the recreation of spirits and blood contained in these vessels.
Erasistratus would have them for intellection. So then Asses brains were as
capable: and therefore Piccolhominy and Laurentius do well and justly deride
this conceit.

The substance of the brain, according to Bauhinus, receives another division;
which is in corticem and medullam. The cortex is the cineritious part, and
compasses the medullam. Medulla is the white body, within the cineritious
part. Piccolhominy divides it into cerebrum and medullam. So that cerebrum
according to him is Totum illud corpus cinereum: this is softer then medulla.
Bauhinus observes, that if you press the substantia niedullaris, Stigmata
sangui nis.
many drops of blood will appear. Neither are they stigmata sanguints which
come like dew, as they would have it, which deny any veins to this part. The
most inner part of this medulla is called corpus callofum, Corpus callosum;
^^ju Vs^s. Deo (...).
whose use is to hold up the brain, and to join both sides of the brain
together: and this is almost in the midst of the brain. This is hollow on
both sides, with two ventricles; between which there is a piece, not tenuis
meningis duplicatae, as Piccolhominy would have it, but is tenuissima cerebri
portiuncula, coated with the meninge tenui, as Laurentius and Bauhinus would
have. Columb. corpus speculare; Septum lucidum, Pic. lapis specularis, Laut.
Columbus calls it corpus speculare; Piccolhominy, Septum lucidum, Speculum
lucidum; Lapis specularis says Laurentius.

Having removed this part which is much about the midst, four extuberances
appear. 2 before, where the seats of the ventricles are: two behind, which make
the Fornix. Fornix.


The Anatomists which follow Herophilus make four ventricles, Quatuor ventric.
sec. Herophilum.
2 before; one on the right hand, and the other on the left; the third in the
midst; the fourth common to cerebellum and spinalis medulla. But Piccolhominy
denies this last; Piccolh. negat 4. Varol. 2. unus sec. Spigel.
Varolus two, as common passages which are only separated tenui meninge: nay,
as Spigel. 321. some will have them but one continuated cavity, differing in it
self in form and use. But we will after the most received opinion, give you
four. The first two are called Superiores, Priores 2. a Corpore calloso.
Priores, Anteriores; and are followed out of the corpus callosum cerebri: they
are the greatest; of each side one, a right and a left. In seat, form, use, and
greatness they are equal. They run according to the length of the head;
before and behind broader, and closer in the middle; they are crooked.
Piccolhominy says they are semicircular. Semicirculares sec. Piccolh. Laurent.
ad duricule formam. Error Columbi.
Laurentius likeneth them to the ear of a man. The fore and hinder-part are
round and obtuse, and pierce to the third ventricle. These having diverse
anfractus, made Columbus to think that there were four anteriores ventriculi.
The inner superficies is drawn over with a watery humor, with which it is many
times full. These end in a common cavity: and Piccolhominy, Vesalius, Columbus,
and Bauhinus say, that their sides are coated with tenui meninge. Vestiuntur
tenui meninge. sec. Vesal. Col. Picch, Plexus Choroides. Cur duo.
Within these are lodged Plexus Choroides. Laurentius says, between the
ventricles and fornicem these are complications of most small vessels involved
in pia matre, with some portions of red flesh. They are two, not because
cerebrum is geminum, as Galen has it; but because the affection or passion of
one should not engage the other, and so the animal function should cease, as
in that Smyrnaean youth, in 8. de usu part.

The Processus Mammillares, or teates, Processus Mammillares.
which come down to the lower part of these two ventricles, are perforated near
the bones of the nose, and are covered with pia matter, that they fall not out
of cranium. By these air is brought to the brain, and the spirits of smelling:
and therefore they are the instruments of smelling; and by these from the
brain are distilled excrements into the nostrils. Under these mammillary
processes there is a foramen, Foramen innominatum,
which runs two ways; the one into these two ventricles, the other into the
palate. This perforation is not to be found but in healthy brains suddenly cut
up. Columbi inventum. Piccolh. negat.
Columbus challenges this invention to be his. Piccolhominy is angry with the
Gentleman for it, and will have it his own. I must confess I could never find
it.

Use 1. Vsus 1. ad praeparationem spirituum. sec. Cial. Ves. Laur. Sec Pic. ad
aerts alterationem.
For the preparing of animal spirits, which are made ab aere inspirato, and
from vital spirits, brought by the carotis up to the Plexus choroides. This is
the opinion of Galen, Vesalius, Laurentius. But Piccolhominy says ab iis nullam
vim pendere, only for the alteration of outward air, the nourishment of
spirits, and containing of Plexus choroides for preparing of spirits. 2. Ad
excrementa reciptenda.
2. To gather and receive the excrements which come from the nourishment of the
brain, and so per meatum ad infundibulum mittere, quo tandem ad fauces
descendant. Error omnium.
But can it be that they should be the Ergasteria of spirits, and likewise
serve for collection of excrements? Piccolhominy says that the nose first was
so made pro odoratu; secondarily, ad mucum evocandum. I do rather incline to
Platerus, and excellent Capivaccius, Spiritus generantur in nobiliori part
cerebri, sec. Capivaccium.
who hold the spirits to be begotten and contained in nobiliori sede, id est,
in the most pure substance of the brain, and not in this excrementorum sentina.

Backward under these is that which is commonly called fornix; by Columbus,
corpus cameratum; by Laurentius, testudo. Fornix. Columb. corpus cameratum.
Laurent. Testudo.
It Is common to both parts of the brain. It Is long, as callosum corpus; broad
behind, sharp before. It Is of a triangular figure consisting of unequal sides,
and with two arches in the back-part, and before with one.

Vsus Fornicis is to hold up the great weight of the brain, Vsus ad robur 3.
ventr.
that it press not the hird ventricle.

Under this arched body appears this third ventricle, which is nothing but the
common cavity which runs backward of the two upper ventricles; and so it is
called, communis cavitas, Communis cavitas Gal. Perforatio veatr.
or meatus communis of Galen. Those that deny the number of ventricles call it
perforatio duorum ventriculorum: others the middle venture, because it is between
the upper most and the fourth; in centro terebri.
or because it is the center of the brain.

It first appears a long cleft; then backwards, and taking up the Fornix it is
broader, and per medium testibus and natibus divisus conspicitur. Testibus and
natibus divisus. Figurae dubiae. Meatus duo 1. ad Basine
It Is of a doubtful figure for the eminencies in it.

Meatus 2. whereof one runs to the basis of the brain, through which the
Pituita of the 2 first ventricles does descend. The second passage (which is
the hindermost, and greater then the former, as Laurentius observes; and
neglected of Galen, as Vesalius will have it) is a piece of the third
ventricle, ^. ad nates.
and runs under the stones and nates, above the beginning of spinalis medulla
into the fourth ventricle, and is a passage into the fourth, in which are small
particles observed. The first is glandula pinealis, Glandula pinedis, penis.
or penis cerebri: this is seated at the entrance of the fourth ventricle, to
maintain a free passage of spirits from the third to the fourth. On both sides
of this third ventricle there are four corpuscula: two of the uppermost from
their form called nates; Nates 2. Testes 2.
and under these, two more, which are testes, little, hard, and round bodies.

Use 1. Vsus 1. molem prohibere. 2. adliberum spirituum ductum. Ventriculus 4.
To keep the moles cerebri from pressing upon the fourth ventricle. Second, for
a free passage of animal spirits.

Ventriculus quartus is between cerebellum and spinalem medullam: nay Riolanus
will have it in cerebello latitare: Riolan. in Cerebello.
and Vesalius likens it to both hands put together; it is the lest, thinnest,
and of an ovall figure; broad above, and straightened downward till it ends in
acumen. Baub. in spinali medulla. Calamus seriptor. Herophilo. Vsus ad ductum
spirituum.
Bauhinus would have the greater part to be in spinali medulla. Herophilus
likens this sinus to calamo scriptorio.

Use, to guide the spirits into spinalem medullam.

It Is wrapped in tenui meninge. This is the most principle venture, and
according to the Arabians the seat of memory, Seeds memoriae Arabib.
for his hardness and dryness. But in truth the seat of all animal faculties
is the substance of the brain. In this is contained much water, as in the rest:
but the two first besides this humor have plexum choroidem, and are large to
hold the great part of spirits. The third has vas venosum, which comes a
quarto sinu crassae meningis.

De Nervorum Paribus.
COncerning the original of nerves, Nervi.
there are diverse considerations, some generationis, others distributionis, and
a third radicationis: of this last briefly. The old Peripatetick quarrel with
Galen we give over, Galen a basi anteriori cor.
as from the brain or the heart, Galen from the anterior Basis of the brain is
quarrelled by Vesalius, Fallopius, Ves. Fall. a posteriore. Varol. a cerebro and
cerebello. Bauhin. Laurent. a medulla oblongat.
who a posteriori basi cerebri. Columbus prope tercium ventriculum, nulli a
cerebello. Varolus from cerebrum and cerebellum. Piccolhominy neither from
cerebrum nor cerebellum, sed from medulla oblongata: so Bauhinus and
Laurentius. For my part, among these great Masters, I do believe that they
arise close to the third and fourth ventricle: for since they are carriers of
animal faculties and spirit, it is fit they should come out of the treasury of
spirits, and that is the third and fourth ventricle. Concerning their number,
Galen makes seven pair; Septem paria Galen. Colum. 9. Ves. Fall. Bauh. 8.
Columbus nine pair; Vesalius, Fallopius, Bauhinus eight pair; the old Distich,
Optica prima, oculos movet altera, tertia gustat,
Quartaque quinta audit, vag a sexta est, septima linguae.


To which add the eight pair, which is olfactus.

The first pair are odoratus, Par 1. odoratus see. quosdam a basi cer. Galen. 1
parop ticorum.
which are two, seated under the Basis of the brain, close by the optics, and
so run white and small ad spongiosum os. Those which reckon but seven pair,
call the optics the first. These are the greatest and thickest, and the
softest, under the middle of the Basis cerebri, where medulla oblongata
appears, they rise divided: then coming forward in an oblique line in the
midst of their way close by sphenoides, they run together, not by
intersection, or per simplicem contactum; but as is well expressed by
Laurentius and Bauhinus, per medullae confufionem, and so make one inseparable
body with the scull into the center of the eye. The inner substance is
medullous, for the fit portage of spirits, till it come to the crystalline,
where dilated, it makes reticularis tunica. The outward, which are coats of
Dura and Pia, are spent in uveam and corneam. But of these in our History of
the eyes.

Secunda conjugatio veterum, 2. oculos moventium, a basi.
is nervorum oculos moventium, which rise from the Basis cerebri together: and
from hence it is well observed, that if you draw your eye to one side, the
other follows. From this one root many sprigs: some to open the lids, and to
lift up the eyes; others to shut them down; others to draw them together:
others to cast them about; and some fibers run to the very coats of the eyes,
Ramuli ad musc. temporal.
and sometimes to the temporal muscle, whatsoever Fallopius and Laurentiut
say; and that is the cause why the temporal muscle hurt, the eye suffers, and
vice versa.

Tertia conjugatio is the least of the nerves, 3 par. Columb.
and not observed by the Ancients, as Columbus will have it. Yet Galen in his
9. de usu part. 8. says it comes ad maxillam superiorem. Bauhinus, ad musculos
faciei. This arises at the side of the Basis of the brain, close to spinalis
medulla, and so runs straight forward piercing the dura Matter, and enters with
the second pair the common Foramen, into the circle of the eye, and so divides
it self in many branches. 1. By the fat of the eyes gives fibers to the turning
of Trochleae, and then piercing the forehead, gives motion to the skin, and to
the upper eyelid. Second branch runs to the forepart of the upper jaw to the
upper lip, and to the outward motion of the nostrils. 3. By the caruncle in the
eyes runs to the cavity of the nostrils, and so into his inner coat, and the
membranous muscle which contracts the nostrill.

Quarta conjugatio, 4. par. Gustator. sed antiquis 3.
which to Galen, Vesalius, Columbus, Fallopius, Piccolhominy, Platerus,
Laurentius is the third, but to my Master Bauhinus the fourth, is Gustatoria,
and arises with many branches from the bottom of the brain, where the fore
part is joined with the hinder, and so with the fifth and sixth pair pierce per
foramen sphenoidis, and so by the muscles of the inside of the mouth into the
tongue, and some branches of the gums and roots of teeth, and some to the
lower jaw and chin, and to the palate within.

Quinta conjugatio are the nerves of hearing; 5. Conjugatio a basi cerebri.
Auditus.
their rise is from the Basis cerebri, where it is joined with a portion of
cerebellum. It has two branches; one soft, almost as that of the eyes; the
other harder: which coming forth of the membrane, are carried ad os Petrosum,
Rami diversi.
(where some would have them joined together; but Galen and Fallopius deny it)
and so in cavitatem Tympanum dictam, and runs along with a vein which goes ad
Auditus organum. Hence close stopping of the ears causes great haemorrhogia,
as Galen relates in 3. de corp. loc. Quidam ad linguam.
Some of these run to the tongue. Hence qui surdi, muti: and from cutting of
cork, absque contactu dentes offenduntur, and surdastris voxrauca redditur: and
another branch runs to the Larynx. Hence by picking of our ears sicca
tussicula excitatur. alter ad laryng.
So Peripneumoniacis aures madent, and Parotides coming salutares sunt. And
sometimes in great tooth-aches ceasing, matter translated to the ear, the ear
is suppurated: and sometimes some of these branches run with the fourth, fifth,
sixth nerve of the arms. But the softer portion is really nervus auditorius.

Sexta conjugatio arises a little beneath the coming forth of the nervi
auditorii, Sexta conjug. ad viscera.
with diverse fibers, which by and by united make one great one, and are
contained in one membrane, and descends where the great branch of the
internal jugular comes up, and so spreads it self back into the neck forward,
to make the recurrent, and the costalem, and the stomachicum round.

Septima conjugatio is the eight with Piccolhominy, Septima canjug.
because he makes the organa olfactus the second conjugation. This arises
properly where the spinalis medulla is, Estinali medulla.
and is piercing out of the scull, and so runs backward to the roots of the
tongue, ad linguae mosum.
where it disperseth many fibers, and to the fornix, and to the hyoidis muscles
for the motion of the tongue. They are the hardest pair which come out from the
cranium, because they come a duriori principio.

Octava conjugaetio arises a little higher about the nervus auditorius from
medulla cerebri, Coning. octava Bathini. inter 2, and 3.
but smaller and harder, between the second and third conjugation, and so runs
in orbitam oculi, and is almost there consumed in the outward angle in musculum
oculi abducentem. Some will have it spent in temporalem, and in that which does
latitare in ore. This, says Bauhinus, was to be reckoned ante quintam, but
that he feared in the number confusionem. Columb. Par nonnullum a natibus ad
faciem.
Columbus adds here another pair from the nates cerebri, which come to the
face, and are joined with the third and second pair.

De Infundibulo, Glandula Pituitaria, and Rete mirabili, and Cerebri Vsu.
WE showed you two passages of the third ventricle; the one backward, the other
forward. This is a deep cavity at the Basis of the brain sub corpore calloso,
coated with Pia matter, woven in with many veins; broad above, but descending
narrow, and in his descent covered with dura matter: from his figure it is called
Pelvis, Pelvis, Infundibulum.
from his use Infundibulum, and receives the thick excrements of the brain
heaped in the ventricles, and transmits them ad Glandulam Pituitariam.

Glandula Pituitaria is seated under the meninges, Glandula Pituitar.
at the end of the Infundibulum in sella Sphenoidis. It Is hollow upward,
gibbous downward, and almost square.

Substance is glandulous, Substantia.
yet more compacted then all Glandules. It Is covered with cenui meninge, which,
as Columbus says, did rise from this place: by the benefit of this membrane
it is tied to the bone, and unto two branches of the Carotides which run by the
sides. Caro bibula. Vsus 1. ad excrementorum receptionem.
This Caro bibula receives the excrements of the Brain like a sponge, and by
straining it by the sides, sends it into Palatum, and by the two canales which
are hollowed on both sides this bone, and serve for the defense of moisture:
but more of these in our History of bones. Vesalius quarrels with Galen for
setting forth Basin capitis cavernosam, id est should be like a sponge,
transcolare pituitam; and yet Laurentius comes near Galen; who holds per cunes
for amina in palatum pedetentim ex glandula instillare. Septem ductus Hippoc.
Hippocrates in libro de Glandulis, and de loc. in Hom. gives an account of
seven passages: per aures, per oculos, per nares, per palatum in fauces, in
gulam, per venas, per spinalem medullam. This Glandula has another use says
Galen 9. de usu Part. scil. to shut the Infundebulum, 2. Vsus Impedire
spirituum egressus. Rete mirabile sec. Galen. Vesalius negat.
ne spiritus animales egrediantur.

Rete mirabile is the last part which falls here into consideration, of which
amongst the Anatomists there is great controversy. Vesaelius denies it Galen,
and says he was deceived by cutting of Oxes heads. Valverda utterly denies it,
and Valverda, and Laurentius.
and Laurentius had rather call that Plexus choroides in the upper ventricles
Rete mirabile. Howsoever the judgment of Vesalius may be questioned in giving
it beasts, and denying it to men; because in men it is hardly found in regard
of the thin spirits it contains, and after death are dissipated. Beasts have
thick and grosser. Fallopius, Piccolhominy, Datur sec. Pic. Fall. Riol. Modus
inveniendi apud Silvium.
and Riolanus are all for it. Silvius teaches us the way how to find it, by
blowing the Carotis in the neck, from which arteries it comes, and not from the
third pair of nerves, as Volcherus would have it. It is therefore here cast
about os Sphenoidis, and is called Rete mirabile from the artificial figure of
the work, Galen, (...), Plexus Retiformis. His fabric is from the arteries
Carotides which are brought from the heart by the chest and neck into the head
at the Basis of the brain, close to the exertion of the optic nerves, and
there make this net, which is not simple, but as if diverse nets were flung on
heaps together, and cannot be separated. Here reside the animal spirits which
are come from the heart, and are elaborated and concocted, and so fly in plexum
choroidem, where they are perfected and poured forth into the third and fourth
ventricle for their conservation.

Use. Vsus 1. ad salutem totius. 2. ad refrigerationem cordis, sed negatur a
Galeno.
Aristotle in 2. de Part. Anim. cap. 7. gives two use, to the brain. 1. Ad
salutem totius naturae. 2. To cool the heart. I know that Galen at large has
refuted this Proposition 8. de usu paat. cap. 3. Yet in Art parva, and the
cap. 29. de Signis calidi cordis nisi Cerebrum obstiterit, which is no more
then Aristotle says. And Averroes upon that place, contemperando naturalem
calorem cordis sua frigulitate naturali. Concerning the contraoperationem
partium, I shall tell you presently. 3. ut sit animae domicil.
3. Use is Galen's, to be Animae domicilium, where are made the chief functions
of sense and motion. 4. His substance to be the laboratory of animal spirits,
4 ut sit officina spirit.
and there to be contained, and from thence to be sent to all the instruments
of sense and motion, and from this substance do all the nerves and spinalis
medulla take their rise. Neither is this spiritus animalis varius and
multiplex, Spirit. anim. unicus, sed sec. organa diver.
sed specie unitus and idem, which carries the whole sensitive soul and all his
faculties by the nerves into every part of the body, although it produce many
and diverse functions, according to the diversity of organs that it is infused
into from the brain, as to the eyes which are the instruments of sight, sight
is made; so to the ears hearing, Actuar.
which Actuarius expresses by the example of the Sun beams, which are one,
yet differ in their variety of color.

Concerning the sensus of the substance of the brain there are diverse opinions.
De sensu Cerebri. Hippoc. Sec. Gal. sentire. Arist negat. Pic. obscure sen ^^.
Fernel. a meningib. Bauhin. expers sen.
Hippocrates says lib. de vul. cap. Cerebrum citissime and maxim sentire.
Galen follows him. Aristotle 3. Hist. anim. cap. 17. Cerebrum and medullam
sensu tactus privari. Piccolhominy, Cerebrum sentire obscure. Fernelius, Sensus
omnes a meningibus manare. Bauhinus, Omnis sensus expers, although it be Sensus
principium and origo, ut in apoplecticis apparet, Medullae spinalis principio
penitus obstructo, omnes parts substantiae sensum amittunt and motum. And yet
the brain feels Sensum not as other parts; Animal. non habet, na^uralem habet.
for animal sense it has not; natural it has, both of those things which
are profitable, and of those things which are not profitable, as the viscera
have; the Heart, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys have sense of those things which hurt
them, and desire to decline them, although they have no nerves from the brain,
but their membranes, which can give no irradiation of sense into their
substance. So we see often faintings from vapors, and ill humors which strike
the substance of the heart. Stern^^^, t^^es.
So sneesings and nocturnall concussions which offend the substance of the
brain. So then the body of the brain membranis nudatum has a kind of natural
sense, Motus naturalis
as likewise a natural motion, and gives a voluntary to the rest of the parts.
And this his motion is proper and peculiar both for the generation, Ad
generationem and expurgationem spirit. Vsus 1. Aerem infer. 2. ad odoratum.
nutrition, and expurgation of spirits. And this his motion has a double use,
according to Galen. 1. To bring air into the brain for augmentation and
ventilation. 2. For the making of Odoratus: and this motion is not only here,
but many parts which have not arbitrary motion, yet have a motion to avoid and
expel from them that which might hurt them. So the Liver, spleen, Qualis in
bepate, liene, etc.
vena, arteriae, humores noxios quotidie deponunt. So the guts in Cris. yet
have no muscles, yea the muscles themselves edocti natura; so in singultu,
where there are no muscles, what hinders then the brains, as in sneesings and
catarrhs. Yet this doctrine has received amongst the Anatomists contradiction.
Galen 8. de usu part. cap. 2. perpetuum tribuit, Galen. perpetuum tribuit,
Vesal. nullum Fallop. dicit continuo moveri.
Vesalius nullum. And as for the argument of smelling, which is per
inspirationem, whilst the brain is contracted, he give no credit to it.
Fallopius in his observat. because he could not find it, dares not determine
it: but in his Institut. continuo moveri dicit. Coiter denies it, so does
Platerus. Coiter. and Plater. negant. Pic. and Columbus perpetuo movetur. Ruf.
a pulsu. Conclusio, propria vi and art^riarum.
Yet Columbus and Piccolhominy hanc perpetuo moveri probant exemplo vulnerum
capitis, even to the substance. So not, as Rufus will have it, from the
pulsatory motion that is in the meninges, and these ratione quatuor sinuum, as
Fallopius. We do determine this question, the substance of the brain to be
moved, not by animal and voluntary motion, not by violent, but by a natural,
proper, and peculiar: besides alieno, arteriarum quippe. Diversis temperib. a
cord.
Neither is this natural motion of the brain answerable to that of the heart,
as appears, if you put one hand upon the top of the head of an infant, and the
other upon the region of the heart, their motions answer not, but there are
more pulsations in the arteries and heart, then in the brain. Therefore it is
not communicated from the heart. Besides, the heart and the arteries,
dilatatione trahunt, and by contraction expel; but on the contrary, the brain
by contraction draws, by dilatation expells. 1. When his substance is
distended, his cavities are narrowed; and they are extended, when the substance
is drawn together.

De Cerebello.
WE have showed you the whole mass of the brain to be divided into Cerebrum
and Cereb^llum. Varolus will have the brain made in gratiam specierum
visibilium, and cerebellum in gratiam specierum resonantium. (...). Situs.
This of the Greeks was called (...), sive posterius Cerebrum; The Petty-brain.
It Is seated under the brain in the inferior part of the scull. It Is covered
with both membranes, and by them divided. It takes up the whole region of the
Occipitium, and for a little space it is joined spinali medullae, and gives some
part to his constitution, unto which on both sides it is continued by 2 round
pieces, and in the midst by the Pia Matter, that the fourth ventricle gape
not; and so stretched up ad nates, it is separated from the brain by Dura Matter,
that the vessels may be safely carried in profundum Cerebrum. Forma.


Forma is broader then long or deep, and the lower back part has the figure of
a globe, in whose middle there is a sharp impression made by the extuberancy
occipitis ossis. Before, toward the nates it is sharp, and has his figure from
the place.

It seems to be made of three pieces, Dividitur in dextram, sinistr, and
mediam, Process. vermifor.
the right, left, and middle, which are not divided but continued. The sides
put together make as it were two globes. The third part makes the vermiformes
processus.

Substantia is the same with the brain, if you consider it freed from Pia
Matter, Substan. eadem cum Cerebro, sed durior.
except in the Busis, whence comes spinalis medulla, which is harder then other
parts, and more hard then the brain. So that spinalis medulla becomes harder,
and answers neither in color nor hardness to the brain. For Cerebellum is of
an ashy-colour, and white only in the superficies of the sinus: but the medulla
spinalis is most white, as likewise the Basis of the brain, which gives him his
beginning. In some it is four times lesser then the brain, Quadruplo minus
Cerebro.
in others ten times. It has a broad sinus in the middle, but not deep, which
makes the seat of the fourth ventricle to be higher. It has no cavities within
as the brain, nor so many excrements, and those which it makes are easily sent
forth.

It has two processus which are called vermiformes. Process. Vermiformes,
tenuis meningis duplicaturae.
The first looks upon the forepart of the ventricle, and the other upon the
hinder, which is common to Cerebellum, and spinalis medulla. Piccolhominy would
have them to be tenuis meninx folded together, which in dilatation of the brain
is extended, in contraction folded. Vsus ad Spirituum ductum. Vsus Cerebelli ad
spirituum retentionem.


The use of both is to keep a passage open continually for the spirits to flow
into the Spinalem medullam.

Use is the same that the brain, and to hold here the animal spirits; Galen,
that from hence the harder nerves may come forth, but Vesalius denies it.

De Spinali Medulla.
MEdulla properly is a simple, moist, fat, white substance, without sense,
contained in the cavity of the bones, and has his original from blood which
is slipped out of the veins into the cavities. It Is white, as it were
spermaticall: but it receives that change from the bones. It Is within the bones
for their nourishment, and that it might refresh them in great motions, and in
other violent causes which might heat and dry them.

Improperly it is spoken of the brain and of his marrow, which differs much from
it; for it can never be molten and consumed, as that of the bones can, which is
covered with a double coat: and therefore for difference sake it is called
spinalis, donsalis, the pith of the back, because through the neck, back and
loins it descends. It has a double signification sometimes; for all that
marrow of the brain which is called oblongata, of which part is within the
scull: but in a more strict signification it signifies that part which is in
the hollow of the vertebrae without the scull. That in the scull Bauhinus
divides (and he has it out of Piccolhominy) into corticem and medullam.

The cortex compasses the medulla, and is of an ash color, and is the aliment
of the medulla, as the vitreous humor is crystalliui.

The Medulla is a white, so lid, firm, and more compacted substance, and is
distinguished by certain oblique lines. Medulla is double, either globosa, or
oblonga, Globosa is of the figure of the Cranium. Medulla oblongata is either
within the scull or without, and this last is properly Spinalis Medulla.

This in a large signification takes his beginning from the hinder ventricle of
the brain, and is a production of Cerebrum and Cerebellum. And this agrees with
the doctrine of Hippocrates in lib. de Carnib. and with Galen. Vesalius says, a
Cerebri basi; and so Platerus. Columbus calls it Cerebrum oblongum, with a
double rise, the greater from the brain, the lesser from Cerebellum. That which
is a Cerebro, is unicum; that which is a Cerebello, is bifidum, and so is
divided into the right and left side. Varolus will have quatuor radices a
Cerebro and Cerebello. Piccolhominy a medulla globosa Cerebri, and so agrees
with Hippocrates; Ecclesiastes, Sinus argenteus.

Situs takes up the sinus Calvariae, about the great hole of the hinder part of
the head under Cerebellum. The part within the Cranium is four fingers long;
The roundnesse, of the middle finger. The rest which is properly spinalis comes
out of the Cranium at the great hole, and so by the hollow of the vertebrae
unto the extremity ossis sacri, per ossa, that it may be a guard that it be not
hurt ab incidentibus. The Greeks called this perforated place (...), sacram
fistulam.

Membranae, which are by Hippocrates called (...), are three, and so many by
Galen; Vesalius, Piccolhominy two; Theophilus four; Bauhinus three. The first
from a ligament which ties the forepart of the vertebrae, which backwards ends
in a nervous and strong coat, which keeps in extension, and bending the Medulla
from breaking, or from being hurt by the bones. About this there is a thick and
viscous humor, as to the rest of the articules and parts which are for motion,
to defend them from drought and pain. There is a second coat from Dura Matter,
and a third from Pia, which are not separated as in the brain. The hard covers
the Medullam, and the Pia divides it into two parts, and ties his vessels and
soft substance together; for through this they run for the nourishment.

Substantia is common with that in Basi Cerebri, or Medulla globosa; yet so as
it is harder and fitter for motion, as the softer part for sense; and the lower
the harder, and it is different in color, as being the whiter, and free from
all anfractus. Bauhinus will have it principium nervorum, and to have almost
the same use, as to hold animal spirits and to perfect them. And therefore his
dignity is equal with that of the brain, since it respects life, whose
consumption brings death, as 7. Epidem. is plain, or wound, as in Bauhinus
wench of 17. years old. It has the same motions that the brain has of Systole
and Diastole, sed vi propria.

Figura is long and thick, and big upwards till it comes to the loins, and then
it grows less when it comes at Os sacrum.

Cavity from the beginning within the Cranium is like Calamo Scriptorio, and is
so called: sharp in the nib, and small, because here are no excrements: this is
the middle of the fourth ventricle. The other is formed a Cerebello, and where
this is joined to Cerebellum.

It Is true that there is not a cavity which manifestly appears: yet it is
divided all along with tenui meninge; so that you may think there is a cavity,
as in the pith of an ox boiled is plain, and appears in Paralysi, where
sometimes one, sometimes the other side is affected. Vesalius would have this
simple and undivided ad lumbos; Columbus to the seventh vertebra of the chest;
Bauhinus beneath the loins, and then like hairs of a horses tail descend in
funiculos and filamenta. Yet throughout they answer unto the number of the
foramina vertebrarum; for so many pair are there, and all ab ipsa Medulla
Spinali. Laurentius was once of the mind with Cabrolius, that all these nerves
shot from the supreme part Spinalis Medullae. But he changed his mind after, as
appears in lib. 4. cap. 18. So that now he will have the lumbares a medulla
dorsali, but quosdam a cervicall, and non onmes; and at their coming out of the
vertebrae for their better strength, nature has made a nodus or ganglio
similis to tie their fibers together.

Use is for the rise of the nerves as from another brain, which might carry to
the parts beneath the brain, animal spirit and faculty, sense and motion,
which it receives from the continuation of the brain, except those branches of
the sixth pair of the nerves, which are disseminated per medium and infimum
ventrem.

Concerning the conjugations of nerves which come from this Spinalis Medulla,
some will have 28. some 29. some 30. we will follow our old Master, and say
there are 30. pair, whose beginnings are different; for the first two
conjugations of the neck, and the lowest five ossis sacri have a double
beginning, and per duo foramina part anteriore and posteriore. The other have
one simple rise, from one hole on each side of the vertebrae; whereof 7 are of
the neck, 12 of the back, 5 of the loins, 6 ossis sacri. Columbus will have but
5 pair. But we go with the Masters of Anatomy, and say there are 7.

The first conjugation and second have something that is peculiar unto them,
for they rise not as the other conjugations from the right and left side, but
one forward, and the other backward. As the first conjugation comes forth
between the occipitium and the first vertebra, and his backward branch runs
into the small Muscles of the Occipitis and Vertebrarum; the fore-branch runs
into the muscles of the Gullet and Neck.

The second conjugation with his first branch, is spent in the skin of the
face, and the hinder branch into the Muscles of the second Vertebra, and the
Occiput.

The third conjugation comes out between the second and third Spondyle, where
the Anterior Ramus runs into the Muscles that bow the neck; the Posterior into
those that extend the Head and neck, and so goes into the lip.

The fourth Conjugation coming out between the fourth and fifth Vertebrae, runs
to the Muscles of the Neck, the Arm, the shoulders, and to the Diaphragma. So
does the 5 and 6. spread themselves into the same parts.

The seventh Conjugation is spent in the arm and Diaphragma.

The Nerves of the Chest are 12. pair. The first 2. pair run into the arm, and
the muscles of the chest. The 10. (but Bauh. will have here but 9.) be
intercostales. The nerves of the Loins are 5. The backer branches are carried
into the loins, the forepart into the Muscles Abdominis, Femoris and Testium.
The Nerves ossis sacri are 6. which are partly spent in Femur, partly in
Musculos vicinos and Cutem; besides in collum uteri, the sphincteres, and
musculos any, vesicae, and in Penem.

The whole Back is moved by four great Nerves which come from the 3 lowest
conjugations of the Loins, and the 4. uppermost ossis sacri. These are the
disseminations of the thirty pair of Nerves which come from Spinalis Medulla.
Concerning their rise and their way, all Anatomists are in Confusion.

FINIS.

