Wit and Folly in a-maze. OR Come try your Wits here; I Will lay a Pot
in half an hour you read it not
In its true sense, as t'ought to be,
Then lay a wager, stake, and see.

had both and a Of neither thought I store; I MONEY FRIEND At length with came
my which pleased me wondrous well

Hereunto is added the Copy of a Letter written from a Young man in the
Country, to a Boon Companion in the City, concerning a mourning Cloak. And his
Conceited Answer thereunto.
Sir,
WHen you came to my Fathers House in the Country, you took away a mourning
Cloak; I know no reason I have to give you a Cloak, wherefore I pray Sir
restore me the Cloak, or Come meet me if you dare, mark me what I say, I say
come meet me. But be advised what you do, for as yet I am not resolved of place
where nor Time. when; till such time, I hope you will be pleased to be quiet;
for why should Thee and I fall o^t?
indeed I do verily protest I mean to try for the Cloak: Peradventure you will
say I promised to give you a Cloak; I confess I did; but I care not for that, I
deny it now: wherefore once more I say restore me the Cloak, and again I say
send me the Cloak; so shall I rest and remain

Your loving Friend, (if by me advised) If not, look in the margent and
tremble. N. N.

HIS ANSWER.
I Pray Sir let it not be spoke,
that from your word you should revoke,
Forbear to spend your Coin in smoke,
And give me leave to keep the Cloak.
Your Father I did bury in the Cloak.
And after I made merry in the Cloak,
And then I cros'd a Ferry in the Cloak,
And yet I am not weary of the Cloak.
I Have drank many cup of Ale in the Cloak,
I Have told many merry Tale in the Cloak.
I Have walked both hill and dale in the Cloak,
And yet I never made sale of the Cloak.
I Have drank many cup of Beer in the Cloak,
I Have eaten very good cheer in the Cloak,
I brought up your Fathers rear in the Cloak
And shed many woeful tear in the Cloak.
You say you mean to try for the Cloak,
I scorn totell a ly for the Cloak,
I hope I shall not die for the Cloak,
I pray Sir do not cry for the Cloak.
You say you will make me smart for the Cloak
I do not care a fart for the Cloak,
I le study the Black Art in the Cloak,
Before that I will part with the Cloak.
I pray good Sir forbear the Cloak.
I know that you can spare the Cloak,
For I will rather tear the Cloak
Than see another wear the Cloak.
Your loving friend till death me choke
If you will but let me keep the Cloak.
B. B.

LONDON, Printed for I. Moxon, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of
Atlas, by St. Michiels Church in Cornhill. 1654.


