THE SPEECH without Door.
Delivered July 9. 1644. in the absence of the SPEAKER, and in the hearing of
above 0000003. persons, then present; who unanimously consented to all
Propositions therein contained, and voted the same fit to be further divulged,
as very pertinent to the public welfare.
M. Speaker,
I Am neither privileged not worthy to express my thoughts within the walls
of your House; and therefore I present them at the door, where I have (by
being concerned in the general freehold) a liberty to speak reason, and am by
Oath and Covenant also obliged (as I conceive) to take the lawful advantage of
all times, places and opportunities, wherein I may be serviceable to the
public honor and safety now endangered. Toward the performance of this duty,
I offer, according to my Talent: not as one presuming to advise my betters; but
as humbly proposing what the multitude of weighty assures has kept, perhaps
from being so remembered, as the present necessity may require, and with heart,
acknowledgements of the Parliaments prudence and unwearied constancy in the
common Cause.

I served the Re-publique in a Militatie capacity, so long as I had
wherewithal to serve it in that kind, and kept my Horses till they had twice
eaten out their heads, ill hope to be some way re-inabled for the like
employment. But seeing my self neglected or forgotten, I nevertheless forgot
not my duty and respects to the common safety: and therefore endeavored by my
contemplations, to supply my want of action; which may perhaps give hints of
considerations and resolutions not altogether unworthy of regard.

(...):
A foo^^ speaks opportunely many times.
It is confessed, that the justness of our common Cause at this time, and
especially the glory of God, and the liberties of the Gospel, ought to be our
chief object and aim. Yet, seeing all they whose hands may be made useful,
are not arrived at their perfections, who seek first the Kingdom of God: In
regard also, that they who are to be allured by outward inducements, to
contribute their external assistance toward the good work in hand, are
neither so impertinent a property, nor so inconsiderable a party, as that
their compliance or encouragement should be quite neglected. And whereas,
likewise, the arm of flesh, (though not to be confided in) is by all reasonable
endeavors, to be strengthened for the performance of those duties which
appertain to the outward man: I thought it material to commend to you a few
Propositions, seeming to good purpose: And my hope is, that they shall be so
heeded, and so made use of, as they deserve.

It extremely concerns us, that competent power be forthwith raised, and all
other possible good means used to set a speedy period to this unnatural war;
before the strength, the provisions and staple-commodities of these Kingdoms
be so wasted, and the spirits of the well-affected so depressed, that we be
thereby made a prey to foreign powers; or to the necessities and insolences
of our own people: which may soon happen, if the successes of war, (whereof
no man is certain) should fail our present expectation, and once more bring
back upon us, a prevailing enemy.

For the advancement of the present design, it is were pertinent that there
should be a strict execution of true Martial Discipline, and a right
distribution of punishment, and reward, with a constant adhering to the plain
principles of religion and honesty, without any doublings (by all Committees
and Officers, deriving authority from the Parliament) according to the
intentions, and sincerity of both Houses. These things have been hitherto
overmuch neglected, by their secret and cunning practices, who are
mischievously against us, while they seem to be with us* And I wish, many be
not more angry that the fault is discovered, then willing to amend it; and more
forward in the evil distribution of these (or more active in practicing the
violence and oppressions of War) and in advancing corrupt policies, then in
discharging the duties required.

But, hoping better, I will proceed: First making a double Quaere or
Proposition, to be a foundation of what I intend, and then building on it that
necessary superstructure, which it is likely to bear. That twofold question
shall be, whether the Goods, Honors, Offices, and Estates, of notorious
Delinquents, and others, who are to this day obstinate opposers of the
Parliament, (by actual Arms or otherwise) ought not in equity, to be
confiscated, seized, and sold by our party, toward the raising of supplies for
disabling our enemies, and for the ease and encouragement of our friends: And
then, whether we should not resolve, without wavering, on this, and on all
other lawful courses, which are availeable for the present necessity, and for
the establishing of the future safety, peace, and welfare of this whole
Kingdom now in danger. If it should be negatively concluded on, (our estates
being first confiscated, seized, and disposed of to the use of our adversaries,
by whom our lives, liberties, Religion, and many other things considerable, are
now endangered) we are enemies to our own innocence and safety; and shall fall
into many unreasonable absurdities and perils: but if this Quaere be
affirmatively resolved on, as it ought to be, I thereupon make these following
Propositions.

1 First, that the Offices, goods, and estates of all, who are, or shall be such
Delinquents, as are aforementioned, may, by Ordinance of Parliament, be
immediately, and without partiality, confiscated, and sold; or so disposed of
that thereby money may be raised, the well-deservers encouraged, and those
terrified from assisting the public enemy, who are not yet voluntarily engaged
in their conspiracies; and that this may be executed with such just severity,
and with such more full respect, as the qualities and offenses of the several
persons may apparently require.

This Proposition is necessary, for that the Commonwealth is brought into
great straits, wants, and perils, by the treasons, and oppressions of the said
enemy. (It is reasonable, because the Owners of those Offices, goods, and
estates, have by the^^ count^^^nced; of fomented this cursed war, and been
the ^^user^ both of) those great necessities and mischiefs which now oppress
us. It is just, in regard the Traitors who seduce the King, did first procure
him to confiscate, and dispose of the estates of his most loyal Subjects, to
be the rewards of the oppressions, and treasons, of his Se^^cers. It is
convenient, in respect it will be a sure means of disabling and dis^^^^ing out
adversaries, and an encouragement and strengthening to our friends. It is safe,
because it will put us off from the false hopes of reconciliation with an
implacable enemy: which false hopes both hinder our peace for the present, and
will endanger it hereafter: yea perhaps utterly destroy as, if God prevent no^.
For, so exasperated are our adversaries, already, and so true to principles
directly repugnant to all hear^y concord with us, that we can do nothing to
make them more mischie so^^ unto in, then they already resolve to be upon all
advantages, how kindly soever we shall use them; and whatsoever Treaties, or
shows of reconciliation they shall please to make. And, therefore, that course
only will be safest for us, which may leave their secret friends, and agents,
among us, nothing to work on, for the accomplishment of their ends; and make us
most confident, that we are to expect nothing but mischief at their hands.

2. My second Proposition is, that Commanders and Soldiers who have
considerable sums of Money owing unto them, may take up their Arreares, and
as much of their future pay, as they can spare, in the purchases of such
confiscated estates, valuing the same at or about eight years purchase,
according to the rack-rent issuing clearly out of them before these troubles,
with some addition or abatement, according to the present benefit or disprofit;
and with respect to improvements by Woods or otherwise: and with a Proviso,
that wheresoever present profit is made, contribution to the war be always
paid out of the same, according to the benefit; And that every Commander,
Officer, and Soldier, may have also proportionably, according to their
several merits, some allowance out of the said confiscated Lands, Goods,
Offices and Estates, over and above their pay, when the war is done.

By this Proposition; the Soldier will not only be engaged to fight the more
courageously for the preservation of what he has purchased, but it will make
him also hasten the speedy finishing of the war, that he may enjoy his
achievements in Peace; whereas, having their pay merely in Money, (which most
of them spend as fast as they receive it) some of them will endeavor to
prolong the war, for the longer continance of their maintenance. For, many,
no doubt, (accursed be they) dealt with the Commonwealth as wicked Chyrurgeons
do with wealthy Patients, under their cure. Others there are, who by such
purchases may be kept more constant and more true to the service, because they
cannot suddenly, or so easily convey themselves out of the Kingdom with their
Lands as they can with Money, which perhaps some will endeavor (...) burden
upon others, when there is most need of help. Besides, the hope of gaining and
leaving inheritances to their children purchased by spending or hazarding their
lives and fortunes, for the preservation of Religion, Laws, Liberties, and the
true Kingship of our Sovereigne (being (...) more honorable purchases, then
those that were gotten, or des^^^ded from those conquests, which were
heretofore made by the spoil of Countries invaded merely out of ambition or
covetuousnesse) it will doubtless encourage rage the living possessours, to
brave resolutions for the present, and be a means to make their posterity,
hereafter; both mindful and zealous of the virtuous actions of their
Predecessors.

3. My third Proposition is, that all they who have been Delinquents, is
aforesaid, before this present day; and shall so be, and continue hereafter, or
shall contribute to the Enemy, (not being in durance) or (being no Inhabitant
within the same,) shall continue in the enemies Quarters above a fortnight
after a day named, (not being restrained perforce) may not only loose all their
Goods, Lands, and Offices, as is aforesaid, but be degraded also of their
titles of honor, and disabled to beat Arms, or be reputed Gentlemen.

By this Proposition, Provision will be made to terrify and restrain from
treacherous, and rebellious practices and combinations, many of the Gentry and
Nobility, who have not yet actually manifested their Malignancie. And indeed,
there is no injustice, nor unreasonablenesse, in these Propositions: For, what
injustice can there be in taking away any part of their private estates, who
employed them for the public Destruction? What unmercifullnesse in making
them poor, who have cruelly inpoverished, and in humanely endeavored to make
desolate, three Kingdoms? What unreasonablenesse can there be in making them
Peasants (a degree, to which honest men are borne, and too good for these) some
of them being made lords and Knights for attempting to enslave Freemen? And
the rest having abused their honors dignities, and gentility, to bring whole
Nations into Villenage? Believe ^t, it will be an Injury to our faithful
Nobility to be made P^ers which such, and b^ing Titles of Honor into contempt.
They are well (...) the way to it already, and I dare say, No one thing has so
depraved and debanched our Nation, as the usurping and misplacing Gentility and
Nobility. And we shall never see happy days again till our dignities be (...)
worthily bestowed, and till our Lords, and Cen^^^en stand (...) upon their
^^^^^tigs then their honors; more upon (...) Public, then (...) the^ private
privllidg^^.

4 My fourth Proposition, therefore, is, that the Titles, and Dignities of
Delinquents, so forfeited as aforesaid, may he conferred on those who (...)
their Honors, Estates, and Persons, for the Parliament, a^^^^ing to the
^^^^nence of their (...). That, the Nobility, also, who have continued
serviceable, and si^ne, in this time of trial, may be digniied, in the first
place^, with some ^d^^ition to their honors. And that every Officer, and
common Soldier, who has served in this War. for the Parliament, without
compulsion, and without taint of plundering, or other notorious Misdemeanors,
may have (according to his degree, and merit) conferred upon him, some gift,
privilege, emblematicall Medail; or badge of honor, to be enjoyed, kept, or
worn by him, when this War is done; to be a memorial of his faithfulness to
posterity, in the defense of his Religion, and Country.

This Proposition being condescended unto, will have many excellent effects,
much dishartening the common Adversary and incourageing both the present, and
future generations, to constancy in well doing, and provokeing to imitation,
and emulation of the like virtues. This Proposition of Honors will make a more
generous Souldierie, then mere pay, by raising youthful Spirits above the
vulgar, and servile aims, of Mercenaryes; and stir up many to endeavor
extraordinary performances. By this course, the Romans, and the most eminent
States, and Nations of the World, first became victorious, honorable, and
famous: And I am persuaded, that if this and the other Propositions may be
cordially put in execution, it will infuse such spirits; and make such a change
in our Soldiers, that they will quickly trample down all the policies and
powers of the enemy.

5 My fifth Proposition is, that all the Tenants to them whose estates are
sequestered, may after sequestration become Tenants to the Parliament, or to
their Assigns, even for that part which shall be assigned to the Delinquents,
upon their submission; or to their Wives, for their Maintenance, as well as for
the rest, reserved. And that if, it be proved their wives do hold intelligence
with their husbands to the da^^age of the State, during their abode in the
enemies quarters, or contribute any of their Allowance unto them, while they
are in hostility there, they shall quite forfeit the said Allowance.

By being constant in proceeding according to this Proposition, The Tenants of
sequestered Lands, having their sole-dependency upon the Parliament, and those
to whom the said estates are disposed, willbe thereby kept the more true and
constant thereunto; whereas (...) they will be fearfully wavering, and easily
seduced by their old Landlords, some of whom do, perhaps, but dissemble their
conformity, in expectation of advantages; By this means also, the enemy will
want a great part of his Intelligence, and secret maintenance, which may the
more easily be supplied, and conveyed unto them, while there be relations
betwixt them and their Tenants.

6 My sixth Preposition is, that all they who have endangered the public, by
deserting the Parliament, on by being Neuters, or by not contributing timely
and according to their abilities, or by malignant expressions to the
discouraging, or corrupting of others (as well as they who have offened in
higher degrees) may be made incapable of bearing any eminent office, or of
executing any place of Judicatrue, or trust, in the Commonwealth.

By condescending to this Proposition, the hands of the common people will be
more strong with the Parliament; because it will make them less fearful to
discharge their duties thereunto; when they perceive those, hopeless of
regaining Authority, who now secretly malice them for their fidelity, and might
perhaps remember it hereafter, to their harm, when they returned to place of
power. By this means also, our just Parliamentarie Privileges will be the
better secured, and the power of malignancie the more suppressed, both for the
present time, and hereafter; whereas else, corruptions, and tyrannies (though a
while deprest) will quickly sult up again, to the renewing of our miseries, if
the dissembling Conformist ever get strength.

7 The seventh Proposition is, that all the Irish, bearing arms against the
Parliament, may be exempted from having quarter allowed unto them, wheresoever
they are found, among those other, to whom Quarter is ^ouchsafed: and that all
convicted Papists who will not conform to the Discipline and Doctrine
established in the Church of England (as it stands in opposition to Popery) may
be compelled, within a certain time limited, to abjure the Realm.

By assenting to the first part of this Proposition, the barbarous Irish will
be deterred from coming over, so frequently and in such numbers, to shed
innocent blood; and by the second part, they who will else be thorns in our
eyes, and pricks in our sides for ever, shall be soon removed: and the
Jesuiticall Faction, shall be deprived of means and opportunities to keep up
the perpetual motion of that design which they have contrived for the
upholding of Antichrist in these Kingdoms.

8 The eighth Proposition is, that there may be more expedition in the dispatch
of public and weighty affairs, by preferring them before all private
business whatsoever; and that private Suits may be dispatched according to
that order in which they are preferred without any respect of persons (except
where some apparent desert, or great necessity shall so require) especially
when they are nearly concerned, who have faithfully endeavored, and
extraordinarily suffered for the Parliament: and that such compassion also may
be vouchsafed to them, and such provision of recompense and supply be
seasonably provided for them, as will be proportionable both to their private
condition, and the public ability.

By the first branch of this Proposition, the loss of much precious time and
of many opportunities, whereby the public is disadvantaged, may be partly
p^evented. By the second, private men (who are often more damaged by long
attendance, then by that whereof they complain, and otherwhile quite undone by
it) shall receive much benefit and contentment thereby, howsoever they speed:
And by that which is propounded in the last branch, the well-affected shall be
more comforted and encouraged then heretofore; God shall be the more merciful
unto this Land, and the plague now afflicting us, shall be the more speedily
removed.

9 The ninth motion is, that notorious Delinquents, especially incendiaries and
seducers of the King, may be proceeded against both speedily and impartially.

By this means, all those will be disabled, or else removed out of the way,
whose lives, counsels, and practices, are yet serviceable to the enemy,
mischievous to the public safety, and displeasing to God.

10 My tenth Proposition is, that wheresoever the goods or estates of
Delinquents are sequestered and apprized, only curiosities, and superfluous
household stuff, may be immediately sold; and that their houses, shops, wares,
farms, stocks, and all necessary appurtenances, may be for a short time staid,
and offered to well-affected persons, who are driven out of their trades and
employment by the enemy, either for ready money, or upon good security, to pay
the same within a little time.

By this means, many shops and farms, which now stand void, to the
impoverishing of the Commonwealth; and many persons of credit now destitute of
a calling, would soon be re-imployed, to the maintenance of husbandry and
trading; to the support of decaying families, and to the increase of Excise,
and other contributions.

11 My eleventh Proposition is, that some provision may be made, that those
Merchants and others, may be some reasonable composition, be encouraged to
return to their houses and trades, who have either departed out of this
Kingdom with their estates; or else obscured themselves within the same,
through fear of what might be the event of the present troubles and
distractions (without entering into any hostility, or partaking by contribution
or counsel, with the one side or other) and are now desirous to return and
join with the Parliament, so they may have assurance that their former
failings shall not be reputed malignancie, or objected to their utter undoing.

By this means, many will be allured to return, and discover themselves and
their estates, to the strengthening of the well-affected party, and to the
advance of trading; who will else, continue where they are, either to the
enriching of other Countries, with their wealth; and industries: or, else,
conceal themselves near home, both to the public loss, and their own
private ruin.

12 My twelfth Proposition is, that when God begins to give us hope of
prevailing, we be neither negligent in taking, or prosecuting all good
opportunities given; nor severe, without mercy; nor, Ahab-like, fooled with a
compassion, offensive to God, and destructive to our selves: but, that (though
we somewhat over-straine our selves) we put forth our strength, and endeavors,
all at once (and in every place together) to make good the advantage, which God
has put, or shall put into our hands; both using severity, and showing mercy,
in their just measure, and at their due times.

By taking this course, our Brethren, in the Enemies Quarters, whose hearts are
with us, shall lend us their hands also, without fear; and help to deliver
us, and themselves, before they and we are quite consumed: whereas, else, we
shall but reprieve our selves, and our neighbors, from imprisonment to day,
that we, and they, may be tormented to death, to morrow: and by acting
imprudently, or by doing the work of God negligently, lose our own lives, and
the lives of the people, whom God would have spared; because, through want of
heed, and diligence, we let those escape, whom divine justice had appointed to
destruction.

13 My thirteenth Proposition is that a more sincere regard be generally had to
the personal honor; and safety of our Sovereign Lord the King: and that
such a strict course may be taken for the preservation thereof, as may be
agreeable to our Allegance, and Christian Profession, notwithstanding all our
unhappy divisions. Both Houses of Parliament, in all their Expressions,
Remonstrances, Declarations, and Proceedings, (the circumstances, and
unavoidable necessities of our unhappie controversies, duly considered) have
had, in my understanding, a pious, and loyal respect hereunto, whatsoever has
been judged of them; and, for that cause, have spared the mention of many
things, famed; whereby their own innocence might be illustrated; and have
discovered nothing reflecting upon this Honor, but what could neither be
hidden, nor left unmentioned, without betraying the general safety. But, some
others have so petulantly, impertinently, and irreverently mentioned his
failings, that, if they are guitlesse of disloyal intentions, sure I am, they
have not considered, that, because of our Sins, the King (as David was,
notwithstanding Ioabs good counsel) might be left, by God, for a while, to be
swayed by his own wilfulness, for our just punishment: or, that (being
forteably ravished, by powers, and policies, too strong for him to resist) he
may, for ought we know, be yet, as excusable, as the woman deflowred in the
fields, where none was present to deliver her from the ravisher. Howsoever, he
is our Father, and his shame is our; let us, therefore, cover it, as much as we
may; that when he awakes, he may bless us. For, when the cup of his
inchancers, and the wicked which are about his Throne, shall be taken away; his
repentance may, perhaps, make him more beloved, and more glorious, then if he
had never erred. It appears by his late Letters, in which he boasted of
victory, when indeed his own Forces had the greatest overthrow that ever they
received, that he is blinded by mis-informations, and continues yet, our
enemy, because he is kept both from the knowledge of his own friends, and of
his own danger: and, we hope, that when his eyes are opened a blessed
reconciliation will soon follow.

By this Proposition, we shall prevent their treasonous designs, who, under
color of prosecuting the public enemy, in this great and general
distraction, have a secret hope to destroy both the King, and his Kingdoms. By
this, we shall escape that perpetuating of civil blood-shod, which else may be
occasioned, by the suggestions, and insinuations, of those, who are addicted to
disloyal intentions; and, peradventure, there is more danger of this mischief,
then some imagine. If we shall essentially discharge our Allegiance, God will
open the eyes, and turn the heart of the King, to the establishing of this
Kingdom upon him, and his posterity, with our peace; or translate the
Government (if he continue wilful) without our guilt: but if he persist to
walk obstinately in the counsels of the ungodly, and we also be found
unfaithful in our duty; both we, and our King, shall pe^ish.

14 My last Proposition is, That we may all privately endeavor, that Gods
public judgments may have better effects upon us, then I can yet perceive they
have had; and that there may be an outward Body of divine worship speedily
established among us, before the soul of Religion be quite lost, or departed
out of our coasts.

By this, we shall escape many curses, and obtain many blessings, which I need
not now mention.

Some other particulars I have though upon, seeming, in my judgment, very
considerable; but I will not insist on them, lest by proposing over much, all
be quite neglected. Neither do I make render of these Propositions, as
absolutely necessary to be executed in every circumstance according as they
are here propounded: But to be rather (as I formerly intimated) hints of some
what to be speedily considered on, and acted to these purposes, by that
wisdom and authority, which best knows how to regulate and make use of such
Memorandums, for the public advantage.

For, they seem to me very material, not only those which concern God and the
King, but even those also which conduce to the strengthening and animating of
our fellow-helpers; Because as the pul^ike work is yet carried on (and for
which neither of the Houses of our honorable Parliament can be blamed) our
enemies have had far greater encouragements, and are diverse ways (for ten
porall respects) in a more secure condition then any of (...) for, their Lands
are sequestered but in part, and for a time only, whereas ours are wholly
confiscated forever^ they do but hazard their lives in the present War,
while we are not only as much endangered as they by the same plague, while it
continues, but threatened also with the Gallows hereafter, if we live to see
our enemies prevail. Should our Cause prosper, they perceive the Parliament is
merciful and have hope, by their favorers continuing among us, to improve
that hope^ yea, and they make it an argument to encourage each other in taking
up Arms against us: but if their designs take successes answerable to their
desires, we are sure to perish; sure of extirpation; Because we have open
adversaries there, and concealed enemies here, who will undoubtedly heap upon
us all informations and aggravations, which may totally destroy us. Th^^
imprisonments are frequently in fair houses, in sweet lodgings, and among
their friendly visitants, where most of them have all their necessities fully
supplied; and many of them the excess of wine, women, music, and what
dainties they please. Whereas, when we are taken by them, deep dungeons,
stink, and the extremities of thirst, hungers, cold and nakedness, are
thought too easy for us, unless other cruelties be^^^^ed: They have a fifth
part allowed by public Ordinance, out of their sequestered estates, to maintain
their wives and children, during their hostility; and these are often permitted
also, to pass and repasse to them with contributions and intelligence by our
lenity and connivency: But we are plundered of all which lies within their
Quarters, without allowance of any such liberty or portion, toward the relief
of our families. They find in both Houses of Parliament etc. in every
Committee, friends ready upon entreaty, and (otherwhile voluntarily
mediating, and speedily prevailing for them in their necessities) while some of
us, who are true to the public, who have often hazarded our lives, fre^^e
contributed our utmost endeavors, and lost our whole estates in the Parliament
service, are compelled to attend a month before we can woo one to accept or
prefer a Petition for us; twice as long before we can procure two or three
Referees to consider and report of it, though they not only half undo us, but
endanger the common safety by their delays yea, (which is worse) though we
see them speed twice as much time, day by day, as would be sufficient to
dispatch matters much more difficult. And these neglects and sufferings we
sometime undergo, to pleasure them by whom we were undone, to our greater
vexation. Nevertheless, if when by these and other indignities, (urged beyond
the patience of the humane nature) we shall in the extremity of our wants and
passions, but some what sharply complain of our neglect, all our losses,
hazards, wounds, and other suff^ings are overballanced with one rash word; and,
we are reproved with as much bitterness, as the worst Malignants: yea, and
they who could not spare one hour in two months, to hear us for our good, can
presently find leisure to hear what is misconstrued, or misinterpreted to our
disadvantage.

These are very great discouragements; and, but that there is in the Houses of
Parliament, a blessed Spirit ordering and disposing, not only their Counsels,
but the mischievous designs of their adversaries also, according to the
prayers and desires of those who are upright and sincere among them, even in
despite of the policies, corruptions, and practices, of their secret
adversaries (masked under the veiles of piety and honesty) all good men, had
long ere this time, been quite disheartened. For, while our enemies are courted,
favored, cherished, and well paid, for their services, (at least, in
plunderings, promises titles, or good words,) that they may continue firm to
an evil Cause; some amongst us, of whose fidelity best assurances have been
given, are sent away (when in extreme necessity, we humbly demand but a part
of our dues) without either pay, respect, or good words; and (some few
excepted) they have generally gained most on our party by this war, who in
plundrings, oppressions, and such like demeanours, do most resemble the most
debauched of our enemies.

Our adversaries have also this advantage, more then we, that among our
Laodiceans abiding with us, they are provided of Proctors, betwixt whom and
them there are reciprocal engagements, making them hopeful to save stakes
which side soever prevail: Whereas we, having no such reserves, no such
refuges, are sure of destruction, if our enemies obtain their desire; and many
of us, not certain of a condition much better, though it succeed otherwise;
whilst public affairs are mingled with private designs, and a Gate to an
unsound reconciliation, left open.

For, it appears by what is lately, and pestilently, expressed in the Pamphlet
entitled, Mercurius Hibernicus, that the Malignant Papist, and the malicious
Royallist, who are armed against us for Popery, and Tyranny, are so impudent,
and so obstinate, in justifying their Treasonous, and Murderous practices,
against true Protestants, and Loyall-Subjects; and in depraving our honest
Cause, and warrantable proceedings (by imputing to us, that which was
perpetrated by themselves) that we are merly lost if we cherish any hope of a
comfortable atonement, while they have a being among us; who are so minded; Or
if we conceive any hope of being at all for ourselves, if ever they recover
power enough to root us out. Therefore, let us endeavor unanimously to destroy
or disable Gods enemies and our own, by resolving upon a reasonable course to
that end, rather then to be unmercifull to our selves and our posterity by
nourishing a foolish hope to reconcile God and Behal; to establish a firm
League between Jerusalem and Babylon; or betwixt the children of Peace and the
enemies thereof. And let us not fear that vaine-externall show of Power, and
Policy, which opposes us; seeing, hitherto, out of the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings God has ordained the strength whereby we have chiefly been
preserved; and, seeing, our greatest deliverances have bin by the meanest
persons and places. Nor let us be afraid of a false Imputation of cruelty,
seeing these our adversaries while they continue in their malice are as those
spiritual Amalekites whom the Christian Israelite is to root out of the Land;
and with whom, he and his seed, is to have war for ever.

I will speak a word or two more, and then conclude. There are, as I have
intimated, so many seeming to be with us, who are secretly against us, (some by
complying plausibly within doors, that they may act their purposes abroad,
with less suspicion; and some, moving other engines) that (if God speedil^
prevent it not) as fairly as our hopes now flatter us, either our
irresolutions, delays, divisions, new discouragements (or these altogether)
will quite undo us; by leaving either no able-man willing, or no willing-man,
able to serve us. I wish it might be otherwise, and I believe it shal^e well at
last; But, I have heard so many sad complaints made without remedy, or regard;
and have by long service, and attendance, both in the field, and city, took
such observations, and made such collections, to assure my self (though
perhaps not to satisfy others) of V^nfa^^hfulnesse, Negligence, Malice,
Self-conceit, Pride, Security, and of acting for private respects, even while
our public ruin is threatened, that I am confident some unexpected mischief
will ere long follow, if such failings as I have pointed at, be not quickly
reformed; and some course heartily endeavored, according to the fore going
Propositions, for the better encouragement of the well affected, and for the
prevention of their politic ends, who by abideing in the Parliament, and by
seeming to comply with it, will else more hazard our safety, then all they who
are in open hostility against us.

I have now spoken what I thought necessary, for this time, and I hope within
the compass of my sphere. For, though I am not of the representative body of
this Kingdom, I am a member of the Body represented, to whom (when the
well-being of it is concerned) there belongs times, and places, and privileges
of speaking. If these expressions may bring any thing to remembrance, which
will conduce to the Public advantage, I have my desire. If they shall add any
thing to my private Profit, it is more then I can look for, till I see,
according to these Propositions, the hands of Gods people strengthened by an
Ordinance, and a practice making them for ever hopeless of reconciliation with
his enemies, whilst they continue such; And till I perceive also, that we are
in a likelier way to be united to his divine Majesty. Howsoever, I have in my
heart unfainedly resolved with David ( Psalm. 139.22.) to hate them that hate
God, even with a perfect hatred. And though I know the dangerous malice of
those enemies, and am, yet, ignorant, how these Propositions, and this
Profession, will be seconded by others; I dare, nevertheless, both publicly
to aver, and openly to sign them with my hand, if need be.

FINIS.

