Wit and Wealth Contending for PRE-EMINENCE: IN A different Dialogue Between
Wat Witty-pole and Davy Rich.


You who have wit, or wealth (or both) to look,
Are wished (impartially) upon this book.
LONDON, Printed for T. B. at the Sign of the Maidenhead, near Holborn
Conduit. 1647.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Wit and Wealth.
Wat. CAre I for thy worldly trash? not a rush: tell not me of thy millions,
thousands, and hundreds: I praise my (bountiful) stars I have an inbred
treasury, not valuable in respect of that which thou countest good.


Davy, I, I, talk on, talk on; it seems thou art neither acquainted with
wealth, nor (what thou brag'st of most) wit; for thou art quite beside thy
Arethmatick, putting the cart before the horses millions first, and hundreds
last: a preposterous Argument suitable to thy disposition.


Wat: Why? I tell thee (fool) I am so wearied from the very conception of any
thought concerning Riches, that it is noe wonder, if all words spoken by me on
that hateful subject prove to be abortive.


Da. How do thou live then, I prithee?


Wat. By my wit, I tell thee, and hold it a far richer Patrimony then all thy
gold can make thee so much as capable of.


Da. Marry I tell thee in my conceit thou'st but a very bad trade on it now.
What can thou expect to get by thy wit, in an age which regards neither wit,
honesty, conscience, humanity. Noble-Ancestrey, nor indeed (to be brief) any
thing; but what I am Master of, (and by which I can accomplish whatsoever my
thoughts would acquire) and that is money, the darling of the time, the
conqueror of Conquerers, the Coyner of Honesty, and the Muzzell of Eloquence?


Wat. O brave Davy, why now I perceive the case is much altered since I saw
thee last, I do not think but thou haste bought (and read) Greens Groats worth
of Wit, or (rather) Wits Commonwealth; why thy phrase and manners is quite
changed from what was wont to be, or I now expected, I do not think but thou
art become one of the wits of the times, all thy usual Dialect was Opus and
usus, or Noverint universi, etc. but now let me see what is it the Darling of
the Time, Conqueror of Conquerers, Muzzle of Eloquence; O rare style I but
tell me Davy, is all this Rhethorick proper to Pelf?


Davy. This quotha? why I Would have thee to know Wat, that these golden phrases,
and thousands more daily in use are the very children of dross (as thou
call it) Subjects of silver, Servants and slaves of gold: why man did
never hear talk of golden Boys, Girls worth gold, and penny white, brown
bread Lasses? I Am sure thou have Wat.


Wat. I marry have I, what then? are all these Epethits equivalent with an
admirable wit, a quaint conceit, a curious delivery, an exquisite device, an
elaborate style, and a gallant humor?


Davy, Tush, what of all this? why, I say again and again, and as many times
again as thou will, that all this, and as much as thou can sum up between
Shrove-tide and Easter, are but L^nt by the benevolence of industrious gold and
silver, does not money buy Learning? and (I prithee) does not learning make
Divines, Lawyers Phisicians, Philosophers, Poets, and what not? Ergo, no money
no Master, no Master no Scholar; for it is an old Proverb, No penny, no
Paternoster; therefore Wat leave off thy bragging of wit, least thou prove thy
self a fool, in preferring it before wealth, which is (as it were) a creator of
Wit.


Wat. I protest Davy, though indeed I never held thee to be very wise, yet I
tell thee, I never expected such a vacuity of discretion, as now thou have
bewrayed in thy last discourse, out upon thee, hold thy tongue for shame, till
thou learn how to use it better: I vow I Am ashamed of thee.


Davy. Why Sirrah? tell me patiently, I believe in truth this is but a flourish
of wit, a mere whimfie to daunt me, and make me leave off, but in faith thou
art a younger brother in that, all thy witty flashes cannot beat me off from my
ground, I say still, that wealth is to be preferred before wit, as being (in a
manner) the very nurse and foster father of it, all these thy bravadoes shall
never beat me off, while I can speak my mind to maintain it.


Wat. I marry, thou have spun a fine thread indeed, thy argument is even as
strong as a Spiders web, which thou shall see me presently blow away, and
dissolve with a blast from my mouth; thou have spoken like a mere Dody-pole as
thou art, in seeking to prove that Wealth buys Learning, and Learning creates
wit, when it is apparently seen to the contrary; only this I confess that
Literature is a most necessary handmaid to the Muses, without which (indeed)
they cannot be well dressed, but Poeta nasci^ur non fit, a Poet is so born, not
so made, for unless a man have an inbred and natural proclivity, what boots
all his Learning? nay rather, does it not render him more odious to his
auditors, who expecting the Nut of Learning, find nothing but the shell of
gilded ignorance, like a Iay decked in Peacocks feathers, a Sow with a gold
ring in her snout, and a Millers Ass, garnished with the rich saddle and
trappings of Beucephelus, does not the experience of all ages ratify this?
speak men.


Davy. Thou would enforce me to believe so, but I neither can nor will,
without particulars to confirm thy words more then a general saying that it is
so, therefore I absolutely deny the Argument to be good unless thou can
instance some pregnant proof to justify thy assertion.


Wat. That I can very readily do, not needing to trouble thee with precedent
men and times, but even turning to those now living in this present age, and of
them one most eminent may serve to dignifie a multitude of others more obscure:
what think thou of that notable (only) English Poet John Tailor, how many
sublime and (truly) witty Poems has be published in Print? raising a
Pyramides to his never dying memory, of an ingenuous fertile brain without any
addition of learning worth mention: but what his own industrious (and inbred)
capacity has possessed him of; what curry-combs has he taken out of the
Iron-mongers own shop to dress the (ill conditioned) Jade withal? how
artificially has he roasted and broyled him upon his own spits, and grid-irons,
how has he fried and tossed him in his own drying pan, basted him with his
own ladle, and boiled him like a Calves-head and Bacon in his own pottage-pot?
Now I prithee judge impartially of this; the one vaunts much of great learning
(which thou say is bought with money) the other professes himself to be
guilty of very little (if any) and yet how different their writings are, having
(with all possible acerbity pressed the Press against each other, the world has
censured already, and so do thou now.


Davy. Why, is not the Iron-monger counted for a pregnant witty fellow? I think
he is, he has published (and does weekly) a number of Pamphlets, which some
like exceeding well


Wat. Why, I tell thee he has no wit, but a^^ kind of railing invention; was
ever any ag^^ guilty of producing such a firebrand of mischief? what
pestiferous incentives has he written and published, to stir up sedition
betwixt the King and his people, while it is to be feared he is really true to
neither.


Davy. Well then, leaving this discourse, let us proceed to something (in my
conceit) more pertinent to our purpose, which shall be this: whether Wit or
Wealth (as I touched in the beginning) will best feed and cloth a man? answer
me to that briefly and plainly; here is the case, thou have Wit enough, and I
have Wealth enough; now which of them affords the best maintenance, there lies
the state of the question, I hold my principle still, Wealth is to be preferred
before Wit?


Wat. And I will confidently defend the precedence of Wit before Wealth, as
being a divine and supernatural gift, which money can never purchase.


Davy. That Is confessed but nevertheless thou can not deny but Wealth is a
Divine gift, as well as Wit, is it not? does not holy writ mention many godly
men, very rich?


Wat. I prithee Davy let holy Writ alone in our quarrel, for I love not to mix
holy and profane matters together, but if thou should hedge in them to make
thy fence the stronger, the examples are so few, in comparison of others, that
have abandoned riches to embrace contemplation in poverty; that the difference
would easily appear; to what end think thou did my Cousen Crates that witty
Philosopher, throw all his wealth (which was abundance) into the Sea; was it
not because it was an impediment to his study, and our Poets in imitation of
him, if they be possessed with any worldly trash (as loathing to keep it) do
they not drown it in Sack, as he drowned his in the Sea? what should he do
with wealth, who hates it in comparison of his study? the Muses children never
turn Usurers, nor care they for coin, but for necessity, all besides is
superfluous.


Davy. This is all true (I confess) but tell me one thing Wat, how if thou
should come to be sick, lame, cast in prison, or feel any such kind of
affliction, can thy wit ease or release thee, will the Physicians, or Gaolers,
take learned Epistles, or witty Poems, in lieu of their fees, can thou in
rhyme show them a reason why they should deliver thee without money? nay, I Will
go (...) nearer and easier way with thee, can thou by such means procure
any palliation or mitigation to (or of) thy mis^^y, will they be mollified with
Madrigalls, softened with Sonets, entreated with Epigrams overcome with Odes?
tell me seriously, Wat, what think thou? whether will Wit or Wealth (in
such sad exigents) stand thee in the most stead?


Wat. This touches home I protest, thou never graveld'st me till now, yet I Will
bear up still; and suppose that relief may be gained by Art; for if Orpheus
had power with his dulced harmony to convert salvage beasts from their natural
(and customary) truculency, can it be imagined that men (such as are Physicians
or Gaolers) should be more barbarous then bruit beasts, more salvage then
Satyrs, more cruel then Caniballs, and more inhumane then Incubuses, have I
clench'd the nail Davy, what say thou?


Davy. Very slightly, Wat, nay, now I perceive thou beginnest to yield, I have
beat thee out of thy pay run thee off o'thy legs, put thee besides thy Text,
turned thee out of time, and whipped thee to confession of thy folly, yield up
the (...) Wat for in truth thou art utterly foiled in thy argument, art thou
not?


Wat. Never the sooner for a hasty word, Davy, I confess that I doubt some of
this is to^ true, but howsoever, Davy, let me have trial by thy own Law, thou
did put me to particular proofs in a general plain raze, the like I claim
of thee.


Davy. Very willingly, Wat, but let one include many as thou servedst me
(about John Tailor) there is an honest man, a very good friend of mine, and one
whom thou know very well (but he shall now go namelesse) he is (by many)
accounted to have an indifferent portion of wit, but in this sad predicament
being a close prisoner in Aulum Iustitia, belonging to Nova Porta) he is
altogether destitute of money, and consequently of friends; all shunning him (as
a man utterly forlorn and forsaken;) nay, which is most (and worst) of all:
Some to whom the key of his wit (when he was at liberty) did, in a manner, open
the door to their earthly happiness (I think they expect no heavenly) now in
his distressed captivity, do utterly abandon his sight not vouchsafing to
visit him with money due to him, nor giving him former employment, what say
thou to this, Wat, will thou yet grant me the Victory?


Wat. Truly I am heartily sorry, that thou give me such (a failing)
occasion; especially considering that he is an intimate acquaintance of mine
(as thou say he is) tush, I am not absolutely induced to believe it; yet
indeed this present age has gotten the start of all precedent times for
ingratitude, hypocrisy, hardness of heart, neglect of lawdable Arts (and
Customs,) and indeed want of common honesty; but let me see, I was about to
ask thee how the Gaolers use him (for that was our argument before) but it is
needless discourse for if his professed and obliged friends, are so
ingratefully cruel, a man may almost conclude it as an Article that his wit or
honesty will but little prevail with the Keepers without that which makes the
Mare to go.


Davy. Why so I said before, and ye in troth, Wat, I must needs (in his case)
vary something from my first principle: for his particular he: has found
unexpected favor from his Keepers (whether wone by his wit, honesty, or both,
I question not) for were not their hearts softened in consideration of his
condition which is without parallel): he had been cast into the common Jail
before this time, there to have perished without any remedy.


Wat. Well, Davy, me thinks yet I smell the victory as hot in my nostrils as a
Bear does honey in a marrow-bone: have not thou confessed it thy self? do not
thou (with pitying his case, withal) conclude that his wit and honesty procure
him favor without money? what can be more clear? a ^^ Davy? have I taken you
tardy ath' last? come yield, yield.


Dav. Well Wat: I perceive that if I give thee an Inch thou wilt take an Ell: but
I prithee don't vaunt before the victory: suppose I have granted that the
Keepers are kind to him beyond customary use? will thou therefore run away
with the argument, as though the poor man might not be better used for money,
if he had it? away with thee, thou a Wity-pole, thou a Dady-pole, (as thou
call'st me) thou have absolutely brought thy self into a Meander of folly; from
which all thy pretended Wit cannot deliver thee.


Wat O brave Davy, I protest I think the rich fool will carry't when all is
done.


Davy. Rich fool quotha, marry, Wat, as the world goes now adays, he is most
wise (or wity, or what thou will call it) that can keep a penny for a rainy day
(as the Proverb says) come, come Wat, have thou wit to save thy money when
thou have it, thou wilt brook thy name the better by it, do not stand upon a vain
opinion of living by thy wit, I tell thee thou may as well turn Chamelion
and live by the a^re, consider with thy self, the condition of people, though
they speak fair in prosperity, while the golden sun or the silver Moon of thy
fortunes, reflect upon them, what will they do, or what will they say when
those refulgent Luminaries are set or eclipsed, Faith, if thou wantst either
meat, drink, or apparel, so thou may, till new Lights be recovered, if thou
owe money, wit will not pay it, that's certain.


Wat, Well though this age my humor will not fit,
The time has been, when I lived by my wit.
And bravely too, my mind unto my self,
Yielding content; exceeded all thy pelf.
A rich man never content, still wishes more,
In The midst of's wealth, he is miserably poor,
The poor man pleased with what rich heaven has sent,
Is rich in mind, being with his state content.
Hang pelf (say I) I Will never be slave to it.
I Will rather mak't a slave to me and wit.

Davy. Then, Wat, it seems all these reasons don't move thee to retract thy
sayings.


Wat. No, Davy no, I will not yield a whit,
Nor say that cursed Wealth shall reign over Wit:
Wit is a branch of Wisdoms sacred tree,
Whose root's in heaven, but on the contrary,
Gold grows in the earth, and causes so much evil,
That many men to gain it, serve the devil.
For my part, what is needful, I respect,
The rest I (as superfluous chafe) reject,
Could food and raiment bought with rushes be,
Take gold and silver then who list for m^^.

Davy. Well Wat, thou have got two strings to thy bow, what thou can not get
with reason thou wilt have in rhyme, well, I Will yield on one condition.


Wat. What Is that, a request that is reasonable, or rimeable, speak?


Davy. Both, I desire a Song before we part, that shall end our controversy.


Wat. Will thou not be angry? may I sing what comes at my tongues end.


Davy, I, I, what comes next let us have it, I prithee honest Wat.


Wat. Then have at it, 't shall be extempore, a trial of Wit.


A Song. To the tune of, See the building, etc. I.
FIE on fond riches,
That earthly minds bewitches,
to grief and Smart:
Woe worth that treasure,
Which does beyond all measure,
ensnare the heart.
Welfare those spirits that ascend.
the forked Mountain.
and taste that Fountain,
Whose dulced streams no tongue can right commend:
Such is the matchless pleasure,
that does on Wit attend.
2.
Observe the sorrows,
Which the rich Miser borrows,
who lends for gain:
Note well the passions
And sleeps preocupations,
which vex his brain.
Take notice also of the joy,
which he'es possessed off
who makes a jest off
This momentary trash, which as a toy,
we wits throw down before us,
the drawers to Employ.
3.
Give me that necter,
Which is my hearts directer:
my Muses guide,
No earthly metle.
Has power my thoughts to setle,
my fancies ride.
Through Heaven, Hell, Sea, Land, and Sky,
all in a moment,
and I can comment.
On all events, and judge both low and high,
so's he that's an affecter,
of heavenly Poetry.
Davy. Gramercy Wat this song deserves my praise,
Were it for nothing else, thou win'st the Bays.
Adeiu honest Wat witypole.

Wat. Davy farewell; anon I Will drink a health,
To him who rates my wit above his wealth.

Exit ambo. FINIS.

