WESTROW REVIVED.

A Funeral Poem without Fiction.

Composed by Geo: Wither Esquire.

That GOD may be glorified in his Saints; That the memory of Thomas Westrow
Esquire; may be preserved, and that others by his exemplary Life and Death may be
drawn to imitation of his Virtues.

Blessed are the Dead who dye in CHRIST;
For, from their Labors they do rest;
And, whether they do live or dye,
His Saints are precious in his eye.
To the READER.
READER, peruse this through: For, to Thee
It most pertains, though WESTROW named be;
And, gives (as by the way) some short hints, there,
To what Intents, He, chiefly does appear,
And whereof, if good heed shall not be took
Somewhat, ere long, more fully will be spoke.
Both Moses, and the Prophets, many a day
Have spoken; and a Greater one then they.
Hear them: For when GOD sends by the DEAD,
His Messages will come with much more Dread
Then Comfort; and few men; with good effect,
Shall hear these, the former do neglect.
Be wise, or else; But, I Will, now say no more,
The Feet of messengers are at the door.
LONDON: Printed by F: Neile in Aldersgatestreet: 1653.

WESTROVV REVIVED.
The first CANTO.
The Authors musings here are shown
The Night, ere ought, to him was known
Of Westrowes death; whereof, the Morrow
Assured him, to his greater sorrow:
Then, that which he has more to say,
Is put off, to another day.
It Was midnight; and, I had my self undrest,
In hope, the nights remainder, for my rest
Had been allowd; and, in that hope, all those
Distractings, which my mind might discompose
Quite threw aside, and hastened to the place,
Where, that refreshment, offered an embrace.
But, in sleeps posture, ere I down was laid,
A Thought, within my heart, start up, and said,
Westrowe, thy best, and most deserving Friend,
Lies feeble, and approaching to his end,
By thee unvisited (though two days, now
Are past, since of his weakness thou did know.)
How, can thou answer such a gross neglecting,
Of one, so well, so truly thee affecting?
A second Thought thus answered thereunto,
(To make amends) to morrow I will go
In hope, (since I, for this neglect am grieved)
A just excuse, will kindly be received;
And, that Love-reall, shall not through defect
That Is accidental, suffer by suspect.
To morrow, said a third thought, comes too late;
His Life's Commission, is quite out of date;
And, that, which might have been enjoyed to day,
Is, by procrastination, lost for aye.
Thou, too too long, thy purpose have forbore,
And, never now, shall hear, or see him more.
Yet, be not grieved, that it happens thus,
For, he is safe. And, as good Lazarus
Lost nothing, by a sickness unto death,
Save only that suspention of his breath
For some few days, which did a means provide,
Whereby, both GOD, and he, were glorifide
In greater measure; so, it may, be thou,
Shall hereby, have occasions offered, now,
Of that, whereby, hereafter may be made
Advantages, which could not else be had.
Advantages! cride out, another Thought,
Alas! what good effect can forth be brought
By such an Accident, if I shall hear
That, to be true, which yet, is but my fear?
How can my pretermission ought produce
Of any future comfortable use?
Or, to what likely profitable end,
Can such a comfortles privation tend?
In Fancies Tennescourt, thus, to and fro
My Thoughts were tossed, and played at hazard so,
That very much distempered I became,
With that unlooked for, and unpleasing game.
Their silent Dialogue made such impressions
Upon my heart, and so inhanc'd my passion
That, all the night ensuing they did keep
My mind on him, and bard mine eyes from sleep.
I, likewise, have so frequently perceived
My souls presagings true, that I believed
This sad surmize; and thereon did proceed
To muse, as if he had been dead indeed
And buried too. From whence, broak in upon me,
Such apprehensions of the Favors done me,
And of his kindnesses in my oppressions,
That, they exacted from me those confessions
Which in the following pages will ensue
To give, what to his memory is due.
Dear GOD! if humane mercy so indears
So swe^t, so precious, if that Love appears
(And so obliging) which enjoyed may be
By Creatures! what is that, which flows from thee?
If, little sparklings, may beget a flame,
What may be thought of that, from whence they came?
And, why from him should not my soul ascend,
To clasp thy love, oh my Eternal Friend!
Who were, and art, and wilt continue so,
When all the World shall into nothing go!
Some will at first, perhaps, with prejudice
Peruse, what in this Poem I express,
On this Occasion; judging, that, hereby
I, somewhat would, beyond the verity,
Insinuate; to make small things, appear
More in the show, then they in substance are.
But they shall see at last, that, I pursue
My Theme no farther then I make it true:
And, bear me witness, ere this has an end,
That, I have done but what becomes a Friend:
That, real cause, occasioned my unrest:
And, that, of him, my thoughts are here expressed,
Without hyperbo^es; without devising
Or adding, what the World cal^s Poetizing:
And, that, I rather put upon the score
Less, then I ow his memory, then more.
But, to the matter: being full of grief,
By what my fear had raised up to belief,
To say, within my self, I thus began;
Westrowe, that noble single hearted man,
Whom GOD, had in a time of need bestown
To be my Friend, is now no more his own.
Alas! nor mine: Westrowe, that heretofore,
Was, to the Widow, Fatherless, and poor,
A Husband, Friend, and Father, them to feed,
To cloth, and harbor, in the time of need.
Westrowe, GODS faithful Almner; he, from whom
No needy soul, who for relief did come,
Went empty (if his needines required,
Undoubtedly, the succor he deserved)
And, then, as GOD does, he did alms bestow
Upon the good, and bad, on Friend, and Foe.
Yea, and when none did ask, what he could grant,
Sought where to find out those, who stood in want:
And, often, was directed unto them,
By Providence, in acceptable time.
That Westrowe, now, has left us to bemoan
Our losses. For thereby, he can have none,
Nor meant us any: But, is gone away
That, our contentment, he make perfect may
By his well-being, in a safe possessing,
His portion, in an everlasting Blessing:
And, that, we may look off, from him, to heed
His Love, from whom, all mercies do proceed.
Westrowe is gone, and we remaining have
No more of him, but what is in his Grave:
There, now, he rests, and exchanged has
Life mortifide, for an inlivening death.
And, him I do behold in contemplation,
So represented, by transfiguration,
As having laid that earthly vail aside
(Which from the World, his better parts did hide)
That, I will now disclose them; therefore, stay
And, know him Reader, ere thou go away.
Nor few, nor mean Advantages he had
Relating to this life, But, these were made
Of small account, with him; and, used so,
As if with them, he little had to do,
Except, for others sakes: For, he denide
Himself, to all things, but, Christ crucifide;
And, in respect of him, placed those among
Such despicable things, as dross and dung;
He therefore, let them pass, to be forgot;
And, will not mention, what he prized not.
He, living, walked upright, in crooked ways,
And, chose the best part, in the worst of days.
He, dying, cheerfully, himself denide,
That (being thereby wholly nudifide
From all that was his own), he might be clothd,
With what he loved, instead of what he lothd.
And, he that can throw off, such Rags as these,
Shall find himself, exceedingly at ease.
How, can I know this, some, perhaps, may say,
If he be dead, and I now far away:
Thus; when I saw him last, I, saw him then
Himself undressing, from that bane of men
Self-love, and selfness; and I know, he never
Would fall from his intention, and endeavor,
Till that were done. For, I was always near him
In spirit, though, I did not see, nor hear him.
We did communicate (when not by quill,
Or with our tongues) in spirit, and in will
As Angels do: yea, many times, when we
In words and terms, appeared to disagree,
(Because of that defect which is in those)
Even then, in will, and spirit, we did close:
And, they whom such experiments acquaints
With that communion which belongs to Saints
Do know, that men may credibly aver,
Sometimes, what they did neither see, nor hear:
And, worthy my regard it does not seem,
What, others, of this mystery shall deem.
This confidence of Him, is but the same
Which he expressed of me, when last I came
To visit him; at which time, I received
Assurance, of what is of him believed:
For, these, the last words were, which from his tongue,
I heard; and, they, from this occasion sprung.
I told him, that I might be faulty judged,
(Considering how to him I was obliged)
That, nor by conversation, nor by pen,
I, lately had with him, (like other men)
My thoughts communicated; but persu'd
My own affairs, as if to be renu'd,
Our Friendship, needed not those complements
Which discontinance of respect prevents.
To such effect I spoke; whereto, he gave
This answer (which I often repeated have
With much contentment;) trouble not thy self,
With needless things, we are now past the shelf,
That ship-wracks friendship. That, which seems neglect
To others; and begets a dis-respect,
Secures you more to me, then if you had
Left your affairs at hazard; visits made;
And added to your frequent visitations,
Acknowledgments of Debts, and Obligations
As others do* It would not give me more
Assurance of you, then I had before.
For, my own heart, has so informed me,
Of what you are; and of what you shall be
With an assurance, so undubitable,
(And everlastingly irrevocable)
That, whatsoever shall of you be told,
(Though we each other never more behold
Nor line comes from you) I, shall live, and dye,
More confident, of your sincerity
Then, if it were expressed every day,
By all that you, or other men could say.
These words (though mine) give, really, the sense,
Wherein, he did express his confidence:
In this sense, his last words to me he spoke;
And, so, my everlasting leave I took.
I think, it may inferred be, from hence,
Things may be known, beyond the reach of sense,
Without corporal presence; and that we
Of some things, though but part of them we see,
May know the rest: He, that does see me go,
And hear me speak, may, without question, know
That, I have heart, and lungs; although his eye
Never saw them, or the place in which they lie:
And, he, that knows but what he hears, and sees,
Is from a beast removed so fevv degrees,
That, I shall mention unto him, in vain
What to the Saints communion does pertain.
Only to those I, therefore will proceed,
To speak, who can believe, as well read:
To be, he rather labored, then to seem;
And, sought his honor in self-disesteem.
He vvanted not repute, of being good,
Save, where his meaning was misunderstood;
Which seldom happened, but, where prepossession
Gained entrance, by a mis begot suspicion,
And what he suffered by it, did produce,
Effects, which were to him of some good use:
And such as gave sometimes occasions, too,
Of that, which good to other men will do.
Such, as did know him well, knevv none to be
A truer Friend, or better man then he.
He, by youths frailties, learned to improve
In riper years, the increase of Faith, and Love;
And, by his life, exemplified that,
Of which the Formalist, does only prate
His Charity, was large; yet, what he did
As much as might be, he from others hid.
For, often, his misdoings, he would tell,
But, seldom mention, wherein, he did well.
He took more comfort, in a needful giving,
Then pleasure, in large benefits receiving.
And (liking not their thrift, who do defer
Almsdeeds, until their treasures useless are
Unto themselves) he did, by timely giving,
Forgiving, and a seasonable relieving,
Show, he believed, that, thereby leave he shall,
More to his child, then if he lest him all.
And, that, he feared, should he not fructify,
(When, in his hungry members, Christ, passed by)
Till, that which may be called his own time, came,
He, and the cursed figtree, were the same.
He, in his judgment, joined not in one,
With some good men: But, disagreed with none
So far, as to infringe the band of peace;
Or, hinder Christian charities increase:
Because, he knew, the wisest, here below,
Know but in part, the things they ought to know:
And, that, to clear his sight, GOD, now and then,
Did leave a darkness upon other men;
Yea, and sometimes, a frowardness, to prove
And exercise, his patience. and his love.
The Christian liberty, he did profess,
Without allowing of licentiousness.
He, labored, that, the Conscience might be free,
From force, (yea though depravd it seemed to be,)
Because, he saw more hypocrites thereby
Then Converts made; and, that hypocrisy
Is worse then error; For, it seldom burns,
For Conscience; and, to GOD, as rarely turns.
Because likewise, he was not without fears,
That, some, who burned in zeal, to weed out tares,
Might purposely, or causually, instead
Of that which they pretended forth to weed,
Either pluck up the wheat, or do it hurt,
By careless treading it, into the dirt.
For, hardly, can distinguishment be made
Twixt Ray, and Wheat, when they are in the blade.
Moreover, since the owner of the Corn,
Commanded, that such weeds should be forborne
Till Harvest, to assent, he was afraid,
That, this Commandment should be disobaid,
Lest, to himself, he might contract the guilt
Of blood, that may be innocently spilt.
And, from this tenderness, some took offense,
Not justly given, or arising thence.
If, he sometimes, did put himself to trouble,
By vainly building, with wood, straw, or stubble,
(As all men do) which quite away consumes
To nothing, when the fiery trial comes;
The loss was his, which only did redound
To loss, of what, was better lost, then found.
He was but man; and man at best, is light,
And must have grains allowed to make him weight.
As he had fallings, and his humane failings,
So he had also risings, and prevailings;
And all GODS Saints have less advantaged been,
By their own righteousness, then by their sin:
For, both must be disclaimed, and they brook worst,
And find it hardest, to renounce the first.
He, by still cleaving to the true foundation,
(And gracious Author of our preservation)
Found himself safe, when all those works were gone,
Which he had vainly builded thereupon.
And was well pleased to see that turned to smoke,
Wherein, he, formerly had pleasure took.
Which* were it heeded well, would (sans all doubt)
Conclude those Quarrels, which arise about
Our superstructures, and must be denide
As useles, when by fire they shall be tried.
To truth essential, he did firm adhear
Although sometimes, in terms, he did appear
To leave it: And, when thither he retired,
Where, he in quiet privacy, expired;
His mind, he so composed, did so confute
All self-mistakings, by a self-dispute;
And, so examined, and so repented,
All, whereto by mistakes he had assented,
Unwarrantably (whether, it related
To ought which had been publicly debated,
Or privately; For Church, or Commonweal
For GOD or men.) And, there, so settled all
His Interests; that with a quiet mind,
He did enjoy the peace, he sought to find;
And* unto GOD, a resignation made,
Of will, opinions, and of all he had:
Even of his selfnes; and therein, found more
Enjoyment, then, in all the world before.
His body, was consumed, by the zeal
He bore to GODS house, and this Commonweal,
(And, by foreseeing, that he might outlive,
The honor of that Representative
(Of which he was a Member,) For, when he
And I, our thoughts conferred, we might foresee,
That, in a short time (as my muse foretold,
Some months before it came) that happen would
Which now is come to pass, although those few,
Who to the Public Interest were true,
Had neither counsel, nor endeavor spared,
To help keep off the mischief that was feared.
Ere, therefore, actually it did ensue,
Tir'de out, with vain endeav'rings, he withdrew*
A place for his retirement he had chose,
Near to the Banks of Them, where backwards flovvs,
The Tide at highest, up against the stream;
That, he might neither be too far from them,
To whom he had Relations, nor too nigh
To such as might disturb his privacy.
There, what he could not other waves promote,
He sought to further by a zealous Vote.
There, private prayers, offered he at home,
That, GOD himself would (for the time to come)
Assume the Work, and call in those thereto
Who, might accomplish, what they could not do.
The World, thus left He, er'e it him forsook:
Against the Flesh, the Spirits part he took;
And by their combatings, attained to have
A Resurrection, er'e he had a Grave.
But, lo, their long fought Battle now is past,
The Spirit triumphs, and the flesh, at last
By yielding to be conquered, has vvon,
More, then by being victor, it had done;
And now is lodged, in her withdrawing-room,
To rest, until the tiumph-day shall come.
There, from it labors, let it therefore, cease;
There, let it lie in hope, and rest in peace,
Till, to a better life, that Flesh, and we,
Raised by a second Resurrection be
There to appear, where we shall fully know
What is but darkly, apprehended now:
Where, we shall see the root of all those things,
Whence flow our needless bitter Quarrellings;
And, where, accordingly we shall receive,
To what we acted, or, as we believe.
Oh! come LORD JESUS come, and fetch us thithes*
Gather thy Saints, and chosen-ones together;
And, mean time, in that Saint be glorified
For whose commemoration I provide.
By thine, and their examples, who do follow
Their steps, Oh! so inform us, how to hallow
Our hearts, so cleanse our hands, and guide our feet,
That, they now gone before, and we may meet.
Thou, that art both our life, and way thereto;
That open door, through which we are to go:
A Fountain always flowing, to refresh
The thirsting Spirit, and the fainting Flesh;
Supply unto us, by thy Holy Ghost,
What, by our selves, and others, we have lost.
O thou! who (being GOD'S eternal Son,)
To free us, from a dungeon, leftst a Throne,
And, underneath his heavy wrath did lie
Till thou crid'st out Lamasabakthani.
To Heavenly joys, convert our earthly greef;
Decrease our doubtings, and increase Belief;
Our carnal love, improve to love divine,
Till our Affections loose themselves in thine?
Oh! let that Love, from whence all beings flow,
Which made all things above, and all below:
Whose Wisdom, did first set them in their way,
Whose Providence, preserved them to this day,
And shall hereafter, govern and dispose,
That which keeps Order, and that, which misgoes,
Oh! hasten to perfection! hasten on,
The work intended, ere the world begun;
And, let that Glory, which produce it shall,
Be his (and his alone) that is ALL in ALL.
Thus, mused I, or, much (if not the same,)
To this effect, before the morning came.
These contemplations, ere I knew him dead,
By thinking on my Friend, conceived I had,
Which afterward, in words, thus, up I dressed;
To leave it thereby, vocally expressed,
What penance, I was put to, for omitting
A duty, my obligements well befitting
Then, as the dawning Light began to creep
About my Chamber, I fell fast asleep.
Next day, (no longer meaning to defer
A Visit, but till means prepared were)
I, meeting with a Friend of his and mine,
Informed him, what, I did predivine;
What I had suffered, what, I have done,
With what, I had that day resolved upon;
And, to prevent it, was assured by him,
That, my Presagings, were no idle dream;
For, he was dead indeed, and on the morrow
To be interred; which did renew my sorrow,
And, reingage me, further to pursue
What, to his pious Memory is due.
For, there is much behind, as yet unsaid;
Which, being truly known, and duly weighd
Will add a fairer luster to his Fame;
Not without some reflectings, to my shame,
For, leaving him, without a Valediction,
Who was so true a Friend in my affliction.
As Soon therefore, as I have gotten leisure,
What Is yet remaining, forth in Words, to measure
Expect it; and in pawn thereof, (till I,
Shall to your view expose it) let this lie;
With this ensuing Epitaph, till He
Shall honored, by a better musing be.
The EPITAPH.
HIs GRAVE (though he desired none
With Name, or Title thereupon)
Was made below this Marble stone?
And, here, interred, now, He lies,
To wait CHRIST'S coming in the Skies,
At whose approach the DEAD shall rise.
Yet, seek not here, among the DEAD,
(On stones, or brass, or sheets of Lead)
What, to his honor may be read:
But, if you more of him, would hear,
Peruse the sheets, whose Forefronts bear
His NAME inscribed; and read him, there.
For though that MONUMENT be built
Withou cost graving paint, or guilt,
It shall remain, when this is spilt:
Yea, though it has but paper wings,
It shall out last, those lasting things,
Which, make up Monuments for Kings.
CANTO the second.
After a due preoccupation,
It offers to commemoration,
Particulars: Insists upon
A rarely memorable-one
Illustrating a matchles Friend;
And, so, this Canto has an end.
THe foll'wing evening, after I had heard
That verifide, whereof I was afeard
The night before, I, then a fresh inspired,
To give my Musings utterance, retired.
And, that no interruptions I might find,
Put all my own concernments, out of mind.
For, he that honestly one work, would do,
Must not, the same time, be employed on two.
But, on the paper, ere I fixed my pen,
Such things, as possibly by other men
Might be objected, questioned, or alleged,
To hinder that, wherein I was engaged,
Rushed in upon me; and, delays, had wrought,
Had I not on a sudden kicked them out;
And given some of them, (ere they would go;)
Areasonable civell answer too.
Among the rest, One (who scarce went away
Well satisfide with ought that I could say)
Thus questioned me: Art thou become so vain,
To think, by charms, and words to raise again
The dead to life; or, to preserve the Name
Of friends deceased, by surviving Fame,
Among this Generation, wherein none
Or few, regard what shall be said, or done,
To that effect? Can thou have hope to bring
By poesy (which an unhallowed thing,
Is now accounted) any due respect
To him, whose memory thou do affect?
Or, think that thou may dignifie his Hearse,
By such a despicable thing, as verse?
Can thou hope this, when he that versifies,
Seems but a coyner, of facetious Lies?
When lovers of the muses, are so scanty,
That, there are hardly two, in five times twenty,
Who, if thy Poem serious be, will heed it;
Or, (if they will) that have the wit to read it,
More gracefully, then if an Ass should play
Upon a Harp, or to the Viol bray?
For, neither heeding accents, points, or time,
They, only make a clinking on the Rhyme.
More harshly grating on juditious ears,
Then scraping trenchers, which none gladly hears?
And, what, of all thy musings, have the effects
Been hitherto, but troubles, and neglects?
This being urged, I, thereto made reply
Thus, in my self: Admit all this, quoth I:
Mo wiseman fears to do, what should be done
Through dread of that which may mis-fall thereon:
Nor, so much cares, what may thereof be thought,
As to be always doing, as he ought.
It is the Muses duty, to be there
Most active, where, most Difficulties are;
And, most courageously, there to advance
Their Standards, where appears most Ignorance;
That to succeeding Ages they may leave
Those things, which present times, will not receive.
It is a portion, whereto they were born
To be exposed to contempt and scorn;
And, it is their honor, to have wisely dared
Just things, for which, the world gives no reward.
Though Poets are despised, and, will yet more
Contemned be, (and thrust behind the door)
As Ignorance gets ground; and, as the Base
Shall rise to sit in honorable place;
There was a time, when Princes did contend
In Poetry, and Poets to befriend;
And, when the one shall consecrate his Muse,
True Piety, and Virtue to infuse;
And, men in power, by Righteousness maintain
Their dignity, it shall be so again.
The Muses, in times past, so awful were
That, they made Kings to fawn, and Tyrants fear.
The Vulger, they made Hero's; Hero's GODS:
Drew Trees and Beasts, out of the salvage woods,
To follow them: That is, they drew together
Blockish and brutish men (as rude as either
Wild Plants, or Beasts, and them allured unto
What reasonable creatures ought to do.
Their Charm threw down the vicious to that hell,
Where everlasting Infamy does dwell:
Raisd up the well deservers from the Grave,
The life of never dying fame to have,
Yea, by their charms they have expelled the devil,
The furious, and the melancholy evil.
And, not alone in former Generations,
Among the learned, and most civil Nations,
Had Poesy esteem, and good effects,
In spite of envy, malice, and neglects.
But, also, here, and lately some have lived
Who, by their musings, honor have received.
And been enabled, by their inspirations,
To vindicate the Muses reputations.
Yea, (in his measure) even the barbarous Bard,
Is of his, people, so beloved, or feared;
That, whom soere he pleases (by his rimes)
He makes to be the minion of the times
Within his Orb: And, they among us here,
Who of this faculty the masters are
(As to the language) can the affections raise,
And move the Readers passions various ways,
By their composures; though they do abuse
His gift, who did that faculty infuse;
As I my self have done, till he that gave it,
Informed me better, to what end I have it.
Then, why, with confidency may not I,
Hope by the help of sacred poesy,
So to embalm my Friend, by that perfume
(Which fluently will by extraction come
From his own virtues) that, a sweet breathed fame,
Disfused from the Orders of his Name,
May draw some after him? and make them grow
In love, with what does from those Orders flow?
And, thereby woo them to an imitation
Of him, and to a virtuous emulation?
If David, in an fun'rall song preserved,
The memory of that, which well deserved,
In wicked Saul his foe; why may not I
Seek to preserve a good man's memory?
Why may not I with warranty commend
The matchles love of my deceased Friend?
Why may not I, as fully as I can
Illustrate my beloved Jonathan?
If, also, they, whose poesy affords
Little save empty shows, and swelling words,
Forced Metaphors, and frothy strains of wit,
(Which on the Jancy, ticklings do beget)
Perused are with some effect that is good,
And, are most pleasing, when least understood)
Why may not I, be read by two, or three,
With more advantage both to them, and me,
Then, by a thousand, that are pleased with chaff,
And, at my plain expressions jeer, and laugh.
Why may not I, who have advantages,
Of truth, and real merits (which helps, these
Impostures had not) trophies hope to Rear
That shall more lasting, and more fair appear
Then such as they build, who composures fain
Out of the durty notions of their brain,
Or, from the vapors, that strong drink infuses,
To dignifie the subject of their mufes?
Why may not I, this faculty employ,
To build up that, which others do destroy,
By their abusing it? and, hope thereby
So to repreeve it from that Obliquie.
Which now it suffers, that, the best of men,
May fall in love with poesy again,
And, not (as now they do) avert their eyes,
As if ashamed of him that versifies?
For, this is part, whereto my Poems tend
Though, peradventure, I may miss my end.
Let it not therefore, seem a profanation
Of Piety, unto this Generation,
That, I adventure to redeem from blame
The gift, by some employed to their shame;
Since, it was first conferred on each receiver,
To raise up his own spirit, to the giver:
And, then, to rouse up other men's affections,
From carnal, popular, and vain dejections?
Or that, to take my Reader, by the ear,
I lay among my verses. here and there,
Some books, with reason baited, which, sometime,
Does eatch those who expected naught but rhyme.
Nor, let this (though a long preoccupation)
Seem to be needless, or a vain digression;
For, though it nothing adds, to my intents,
The taking somewhat from them, it prevents;
Which being done, i will now proceed to that
Whereof, I purpose, further to relate.
The subject of my Musings, being large
It Is not within my graspings, to discharge
What Is thereto due; nor can it be confined,
Within that compass, which I have designed.
To tell you therefore, fully, what he was,
Or, what he was not, would so far surpass,
This limit, that I only must express
So much as may enable you to guess
At what remains untold, (though it be more
Then here ensues, or has been said before)
And that I may, his inside lay to view
Which I much better, then his outside knew.
He was a man, endowed with no less
Of piety, then moral Righteousness;
And in the practicing of both, so hearty
That, to the honest, and the god'y party;
(As called some are) he brought a supplement,
Of real worth, as well as Ornament:
And aimed at that reward, for which he ran,
Not in the outward, but the inward-man.
From youths extravagancies, which, (as he
Has often confessed) he once thought to be
Th'accomplishments of Gentry, without which
They had in vain, been nobly born, or rich,
From these (even when he most endangered seemed)
He was by GODS especial grace redeemd,
(And brought off, by his providentiall hand)
In seasonable time; even as a brand
Snatchd from the fire. For, those commodious places,
Prepared for the Muses, and the Grace,
To coinhabite in, for education,
Of youth in knowledge; and to keep this Nation
From Barbarism; Places, were become
So fraught with Vices, and so perilsome,
To soul and hody, that, he was almost
By ill examples, and lewd consorts, lost.
For which, a threatening vengeance hangs over
Those Seats, that will admit of no Remover
Of what is menaced, till their Foundation
Is rooted up, or saved by purgation.
With what pr^varications, he, was there
Impoyson'd, and what principles they were
Whereby he was indangerd, he to us
Rendr'd as banefull, and ridiculous
As words could make them; that, it might advance
GOD'S grace vouchsafd, for his deliverance;
And make them useful, unto those who heard
What he was saved from, and what was feared.
He was among the first, whose knowing zeal,
Flamd our, to vindicate this Commonweal
From thraldom and oppression; thereto moved
In conscience, and by principles approved.
Not stirred up, by factious discontent,
By rashness, want, or by malevolent
Affections, or Designs; though not without
Some counterpleas, in what he went about:
For, in immergencies, which do relate
To private conscience, and Affairs of State,
The wisest man, his resolution brings
To settlement, by various combatings.
With him, thus fared it: Then he to withstand
The public Fo, was honored with Command;
Wherein, he ventured not his life alone,
Without that profit, which by many a one
Was aimed at, and enjoyed) but lent, and give,
And, wasted his Estate, to guard, and save
The Public Interest, without a prayre
Exhibited, or temporal repair.
Unsought for, (as I verily believe)
He, afterward, the honor did receive
Of supreme trust; and, without cause of blame,
According to his power, discharged the same;
The speaking, of no needful truth forbearing;
The power, or presence, of no person fearing;
Swaid nor by hatred, neither by affection,
To others; nor by that which ha^ reflection
Upon himself; But, freely said his mind,
And conscience, as he did occasions find,
In whatsoever matter was debated;
Whether the thing proposed, to GOD related,
Or Commonwealth: if they who present were,
(As I believe they did) the truth aver.
And, if it so did happen that, sometime
A tender pity, did prevail with him
To plead for mercy, on behalf of some
Made liable, by law unto the doom
Of mulct, or death; the same he never pressed
Ought further, then the Public Interest,
With safety might allow it: And although,
He felt what other men are moov'd unto.
By natural Affections, he did still
Conform his Judgment, and confine his will
To Justice: And, this, rather does increase
His honor, then appear to make it less.
And, though the Author, of the History
Of Independents, has injuriously
(Among his other Leazings) added him
Unto his lying Catalogue, of them.
Who, to the damage of the Commonweal,
By their Commands, Gifts, Offices, or spoil,
Enriched, and aloft advanced be.
From poor estates, and from a low degree;
On him, that sticks not; but, reflects disgrace
Apparently, upon that Liers face.
For, to all those, who knew him, it is well known,
That, with a large estate, by birth his own,
He was endowed. His Mother, yet, in Kent
Survive^; a Lady, rarely eminent
For Charity, and for a open door,
To such as are in misery, and poor.
And, as he no way needed to enlarge
His portion, or the Commonwealth to charge
By such supplies, as others have desired
(And often surreptitiously acquired)
So, he was all his life, so far from craving,
From wishing, from receiving, and from having
Gift, place, or office, whereby he might add
An augmentation, unto what he had,
That, many whom the Common miseries
Had beggered, and whose pub iek services,
And wants he savv neglected, he relieved
Out of his own estate; and them reprieved
From ruining, when helper they had none:
Among which number, I my self, was one.
And, that, which in this kind he lent or gave
Was meant (as I believe) as well to save
The Nations honor, as to do a deed
Of simple Charity, in time of need:
For, he preferred, the Public Faith before
His private Credit; and, did so abhor
Their Avarice, who by a mutual Giving,
Forgiving, and unseasonably relieving,
Obstructed those performances, whereby
Our deep Engagements did neglected lie:
That, to prevent it, he thought fit to scatter
A portion of his bread upon the water
Lest after private miseries, things worse
Ensude; a national, a public curse.
Then, those large Legacies, which he in death
To Charitable uses, did bequeath,
(Considered, with his frequent bounteous giving,
To such as were distressed whilst he was living.)
Do make it, without question evident
That he, both had enough, and such content
With what he had, that, he upon his score
Leaves nothing, that shall make his Children poor
As they will do, who gave and took the bread,
Wherevvith the Fatherless should have been fed;
And, have, with what their Servants blood did buy,
Enlarged their Fields, and raised their houses high.
But, I to little purpose thus go on
To set my Candle up before the Sun.
They who had eyes to see it did behold,
And knew as much before, as I have told.
They, who by wilfulnes, dark-sighted be
Set up what light we can, will never see.
Now, some of you, (it may be) will suppose
That my conjectures only, I disclose;
Or that a knowledge of such things I fain
Which to his private actings do pertain;
Or, take them up on Trust. If, so, they think,
So, let it be; I will not strive to sink
A millstone in a shallow dish of water;
Or seek to fill a viol, with such matter,
As it admits not. Things, which must be known
As well by others eyes, as by my own
To make them certain; I Will no further mention,
Without proof it seem a self invention
That, which has passed 'tvvixt us two alone;
Those things, whereof my knowledge can by none
Be doubted of) to mind I will recall;
And, out of many, bring forth one for all;
One, that shall set forth his deserving more
Then all that I have mentioned before;
(At lest according to that excellence
Which suits a sensual Intelligence)
And, when with that expression I have done,
I Will rather leave it to be thought upon,
Then imitated; till self-love begins
To loose that ground, which hitherto it vvins.
He, that is really a faithful friend,
Has that, which does within it comprehend
All moral virtues; yea, and, therevvith too
That charity, which from true Faith does flow:
For, such a person cannot be alone
(In being so) a faithful friend to ONE;
But also to all others* yea, extend;
His love to all GODS creatures, as his friends*
And, doubtless* far above all those, to him,
Who, for himself alone created them.
This virtue therefore, does on men confer
The highest excellence they can have here;
And, this rare virtue, (whereof, I, the Sound
Had vainly heard before) in him, I found
And thereof, such experiment will give
That, you shall think of him, as I believe;
And that in charity, he did out go
Most men, who thereof, make the greatest show.
That, you may know him; whom I knew so well,
My means of knowing him, thus, first i will tell.
The late intestine Wars, which with a flood,
Of miseries, and with a sea of blood
Ore flowed these Nations, like a raging torrent
(Which bears down all with an impetuous current,)
Brake in, even at first rising* where then lay
My chief Estate, and svvept it all away;
That, little thereof, which elsewhere was left,
Was also, by the Oppressors hand bereft,
Save only some small part of my Estate,
Consisting in rings, housholdstuff, and plate,
Which being portable, preserved were,
Or got together, by my future care,
That, which exposed my portion to the raging,
Of my destroyers, was, a free engaging
Against the common foe: And, they, with whom
I* for the Public* did engaged become,
Gave me the Public Faith, that what I lost
Should be repaired at the public cost;
And, that my Children, should be looked upon
With favor, and regard, when I was gone.
By these encouragements I did pursue
Their services, until I neither knevv
Which way my p^esent wants, might have supply,
Or whereon, for the future to rely;
And then, perforce, retreated for recruit,
To prosecute the Cause with fresh pursuit:
Whereof I got some few effects in show,
Which in the substance, proved not to be so.
But rather brought, much greater mischiefs on me,
Then all my open enemies had done me.
For, some who had but fainedly pretended,
To that, which I had seriously defended;
Perceiving, me, preparing to disclose
Their falsehood, did become my open Foes;
And through their Accomplices (who by the hand
Of Providence were weeded from the Land,
Soon after) they so wrought, that Innocence
And Faithfulness were judged an offense,
Maugre apparent proofs and demonstrations
Yet extant, by their own examinations:
So, I was find, confinde, and on my head
That censure laid, which they had merited
With seven* fold more; and for my service past
Into disgrace, was innocently cast,
With nothing for subsistence, but, that poor
House-furniture, which was within my door.
To add more burden to those heavy weights,
And drive me, thereby, into greater streights;
My Friends, and my Acquaintance, then began
To look upon me as a faulty man
Who had deceived their hope* so that, if they
Who (though too few to help me) day by day
Were at my trial, had not seen and heard
Th'injustice done me, and the same declared;
I had, in likelihood, ere this day, ended
My life in want; disgraced, and unbefriended.
For, as my Friends fell off, my Foes fell on
With fresh pursuit of what they had begun,
And* had not GOD in an unlooked for hour
Deprived them of their abused power,
They had destroyed me quite. But, I, at last
Escaped; and they into the pit were cast.
Mean while, they insolently domineered,
Made songs and pamphlets on me; scoft and jeered,
And had so villifide my Reputation
To those who represented, then, this Nation,
That, of four thousand pounds (to which account
My due (proved fully) truly did amount)
I could not get one penny for relief
Of me, or mine, to mittigate our grief;
Though, I had forced words into their ears,
Which from bystanders, often, extracted tears;
And, to compassion, might that Judge have wan
Who neither feared GOD, nor cared for man.
To add yet further, to my great afflictions,
GOD, with a sickness, (spreading forth infections)
Visits my house, and drove all those from thence,
Who were some comfort in my indigence,
That, being shut up, and excluded from
All other helpers, I, to him might come.
My children were all sick of that disease;
Their single keeper, to her little ease,
Was their sad Mother, whilst (as sad as she)
I, sought, whereby they might supported be.
And we, who served were, a while before
With sixteen household servants, (sometimes more)
Had then, but one Boy (who, sick also lay)
And one poor woman, hired by the day.
To pay, and feed those, I my plate had sold:
My Wife, the silver, and the lace of gold
Which lately trimmed her Garm^nts, ripped away;
To buy things needful, for the present day:
Her Ornaments she changed for bread, to eat:
Then, sold the dishes, which did hold our meat:
And last of all, our highest valued things,
The precious stones, the jewels, and the rings,
To us, from honorable Persons sent,
As tokens of respect (the same way went.
And what was left, ill spared though it could be)
To follow, for ought I then could see.
Only this hope remained, that GOD had sent
A sickness, which by death, would wants prevent;
Or, give us by his own hand, some repair:
For, of his love, I, never shall despair.
In this good hope, the Worlds neglect I scorned,
And my petitions, into prayers turned,
Directed unto him; who only knew
My wants, and what was likely to ensue.
But, he likewise, to answer me delaid;
And for a while seemed deaf to what I prayed:
Yet knowing not, what else remained to do,
Or whether, or to whom, for help to go;
Nor caring (if GOD left me) for supplies
From other hands; I still renewed my cries
To him alone, and suddenly was cheered
With somewhat, which to sense no where appeared,
And, as a Loves, thinking (in a dream)
He hears his best Be oued calling him,
Starts up in have, and runs out to meet
The voice that calls him, ere he find his feet,
And goes he knovvs not whether: So, with me
It fared, who (hoping not deceived to be)
Walked forth to see, if providence divine,
Would bring to sight, or mind, some Friend of mine,
Or his, from whom, I might that aid receive
Which to obtain from GOD, I did believe.
And, mark his goodness, Oh! all you that read it
So mark it, and with seriousnes so heed it
That; (if I should forget it) you may be
Remembrancers, hereafter unto me
As I have been to you, in former time,
Of what concerns this Nation, and this Clime.
In this distress, he, meets me, of whom here
I am discoursing; And with pleasing cheer
Salutes me thus: Amid thy troubles now
How is it with thee George? how farest thou?
I, answered, SIR, I live, though I am poor;
And, of my welfare, cannot say much more.
Take heart said he; These days will have an end,
And future times will better thee befriend.
I sought thee at thy house, not with intent
To trifle out an hour in complement
But, lovingly brought thither, by a fear
Lest more lay on thee, then thou well might bear.
For, thy Petitions I, have heard, and seen,
Of those transactions I have witness been,
Whereby thou, were oppressed; and wherein
Thy Country has no less abused been.
I, also publicly have heard debated
Thy claims, and when they were allowed, and stated;
Saw what was justly, or unjustly done;
And am assured GOD will look thereon
Yea, I have so well heeded what thou have
Both lately and in former time expressed
For GOD, and also for thy Countries sake,
Whereof ensuing times will notice take
That, I, my self to be obliged, thought
To seek thy welfare; and from GOD have brought
This token of his love* thus having said,
Just twenty pounds into my hand he laid
Of current gold; whereat (as one amazed)
On him with overflowing eyes I gazed;
Not able, for the present, to afford
The retribution of one thankful word.
For, out of me, my heart away was gone
To GOD, who made him do, what he had done.
But, after recollection, SIR, said I,
He that has moved you, to this charity
Will doubtlesly with interest repay
What you have ministered to me this day;
For, GOD himself alone, and none but he
(Who knows in what distresses all men be)
Could, you, to me so timely have directed
Oppressed with wants, and of all friends neglected
Or, so enlarged your heart, to bring relief
Proportionable to my present grief.
And, therefore, now i will tell you, in what state
You find me, that you may rejoice thereat,
By making you assured, that you have wrought
A work, which in it self rewards has brought
That will requite it fully, though I lived,
To let slip out of mind, what I received.
Then, told him all, that is before expressed,
And so much more as did infer the rest
That might have followed, if GOD had not sent
His charity, my ruin to prevent.
The same impression, which his Act had made
On me, my words on him, effected had;
And, I am confident, that, had I given
To him, the greatest gift, on this side Heaven,
He had not gone away, with more content
Then, in his being made an instrument,
Of such a timely mercy; and, that he
So opportunely too, should meet with me.
Now judge, if this be true, which I protest
(Except the words, wherein it is expressed,
And, some few circumstances, to supply
The story, with a formal decency,)
Is real truth; and no poetic strain,
More adding, then the Essence did contain.
Judge now, what, I, could honestly have less
Hereof declared, then here I do express,
Consid'ring what he was to me, till then;
And, what I was to many other men.
For, at their door, for whom I had of late,
My life adventured; lost my whole Estate;
(And those exposed, who were more dear to me
Then life, and livelihood, destroyed to be)
Even at their door, I, perishing was left
Of credit, and Estate, at once bereft:
To let me thereby know, and knowing, heed,
That in the times of trial, and of need,
It Is none of those Acquaintance, or those Friends,
Which we our selves get, or whose love attends
On our Prosperities; nor that, which we
Think, obligations, upon them to be;
Nor public Faith, nor Vows, nor Protestations,
Either of Princes, Parliaments or Nations;
Nor that which is, nor that, which we suppose
A merit in Us, (or, for Virtue goes)
Which, for helps, are to be relide upon,
In great extremities; But, GOD, alone,
And, that, in our Desertions, he, can make
Not only, strangers, pity on us take;
But, also, from the malice of our Foes,
Raise us up help, salve mortal wounds, by blows;
Cure us by sickness; make us rich, by losses:
Give us true joy, in grief; Content, in Crosses;
A life, by dying; and the first beginning
Of justifying righteousness, by sinning:
Yea, by the hiding (for a time) his Face,
Assurances of everlasting grace:
And to confirm my often experiment
Hereof; GOD, made this Friend an Instrument,
To give me, of that mercy, one pledge more,
Of which, he gave me many, heretofore.
And yet, this is not all; for, ere those weights
Which lay upon me; and the many streights,
Then pressing me, removed were and past,
(Which, some years, and some months to boot, did last)
In times of like need, he continued on
That work of mercy, thus by him began;
Till, in this manner, he, upon his score,
Had set me, twenty hundred Crowns, and more,
Without desiring, Band, or Bill, or Note,
To testify the lending of one groat;
Or urging me, betwixt our selves, to say
I owed him ought, or that I would repay.
Thus much for this time: For, it is cold, and late;
And, that you may have time to ruminate
On what is said; i will now break off, and borrow
An hour or two, from my affairs to morrow,
So much, of what remains, to recite
As seems pertinent: And so, good night.
The third CANTO.
The Author, shows to what end,
This Poem, was designed, and penned.
Next, he proceeedeth to unfold
What, is begun, and left untold
Relating to his Friend, and Him;
And, gives you then, a breathing time.
WHen I have spent the day, as often I do,
In vvheeling round, and trudging to and fro,
Through that meander, which do what I can
Still further leads, (then when I first began)
From my desired rest; and, nothing leaves me,
But new assurance, that the World deceives me;
And yet still keeps me active, with a thought
That, I am thereby doing what I ought;
(Because, even by persuing what is vain,
A knowledge of some usefulnes I gain,
Which else could not be had) I take content
In suffering what I labor to prevent;
Permitting GOD, to order as he pleases,
Me, and my something, and my nothing nesses.
And, in the night, when all to rest are gone;
I muse on things more worthy thinking on,
And, how, to others, and my self, I may
Add somewhat, by our losses in the day.
Nor are my watchings, in that stolen leisure,
So painful, as some think; but full of pleasure.
Nor do my solitary Musings tend
To that deceitful, and unfruitful end,
As is perhaps thought, in those lucubrations,
Wherein I take my loanly recreations;
For, that, which me all night does waking keep,
Refreshes more my spirit, then my sleep.
The subject, which this hour employes my pen,
Makes my dead friend, to live with me again:
I, visit him, and often he visits me
With inter-courses, which no eyes can see.
Within my Chamber; (none else being there)
Me thinks, we two, as if alone we were
Converse together, and he brings unto
My memory, and thought, what I should do
To order so my life, that when I dye,
No living soul may be more glad as I.
Sometime, with him I walk unto his grave,
To view what kind of lodgings dead men have,
And whether I can, see among them, there,
Such dreadful things, as flesh and blood does fear.
Yea, there, at midnight I have with him been,
And every corner of the grave have seen,
By Contemplation, (which sees many sights,
Not to be viewed by ordinary lights)
Yet there I did behold no greater dread,
Then when I sleep most sweetly in my bed.
Sometimes, he comes into my mind, and brings
A multitude of temporary things
To be by many thought of, who yet live,
And were of that late Representative,
Which from it honor, and, it being, fell,
Because they nor believed, nor acted well.
Of somethings too, that nearly will concern
The wise, (till they are grown too wise to learn)
He me remembers, by those conferences
Which we often had, when he enjoyed his senses.
And, whereupon, I often did more then guess
At what was verifide in their success:
Yea, and sometimes, he makes me think upon
The present Power, and on what is yet undone,
And should be done, and will be done, ere long,
Unles, it grows, in self opinion strong,
And sleights that counsel, which may save the State,
As their Foregoers did, till 'twas too late
Sometime, the thought of him, translates me hence
To Heaven; where, what transcends intelligence
And my expression, is to me disclosed,
By fraction, and by notions discomposed;
Which, nay the less a certainty declare
Of some things, which for edifying are.
Sometime again (for we can any whither
Go safely) we descend to Hell together
By contemplation; and there, take full views
Of that which on Hypocrisy ensues;
And, on each other failing, and offense,
Perpetuating an Impenitence;
And, thence, assume occasion to improve
My thank fulness, for that eternal love
By whom I am secured from that place,
Through his preventing, and assisting grace.
By thinking upon him, who in his grave
Lies thoughtles, of what thinkings I can have
Thus, I my self employ; and, by things past,
The ordering of future things forecast;
And, find a means whereby I do refresh
My Spirit, whilst imprisoned in the Flesh
And wherefore, judge you, I my time thus spend?
Is it to tell the World I had a Friend?
How vain were that! since, I am not to know
It cares not, whether I have Friends, or no.
And, loves to hear of no respect that is shown
To any, whom she takes not for her own.
Is it to gain a gratiousnes with those
Who, have, what he has left at their dispose?
That were to fall, ten thousand leagues below
My spirit; and more base in me, would show
Then it would do in them, to look upon
With such a thought, what, here, by me is done,
For, these my retributions, are as free
From self ends, as his bounty was to me,
And, rather should be paid back, ten time double,
Then I would loose my freedom for that buble.
It is to please, his near and dear relations,
With large applauses, and commemorations
Of him that is gone? Alas! that does but keep
Sorrows awake, which else would fall asleep.
Does but his knowledge in the fiesh renew,
Which keeps his better being, from their view;
Adds brine to thirst; and to devouring fire
Casts Oil, which makes it but to flame the higher:
And, if no better use, could hence be raised,
It came to far less, then, not to be praised.
Is it to honor him, that is in his Grave?
That were the simplest thought the fool could have,
What honor can they want, who triumph there,
Where sulnes of eternal glories are?
What honor can he have from earthly things,
Or glory, from a fame with paper vvings,
Which cannot make a flight for many miles,
Beyond the compass of these British Isles?
Or, from an Epitaph, on stone, or brass
Read by a fevv, in some obscured place?
Or, how will it concern, or please him now,
Who, to himself, would not, in life, allow
Those attributes of honor, which appeared
Then due; nor, for an empty title cared?
And, would have been displeased, if he had knowvvn
I, would on him, this trifle, have bestovvn,
(Only because, it to his honor tends)
Although, therewith, composed to other ends?
Beside, (although it somewhat may concern
His reputation) I am not to learn
That these Blasts, for the most part, oftener rear
A dust, to cloud it, then preserve it clear;
Or, stirs up, envy, hate, or evill-will,
To brawl, which else (it may be) had lain still.
For, to the Flower that spreads the fairest blooms,
The Cankerworm and Caterpiller comes.
Moreover, they, who least deserving are
May in this kind of honor have a share
With best Desert; and buy, with what was theirs,
A better Monument then this appears.
Is it for some advantages designed
Unto my self? sure no; for none I find
Hereby acquirable; nor had I brought
My poverty to light, if I had sought
Self-honor; seeing, there is nothing more
Dishonorable thought, then to be poor.
Well then; if it were neither so nor so,
What is my purpose, in what now I do?
Even this, That, from the best man whom I knew
Here living, I might set forth to your view
A self-denial, through the want of which
The Commonwealth grows poor, and poor men rich.
That, also, by him, in whose charity,
GOD, did appear, in my necessity,
Others may be provoked, through his examples,
To show more love unto those living Temples,
In which he dwells; and, at least, forbear
To ruin them, although they have no care
Of their Repair: For, this is one of those
Deficiencies, which multiplies our woes,
And, through defect, whereof our former cost,
And present hopes, will suddenly be lost,
As they have been; unless we do with speed
Put, what is yet but words, into a Deed;
Not dreaming still, that, we from GOD can hide,
What is by men, apparently espide:
For, though we will not see, what we behold,
Nor credit what we know true, being told,
It shall, in spite of all our impudence,
Let in a Fear, against which, no defense
Can possibly be made; and, then, the doom
We feared in secret, openly shall come.
He, of this self-denial was a Teacher,
Yea, and as well a Pattern as a Preacher
Who, taught with power, such principles as these,
And, not as do our Scribes and Pharisees.
I vvrote this partly likewise, in requital
Of his rare kindness; and by his recital
Of what he was, to stir up imitation
In all those who had any near relation
Unto his fleshly being; and thereby,
To pay my debt to his posterity;
And, that (if well improved) it might be
Some retribution, for his love to me.
But, (in the first place, though I name it l^st)
This opportunity I have embraced,
To keep still visible, before mine eyes,
That Object, which the world does most despise
To look upon; even that, disgraceful, poor,
And low estate, in which I, heretofore
Was friendless left; and, in how just a time,
GOD, sent me full Deliverance, by him;
One, from a Thousand chose, to signify
Thus much; that, (notvvithstanding they whom, I,
Remembered often; me remembered not)
His everlasting love, was not forgot.
Having now shevvn the Reason of my Rhyme,
I will return again to speak of him
Who caused this discourse, which I am in;
And, where I left ^ff, there, I will begin.
Before, the bounty, which from him did come,
Amounted to the fore expressed sum,
Ashamed in my self, to see how far
He had engaged me, without taking care
Of reimbursement; unto him I sent
Unask, a true and full acknowledgment
Of all I had received: But, to my hand,
He back returned it, with this command
That, to no Person, I a word should say
Of what had past betwixt us, in that way.
For, well I know, said he, both you, and I,
Shall get but disadvantages thereby.
The World, is full of envy, and malicious,
Making to us, our best works most pernicious.
They who in her affairs, are chiefly wise,
And, view, our actions, with mere carnal eyes,
Will judge me but a fool; and, think perchance,
Your wit, has wrought out of my ignorance
Or easines, that, which is an effect
Of GODS good providence, and my respect:
Keep it in secret therefore; for, from thence,
There can arise no mischief, or offense.
These Reasons charmed me; and, with much ado,
I silence kept, because, he wil'd it so.
Only, (some few days after he forbid
This to be mentioned) him, I friendly chid
By these ensuing Verses, which are next
Inserted here, as not beside my Text.
SIR, though, so friendly, you to me have been,
That, to forget it, were a mortal sin,
Yet, I am one, whom diverse do suppose
To make no difference, betwixt Friends, and Foes
In my reproovings; And, if that be true,
My worthy noble Friend, then, have at You.
For, you forget your self, and strive to clime
To heights, so unfrequented at this time,
That, I suppose, I am in conscience tide
Your temper, and your practices, to chide,
Lest by soft-hearted kindness, and compassion
(With such like virtues, now grown out of fashion)
It may deservedly be said, by some,
One of these Sectarie you are become,
( And, of these Heretics thought worse then Turks)
Who show their true believing, by their works;
And, seem to bring their simple custom hither,
Of living well, and lovingly together.
Fie! have you honored been to sit among
The wisest of this Commonwealth so long?
And where, the men, who do themselves suppese
To be (at least) the wisest part of these,
Can many days, weeks, months, yea many years,
Hear Widows outcries, and see Orphans tears,
Without the casting of one look aside
On those, who by their path, stand Crucifide?
And will you so degenerate from them
Whose practices, are patterns for the time
To look on him, whom they have trampled on,
And lest, as to the world-ward, quite undone?
Can you descend so low, to fix your eyes
On those, whom men in honor do despise?
Yea, in a manner, seek unto them, too,
Who are distressed, (before they seek to you?)
W^^e them to be releev'd, by your expen^e?
(As if you suffered, by their indigence)
And charge them, that they tell it unto none,
As if a deed of darkness, you had done?
Believe, it SIR, this is a novelty,
Which does betray you, so apparently
That, were it known, your best Friends would not stick,
To voice you, publicly, a Schismatic.
Scarce paralleled: For, you in this divide
From all I know, in all the World beside,
Excepting one or two; and you, and they
Make up that little Congregation may,
With whom CHRIST promised he would present be
Though it consisted but of two, or three:
And which was promised, (for ought I hear)
Though none of them, a Priest, or Prelate were.
The circumstances heeded in your acts,
Do very strangely aggravate the facts.
Had it been only, in a humor done,
Or, in a fit, but once, or twice alone
(As works of charity, are, now and then,
Performed, and repented of again,)
Or, had that charity, from you distilled,
But, drop by drop; or had it forth been filled
By thimbles full, (as unto those we give,
Our Aquavitae, whom we faint perceive)
Had it been so, or so, I should have thought
So much thereof, as I in reason ought;
(Though, with much more respect then yet I see,
My public services, will thought on be)
And would have strived, as far as I was able
To make the gifts, and thanks, proportionable,
As wise men do; or, some way complemented,
And customary services presented,
According to the fashion: But, the course,
That you have took, Acknowledgments enforce
Beyond all Presidents: For, Sir, you stretch
Your noblenes so far beyond the reach
Of my weak faculties, to retribute
Acknowledgments, which thereunto may suit;
Yea, and so often, so long, so gen'rously
You have releeved my necessity;
That, therewith overcharged, I am fain,
To break out of the to de, into a strain,
Some way extravagantly to declare,
As often in such straights as these we are
Constrained to do; And, as once Peter did
When through CHRIST'S manhood, he the Godhead spid;
And, when, he having fished all night for naught,
And drew a whole ship lading at one draught,
He cride out, LORD, go from me (get thee gone)
For I confess my self a sinful one.
As, is the Fruit, so, may the season be
A token of the nature of the Tree:
(As that which comes by the Rivers side,
And, whereby Righteous men are typifide
Illustrates well,) I, therefore, in respect
Even of the time, may somewhat here object,
To show, yet farther, how you rend from those
Who have our earthly things, at their dispose.
For, at such times of need, still, aid you lent,
As if by GOD himself, it had been sent,
Who, only, knew my wants; and unto whom
I, only show them, when such great ones come:
Because, in greatest wants, I do perceive
Men readier to destroy, then to relieve.
Such, is the state of many in distress;
Such, is the hate, of those, who do oppress.
The rightly timing of a benefit,
Does, very often, more then double it:
And, though such charity, may, in these days,
Return you little present gain, or praise,
Yet, GOD observes it; and, as sure, as he
Will of a cup of Water heed full be
Bestowed on him who does assume the name,
Of his Disciple, (although not the same)
You timely, and your large benevolence,
Shall have a timely, and large recompense.
Me, in due season, GOD not only shall
Enable too, some way, to pay you all;
But, add mean time, a blessing to defray
That interest which he does yet delay:
And, in that place, where some of those (I fear)
Who, me oppressed, will tremble to appear,
You, shall be welcomed, with come ye blessed,
Who fed, and clothed me, when I was distressed.
These things considered, this, which I begun,
Pretending some reproof, intends none:
But, rather, is, (that debts be not forgot)
A memorandum only, or a note,
Subscribed with my hand, for intimation,
That, you, with me, shall have his obligation
Whose word is passed already to restore
Whatever shall be lent unto the poor:
And, who, does good to every one intend,
Whose heart he moves, the needy to befriend.
Yet, that, mean time, I may not failing be
To pay as much in hand, as lies in me;
Receive this Benediction. Whensoere
The day of fiery trial shall appear,
To prove your Faith, and purge you quite from all
Your selfnes: which ere long time will befall:
Let, then, your Faith be strong, and GOD be seen
A friend to you, as you to me have been:
And let your charity before him stand,
To manacle, and weaken every hand,
That would oppress those, whom you leave behind:
Let them GODS favor, in all troubles find:
Be safe preserved, in all times, and places,
By his free mercies, and preventing Graces;
And let this prayer, still, about GOD'S Throne
Be fluttering, till he says, so be it done.
These Verses, for his large benevolence
Were, for a long time, all his evidence.
Nor would he more receive, though many a time
Security was offered unto him.
And, once, it was in words like these, denide:
When first I your necessity supplide,
My purpose was not, merely to relieve
Your present need; but, likewise, aid to give
That, by your own endeavor, (with my cost)
You might recover that which you have lost.
The State, has no part satisfied, yet,
Of your allowed, and overlong due debt:
And, till that shall be done, I will expect
No payment, neither ought to that effect.
But, his assistance having made me strong,
That, to recover, which had been by wrong
Detained from me, in a private hand;
(And having somewhat more at my command)
I thought my self obliged (as I was able)
To render some returns proportionable
To my Estate. So, he accepts, at last,
Security for part, and left the rest;
(Of which, to him, I somewhat yearly brought)
Without his asking, as expecting ought
(By any thing expressed) until that,
Were paid me, which is owing by the State;
Or, till the residue, I could repay,
By some enablement another way.
This, shows it is no frivilous occasion
From whence this Poem springs; or, Obligation
To be as inconsiderable, slighted
Which me to this acknowledgment invited:
But rather, in regard of GOD, and Man,
An act, which ought, as fully as I can
To be expressed; That, for it I might give
The praise to GOD, and, men the example have.
For, by his charity, GOD'S love appears:
I was, thereby, preserved many years
From perishing: Thereby, likewise, together
With that assistance, which I had from other
Concurring helps, (which have the same way, been
To me by GOD'S good providence, sent in.)
I got to be possessor of the gate,
Of those, who were mine enemies of late;
And, thereby, also, partly to express
To others, in their need, my thankfulness.
Thereto, the Noble, and much Honored
Bradshaw, and Dixwell, aid contributed,
Among some others, who are not forgot.
Although their kindness I here mention not;
Yea, GOD, for me, so likewise, did dispose
The purpose, of my avaritious foes,
That, doubly, it advantaged me, and more
Then all those loving friends had done before.
Which, suddenly improoving my Estate
Beyond, what I did hope, or aimed at;
The World does seem to think, and some do say,
That, I, to thrive, have practiced her way;
And, on my conscience, would now love me too,
If, truly, she believed it had been so:
For, nothing renders her, a Foe to me
But, that she fears my words, and deeds agree.
And, that, though baits, and snares for me are laid
To serve her ends, I shall not be betrayed.
Now, having finished this little story,
Which has a near relation to GOD'S glory
As well as to the honor of my Friend,
With some brief inferences, I will end.
But, lest, these may detain you overlong,
Here pause; and read them, in the following Song.
The fourth CANTO.
Of Christian love, the large extents;
The sad, the bad, the mad events
Of discord, here the Muse displaies;
That Idol SELFNES open lays.
Some other things to heed commends,
And, then, with praise, and Prayer ends.
WHat shall that Musing profir, which affords
Nothing but bare Relations, or mere words?
Or, what will things avail, that shall be read,
Concerning those, who sleep among the dead
If no advantages at all they give
To benefit, or better those that live?
Sure none; Lest, therefore, these may justly pass
For tingling Cymbals, or for sounding Brass,
Some useful notes, or notions, i will discover
On this occasion, ere I pass it over.
And though I cannot talk, as others do,
He preach my way; and, preach to purpose too.
Of many things, which merit mention may,
Wherein my Friend, has pattern'd out the way
Of walking, and of practice; three things, here,
Shall be insisted on, as those that are
Deserving special heed: Such, as (if we
Well imitate) a true ALL HEAL shall be:
End all Quarrels; Take off, from our eyes
The blinding scales, and filmes of prejudice
Which keeps us dark, and from a right perceiving,
of truth, and, in a wilful misheleeving.
An imitation thereof, would bring hither
Outward, and inward peace; and knit together
CHRIST'S disunited members so, that love
Would ripen knowledge; Knowledge help improve
A saving Faith; That Faith renew the Will;
A will renewed, would GODS mind fulfill,
And therewith, so acquainted make us grow
That, we should learn to Act, as well as know.
The first of these is Love; love, not extending
It self, to these, or those, but comprehending
All things created, with an imitation
Of CHRIST, by meekness in his conversation
With Publicans and sinners; and, with such
As knew but little, and believed not much.
Such, was CHRIST'S love; and (if I do not miss)
According to man's measure, such was his.
For, though, that vail of flesh which others vvear,
And, that, which clothed him, when he was here,
Disguised his inward man, and made him pass
For one of those, who running of a Race
Does beat the air in vain; yet, they, whose eyes
Observed him when he was near the prize,
Savv, he had usde the means, and chose the ground,
Which best advantaged him, and would be crowned,
When, many, at a loss themselves would find.
Who, better dieted, and disciplined
Were thought to be; For, none could know so well
What best befitted him, as he might tell.
Near to his latter end, he had attained
Such love to all, and, therewith, so unfain'd
A longing both to win, and to be won
Unto the Truth, that, he was Fo to none
So much, as to himself: and, by forbearing,
By hopefulness, long-suffering, patient hearing,
And meekness, without bitterness of spirit,
True quietness of heart he did inherit
Within himself; and waited, when GOD'S leisure
Would of his grace, to others, fill the measure.
My cognizance of him, persuades me so,
And, whether he thus perfect were, or no,
It serves the turn, as well to let us see
What you, and I, and every man should be.
Yet, of this Christian temper I had proof,
To make it forth, with evidence enough.
For, though in fundamentals we agreed,
Essentially (as by what did succed,
Is manifest) yea, though we did accord
In one GOD, in one CHRIST, one Faith, one word.
One will, and hope; (as all true Christians do,)
Yet, in some accidental means thereto
We disagree'd; yea, often, did dissent
In some things, which 'twixt others made a rent.
And, I was often, so earnest in dispute,
His tenants to disprove, and to confute,
That, they who should have heard us, might have judged
Not me to him, but him to me, obliged,
And that like Paul ^^d Barnabas, at least,
A parting, would have followed our contest.
Yet, though we both stood firm, to what we thought
Nor loss of love, nor breach 'twixt us, it wrought;
But, rather, to each other kept us nearer,
The firmer in our friendship, and the dearer:
Because we both knew, that, one Judge we had,
In whom Atonement, would, at last, be made:
Because, we both intended, not that He,
Or, I, might conquer, but, Truth victor be:
And, I, might conquer, but, Truth victor be:
And, this declares his deserving, more
Then all, that I have said of him before.
For, what man else, but he, would not have thought
My Obligations, should my soul have brought
In bondage to his Judgment? or, at least
Kept me from owning mine, by hot contest?
Who else but he, would have continued on
His love, and bounty, unto such a One
As thwarted his opinions? and, not rather
Have made me scatter what he holp to gather?
Converted former friendship, into hate,
And, sought to ruin me, in my Estate?
Which had with ease been done; since, at that time,
My chief subsistence, was received from him.
But, of his judgment, what er'e think I might
I knew his love was firm; his heart upright;
And, this belief of no man, I could have
Who gave his charity, to make a slave:
Or, who from bondage did my flesh unbind
To lay a greater Thraldom, on my mind.
No, (though from servitude, he set me free)
If he, thus cruel, should to others be.
Nay, though a King, with me should share his Throne,
And prize me, as his chief elected one,
Were he a Tyrant over other men,
I could not give him love, for love again:
Nay, further (be it spoke with reverence
To him I speak of, and without offense)
Could I believe that GOD, in whom I trust
Were (though he loved me) cruel and unjust,
I would not seek with him in Heaven to dwell,
But, rather, go, and live alone in Hell.
For, he, that is with essential GOD delighted,
And, thereunto by hearty love united;
Should therewith feel to him, such virtue given,
As would translate the lowest Hell to Heaven.
I fear, I go too high in my expressions,
I Will therefore stoop again, from these digressions
To speak what is possible to be believed
Of those, by whom this cannot be received.
And show them, in my common strain, how far
From Christian love, the greatest number are,
Who most profess it; that, affect they may
A far more excellent, and better way,
If carnal lusts, will give them time to read it,
And, their self-love, admit of Grace to heed it.
It is not love, but cruelty in those,
Who, would on others consciences impose
Their Yoaks, or break the bands of loving kindness,
Because, their friends have weaknesses, or blindness:
Nay, (which of cruelties appears the worst)
Because, they would not be, from that divorst,
Which is their comforts chief preservative;
And, without which, none happily can live
Here, or hereafter; And, when doing so,
To these imposers, no true good can do.
What is a friend for; or, what better are
Those friends, then foes, who neither can forbear
Nor help to bear, that Friends infirmities
With meeknes, whom he has been pleased to prize?
But, beat the lame, because, they cannot run;
Leave him that is blind, because he sees no Sun;
And, separate from them, for that, which they
Would willingly disclaim, and cast away
If they were able; or, else, did not fear
They, thereby, sinners against Conscience, were?
Whereas, they rather should with these abide,
To lead the lame; to be the blind-mans guide:
And, with long-suffring, to instruct the other,
Till he becomes a true believing Brother.
Oh! how far off! how far! are such as those
From imitating him, who loved his Foes?
(And did to save them?) who pursue with hate
Their friends, for those concerments, which relate
Unto themselves alone? How far are such
From loving them, who have offended much?
This temper at this time, is very rare,
For gen'rally almost, we bite and tear,
So barbarously, each others flesh, and fleeces,
And rend CHRIST'S Robes into so many pieces,
That, we seem rather Woolves, and dogs, then sheep,
Belonging to that Flock which he does keep.
Nor are they, only, Woolves in sheeps array,
Who, thus their Woolvish nature do betray,
But, even on some of us, who of his Fold
Are Members, this, distemper does lay hold.
Even we forsooth, for whom our GOD has done
So much of late; we, we, who look upon
Our selves at this time, as a People chose
By special providence, to scourge his Foes;
And, to be they, whom he first calls to bring
Unto his Throne, our Everlasting King,
Whose Banners LOVE; Even we, have here of late,
Instead thereof, advanced the Flagg of HATE
To be our Standard; and, the same display
With as much virulency as we may
Against each other: Yea, against those, too,
Who seek GOD'S face, as truly as we do.
Some of us, so aloft, our selves do carry
With hope of great achievements temporary,
That, we forget from whence we first ascended;
Slight them, for whose sakes, we have been befriended;
None loving, but our selves; and looking on
All else, as if the Earth, for us alone,
Had been created; and all others, born
For objects of our hatred, or our scorn:
And, leave them unrewarded, by whose hands
The ground was won, on which our building stands.
Some of us, on a spiritual account,
To such an overweningnes do mount,
As if, we only, were the men, to whom
Belongs that Kingdom, which is yet to come:
Or, as if Heaven, for none else were ordained,
But, those, who are among us entertained;
Bound up to our Rules; marked, with our Prints;
Or, qualifide with our distinguishments:
And, so bewitch't are we, by our own Dreams,
With that, which we have Preached upon those Theams,
That, if we take not heed, 'twill bring about
That mischief, which we purpose to keep out.
For, we through want of love, are so divided,
By having this way, or else that way, sided
To raise what others build up, or, in striving
To raise a Babell, of our own contriving;
That, some perchance, may see the Dragons tail,
Swing once more over us, ere we prevail.
Yea, want of love, on all sides, so misteaches,
Here, sucn Obstructions makes, and there, such breaches
That, we are like to make our common Foe,
An easy passage, where he could not go.
Yet, it is not possible to make us wake
From our vain Dreams, a safer course to take;
Unles, GOD, shall, our Adderlike deaf ear,
Pence by some stranger charms, then, yet, we hear:
For, they are thought to speak words most in season,
Who speak most impudently, and least reason:
In which besottednes, if he walk on
Much longer, as too long time we have done,
(Acting, as if we thought, to show, our folly
Would be an argument to prove us holy.
And drive still furiously against each other,
As if all shortly would be mad together,)
They, will not much mistake therein, who shall
This Isle, Great BEDLAM, now Great BRITAN call.
The other virtue, of my now dead Friend,
Which to our imitation, I Will commend,
Is, to be zealous, in the pulling down
Of our great Idol. now, more famous grown,
Then was Diana; and, adored by us,
Much more then she was once, at Ephesus.
That weak, that base, that despicable ELFE,
Called SELFNES, which, man sets up in himself;
And, for whose services, and adoration,
We from all things within the whole Creation,
Make patterns to our selves: And, not of these
Alone, make we fantastic images.
But, of things also, which had neither birth,
Or being, on, or underneath the earth;
Neither within the water, air, or fire,
Or any where, in lower place, or higher.
This, is that God, which now is worshipped more,
Then Baal, and all those Idols heretofore,
Which did provoke to wrath. There, are our loves
Most fixed. Thereto, our Temples, Altars, Groves
Are consecrated; and, what else, beside
Whereby, an Idol may be glorifide.
Thereto, those Tithes, those Duties, those Oblations,
Thanksgivings, Prayers, solemn Observations,
All forms, and ceremonies, (whether taught
By truth, or, superstitiously in brought;)
Our Governments, our Parliaments, our Laws,
Our Armies, our unjust, and righteous Cause;
Our Conquests, all our wisdom, all our wealth;
Our honor, beauty, with our youth, and health;
Our righteousness (if we in us, have any;
Our wickednesses, (whereof we have many;)
Even Scriptures, Judgments, mercies, Sacraments,
With what else, GOD ordains, or man invents,
Are all, by some among us, now converted,
(Or, rather, to speak properly, perverted)
Some way to serve, as to advance the praise
Of SELFNES, that great Idol of our days.
And, some, who vote, and speak against it more
Then many; more, then any, her adore.
Most, who pretend, to serve the Commonweal,
Do most intend, from thence to rob and steal
Wherewith, to sacrifice before the shrine,
Of that loved Idol; which does glare, and shine,
With jewels, gold, and those embellishments,
Which should have been the public Ornaments.
They, from poor Orphans, and sad Widows, tear
Their Garments, for that pseudo-god to wear:
Pluck from their hungry mouths, their bread and meat,
For that devouring God of theirs to eat:
And, then, for his drink-offrings, pour forth floods
Of faithful servants, Friends, and Childrens bloods.
Most, who pretend true Justice to maintain,
Do more contend, to wrong those who complain,
Then how to right them; that, thereby they may
Make innocents, this cursed Idols pray:
And, to their faithful friends, are most severe;
Either, to make a show, as if they were
Impartial, or, perhaps, thereby, to pay
A good desert, the clean contrary way.
Most, who pretend to charity, do give
Either, in hope they, thereby shall receive
Some benefit; or, else in hope to raise
A Monument, or Trophie of self praise:
And fevv out of a tenderness of heart,
Give, to releeve, or to revvard desert.
Most, who pretend to friendship, do but buy
With complements, or some cheap courtesy,
Their self advantages; and, to more charge,
When they are put, it is but to enlarge
Their selfnes; and, some way thereby, among
Such other ends, to make their party strong:
For, when unserviceable, these are grown,
They cast them off, as Persons never known.
Yea, when the times does come, which truly shows
Who is a Friends, they then become their Foes.
Most, who pretend for GOD, that virtue fain
For naught; with them, is godliness, but gain.
They frequently, more bold with him do make,
Then with all others; and from him dare take
What ere they can, to sacrifice unto,
This Idol; and suppose no wrong they do.
Yea, those pert Jewish women, who had given
And, would give spice Cakes to the Queen of Heaven
(And had befoold their Husbands to consent
That, them they should, in GODS despite, present,
Took not his Oil, his pure Wheat* and his spices,
To make, their wicked wilful Sacrifices,
With bolder impudence, then many a one
Among us, for this to Idols use have done.
A Spirit, being, GOD, in no need stands
Either of Churches, Tithes, or Rents, or Lands,
Or Forms, or any of those other things,
Which, for GODS worship, our devotion brings:
For, these will do his deity no good:
But, selfnes, is a God of flesh, and blood,
That will be highly pleased, with those oblations
Which GOD Almighty, counts abominations,
If not made use of, with all circumstances,
Which, in a right way, piety advances.
And, therefore, we do purpose (if we may)
To take them, for this Idol, quite away.
But peradventure, ere effect that finds
We may be taken hence, or change our minds.
This, is in every heart, the Antichrist,
Which does usurp CHRIST'S Temples, and resist
His reigning there. There, paramount is he
(Though other Antichrists, there, also be)
His chiefest opposite; and gives offense,
More then his Foes of greater eminence.
The Devil, does in the World, against him rant,
As his chief Foe; In his Church militant,
(At large) The man of sin; And, this, or that
Corruption in each individual State
Or Congregation: But, this, has alone
In every single man, the supreme Throne
Of opposition; though, sometimes, appearing
In one beloved sin, and sometimes wearing
Another habit, as it best befits
The place, or person, where, enthroned it sits:
And, though the Devil, Turk, and Pope, and all
Whom, in their spears, The Antichrist we call
Should down be thrown; we shall rejoice in vain
If, in our hearts, this Antichrist still reign.
This, is that Idol, which prolongs our woes:
This, is that Idol, which, if ere we lose
Our present hopes, is that, which will effect it:
And, I do more then probably suspect it.
This, is the last thing, my deceased friend,
Declaimed against, before his latter end,
As likely to be that abomination,
Which will occasion here, a desolation;
If not destroyed, or, at least, debased
Within those Temples, wherein it is placed.
This Idol, has in every heart a shrine;
Yea, (though I hatert) does possess in mine
The inmost room; there, screwed in so fast,
That, thence, I fear, it hardly will be cast
Till all that Fabric shall be broken down,
Wherewith it is incorporated grown,
It knows what now I think, what now I write,
And sticks the closer to me, in despite
Of all that I can think, or say, or do:
Yea, and by means of this performance too,
The more exalted in my heart will be,
If, GOD himself, shall not deliver me.
But, he will add sufficiency of Grace;
For, I intend even in that very place,
Where fixed it stands, to sacrifise the Beast
With all the trinkets of self Interest:
Which, if I can do, while it is fixed there,
Will better please, then if destroyed it were.
Another Virtue in my Friend, no less
Deserving heed, was Conscientiousness
In words and works; whereof, an imitation,
Would bring much happiness unto this Nation.
For whise good Conscience, entertain we shall,
It keeps a never-ending Festival,
Which gladdeth more the heart, then when we seast
To entertain our best beloved Guest.
If slighted; it becomes our greatest Fo:
If cherished; it such a Friend will grow,
That, when all else forsake us, and abuse us;
When they oppress, and causlesly accuse us;
When opportunity the Devil wins,
To muster up against us, all our sins;
When, GOD perhaps, does lay upon us too,
A heavy hand: when Death (as it will do)
Arresteth us, our countless debts to pay,
And, to his dungeon carries us away;
Even then, when all our honors and our wealth,
Our youth, our strength, our pleasures, and our health,
Shrink from us: when, our best beloved Friends,
Our wives and children, upon whom depends
Our greatest earthly comforts, will forgo us;
Lodge us among the dead, where none shall know us;
And, leave us without succor, all alone,
To give account for that which we have done:
Then, will this Friend, if well we cherish her;
(Yea, though she formerly abused were,
If we be sorrowful for our offense
And reconciled by true penitence,
Will go along with us unto the Grave;
Remove all thence, whereof, we dread may have;
Sleep there with us, whilst there we shall remain;
Rise with us, when we shall arise again;
And, make us there, with joyfulness appear
Before that Judge, whom other men shall fear:
For, having in this life, the privileges,
Of our Accusers, Witnesses, and Judges,
(Which none else has by our terrestrial Laws,)
Before hand, she determines our Cause.
She, by the Law that is written in our hearts,
Does judge us; and no jot from that departs;
So that no Soul, can justly counter-plead,
An Ignorance; or stand in any need
Of an Interpreter, or, witness brought,
To testify, of what, was good or naught:
For, none, will she condemn for that offense,
Whereof, he brings not an evidence
Within himself, to clear, or to condemn.
For that, which is objected unto them.
And, whosoever to this judgment comes,
Shall blame themselves, and justify her dooms.
Look therefore that you keep this Judge your friend,
And that, by your fault, she who will pretend
To be this Conscience, be not entertained
Instead thereof: For, Conscience may be strained
So far, and by accustomed refusing
Good counsel; and by vvilfully abusing
Her just reproofs, till her away we chase
And let an evil conscience take her place.
And, what events, may afterward ensue,
I leave it, to be thought upon, by you.
How, we may know a Conscience rectifide;
How, to preserve it, we may means provide;
How to recover it again when lost;
Time to compose a large discourse would cost:
To sound these depths, I therefore will forbear,
And only add, for your example here,
What, by occasion of my Friend, that is gone,
I have, since his departure, mused on.
Good Conscience, whereof high esteem he made
Three Objects has; to which there must be had
A due respect, asunder, and together,
Without neglecting, what belongs to either;
Except in things, wherein the less is debtor,
To wave his due, for that, which is the greater.
GOD is the first; our neighbors, or our brother
(In some respects) the next; our selves the other;
Whose welfare, in some cases, may before
The second be preferred, and tendered more:
Because, it is the Rule whereby to square,
That love, which to our neighbors, we should bear.
Our duties to all these, were in the heart
First written; and renewed again, in part,
By common grace: But, sin has so defaced
That Table, and that writing so much rased,
That, we must seek to make up that Record
By what, GOD has supplied in his Word;
And, they, who would preserve the conscience fair
And blameless, to that Glass, must often repair;
Which, (by that aid, which GOD to add will please)
Shows us, our several duties, to all these.
All they, whose Conscience is this way renewed,
Know what should be embraced, and what eschew'd.
Such, will not of his honor, God, bereave,
To save their Country; nor, their lives to save,
Spoil or betray that; nor, themselves deprive
Of ought, which they to serve these, did recieve
Through cowardice or sloth; nor, to enjoy
The pleasures of the flesh, the Soul destroy.
To GOD, they will not make a sacrifice
Of guiltless blood; or, honor him with lies:
Or, offer to him things achiev'd by stealth,
By fraud or rapine; nor their Commonwealth
Repair, enrich, or strengthen, by oppressions;
By tollerating any known transgressions,
To Piety destructive; or, to that
True Justice, whose defect, may ruinate
Humane society; either, by searing
To dravv their svvords against a Tyrants daring;
Or seeking, by a warlike way of murder,
How, to enlarge their territories further;
In hope of needles gain, or fruitles glory,
hais'd out of black deeds, by a bloody story:
But, prosecute the troublers of their peace,
Till safety, may be settled; and, then, cease:
That, throughout all the World it may be known,
They sought not to enlarge, but save their own;
And to disable those from doing vvrong,
Who, else, would all the World embroyl, ere long.
Such, will not make their Public Faith a scorn.
That they who live, and they who are unborn
May in times future, be discouraged from
Assisting, when another need shall come;
And, let all, rather unto ruin run,
Then trust, what is not to be trusted on.
Such, will not (as in times of need they may)
Take some men's lands, and lively hoods away,
The Public to secure, without supply,
For loss of that, which it was saved by:
But, to each private sufferer, reimburse
Their private damage, from the Public purse.
Such, will not misemploy their Power, in place
Of supreme Trust, unjustly, to disgrace
Their faithful servants, upon bare surmizes,
On misreports, which evil will devises
To blast their credit, ruin their Estate,
(Perhaps their lives too) by objecting hate
Which is untrue- For, they not being there
Who could refute that, vvherevvith charged they were,
(Nor suffered to take notice, from whose tongue
They, in their absence, did receive that vvrong)
A prejudice, does bring a censure on them,
Which ere they can prevent it, has undone them.
If they good conscience have, who thus can do;
I Will think, the devil has some conscience too;
How seared are the consciences of those,
Who, give their friends, much less respect then foes?
Obliging them by favors whom they fear,
Would else be traitors, (or perhaps so are)
And disoblige true men, because, they know
No injury can make them less then so?
What conscience, have they who do pretend,
The Public has not, to releeve a friend
That Is perishing; and, yet the self-same day
(Though no need were) profusely give away
Large sums among themselves; and gratify
Those men, who with their faction do comply?
(And own their ways, opinions, and designs)
As if they did possess, the Indian Mines?
What Consciences have they, who pay some worst,
Who merit best; and last, who served them first:
Provide for those; who for self ends do serve;
And let the Commonwealths true servant starve?
Give ready Coin to some; and unto them
Who did the same work, at the self-same time,
Not any thing at all? except, perchance,
A Warrant, Order, or an Ordinance
Which by begetting others, does still add
New troubles, and expense to what they had;
And without profit, so enlarge their cost,
By precious time, and redious labor lost;
That, if at first, their debts they had forgiven
(And added so much more, to make all even)
To get a flat denial; some, had gained
Much more thereby, then will be now obtained,
Though they were paid to morrow? One, I know
Who by experiment, has found it so;
Yet, some of them, who may this conscience own,
Woe uld seem to think, great things on him, bestown:
Because, Gods mercy, other ways supplies
That, which to him, their Justice yet denies.
What partial Consciences are also theirs?
Who, in establishing of just Arrears,
Gave some full Interest for debts delayed,
And none to others, for like debts unpay'd
Ten summers after; and, which may, before
They are discharged, stand charged ten years more
And then at last, perhaps, aside be laid
Among those debts, that never shall be paid?
From such corrupted consciences as these,
Has sprung our Epidemicall disease:
Those many fold complainings, in our streets,
Wherewith each friend his sad companion greets:
Those scandals, which are published in disgrace
Of persons, who were lately in the place
Sapream Trust: hence, also, flows that hate
The Quarrels, coffeehouse, and debate,
Which is amongst us: Hence, those hazzards rise
Which make us fearful, and our Enemies
Still hopeful, that, it either shall occasion
Some broyl within, or, some without Invasion.
And, if I may believe what my heart tells,
That, which they do expect, or somewhat else
Equivalent, will shortly come to pass,
If we below, and they who are in place
Above us, make not conscience of our vvayes
More then we have done, in preceding days.
For, if there be a GOD, as my soul knovvs
There is, by that, which daily from him flovvs:
If there be devils, as I know well to,
There are by what, I see their servants do.
GOD, or the Devil will to us appear
By some new Act of Grace, or work of fear,
To purge hearts, from death procuring works,
And that hypocrisy within them lurks;
And keep us to the rule of doing so,
To others, as we would be done unto.
Of which good practice, whilst he here was living
My Westrow (having by examples of giving)
Deserved to be a pattern, I, contrived,
This way, of having him, again revived;
That, I, and you, and others, by the light
From henoe reflecting, may walk more upright.
Lord, let these overflowings of my Spirit,
Which, in themselves have neither power, nor merit.
Produce forth good effects; and not be found
Like that, which gives an useles, emyty sound.
Let it be some way, fruitful unto them,
Who had relations in the flesh to him,
Who, hereof gave occasion; and, some way
To every Reader, who peruse it may;
And, not a memorandum only be
To other men; but, likewise unto me.
Vouchsafe me grace, whilst, here I live to serve
( In this my Generation) not to swarve
From my appointed work; but to persever
In doing it, with vigilant endeavor;
That, of my Talent, when I must appear
To give account (which time approaches near)
I may be faithful found, and to that joy
Admittance have, which nothing can destroy.
Let neither fears, nor hopes, neglects, or wrongs,
Deter from doing what to me belongs:
And, though my faculty has small esteem,
And needles to the World, perhaps, may seem,
In those affairs which may be pertinent
To thy great work: make it a supplement
Of some good use; that, times to come may see
My withered leaves, did help adorn the Tree
During that season, wherein clothed it stood;
And, were for cure of some diseases good.
Of what, in others, to be good, or ill,
I have observed; let application, still,
So to my self be made, that what I saw,
To be amiss in them, may me withdraw
From erring paths; and, in their steps to tread,
Who nave uprightly walked, (alive or dead.)
That, I may truly foot thy measures, too,
As well as pipe them out, to those that do:
Lest, I my self, a Reprobate be found,
When all things have completely daunc'd their round.
Let not the Revolutions, or the changes,
Or, that prevarication which now ranges
Throughout the World, me, from my station carry;
Or, cause me from good Principles to vary.
But, in the stream, of all those great distractions,
Diffring opinions, counter-marching actions,
Plottings, designings, threatenings, and pertakings,
Whimsies, Chimeras, doubtings, and mistakings,
Fawnings, and frownings, praises, or disgraces,
Wants, and aboundings, in all times, and places,
So steady keep my Judgment, and so clear,
That, all my Life, I firmly may adhear
To truth, and honesty; and, plainly see
What man intends, or is designed by thee,
And, whatsoere, without me, makes a din;
Let, me have always, peace, and joy, within,
My life, has been a warfar to this day;
And troubles multiply: Yet, if it lay
Within my power, to choose what other lot
The best man living has, (or I have not)
And, might my self, my own self being make;
Let me no comfort, in my Portion take,
If, I, would choose ought else, but that which now
I have, and thy free mercy, shall allow:
For, of thy love, so well assured am I;
And, how, thou best know, what for me is best;
That, on thy Wisdom, Power, and Love I Will rest.
I, love to see the doing what thou do,
( Oh GOD! most holy, powrful, wise, and just)
And, therefore, though my flesh be terrifide
By thy approaches, and, often loath to bide
Where, I may stand to see thee marching on,
And doing, here, such things as thou have done:
Yea, though sometime, such horrors on me cease,
That, they do shake my bones; yet naytheles,
My spirit, so is pleased, to behold
Those Judgments, and those mercies manifold,
Which I observe; that, in no other time,
Nor, (might I choose) in any other Clime,
Would I have lived, save where I might have seen
Such things, as have to me discovered been:
No, though thy Judgments, which, now on us be,
Have in the flesh, with others, wrapped up me,
For, whatsoever former times afford;
Whatever, has been written in the Word;
What signs, or wonders, have been to thy glory
Recorded in profane, or sacred story;
Has been a new transacted, in my days.
So, have I seen the River, and the Seas
Made passable: So, have I seen thy wonders
In blood, and Vermin; in fire, hail, and thunders;
And, in those other dreadful signs, whereby
Thou, heretofore did Pharaoh terrify;
Mysteriously, or morally (at least)
If not in all things, lit'rally expressed:
And, have abserv'd, that, they on other men
Have now, the same effects, which they had then.
To carnal wisdom, but events of chance
They do appear; and, such, to ignorance.
Great Kings, and Princes, will not yet be wise,
But fool themselves, with vanities, and lies;
And, are like Pharaoh, daily hardened so,
As if they dared thee, thy worst to do.
Yea, their inchanters, though they cannot stand
Before thee, (and acknowledge it is thy hand,
Which is upon them) do endeavor still,
To seek themselves, and to resist thy will.
And, all of us, almost as heedles are,
Of what thou do, as Jacobs offspring were.
Thy judgments, mercies, threatenings, promises;
The several causes, and effects of these,
Have been to me, exemplifide a new,
By that, which has been offered to my view:
The occurrances, betwixt thy Friends, and Foes,
Long time ago, foretipifying those
That should succeed, (and, were for Presidents,
That like proceedings, would have like Events
Throughout all ages) I Have seem paralleled
By those, which with mine eyes, I beheld:
And, by those tipes, compared with what I saw,
Did, sometimes from them such conclusions draw,
That, I foretold, when few believed me,
What, they and I, have lived, fulfilled to see.
And, though, thou art not pleased to let me know,
Perspicuously, what is approaching now:
Yet, I see dim appearances, whereby
I may suspect a mischief drawing nigh.
A Cloud, which like a man's hand seems to be,
Or, else, a man's hand, like a Cloud I see
Threatening a storm. I see, me thinks, Ob Father!
Vapors far off dispersed, begin to gather
Into divided bodies, whence may break
A voice of Thunder, and things dreadful; speak,
With sad events; If we with speed repent not;
And, thou, the plagues, which we deserve, prevent not.
Oh! therefore, turn our hearts; and unto thee
So, from our own ways let us turned be,
That, thou may still continue thy compassion,
With thy accustomed favors, to this Nation.
And, my beloved Brethren, for whose warnings,
I, thus adventure my dim fore-discernings
To public censure, though not for my sake,
(For your own safety, notice of them take:
And, of your vanities, repent with speed;
That, Judgments, but conditionally decreed,
May be averted: And, that, those good things,
Of whose approach the season symptoms brings,
Deferred may not be: For, there is, yet,
Somewhat, to be removed, which does LET,
That Kingdoms coming, for which, many pray;
And, that Removal, must prepare the Way.
If, GOD, this way, by judgments, must enforce,
It will, for us, now living, be the worse;
And, we shall bear the strong pangs of that BIRTH
Which, that mysterious WOMAN will bring forth,
On whom, the DRAGON waits to devour
The MANCHILD, who (delivered from his power
By his Almighty Father, and our GOD)
Shall rule the Nations, with an IRON ROD.
But, if we willingly remove from hence,
That LET; it shall produce a recompense,
Which will requite our labor, and destroy
The great Obstructer of our promised Joy.
Here, I had done. But somewhat, presses in,
On which, I could anew again begin.
It does not much concern my Theme, I know;
But, what, of that? It may concern you, tho.
My Muse, often times, when she is on her wings,
Wheels from her Game, to unexpected things
Which come to view; and, thereby more has won
Sometimes, then if aside she had not gone.
So, may she now; I Will therefore, let her fly
At what she sees, although I know not why.
The Kingdom looked for, seems to be near
By many tokens, which to me appear,
As well upon the Governments of those
Who, there to are professed, or secret Foes,
As on the SAINIS: For, when I was but young,
(And ever since my childhood, all along)
I, thereto had an eye: And, in this clime,
(Or little world) I Have seen within my time
Four Governments, almost as differing
Both in the roots, from which they forth did spring,
And discipline, as DANIELS Monarchies:
And, much, to be considered, in them lies,
To make me to believe, that, CHRIST is shaking
The Worlds foundations; and, approaches making.
The first was, when much sam'd ELIZABETH,
Raig'nd here; In whose time, (though I drew my breath
Not thirteen years) I, observations made
Of things, then said and done, both good, and bad,
More then my age did promise; and, er'c taught,
Was to the best part, of my knowledge brought.
During this Monarchy, I did perceive,
Sincerity, begin to take her leave;
That, Christian zeal abate, and cool again.
Which was so hot, when she began to Reign;
And, introductions of such deviations,
As, both forego, and foreshow alterations.
Yet, that, which then did seem to keep in aw
These Nations, was, the GOSPEL, and the LAW.
Next her, out from the Caledonian Wood,
A ramping Lion came; and, up he stood.
As, he first got this power, he kept the same,
By acting of the Fox, and seeming tame.
To his devourings, he imposed no measure:
The Law he governed by, was WILL, and PLEASVRE;
And, he pursude, what he designed at first,
As far, as any crasty coward durst.
More stoutly, his Successor, carried on,
Then politickly, what his SIRE begun;
And after many struglings, and much cost,
Himself, his Kingdoms, and desigments he lost.
Yet, for that Government, thus much I Will say,
Justice, and piety, wore in that day,
The fairest outside; and, were trimmed about
With many Ornaments, now, nigh worn out;
And, goodness, had a very glorious shell,
Although the kernels therein proved not well.
Against this Government, the People rose,
In throaning them, whom they themselves had chose;
And whilst they were continued on the Throne,
NECESSITY, was law, for what was done:
Which Law, to lengthen, and corroborate,
They, new NECESSITIES did still create;
Till their Adorers, did their Power contemn,
And, found great need of all things, but of THEM.
For, by indulging selfnes, they destroyed,
What had by self-denial been en^oy'd;
And made themselves so rich, and some so poor,
That, now, the Peoples choice, is out of door.
Yet, whilst they kept the Throne, GOD, by them wrought
Effects, which will not wholly come to naught:
For, though self-seeking, most prevailed then,
There were among them, good, and righteous men,
(To GOD, and to their Country serviceable)
Whose number, had it been proportionable
To ten, for each five Cities, Towns, or Shiers;
Had made the work, reserved for others, theirs.
The SWORD, has now, obtained the sovereign power,
Let it, Oh LORD! protect, and not devou'r.
Let, it take notice, that it is prepared,
The Vineyard, only, to secure and guard,
(Or, cut away those Plants, which might annoy
The fruitful Vines, and their sweet grapes destroy)
Not to possess the same as if it own.
Let us (although the power thereon bestown,
Should be abused) obediently attend,
Till to the reign, thereof, thou setst an end:
For, when thou please, thou, can in one hour,
Make it destroy it self, by it own Power.
To rule us, thou have now advanced it;
Let us, for conscience sake, therefore, submit,
Whether it be for future good, or ill;
Because, to have it so, it is thy will.
Thou can as well by Arms, as by the Gown
Rule peaceably, and make thy mercy known.
Although it be a Sword, that bears the sway,
Let, it thine Adversaries, only, slay;
Let none of thine, have any cause to fear it:
And, let it no ways damage those that wear it.
Still, mindful make it, for whose good, and aid
'Twas first advanced, disciplined, and paid:
Who, did contribute, what, first, made it strong
To conquer: who, still adds, what does belong
To keeping of that Power; and, let it not
Endanger those by whom it was begot;
Wrong their propriety, whom it defended;
And whose just preservation was intended;
Nor, break those ancient bounds which kept should be
'Twixt man and man; and, betwixt man, and Thee;
And, upon whose Infringers thou have laid,
Curse, whereof, all, ought to be afraid.
Let it perform the works thereto appointed;
Make way for Justice, and for thy Anointed:
And, when the time designed thereto is done,
Let it, to what must follow, yield the Throne.
The next, I hope shall be the LIVING-WORD.
Let his long looked for KINGDOM come, Oh LORD!
Let over us, that King of Nations reign,
To whom, all praise, and Glory does pertain.
For, whatsoer'e this proves, that best will please us.
Come therefore, quickly Quickly come, LORD JESUS.
Mean while, accept a sacrifice of praise,
For what has been vouchsafed in these days,
By way of preparation, to that End,
For which, in Faith, and hope, we do attend.
Accept of pra^ses, from the single hearted,
For all thy Saints, which are from hence departed;
And, for all those, who shall make up the sum,
By which thy Kingdom, will complete become.
Accept my Thanks, for what thou did confer
On me, by him that is gone, and those, yet here:
Accept it rather, for that love of thine,
Vouchsafed from thy self, to me and mine,
By frequent pledges; and, for that Free grace,
Whereby before all time, I chosen was,
To be eternally made One with Thee;
And, in thy self, accept them LORD, of me.
Thus, having my Friends Obit, truly truly kept.
Six nights, (whilst others round about me slept)
Here, that Contexture, which conceived I had,
Is now produced, spun, and weaved, and made.
It Is true the Object, of my contemplations,
Was WESIROW: But, from him, my Meditations,
Rose higher; and my soul did contemplate
Things, which conce^n these Nations, and this State;
And, thereupon, some hints, are interweaved,
Which will (if passed by, as unperceived).
Make the which is, the Muses way of giving
Life to the Dead; to be, unto the Living,
An on (...) presage; at least to some,
Of death, of shame, or, of worse things to come.
FINIS.

