Elmston the 9. of the 11. Month, 1656.
For Thomas Munnings, John Durance, and the rest of the Commissioners sometimes
sitting at Canterbury about tithes.
The Plea and Protest of Robert Winter of Elmston in the county of Kent, for
his non-payment of tithes.
May 8 1657 My Friends and Countrymen,
IN my absence some days ago there came a man to my house (as I am informed)
with a Note, Paper, or pretended Warrant, to require me to appear before you
(as I judge) the Commissioners about tithes, sitting at the Red Lion at
Canterbury upon the twelfth day of this present eleventh month, 1656.

But by way of righteous and conscientious Plea and Protest against your so
summoning of me, I solemnly and deliberately declare and say:

1. That Moses the true servant of the Lord, who was faithful in the House of
God under the first Covenant, Heb. 3. in his administration by the infallible
unerring spirit of the Lord, professed unto old Israel then the church of the
living God, That the time should come, that the Lord their God would raise up
unto them a Prophet from the midst of themselves of their Brethren like unto
Moses, and that he will put his words into his mouth, and he shall speak unto
them all that the Lord shall command him; and it shall come to pass, that
whosoever (says God) will not hearken to my words which he shall speak in my
name, I will require it of him ( Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18, 19.) or he shall be destroyed
from amongst the people, or declared a Fugitive and Vagabond from God, yea, and
a rebel against him.

2. That when the fullness of time was come appointed of the Father, he sent and
manifested his Son the Lord Jesus Christ, born under the Law or first covenant,
and made subject to the Law, yet anointed with the oil of gladness above
measure, in whom the Godhead dwelt bodily, whom with great majesty, power, and
glory he declared, and by his faithful and true witnesses, witnessed him to be
that great Prophet that Moses many hundreds of years before prophesied of, whom
the people under the second or new covenant of life, and peace, and power, were
to hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto them, upon pain of being
destroyed from amongst the people, Acts 3.22, 23. and 7.37.

That this great Prophet, being so manifested, was the real substance of all
shadows, types and figures, in whom, and at whose death they all ceased, and by
which there really was made a change of the first or Levitical Priesthood, and
so of the whole law, wages and maintenance thereunto belonging, and so the
payment of tithes thereby for ever wholly ceased, Heb. 7:

In all which regards for me to pay tithes now under the gospel, or second and
new covenant of life and peace, is as much as in me lies to deny the Son of God
manifested in flesh, and life, and power; and also to set up again the first
and changeable priesthood, and so to be a real rebel, or a blasphemous
Antichrist against the Lords anointed great and true Prophet, the Lord Jesus
Christ, which to do I dare not for all the world, though I cause my life and
estate thereby.

And besides, by the standing and binding Parliament-Laws of England, as the
24. of Henry the 8. chap. the 12. the Rights of tithes are plainly declared to
appertain to the spiritual Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical courts.

Yea, By the last Statute (as I understand) that ever was made in England for
the paying to, and receiving of tithes by any Ecclesiastical person, Vicar,
Curate, Proprieter, Owner, or other Farmer or Deputy, it is plainly declared,
That they, or any of them shall sue for tithes only before the Ecclesiastical
Judges in Ecclesiastical Courts, and no where else, as clearly appears by the
statute of the second and third of Edward the sixth, chap. 13.

But all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction being as I understand, for ever in this
nation anihilated and abolished by special and solemn act of parliament made in
or about the year 1641. and was never since, as I am certainly informed, by any
act of parliament past since revived.

And therefore you have no English humane legal jurisdiction to hold plea for
tithes before you, nor so much as justly to summon me before you to show cause
wherefore J will not now under the Gospel-administration pay tithes.

And therefore J hereby solemnly protest before God and Man against your
unrighteous molestation of me, in requiring me to appear before you, who have
no English humane legal parliamentary jurisdiction residing in you, to hold
plea for tithes, or trouble me, or any other that conscientiously and
rationally judge our selves freed from paying of tithes, both by the divine
declared Laws of God, and the humane declared parliamentary laws of England,
and to-this the 9th day of the 11th month 1656. J subscribe my name, Robert
Winter, and submit my body and estate in patience to your mere wills, so far as
the Lord thinks fit to give you power over them,

R. M.

A copy of the foregoing paper the said Robert Winter delivered in at the day
of his appearance before the Commissioners at Canterbury unto themselves, and
although they dismissed him then, yet they have since caused him and his
neighbor and friend Abiezer Bokins to appear before them for the non-payment
of their tithes, although them have not the least shadow of pretense of any
legal jurisdiction (nor no more has any of the called Judges in
Westminster Hall, or the Barons of the Exchequer) to hold plea for non-payment
of tithes before them.

And therefore in their forcing and compelling of people without the least
shadow of Parliamentary law to pay them, they really commit the same high
treason in its kind, that the called Earl of Strafford lost his head for, which
was for endeavoring by the late Kings command, or formal commission against
law, to subvert the laws, liberties and properties of the people of England,
and by his will and pleasure to introduce and arbitrary tyrannical government
above law.


