ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE ARMIES REMONSTRANCE, DELIVERED To the HOUSE of
COMMONS, Monday, 20. November, 1648.

In vindication of the PARLIAMENTS TREATY with the KING in the Jsle of Wight.

Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
Clodius accusat Maechos, Catelina Cethegum.
In tabulam Syllae dicunt ejus discipuli tres.
LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1648.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON The ARMIES REMONTRANCE, DELIVERED To the House of Commons,
Monday, 20. November, 1648.
ABout May 1647. The 2 Houses in a full and free Parliament took into
consideration how to ease the people of their Taxes; in order whereto they
ordained the Disbanding this Army (6000 or 7000 only excepted to suppress
Insurrections in England, and the rest to be sent to the relief of Ireland)
200000 l. was provided for this work, for the rest of their Arreares they were
to have unquestionable security. Lieutenant General Cromwell subtly
encouraged the House of Commons to this resolution, with intent rather to
discontent, then disband the Army (which hates nothing more then disbanding,
and returning to their old Trades) and then to make use of their discontents
against the Authors of this counsel, being men of different principles and
interests from himself.

To carry on which design, he, and his Son Ireton upon the 4 and 5 of June, by
their Agitators, (men whose public spirits they abused for private ends, Book
of Decl. p. 22. Solemn: Engagement.
and at last cast them off) caused the Army to enter into an Engagement (in
opposition to the said Ordinance) not to disband, nor to divide.

June 23. at Saint Albans, the Army Declared, Book of Decl. p. 39.
That their respects to the Peoples Safety enforced them to admit of no longer
delays then four or five days, wherein the House should give assurance to
them and the People of a safe and speedy proceeding to settle the Armies, Page
67.
and the Kingdoms rights, and freedoms.

After this, Cromwell plotted the securing of Oxford, and the surprising of the
Kings Person by his instrument Joyce: and when Joyce told him, he had the King
in his power, Then (quoth Cromwell) I have the Parliament in my pocket.

In farther prosecution of which design, to pull down their opposite Faction:
They caused an Impeachment in the name of Sir Tho: Fairfax and the Army, Putney
Projects, p. 8.9.
(in general Terms only, for the particular matters of their Charge was to
seek, after they had in general charged them) to be sent to the House of
Commons against eleven of their Members for some things done in the House, as
That by their power they caused the Ordinance for Disbanding the Army to pass,
etc. and for some things done out of the House, which had been formerly
examined and cleared by the House: As Corresponding with the King, etc. In the
2, 3, and 4. Article of which Charge, they profess themselves disobliged and
discouraged from any farther Engagement in the Parliaments Service. And indeed,
they have since carried themselves as if they were disobliged: for,

1. They demanded the House to suspend the said 11 Members from sitting:
Whereupon, the House voted, 25. June. That by the Laws of the Land no Judgment
for their suspention could be given upon that general Charge, before
particulars produced, and proofs made: the Army thereupon, threatened to march
up to Westminster, unless they were suspended: whereby they were enforced to
forbear the House.

2. They courted the people by undertaking to settle Peace, to establish the
Kings interest, and all other just interests: and invited the People to make
Addresses to the Army by Petitions against their grievances: to which they gave
Answer, That, This and This is the sense of the Army: The Declar. against the
Army as Enemies to the State unvoted, Put. Pro. p. 9. see Repres: June 4.5. B.
of Decl. p. 33, 34.
as if their sense were the supreme Law.

3. They compel the Parliament to unvote some of their Votes, and afterward
reproach them for their inconstancy in their Printed Papers.

4. They turn the Council of War, into a Council of State; and there debate
and resolve all Public Affairs, as if they were another Parliament, judging
of all Public Interests, and Safety of the Kingdom; The Prerogative of the
King: Fundamentals of Parliament: and Laws of the Land: as if they would
(legem dare) impose Laws upon the Land: for (I am sure) they are not learned
enough (legem dicere) to expound the Law.

5. They march like Conquerours through London, Put: Proj: p. 9.
fright away many Members of Parliament, throw down their defensive Works, set
Guards upon the Houses, etc.

6. They obey Ordinances of Parliament but at their own discretion. The Houses
Voted the Disbanding of Supernumeraries: They collusorily Disband some in one
place, and take them in again in another: and (by way of Bargain, as it were)
they lately demanded 3000. of them to be added to the established Army which is
already above 27000 men, and has an established pay of 60000 l. sterling a
Month; a far greater pay, and better paid then any Army of Christendom of the
like number has: and yet they have often demanded an addition of 20000 l. a
Month more, and did demand a weekly Tax for Fire and Candle, and do take free
quarter. And though the Houses have voted the disgarrisoning of diverse inland
Garrisons for ease of the People, yet they are not obeyed: for now (as Putney
Projects say, page 9.) The Parliament trembles at the shaking of their rod, and
every of their desires to the House is a Mandamus; both King and Parliament
being subjected to their beck.

7. And lastly, though they Declare, June 14. 1647. That they continued in
Arms, in Judgment and Righteousness, for the ends specified in the
Parliaments Declarations: and were not ignorant, The Parliament sundry times
declared the intent of their War to be for removing evil Counselors from the
King, 1 Part Exact Col: p. 118. 632
and for preservation and defense of His Person, Crown, and Dignity, etc. Yet
having the KING in their custody at Hampton Court, they opened a free way of
access to him for many the most malignant of his party: As Mr. John
Ashburnham, The Machiavilian Cromwellists.
whom Cromwell (whose pulse about this time beat a Lordly pace, as one of their
own penmen says) and Ireton sent for out of France. Col: William Leg, whom
they caused to be admitted of the Kings Bedchamber. Sir Will: Ford, a Papist,
Iretons Brother-in-law, and Major Boswell, both of them resident for the King
in the Army to corrupt the Soldiery, and many more, by whose mediation they
entertained correspondence with the King himself, and had their set-dayes of
writing Letters into France and Holland concerning an Accommodation. And the
better to mould the Soldiery to their designs, they enrolled many Cavaliers
in the Army, who cried out at Ware, Charge against 11 Members. Book of Decla.
page 112.
For the King and Sir Thomas: And yet they called M. Hollis his correspondence
with the King, A breach of trust, a breach of his Oath, taken in June 1643. a
breach of the Parliaments Ordinance in October 1643. and no less then Treason.

Book of Declaration. page 112
At this time Ireton framed the Proposals at Colebrook, which, as they say,
contained the particulars of their desires in order to the clearing and
securing the Rights and Liberties of the people, and settling a lasting Peace.
By these Proposalls the foundations of the peoples Freedom were undermined,
and the Kings Interest supported; as Putney projects, page 13. said, where it
is believed they passed (...) a General Council. And it is there affirmed,
that they passed the Kings file, who moved for a Personal Treaty upon them.
Ireton, in a private Conference, having promised the King a Copy of them, which
was sent by Major Huntington, and returned with the Kings crosses and scratches
upon them with His own pen. page 14.
At last Sir John Berkley, and Ashburnham, brought the Kings Answer to them at
Colebrook, August 1. and the Proposalls bear date August 2. and the Proposalls
were altered in five or six Particulars, nearly relating to the Kings Interest.

But now let us collect some few short Observations out of the Papers, and the
said Proposalls of the Army; that by comparing them with the present
Propositions sent to the Isle of Wight by the Parliament, it may appear whether
the Army that has no Authority, or the Parliament that has Authority, to
Treat with the King, have best provided for a safe and well-grounded Peace,
with preservation of our Religion, Laws and Liberties.

Book of Declaration. page 45.
In the Representation of the Army, June 14. 1647. this is set down as the 8.
proposal for Peace: That (public Justice being first satisfied by some few
examples to posterity, out of the worst excepted persons, and other
Delinquents, having made their Compositions) some course may be taken for a
general Act of Oblivion; whereby the seeds of War, etc. may be the better
taken away.

1. Observation. The wisdom of Parliament thought it not fit to disparage
their righteous cause by propounding an Act of Oblivion; but when the King
freely offered it, and made it a proposal on his part, they accepted it,
reserving a power to themselves to add what exceptions and limitations to it,
the two Houses should think fit.

In the Remonstrance of the Army presented to the Parliaments Commissioners at
S. Albans, June 23. 1647. page 64.
They declare their principles to be most clearly for a general Right, and
just freedom to all: and therefore declare particularly, That they desire the
same for the King and others of His party, (so far as can consist with common
Right and Freedom, and the security of the same for the future.) And they do
clearly profess they do not see how there can be any peace to the Kingdom
firm and lasting, without a due consideration of, and provision for the
Rights, quiet and immunity of His Majesty's Royal Family, and his late
partakers: and herein they think that tender and equitable dealing (as
supposing their cause had been ours) and a spirit of common love and justice,
diffusing it self to the good and preservation of all, will make up the most
glorious conquest over their hearts, to make them and the whole people of the
Land lasting friends.

2. Observation. What more could the Parliament say? Peruse the Propositions
sent to the Isle of Wight.
What more has the Parliament done for the King and his party in their
Personal Treaty with the King at the Isle of Wight, for a safe and
well-grounded Peace, then here the Army prompts them to? Or how has the King
deserved worse of the Kingdom since the Army hunted Him from Hampton Court
into their Purse-net at Carisbrooke-Castle, where He has been watched, and
kept in so strict and limited a condition, that He could neither act nor
negotiate any thing? But (The Armies Scout says) the Grandees of the Armies
Faction are exasperated against him for rejecting their offers last year, and
his adherence to the Scottish interest: and therefore at the latter end of his
foul sheet the Scout has this Distich, Oh Charles, old Nol (thy terror) now
draws nigh,
If thou will save thy neck, have, have, to fly.


Book of Decl. p. 75.
In a Letter from Sir Thomas Fairfax to both Houses, giving an account of the
transactions between His Majesty, and the Army, (bearing date, Reading, July 6.
1647.) He says, We conceive that to avoid all harshnesse, and to afford all
kind usage to His Majesty's Person, in things consisting with the peace and
safety of the Kingdom; is the most Christian, honorable and prudent way: and
in all things (as the Representation and Remonstrance of the Army does
express) we think that tender, equitable, and moderate dealing, both toward
His Majesty, His Royal Family, and late Party, (so far as may stand with the
safety of the Kingdom, and security of our common Rights and Liberties) is the
most hopeful course to take away the seeds of War, etc. and to procure a
lasting peace, and a Government in this distracted Nation.

3. Observation. But the Army has since found New Lights: yet these plausible
pretenses of the Army to restore Peace and Government by settling the Kings, and
all just Rights, kept the People hitherto quiet, and made them with hope and
patience to bear Taxes to the Army and Free quarter, whereby many of their
backs were broken, and all galled: until they found the Army to lay by these
principles, and to make use of the good opinion they had got only by them, to
suppress and destroy all that labored for peace and ease of the people; both
Petitioners and Members of Parliament to keep themselves still in pay, and
pursue their own profit, and preferment, then finding themselves cheated,
despair thrust them rashly into Arms in Wales, Kent, Essex, etc. where their
success was suitable to their discretion, whereof the Faction of the Army do
now take advantage to lay their own bastard at other men's doors, as if all
this were done by design of a Party in Parliament and City. But Peace and an
Army are as inconsistent together as light and darkness.

In the Proposals of the Army, 1 Aug. 1647. they propound,

14. That (things before proposed being provided for securing the Rights,
Liberties, and Safety of the Kingdom.) His Majesty's Person, Queen, and Royal
issue may be restored to a condition of Safety, Honor, and Freedom in this
Nation, without diminution of their personal Rights, or farther limitation to
the exercise of the Regal power, then according to the particulars aforegoing.

4. Observation. You see the City in their Engagement, and the Parliament
borrowed from the Army, that phrase they now so much cry out upon, of restoring
the King, with Honor, Freedom and Safety.

15. For Compositions, The Army propounds, That a lesser number out of the
persons excepted in the two first Qualifications, (not exceeding five for the
English) being nominated particularly by the Parl. who (together with the
persons in the Irish Rebellion included in the third Qualification) may be
reserved to the farther Judgment of the Parliament as they shall see cause:
all other persons may be admitted to Composition. That the rates for all future
Compositions may be lessened, etc. and no compounder enjoined to take the
National Covenant.

5. Observa. You see the Army more remiss in exacting Justice then the
Parliament, who have excepted seven English clearly out of mercy, which is more
then to reserve them unto farther Justice, as they shall see cause: and all men
to be enjoined by Act of Parliament to take the Covenant.

The Army propounds, Putney Proj. page 14.
That all that have been in hostility against the Parliament, be incapable of
bearing Office of public trust, or power for five years. But it was added
(after the great Officers intercourse with the King) That the Council of State
should be enabled to admit them to such Offices before those five years
expired.

6. Observation. The Parliament has reserved to themselves the gifts of all
Great Offices in England and Ireland for 20. years, and disabled Delinquents
in Arms to be Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, etc.

page 15.
The Army propounded, Only that the Coercive Power, and Jurisdiction of Bishops,
extending to Civil Punishments upon any, may be abolished and demanded,
nothing for passing an Act for sale of Bishops Lands; although at last they
encouraged the Parliament to sell them. But according to their Proposals for
Peace, the King was first to be re-established with His Negative voice.

7. Observation. The Parliament propounds the utter Abolishing of Episcopacy,
and Bishops for ever: and an Act for alienating their Lands for ever.

The Army propounded, The Militia should be for ten years only, in the dispose
of the Parliament, and afterward, this present King not to dispose thereof
without consent of Parliament.

8. Observation. The Parliament propounds the Militia of England and Ireland,
by Land and Sea, with all Forts, Castles, Garrisons, to be in the Parliament
alone for twenty years, from 1 July, 1646. And after the said twenty years,
neither the King, His Heirs, nor Successors to dispose thereof without consent
of Parliament, etc.

Putney Project page 43.
These Proposals of the Army being obtruded at last, upon the House, a contest
grew, Whether they, or the Propositions formerly sent to New Castle should be
sent to the King at Hampton Court. At last it was concluded to send the
Propositions of New Castle, But the King knew, that neither the Grandees in
Parlia. or Army, intended they should be assented to, being inconsistent with
their Independent interests; but they were sent only to usher in the Kings
desire of a Personal Treaty upon the Proposals of the Army: which the King had
made known before hand should be His Answer. And when His Answer was Voted in
the House of Commons to be a denial, and debated hotly, whether any more
Addresses should be made to the King; at last a Member of the House produced a
reason as sharp and weighty, as Goliahs sword. It is the sense of the Army
(quoth he) that a farther Address be made to the King. And Ireton himself told
them, he could not promise them the Armies assistance if they ceased their
Addresses to the King: whereupon, being bruited abroad, that the Army had
compelled the Parliament to make farther Addresses to the King, and to send
part, or all of their Proposals as the grounds of Peace: very many of the Army
declared openly against it: and many Speeches in their Council reflected upon
Ireton, for abusing the Army therein. So their hopes in this policy vanished,
like the hopes of an Alchimist.

I could proceed much farther with these parallel Observations; but I have
little leisure, and peradventure Reader, thou have little money to lay out upon
Books; and I desire to open thy eyes as good cheap as may be. But the Armies
Remonstrance presented to the House, 20 November, page 43. 44. says, These
Compliances of their part were only Negative: what I have said already does
sufficiently confute this excuse. It farther says, they complied with the King
through example, to prevent others from strengthening themselves that way:
meaning M. Hollis, etc. which was examined by the Parliament, and he acquitted
thereof; and though the Army (not resting in the Judgment of the Parliament,
as by their own profession they ought to do) charged him again herewith in
their Impeachment of the eleven Members: yet they never proceeded to prove it.
See Putney Project. page 8.

You see that Privileges, and Commands of Parliament, nay their own promises
are no more to the Grandees of the Army, (since they declared, the Parliament
had disobliged them) then the Philistines withes to Sampson. Did they not
command the Commons by a set day to cast out the Faction that overtopped them,
to recall their Declaration against them; whereby in full and free Parliament
they were declared Enemies? to provide them pay? to own them for their Army?
Have they not contrary to the Parliaments Orders admitted Cavaliers to the
King? made Addresses to Him? Quartered round about London after the Parliament
Commanded them to Quarter forty miles off, which Order is still in force? Have
they not promised and engaged to acquiesce in the Judgment of Parliament?
Declaration 14 June 1647.
And did they not a year since, keep a day of Humiliation at Windsor to implore
Gods mercy for their former insolency to the Parliament, and promising more
obedience hereafter? Have they not declared that it was proper for them to act
only in their own sphere as Soldiers, and not to intermeddle with affairs
of State, which concern the Parliament? Why then do they interrupt the
Parliaments Treaty with the King in the Isle of Wight? Declaration 14 June 1647.
Why did they 20. November. 1648. send a peremptory Remonstrance to the
Parliament, (instead of an humble Petition) charging them with weakness,
inconstancy, and breach of trust in the same Treaty, and magnifying their own
wisdom and integrity above theirs; and that in such Magisteriall, and
censorious language, as if the Tables were turned, and they were the
Parliament, and the Two Houses but a Council of the Army. I will continue the
method I have begun, and make some few, sudden Observations upon this
Remonstrance, as I have formerly done upon the Armies Proposals: and leave the
fuller answering thereof to some better Pen, that has more leisure and
abilities then my self.

Objections in the Remonstrance, delivered 20. November, against the Parliament
and Treaty.

Remonstrance, page 7, 8, 9.
1. The Army Objects, the Votes of the Houses for no more Addresses to the King.
Charging the Houses with inconstancy in retracting them: and thereby putting
the people into an unsettled condition; and stirring them to Petition for a
Personal Treaty, and at last to rise in Arms for it, and alleges the House
was free at the passing those Votes.

Answ. 1. The said Votes for no more Addresses to the King; were contrived in
private, between the Independent Grandees of the Houses and Army: and then
imposed upon the House of Commons, after many of their Members were frighted
away by blanke Impeachments in the House, and by the Armies hovering about the
Town to back their own party, Putney Proj. page 43.
and suppress all men of contrary judgment. Not were the debates in the House
free, Ireton leading the Van in the debate, and telling them the sense of the
Army (which usually leads every reason captive.) That now it was expected
they should settle the Kingdom without the King, and not dissert those valiant
men who had engaged for them beyond all hopes of Retreat, and would never
forsake the Parliament, unless the Parliament forsook them first. And during
the whole debate, the Armies party often taunted them that spoke for farther
Addresses, calling them the Kings party in the Commons House: and when they
were ready for the question, Cromwell brought up the Rear: saying, It was now
expected the Parliament should govern the Kingdom by their own power and
resolutions, and not teach the people to expect safety from a man whose heart
God had hardened. That those men that had hitherto defended the Parliament,
would defend them herein against all opposition, Teach them not by neglecting
the Kingdoms safety, to think themselves betrayed: and left to the malice of
an irreconcilable enemy, whom they have subdued for your sake, and are like to
find his future Government insupportable, and full of revenge: lest despair
teach them to seek their safety by other means then by adhering to you: and
how destructive such a resolution in them will be to you all, I tremble to
think, and leave you to judge. With which words he concluded, laying his hand
upon his Sword, and putting on as stern a vizard of terror, as such a face
could fall into. You see now with what bridle they turn and rule the House,
they can deliver the sense of the Army for Addresses to the King, and against
Addresses; and with the wind of their Breaths, make the Weathercock sit which
way they please: Not long after, in a thin House, and at an unseasonable time
of the day, it was moved, that a letter might be forthwith sent to the
General, to send a party of Foot to Garrison White Hall, and a party of Horse
to Garrison the Mewes. The Lords concurrence not desired, and the letters
immediately sent. But before this Vote passed, diverse Forces were upon their
march near the town, and came to White Hall next morning by 8. of the clock:
for this subsequent Vote did but color and ratify what the Army had formerly
resolved and put in execution. As soon as White Hall was Garrisoned, that very
day the Army sent a Declaration to the Commons, thanking them for their four
Votes against the King, and promising to live and die with them in defense of
them against all opponents. The Lords had debated hotly upon these Votes,
insomuch that it was 10. Lords to 10. The balance inclining to neither side,
until the unexpected Garrisoning of White Hall and the Mewes, and the said
Declaration or Engagement of the Army to the Commons turned the scales; and
then Necessity (which neither knows Law nor Reason) prevailed with them to
pass those Votes three or forre days after, (that both Lords and Commons
might draw in one equal yoke) the Army was pleased to give them thanks also.
These four Votes troubled the whole Kingdom, and filled men's minds with
suspicion, what new form of Government the Authors of them would set up: and
every man's mind presaged these Grandees desired a new War, for upholding this
Army, and their own power, and to color their raising money, which they share
amongst the Army and themselves: and every man now laid the project of a new
War at their door, and it now appeared to every intelligent man, that their
Impeachings of diverse Members and Citizens for endeavoring a new War, (when
they did but arm in their own defense against the printed threats and menaces
of the Army then upon their march toward London) was done by way of prevention
only: it having always been an impudent policy of this Faction, To accuse
other men of those crimes which themselves only had or would commit, and
thereby to amuse the people. But suppose the Houses had been free at the
passing the said four Votes? Sapientis est mutare consilium, Wise men must vary
their counsels according to emergent occasions and circumstances. The heavy
Taxes and Free Quarter of the Army, with their insolent carriage in men's
houses, giving out, They had conquered the Kingdom: their turning their
Council of War into a Court of Judicature, contrary to the Laws of the Land,
but principally their courting and cheating all the interests of the Kingdom:
their committing open adultery with the Kings Interest in order to Peace, and
then casting it off upon private dislike, (as has been already said in the
third Observation) had enraged the whole Kingdom (even the best affected, and
most constant) and made them desirous of a Personal Treaty, (to which the
Armies Proposals gave the rise) and of their disbanding: Without which, either
there can be no Peace, or we shall suffer all the discommodities of War in
time of Peace; Mars is a good Soldier but a bad Magistrate; and a military
Government the worst of all others. As for the Declaration of Parliament
against the King, showing the grounds and reasons of the said 4 Votes, all men
know they gave no satisfaction to the people; and the weakness, falsehood, and
absurdities thereof has been sufficiently laid open by many good pens.

Object. 2. Rem. p. 12, 13.
That the Lords closed readily with all the desires of the City Malignants, the
Prince, and all the Parliaments Enemies, going before the Commons, and haling
them after: and when at any thing toward the Treaty, the Commons made some
stick, then clamorous Petitions from the City came thick, with menaces
insinuated; debauched Reformadoes, desperate Cavaliers, faithful Members
driven out of Town, etc. We conceive at this time the Judgment of Parliament
was not with due and former freedom.

Answer 2. Here is a causlesse quarrel picked against the Lords, City, and
Reformadoes; against the Lords, in order to lay by the King, against the City
for being rich, and against the Reformadoes for being valiant, and no
Hypocrites; the Petitioners for a Treaty for Peace never petitioned against the
Fundamental Government, and Laws of the Land; nor against any known
Privilege of Parliament; nor in a peremptory manner, as the Petitioners, 11.
September. (countenanced in this Remonst: p. 69.) did; nor did they send any
insolent Remonstrance to the House, or use any menaces either insinuated, or
open; as the Army and their Adherents usually do; nor were any faithful
Members driven out of Town; politic Fugitives have heretofore run away to
the Army, and may do again upon pretended fears, to carry on their design;
and to color the open violence, and secret conspiracies they have used, or
mean to use against the lives of their Opponents. I wish these titular Godly,
faithful, Honest men, would as much abhor the profitable Art of Lying and
Slandering, as they do the unprofitable Vice of Swearing and Cursing: But this
is to take a Schismatic out of a Schismatic, an Antimonarchist out of an
Antimonarchist, and an Independent out of an Independent it is to take his
definition from him, as much as to deny a man to be animal visibile: in this
objection I can more clearly foresee a second force coming from the Army upon
the Houses, then Lilly (with all his fantastical schemes) can prognosticate
fair or foul weather, good or bad luck. Were the Houses free when Sir Tho:
Fairfax threatened to make some of the Members Prisoners of War, and try them
by a Council of War, only for voting, I, and No; according to their
consciences? when he marched in hostile manner against the Houses and City, and
really frighted away many honest Members? when he set his own Guards upon the
Houses? when the Armies faction in the House threatened the dissenting Members
with the Army, and the longest sword? if they were free then, they were not
free during the agitation of this Personal Treaty.

But let us now examine the principal Propositions for settling the Kingdoms
peace and safety, as they are contained in this perplexed, confused,
long-winded Remonstrance, and then open your understanding with some
Observations upon them.

The chief Propositions of this Remonstrance are the same in effect with those
Propositions set on foot in the Army by the Levelling party there, in a printed
Book, called, [The Agreement of the People] which were disavowed by the
General in his Letter to the House: and some of the Levellers were condemned
by a Council of War, as seditious and mutinous Persons for promoting them.

The first Proposition is, That the House would forbear any farther proceeding
in the Treaty with the King, and to return to the Votes [for no more Addresses
to Him] and to settle the Kingdom without and against Him, upon such grounds
as the said Remonstrance does lay down.

1. Observation. After the Houses are engaged past all retreat, and the eyes of
all Christendom upon them, they enjoyne them to break off the Treaty contrary
to their faith and honor engaged: when the Treaty is so near a conclusion
that we shall suddenly receive the Kings Concessions? or have a just ground to
settle the Kingdom against Him without breach of faith. Let us now see what
foundations of setlement these new Statesmen lay down.

2. Proposition. That the King may be brought to Justice for the Treason, Blood
and mischief he is guilty of.

2. Obser. The Parliament in their several Declarations, and in their
Commissions to their Generals always accused the Kings evil Counselors of
these crimes, and not the King; following therein the civility and policy of
our Laws; and declared War only against them, not against Him; knowing it
had been High Treason by all our Laws to war against His Person, Stat. 25
Edw. 3. And I challenge all the Antimonarchicall tribe to show me one Law or
Stat. to the contrary, or to show me any one president in the Scriptures of any
King of Juda or Israel deposed or put to death upon Trial by his people for
misgovernment, or any King of England so dealt with since the Conquest. Rich.
2. Ed. 2. and Hen. 6. were articled against and Deposed, or forced to Depose
themselves in Parliament, but those Parliaments were not free Parliaments
(being packed and overawed by ambitious Princes of the blood, with Soldiers)
and therefore this cannot be imputed to the People. And the King, being by our
Laws, supreme Governor in all Causes and over all Persons; has no Superior
who can call Him to account; otherwise you must proceed in infinitum: If you
will say the People or their Representative shall call Him to account, who
shall call them to account? Parliaments (for ought I see) being as subject to
corruption as Kings. Besides, you open a wide gap for any ambitious Prince of
the blood to make himself popular by scandalizing the present Government, (as
Absalom did) and so to stir up the People or Parliament against the King to
make way to the Crown for himself: and involve the Kingdom in frequent and
lingering Civil Wars.

3. Prop: That the Prince and Duke of York may be summoned to render
themselves, etc. if they do not, that then they may be declared incapable of
Government, etc. and as Enemies and Traitors to die without mercy if afterward
found in this Kingdom: if they render themselves, the Prince for his Capital
Delinquency to be proceeded against in justice. And the Duke as he shall give
satisfaction, etc.

3. Observe. This is to lay by the King and His Posterity, contrary to many
Declarations and Engagements of the Parliament, and to enforce the Prince to
cast himself into the Arms of the French, or some other his Allies, Papists,
or others for succor upon such terms of disadvantage as they (working upon
his necessity) shall put upon him, to the prejudice of these Realms, his own
Religion, in his Match, or otherwise; and to compel him to bring an Invasion
upon the Land, to assert his own and the common Cause of Kings, controverted
in this example; and so turn our Episcopal war, into a Monarchical war;
which will draw a confluence of all the loose Soldiery of Christendom to seek
employment here, and bring the calamities of Germany upon us.

4. Prop: That a period be set to this Parliament, etc.

4. Observe: I wish a period, so as this pragmaticall Army be first Disbanded,
otherwise they acknowledging no King, and their Masters the Parliament being
dissolved, the Kingdom will either be left under the government of the Army,
or they will overpower all Elections, and set up a Mock-Parliament of their
own creation, whose Authority shall depend upon their Sword, and then the said
Parliament shall set the stamp of their Authority upon the Army, and between
both, the Kingdom be sawed in pieces.

5. Prop: That no King be hereafter admitted but upon the Election of the
People; by their Representatives.

5. Answer. They will first have a Parliament of their own making, as
aforesaid, and then this Parliament shall have a Conge d'estlier, or leave to
choose a King of the Armies nominating: whether they will vouchsafe to abuse the
infancy of the Duke of Gloucester, and make him their property until they have
had time to settle their Utopian Government, to root out all Opponents, to fill
all Places of power and profit with their own Creatures, to break the Peoples
spirits with a customary Bondage, to dis-arme and impoverish them, and reduce
them to the heartlesse condition of French Peasants; to settle foreign Leagues
and Correspondencies, and then lay him to sleep with his Fathers? Or whether
they will Elect King Nol, for our Sovereign? (whose Nose is clad in Purple
already) God knows. But he that knows any thing, knows the danger of
Elective Kingdoms, liable to Faction and Civil Wars amongst Competitors upon
the death of every King, let the miserable examples of the German Empire,
Poland, the old Roman Empire, and others witness.

6. Prop: These things to be declared and provided by this Parliament, or by
the Authority of the Commons therein, and all people to subscribe; nor any to
be capable of any benefit by this Agreement who shall not consent and subscribe.

6. Observe: Here you see the Lords and King (being 2 of the 3 Estates, whereof
our Parliaments are compounded by the fundamental Laws of the Land) struck
out, to the utter subversion of Parliaments, and all men enjoined to assent and
subscribe to their own wrong under a penalty, the consequence whereof does not
yet appear.

These things (the Remonstrance says) are of vast concernment to all public
Interest, not only in this Kingdom, but neighbor Nations.

7. Observe: Whether this be spoken to Scotland and Ireland only, or to all
neighbor Nations? as if these men had some correspondencies in their
Dominions, to make this Antimonarchicall, popular disease, infective and
diffusive to them, thereby to divert them by Wars at home to look over upon us,
God knows: but it is very likely to stir up the jealousies of Foreign
Princes, to quench the fire in their neighbors house, lest the flame catch
hold of their own.

1 Consequence of the said Propositions.
These Propositions tend to the utter subversion of all the Fundamental
Government, and Laws of this Land, and the destruction of Parliaments, and
will bring such an Anarchy and confusion upon us, as will continue a War in our
Bowels, during the life of this King, and His Posterity; whereby we shall be
enforced to keep up and augment this Army, and to entaile the Commands and
Offices therein, upon the Grandees of the Army, their Sons and Adherents from
Generation to Generation: and make a home War the only trade amongst us.

2. Consequence. The Army (by puutting the Parliament upon it, to be the
Authors and Actors of these miseries to their Country) will make them the
common scorn and hatred of all the world, and may then lay by the Parliament
with applause of all men, glad of the revenge, and then Govern by the Sword.
It is a sure rule in State, that when great men put their Ministers upon
actions of public hatred, they prepare them for destruction.

3. Consideration. The Parliaments Declarations, the Laws of the Land, the
Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy, and our National Covenant do all cry out
to the Parliament to oppose these destroying Propositions.

The Declaration 26 May 1642. says, Their endeavors have been for maintenance
of the Protestant Religion, the Kings Just Prerogatives, The Laws and
Liberties of the Land, and Privileges of Parliament, wherein they would
persist, though they should perish in the work.

1 Part. Exact Collections, page 618. 632.
The like Declaration passed, June 2. 1642. upon the Propositions for Money and
Plate.

42. Edw. 3. The Commons in Parliament say, they cannot assent to any thing in
Parliament to the Disherison of the King and His Crown, whereto they are
Sworn. The Petition of Right, 3 Caroli, The Commons in Parliament declare,
That they neither meant, nor had power to hurt the Kings Prerogative, with
infinite more Authorities, wherewith our Law Books are full.

By the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy (which every Member takes before he
sits in Parliament) they are bound to defend and maintain His Majesty's Royal
Person, with all the Prerogatives, Privileges, and Preheminencies belonging,
or annexed to the imperial Crown.

By the Solemn League and Covenant we swear, with hands lifted up to God, To
maintain and defend the Kings Person and Authority, in the preservation of
Religion, Laws and Liberties; not to diminish his Just power and greatness,
To defend the Privileges of Parliament: And to continue all the days of their
lives in this Covenant against all opposition whatsoever. The Protestation is
to the like effect.

But the said Remonstrance, page 54, 55, 56, 57. says, This is only a bare
Covenant between party and party, wherein God is a witness only to avenge the
breaker and violater thereof. But let this Casuist in Buff know, that it is not
only so, but is also a promissory Oath made to God: and therefore he is as well
a party, as a witness to it. Observe here, a high point of insolency. An
interpretation put upon the Parliaments Covenant, by men that (for the most
part) refuse to take the Covenant.

Let not the Independent Members please themselves in seeing the Presbyterians
overthrown, since their turn is like to be next: 4 Consideration.
what malice and design now lies upon the Presbyterian: a covetous desire to
share with them in their rich gains, will hereafter lie upon the Independents.
The vast desires and expenses of this Army are like a consuming fire: He that
fares best, shall be but the last fuel to it.

To conclude, 5 Consideration.
There is a desperate party intermingled amongst the whole Mass of this
Commonwealth, which has perpetrated all manner of crimes from Blasphemy, and
high Treason, to Trespass. They have violated all Laws, Divine and Humane, and
all Government and Magistracy: They have so far cheated and abused the King,
and His Issue, that like Caine, they think their sins greater then can be
forgiven: they have so far injured, and cheated all the Interests and People of
the Land, that with Caine they think that every man will slay them, and
despair of reconciliation: and therefore place all their hopes in bringing
them to slavery and confusion. They hate all honest men, because they fear
them as witnesses and prosecutors to bring them to judgment hereafter. And
therefore labor to ruin and extirpate them, especially out of the Parliament,
under the notion of the Kings Party. Wherefore (dear Countrymen) especially
you Lords and Gentlemen of the Parliament) call to mind your duty you owe to
your God, your King, your Country, your Wives, and Children; call to mind
Religion, Laws and Liberties, and cry out with one voice against these
innovators (as your forefathers did long since in a Parliament) Nolumus Leges
Angliae mutare; we will not change our good Laws. Remember your Oaths of
Allegiance, Supremacy, National Covenant, and Protestation, for which your
souls are morgaged to a just and severe Creditor. And learn to fear God, and
not Man. We owe a death to God and Nature, and must assuredly pay this debt:
why not now before we taste of misery and slavery? why not in an honorable
defense of our Country, rather then in a base desertion of it? He that fears
death, dies as soon as he that contemnes death; and no man is worthy of life,
but he that scorns life, when his Country stands in need of it.

Ingens creed nefas animam praeferre pudori:
Et propter vitam, vivendi perdere causas.
Mors and fugacem persequitur virum, nec parcit
Imbellis juventae poplitibus, timidoque tergo.
Death strikes a coward in the back, as soon as a valiant man in the face.

Good God, who broughtest all things out of Chaos into light, giving them
order, form, and beauty: suffer not the Nimrods of our times to reduce all
things back again into Chaos. Suffer them not to pull down Sion, and build up
Babel. Oh heavenly Daedalus, lend us thy Clue, to lead us out of this Labyrinth.

The sum of all these Observations is this:

In the Remonstrance, 20 November. 1648. They endeavor to subvert the King, His
Posterity and the Kingdom.

In the 2, 3, and 4. Article of their Impeachment against the 11. Members. They
profess themselves disobliged from any farther engagement in the Parliaments
service: and have and do act according to this profession.

Quaere. Who these men serve and what judgment the law gives upon them?

PROLEGOMENA, OR, Selected Observations, explaining the general drift of the
Remonstrance; and therefore set apart by themselves.
MAjor White said in the Council of the Army at Putney, That shortly there
should be no visible Authority left in the Kingdom but the power of the Sword.
Though this was then in design, yet because he vented it unseasonably, before
it was ripe for practice, he was expelled the Army; but soon taken in again,
they being unwilling to lose a man of their own principles.

9. March. The Engagement of the fugitive Members [to live and die with the
Army] was sent from the Lords to be approved by the Commons. Whereupon,
Derbyhouse Projects, p. 7. (written by an Officer of the Army) says, This was
done to try the temper of the House, and if they had not approved it, they
resolved to fly to their Arms and make a New Charge against their Opposers;
for they acknowledge amongst themselves, That they rule by Power only, and
that the House of Commons is no longer theirs then they overawe them; and that
they fear the Critical day will come, which will discover the Parliament to
be no longer theirs, then while they have a force upon it.

Observe, that upon these grounds the present design of this Remonstrance is,
To make a new Charge, and dissolve this Parliament, and to make a new
Parliament merely popular, without King, or Lords; consisting only of a
Representative of the People, of their own choosing; for, the Army
acknowledges none but themselves and their Faction, to be the People: all
other men are but Amalekites, or the seed of the cursed, to be rooted out, that
themselves the seed of the Godly, the Faithful only may inherit this good
Land. And this New Parliament shall be accountable to the People, that is, to
the Army. Compare the Remonstr: and the Declaration of the Army following it.
So we shall be governed arbitrarily by a Popular Parliament protected and
overruled by a standing Army: the Laws (which depend wholly upon the Authority
of the Crown, for their defense, interpretation, and execution) being first
plucked up by the roots: in the pulling down of Monarchy, look about you
Englishmen; you have fought for Religion, Laws, and Liberties, until you are
cheated of them all.

THE END.
THE ROYAL OAK OF BRITTAYNE



